IETHRO'S JUSTICE OF PEACE.

A SERMON PREAched at a general Assizes held at BVRY St. EDMVNDS, for the
County of Suffolk.

By SAMVEL WARD Batchelour of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin for John Marriot, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the white Flower-de-luce near Fetter-lane end in
Fleet Street. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Chancellor of England,
etc.
WHen we see one go or do amiss, though his feet or hands be the next
actors and instruments of his error: yet we say not, Are you lame? but, Have
you no eyes? or, Can you not see? What ever sweruings or stumblings any part of
the body politic makes, the blame lights not upon the Gentry or Comminalty,
the immediate delinquents, but on the principal lights in Magistracy or
Ministry, which being as Guardians and Tutors of the rest, should either
prevent or reform their aberrations. And herein miserable is the condition of
these two opticke pieces, that they are more subject, and that to more
distempers then other inferior parts: yet herein more, that being hurt, they
are more impatient of cure; not only of searching acrimonious waters (which yet
often are needful) but shie of the most soft and lawny touches: but most of all
in this, that being once extinct, they leave a void darkness to the whole
body, exposing it to the pits of destruction. As exceeding great on the other
hand, is the happiness, honor and use of them, if clear and single. For this
our National body, it will little boot either to applaud the one, or to
bewail the other: I rather wish and look about me for some eye-salue, which
may help to descry and redress, if any thing be amiss. And behold here
(Right Honorable) a confection poomising something thereto: It was prescribed
first by Iethro, whom Moses calls the eyes of Israel, Number. 10. 31. And newly
compounded by an Oculist, of whom as I may not, so I need not say any thing at
all. Next under the sacred Fountain of light (the light of our Israel) I
worthily account your Lordship most sufficient in law to accept, to make use,
to judge, to patronize it. The subject of the book is the principal object of
your office, to elect, direct and correct inferior Magistracy. To which
purposes, Nature, Literature and Grace have enabled you, that if you should
fail the worlds expectation, they will hardly trust any other in hasle. Many
in rising have followed the stirrup, pampered and ietting honor not standing
the ground, but once seated have done renownedly. But your Lordship had never
any other greeces then your birth and desert; to which, hereditary dignity has
so gently tendered it self, that you have not let fall your name of religion in
getting up. Therefore now you are in the top of honor, all that know you,
look you will be exactly honorable. For my part, bounden to your Lordship
for a favor formerly received, greater then your Honor knows of, or I can
express: I shall leave Iethro to be your Montoir, and my self remain ever an
humble suitor to God, who has made you a Judge of conscience, that he would
make you continue a conscionable Judge, improouing your place and abilities to
the best advantage belonging to it, the furtherance of your reckoning at the
last day.

Your Honors daily Beadsman, NATH. WARD.

EXODUS 18. 21. 22. 23. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people able
men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over
them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,
and rulers of tens.

And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be that every
great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall
judge: so shall it be easier for thy self, and they shall bear the burden
with thee.

If thou do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shall be able to
endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.


IF Iethro were, as the fashion of those times, and the nature of his style
will bear, and (as some conceit) both Prince and Priest; Cohen.
then was he beyond all exception, every way qualified; for skill, as a
Judicious Divine; and for experience, as an aged Governor, to give direction
in matters of Magistracy, and to cast Moses a molde for a Polity in Israel.
Sure I am, a godly and religious man he was, for he begins with prayer and
ends with sacrifice. And such as himself, was his advise, sage and holy. And
howsoever it passed from him at the first under Gods correction, yet afterward
allowed by God and practiced by Moses, becomes of good policy, sound divinity;
of private counsel, a general oracle: ruling for the substance of it, all
ages and persons.

(...). Ignat. ad Marian Cassob.
coins and Statues? who passes by a crystal fountain bearing some ancient
name or date, and tastes not of it, though no thirst prouokes him? Such is
this, the clear head-spring of all ensuing brooks in Scriture and other
writers concerning Magistracy. All those texts (which I wish were set as a
frontlet between the eyes, and as a seal upon the hearts of all in authority)
Iehosaphats charge, 2 Chro. 19. 5. Job his character, cha. 29. David's vow,
Psalm. 101. The scattered Parables of Solomon, and passages of the Prophets,
chiefly that round and smart one Isai. 33. 14. are they not all branches of
this root? In which respect it must needs be of sovereign use for the
discovering and reforming of whatsoever error time has soyled government
withal. How are defaced copies and disfigured pictures better amended, then by
reducing them to their original? if the pipe fail, go we not to the head?

Here is the Archetype or first Bucer to press upon Edward the sixth, for the
purgation of his offices and laws, from the dross and filth contracted under
the Romish confusion: which considering, that worthy Josiah of ours took in
such good part, and practiced with such good success. Yea, Moses himself
learned in all good literature, trained up in Court, the greatest Lawgiver
that ever was, and father of all Law-giuers, of the thrice great Hermes,
Lycurgus, Solon. Plato, Justinian, and the rest. Yea, Gods familiar favorite,
faithful in his house, known by name and face, honored with miraculous
power, etc. And that at the hands of one (age and fatherhood excepted) his
inferior. I trust that none will dare to reject or slight it of, remembering
that Divinity, as the mistress takes upon her to direct her hand-mayd, and
that the Scripture is the best man of counsel for the greatest Statesman in
the world: This little portion thereof containing in it more then all Lipsius
his Bee-hiue, or Machiauels Spider-web. All which will best appear by the
opening of this rich cabinet, and viewing the several Jewels in it, which are
these.

The parts of the Text. Division.

It first gives order for the care and Provide.

Secondly, it directs this choice by 1. Men of ability. 2. Fearing God. 3. Men
of truth. 4. Hating covetousness.


Thirdly, it applies these four to And place such over them to be rulers. 1.
of thousands. 2. of hundreds. 3. of fifties. 4. of tens.

Fourthly, it prescribes to the Magistrates, viz. to judge the people in the
smaller causes, etc. and their assiduity and industry therein. And let them
judge the people at all seasons, etc. And it shall be that they shall bring
every great matter to thee, but every small matter they shall judge.

Lastly, it propounds the blessed fruit and emolument that will necessarily
ensue thereupon. First, to Moses himself, So shall it be easier for thy self,
and they shall bear the burden with thee, and thou shall be able to endure.
Secondly, to the people, And all this people shall go to their place in peace.

Techezeh, Provide, or look out. Circumspection.
A word implying all exactness and curiosity incident to elections, as
Inspection, circumspection, inquisition, suspicion, information, deliberation,
coming of Chozah, to see or contemplate, whence the Prophets were called
Chosi, Seers. It is in a manner translated by a word of the like force in a
business of the like nature. Acts 6. 5. (...), survey the whole body of the
people, and choose the best you can cull out. It were somewhat strict and
strange to say, that prayer and fasting must be used: And yet this I find
practiced in such cases, Acts 1. and Numb. 27. 16. Let the Lord God of the
spirits of all flesh set a man over this Congregation. Yea, Iethro himself
sanctified this his advice with a prayer, verse 19. God be with thee. And good
reason he should be called to counsel whose the judgment is, and whose
providence is always very special in those elections, whether sought or no.
If God supravise not, Samuel the Seer shall take seven wrong before one right.
1 Samuel 16.
Some men's faults are palpable, and go before election, some are cunningly
concealed and break not out till after. First, therefore look up to God, and
then amongst the people, have thine eyes in thy head, all the care that may be
will be little enough. Say not there are no sufficient persons, nor yet think
every one that thinks himself so, or commonly goes for such, is sufficient:
seek out such, and such may be found. Look among the Olives, Vines, and
Fig Trees: such trees must be climbed. Brambles will lay hold on the sleeue
for preferment. Ne fit qui ambit. Let him never speed that sues. Lay hands on
none rashly. They that are fit and able, must and will be sought to; yea,
haled out of their ease and priuacy into the light of employment: the charge
and danger whereof they weighing, as well as the credit, or gain, and knowing
them to be callings, will not meddle with them, till they be called to them.
Which ambitious Inconsiderates not being able to ponder, much less to
sustain, thrust their shoulders under, and either by hook or crook come in,
or climb into the chair of honor, more tickle then the stool Eli brake his
neck off: whither when they have aspired with much travail and cost they sit
as in the top of a mast in fear and hazard, and often fall with shame and
confusion. Not unlike to some rash youth, that having gotten an horse as wild
as himself, with much ado backs him, sits him in a sweat, and comes down
with a mischief.

For the prevention of all which evils Iethro's counsel was and ever will be;
That such be provided, not as would have places, but as places should have.
Which care, as Iethro commits to Moses, so both the Scripture and reason
imposes upon the superior Magistrate, in whose power and place, it is either
to nominate or constitute inferior Authorities: and whose fault chiefly it is,
if they be otherwise then they ought, or the people injured in in this kind.
How circumspect and religious ought such to be, in the performance of this
greatest and waightiest duty.

Iethro a simple meaning old man. A beaten Politician of our times, learned in
the wisdom of newer state, and acquainted with the mysteries of the market,
that knows how to improoue things to the best, for his own time and turn,
and to let the common body shift for it self, would have proiected Moses a
far more commodious plot, after this or the like manner: Now you have offices
to bestow, a fair opportunity in your hand, to make your self for ever, to
raise your house, to pleasure your friends, either proclaim it openly or
secretly, set it abroach by some means or other, see who bids fairest, weigh
the sacrifices, choose the men of the best and greatest gifts.

Oh gall of bitterness, oh root of Tanquam sub hasta.
The particular branches whereof, when I seriously consider, I wonder not that
Christ with such zealous severity brake down the banks, and whipped out the
chapmen out of the Temple: nor that Peter with such fiery indignation banned
Simon and his money. For if such men and money perish not, Kingdoms and Churches
must perish, and both Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts will soon prove dens
of thieves.

Whose soul bleedes not to see often the sellers of them. I would the fault
rested only in benefices, and reached not into offices and civil dignities.
Indeed that kind of purchase we call not simony, it may from his other name
be fitlier styled magic: for by I know not what kind of witchcraft, men
sin by leave and law in these civil purchases. The laws and statutes
provided for the remedy of the evil in some cases, tolerating it in other, and
the practice by means of this allowance growing intolerable. Some of them (as
the world reports) offices for life and at pleasure, amounting to the rate of
lands and inheritances.



Does not Bucer deal faithfully Julius, Iustinianus, or Theodosius their laws
give allowance to any? See then how prouidently Iethro prouides against this
Hemlock-root of Justice? out of whose prouiso I conclude that which Augustine
saw in his time, and dear experience confirms in others: Aug. Lib. (...)
That such as provide themselves places, and are not provided for them; come
into them, and execute them, not with a mind of doing good, but domineering;
not of providing for others welfare, but for their own turns. Let us pray,
that if it be possible this fault may be forgiven and amended.

And not this only, but another Generality.
met withal in the very next clause of my text, Among all the people Micol
Hagnam.) Where Iethro restraines not Moses to his own Family, to any
particular Tribe, or to the richer sort: but requires this freedom, as well as
the former circumspection. Generality and impartiality being requisite to the
good being of a choice: and limitation and restraint the very banes of
Election; yea, contradictions to it. As if one should say, you shall choose
amongst twenty, but you shall choose this or that one: Does he not in effect say
you shall not have your choice? will a man when he goes to Market be confined
to any shop or stall, if he mean to provide the best? How grossly is the
country wronged and befooled, chiefly in the choice of such, as into whose
hands they put their lives and lands at Parliaments, by a kind of Conge
defliers, usually sent them by some of the Gentry of the Shires, persuading (if
not prescribing) the very couple they must choose. Thus have we seen Naturalls
tied to a post with a straw, which they durst not break.

This text bids you know and stand

The second part.
It teaches you how to order and

These four whosoever is compounded Candidati, and to be chosen: but also of
such as are invested and already in in place to approve or reprove their
condition. And for this end and purpose, let us use them this day, as four
waights of the Sanctuary, whereunto whatsoever Officer here present, from the
Judges to the Bayliffes, shall not answer: This Text (as the handwriting on
the wall) shall say unto him from God; Thou art waighed in the balance, and
found too light, and thine office (at least ought to be) taken from thee.

The first Character or weight.
Ability.
The first and prime mark is Ability (Anishi Chaijl). So our new translation
expresses it well in a comprehensiue word, and so I find it in Scripture
signifying and comprising all the seueralls that belong to faculty or
ability: whereof I number first three complementall for conveniencie;
secondly, three substantial and of necessity.

First Chaijl includes strength of body and manhood, Strength.
such as inableth them for riding, going, sitting, watching, and industrious
execution of their place: Such as the scripture commends in Caleb at fourscore
and five, and stories in Vespasian, our Alfred, Hardicanutus, Ironsides, etc.

Which our straight buttoned, carpet Wealth.
wanting, cannot endure to hold out a forenoon or afternoon sitting without a
Tobacco bait, or a game at Bowls, or some such breathing to refresh their
bodies and minds, little acquainted with the tediousnes of wise and serious
business: Woe to the people (says Solomon) whose Princes are children and eat
in the morning; and blessed are the people whose Governors eat in time and for
strength. Eccles. 10.

Secondly, neither is wealth to be excluded: That Diana of the world, which it
only accounts Ability, and calls it opes and potentia, which yet is better
called value than valor, yet may it concur to make up that which our Law
term calls mieulx vailiant; and though at the beam of the Sanctuary money
makes not the man, yet it adds some metal to the man.

Ad populum phaleras, which taught Agrippa to come to the Judgment seat with
pomp, state, and attendance, like that of our Sheriffs not to be neglected, as
that which procures some terror and awe in the people: which Alexander well
advised of, left his Gigantique armor behind him among the Indians, and used
more state then at Greece.

(...) Cassa and hordea^ea morionu sceptra. Chapm. Z^ch.
the Sophistry of government, as one calls them. And as Zachary the Prophet
says, the instruments of a foolish Governor. And such as Jeremy derides in
Shallum the son of Josiah, Ierem. 22. 14.
Think thou to rule because of thy large building, Cedar seeling, painted
with vermilian, did not thy Father prosper when he did execute Judgment and
Justice? which is indeed the truth and substance, the other but the flourish.

Thirdly, I exclude not birth and Birth.
which many times conveyes spirit and courage with it, Blessed is the land
whose Princes are the sons of Nobles. Eccles. 10. 17.
Eagles produce Eagles, and Crows Crauens, yet regeneration and education
often corrects this rule: and experience tells us, That cottages and ploughes
have brought forth as able men for the gown and sword, as Palaces and
Scepters. Judge 6. 15.
Gideon came out of the poorest of the family of Manasse, and he the least in
his fathers house, a poor thresher. David was taken from the sheepefold etc.
yet both mighty men of valor, and special Saviors of their people. And the
wisdom of some of our neighbor Nations is much to be commended in this, that
if they discern an excellent spirit and faculty in any man, they respect not
his wealth, or birth, or profession, but choose him into their Magistracy and
weighty employments.

1 Wisdom and experience.
the three following of the maine and essential to Magistracy, all comprised
under the word Chaijl, as first wisdom and experience, which the Preacher tells
us is better then strength, Eccles. 9. 16.
either of body or estate. And of this ability Moses expounds this word in his
practice, Deutro. 1. 15. which is a good Commentary upon his fathers advice.

Monstrum eui lumen ademptum.
but a blind Polyphemus, or a monster without an eye. If he want either skill
in the laws, or observation of his own, must he not be tutored by his
Clarke, as it often falls out? or shall he not be misled by some Counselor,
crossed and contradicted by every stander by, that shall tell him this you
cannot do by Law, or I take it you are besides your book.

The second is strength of mind, to 2 Moderation of mind, or equanimity
which he that weilds at will, is stronger then he that subdues a city and
conquers a Kingdom, to bear and forbear, and to order the mutinous
perturbations of the mind, is that ability which the Grecians call (...) and
(...).

Very requisite in a Judge, who must and homeliness of common people in giving
evidence after their plain fashion and faculty, in time, and multitude of
words, happily with some absurdities of phrase or gesture, nor impatient
toward their foolish affected eloquent terms, nor any thing else whereby the
truth of their tale may be ghessed at.

Geneua translation, that fortitude, Courage or Magnanimity.
valor and magnanimity, which we call courage and spirit; typified in Judah
the Law-giuing Tribe, whose emblem or scutchion was the Lion Couchant, that
sits or lies by the prey without fear of rescue, that turns not his head at
the sight of any other creature, Prou. 30. which Solomon symbolized in the
steps of his throne adorned with Lions: The Athenian Judges by sitting in
Mars-street. (...).
Some think that from this virtue Constantine was termed Revel. 12. the
Churches male or manchilde: others apply it to Luther: others to Christ, the
true Lion of Judah.

And though I regard not the Salick because the God of spirits has often put
great spirits into that sex; yet I mislike not Theodorets observation upon that
in Leuiticus, Leuit. ^. 22. and 27.
where the Ruler for his sin is enjoined to offer an hee-goat, (...).
the private man a shee-goat. The male suits the Ruler best, and the female the
ruled.

This ability is so requisite, that it is Moses charge to Joshua, and David's to
Solomon. And experience has taught, that where this one has abounded, though
the other have been wanting in some Magistrates: they have done more good
service to their Country, then many others who have had some tolerable measure
of the rest, but have failed only in this.

Had not the principal posts of an rulers and standarts that regulate other
measures, to be made of soft wood, or of lead, that will bend and bow at
pleasure? do men choose a starting horse to lead the teeme? had not he need
be of David's valor, and Sampsons courage, that must take the pray out of the
Lions mouth, and rescue the oppressed from the man that is too mighty for him?
had not he need to be of some spirit and resolution, that must neglect the
displeasure and frowns, reject the letters and suits of great men and
superiors?

the clamours, rumors, and sometimes the flatteries of the vulgar, which often
intoxicate able men, and make them as weak as water, yielding and giving as
Pilate, when he heard but a buzze that he was not Caesar's friend, and saw that
in dismissing Christ, he should displease the Jews.

What heroycall spirit had he need Hydra of sin, oppose the current of
times, and the torrent of vice, that must turn the wheel over the wicked;
especially such roaring monsters, and rebellious Chora's, such lawless sons of
Belial, wherewith our times swarm, who stick not to oppose with crest and
breast, whosoever stand in the way of their humors and lusts? Surely, if Iethro
called for courage in those modest primitive times, and among a people newly
tamed with Egyptian yokes: what do our audacious and fore-headlesse
Swaggerers require? our lees and dregs of time; not unlike to those wherein God
was feign to raise up extraordinary Judges, to smite hip and thigh, etc. What
Atlas shall support the state of the ruinous and tottering world, in these
perilous ends of time?



Gedeon in the ears of all the faint-hearted. Whosoever is fearful and
timorous, let him depart from mount Gilead, Judge. 7. 3.
and there departed twenty thousand; and yet God the second time, out of the
remnant, viz. ten thousand, defaulks all the lazy persons, and reduced that
huge army to three hundred able persons.

It were excellent for the Commonwealth, Gedeon, with God and the Kings offices.

On the contrary, it says to all men Gedeon, The Lord is with thee thou mighty
man of valor, go on in this thy might to save Israel, etc. What is our office
that are Ministers, but as Gods Trumpetters and Drummers to encourage, hearten
and put life in those that fight his battles and do his work. By the virtue
then of this my text, I say to every good-hearted Magistrate, proceed and go
on from strength to strength.

Job, Job 28.
Silver has his vein, and gold his mine where it is found, iron is taken out
of the earth, and brass moulten out of the stone, but the place of this
ability is not to be found in the land of the living. Nature says it is not
to be found in me; Wealth and Honor says not in me: It is falsely said of
Cato and Fabricius, that the Sun might sooner be stayed or altered in his race,
then they in the course of Justice. The stoutest and the richest will yield.
But David tells his son Solomon on his deathbed, where he shall find it.
Thine, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. and 12.
o Lord, is greatness and power, thou art the head of all riches, honor and
strength are in thy hands, it is in thee to make great, etc. This God has
taught David to break a bow of steel with his hands: It is he that loses
the collar of Princes, girdeth their loins, and vngirdeth them again, befooles
the Counselor, the Judge and the spokesman: He it was that made the shoes of
Joseph as strong as brass, Jeremiah as a wall of brass, Caleb as strong at
fourscore and five as at forty; if Sampsons hair be off, and God departed
from him, he is as other men, and he can strengthen him again without his
locks at his pleasure.

If any man want wisdom or

It is the fault of many Christian Magistrates, ever to be complaining and
groaning under the burden: as if ease and delicacie were to be sought for in
government. What if there be a Lion in the way? the righteous is bolder then
the Lion: what if thou be weak? is not God strength? and does not he perfect
his strength in our weakness? what if there be many opposites in the way, true
courage is strong as death, Cant. 8.
and will trample all under feet without resistance.



Eccles. 7. 1^.
that knew what he said, wisdom strengthens one man more then twenty mighty
Potentates that are in a city, he that fears God shall come forth of all
dangers. Whence by way of passage, note that the next point of the fear of
God, is that which gives life to the foregoing, and to the two following
also: and is placed in the text, as the heart in the body, for conueying life
to all the parts; or as a dram of musk, perfuming the whole box of ointment.

Fearing God.
Iethro must be understood not of the poor bastardly slavish fear, The second
Character.
which depraved nature has left in all: nor Felix, Balshazzar and Caligula
were not void of, and yet never the better Magistrates: But such a filial
fear, as faith and the assurance of Gods love and salvation breeds; such as
awed Joseph, Cornelius, David, etc. This is the fear required by Iethro, (...)
quae parit (...), godliness which breeds an heedfulnesse in all our ways
and actions.

Without this fear of God, what is ability but the Devils anuile, whereon he
forgeth and hammereth mischief? what is wisdom but subtilty? what is courage
unsanctified, but injustice? wherein is such skill in the laws commonly
employed, but in coloring and covering bad causes and persons, and in making
the laws a nose of wax to private ends? other men have other bits and
restraints; but men in authority, if they fear not God, have nothing else to
fear. Wherefore Christ ioynes them well in the unrighteous Judge, that he
feared neither God nor man. If he be a simple coward, he fears all men, if a
man of ability, he fears none at all.

Sampsons cords, which he snapt asunder, as fast as they were offered him. The
common sort of our people count the oaths that men take when they take
offices, no other then formal: so they distinguish them (a strange
distinction) from other oaths of contract, and dally with them accordingly.

They discern God no more in oaths, then Christ in the Sacraments: Judas; and
runs them headlong into all perjured courses: which makes the land to mourn
for the contempt of oaths, and neglect of duties. What is the ground of all
fidelity to King and Country, but religion? welfare Constantius his maxim, He
cannot be faithful to me, that is unfaithful to God. Why then, what are
oaths for Atheists and Papists, other then collers for monkies necks, which
slip them at their pleasure? such neither are nor can be good subjects:
muchlesse good Magistrates. Papists will keep no faith with Protestants, (...).
let Protestants give no trust to Papists, (...)
though they swear upon all the books in the world.

Finally, what is the principal scope Cato or a Gallio, who bears the sword
in vain for God and his ends; who never minds any thing but his own Cabinet,
or the ship of the Commonwealth at the best: for the other, sincke they swim
they, all is one to him, he took no charge, nor will he take notice of them.

Paul Gods Minister and sword bearer: John 3.
yea, Romans 13.
the very form and soul of such an one: yea, it troubles me to make it,
Eccles. 12. 13.
but a part which Solomon calls the whole of a man, especially such a man who
is sent of God, 1 Pet. 2.
for the praise of the godly, and the punishment of evil doers. In which
respect being the maine of my Text, give me leave to give you a short character
of such a Magistrate, as this quality will make him, where ever it is found in
any good latitude.

He is one that came into his place Olanes upon the flead skin of his (...),
nailed by Cambyses on (...) Tribunal: or as a Russian Judge that fears the
boiling caldron, or open battocking: or the Turkish Senate, when they think
the great Turk to stand behind the Arras, at the dangerous door.

Deuteronomy. 17. 18.) a copy of the law of his God before him, and reads it all the
days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep
the Commandment without turning aside, either to the right hand or left.

little ones, nor afford a good look to a varlet, nor yet so to respect their
persons, as to wrong their cause; for he knows all these to be abomination to
his Lord, into whose hands he dreads to fall, as knowing him a consuming fire,
and one that has provided Tophet for Princes. When an unlawful suit is
commenced by power or by friendship, his heart answers if not his tongue) with
Job: How shall I do this, and answer God when he comes to judgment.

As for bribes, he dares not look

When he comes in court, he fixes nor behind him for bribes, Summa boni
Iudicu est neque respicere, neque despicere, neque circumspicere, sed
suspicere. (...) in Ioh. 5. 30.
but upward on God: generally considering that Christ is Lord Paramont of all
courts of justice, and that now his father has resigned all judgment into his
hands. He stewards all to his content, promotes his profits without wrong to
the Tennant. Looks so to the Church, that the Commonweal receive no
detriment: and so to the Commonwealth, as the Church shall surely flourish: so
countenancing the servants of God, that he wrong not the worst worldling:
maintains piety, and neglects not equity: keeps his house well, but his
Church better: in frequenting whereof, he with his family are presidents to all
the hundreds where he dwells: And in a word, does as much good by his example,
as by his authority.

This is the godly man, whom the Lord chooses and guides, whose praise and
reward is of God: which David having found true in his life, a little before
his death, records to all ages. 2 Samuel (...). 3. 4
The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. The God of
Israel spoke to me, the strength of Israel said, thou shall bear rule over
men, being just, and ruling in the fear of God. Even as the morning light when
the sun rises, the morning, I say, without clouds, so shall mine house be,
and not as the grass of the earth is by the bright rain. For God has made
with me an everlasting covenant, perfect in all points and sure.

Let the Devil and the world storm and burst with envy, one of these is they
are but all as ciphers in Gods account.



Deputies for him, Imps of his Kingdom, far better becoming an Ale-bench,
then a Shire-bench, and the bar, then a Judgment seat.

But what shall I say to such mock-god-like Esau's? shall I take up the words
of Moses: if thou will not fear this glorious name, The Lord thy God, I will
make thy plagues wonderful, and of great continuance: Or those of David, which
perhaps will sit them better, and these times of imminent changes, They know
not, and understand nothing; they walk in darkness, albeit the foundations of
the earth be moved: I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men, and
fall like others. Or will they suffer the Prophets exhortation, who art thou
that dreadest a mortal man, Isa. 52. 8. 12. 13.
whose breath is in his nostrils, whom the moth shall eat like a garment, and
the worm like wool: And forgettest thy maker, that has spread the heavens,
laid the foundations of the earth, that gives the first and latter rain, that
has set the bounds to the sea, Ier 5. 22. 24.
etc. Or will they hear Salomons end of all? Fear God, that will bring every
secret to judgment: or a greater yet then Solomon, Fear him that is able when
he has killed the body, to destroy the soul also in hell fire for evermore.



Men of truth.
Without which, show of religion The third Character.
a glorious profession, but plain hypocrisy: And courage, if it be not for
the truth and in the truth, is but either Thrasonicall audacity, or wicked
impudency. And therefore this character added to the former, ioynes those which
are in the form of Iurates, and ought to be in all Officers, good men and
true.

This style, men of truth, admits two Israelite, a true Nathaniel void of
guile, as truth is opposed to hypocrisy: (...).
or else a lover of the truth, as truth is opposed unto falsehood. One that in
particular cases, suits, and controversies between man and man, counts it his
honor to sift out the truth, maintain the truth, stick to it, not suffering
himself to be misinformed by Tale-bearers, Promoters and Sycophants: nor
misled and perverted by the false pleading and coloring of consciencelesse
Counselors: But brings judgment to the balance and rule of righteousness,
and delights (as the hound does naturally in senting out the hare) to search
and trace out the truth, out of all the thickets and dens of iuggling and
conueyance, laboring as much to boult it out by examination in Hypothesi, as
the Philosophers by disputations in Thesi: being of his temper that worthily
said, Plato is my friend, Socrates my friend, but the Truth is my dearest
friend. Or like Job, Job. 29. 16.
who covered himself with Justice, and to whom Judgment was as a robe and a
crown, who when he knew not the cause, sought it out diligently.

David, Psalm. 101. 7.
abandons all liars out of his household: whereas of a Prince that hearkneth to
lies, all his servants are Liers. And of such Justice, which is in truth and
for truth, I say (as of old it was said) neither the evening nor the morning
star equals it in brightness. (...).


and utterly perished from among men, Isa. 54. 4.
Judgment fails and stands a far off, equity enters not. The common trade
of the times, being to weaue lies in all cases, especially against the true
servants of God. And the common weakness of the times, to receive the slanders
which are broached and bruited by tongues set on fire from hell: so that he
that refraines from cunning, makes himself a prey, the Latin whereof was all
that Lewis the eleventh would have his son to learn: (...)
and is all the policy that most study and practice. Insomuch that the common
by-words are, that when men swear by faith and truth, they swear by Idols
that are not, names they are and notions, things they are not, nor substances:
Jewels they are, but such as use them die beggars: honorable Ladies and
Mistresses they are, but such as follow them close at the heels, may have their
teeth dashed out of their heads.

Tiberius his Art, or the Devils rather, the father of the Art, of
dissimulation. In the end they shall prove it to be most pernicious to the
Students and Masters of it. Let the children of truth justify their mother,
which has the reward of honor in her right hand, and of wealth in the left.
And if it should be attended with hatred and crosses for a time, yet he that
is Amen, the true witness, yea truth it self, will reward them in the end:
when he shall shut out with the dogs, all such as love and make lies; with
whose exhortation I close up this lincke, and knit with the following, Buy the
truth and sell it not, which he that means to do must be

A true hater of covetousness,
Else will Salomons several proverbs The fourth Character. Prou. 17. 4.
The wicked gives heed to the false lip, and the lier to a naughty tongue. He
takes the gift out of the bosom to wrest judgment. Acceptatio muneris est
preuaricatio ver^tatis
Acceptance of gifts prove commonly preuarication to the truth. It is
impossible to be a champion to Truth, and a slave to Mammon: but he must love
the one and hate the other. It is best therefore to hate the worst, yea the
worst of all vices incident to Magistracy: the root of all evil, which if it
be not rooted out of the Magistrates heart, it alone will poison all the three
former qualities required in him. Neither strength, nor religion, nor love of
the truth, shall be able to preserve him from enchantments of covetousness.

Which being an inordinate love of (...).
an evil concupiscence of having more then God has allotted, or a lawful
course affoordeth: is such a kind of Idolatry, as transformeth the worshippers
of this golden calfe into Idols themselves, Exodus ^7.
making them to have eyes that see not, ears that hear not: only leaving them
hands to handle that which peruerteth the eyes of the wise. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
It bores out their eyes, and makes them as blind as ever was Sampson and
Zedekiah.

(...)
And a drams weight iniected, incline the golden scoles of Justice to which
side they please.

Balaams deceiptfull wages, that he that will admit them for Justice, (...)
shall soon take them for injustice: if the right hand be full of bribes the
left hand must be full of mischief. The Devil as well as the Briber lays
his hooks in this shrap, whereof he that is greedy, and will needs be rich,
falls into his snare, and many other noisome lusts, 1 Timothy 6.
which sincke men into perdition, peirceth their souls with sorrow, their
names with reproach: cause them to swerue from the truth, and make shipwreck
of a good conscience: Even the most precious things are vile and cheap in his
eyes: to whom money is dear, he will not stick with Ahab to sell even
himself to work wickedness for the compassing of that this soul loves and
longs after.

But thou oh man of God fly these Ammon did Thamar, first thrust it out of thy
heart, and shut and lock the door after it. Secondly, Heb. 13. 5.
let thy behavior and conversation be auerse and strange from the love of
money. (...).
Let all sordid and filthy lucre be abominable: all ill gotten goods
execrable; let them stincke in thy nostrils, as ill as Vespasians tribute of
urine.

Shake thy lap of bribes with Nehemiah. Consider as Bernard counsels Eugenius,
(...)
How the people may grow rich under thee, and not thou by them. Remember the
end of Balaams wages, and of Judas his bag. And wish with Damianus rather to
have Gehazies lepry, then his curse entailed to thee and thy posterity, and
inheritance after thee: fretting thine estate as a canker and moth, consuming
your flesh as fire, and crying in the ears of the Lord of hosts for vengeance.

Pharisees laugh at Christ his woes, because they were covetous: And so do
they serve all our caueats against covetousness, applauding themselves and
laughing in their sleeves, when they behold their bags in the chest, and their
lands from off their Turrets, saying to themselves, What is a man but his
wealth? What is an office but the fees?

Esaias, that if Paul had the preaching of it, Esaias 33 14.
he would make every groping and griping Felix to tremble, I mean such as the
Scripture terms roaring Lions, ranging Bears, Horse-leeches, Wolves,
devouring all in the evening, and leaving none till the morning: as well Judges
that judge for reward, and say with shame, Bring you; such as the Country
calls Capon-Iustices: as also such mercenary Lawyers, as sell both their
tongues and their silence, their clients causes and their own consciences: who
only keep life in the law, so long as there is money in the purse; and when
this golden stream cease, the mill stands still, and the case is altered:
such extorting Officers of Justice, as invent pullies and winches for
extraordinary fees, to the miserable undoing of poor suitors: such false
perjured Sheriffs, Stewards of liberties and their Deputies, as for money
falsify their charges: such corrupted Iurates and witnesses of the post, which
are as hammers and swords, and sharp arrows in their brethrens hearts: such
cheese-bayliffs and lamb-bayliffs, as vex the poor Contrymen with unjust
summons to the Assizes and Sessions, with the rest of that Rabble.

to have and to hold. Let such consult shame to their houses: let such make
their offices as casting nets for all fish that come: till they get the Devil
and all: Let them heap up treasures of wickedness and treasures of wrath
withal.

John's counsel prevail with them, to be content with their due wages: Let
Paul persuade them, that godliness is gain with contentation: Solomon, that
Gods blessing makes rich, and adds no sorrow therewith: So shall they follow
Iethro's advise the better, and and prove complete Magistrates and Officers:
Men of courage, men of religion, men of truth, hating covetousness.

These are the four Cardinal virtues statues of the gods, the statues of men:
then would people become voluntary subjects, put the scepters into their hands,
and the law of commanding and obeying become easy, things thought irreparable
would easily be reformed.

The third part.
But before I come to make use of peace only, as I fear most have imagined in
hearing it: but to all from the highest and greatest, to the lowest and least
Instrument of Justice, from the Governor of the thousand, to the Centurion,
from him to the Tithingman or Decinour. To the which ancient division of the
Jewish Commonwealth, our platform agrees in substance. Their Sanedrim or
Senate of seventy, to our Parliament, Counsell-Table, Starr-chamber,
Exchequer-chamber, etc. Our Justices of Assizes in their Circuit, and Justices
of peace in their general commission or dominion, and High Sheriffs in their
Shires, answering to the Rulers of thousands.

Our Justices in their several divisions, Judges of hundred Courts and Turns
to their Rulers of hundreds, to whom I may add high Constables in their
places, our Court-leets, and Court-barons, to the rulers of fifties; to whom I
add ordinary Constables in their offices, our chief Pledges, Tything-men or
Deciners, to their rulers of tens. Now all these Iethro means, and speaks of
every one of them in their station and degree, conceiving the Commonwealth, as
an instrument not well in tune, if but the least of these strings be false or
naught.

Contrary to the common and dangerous Alas, alas, the more subject to tentation
and vice it is, the more needful it is that none other should have them.

Oh but (say they) a good Judge or highest, but of the Sun and Moon, and the
lowest and nearest orbs that govern the world. It is the ground-winde, not the
rack-winde, that drives mills and ships. It is in the Civil, as in the
Ecclesiastical body: if Bishops be never so learned, and the parishionall
Minister negligent, worldly, proud, or blind Sr. John's, the people perish for
want of vision.

Sargeant, or any other that should execute Justice, be remiss and slack,
then must the Dutch-mans proverb be verified, Look what the bell is without
the clapper, Quod campana seen (...) and apud (...).
such are good laws and judgments without due execution.

Thus we see in this curious clockwork of Justice, the least pin or wheel
amiss may distemper and disorder all: but if care were had to frame all these
parts of the building according to the plat-forme of this skillful Architect,
what an absolute harmony of the parts, what an exact perfection of the whole;
yea, what golden times should we live to see?

Hearken o ye mountains and little Application.
you Rulers of thousands, you Rulers of tens, you reverend Sages of the Laws,
you worshipful Knights and Gentlemen of the Country: ye listen to this
charge of Iethro: ye of the meanest place of the common-welth, weigh not things
nor persons at the common beam of custom and opinion, but at the golden
standart of Gods Sanctuary, with these Goldsmiths waights of my text: which if
I shall persuade you to do, I fear that we must say with the Psalmist, that
sons of men Beni-Adam, Psalm. 62 9.
yea the cheifest men Beni-ish, to be laid upon the balance, will be found
lies and lighter then vanity: here money will not make the man, nor craft
carry it away. Every Nabal of mount Carmel, nor every Achitophel may not be
admitted.

Samuel to Saul, God has rent thine office from thee: and bestowed it on thy
better: or as the Scripture of Judas, let another more worthy take his place:
if this order and rule of trial might take place, how many would be turned
out of commission? how many would be offici perdae? how would benches and
Shire-houses be thinned?

As for this present, to the which Daniel, or picture in Horace, or table of
the Popes of Rome, which for memories sake I reduce to these two Disticks Ex
auro caput est, argentea brachia, venture
Aeneus, admisto ferrea crura luto
Diuino capiti, ceruix humana, ferinus
Assuitur truncus Daemonijque pedes.


The head of gold. And with such you to prove and weigh your selves by
Iethro's waights, and accordingly to have peace and approofe in your own
consciences, before the Judge of all Judges.

God be praised, religious and able Justices, and so many, as I believe few
other Benches are furnished withal, yet in this silver I fear some dross,
some whose skill and ability the Country doubts of, being conceived to be
either so simple or so timorous, that they dare meddle with none that dare
meddle with them: or else so popular they will displease none. The Devil
himself they say may keep an Alehouse under their nose. Others whose
religion they call into question, at least for the truth, and for the power of
it: unless religion may stand with common swearing, with drinking, with
familiarity with Papists and Recusants, with ungoverned and ungodly families,
void of all exercises of religion, fraught with spirits of the buttery,
Ruffians, Ale-house-hunters, and such as are the Sin-tutours and Sin-leaders to
all the Country about them. I hope there be but few such, I could wish there
were none at all.

The breast and belly of brass, the

The legs and feet of iron and clay, Beelzebub wanted officers, he needed no
worse then some of these: what mysteries have they to vex the poor
Contrymen with false arrests? and by virtue of that Statute tying every Free
holder of forty shillings per annum, to attend the Assizes, but I list not to
stir this sediment of the country too unsavory to be raked up in a sermon.

Iehosophat would visit and reform, or that you Judges in these your days of
visitations, would redress some part of these greeuances, and reduce all to
this Idaea of Iethro's, which indeed would make an Heaven upon earth amongst
us. An Vtopia I fear some will say, too good to be true, Ob.
obiecting to me as to Cato, that he not discerning the times he lived in,
looked for Plato's Commonwealth in the dreggs of Romulus. And so that these
Magistrates thus limbed out, might be found in Moses golden age of the world,
but not in these lees of time.

Answ.
that if Iethro were now to give advice, he would double the force of it: If
David's reason be true, it is now high time for God to work, for men have
destroyed his Law: Was there ever more need of courage then now, when sin is
so audacious? of truth, when Esawisme? of religion, when hypocrisy and
iniquity? of contentation, when the love of the world so abounds? The only way
to repair these ruins of the dying world is to renew government to the
primitive beauty of it: the face whereof I have now showed in this excellent
Mirror or Looking-glass: so you go not away, and forget both the comeliness
and spots it has showed you, but wash and be clean, and such as it would
have you to be.

There being nothing else remaining

Let them judge the people at al times, The fourth part.
etc.

Iethro his discourse. How do you think it would have affected him, to have
seen six or seven I have heard sixteen sums set upon one suit. These our
English delays being (as Marnixius complained) worse then the Spanish
strappadoes.



neighbors causes: Let him (as the woman said to Philip) have no leisure to
bear office. Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, and with
holds his hands there from.

You Gentlemen complain often factotum and fay't neant.

From this neglect comes that and judge of a courtesy made out of the path, or
a blow given upon the shoulder upon occasion of a wager, or such like
bawble-trespasses which I shame to mention. And to punish every petty larceny,
every small riot or disorder, which lighter controversies and faults, if
particular Officers would comprimize and redress in their Spheres, these
greater Orbs should not be troubled with them.

Then indeed would that follow, which Iethro assures Moses of in the last part
of my Text, The fifth part.
ver. 23. If thou do this thing (God so commanding thee) then shall thou and
thy people endure, and all this people shall go quietly to their place.

blew and purple silk might shine and glister within the Tabernacle, the
outside was covered with red skins and goats hair, such a shelter is
Magistracy to Gods Church and Religion. Nebuchadnezzar was a great tree, and
every particular Magistrate a little one under whose boughs people build and
sing, and bring up their young ones in religious nurture, even foster-fathers
as Joseph in Egypt. Such were the rich and religious times under David and
Solomon, and under such as are described, Esa. 32. which whole chapter is worth
the reading, as a just Commentary upon this point: setting forth the felicity,
quietness, plenty, virtue and piety of just Governors, as are hiding places
from the wind, and refuges from the tempest, rivers of waters to to dry
places, and as rain to the new mowen grass, etc.

Such also were the times enjoyed Constantine, deciphered as I take it, Revel.
8. when there was silence in the heaven about half an hour, the golden vialls
filled with sweet odors, the prayers of the Saints ascending as a pillar of
smoke up to heaven.

Eusebius. lib. 10.
and one of them at large recorded by Eusebius, which whole book is nothing
but an Elogium of those peaceable days, wherein the Church was edified and
multiplied. The Commonwealth being to the Church, as the Elm to the Vine, or
as the garden to the Bees; the flourishing of the one, the thriuing of the
other; and the disturbance of the one, the disquiet of the other.

London with suits. As I have known a Constable molested with five or six
actions, for an act of Justice, in punishing vice according to his office. With
what bitterness of spirit do men groan under delayed and perverted Justice,
when it is turned into Hemlocke, and turns them out of their wits, some of
them swouning at the sight of their orders, as I have heard from credible
eyewitnesses, others ready to destroy themselves, their adversaries, yea and
sometime their Judges.

Oh the benefit of good Magistrates, summum bonum, which the Philosophers so
much sought after, he now enjoying more sweetness of little, then of great
revenues in troublous times. Surely, we Christians ought to prize it as the
mean of our greatest good, of our peaceable frequenting of our Churches, and
our serving of God. Merchants make a higher use, and are more glad of a calm
then common passengers: so should we Christians then Heathens, by how much we
may and ought to improoue it for richer ends of Gods glory, and the salvation
of our souls.



Amos speaks) shall judgment flow as waters, and righteousness run down as
a mighty torrent; or as David, Then shall the earth increase, all people shall
praise God, and God even our God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth
shall fear him. And so I make Iethro's preface my conclusion. I have given you
counsel this day: Hearken to my voice, and the Lord God be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.
To my loving Brother Mr. SAMVEL WARD.
BRother, if you meet with your Iethro's counsel returned from beyond the
seas, and as much beyond your expectation preserved alive, as his son in law
was against Pharaoh's Iniunction, meruell as much as you will, but be no more
offended then you have cause. Ioab sinned wider on the other hand in destroying
David's Absalom, contrary to his serious charge, yet Ioab was pardoned, and yet
no brother. I have noted you hitherto inexorable for your own publishing of
any thing of your own; whether out of judgment, modesty, curiosity, or
melancholy, I judge not: but when others have adventured them with fruit and
acceptance, into the light, I have seen you rest content with the public
good The like leave I have taken, expecting like success, assuring you and my
self of the general welcomeness and usefulness heerof to all whom it
concerns, which are the greatest number of the land, even so many as have any
reference to Sessions and Assizes, if not all sorts of Christians. Only I
fear that the corruption of our times is grown so gross and Eglon-like, that
it does not Ebud-like enough sharpen the points, and send them home to the
heft, that they may reach to the quick. I had my self added thereto a project
and persuasion for the redress of many abuses crept into offices and officers,
having spent so much time in the study of the law, and execution of some
offices, as made me weary of the errors I saw, and heartily wish the
reformation of them: but fearing I have learned too much bluntness and
plumpnesse of speech among the Lutherans, which is here as prime a quality, as
smoothnes with you, as also loath to meddle out of mine orb, in my second
thoughts I suppressed it. And so wishing unto this, many diligent, conscionable
and ingenuous Readers and Appliers, and to them Gods blessing and the fruit
intended, I take my leave. From Elbing in Prusia.

Your brother in the flesh, in the Lord, and in the work of the ministry.
NATH. WARD.


