WOE TO DRVNKARDS.

A Sermon by SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich.



LONDON Printed by A. Math for John Marriott, and John Grismand, and are to be
sold at their Shops in St. Dunstons Churchyard, and in Paul's Alley at the
Sign of the Gunne. 1622.

PROVE. 23. verse. 29.32. To whom is Woe? to whom is Sorrow? to whom is Strife?
etc.

In the end it will bite like a Serpent, and sting like a Cockatrice.


SEer, art thou also blind? Watchman art thou also drunk, Esaias 21.
or asleep? Or has a Spirit of slumber put out thine eyes? Up to thy
Watchtower, what descriest thou* Ah Lord! what end or number is there of the
vanities which mine eyes are weary of beholding* But what feast thou? I see men
walking like the topps of trees shaken with the Wind; like Masts of Ships
reeling on the tempestuous Seas. Drunkenness, I mean, that hateful
Night-bird, which was wont to wait for the twilight, to seek nookes and
corners, to avoid the houting and wonderment of Boys and Girls: Now as if it
were some Eglet to dare the Sunlight, to fly abroad at high noone in every
street, in open Markets and Faires without fear or shame, without control,
or punishment, to the disgrace of the Nation, the outfacing of Magistracy and
Ministry, the utter undoing (without timely prevention) of health and wealth,
Piety and Virtue, Town and Country, Church and Commonwealth. And do thou
like a dumb dog hold thy peace at these things, do thou with Salomons
sluggard fould thine hands in thy bosom, and give thy self to ease and
drowsiness, while the envious man causes the noysomest and basest of weeds to
overrun the choysest Eden of God? Up and Arise, lift up thy voice, spare
not, and cry aloud? What shall I cry? Cry woe and woe again unto the Crown
of pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim. Esaias 5.11.22. Esaias 28.1. Joel 1.5. Hab. 2.
James ^.
Take up a parable, and tell them how it stingeth like the Cockatrice, declare
unto them the deadly poison of this odious sin. Show them also the sovereign
Antidote and Cure of it, in the cup that was drunk off by him, that was able
to overcome it: Cause them to behold the brazen Serpent and be healed. And
what though some of these deaf Adders will not be charmed not cured; yea,
though few or none of this swinish heard of habitual drunkards, accustomed to
wallow in their mire, yea, deeply and irrecouerably plunged by legions of
Devils into the dead sea of their filthiness; what if not one of them will be
washed and made clean, but turn again to their vomit, and trample the
pearls of all admonition under feet; yea, turn again, and rend their
reprouers with scoffs and scorns, making jests and songs on their Alebench:
Yet may some young ones be deterred, and some nouices reclaimed, some parents
and Magistrates awakened to prevent and suppress the spreading of this
gangrene: and God have his work in such as belong to his grace. And what is
impossible to the work of his grace?

Go to them now ye Drunkards, listen not what I, or any ordinary hedge-priest
(as you style us, but that most Wise and experienced royal Preacher) has to
say unto you. And because you are a dull and thick-eared generation, he first
deals with you by way of question, a figure of force and impression. To whom
is woe, etc. (...). Basil
You use to say, Woe be to hypocrites. It Is true, woe be to such and all other
witting and willing sinners, but there are no kind of offenders on whom woe
does so palpably ineuitably attend as to you drunkards. You promise your selves
mirth, pleasure, and iollity in your Cups, but for one drop of your mad mirth
be sure of gallons and tons of woe, gall, wormwood and bitterness here and
hereafter. Other sinners shall taste of the Cup, but you shall drink of the
dregs of Gods wrath and displeasure. To whom is strife. You talk of good
fellowship and friendship, but wine is a rager and tumultuous makebate, and
serts you a quarrelling, and meddling. When wit's out of the head and strength
out of the body, it thrustes even Cowards and dastards unfenced and unarmed
into needles frayes and combats. And then to whom are wounds, broken heads,
blue eyes, maimed limbs* You have a drunken byword: Drunkards take no harm,
but how many are the mishaps and untimely misfortunes that betyde such, which
though they feel not in drink, they carry as marks and brands to their
grave. You pretend you drink healthes and for health, but to whom are all kind
of diseases, infirmities, deformities, pearled faces, palsies, dropsies,
headaches? If not to drunkards.

Upon these premises he forcibly inferrs his sober and serious advice. Look
upon these woeful effects and evils of drunkenness, and look not upon the
Wine, look upon the blew wounds, upon the red eyes it causes, and look not
on the red color when it sparkleth in the cup. If there were no worse then
these, yet would no wise man be overtaken with Wine: as if he should say, What
see you in the Cup or drink, that counteruaileth these dregs that lie in the
bottom. Behold, this is the Sugar you are to look for, and the tang it leaves
behind. Woe and alas, sorrow and strife, shame, poverty and diseases; these
are enough to make it odious, but that which follows withal, will make it
hideous and fearful. For Solomon duly considering that he speaks to men
past shame and grace, senseless of blows, and therefore much more of reasons
and words insisteth not upon these petty woes; (...), Acharito chenachash,
veche Siphgnoni iaphresh: no uissimo sub tanquam Serpens mordebit, and tanquam
regulus punget. Montanus and Mercerus, tamquam haemorrhois vel dipsas Tremelius.
which they, bewitched and besotted with the love of Wine, will easily ouer-see
and ouerleape: but sets before their eyes the direful end and fruit, the
black and poysonfull tail of this sin. In the end it stingeth like the
Serpent, it biteth like the Cockatrice (or Adder) says our new Translation.

All Interpretors agree, that he means some most virulent Serpent, whose
poison is present and deadly. All the Woes he has mentioned before, were but
as the sting of some Emmet, Waspe or Nettle, in comparison of this Cockatrice,
which is even unto death; death speedy, death painful, and woeful death, and
that as naturally and ineuitably, as Opium procures sleep, as Ellebore
purges, or any Poison kills.

Three forked is this sting, and threefold is the death it procures to all
that are stung therewith. Vim habens presentaneam sopori ferara. etc. Remus in
Spici legiis. Vide etiam Seneca ep. 84. vbi cum opio elleboro veneno ebrietatem
comparat.
The first is the death of grace, the second is of the body, the third is of
soul and body eternal. All sin is the poison wherewithal the old Serpent and
Red Dragon enuenoms the soul of man, but no sin (except it be that which is
unto death) so mortal as this, which though not ever vnpardonably, yet for the
most part is also irrecouerably, and ineuitably unto death. See thou one
bitte^ with any other Snake, there is hope and help. As the Father said of his
son, when he had information of his gaming, of his prodigality, yea, of his
whoring: but when he heard that he was poisoned with drunkenness, he gave
him for dead, his case for desperate and forlorn. Age and experience often
cures the other; but this encrcaseth with years, and parts not till death.
Whoring is a deep Ditch, yet some few shall a man see return and lay hold on
the ways of life, one of a thousand, but scarce one Drunkard of ten thousand.
One, Ambrose mentions, and one have I known, and but one of all that ever I
knew or heard of. Often have I been asked, and often have I enquired, but never
could meet with an instance, save one or two at the most. I speak of
Drunkards, not of one drunken; of such who rarely and casually have Noah-like
been surprised, De ebrioso non de ebrio, cuius viuere est bibere.
ouer-taken at unawares. But if once a Custom, ever necessity. Wine takes away
the heart, Principia ledit and coedit hominem in fungum and testudinem vertit.
and spoils the brain, overthrows the faculties and Organes of repentance
and resolution. And is it not just with God, that he who will put out his
natural light, should have his spiritual extinguished? He that will deprive
himself of reason, should loose also the Guide and Pilot of reason, Gods
Spirit and Grace: he that will wittingly and willingly make himself an
habitation of unclean spirits, should not dispossess them at his own
pleasure? Most aptly therefore is it translated by Tremelius, Haemorrhois,
which Gesner confounds with the Dipsas, or thirsty Serpent, whose poison
breeds such thirst, drought, and inflammation, like that of Rats-bane, that
they never leave drinking, till they burst and die withal. Would it not grieve
and pity any Christian soul, to see a towardly hopeful young man well
natured, well nurtured, stung with this Cockatrice, bewailing his own case,
crying out against the baseness of the sin, inueighing against company,
melting under the persuasions of friends; yea, protesting against all
entisements, vow, covenant, and seriously indent with himself and his friends
for the relinquishing of it: and yet if he meet with a companion that holds
but up his finger, he follows him as a fool to the stocks, and as an Ox to
the slaughterhouse, having no power to withstand the temptation, but in he
goes with him to the tippling house, not considering that the Chambers are the
Chambers of death; and the guess, the guests of death; and there he continues
as one bewitched or coniured in a spell out of which he returns not til he
has emptied his purse of money, his head of reason, and his heart of all his
former seeming grace. There his eyes behold the strange woman, his heart
speaks perverse things, becoming heartles as one (says Solomon) in the
heart of the sea, resolving to continue, and return to his vomit what ever it
cost him, to make it his daily work. I was sick, and knew it not. Verse.
34.35.
I was struck and felt it not, when I awake I will seek it yet still. And why
indeed (without a miracle) should any expect that one stung with this viper
should shake it off, and ever recover of it again. Yea, so far are they from
recovering themselves, that they infect and become contagious and pestilent to
all they come near. The Dragon infusing his venom, and assimulating his elses
to himself in no sin so much as in this, that it becomes as good as meat and
drink to them, to spend their wit and money to compass alehouse after
alehouse, yea town after town to transform others with their Circean Cups,
till they have made them bruits and swine, worse then themselves. The Adulterer
and Usurer desire to enjoy their sin alone, but the chiefest pastime of a
drunkard is to heat and overcome others with wine that he may discover their
nakedness and glory in their foil and folly* In a word, excess of wine, and
the spirit of Grace are opposites, the former expelles the latter out of the
heart, as smoke does Bees out the Hiue: and makes the man a mere slave and prey
to Satan and his snares, when by this poison he has put out his eyes and
spoiled him of his strength, he uses him as the Philistims did Sampson, leads
him on a string whither he pleases, like a very drudge, scorn and makesport
to himself and his Impes; makes him grind in the mill of all kind of sins
and vices. And that I take to be the reason why Drunkenness is not specially
prohibited in any one of the ten Commandments because it is not the single
breach of any one, but in effect the violation of all and every one, it is no
one sin, Omne vitium incendit and detegit, obstantem malis conatibus
verecundiam remouet. Senec* Epist. 84. Ebrietas in se culoas complectitur omnes.
but all sins, because it is the Inlet and sluice to all other sins. The
Devil having moystened, and steeped him in his liquor, shapes him like soft
clay into what mould he pleases: having shaken off his rudder and Pilot,
dashes his soul upon what rocks, sands, and Syrts he lists, and that with as
much ease as a man may push down his body with the least thrust of his hand or
finger. He that in his right wits and sober mood seems religious, modest,
chaste, courteous, secret, in his drunken fitts swears, blasphemes, rages,
strikes, talks, Musto dolia ipsa tumpuntur, sie vino exestuante quicquid in
imo latet effertur. Idem Ibidem.
talks filthily, blab s all secrets, commits folly, knows no difference of
persons or sexes, becomes wholly at Satan's command as a dead organ to be
enacted at his will and pleasure. Oh that God would be pleased to open the eyes
of some drunkard, to see what a dunghill and carrion his soul becoms, and how
loathsome effects follow upon this spiritual death and sting of this Cockatrise
which is the fountain of the other two following, temporal and eternal death?

And well may it be that some such as are altogether fearelesse and careless
of the former death will yet tremble and be moved with that which I shall in
the second place tell them. Among all other sins that are, none brings forth
bodily death so frequently as this, none so ordinarily slaies in the Act of
sin as this. And what can be more horrible then to dye in the act of a
sin without the act of repentance? I pronounce no definitive sentence of
damnation upon any particular so dying; but what door of hope or comfort is
left to their friends behind of their salvation? The whoremaster he hopes to
have a space and time to repent in age, though sometimes it pleases God that
death strikes Cosby and Zimry napping, as the devil is said to slay one of the
Popes in the instant of his adultery and carry him quick to hell. The swearer
and blasphemer has commonly space, though seldom grace, to repent and amend:
and some rare examples stories afford, of some taken with oaths and
blasphemies in their mouths. The thief and oppressor may live and repent and
make restriction as Zacheus: though I have seen one slain right out with the
timber he stole half an hour before; and heard of one that having stolen a
sheep and laying it down upon a stone to rest him, was gran'd and hanged with
the struggling of it about his neck. But these are extraordinary and rare cases.
God sometimes practicing Marshall law and doing present execution, lest fools
shall say in their heart, there were no God or Judgment: but conniuing and
deferring the most, that men might expect a Judge coming, and a solemn day of
Judgment to come. But this sin of Drunkenness is so odious to him, that he
makes it self, Justice, Judge and Executioner, slaying the ungodly with
misfortune, bringing them to untimely shameful ends in brutish and bestiall
manner often in their own vomit and ordure; sending them sottish, sleeping, and
senseless to hell, not leaving them either time, or reason, or grace to
repent, and cry so much as Lord have mercy on us. Were there (as in some
Cities of Italy) an Office kept, or a Record and Register by every Crowner in
Shires and Counties, of such dismal events which God has avenged this sin
withal, what a Volume would it have made within these few years in this our
Nation? How terrible a Theater of Gods Judgments against Drunkards, such as
might make their hearts to bleed and relent, if not their ears to tingle, to
hear of a taste of some few such noted and remarkable examples of Gods
Justice, as have come within the compass of mine own notice and certain
knowledge, I think I should offend to conceal them from the world, whom they
may happily keep from being the like to others, themselves.

An Ale-wife in Kesgraue near to Ipswich, who would needs force three
Seruingmen (that had been drinking in her house, and were taking their leaves)
to stay and drink the three Outs first (that is, Wit out of the head, Money out
of the purse, Ale out of the pot) as she was coming toward them with the pot
in her hand, was suddenly taken speechless and sick, her tongue swollen in her
mouth, never recovered speech, the third day after dyed. This Sir Anthony
Felton the next Gentleman and Justice, with diverse others eyewitnesses of her
in sickness related to me; whereupon I went to the house with two or three
witnesses, inquired the truth of it.

Two servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for a rumpe of a Turkey,
struggling in their drink for it, fell into a scalding Caldron backwards:
whereof the one dyed presently, the other lingringly, and painefully since my
coming to Ipswich.

Anno 1619. A Miller in Bromeswell, coming home drunk from Woodbridge (as he
often did) would needs go and swim in the Milpond: his wife and servants
knowing he could not swim, diswaded him, once by entreaty got him out of the
water, but in he would needs go again, and there was drowned. I was at the
house to inquire of this, and found it to be true.

In Barnewel near to Cambridge one at the Sign of the Plough, a lusty young
man, with two of his Neighbors, and one Woman in their company, agreed to
drink a barrel of strong Bear; they drunk up the vessel, three of them dyed
within 24 hours, the fourth hardly escaped after great sickness. This I have
under a Justice of Peace his hand near dwelling, besides the common fame.

A Butcher in Haslingfeild hearing the Minister inueigh against Drunkenness,
being at his Cups in the Alehouse fell a jesting and scoffing at the Minister
and his Sermons. As he was drinking, the drink or something in the Cup
quackled him, stuck so in his throat that he could neither get it up nor down,
but strangled him presently.

At Tillingham in Dengy hundred in Essex, three young men meeting to drink
strong waters fell by degrees to half pints: one fell dead in the room, and
the other prevented by company coming in, escaped not without much sickness.

At Bungey in Norfolk three coming out of an Alehouse in a very dark
evening, swore, they thought it was not darker in Hell it self: one of them
fell off the Bridge into the water, and was drowned; the second fell off his
Horse, the third sleeping on the ground by the Rivers side, was frozen to
death. This have I often heard, but have no certain ground for the truth of it.

A Bayliffe of Hadly upon the Lords day being drunk at Melford, would needs get
upon his mare to ride through the street, affirming (as the report goes) that
his Mare would carry him to the devil; his Mare casts him off, and broke his
neck instantly. Reported by sundry sufficient witnesses.

Company drinking in an Alehouse at Harwich in the night, over against one
Master Russels, and by him out of his Window once or twice willed to depart, at
length he came down and took one of them, and made as if he would carry him to
prison, who drawing his Knife fled from him, and was three days after taken
out of the sea with the Knife in his hand. Related to me by Master Russell
himself, Mayor of the Town.

At Tenby in Pembrokeshire a Drunkard being exceeding drunk, broke himself
all to pieces of an high and steep rock in a most fearful manner, and yet
the occasion and circumstances of his fall so ridiculous, as I think not fit
to relate, lest in so serious a judgment, I should move laughter to the Reader.

A Glasier in Chauncery Lane in London, noted formerly for profession, fell to
a common course of drinking, whereof being often by his wife and many Christian
friends admonished, yet presuming much of Gods mercy to himself, continued
therein, till upon a time having surcharged his stomach with drink, he fell
a vommiting, broke A Vein, lay two days in extreme pain of body and
distress of mind, till in the end recovering a little comfort, he died: both
these examples related to me by a Gentleman of worth upon his own knowledge.

Four sundry instances of drunkards wallowing and tumbling in their drink,
slain by Carts, I forbear to mention, because such examples are so common and
ordinary.

A Yeomans Son in Northhamptonshire being drunk at Wellingborough on a Market
day, would needs ride his Horse in a bravery over the plowed lands, fell from
his Horse, and brake his neck: reported to me by a Kinsman of his own.

A Knight notoriously given to Drunkenness, carrying sometime payles of drink
into the open field to make people drunk withal, being upon a time drinking
with company, a woman comes in, delivers him a Ring, with this posie, Drink
and Dye, saying to him, This is for you; which he took and wore, and within a
week after came to his end by drinking: reported by sundry, and justified by a
Minister dwelling within a mile of the place.

Two examples have I known of children that murdered their own Mothers in
drink, and one notorious drunkard that attempted to kill his Father; of which
being hindered, he fired his Barn, and was afterward executed one of these
formerly in print.

At a Tavern in Breadstreet in London certain Gentlemen drinking healthes to
their Lords, on whom, they had dependence, one desperate wretch stepps to the
Tables end, lays hold one a pottlepot full of Canarie Sack, swears a deep
oath; What will none here drink an health to my noble Lord and Master: and so
setting the Pottle pot to his mouth, drinks it of to the bottom, was not able
to rise up, or to speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoaring
sleep, and being removed, laid aside, and covered by one of the servants of
the house, attending the time of the drinking, was within the space of two
hours irrecouerably dead: witnessed at the time of the printing hereof by the
same servant that stood by him in the Act, and helped to remove him.

In Dengy Hundred, near to Maldon, about the beginning of his Majesty's
reign, there fell out an extraordinary judgment upon five or six that
plotted a solemn drinking at one of their houses, laid in Bear for the once,
drunk healths in a strange manner, and died thereof within a few weeks, some
sooner, and some later: witnessed to me by one that was with one of them on
his deathbed to demand a debt, and often spoken of by Master Heydon, late
Preacher of Mauldon, in the hearing of many: the particular circumstances were
exceeding remarkable; but having not sufficient proof for the particulars I
will not report them.

One of Aylesham in Norfolk, a notorious Drunkard drowned in a shallow Brook
of water with his horse by him.

Whilst this was at the Press, a man 85 years old, or thereabout, in
Suffolk, overtaken with Wine (though never in all his life before, as he
himself said a little before his fall, seeming to bewail his present
condition* and others that knew him so say of him) yet going down a pair of
stairs, (against the persuasion of a woman sitting by him in his chamber)
fell, and was so dangerously hurt, as he dyed soon after, not being able to
speak from the time of his fall to his death.

The names of the parties thus punished, I forbear for the kinreds sake yet
living.

If conscionable Ministers of all places of the land would give notice of such
Judgments, as come within the compass of their certain knowledge, it might
be a great mean to suppress this sin, which reigns every where to the
scandal of our Nation, and high displeasure of Almighty God.

These may suffice for a taste of Gods Judgments. Easy were it to abound in
sundry particular casualties and fearful examples of this nature. Drunkard,
that which has befallen any one of these, may befall thee, if thou will dally*
with this Cockatrice, what ever leagues thou make with Death, and
dispensations thou give thy self from the like. Some of these were young,
some were rich, some thought themselves as wife as thou; none of them ever
looked for such ignominious ends, more then thou who ever thou art: if thou
hate such ends, God give thee grace to decline such courses.

If thou be yet insensate with wine, void of wit and fear, I know not what
further to mind thee of, but of that third, and worst sting of all the rest,
which will ever be gnawing, and never dying which if thou will not fear here,
sure thou art to feel there, when the Red Dragon has gotten thee into his
den, and shall fill thy soul with the gall of Scorpions, where thou shall
yell and howl for a drop of water to cool thy tongue withal, and shall be
denied so small a refreshing, and have no other liquor to allay thy thirst, but
that which the lake of Brimstone shall afford thee. And that worthily, for
that thou would incur the wrath of the Lamb for so base and sordid a
sin as drunkenness, of which thou may think as venially and slightly as
thou will. But Paul that knew the danger of it, 1. Cor. 6.10.
gives thee fair warning, and bids thee not deceive thy self, expressly and
by name mentioning it among the mortal sins, excluding from the Kingdom of
heaven. Esaias 5.14.
And the Prophet Esaias tells thee, that for it Hell has enlarged it self,
opened it mouth wide, and without measure; and therefore shall the multitude and
their pomp and the iollyest among them descend into it. Consider this you that
are strong to power in drink, that love to drink sorrow and care away: And
be you well assured, that there you shall drink enough for all, having for
every drop of your former bousings, vials, yea whole seas of Gods wrath never
to be exhaust.

Now then, I appeal from your selves in drink, to your selves in your sober
fits. Reason a little the case, and tell me calmely, would you for your own,
or any man pleasure to gratify friend or companion, if thou knew there had
been a Toad in the Wine-pot (as twice I have known happened (...) the death
of drinkers) or did you think that some Caesar Borgia, or Brasutus had
tempered the cup; (...) did you see but a Spider in the glass, would you, or
durst you carouse it off? And are you so simple to fear the poison that can
kill the body, and not that which kills the soul and body ever, yea for ever
and ever, and if it were possible for more then for ever, for evermore? Oh thou
vain fellow, what tellest thou me of friendship, or good-fellowship, will thou account him thy friend, or good fellow, that draws thee into his company,
that he may poison thee? and never thinks he has given thee right
entertainment, or showed thee kindness enough, till he has killed thy soul
with his kindness, and with Beer made thy body a carkase fit for the Beer, a
laughing and lothing-stocke, not to Boys and Girls alone, but to men and
Angels. Why rather say thou not to such, What have I to do with you, ye
sons of Beliall, ye poysonfull generation of Vipers, that hunt for the
precious life of a man? Oh but there are few good Wits, or great Spirits now a
days, but will Pot it a little for company. What hear I? Oh base and low
spirited times, if that were true! If we were fallen into such Lees of Time
foretold of by Seneca, Seneca de Benesicii, lib. 1. ca. 10 quum plurimum me i
sumpsisse virtus erit, etc.
in which all were so drowned in the dregs of vices, that it should be virtue
and honor to bear most drink. But thanks be to God, who has reserved many
thousands of men, and without all comparison more witty and valorous, then
such Pot-wits, and Spirits of the Buttery, who never bared their knees to
drink health, nor even needed to whet their wits with wine, or arm their
courage with Pot-(...). And if it were so, yet if no such wits or Spirits shall
ever enter into heaven without repentance, let my Spirit never come and enter
into their Paradise; ever abhor to partake of their brutish pleasures, lest I
partake of their endless woes. If young Cyrus could refuse to drink wine, and
tell A stiages he thought it to be poison, for he saw it metamorphose men
into beasts and carkases: what would he have said, if he had known that
which we may know, that the wine of Drunkards is the wine of Sodom and
Gomorrah, their grapes, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
the grapes of gall, their clusters, the clusters of bitterness, the juice of
Dragons, and the venom of Aspes. In which words, Moses is a full Commentary
upon Solomon, largely expressing that he speaks here more briefly, It stings
like the Serpent, and bites like the Cockatrice: To the which I may not unfitly
add that of Paul's, and think I ought to write of such with more passion and
compassion, then he did of the Christians in his time, which sure were not such
monsters as ours in the shapes of christians, Whose God is their belly (whom
they serve with drink offerings) whose glory is their shame, and whose end is
damnation.

What then, take we pleasure in thundering out Hell against Drunkards? is there
nothing but death and damnation to Drunkards? Nothing else to them, so
continuing, so dying. But what is there no help nor hope, no Amulet, Antidote
or Triacle, are there no presidents found of recovery. Qui ludibrium fuerat
ebrietatis factus est postea sobrietatis exemplum. Amb. de Hes.
Ambrose I remember, tells of one, that having been aspectacle of Drunkenness,
proved after his conversion a pattern of sobriety. And I my self must
confess, that one have I known yet living, who having drunk out his bodily
eyes, had his spiritual eyes opened, proved diligent in hearing and
practicing. Though the pit be deep, mierie and narrow, like that Dungeon into
which Jeremy was put, yet if it please God to let down the Cords of his divine
mercy, and cause the party to lay hold thereon, its possible they may escape
the snares of death. There is eue^ for the most debauched Drunkard that ever
was, Magna medicina tollit peccata Magna. Ambrose.
a sovereign medicine, a rich treacle of force enough to cure and recover his
disease, to obtain his pardon, and to furnish him with strength to overcome
this deadly poison, fatal to the most. And though we may well say of it as
men out of experience do of quartane agues, that it is the disgrace of all
mortal Physic, of all reproves, counsels and admonitions Yet is there a
salve for this sore, there came one from heaven that trod, the Winepresse of
his Fathers fierceness, drunk of a cup tempered with all the bitterness of
Gods wrath and the devils malice, that he might heal even such as have drunk
deepest of the sweet cup of sin. And let all such know, that in all the
former discovery of this poison, I have only aimed to cause them feel their
sting, and that they might with earnest eyes behold the Brazen Serpent, and
seriously repair to him for mercy and grace, who is perfectly able to eiect
even this kind, which so rarely and hardly is thrown out where once he gets
possession. This seed of the Woman is able to bruise this Serpents head. Oh
that they would listen to the gracious offers of Christ! If once there be
wrought in thy soul a spiritual thirst after mercy, as the thirsty land has
after rain, a longing appetite after the water that comes out of the Rock,
after the blood that was shed for thee; then let him that is a thirst come, let
him drink of the water of life without any money; of which if thou have took
but one true and through draught, thou will never long after thy old puddle
waters of sin any more. Easy will it be for thee after thou have tasted of
the Bread and Wine in thy Fathers house ever to loath the husks and swill thou
were wont to follow after with greediness. The Lord Christ will bring thee
into his mothers house, cause thee to drink of his spiced wine, Cant. 8.2
of the new wine of the Pomegramate: Yea, he will bring thee into his cellar,
spread his Banner of love over thee, stay thee with flagons, Cant. 2.4.
fill thee with his love, till thou be ficke and overcome with the
sweetness of his consolations. In other drink there is excess, but here can
be no danger. The devil has his inuitation, Hubet Deus suum inebriamini, etc.
Bernard, in Cant.
Come, let us drink; and Christ has his inebriamini, Be ye filled with the
spirit. Here is a fountain set open, and proclamation made. And if it were
possible for the brutishest Drunkard in the world to know, who it is that
offers, and what kind of water he offers, he would ask, and God would
give it frankely without money, he should drink liberally, be satisfied, and
out of his belly should sally springs of the water of life, quenching and
extinguishing all his inordinate longings after stolen waters of sin and death.

All this while, little hope have I to work upon many Drunkards, especially by
a Sermon read (on less life and force in Gods ordinance, and in it own
nature, then preached), my first drift is, to stirre-vp the spirits of Parents
and Masters, who in all places complain of this evil, robbing them of good
servants, and dutiful children, by all care and industry to prevent it in
their domestical education, by carrying a watchful and restraining hand over
them. Parents, if you love either soul or body, thrift or piety, look to
keep them from this infection. Lay all the bars of your authority, cautions,
threats and charges for the avoiding of this epidemicall pestilence. If any of
them be bitten of this Cockatrice, sleep not, rest not, till you have cured
them of it, if you love their health, husbandry, grace, their present or future
lives. Dead are they while they live, if they live in this sin. Mothers, lay
about you as Bathsheba, with all entreaties; What my son, my son of my
loves and delights, Wine is not for you, etc.

My next hope is, to arouse and awaken the vigilance of all faithful Pastors
and Teachers. I speak not to such Stars as this Dragon has swept down from
heaven with it tail: for of such the Prophets, the Fathers of the Primitive,
yea, all ages complain of. I hate and abhor to mention this abomination: to
alter the Proverb, As drunk as a Beggar, to a Gentleman, is odious; but to a
Man of God, to an Angel, how harsh and hellish a sound is it in a Christians
ears. I speak therefore to sober Watchmen, Watch, and be sober, and labor to
keep your Charges sober and watchful, that they may be so found of him that
comes like a thief in the night. Two means have you of great virtue for the
quelling of this Serpent, Vt Serpens hominis qua tacta saliuis, disperit, ac
sese mandendo conficit ipsa: Lucretius: vide etiam Ophilium et Gesuerum, etc
zealous preaching and praying against it. Its an old received Antidote, that
man's spittle, especially fasting spittle, is mortal to Serpents. Saint Donatus
is famous in story for spitting upon a Dragon that kept an high way, and
devoured many passengers. This have I made good observation of, that where God
has raised up zealous Preachers, in such towns this Serpent has no nestling,
no stabling or denning. If this will not do, Augustine enforces another,
which I conceive Gods and Man's laws allow us upon the reason he gives: If Paul
(says he) forbid to eat with such our common bread in our own private
houses, how much more the Lords body in Church assemblies: if in our times this
were strictly observed, the Serpent would soon languish and vanish. In the
time of an Epidemicall disease, such as the Sweating or Neezing sickness, a
wise Physician would leave the study of all other diseases to find out the cure
of the present raging evil. If Chrysostom were now alive, the bent of all his
Homilies, or at least one part of them should be spent to cry down
drunkenness, as he did swearing in Antioch: never desisting to reprove it,
till (if not the fear of God, yet his importunity, made them weary of the
sin.

Such Anakims and Zanzummims, as the spiritual sword will not work upon, I
turn them over to the Secular Arm, with a signification of the dangerous and
contagious spreading of this poison in the veins and bowels of the
Commonwealth. In the Church and Christ his name also, entreating them to carry
a more vigilant eye over the dens and burrowes of this Cockatrice, Superfluous,
Blind, and Clandestine Alehouses, I mean the very pest-houses of the Nation;
which I could wish had all for their sign, a picture of some hideous serpent,
or a pair of them, as the best hieroglyphick of the Genius of the place, Pinge
duos angues,
to warn passengers to shun and avoid the danger of them. Who sees and
knows not that some one needles Alehouse in a Country Town, undoes all the
rest of the houses in it, eating up the thrift and fruit of their labors; the
ill manner of sundry places being, there to meet in some one night of the
week, and spend what they have gathered, and spared all the days of the same
before, to the prejudice of their poor wives and children at home; and upon
the Lords day (after evening Prayers) there to quench and drown all the good
lessons they have heard that day at Church. If this go on, what shall become
of us in time? If woe be to single drunkards, is not a National woe to be
feared and expected of a Nation ouerrun with drunkenness? Had we no other sin
reigning but this (which cannot reign alone) will not God justly spue us out
of his mouth for this alone? We read of whole Countries wasted, dispeopled by
Serpents. Pliny tells us of the Amyclae, Lycophron, of Salamis, Herodotus of
the Neuri, utterly depopulate and made inhabitable by them. Verily if this
Cockatrise multiply and get head amongst us a while longer, as they have of
late begun, where shall the people have sober servants to till their lands, or
children to hold and enjoy them. They speak of drayning Fens, but if this
evil be not stopped, we shall all shortly be drowned with it. I wish the
Magistracy, Gentry, and Yeomanry would take it to serious consideration, (...).
Aelian lib. 14. cap 27. Tauta potentia huius mali vt sanari prorsus sine
concilii autoritate non possit. Aug. ep. ^4. ad Aureliuns.
how to deal with this Serpent, before he grow too strong and fierce for them.
It is past the egg already, and much at that pass, of which Augustine
complains of in his time, that he scarce knew what remedy to advise, but
thought, it required the meeting of a general Council. The best course I
think of, is, if the great persons would first begin through reformation in
their own families, banish the spirits of their Buttries, abandon that foolish
and vicious custom, Bibamus pro saluite imperatorum, comitum, Oh fluititiam
vitium sacrificium putant. Amb. de Helia, etc. Bazil. Hom. contra Ebrios.
as Ambrose and Basil calls it, of drinking healths, and making that a sacrifice
to God for the health of others, which is rather a sacrifice to the devil, and
a Bane of their own, I remember well Sigismund the Emperors grave answer,
wherein there concurred excellent wisdom and wit seldom meeting in one saying)
which he gave before the Council of Constance, to such as proposed a
reformation of the Church to begin with the Franciscans, and Minorites. You
will never do any good (says he) unless you begin with the Moiorites first.
Sure til it be out of fashio and grace in gentlemen's tables, butteries, and
cellars, hardly shall you persuade the countriman to lay it down, who as in
fashions so in vices will ever be the Ape of the Gentry.

If this help not, I shall then conclude it to be such an evil as is only by
Sovereign power, and the Kings hand curable. And verily next under the word of
God which is omnipotent, Where the word of a King is, there is power, Eccl. 8.4.
how potent and wonderworking is the word of a King? when both meet as the Sun,
and some good star in a benign conjunction, what enemy shall stand before the
sword of God and Gideon? what vice so predomina^t which these subdue not. If
the Lion roar, what beast of the forest shall not tremble and hide their
head? Have we not a noble experiment hereof, yet fresh in our memory, and
worthy never to dye in the timely and speedy suppression of that impudent
abomination of women's Mannish habit, threatening the confusion of sexes, and
ruin of modesty? The same Royal hand, and care the Church and Commonwealth
implores for the vanquishing of this poison, no less pernicious, more
spreading, and prevailing. Take us these little Foxes was wont to be the suit
of the Church, for they gnabble our Grapes, and hurt our tender branches: but
now it is become more serious: Take us these Serpents, lest they destroy our
Vines, Vinedressers, Vineyards and all. This has ever been Royal game. How
famous in the story of Diodorus Siculus, is the Royal munificence of Ptolomey
King of Egypt, for provision of Nets, and maintenance of Huntsmen, for the
taking and destroying of Serpents, noxious and noisome to his country. The
like of Philip in Aristotle, and of Attilius Regulus in Aulus Gellius. The
Emblem mentioned at large by Plutarch, engraven on Hercules shield, what is it
but a Symbol of the divine honor due to Princes following their Herculean
labors, in subduing the like Hydraes, too mighty for any inferior person to
take in hand. It is their honor to tread upon Basiliskes, and trample Dragons
under their feet. Solomon thinks it not unworthy his Pen to discover their
danger.

A royal and eloquent Oration is happily and worthily preserved in the large
volume of ancient writings, with this title, Excerpta ex Historia Nicolai
Harpsteldii Arbiep. Contuariensis. Viae Tomu^ 13, Bibliotheca patrum.
Oration magnifici et pacifici Edgari Regis habita ad Dunstanum Archiep.
Episcopos etc. The maine scope whereof is, to excite the Clergies care and
devotion for the suppressing of this vice for the common good. Undertakers of
difficult plots promise themselves speed and effect, if once they interest the
King, and make him a party. And what more generally beneficial can be devised
or proposed then this, with more honor and less charge to be effected, if it
shall please his Majesty but to make trial of the strength of his temporal and
spiritual arms. For the effecting of it, if this help not, what have we else
remaining, but wishes and prayers to cast out this kind withal. God help us.
To him I commend the success of these labors, and the vanquishing of this
Cockatrice.

FINIS.

