Book of husbandry



HEre begyneth a treatise of husbondry which master Groshede sometime bishop
of Lyncoln made / and translated it out of frensshe in to English / which
techeth all manner of men to govern their lands tenementes / and demenes
ordynatly as the chapytres euydently is showed.

The.i. chapter tells how ye shall spend your good and extend your lands.

The.ii. chapter tells how your land shall be mesured / and how many
perches makes an acre / and how many acres makes a yerde of land / and how
many yerdes makes an hyde of land / and how many hydes makes a knights fee.

The.iii. chapter tells how many acres of land yt a plough may tele in a
year.

The.iiii. chapter tells whether a plough of oxen or a plough of horse many
tele more land in a year and which is more costly.

The.v. chapter tells in what season ye shall begin to falowe all manner of
lands.

The.vi. chapter tells how ye shall lay your land at sede time.

The.vii. chapter tells how your land shall be sown in all seasons.

The.viii. chapter tells how ye shall change your sede and nourysshe your
stubble.

The.ix. chapter tells how ye shall nourysshe your dounge and wede your
corn and how it shall be mesured out of the barn / and how much an acre
shall yield again more than your sede if ye should have winning thereby.

The.x. chapter ielleth how ye shall change all manner of catell in season.

The.xi. chapter tells how ye shall change your work bestes and wene
your calves / and what prouffy te ye shall have of your kyne / and vayll to
butter and chese.

The.xii. chapter tells how ye should nourysshe your swyne and your
pigs.

The.xiii. chapter tells how ye shall nourysshe your sheep and diverse
medycynes for them.

The.xiiii. chapter tells what profytes ye shall have of your ghees and
hens.

The.xv. chapter tells how ye shall bye and selle and preue your weyghtes.

The.xvi. chapter tells how ye shall take a compte of your balyf ones a
year.

The.i. chapter.
THe fader in his old age says to his sone / sonelyue wisely and dyscretly
atter god and the world / and think on the hard change of fortune how by
little and little it atteyneth to riches / and by little and little descends
to pouerte and wretchydnes. And therefore I counsel you to ordeyne your
living after thextent of your lyuclode / and not more then ye may dyspende in
a year by your lyuelode. And if ye may profit and make your land better by
wynnge or by store of catell or any other profytynge more than thextent of
your lyuelode amounts / as much it is in value thextent kept and dyspende
it not. For if your catell deye or your corn fail it may stand you in
good stead. For and if ye despende the value of your lyuelode in one year and
mysauenture fall upon you ye have no recover by your profytes. For the wise
man says. He that profyted to other men oftymes / he wastes his own. For it
is often seen that many men have both lands and teneme^tes and can not live
thereon / by cause that they live without ordinance and purueaunce made in due
season. And for they have spend more than their lyuelode may susteyn / and
than can none other shyfte but fro ye hand to the mouth / and so they fall in
to pouerte and wretchydnes. And therefore be wise in your demenynge / desire
none of your neighbors goods wrongfully and keep your own wisely / so that
by reason no man may repreue you ne your works And ye good that god has lent
you dyspose it well in gifts and despenses. And ye shall know four profitable
things for you. The first is when ye give and to whom. The second is if ye
give or make any dyspenses / look that it be done with good will and that it
shall be profitable. For if ye give it against your will ye lose as much as
ye give or dyspende. The third is lost that ye give to hy^ that may both
further you and hinder you. The fourth is look ye give neither to much ne to
little but after that the person be that ye give it to / and after your matter
be much or little / and after that ye have to do with ye person. Also let
your lands be extendyd by wise men sworn and se what every percell there of
is worth by the year more than thextente as well in manners as gardyns and
closses / and after ward look how many acts be in your closses / and se what
an acre thereof is worth by year. And se how many acres of erable land ye have
/ and what an acre is worth by year / and of all other lands meadows and
pasture in like wise / and thus may ye know what ye may dyspende in a year
without waste or dystruccyon and of free tenementes according how much every
man holds of you and by what service. Also what mylles and fysshy^ges be
worth and ye have any within your lordshyp yearly over thextent / and of all
manner of cotages rentes service and customs in like wise. Or any other thing
whereby any profit to you yearly may arise / and look how much shall
competently sow an acre of land of each manner of granes / and look how much
store ye may keep upon euerych of your manners / this known than se thextent
of your lyuelode. And ye shall know how much your balyf shall answer you
yearly by the approueme^tes over extent / and thus ye shall know what the
value yearly is of your lyuelode / and there upon to rule expe^ses wisely /
and look ye take ye reckoning of your balyf yearly in ye month of Iuyn how
many quarters of corn is sown upon your demene lands / and than look your
extent and go in to ye field therewith and take a few of every pyece of land
that is sown / and perauenture ye shall find more sown than he gives a
compte of which he holds to his own behoue. Or else perauenture ye shall
find more corn sown than needs. And thus ye shall know whether your balyf
be profitable for you or not. And if ye will ye may depart your lands in
three parts The first to be sown with winter corn. The second part to be
sown with lenten sede / as with otes pesyn and other such granes. And ye third
to be falowed and somer laid. Also ye may depart your land in two parts.
The first part to be sown with winter corn and lenten sede. The second
part be falowed and somer laid. Also a plough shall tell. viii. score or. ix.
score acres of land a year than lay your extent and see how many acres of
land ye have / and command your balyf to keep this manner gydynge of tithe.

The.ii. chapter.
IT is to wete that three barley corns take out of ye mids of the eere makes
an ynche and. xii. inches makes a foot. And. xvi. foot and an half makes a
perch / and. xi. perches in length / and. iiii. in bread makes an acre of
land / and. iiii. makes a yerde of land / and. v. yerdes makes an hyde of
land / and. vii. hydes makes a knights fee.

The.iii. chapter.
SOme men say yt a plough may not tele. viii. score or. ix. score acres of
land a year. But I shall preue it by good reason yt a plough may do it. For ye
shall vnd^stonde that an acre of land is in msure. xl. perches in length /
and. iiii. in bread / and the mesure of a perch is. xvi. foot and an half.
And so ye bread of an acre of land is. lxvi. foot and so ye go with your
plough. xxxiii. times up and down the land / and se the first forowe be a
foot / and each of the other be in like quantyte / and than is an acre cred.
And when the forowe is as strayte as it may be / than is it. xxxvi. times up
and down the land though it be a large acre. And the plough be never so feeble
at most ye have gone but. lxxii. times up and down ye land which is but.
v. mile way. Now truly the horse or ox is feeble that from the morrow may not
go softely. iii. mile from home and come again by none. And by this other
reason ye vndstonde that there be. lii. wekes in in the year / take. viii.
wekes for holy days and other lettynges / and there remaneth behind. xliiii.
to work in the se. xliiii. wekes ben. CC. lx. days beside sondayes. Also a
plough shall ere thryes in the year / yt is to say in the winter / in lenten /
and in leke sede time. In winter a plough shall ere. iii. rodes and an half a
day And on each other seasons an acre on the day at the lest. Now know ye
whether it may be done or not / but by cause plough men carters and other
feign and work not truly It is behouefull yt men find a remedy against their
servants. And therefore it is necessary that the balyfor some of the lords
officers be with them the first day of doing following and so wynge to se if
they do their works truly / and let them answer you as much work as they
did the first day. Also it is necessary that your balyf over se your
work men ones in a day to wete if they do their work truly as they ought to
do / and if ye find them contrary he shall chastyse them reasonable therefore
/ and by dyscrecyon.

The.iiii. chapter.
THe plough of oxen is better than the plough of horse / but / if it be upon
stony ground ye which greueth fore the oxen in their fete. And ye plough of
horse is more costly than ye plough of oxen and yet shall your plough of oxen do
as much work in a year as your plough of horse / though ye drive your horse
faster than ye do your oxen / yet in what ground so ever it be your plough of
oxen / if ye tele your land well and euenly / they shall do as much work one
day with a another as your plough of horse / and the ground be tough / your
oxen shall work where your horse shall shall stand still. And if ye will
know how much the one is costlyer than ye other I shall teache you. It is a
costume yt bestes yt go to the plough shall work from ye feste of saint Luke
unto the fest of saint Elene in May / that is to say. xxv. wekes / and if
your horse should be kept in a good plyght to work / he must have daily the
syxt part of a bushel of otes price. ob. / and in gresse in somer season. xii.
d. And every weke that he stands at dry mete one with an other. ob. in
straw for lytter. And in shoy^ge as often as he is shodde on all four fete.
iiii.d. at the least. The sum of his expenses in the year is ix.s.vi.d.ob.
beside hay and chafe and other things. And as for the ox ye may keep him in
good plyght daily to do his Journey gyuynge him every weke three oten sheues
price. i.d. by cause. x. oten sheues yield abusshell of otes if they be made by
the extent and in somer season xii.d. in gresse. The sum of his expenses by
the year is. iii. S: i. d. beside straw and chafe. And if a horse be ouerset
and brought down with labor it is adventure and ever he recover it. And if
your ox be ouersette and brought down with labor / ye shall for. xii. d. in
somer season have him so pastured that he shall be strong enough to do your
work / or else he shall be so fat that ye may selle him for as much money
as he cost you.

The.v. chapter.
IN Apryll is good season to falowe land if it be well broken before the
plough. For in that season is neither to wete ne to dry / but he that has
much to do may not abide all the good seasons of the year. Nevertheless / when
so ever ye ere if it be in good soil ere deep with a square forowe so that
some of ye good land may rest. And if your land lie in feeble soylery ere not
deep but falowe it clenly so yt ye land be neither covered ne uncovered. And
at the second falowe ere not to deep but so as ye may dystroy thystelles and
other wedes. For if your land lie marras or watery ground / and it be to deep
at ye second falowe which is to say your plough shall not come to no hard
ground but go shotynge all in mire. And if your plough go an ynche deper in
sede time then it did all the second falowe it shall find good ground /
and else the tylthe of ye mire and make good erynge.

The.vi. chapter.
AT ye sowynge of your sede lay your lord narowe together so yt your sede may
fall even upon ye land. For if your land be wide a sonder it shall cause
great hurt. For the land sown the harowe shall cast the corn in holles and
vayles that been between the gates of the plough so that the corn that is one
the rydge shall be uncovered and cause little or naught to grow upon the
land. And if ye will preue it / wha^ your corn is grow out of the earth / go
to the head of your land and look toward ye other end and ye shall se whether
that I say soth or nay. And if ye sow your land under the forowe / let it be
ered and leyde small and nere to gyder / so yt ye rydge of land between the
forowes be narowe enough together like a creste in the mids of the land the
rydge under the left side foot / and wha^ they dry the land again kerue it
with your plough so that the first erynge may be over turned / and tha^ shall
your land be narowe enough to gyder.

The.vii. chapter.
Look that ye sow your winter corn tymely so that your land sad and
your corn rote / or that great winter come / for if a great rain fall with
in. xx. days after the sowynge of your corn and there upon endurynge.ii.
or.iii. days. The froste shall make the corn to perysshe that is new sown
by cause it is but tender and ye rote thereof but newely budded or put out. All
such clay lands and stony lands as ye purpose to sow with lenten sede / sow
them or May come for it causes cley lands to wexe hard / and stony lands
dry and comynly the land opens for dryness / and therefore it is needful to
sow such manner of lands tymely so yt the sede that is sown thereon may have
his nourysshynge. As for sondy lands it needs not to sow them so tymely /
for it is not good to plough such manner of lands in great moisture / and if
they be a little wete with a dew at the sowynge it shall not noye it but do it
much good. And if your land lie in marras or in watery ground / make good
deep furowes there so that ye ridges may be delyuerde of the water.

The.ix. chapter.
Look ye change your sede ever year at Myghelmas for it shall be more avail
to sede your lands with sede yt grows upon other men's lands tha^ with
sede yt grew upon your own lands. And if ye will make a preue thereof / ere
two pieces of land in lust and like in soil / and sow them at ones / that
one with that sede yt grew upon your own land / and that other with sede
grew upon other men's lands / and ye shall find if I say sothe or nay.
Also take not the stubble of your lord lest ye have need thereof for couery^ge
of your houses.

The. ix. chapter.
MAke your donge and meddle it with earth that is fresshe / and make clean your
shepecote every. xiiii. night / and meddle ye donge that comes thereof with
fresshe earth or claye or such matter as men cast out of dykes / and strewe it
well with straw and chaf. And if ye have more straw than your store will
spend / strewe it in your fold or shepecote / and let that donge as well
within as without be gadred to gyder and laid upon an hepe And when ye shall
carry it to your land take heed yt your carters do truly their work / and let
them answer you duly as much work as they did you the first day when
they were ouersene lest they find a reasonable excuse of their lettynge. And
when ye deliver your carte horse shone sadelles or any other stuff / here a
reckoning of the old / or else let it be acompted on ye carters wages if it be
lost thrughe their neclygence. And ye grees yt ye deliver to your carters /
let it be meddled with terre or hard soap / and it shall be the better for your
carte / and if ye carter grees their shone theyrwith it shall brenne them and
rote them to donge. Also the donge that is medleo with earth put it upon sondy
ground if ye have any / for in somer the weder is hot and the sonde is hot
by kind the which two hetes when they mete to gyder after mydsomer it causes
the corn to wexe passing short that grows on such sondy lands but it be
remedyed by this manner of donge as is before said. When ye dry donge in ye
ground to sow corn dry it not to deep / for yt wastes your do^ge. Now shall
I tell you what wynnynges ye shall have by your donge that is meddled with earth.
Donge yt is roten by it self with without earth shall last two or three year /
and after the land be hot or cold. And donge that is meddled with earth shall
last double as long / but it shall not be so sharp ne so rank berynge /
also meddled earth lasts longer than donge not meddled / by cause when the donge
and the earth is meddled together and spread upon the land / and yt land harowed
the earth kepythe the donge that it may not wast in dyscendynge as it would do.
And if it rain a little when ye lay your donge on your land it shall do it
much good / for it causes the donge and the land Join together / and ye put
your donge upon your land at falowynge time at the second falowe it shall be
turned under the earth so that it be hid with earth at sowynge time. Also
let your sheep do^ge be put next your sede / for that is most worthy / and
at ye first feast of our lady ordeyne your hyrdylles after that ye have sheep
and keep your fold / for in yt season they have most donge And after
mydsomer let your corn be weded and not before. For if ye cut thystelles.
xx. or. xv. or. viii. days before that time for every thystell shall grow
four again. And let your meadows be well and clean mowen by ye advise of
your balyf. And se that your mower hold not his right hand a fore to high
behind / him so that the grass be not cut in the mids. And this defaute
is called forsynge / and it is a great defaute and a great loss of hay. And
let your corn be wisely shorn and gadred to gyder and laid in your barn.
And let your thresshers be sworn to thresshe it clean / Never theles take heed of them that they have no pokettes nor no great purses to stele your corn
in / and se that your wyndowers have no pokettes between their legs to stele
your corn. And when your corn shall be mesured out of your berne purueye you
a true man to ouersee your baly / for it is often seen that offecers ben of
one assent to avail them self and hurt their lord. And se that your corn
be mesured with a true mesure / yt is to say with a true busshell / and that
every busshell every busshell be streken. And se that they have a clothe under
their fete to keep ye corn that fallyth when it is put in ye sackes. And
beware of mesurynge of your busshell that is heped for therein is great dysceit
and I shall tell you how. When the balyf has made his acompte of the corn
let ye busshel that he resceyued the corn with be preued with his acompte.
For if it be a large busshell four busshels up heped makes. v. busshels
streken / and but little more or little less. Or. v. busshels up heped makes.
vi. busshels streken of / and if the busshell be not so large or some what more
/ but and if the busshell be never so small yet. vi. busshels up heped makes.
vii. stryken / and so of every busshell sometime more and sometime less And
thereby some balyfs that give at their acompte for viii. busshels up heped but.
ix busshels streken. And whether ye busshell be great or little therein is great
dysceyte. For at the large busshell he stelyth. ii. busshels / and if ye corn
be great and large / than both the great busshell and the small busshell is
great dysceyte and falsnes. And if your land yield again but three times
asmoche as ye sewe thereon ye shall win nothing thereby but if corn happen to
be of greter price than it was when it was sown. Also ye shall understand that
an acre of land shall have three erthers or men sow it and some more. And each
of these erthers be worth. vi.d. ye harowynge. i.d. and on the said acre shall
be sown. ii. busshels of whete the price. xii.d. the wedynge thereof. ob. the
shetynge. v.d. the ledynge in to the berne. i.d. the straw and the chafe shall
aquyte the thresshynge. And so three times the sede. vi. busshels / and if a
quarter of whete be sold but for. iii.s. after Myghelmasse than your. vi.
busshels be worth. iii.s. And your cost done upon the said acre draws
unto. vii.s.i.d.ob. beside the rent of ye lord.

The.x. chapter.
IF ye have any land whereupon store of catell may be nourysshed and kept /
let it be stored after that it may bear. For and if it be well stored and the
store well kept shall answer you as much as thextent of your land
amounts. And look ye draw and search your catell ones in ye year bytwyne
Ester and wytsontyde / and change those that be not good. Keep as well your
carte horse and oxen as any other catell and those yt be not good to keep put
them to gras for if ye make them fat with gras ye shall have winning thereby. Also
ye shall wete that the feeble ox cost as much or more as the beast ox. For
if he be a waster ox he must be the more spared / and by that sparynge the
best ox is the more grieved. And if ye bye you store of catell / look ye by
them between Ester and wytsontyde / for than bestes be lene and good chepe /
and change your carte horse or oren or they be sore worn / for with a little
cost ye shall have young horse as to keep stylle the old. And if ye bye and
sell in season / it shall avail you more then keep your old till they be
worn

The. xi. chapter.
Look that ye give your plough bestes suffycyent mete to sustain their labor
with not ouercharged ne brought down with labor / for it will cost you much
or they be recovered and releued again and your work shall be gretely let
thereby. Also put not your bestes in houses in rayn weder nor in great hete for
yt engendryth a hete between ye skyn and ye flesh and between the lyske and
the thygh which turns your catell to great hurt / and if your catell have
every day prouender let it be high day or they have it / and let it be
delivered by your balyf / and let their prouendre be meddled with wheten chafe or
oten / but not with barley chaf / for yt hurts them in ye mouth and specially
horse. And I will tell you why your prouendre is meddled with chaf / by cause
their kepers shall not stele it a way / and chaf causes them to ete and to
drink better than they should do. And look their stable be made clean every
day ones for yt does them much good / and look ye give your oxen no great
quantyte of straw at ones but little and little and often / and they shall ete
well and wast little. For wha^ they have a great quantyte before them atones
they ete their fill / and than they ly down and chewe cudde and blow on the
mete yt is left and causes it to wexe dry / and than they will ete no more
thereof. And look your oxen be duly made clean and rubbed with a wyspe of
straw and that shall cause them to like them self ye better. And let your
kyne have suffycyent mete and let them have the prouender yt your horse and
oxen leave over night. And if your male calf be seek when it is calued / let it
have the moders milk a month and at the months end take from it a pape
and so at every wekes end following take a pape till he have souked / first
and last seven wekes and learn him to ete. And let a female calfe have the
moders milk three wekes / and at the third wekes end take from it a pape /
and so forth wekely as ye did the male chafe and let your calves have
water enough / and let them not out of the house till they be waned and some
what styfe of age / for many calves dye for defaute of houses of an evil that
is called la pomelyer. And if any of your calves fall in sykenes / spend.
i.d. by time to help it For the wise man says / blessed be the penny that
saved the pound. If any of your bestes deye in moreyne let them be fleyn and
put the skynnes in water. viii or. ix. days / than take it out and let the
water run out and that shall make it thycke and better to the sale and ye
selle it let it not be dry / but some what moist Now ye shall know the issue
of your kyne and wynnyngein butter and chese / and how much a cow shall give
wekely. Ye must put your feeble kyne from your good kyne in a good pastor of
salt marras than. ii. kyne shall answer you of these between Ester and
Myghelmas beside every weke half a gallon of butter and if it be in fresshe
pasture / yt is to say wode field or stubble after mowynge / than three kyne
shall answer you as much as the two that goth in marras and but little more.
And sheep if they be pastured in salt marras / than. xx. mother sheep shall
answer as much as the two kyne that be pastured in salt marras. And if they
go in fresshe pasture / than. xxx. mother sheep shall answer as much as the
three kyne that gone in the fresshe pasture. There be some balyfs and deyes that
will say nay to this / but if the milk be spylte or spend other wise. And I
shall tell you of this three kyne yt give apyece of chese between. Ester and
Myghelniasse and every weke half a galon of butter. It is a feeble cow yt
gives not in. ii. days as much milk as will make a chese of an. ob. and
that is in six days. i.ob. For the sunday is not rekened. For it is for
tithe and other necessaryes. Ye know that between Ester and Myghelmasse ben.
xxiiii. wekes / and for each of these wekes rekynes a. ob. the sum three. s.
Put as much for the second cow / and for the third cow the sum of all.
ix.s. and so ye shall have a piece of chese for that is the comen price. Also
that cow is right feeble that may not give with that the third part of a
pottell of butter / and if a galon of butter / be sold for. vi.d. then yt
third part of a potel is sold for. i. d.

The. xii. chapter.
Let your swyne be looked and draw ones in ye year at after Ester and let
them be changed that be not hole. And look that ye keep no bores but if they
be of good kind / and look that ye keep your female swyne well at forowynge
time so they be not hurt ne appared through evil keeping and after ward with
good mastynge they will be as good for your larder as your male swyne. In
winter give your swyne mete enough so they may be strong of their self /
specially in Februarii March and Apryl for than they have most need / for
tha^ your sowes shall have pigs but if it be through evil keeping. And if ye
will keep them well / keep them in long at morrow / and let them lie dry
whiles ye pigs souke and they shall grow the better.

The. xiii. chapter.
Look that the shepeherde be not yrous with your sheep / for that is an evil
vice / and ye shall preue it where your sheep pasture as your shepeherde goth
among them. For if they fle from him / it is a sign that he is not peasyble
with them / and look every year between Ester and Whytsontyde yt ye draw your
sheep / and look if they be clean / and if they be fauty let them be cleped and
marked and put fro the hole sheep in to good pasture to be made fat. And at
mydsomer when they be fat / selle them for than moton is in season / and let
the wull of those sheep be sold with the skynnes of them that dyed in the
moreyne. And with that wulle and skynnes ye may bye as many young sheep and put
them in houses between saint Martyns day and holy Rode day in may.
Nevertheless if the weder be dry and the fold well strawed with straw. I
say not nay but they may lie in the fold / and the sheep yt lie in houses
must have mete after the weder / sometime more and sometime less. And look that
their house be close yt none air come to their creche and every night put new
straw under them / and se their house be made clean every. xiiii. night ones
and ye have much donge and most profit of them as they lie in your fold.
And if your motons lie in houses for tempest let them lie by them self /
and not with other sheep / and let their hay be meddled with whete straw or
with oten straw / by cause of the tempest and evil weder that they might not
feed when they were upon their pasture so that when they come in to ye house /
they be so hungry that ye strong sheep put ye feeble sheep fro their mete. And
for this cause they swalowe their mete hole without chewynge / and specially
the smallhaye. And when the sheep have eten their fill they will lie down and
chew cudde / and the mete yt is not chewed comes not up with the mete that is
chewed / but lies in their body till yt it be roten by his own kind and
thereof many sheep perysshe. And if your hay be meddled with straw / they shall
chewe it the better by cause of the gretenes of the straw. And if ye have
defaute of straw or great hay / take lynge and hay meddled together for yt is
good mete for sheep. And if an evil fall among them / yt is called the
weruis suddenly let them be sprencled with water / and put them in house as
long as from ye morn unto the none / and let one sheep chaufe well another
for yt is a good medesyne for that syknes. And so it is for an evil that is
called the pockes / and yese at morrow a dew upon the ground that is called
ye web of tayne chau^gynge upon the grass between the first feast of our
Lady and the feast of saint Martyn. Let not your sheep out of the fold till
that unwholesome dew be of the ground. And let your shepeharde reyse your
sheep upon their fete a good while or they go out of the fold / than drive
them to their pasture And for as much as they were kept in at morn by cause
of the unwholesome dew let them pasture so much longer at even when ye sterres
be on the sky for the even dew is holsom for sheep. And if ye have pasture of
mount of heth / if it be dry in somer take them fro yt pasture / for in dry
weder that standing water yt stondeth in such manner of pasture wexeth black
yelowe or grene / and these waters be not holsom for sheep ne for none other
bestes. For if your horse drink thereof he shall have the chaudys / and if your
sheep drink thereof it abides so long in them that it makes the flesh to
be corupte. First it wexeth white and after yelowe and than it roteth without
remedy / and for a preef hereof slay sum of the sheep that goo in such
pasture about Myghelmasse and fley them and ye shall find that that I say
sothe. And if ye will save your sheep in a wete somer / take them out of a
wete pasture and put them in a dry pasture. And at the feste of Simon and
Jude slay threof your best wedders and two of your best ewen / and if they be
fault let them be sold / and or ye fail of chapmen sell them to festes /
so that ye may be sure of your money / and gader this herbs under wreten in
herueste / yt is to say amyroke other wise called maiden wede and dry it /
and at first coming in to the house of your sheep / that is at Marymas let
meddle this herb with their hey and put some in to the walls of ye house / for
it will dry the evil humors with in their bodies / and it is good for the
lever And when their lambs be ewed let your shepeherde take away the wull
about their moders papes for it fastneth about the lambs tethe and some goth
in their body and causes them to perysshe. And let your shepeherde answer
you of ye wolle yt he gadreth so and put to your fleces when your sheep are
shorn. And look yt ye make tails between your shepeherde and you / and tail
the weders by them self / and the ewen by them self / and the male hogs by
them self two times in the year that is to say at the feste of saint Martyn
when they come in ye house / and at the feste of the holy Rode or at clyppynge
time when so ever it be. And when ye put them in ye house let them be marked
on ye ere / and ordeyn you a strong iron to mark them in ye forhede / and if
any of them dye in moreyne / resceyue not their skynnes but they be marked with
your mark.

The.xiiii. chapter.
THees and hens shall be at the delyueraunce of your bailey for let so ferme
a goos for. xii.d. in a year. Five hens and a cock for. iii.s. in a year and
there be some baylyfs and deyes that say nay to this prouffytes. But I shall
preue it by reason / for in half a year be. xxvi. wekes / and in these. xxvi.
wekes be. ix score days / and in each of these days ye shall have an egg of
each hen / and yt is. ix. score eggs of each hen in that half year / it
is a feeble sale of eggs and. xxx. eggs be not worth a penny and if any of
them sit in that half a year or some day in defaute of lyenge / ye shall be
recompensed therefore / and of. vi. more to bear out the ferme ye cock / and with
the sale of the chekens yt your sitting hens bring forth in that other
half year. Now shall ye se whether I say sothe or nay the pecocke shall
answer as much the for feders as the sheep for his wolle Every cow shall
answer you a calfe. And every mother sheep shall answer you a lamb. Every
female swyne shall answer you. xiii. pigs at three farowy^ges at two times at
each time. iiii. and the third time five / the. x. for tithe Every hen shall
answer you of. ix. score eggs or of chekens to ye value. Every goos shall
answer you of. vi. ghoslynges. And if any of this catell be bareyne ye balyf
shall answer you of the issue that is lost through his evil keeping / because
that he did not selle them and put the silver to other prouffytes to the
value.

The. xv. chapter.
Look ye bye and sell in season / and look ye have a true man to here your
bargayn / so yt ye have record if need be and take heed of your balyf. For it
is often seen yt he encreseth such things as he byeth and sells for his
lord or master / and therefore if ye bargayn be not good let hy^ keep it to
him self and answer you ye value thereof both in price and in prouffytes. And
if ye bye and sell by weight / beware of him yt hold ye belau^ce for he may do
you great dysseyte. Also ye shall wete yt a penny english without tonsure
ought too wey. xxx. graynes of whete taken out of the mids of ye ere / and.
xx. english pens ought to wey an ounce / and. xii. ounces make a. li. and.
viii. li. make a gallon / and. viii. gallons make a busshell / and. viii.
busshels make a quarter.

The. xvi. chapter.
Look a compte be made onesin the year / for it was first ordained to wete and
to know the state and the value of your manners / and to have knowledge of all
manner yssues in byenge and selling and dyspenses as well in household as other
things. And if ye have any rent or money look ye have it out of your officers
hands ones in a year. For it is often seen yt the balyf or other of the lords
officers make their marchau^dyse with their lords money to their own avail and
hurt their lord. And if there be any arerages look yt ye gader them without
delay. Look ye take the names of them that owe the arerages / for it is often
seen that the balyf is receyuer him self / and so he makes other receyuers
under him / and so one spares an other / and so that the arerages ben often
forgeten And look ye vysyte your things wisely and often / and ye shall se if
they take harm and amend it. And look ye besyte your servants often and that
shall cause them to be ware in doing amysse.

Here ends the book of husbondrye.
Here begins the plantynge of trees and of vynes.
If ye will graf a tree whose fruit have no cores take and bow in both ends
courbynge / and cut both ends with a knyfe / and fasten both ends in a
stoke and when it grows so with that tree cut away the greter end and
suffer the small end to grow and stand still.

If ye will make your apples read / take and grave a grafte of an apple tree
upon a stock of an elm or an elder and it shall bear read apples.

if ye will that a pere tree bear much fruit or else as he was wont to do /
dystempre Scamony with well water / and put it in a hole that is perced unto
the pyth of the tree / and stop the hole again with a pynne made of the same
tree / and it shall bear much fruit.

If ye will plant an almonde or walnot tree or a chery tree / or a pere tree /
put the kernels of yt which ye will in water three days / and put them in the
earth of gourdes and cucumbers / and ye may find ye same in diverse fruytes.
Chery trees loves cold earth and moist / but chery trees be well liking in
hylly places / ye best setty^ge of chery trees is in the month of January /
and if a chery tree rotte / make an hole with a persoure under the place / that
the water that causes the rottynge may dyscende out / and ye may do the same
with all manner of trees that rotte.

If a peche tree begin to draukyn / let him be well moysted with donge as
Pallady says / his best dongynge is with drastes of wine / and that may keep
him / dyscendynge.

If a peche apple begin to fall / take and cleue the rote thereof / and in the
clyfte drive a wedge made of a pyne tree / or else make holes with a wymble /
and make pynnes of a wylow and smite them in with a maylet of tree and the
fruit shall abide fast enough

If worms grow upon a tree / take ashes that is meddled with oil olyue or
myrre and that shall slay them. Or else take and stryke the tree with mellour
made the two parts with ox pysse / and ye third part of claye.

If thou will that a costarde or a quynce wex great take a pot and set it in
the earth and bow one of the branches in to the pot / and let it alone as
long as it wexeth in the pot and it shall be a great apple.

If ye will have many roses grow in your gardyne take hard pepynes of the
same roses and sow them in earth in February or in march / and when they
spryn dew them well with water / and after a year ye may plant them and
depart them each far enough fro other in what order ye will.

Also Greeks refourme or join a barayne vine cleue the stock and put in the
clyfte a stone mete therefore and let it stand till it be closed in / and put
about the rote with earth that is mydled with lack.

If ye will have a vine to bear on ye one side white grapes / and on the other
side read grapes / puruey you of a white vine and of a read wine / and set
them in earth / and when they rote / mesure of each of both a shaftement / and
of either party cut away half endlonge unto ye pyth / Join them to gyder and
bind them so that either party mete with other without dysioynynge / and at the
three days end moist it burgyon and ye may do thus with pere trees and apple
trees branches and in process of time ye may assay if the one vine rote may
be taken away and the other shall bear both white grapes and read Greeks
refourme a vine and make them bear tuacled grapes they cleue the vine that is
able to be set in the side the space of two finger bread / and there the put in
treacle so yt it be nere the rote end of yt stock that is cloven / the
profit thereof is that the grape or the wine or ye vynagre or else ashes or
that stourges brent is good against all manner of venym / and in like wise ye
may do to other trees.

If ye will keep apples and peers long / ye must gader them slely without
brusure and the place where they should be kept must be without wind or
temperate cold and put straw under them and cover them with straw. Also
some men put them in a pot or a susteren / and some wrappe them in payste
of claye or of mortar and in this wise ye may keep all manner of grapes and
other fruytes.

Here ends the book of husbondry / and of plantynge and graffynge of trees
and vynes.

