ANIMA'DVERSIONS OF WAR; OR, A MILITARY MAGAZINE OF THE TRVEST RVLES, AND
ABLEST INSTRVCTIONS, FOR THE MANAGING OF WAR. COMPOSED, OF THE MOST REFINED
DISCIPLINE, AND Choice Experiments that these late Netherlandish, and Swedish
Wars have Produced.

With diverse new inventions, both of Fortifications and Stratagems. As also
Sundry Collections taken out of the most approved Authors, ancient and modern,
either in Greek. Latin. Italian. French. Spanish. Dutch,
or English.

In two Books.

By ROBERT WARD, Gentleman and Commander.

LIPS. Pol. Lib. 5. Nunquam bonos fortesque milites habebis, nisi hac duo,
velut instrumenta adhibeas, delectum and disciplinam.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, and are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield at
the sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

TO HIS ROYAL MAJESTY KING CHARLES.
Most dread Sovereign,
I Having had many thoughts of the vicissitude of times, and of the mutation
and change of this precious Jewel Peace; And likewise observing how Sampsons
Foxes have swinged about their fiery tails of dis^ention and discord, whereby
this grim Monster (War) has violently broken down the Pale of prosperity in
our Neighboring Kingdoms; and would subtly be picking of the golden Lock
of Tranquillity, the which Omnipotency (by your Royal Majesty's goodness and
well-governing) has been so tender in preserving. And in regard neither Peace
nor War can bud nor flourish, but under the well-managed Sword: according to
my slender ability I have spent some few Months in discoursing upon the
principal parts of the Body of War, and that in two respects: First, that some
one judicious, learned, and wel-experienced Soldier, taking a survey of my
defects might be thereby instigated to begin and finish a more excellent work
tending to this Subject. And secondly, that my fellow Subjects who have not
been verst in these affairs, might gain some profit, whereby they might be
enabled to do your Majesty the better service upon all sudden occasions, when
your Highness shall call them thereto. And although it may be demanded whether
Reading or Practice have the first place in this Art, to be laid as a
foundation to this Building; I must with Marius answer this question, who
envying at the Nobility of Rome (says) Qui postquam Consules facti sunt, acta
Majorum and Graecorum Militaria praecepta legere coeperunt. Homines
praeposteri, nam legere quam fieri; tempore posterius, re and usu prius est.
For since that all motion and action proceeds from the Soul, and cannot well
be produced, until the Idea thereof be first imprinted in the mind; according
to which pattern the outward Being and sensible resemblance is duly
fashioned, how is it possible that any action belonging to War, can be well
expressed, when the mind is not directed by knowledge to dispose it in that
sort as shall best agree with the occurrents of such natures as are necessarily
interessed both in the means, and in the end thereof? Therefore Speculative
knowledge, as the Gnomon or Tramontane to direct the course of all practice, is
first to be respected; But withal no man can so well rest upon such certainty
through the Theorick of Knowledge, as he that has also proved his learning
verified by practice; And in regard the habitude of Arts and Sciences cannot
be said to be perfectly attained, unless their particular parts are in such
sort apprehended, that from the variety of that individuality; the
Intellectual power frames general Notions and Maxims of Rule uniting
terms of the same nature in one head, and distinguishing diversities by
differences of properties, aptly dividing the whole body into his greatest and
smallest branches, and fitting each part with his descriptions, duties,
cautions, and exceptions; For unless the understanding of a Soldier be in
some kind qualified, and able by Logical discourse, to ascend by way of
composition, from singularity to Catholic conceptions, and return again the
same way, to the lowest order of his partitions, the mind cannot be said to
have the perfection of that Art, or instructed in true knowledge, but guided by
some broken Precepts; whereby it will follow that this Science of War being
divided into many branches, and consisting in the multiplicitie of diverse
members being all so material, and interes^ed in the Bulk, that a mayme of
the smallest part, causes either debilitie, or deformity in the body, so that
every small and unrespected Circumstance, quite alters the nature of the
action, and breeds such d^sparity, and difference, that the resemblance of
their equal participating properties is blemished with their disagreeing
parts. It cannot be denied, but he that is acquainted with most occurrences,
and best knows the variety of chances in the course of War, must needs be
thought a more perfect Soldier, and deserves a Title of greater dignity in
the noble profession of Arms, then those that content themselves with a few
common Precepts and bro^en Rules; Therefore experience and practice does not
only make a Soldier worthy of his name; But the knowledge of the manifold
acc^dents which rise from the variety of humane actions, wherein Reason and
Error has enterchanged contrary events of Fortune: And this knowledge is only
to be gained in the Registers of Antiquity and History recording the passages
of former a^es, that their harms may be our warnings, and their happy
proceedings our fortunate directions; Wherefore accordingly (Most gracious
Sovereign) I have indevoured to set for a Preface to this Warlike-Discourse,
such accidents and occurrences as happened in the raising and declyning of the
four most Ancient and renowned Monarch^es; a subject full of the variety of
the events of Fortune. And then I have briefly run over the principal parts of
the Body of War; A Subject (if not spoiled by my illiteratnesse and
inabilitie) fit to kiss your Royal hands; And like Pyrrbus in Plutarch in
silence craves your Highness tuition; I do not question your high esteem,
and gracious acceptance of works of this nature; and although these my
collective Anima'd versions are but shadows to the real substance your
Princely mind is beautified withal, yet may they seem worthy to excite your
Warlike cogitations to visit the excellent treasure of your own mind, that
thence you may extract particulars for this warlike age, agreeable to your
Magnanimity and wise^ome, the Embassage of this my pains is delivered and
discharged. And seeing the Lord of Hosts has fitted and enriched your Royal
person with the best abilities of nature, and your Heroyick spirit with true
wisdom and undaunted valor; So that in your youth, your height of courage
did venture to plough through the rude Seas, and pace over the Territories of
Foreign Kingdoms to the worlds amazement, (a fortunate pres^ge that your
mighty hand should afterward Conqu^r, and subjugate both by Sea and Land;)
Accordingly Implore the Heavens to be propitious to your Majesty, and ^owne
you with Victory over all your Enemies; Thus most humbly craving pardon for my
great presumption, desiring God to be your Rule and Guide, I shall be ^old to
conclude with your Royal Motto, Exurgat Deu^ and dissipentur Aenimici;

Your most faithful and loyal Subject and Servant R. W.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF WARWICK, AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
WILLIAM Lord Maynard of Elton, Lord Lievetenants for the County of Essex; And
to the right worshipful the Deputy Lievetenants, and Noble Captains of the
same.
RIght Honorable and right Worshipful; God wins Romans Ant.
in the ancient Roman Coin the picture of Mars was usually stamped with a
Iavelin in one hand, a scourge in the other, and the Portraict of a Cock
standing by him; The Iavelin intimated Prowess, the scourge Authority, and the
Cock Vigillancie and indefatigable care: What was but engraven on that Coin
is vively expressed in all your Honors and Worships actions, which doubtless
moved that Royal hand to confer upon you the high charge of ordering his
martial affairs in this County of Essex. Your high Authority and my service
under it has moved me to present unto your viewes a Treatise of War; a subject
in these perilous times very requisite to be regarded, especially by men of
this honorable profession, since we perceive all doubts in adjacent dominions
are now decided only by dint of the Sword: Proximus ardetucalligon; our
neighbors house is of a light fire, their Towns and Towers burn like
Beacons: We know not how soon their flame may catch hold of our own buildings
(War being in a neighbor Province like fire in the next dwellings which can
hardly be kept off, but by good help) No help better to divert a war then a
skillful Soldiery; for that enemy which dares do much against a numerous
people unskilful in the feats of Arms, will consider well before he attempts
any thing against those that be Warlike, though of far less numbers; nothing
makes a people warlike so soon as maintenance of Marshall discipline, nor does
anything make the Common wealth more safe then that. This was one motive which
instigated me first to undertake this hard and difficult task, and not out of
any ambition to teach, since it is well known that your Honors and Worships
are well verst both in the Practicke and Speculative knowledge of War: And
inregard your Noble professions are adorned with the truest rules adherent to
these actions, it is in a manner superfluus for me to commend these unpollisht
Lines to your viewes, you being no strangers to this subject; Yet as Mela said
once in his description of Italy: De Italia magis quia ordo exegit quam quia
monstrari eget pauca dicentur, nota sunt omnia; the like I may justly say
concerning this discourse of Warlik discipline, it is so obvious to your sight
that you need not the spectacles of Letters, yet something I must say rather
for methods sake unto your Lordships then necessity, and I hope it shall not
seem impertinent unto your Honors, since your golden Spirits cannot admit of
such effeminizing as the Pithagorians which inhabited Amicle a Town in Italy,
who often being terrified with a vain rumor of their enemies approach,
promulgated a Law, forbidding all such reports, by which means their enemies
coming unawares upon them took the Town, from hence grew the Proverb
Amiclas silentium perdidit; therefore with Lucillius who was commanded to he
silent, I must return this answer (to those that ure not verst in these
martial affairs but are altogether submerge^in security) Mihi necesse est
loqui, S^^o enim Amiclas silentio perijsse. It is not unknown to your Honors
and Worships who are experienced, how far both Officers and Soldiers are
degenerated from former ages, in which they made the use and practice of Arms
their glory; but our age makes it a burden and a shame to use and bear that
name which of all attributes and titles is most honorable, if such would with
Cicero consider to what end they were borne, with him they would confess Non
nobis solum nati sumus sed etiam pro Patria; Wherefore the noble profession of
a Soldier is a thing of no small consequence, when as true Religion cannot be
maintained, the honor and safety of our gracious King cannot be safe, the
possession and welfare of our kingdom cannot be enjoyed, nor the subduing of
our enemies cannot be achieved but by and under the shadow of the well managed
Sword: For indeed the infinite chances, hazards and events of War are so
doubtful and dangerous (that as Jason said to Epaminondas) he is not wise
that does not fear them, seeing as I have said before the whole world is in
combustion, we ought to fit our selves and provide for the hardest: for
certainly expert commanders can easily conquer those that are Novices; and a
battle once lost has an ill tail or consequence, as the great Soldier and
Statesman Commineus says, un Battaille perdu a maunaise queue, for it
redoubleth the hope and courage of the victors, and discourageth and
astonisheth the vanquished; it shakes the fidelity of Subjects, it ministers
matter and opportunity of conspiracy to Malcontents, of revolts to Towns,
and of Allienation to confederates, who commonly sway with the good success:
And for this cause all Princes have been very vigilant and careful to have
their Commanders very expert and valiant, and their Subjects well exercised in
the use of Arms; that no sudden danger should dismay them, nor no Enemy too
subtle for them; for although a Nation be never so well verst in all Politic
Stratagems and most able to manage a War, yet there are many accidents that
the Engine of wit cannot evade, whereby mighty Armies may be dissipated and
dispersed, and the greatest enterprises overthrown; A^ sometimes it has fallen
out by the death of some one man, Pedro Mexia in Lodo^^^ Bavaro, how by the
death of Constructio the Emperor the design against Florence was lost
sometimes by the dissension of Leaders and Captains amongst themselves,
Paulus Emil. in Carolo by a schism between Vrbat and Clement the Army was
ruined
sometimes by mutiny of Soldiers, Sigon de regno Itallico Anno 896. how Rome
was surprised by Ar^ulphus the Emperor through a sudden fear.
sometimes by means of a Tempest or unseasonable weather; Paulus Em^l. in
Ph^lipo secundo.
sometimes by Plagues or other diseases in the Camp, Nauclerus in Cro^ the
Christians overthrew the Sultan through a sudden fear.
and as Guicchardine notes in his second Book, by mistake of a
Commanmandement, either not well understood or ill executed, by a little
timerity or disorder which may happen by some evil words or speeches even of
the meanest Soldiers, and as Commineus further relates, Osorius in lib. 7.
cap. 36. diverse Battles lost by diverse accidents.
that be the Counsel never so well taken, and the plot never so well laid, yet
it is seldom or never executed in the field as it is ordained in the Chamber;
Guic. lib. 5. the French were overthrown by a word mistaken
what infinite care and pains therefore (my Lords) ought every particular
Officer under your Honors Commands take in preparing themselves and fitting
their Soldiers against the time of Service, that they may be able to eschew
these dangers, Titus Livius in dec. 3. lib. 2. and d^c 4. lib 7.
and vindicate honor and triumph to themselves, that they may seem worthy to
be crowned with the wreathes of victory, Pedro Mexia in vita Imp. Adolph.
as Valor. Max. lib. 2. reports that no Captain was worthy to be honored
with a Crown of Laurel, Guic in lib. 8. what victories has been lost by
Sun, wind and rain, etc.
clothed in rich Purple, and mounted in the golden Chariot of Fame, unless he
had fought some notable battle against the Enemy, wherein above 5000. men at
the least were slain; this victory begets such immortal honor and renown to
the name of Captains according to their memorable actions which has eternized
their houses of descent by contrary names of glory and fame, as by the example
of the Warlike Romans, the three Metelli, whereof one of them (as Salust and
some others write) because he had overcome King Iugurthe conquering the Land of
Numidia was surnamed Numidicus; the second conquered the King of Macedon, and
was styled with the name of Macedon^cus; and the third for conquering the I Will
of Creete was honored with the name of Creticus, and the like of diverse others;
and as the Romans were curious in conferring honors upon true desert, so also
they were severe in punishing of base Cowardice or wilful neglect, and stupid
ignorance; for if they lost honor in that kind where as by their own
endeavors they might have achieved it, they had as a duemerit the basest of
punishment inflicted; as whipping in the head of the Troops until the blood
followed; or manacled together with Irons: And for leaving of their General or
Commanders in time of fight, they were spitted upon Stakes, and diverse other
rigorous torments executed upon delinquents for the like offense. Therefore
with the Prophet David I implore his aid (who styles himself the Lord of
Hosts and a man of War) that he would teach our fingers to fight and our
hands to Battle, Esaias 42. 13.
that we may be ready when the Sword (which God in our time avert) shall come
upon the Land, Psalm. 18. 34.
and the Trumpet blows and warn the people, we may then make a valiant
resistance. But he that hears the sound of the Trumpet and will not be warned
(says the Prophet Ezekiel) if the Sword come and take him away, Ezekiel. 33. Ver.
3, 4, 5.
his blood shall be upon his own head; for he heard the sound of the Trumpet
and would not be admonished, but he that receives warning shall save his life.

Your Lordships and Worships Humble Servant, ROBERT WARD.

A Table of the Contents of the several Sections and Chapters contained in in
these two Books.
The Contents of the first Book.
SECTION I. The Mutability of Flourishing Kingdoms.
Chap. 1.
THere is no nation ever did, or ever shall possess a perpetual peace. Page 1
Chap 2.
Of the Monarchy of the Assyrians and the wars thereof. 2
Chap. 3.
Of the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians and the wars thereof. 3
Chap 4.
Of the Macedonian Monarchy and the wars thereof. 11
Chap. 5.
Of the Roman Monarchy and the wars thereof. 18
SECT. II. How to provide in Peace for war.
Chap. 6.
It is good in time of Peace to provide for war. 26
Chap. 7.
Of the things necessarily to be provided and first of Victuals. 27
Chap. 8.
Of the preparation of Armor and weapons. ibid
Chap. 9.
Of the provision of Money. 28
Chap. 10.
Of the provision of Shipping. 29
Chap. 11.
Of the provision of Soldiers and landforces. 30
SECT. III. The manner of Fortification.
Chap. 12.
The Abridgement of Geometry, so far as belongs to the Art of Fortification.
35
Chap. 13.
How to line and stake any Bulworke upon a Regular figure. 40
Chap. 14.
How to Fortify the Exagon Figure, with the second kind of Flanks. 43
Chap. 15.
How to Fortify a place that is not capable of a regular Fortification. 45
Chap. 16.
Another Irregular Figure Fortified. 47
Chap. 17.
A third Irregular Figure Fortified. 49
Chap. 18.
A fourth Irregular Figure Fortified. 51
Chap. 19.
A fifth Irregular figure Fortified. 53
Chap. 20.
A discourse, how the Ancients Fortified their Towns. 55
Chap. 21.
A second way which the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns. 56
Chap. 22.
The third way the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns. 57
Chap. 23.
The fourth way the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns. 58
Chap. 24.
The fifth way the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns. 59
Chap. 25.
Of the measures and proportions of our modern Fortresses. 60 Of Fortresses in
general, and of their perfections and imperfections. 62
Chap. 26.
Of four kinds of Fortifying now in use; first of the manner of Fortifying in
France. 67
Chap. 27.
How the French Fortify their Irregular figures. 68
Chap. 28.
The manner of the Spannish Fortifying. 70
Chap. 29.
Of the Venetians manner of Fortificati^o. 71
Chap 30.
A Comparison between the rules of Fortification handled in this Treatise with
the rules of others: with certain Answers to diverse objections in
Fortification. 72
Chap. 31.
The manner how to gain and defend the Fortresses. 76
Chap. 32.
Diverse observations, Rules, and Orders which all Generals ought to observe in
the besieging, and defending of Fortes. 79
Chap. 33.
A Triangular Sconce, with direction, for the best scituating of it. 84
Chap. 34.
The manner of framing a Trianguler Redout. 85
Chap. 35.
The manner of fram^^^ a Quadrangle Redout. 87
Chap. 36.
The manner of framing a Qnadrangle Sconce. 88
Chap. 37.
The manner of framing a Sconce with six Points, or Angles. 89
Chap. 38.
The manner of framing a Half Moon. ibid.
Chap. 39.
The manner of framing a Horne-worke. 90
Chap. 40.
A second kind of Horne-worke, with its proper place. 91
Chap. 41.
The description of the Redouts, Fortes, and Batteries which were raised by
Spinola at the Seige of Breda. 95
Chap. 42.
Diverse choice Observations, concerning the beleaguring of a Fort; collected
from the famous Seige of Breda Anno 1624. 98
Chap. 43.
How to frame a Flankered Redout. 105
SECT. IV. The use of Artillery in Forts.
Chap. 44.
The office of the Master of the Ordinance, and other inferior Officers; 107
Chap. 45.
The names of all kind of Ordnances whatsoever, now in use, with the height of
their Diametets, their weight etc. 109
Chap. 46.
How the Gunners of our times do divide these Ordinance, according to their
quality for several service. 112
Chap. 47.
How a Gunner ^s to Tertiate and measure a P^ece of Ordnance, and also how to
despart any kind of Ordnance. 114
Chap. 48.
Diverse circumstances and causes to be considered and avoided, which causes
Error in shooting. 118
Chap. 49.
Observations in charging great Ordnance with their due proportion of Powder,
and Shot with their Ladles, etc. 111
Chap. 50.
Diverse Rules and observations to be used in Levelling of Ordnance, by the
Gunners Quadrant, Scale etc. 124
Chap. 51.
Diverse brief observations, concerning the Imbasing of Ordnance, and shooting
in Morter-peeces. 130
Chap. 52.
The description of such Instruments, with the best selected Rules, which have
been invented and practiced, for the taking of heights and d^stances; whereby
a Gunner may make his shot at more certainty. 134
SECT. V.
Chap. 53.
The Art of conveying Letters out of a Forte, described. 143
SECT. VI. The Art of Conveying a Mine under a Forte.
Chap. 54.
How to conduct a Mine under ground, to blow up a Bulworke. 147
SECT. VII. The duties of Souldies in general both in Fort, and Field.
Chap. 55.
The duties of Soldiers, both Gentlemen and Senteries, generally discoursed
of. 150
Chap 56.
The duties both of Officers, and Soldiers in Garrison. 155
Chap. 57.
The duties of Officers and Soldiers in the Camp. 157
Chap. 58.
Of the due obedience, both Subjects, Officers, and Soldiers should hear to
their Prince or General; with a demonstration how Mutinies and Treasons have
been rewarded with infinite miseries. 158
SECT. VIII. The true Valor of Subjects and Soldiers in Fort, and Field.
Chap. 59.
The true nature of Valor described, and how men ought to be qualified with
it. 172
SECT. IX. A discourse upon unjust Valor in Duels.
Chap. 60.
Of the opinions of diverse Learned men concerning Duels; with the chiefest
circumstances that can be alleged for the Lawfulnes of them, and so confuted
both by divine and humane reasons; 183
S^CT. X. The Office and duty of every particular Officer in an Army.
Chap. 61.
The duty and Office of a Drum to a pryvate company; and of the
Drumme-Major of the Regiment.
Chap. 62.
The Office of a Corporal, and his Lantsprezado. 195
Chap. 63.
The Office of a Sergeant to a private Company. 196
Chap. 64.
The Office of an Ensign to a private Company, 197
Chap. 65.
The Office of a Lieutenant to a private Company. 199
Chap. 66.
The Office of a Captain of a private Compatie. 200
Chap. 67.
The Office of a Serjeant-Major of a Regement, 203
Chap. 68.
The Office of a Lievetenant-Colonell of a Regiment. 204
Chap. 69.
The Office and duty of a Colonel over a Regiment. ibid.
Chap. 70.
The Office of a Serjeant-Major-generall of an Army; 206
Chap. 71.
Tho Office of the Lord Marshall in the wars, and of his high Jurisdiction and
command in the Army. 207
Chap. 72.
Of the Council of war, and of their office and duty in the time of war,
209
SECT. XI. The Art of Drilling, or excercising a Foote-Companie.
Chap. 73.
The manner how every Officer should Drill and exercise their Companies of
Foot, in all their Postures, and Motions, with the several ways of giving
fire. 211
Chap. 74.
How a Captain shall cause his Officers to order and rank his Company, fit
to march into the field. 212
Chap. 75.
How the Officers are to draw both Pikes and Muskets (one file sequenting
another) into a Ring for the better and speedier exercising them in their
Postures. 214
Chap. 76.
How an Officer is to Demean himself, in the Exercising of the Musketeers.
215
Chap. 77.
How an Officer is to Demean himself in the Exercising of the Pikes. 222
Chap. 78.
How the Comand^rs shall draw their Files both of Musketeers and Pikes, and
join them in one body, fit to be exercised in gross. 225
Chap. 79.
How a Comander shall exercise his Company in gross in their porper motions.
226
Chap. 80.
Of Facing square, and how to perform it: The usefulnes of Facing and the
several parts thereof. 227
Chap. 81.
The manner of opening, and closing, both of Ranks and Files. 230
Chap. 82.
How an Officer shall exercise his Company in Doubling of their Ranks and
Files. 231
Chap. 83.
Directions how to perform those seveverall kinds of doublings, and how to
reduce them again. 234
Chap. 84.
Of Inversion and Conversion, with their words of Command, whereby those
motions are produced. 243
Chap. 85.
How an Officer is to exercise his Soldiers in three manner of
Counter-marches, etc. 247
Chap. 86.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in the motions of Wheeling. 254
Chap. 87.
How a Commander shall prepare his Soldiers for skirmish, with the manner and
use of firing by Forlorn Files in the Front, 259
Chap. 88.
How a Commander sball exercise his Soldiers to give fire by two Ranks, etc.
260
Chap. 89.
How a Commander shall exercise his Wings of Musketeers to give fire, etc. 261
Chap. 90.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in giving Fire to the Reere. 267
Chap. 91.
How a Commander shall exercise his Company in giving fire in the Flanks. 268
Chap. 92.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in Divisionall Firings. 272
Chap. 93.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in giving fire to the Reere, and
right Flank, Marching, etc. 273
Chap. 94.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in a Triple way of giving Fire to
the Front. 274
Chap. 95.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in giving Fire three ways at
once (viz.) to the Front, Reere, and Right-Flanke. 275
SECT. XII. The Drilling or exercising Horse-Troopes.
Chap. 96.
Of the preheminencie and dignity of Officers (for avoiding of disputes) with
a short Declaration of the high office of the General of the Horse. 277
Chap 97
The Office of the Lieutenant-Generall of the Cavalrie. 278
Chap. 98.
Of the Serjeant-Major-Generall of the Cavalrie. 279
Chap. 99.
Of the Quarter-Master-Generall of the Cavalrie. 280
Chap. 100.
The office of the Captain of the Cavalrie, Ibid.
Chap. 101.
The Office of the Lieutenant of the Cavalrie, 281
Chap. 102.
Of the Cornet belonging to the Cavalrie. 282
Chap. 103.
Of the ordering and riding of Horses to make them fit for service. 283
Chap. 104.
Further instructions concerning the ordering, and riding of a Horse for
service, with the use of the Ring. 285
Chap. 105.
How to manage a Horse for service four kinds of ways. 289
Chap. 106.
How to make a Horse endure Pike, Sword, Gunshot, Drum, and the like. 291
Chap. 107.
How the Horse-Troopes ought to be divided, and distinguished by their
several Arms 292
Chap. 108.
How the Harquebuziers, and the Carabines ought to demean themselves. 293
Chap. 109.
How the Dragonnes ought to Arm and demean themselves. 294
Chap. 110.
How a single Troop of Horse ought to be drawn into Rank and File. Ibid.
Chap. 111.
What orders and distances a Horse-Troope should observe in exercise. 295
Chap. 112.
The motions which the Cavalrie are to observe in their exercise. Ibid.
Chap. 113.
The manner how a Commander over 120 Horse, besides Officers, sbould troop
with them into the Field to be exercised. 296
Chap. 114.
How a Commander should draw this Troop of Horse into a Body, in manner of a
Batalia. 297
Chap. 115.
How Soldiers are to be made to understand their Commanders intentions in the
time of Skirmish. 298
Chap. 116.
The description of the Postures for the Cavalrie. 299
Chap. 117.
Of the Exercising of the Harquebuz, and Carabine, with the Postures to them
belonging, etc. 301
Chap. 118.
Of the excellent service which may be performed by the Dragoones here in
England. 302
Chap. 119.
The order of exercising a Horse-troope in their motions, being drawn in
Batalia, 304
Chap. 120.
The fashion of Horse-Battels discoursed of, and first of the Rhombe. 309
Chap. 121.
The manner and form how the second kind of Rhombe is ordered in Batalia. 310
Chap. 122.
The manner and form of imbattelling the third kind of Rhombe. 311
Chap. 123.
The manner of Imbattelling the fourth kind of Rhombe. 312
Chap. 124.
The manner of Framing the Battle called the Wedge, or half Rhombe. 313
Chap. 125.
The Reason why we retain the custom of Ranking five deep in File. 314
Chap. 126.
How the Cavalrie are to order, and demean themselves in proportionable
Battles, fit to be joined with the Infantrie, with their due order of fighting
against the Enemies Foot-Troopes; Likewise how they are to give, and receive a
Charge of the Enemies Cavalrie in Gross, as also in single Combats and
assaults. 316
SECT. XIII. A Discourse of Politic Stratagems.
Chap. 127.
A perfect Demonstration of such Politic Stratagems as have been plotted,
and and practiced, both by Ancient and Modern Commanders. 321
Chap. 128.
How the Prince of Orange took in Grolle in Gelderland. 322
Chap. 129.
A Policy to defer time, when a Town is beleaguered, that relief may be
gained Ibid.
Chap. 130.
How Zophirus, by a Politic Stratagem, delivered a whole Army into his
Generals hands. Ibid.
Chap. 131.
How Philip Macedon, and diverse others, by their Policy have gained Kingdoms
by affording their aids to distressed Princes, 323
Chap. 132.
A Policy to preserve Towns from revolting, with a covert-way to banish such
men as are held in suspicion. Ibid.
Chap. 133.
A Politic way to prevent an Enemy from stopping the March of part of an
Army 324
Chap. 134.
A Politic way for an Army that is fallen into danger, to escape it, by
securing the one half by the hazarding the other. Ibid.
Chap. 135.
A Policy whereby Scanderbeg in a Battle against the Great Turk, overthrew
his Troops of Horses. Ibid.
Chap. 136.
A Policy which the Duke de Alva used to fortify his Army against the Prince
of Orange his Horse. 325
Chap. 137.
A Policy to prevent rebellion of such in high Authority as are discontented,
or of a proud and haughty spirit. Ibid.
Chap. 138.
How a General ought to demean himself Politickly, both in giving of
Battle, and in refusing it. Ibid.
Chap. 139.
A Politic observation of a General how he should entreat a Peace. 326
Chap. 140.
A Policy to prevent the assistance of a foreign friend. Ibid.
Chap. 141.
How to gain fortunate success to an Army, Ibid.
Chap. 142.
A Policy used by Marrius to try the fidelity of the French, which inhabi^ed
Lombardy. 325
Chap. 143.
A policy to compel an Enemy out of a Land without hazarding an Army in
Battle with him. ibid.
Chap. 144.
How a General sbould use policy in letting an enemy pass without sight. ib.
Chap. 145.
A policy to make Soldiers fight in a pitched Battle, and to prevent their
running away. 328
Chap. 146.
A policy of a Genoys, used to the Negotiator of Lodwick Sforza, to cause him
to know the nature of oppression. ibid.
Chap. 147.
A policy to be used by a General to encourage Soldiers to work in time of
necessity. ibid.
Chap. 148.
A politic way for a General to gain a difficult passage with his Army.
ibid.
Chap. 149.
A policy to be used by a General, to further the assault made against a
Town. 329
Chap. 150.
A politic Stratagem used by the Hollanders to take in the Town of Breda.
ibid.
Chap. 151.
A policy which the City of Cassiline used to make Haniball raise his seige
ibid.
Chap. 152.
Caesar's policy in letting the Dutchmen fly, that he might vanquish them. 330
Chap. 153.
How by a Stratagem the Guard of the Sconse at Zutphen was cut off, and the
Sconse taken, and immediately after the Town. ibid.
Chap. 154.
A policy used by the Romans to relieve such Towns as had Rivers running by
or through them. ibid.
Chap. 155.
How the Governor of Bergen-up-zone had like to have routed Spinola's Army at
his first beseiging it. 331
Chap. 156.
A policy used by Mennon of Rhodes to draw his enemy out of his Trenches to
give him Battle. ibid.
Chap. 157.
How Marcellus by a politic Stratagem cut off Haniballs Forces which came to
assault the Town of Nola. Ibid.
Chap. 158.
A Policy which Scipio used to weaken and dishearten the Army of Asdruball,
before he would give him Battle, whereby he gained the victory. 332
Chap. 159.
A Politic Stratagem which Titus Didus made use of, to prevent his enemy for
encountering with his fresh supplies that were coming to assist him. ib.
Chap. 160.
A Policy of Haniball to bring the Romans into jealousy of their General
Fabius Maximus that thereby he might work his own ends. 333
Chap. 161.
A Politic Stratagem whereby an Army has been disheartened in time of
Battle. ib.
Chap. 162.
A Politic Stratagem used by Labienus in France, whereby he vanquished his
enemies Army, marching over a River. ib.
Chap. 163.
A Policy whereby an Army may pass over a River, when the Enemy attends the
advantage to ruin them. ibid.
Chap. 164.
An excellent Policy for a General to put off a people that he is in league
with all, and desires his assistance 334
Chap. 165.
The Policy of Vigetius to conv^y foote-Troopes over a River that is passable,
so that the stream shall not offend them. ib.
Chap. 166.
How by a Politic device the Hollanders obtained a convenient piece of ground
from their Enemy, upon which they built the Sconce called Skinkes. ibid.
Chap. 167.
Haniballs politic observations in placing his Battles upon advantages. 335
Chap. 168.
A Policy used by Pyrrhus, whereby he deluded the Lacedaemonians. ibid.
Chap. 169.
How Demetrius by a Politic Stratagem overthrew the Army of Ptolomie. ibid.
Chap. 170.
A Politic way to weaken an Enemies Army. ibid.
Chap. 171.
A Politic Stratagem used by Fulvius, whereby he cut off the Sallies of the
Cimbrians. 336
Chap. 172.
A policy whereby Alexander deceived the Illyrians, by counterfeiting the
Enemies Colors. ibid.
Chap. 173.
A policy used by Tamirus, and Tiberius Gracchus, whereby they overthrew their
enemies whole Army at once without loss or hazard to themselves. ibid.
Chap. 174.
A politic Stratagem used by Eumenes to cause his Soldiers to follow him
upon a dangerous attempt. ibid.
Chap. 175.
A policy to gain a Town whose fidelity is doubtful. 337
Chap. 176.
A policy used by Alexander to secure Thracia from rebellion. ibid.
Chap. 177.
A policy to beguile an Enemy from opposing an Army that would march over a
River. ibid.
Chap. 178.
A politic Stratagem used by Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, whereby he
surprised the strong town of Manheim in the Pallatinate. ibid.
Chap. 179.
A politic Stratagem used by Alexander, whereby he forced his Enemy from a
passage which by strength he could not have gained. 338
Chap. 180.
How Scipio by his justice and chaste carriage to a fair Lady (which he had
taken prisoner) won the hearts of his Enemies. ibid.
Chap. 181.
A politic answer of Alexander unto certain malicious enemies, and his wise
device to gain their love. ibid.
Chap. 182.
A politic course used by Tamberline, whereby he gained speedy conquests. 339
Chap. 183.
A policy used by Edward the fourth to suppress his Rebels. ibid.
Chap. 184.
A politic device used by William Rufus to get moneys. ibid.
Chap. 185.
A politic course to keep a new conquered people from Innovations and
Rebellions. ibid.
Chap. 186.
A politic way to stay mutinies in an Army. 340
Chap. 187.
A policy used by King William, to Malcolme King of Scotland. ibid.
Chap. 188.
Politic observations in a confederate War* ibid.
Chap. 189.
A policy used by the Governor of Croizon to make his cowardly Soldiers
fight. 341
Chap. 190.
A policy used by Generals to beguile hunger in a straight besieged Town.
ibid.
Chap. 191.
A politic Stratagem practiced by the Governor of Berghen against the Prince
of Parma's Forces. ibid.
Chap. 192.
A politic observation for a General if he fears his enemies Battle, to
march from him by night. 342
Chap. 193.
A politic Stratagem whereby the King of Naples regained the possession of a
City and Castle, formerly lost to the French. ibid.
Chap. 194.
A politic Stratagem used by Nauplius against the Graecians as they came for
the Island of Euboea. ibid.
Chap. 195.
An excellent policy used by Mahomet Bassa, to conceal the death of Soliman
from his Soldiers at Sigeth in Hungary. ibid.
Chap. 196.
A politic Stratagem used by Simon son of Miltiades, whereby he overthrew
the Sea and Landforces of the Persians in one day. 348
Chap. 197.
A policy of the Duke of Burbon, to cause his flying Soldiers to stand a
Charge. ibid.
Chap. 198.
A policy used by Henry the fifth, being overcharged with prisoners. ibid.
Chap. 199.
A Stratagem whereby the Town of Fast-Castle in Scotland was taken from the
English. ibid.
Chap. 200.
A notable policy whereby the Island of Sarke was taken from the French. 344
Chap. 201.
A politic device used by Iugurth to help his Army in case it were
overthrown. ibid.
Chap. 202.
A politic Stratagem used by Count Pedro Navarese to beat his enemies from a
Breach. ibid.
Chap. 203.
A policy used by the Prince of Orange to drown his enemy out of his
Trenches, and then to relieve the Town by Boats. 345
Chap. 204.
A policy used by the Spaniards against the French to prevent the power of
their Horse against their foot. ibid.
Chap. 205.
A politic Stratagem whereby the Lord Poynings gained a Castle at
Samer-dubois, there being no access to it with Ordnance. ibid.
Chap. 206.
A policy used by Mounsieur Lautreck to make his foreign assistance to
fight. ibid.
Chap. 207.
How Scipio by his policy defeated the Carthaginians of their design. 346
Chap. 208.
A politic Stratagem used by Philopaemen against Nabis. ibid.
Chap. 209.
A politic Stratagem to prevent an Enemy from entering, the Ports being blown
open. ibid.
Chap. 210.
A politic Stratagem used by Maximilian whereby he took the Town of Arras.
ibid.
Chap. 211.
A policy to prevent mischief when two great Princes meet to discourse. 347
Chap. 212.
A policy to conduct Troops of Horse over Bogges, etc. ibid.
Chap. 213.
A policy used by the Citizens of Priennia, which caused the enemy to leave
his Seige. ibid.
Chap. 214.
A politic Stratagem whereby young Scipio brought Haniball into suspicion
with Antiochus. 348
Chap. 215.
Politic devises used by Archelaus Methridates, to cause his Soldiers to
fight. ibid.
Chap. 216.
A politic Stratagem used by Flavius to bring Gracchus into an Ambush. 349
Chap. 217.
A policy whereby Haniball had like to have caused the Romans to have fled.
ibid.
Chap. 218.
A politic Stratagem used by Marcius to make use of the Carthaginians
security. 350
Chap. 219.
A politic Stratagem whereby Asdruball delivered his Army out of a great
strait from Nero. ibid.
Chap. 220.
How Haniball by using of a politic Stratagem (in preventing his Horse
Troops) gained a victory from Fulvius. 315
Chap. 221.
How by the wisdom of Crispinus, the politic Stratagem of Haniball was
prevented. 352
Chap. 222.
A policy whereby Scipio had 300. Romans armed and instructed, without the
charge of the General. ib.
Chap. 223.
A politic Stratagem used by the French, whereby they vanquished Lucius
Post-humus and his army. 353
Chap. 224.
The policy of Cyrus, how to gain valiant and loyal Commanders in his
service. ibid.
Chap. 225.
A policy to stir up emulation amongst Soldiers. ibid.
Chap. 226.
A policy to be used at the entering of an E^nemies Town; etc. 354
Chap. 227.
A politic Stratagem whereby Fabius the Consul took the town of Arpos.
ibid.
Chap. 228.
A politic Stratagem of Scipio in counterfeiting an intrenchment. ibid.
Chap. 229.
A politic Stratagem whereby Haniball gained a Town of great Consequence
under the pretense of bringing in a Wild Bore. 355
Chap. 230.
The policy of Zenophon in electing of Hostages. 356
Chap. 231.
A policy of Zenophon whereby he deluded his enemy with his small army,
causing them to think it to be of a mighty strength ibid.
Chap. 232.
A policy used by the Prince of Orange to delude an Enemy from succouring a
town 357
Chap. 233.
An Imposture used by Sertorius whereby he confirmed his Soldiers valor. ib.
Chap. 234.
How a Scottish King by an Imposture caused his soldiers to be valiant,
whereby he obtained a victory ibid.
Chap. 235.
A politic Imposture used by Boniface whereby he gained the Papacy. 358
Chap. 236.
A Politcike Imposture whereby wonderful things have been achieved. ibid.
Chap. 237.
A Politic Imposture used by Minos to bring in and establish his laws. ibid.
Chap. 238.
A Politic Imposture used at the Interments of Emperors to make the pople
believe they were highly honored of God. 359
Chap. 239.
A Politic Imposture able to seduce multitudes, by walking upon the water.
idid.
Chap. 240.
Illusions whereby diverse learned, and Judicious men have been deceived. ibid.
Chap. 241.
How Spinola at the siege of Breda, gained intelligence of all the proceedings,
both in the Prince of Oranges Camp, and in the Town of Breda, 360
Chap. 242.
A Stratagem whereby the Prince of Orange had like to have gained Antwerpe
Castle. 361
SECT. XIIII. A Description of Engines, and warlike Instruments.
Chap. 243.
The description of such Engines and Warlike Instruments as are prevalent in
the wars, with the manner of using them; and how to make them. 362
Chap. 244.
The use of Grenades, how they are made, and charged with Powder, and how they
are to be discharged out of a Mortar, or thrown by the hand. 363
Chap. 245.
The use of Fireballs, with the manner of framing them. 365
Chap. 246.
The use of Lanthorns, and Hollow Plates filled with stones and Bulletts for
the defending of Breaches. 366
Chap. 247.
How to make a certain stone to burn in the water or to kindle fire in rain.
ibid.
Chap. 248.
Of certain earthen Bottels, filled with a kind of mixture, to be fired, and
thrown among the Enemies. 367
Chap. 249.
How a Frame of Muskets are to be made and ordered. ^68
Chap. 250.
An instrument called a Flaile. ibid.
Chap. 251.
The use of the Turne-Pike and how it is framed. 369
Chap. 252.
The use of Pallizadoes, and how they are framed. ibid.
Chap. 253.
The use of the Calthrope, and of the Spiked Planke. 370.
Chap. 254.
The use of the Bome, or Barricadoe. 371.
Chap. 255.
Of a second kind of Bonme or Barricadoe to lay over a River. 372
Chap. 256.
Duke Alberts invention for the staying the Hollanders Ships at Ostend, that
his Batteries might the easier discharge upon the^. 373
Chap. 257.
The manner of making a Battery to float upon the water. 374
Chap, 258.
The manner of Framing the Engine called the Saulcisse. 375
Chap. 259.
How to stop up the passage of vessels and Boats in a Channel, or to mend a
breach in an arm of a Sea. ibid.
Chap. 260.
The manner how to make a Bridge with Cords to convey Soldiers over a Moate
or River. 376
Chap. 261.
How to make a firm bridge over any River both for Horse and Men to pass over
and transport their Ordnance. 377
Chap. 262.
The use of the Leatherne Boat and to how make it. 379
Chap. 263.
An easy and quick way to cast water with great Scoopes. 380
Chap. 264.
How to make a Serve to wind up water with the use of it. ibid.
Chap. 265.
The Description of an Engine whereby water may be drawn out of any place or
depth, or mount any River etc. 382
Chap. 266.
The description of an Engine to force water up to a high place, useful to
quench fire, etc. 383
Chap. 267.
The description of an Engine to cast up water. 384
Chap. 268.
How to make water at the foot of a Mountain to ascend to the top of it 385
Chap. 269.
How to make a Scaling-ladder of Cords, which may be carried in a Soldiers
pocket, Ibid.
Chap. 270.
Of Scaling-ladders framed of wood, and how they are to be used in the Wars.
386.
Chap. 271.
The use of Gabions and Baskets for the defense of the Cannoniers and
Musketeers 387
Chap. 272.
The use of Cru-wagons, and Small Carts, with the fashion of them. Ibid.
Chap. 273.
The use of the Powder-pots in a pitched Battle, with the description of the
form of them. 388
Chap. 274.
How to make Torches and Candles to burn in any weather. 389
Chap. 275.
How to arm Pikes with Wildfire and Pistols for to withstand a Breach. Ibid.
Chap. 276.
A device to make a Musket shoot with the same quantity of Powder, half as
far again as her uusall shot is 390
Chap. 277.
Of the Bow-Pike, and how it is best to be used in the wars. 391
Chap. 278.
The description of an Engine whereby the diversity of the strength of Powder
may be known. Ibid.
Chap. 279.
Of a Bridge made without Bates or Barrels, Cordage, or Timber-worke, which
transported 4000 men over a great River, 292
Chap. 280.
How Caesar made a Bridge over the Rhine, and carried his Army over into
Germany, Ibid.
Chap. 281.
The description of an Instrument invented by Henry the fifth at the Battle of
Agin-court, and since used by the King of Sweden, and by him called a
Swines-Pike. 393
Chap. 282.
How a Case of Tin is to be made, to carry light Matches in, that the Enemy
may not discover them. Ibid.
Chap. 283.
How the Venetians did order their Powder, after their Arsnall was burnt. 394
The Contents of the second Book.
SECT. XV. THe Office of a General with his Accomplishments.
Chap. 1.
The Character of a General, with such excellent properties (both of body and
mind) which he ought to be endued withal, declared. 1
Chap. 2.
The things which a General is to give order for unto his sub-Officers, with
Rules and Precepts, whereby the ablest Generals in former ages have stereed
their Warlike course. 2
SECT. XVI. Rules to be observed by a General in marching his Army.
Chap. 3.
Diverse Rules and Observations to be used both in marching, and retreiting
from the Enemy, whereby confusion may be avoided. 21
SECT. XVII. Rules to be observed in Quartering, or Incamping an Army.
Chap. 4.
How a General is to quarter his Army, with the el^ction of places of greatest
security; what Redouts are to be raised upon the passages, and how the
Out-guards are to be placed, with diverse other observations thereunto
belonging. 29
Chap. 5.
How the King of Sweden in the late Imperial Wars, used to incampe his
Army, with Figures to explain the same. 36
Chap. 6.
The Oath of all underofficers, both of Horse and Foot, to be given at the
proclayming of the Articles following, 41
SECT. XVIII. Articl^s and Military Laws to be observed in the Wars.
Chap. 7.
Diverse Articles and Martial Laws, whereby an Army is to be regulated, and
governed, both in Camp and Garrison, 42
SECT. XIX. Rules and Observations to be used before Battle.
Chap. 8.
Diverse Premonitions and Observations for a General to take notice of before
the pitching of a Battle. 55
SECT. XX. Rules and Observations to be used in time of Fight.
Chap. 9.
Diverse Observations which both Generals and Officers must make use of in the
time of fight or skirmish. 61
SECT. XXI. Rules and Observations to be used after fight.
Chap. 10.
Diverse Rules and Observations to be used after a Battle is either won or
lost. 65
SECT. XXII. The manner of Framing of Battles.
Chap. 11.
An Excellent strong form of Imbattelling an Army, consisting of 26000 Foot,
and 4000 Horse. 67
Chap. 12.
A second Figure showing a very strong Form of Imbattelling, and very apt for
the drawing of an Enemy into a Stratagem, 71
Chap. 14.
A very strong Form of Imbattelling, 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, very proper
to be used in the Champion, the Enemy exceeding in strength both in Horse and
Foot. 73
Chap. 15.
A fourth Figure of Imbattelling, consisting of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse. 74
Chap. 16.
A fifth way of Imbattelling an Army consisting of 12000 Foot, and 4000 Horse
etc. 76
Chap. 17.
The sixth way of Imbattelling an Army consisting of 12000 Foot, and 4000
Horse, etc. 78
Chap. 18.
A seventh way of Imbattelling an Army consisting of 15000 Foot, and 5000
Horse etc. 79
Chap. 19.
The eighth form of Im^attelling an Army consisting of 5000 Foot, and 1000
Horse, etc. 81
Chap. 20.
A Description of the ninth Figure how to frame a Battle for Stratagem, etc.
83
Chap. 21.
A tenth Form of Imbattelling an Army consisting of 12000 Foot, and 4000
Horse, used by Henry the fourth of France etc. 84
Chap. 22.
The eleventh Form of Imbattelling an Army of 30000 Foot, and 6000 Horse
etc. 86
Chap. 23.
The twelfth form of Imbattelling of 12000 Foot and 3000. Horse, partly
imitating Mounsieur Bellay in his military discipline.
Chap. 24.
A form of Imbattelling of 15000 Foot and 2000. Horse, etc.
Chap. 25.
The use of Maniples of shot, with a general discourse of the Light-armed. 92
Chap. 26.
Diverse observations of the Ancient Grecicians in framing of Battles. 95
Chap. 27.
The Order and Rules which are to be obserserved by Going-Paces to know any
state or piece of ground, how to embattell either Horse or Foot according to
the proportion thereof. 98
THE MVTABILITY OF FLOVRISHING KINGDOMS.
CHAP I.
There is no Nation ever did, or ever shall possess a perpetual peace: It is
good therefore in time of Peace, to provide for War.
THe Hieroglyphicke of happy Peace in this transitory World, may very well be
expressed by the splendent progress of the Sun, which has both his Summer and
his Winter Solstice: The one ushering in the most pleasant Spring, The other
pushing forwards the Crest fallen Autumn. The one of them spreads the fair
green Carpet on the Table of the Earth; the other (as if the Banquet were
ended) with-draws, and takes away again: Thus fares it between these two
opposites, Peace, and War. Peace, like the Summer Solstice (where she goes)
makes all things look bucksome, for she her self (if you please to have her
described) is a pure and unspotted Virgin, in whose forehead never appeared any
one frowning wrinckle; she is the Mother of learning, and the Nurse of Arts: A
Daughter of as royal a descent as any; Pax Dei. Col. 3. 13.
for she has God for her Father, and she has a Royal Mother also, even true
and unfeigned Love; a virtue beyond comparison. Alack, that this Royal
Virgin, (whose presence makes all things prosper) is of no longer durance
amongst men: but it is decreed, all things below are subject to mutability. The
Winter Solstice must succeed the Summer, and War must follow Peace; the Table
must not always be covered, a time of withdrawing will come at last. For
proof of which, lets take a survey of some of those Kingdoms which in former
ages have most flourished in this World; and by their mutability, judge whether
it be possible for any Kingdom, how strong and settled so ever, to perpetuate
Peace unto it self: And it will not be amiss to begin at the golden head of
that Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, Dan. 2. Prefiguring himself
and the Kingdom he ruled over, even the Kingdom of Assyria.

CHAP. II.
Of the Monarchy of the Assyrians, and the Wars thereof.
THis Kingdom of the Ayssrians, was without question the strongest and best
settled Kingdom that ever was before, or ever followed after it, in succeeding
Ages: And therefore prefigured by a head of Gold. It is mavelous what
Historians report of this Kingdom; but because some in these times, do doubt
of the truth of their reports, I will point you only to that which the sacred
Oracles of God avouch, which no man can doubt of. For the King himself, he was
every way renowned, Rex Regum, a King of Kings, and that of the Lords own
establishing. For God had given him a Kingdom, power, strength, and glory.
Dan. 2. 37. For the amplitude of the Kingdom, it was not bounded within lesser
limits then the Confines of the then inhabited World, Dan. 2. 38. and
wheresoever the Children of men dwell, the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls
of the Heaven has he given into thy hands. If you please to compare it with
that famous Monarchy of the Medes and Persians which succeeded it: You shall
find, that as the Persians were after it in time, so also in Power, and
Nobleness, Dan. 2. 39. And after you shall arise another Kingdom inferior to
you. Here now is a Monarchy, one would think so strongly seated, as that a
face of War should not dare to look upon it: yet did it run many hazzards,
and endure many changes by dint of the sword, and that at several times also.
And first in the days of that lusty Virago, Semiramis. She not content to
defend the limits of her Kingdom left her by the conquest of her deceased
Husband, was the first that ever with sword in hand ventured into the Indies,
quo praeter illam and Alexandrum magnum nemo itravit. And this happened in the
days of Staurobates, who met her in the confines of his Kingdom: and though
he suffered loss in the first shocke, yet renewing his Forces, renewed also
the Battle, fought with her hand to hand, wounded her sore; and at last,
forced her over the River Indus: where multitude of her Soldiers (the Bridge
being broken) came to their ends.

But this wound was afterward well healed up, and the Kingdom well settled
again in a long lasting Peace, which endured the Reigns of above Thirty Kings;
until at last came Sardanapalus, who was Vir muliere corruptior. Into whose
presence, when as Arbactus his Lieutenant in Media with much ado was admitted;
he found him spinning (more like a good houswife, then a Royal King) amongst a
company of tender Ladies, himself in softness excelling them all: At which
sight, the great Captain disdaining, and stomacking that so many valiant men
should be subject to such an estiminate King; and that those who were used to
handle swords and spears should obey him, whose hands were inured to nothing
but a distaffe; he comes away with shame, and makes report to his fellows of
that ignominious sight. Negans se ei parere posse; qui sic faeminam malit esse
quam virum: Forthwith a conspiracy is made, and War denounced against
Sardanapalus: which when he had notice of, he does not like a man prepare to
defend himself: but as Women which are afraid of death, Primo latebras (...),
first looks about where he may hide himself; but finding no remedy there, at
last, with a few, and those disordered Troops, and untrayned, he comes to
battle, and being with much ease overthrown, he withdrawes himself into his
Palace, and there ^ires himself and all his Riches, Hoc solo imitatus virum,
as some Historians says of him: And so the Kingdom was translated to
Arbactus, or rather divided between him and the Lieutenant of Babylon
Belochus, who is as some think called Pull King of Assyria, in the sacred
Scriptures, 2. Kings 15. 19. In whose Posterity the Scepter continued for some
few generations following, until Senacherib his great Grandchild, who was
betrayed and slain by two of his own Sons, 2. Kings. 19. 37.
to wit by Adramalech, and Sharezer: But Esarhaddon his Son, who governed the
Kingdom in his Fathers absence, stepped into the Chair of Estate, yet could he
not possess it without much trouble. For first these two Brethren that had
slain their Father, put themselves also in Arms against their Brother, hoping
by this means to share equally with him. This trouble amongst the brethren,
occasioned Merodath, which the Scripture calls Merodach Baladan, Isa. 39. 1.
Liuetenant of Babylon to rebel against Esarhaddon: and first drawing (partly
by fair means, partly by threats) the people about Babylon to side with him:
forthwith he defieth his Master; and finally, in the Twelfe year of his
Reign, utterly overthrew him: and so joined the Empire of the Assirians, unto
the City of Babylon. In the Posterity of this Merodach, did the Monarchy
continue for three descents: To wit Nebuchadnezzar, Evill-merodach, and
Belshazzar; in whose days, Darius the Mede, called by Historians Chaxares
son of Astyages, and Cyrus the Persian, Grandchilde to the aforesaid
Astyages, subdued the Assirians, and translated the Monarchy to the Medes and
Persians.

CHAP. III.
Of the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians, and the Wars thereof.
THis of the Medes and Persians, was a very strong Kingdom also, though
inferior to the former: Under whose Dominion, there were no less then 127.
Provinces, whose confines reached from India, to Ethiopia. Yet was not this
Kingdom for all the greatness, without War and trouble. Cyrus himself
raising an Army in Persia, Ester 1. 1.
assailed his Grandfather in Media, and overthrew his Army, under the conduct
of his General Harpagus: but the King would not be discouraged for the loss
of one Battle, but Arms the second time, and leads them himself into the
Field, where he divides them into two Battles; Commanding the hindmost, that
if they did perceive any of the foremost Bands to recoyle, they should slay them
like enemies: and declaring to the foremost, that unless they did carry the
victory, Non minus fortes etiam post terga inventuros, quam a frontibus viros:
a stratagem that put such hardy courage into his foremost Soldiers, as that
with great resolution, they beat back the Persians foremost troops, which
being perceived of the Women, their Mothers and Wives met them flying
homewards, and earnestly entreated them to return to battle: but they
delaying, Sublata vest (as Justin says) obscana corporis ostendunt, rogantes
in uteros matrem velint refugere: With which correction they were so ashamed,
as that they returned into the Battle more furious then before: Et facta
impessione, quos fugiebant fugere cumpellunt, and so Astyages was taken
Prisoner, and his Crown set upon his Grandchildes head.

But for all this, Cyrus could not perpetuate his own, and Kingdoms peace:
for the Cities of the Medes rebelled against him: the Babylonians made War
upon him, and to strengthen their party, drue into their League Crassus the
Potent King of Lydia, Cujus opes et divitiae, insignes ea tempestate erant: so
that if he had not been a Soldier, his Kingdom had been dissolved before it
had been very well settled. But through his prudence and valor, he brake
through all these difficulties, quieted the Rebellion, subdued the Babylonians,
and overcame the Lydian their Auxiliarie, who he used with such Lenity, as
that thereby he politickly avoided a most dangerous War with the Greeks,
the most entire friends of Crassus. For as Justin says, Tantus Crassi amor
apud omnes urbes erat: re passurus Cyrus grave bellum Greciae fuerit, si quid
in Crassum Crudelius consuluisset: This Cyrus afterward was slain, and his
whole Army roughted by Tomaris Queen of the Massagetes: So fickle a thing is
Peace and Prosperity in this World, seem it never so firmly to be settled and
grounded. After the decease of Cyrus (or rather before) for when Cyrus was gone
against the Messagetes, Cambyces in his Fathers absence was declared King: But
for his cruelty, Almighty God, cut him short by a grievous wound in his thigh,
made by the falling of his own sword out of the scabbard, as he was mounting
on Horseback: He was no sooner dead, but one of the Magi, by name Comaris, or
as others say, Praxaspis, thinking to transfer the Scepter into his own
Line, sets up his own Brother Oropastes, under the name of Smerdis, the
deceased Kings Brother: which he himself by the Kings Commandment had
formerly slain: Erat enim oris et corporis liniamentis persimilis. But this
cozenage was quickly found out by the policy of Othanes one of the Nobility;
for this mocking wanted ears: which Smerdis the Kings Brother, and Heir
apparent to the Crown did not, had he been alive upon this discovery. A
conspiracy is made by Seven of the Nobility, and the Kingdom delivered from
the slavery of the Imposture; he and his Abettors being slain. In whose
stead, Darius Son of Histaspis surnamed Artaxerxes, was saluted King, upon
occasion of the neighing of his Horse: For so it was determined that those of
the Nobility who had freed their Country from servitude: meeting in the Suburbs
next morning on Horseback, he whose Horse first neighed, should be saluted
King: Chrori^^r Carionis Lib. 2.
and this they did to avoid contention amongst them, which otherwise were
equal. This Darius as some think, was that great King Aha^uerus, who put away
his Wife Vasti, by Herodotus called Attasha, Daughter to King Cyrus, and
married Ester (or Aristona as Herodotus calls her) kinswoman of Mordecai the
(...). This mighty Prince, whose strength and power is described largely in the
book of Hester, could not live without War and trouble: The Babylonians
rebelled against him, and had he not had a Zophirus to gain his Master
Babylon, lost his own Nose and Fares: (...)
which occasioned the King on a time (having a Pomgranet in his hand) to say,
Se non optare majorem Thesaurum, ullum quam ut tot haberet Zopyrus, quot grava
sint illius pomi. This Darius sought to incorporate Macedonia, the next
bordering Kingdom, with his own Territories, and the rather, because he
heard that there were most rich veins of metal: And for this purpose sent
Messengers to Amintus of Macedon, who required, Vt terram et aquam traderet
Dario. Amintus fearing the Persian power, answered mildely, and invited the
Ambassadors to a Banquet, during which, they behaved themselves laciviously
toward the noble Ladies that were placed between them at the Table for their
greater honor. Which thing moved both Amintus the old King, and Alexander his
young Son to anger: Whereupon Amintus at his Sons entreaty, departs as it
were to take some rest: But young Alexander first for a while fained mirth, and
afterward craves leave for the Ladies absence, for some little time, promising
their speedy return. But being dismissed, he commanded so many Noble young
Men to put on the Ladies garments, and secretly to carry poynards underneath
them, with this charge: that when the Persians began to toy, they with their
weapons should stabbe them: which charge afterward was performed to purpose,
Et lasciviae ac potulantiae poenas legati justus dederunt.

After this the Jones by the persuasion of one Istiaeus fell from him, and with
the help of the Athenians they burnt the City Sardis: But they being overcome
in a Sea Battle, and the Sedition pacified with some difficulty; he turns
about, and turns all his fury against the Athenians their assistants: Centum
millia peditum and de^^m millia equitu^ Car^on. Lib. 2.
being further urged hereunto by Hippias Son of Pisistratus the Tyrant, whom
the Athenians had banished. Whereupon, Darius sent against the Athenians a very
great Army, under the leading of the said Hippias: Sexcenta millia Justin. Lib*
2.
Against them marches Miltiades the Athenian General, by whose prudent
Conduct, and the Soldiers valor, they were routed in the Field of Marathon,
and leaving behind them Two hundred thousand of there men, with great
astonishment they fled to their Ships, where the proper valor of one
Cynaegirus an Athenian Soldier appeared; for he not wearied with innumerable
slaughter in the Battle, lays hold with his right hand on one of the flying
Ships, and would not let her go, till both were dismembered from his valiant
arms: and then also Veluti rabida fera dentibus demicaverit. To withstand this
great Army, Miltiades had only 10000 well trained Athenians, and 1000
Plataecuses Auxiliaries: The difference being so great, it was needful that
one should exceed in skill and valor, as much as the other did in number: and
truly it is mavelous what a skillful leader may do, with so many valerous
and well trained Soldiers, such as these were; for they were all like
Cynaegirus. Justin says of them, In eo praelio tanta virtus singularium fuit,
ut cujus laus prima esset difficile judicium videretur. Such valor as this,
must needs astonish the Cravant Persians. But some report that in the Athenian
Front, there were also terrible noyses heard, and terrible sights seen, which
the Athenians called Species paves, which affrighted the Persians so mightily,
as that presently they fled: and hence it is, that we say when one is suddenly
affrighted, that he is struck with a Panick terror.

After this Darius died, and at such time as he was preparing more forces to
renew the Wars in Greece: After him succeeded his Son Xerxes, who was
scarce warm in his Royal estate, ere he was solicited by Mardonius his
great Captain and Counselor, to follow the Grecian War, for which his
Father had made so great preparation: and the young King desirous of glory,
yields to the motion, prepares his Army, which consisted 1000000 men; whereof
700000 were Persians, the rest Auxiliaries, an Army great enough to have
overcome the World, had they but had a Captain but Hui^ tanto agmins dux
defuit, says Justin: and he gives a good reason for it in my conceit: Ipse
enim primus in^uga, postremus in praelio semper visus est, in periculis ti^^dus
fit ubi metus abesset instatus, a very good description of a Coward; he flies
in the Front, and ^ights in the Rear, in danger, fearful, but out of it, too
insolent and proud: such was this great Commander, and his success also was
there after; for within less then two years, he had no less then four
shameful overthrowes, two by Water, and two by Land. The first fight by Water,
was near Armissium in Thessal^. And about the same time was the second Battle
fought also at Land, in the narrow place which for the hot Springs there are
called There mop^lae: Here had Leonides King of Sparta settled himself with 300
Spartans, 400 Thebans, and about 3000 other Grecian Soldiers, to check the
proceedings of this great Army. Xerxes scorning their number; commands those
only whose kindred were slain at the Battle of Marrahon in his Fathers
days, to assault the straight passage which Leonides kept upon the hill, qui
dum ulcissi suos quaeru^t, principium ^ladis fu^re. But other troops being
appointed to second these; a great slaughter is made for three days space.
Upon the fourth day, when it was discovered to Leo^^d^s that 20000 of the
enemies had gotten the top of the hill, then he exhorted his associates to
reserve themselves for the further service of their Country: and he with his
Lacedemons, would try the fortune of that place: Whereupon all departed save
his own 300 Spartans, 400 Thebans, and a few of the Thespiences, a maniple in
respect of so great a multitude as did oppose them. Yet were they resolved to
dye with their King upon the place, or to eternise their names with an
incomparable victory. To these the King adresseth his speech on this wise:
Noble Contrymen, our numbers are so unequal, that however we fight, yet
must we fall, this I suppose is the resolution of you all: otherwise you would
not have stayed the hazard of a Battle, where is such disparrity; see
therefore that you show not more valor in your staying for the Battle, then
in your fighting in it: for the ordering of which, I am resolved not to expect,
till we be enclosed by our enemies: but so soon as the night approaches,
we will fall resolutely within the bowels of their Camp* which rests without
fear of our small numbers; for never can undaunted Soldiers dye more bravely,
then in the Tents of their daring Foes.

Which speech they took with great alacrity and cheerfulness, and in sign
thereof, immediately addressed themselves to their Arms, and then did Six or
Seven Hundred men at most, break into the Camp of 500000 of their enemies:
and having once got entrance, forthwith beat toward the Pavillion of King
Xerxes: Aut cum illo, aut si oppressi essent in ipsius potissimum sede
morituri. A tumult is raised in the Camp upon their entrance: and the Spartans
missing of the King at his Tent, ran like lightning through every corner,
beating and throwing down every thing that stood in their way, as if they knew
they fought not for the victory, but to revenge their own deaths: The Battle
lasted from the beginning of the night, until the great part of the next day
were spent, and at last, Non victi, sed vincendo fatigati inter ingentes
stratorum hostium catervas occiderunt.

After their fall who were to keep the Straights, a fair passage was opened
for the Army into Greece: but Themistocles with 378 Sail of the Grecian Navy
being at Sea; Xerxes thought it was meet, first to try of what force they were,
before he went any farther: wherefore he addressed himself to his Sea
forces. How great they were I cannot certainly say, but take the number as
Justin gives them, Naves quoque decies centum millia numero habuisse dicitur:
Justin. Lib. 2.
Here are now as great odds at Sea, as before at Land: wherefore it behoved
Themistocles the Athenian Admiral, to be both politic and valourous, and
truly he was wanting to his Contrymen in neither: For so soon as he
perceived the Persians bent for a Sea Fight; he does within him lay to work
their defeat: which he does first, by getting advantage of the place where
they were to fight, which was in the Straites near the Island Salamis, least
they should be encompassed with the multitude of their enemies. Having gained
the advantage of the place, next he sought to weaken them, in that thing
wherein they had most advantage of him, which was in number. To this purpose
he solicited the Ionians, who were now in aid of Xerxes, to come over to his
party, and those men were fit indeed to be wrought upon. For when as the
Persian came against them in a former War, the Athenians had sided with them
against this Kings Father; which thing alone wrought this displeasure against
the Athenians, and the rest of the Grecians: wherefore Themistocles wrote to
them in these words. What fury possesses you (oh ye Ionians) and what an
odious crime do ye commit, in waging Battle against them, that have in times
past, been both your friends and founders, and of late also the revenger of
your wrongs? and was it indeed for this purpose that we built your Walls that
they might preserve you, who strive to ruin and destroy ours? what cause I
pray you had there been, for Darius first, and now for Xerxes, to make War on
us, but only this; we would not forsake you Rebels, when he desired to
chastise you? but it is no matter, do you but only this, come from them to us;
or if that be too full of danger, then when the Battle is begun, do but
recoyle, do but slacken your Oars, and ye may safely depart away.

But while these things were a working at Sea, his Forces at Land sacked
Plateae, and Thespiae, two famous Cities of Boeotia, and Athens on the
Seacoast, but all of them forsaken by their Inhabitants: and behold his
spleen, quoniam ferro non poterat in homines, in aedificia igne grassatur:
yea, which was more (as if he had Warred not only with the Greeks, but their
gods also) He destroyed the Temple of Apollo at Delphos so famous through the
World. These things startled the Princes of those Cities which were joined with
the Athenians, they knew not how soon their Cities might run the same
hazard: wherefore they began to consult of their departure, for the defense of
their own Territories. Which thing so soon as Themistocles perceived, least
their forces should be diminished by the departure of their Associates: he
gives Xerxes to understand, by a faithful servant of his own; that now at
this instant he might easily intercept all the force and flower of Greece,
contracted into one place, who if they were severed (as presently they were
like to do) it would be to his greater labor and cost to hunt after them in
several places: and by this deceit, he necessitated the King to give the
signal of Battle: and the Grecians busied with the approaches of the King,
with their joint forces entertained the Skirmish. While the Battle remained
somewhat doubtful, the Ionians according to the advice of Themistocles,
withdrew themselves; and their flight dashed the leaden courages of the
Persians, so that presently they turned their backs and fled. Xerxes being at
his wits end at this overthrow, Mardonius his great Captain and Counselor,
advises him in his own Person to hasten home, least the fame of this unlucky
battle move sedition there: and tells him, that if he will leave but 300000 of
his choice men, with them he will either tame Greece to his Masters glory, or
yield to the Adversary without his ignominy. This advice did Xerxes like well
enough, wherefore he delivered 300000 of his Soldiers to Mardonius, and with
the rest, he prepared to go back into his Kingdom: Which the Grecians
perceiving, resolved to break the bridge that he had built at Abydo^; that so
his passage being cut off, he might perish with his Army: or at least being
driven to despair, might sue for peace.

But here again did the wisdom of Themistocles appear, for fearing that the
enemy when he was cooped up, and so necessitated to fight, would turn his
cowardice into valor: advises the Greeks, that they had enemies too many in
the Country, and it was not convenient to increase their number by stopping
those that would be gone: but seeing he could not prevail with his advise,
he sent his servant a second time to Xerxes to acquaint him with the
resolution of the Greeks; which when Xerxes knew, in a shameful afright, with
a few of his servants only, he fled in all haste to Abydos; commanding his
Captain speedily to March after him with their Troops: but coming to
Hellesponte, and finding the Bridge broken with the Tempests of the fore-passed
Winter. He ferried over alone in a poor Fi^herboate, an admirable spectacle
to behold: he whose followers the earth groaned to bear but a year ago, is
glad to fly now without one to attend him. Cujus introitus in Greciam quam
terribilis, tam turpis ac foedus discessus fuit.

After that dishonorable flight of Xerxes, Mardonius his General followed the
warfare at land: Olinthus was the first Town he sat down before, and it he
took by Assault. After this he labored to reconcile the Athenians to the
King his Master, promising them restitution for the loss of their City which
was burned: but after he perceived they would not part with their Liberty and
freedom at any rate, he set fire to those buildings they had begun to
reedifie, and so Marched into Boeotia, where the maine Army of the Greeks was
inquartered, consisting of a 100000 men; there they came to blows near the
City Plataeae, which was not far from Thebes: Sed fortuna Regis cum duce
mutata non est, For Mardonius was there utterly overthrown, himself slain by
a common Soldier, his Tents, stuffed with the Kings Treasure, seized on; and
finally Greece freed from the Persian War. The Athenians would not loose the
benefit of this victory, but with their Sea forces sailed up the Hellesponte,
and by Assault took the Town of Sestos from the Persians, and sacked it.
After this they turned home, built and fortified their City; and joining them
with other Cities of Greece, under the conduct of Pausanius and Aristides they
took Cypria and Bizantium frym the Persian.

Thus you see this great Monarch, who had so many Millions of men under his
dominions, could not live in Peace; yea, and for want of good order in his Army
suffered many shameful overthrows: which together with some other iniquities
of his own, brought him in contempt with his own Subjects: who before was a
terror to other Nations, and by and by after, he was slain by his Lieutenant
Artabanus. His Successor was Artaxerxes, Chron. Cario. Lib. 2.
who was also called Longimanus: quia dextra longior fuit quam sinistra. There
is not any mention in History, of any great trouble that happened in this Kings
Reign, after that he had put to death Artabanus and his sons, who were the
murderers of his Predecessor Xerxes: and had laid their plots also against
him, had it not been in a fit time discovered by one Baccabassus, a man well
content with the present government. This Prince having Reigned peaceably 37.
years, expired: and left his Scepter to Darius Nothus his Sisters Husband: who
in like manner governed the Kingdom peaceably 19. years, and then yielded it
up to his eldest Son Artaxerxes Mnemon, whose Reign was somewhat troublesome,
with the great Spirit of his younger Brother Cyrus, to whom his Father had by
will assigned the government of Lidia and Ionia, (where he was in his Fathers
days Lieutenant) but without the title of King. But this gave no content to
the high spirit of Cyrus, who aimed at far greater matters: wherefore he
began first privately to make preparation against the King his Brother, which
being disclosed to the King; Justin. Lib. ^*
he sent for Cyrus, who dissembled the matter, and pleaded not guilty: yet for
all that, the King bound him in golden fetters, deprived him of liberty: and
had done so by his life also in matter prohibuisset: But afterward obtaining
liberty, he was so much enraged against his Brother by this disgrace, as that
he began openly to threaten him with War. And for that purpose he gathered
a great Army out of Asia the less, and 10000 Auxiliaries also out of Greece,
with which he marched against his Royal Brother, beyond the River Euphrates.
Artaxerxes was not unmindfull of these affairs, but like a wise and a valiant
man, prepared forces to bid his Brother battle: When they came to blows,
Cyrus wounded his Brother, and forced part of his Army to give ground: but
being of a hot and haughty spirit, and with weak Attendants, beating to far
within his Brothers Troops; at last he was slain by his Brothers Guard. Upon
the news of his death, the whole Army took the Route, save only the 10000
Greeks, who in despite of Artaxerxes, departed whole away, and came safe into
their own Country. After the death of Cyrus, the fair Lady Alpasia was taken
in his Tents: on whom Artaxerxes (when he beheld her) set his affections: and
this Lady was the cause of a new insurrection; for being equally beloved of the
Father and the Son: the Son petitioned to his Father for her, and had her
granted: But the Father afterward condoling his own loss, took her away
again: Whereupon the Son conspired with one Terebathus, that they two with
some armed Troops, should on a certain day, break into the Kings Closet and
slay him; but this plot being discovered, the King escaped the Treason:
Terebathus and his Troops, were slain by the Kings Guard; and Darius the
Kings Son apprehended as a Traitor, and adjudged to death by the Council of
Princes, before whom his Father would have him stand for his trial: after his
death, also the King himself languished and died, and appointed for his
successor, Othus the youngest of those three Sons that he had by his lawful
Queen. Othus Reigned about Twenty Six years, more like a Tyrant then a King:
for he filled his Royal Palace with the blood of Princes, his own kindred:
Nulla non sanguinis, non sexus, non aetatis misericordia perm tus: and for his
cruelty was slain afterward by the Prince Bagoas, who thought to have seated
himself in the Royal Chair: but having not power enough to effect that, he
Proclaims Arsames Son of Othus King, who he also slew afterward: Metuens
filium propter necem paternam: And here was an end of all the Stock of Cyrus,
and the end of this Monarchy followed about Six years after. For when Arsames
was slain, Bagoas the murderer repaired to Codomamius, who for his virtue and
valor against the enemy, was first made Ruler of Armenia, and now King of
Persia: After the obtaining of which, he changed his Name; and is commonly
known by the name of Darius Vltimus, Dan. 11. 2.
a Prince nothing inferior to any of his Predecessors: And yet in this King
happened, the subversion of this mighty Kingdom. Against him first of all
Philip King of Macedon (being elected General of the Grecians) took Arms,
^^ren Carionis Lib. 2. Justin. Lih. 9.
and sent his Forces into Asia, under the conduct of Farmenio, Amynters, and
Attalus: against them Darius took Arms, and sent his Army; over which he
placed Memnon of Rhodes an expert Soldier as General. But while these Wars
were managed abroad by their substitutes, Philip himself was slain at home by
one Pausanias a Noble Macedonian, upon this occasion: Pausanias was abused in
his tender age through the lust of Attalus; which the young Man taking in ill
part, complained to Philip, and craved justice against the offender, but was
put off in derision; and the Malefactor honored with a Generals place in the
Wars. Whereupon Pausanius turns his anger against Philip, and as Justin
says, Vltionem quam adversario non poterat, ab iniquo judice exegit.

But the Persian War was not given over upon the Kings death; for Alexander
the great, Plut. invita Alexquando omnes opes suas inter (...) distribu^ss^t,
hic pe^d^^ dicent^, (...) Rex reliquam erit? spes s^la respondit.
his Son and Heir, after that he had quieted the Cities of Greece, which
the Persians politickly had stirred up to rebel against him, by that means
hoping to divert the War out of Asia: Having collected and shipped his Army,
goes in his own Person into Asia, and divides his Patrimony in Europe amongst
his friends, saying Sibi Asiam sufficere.

His Army consisting of 32000 foot, and 4500 Horse: he wafted over in 182
Ships: An admirable thing that he durst attempt the conquest of the greatest
Monarchy of the World with so small a number; In omni praelio non ta^^ (...);
et vir^^ ^^docta: quam ars and excr^^tum solent traeslare victorum vegetius
Lib. 1.
but mark who they were, not young striplings, prim^ flore aetatis: but
veterares plerosque, old beaten Soldiers for the most part, such as had borne
Arms under his Father and Uncles: they were through their long experience, Non
solum millites, sed magistri militiae: not only Warriors, but masters of the
War: there was never a Captain which was less then Sixty years of age: Vt
si principia castrorum cerneres, Senatum se alicujus priscae reipublicae vider
diceres: and they all resembled the King for courage, for they minded nothing
but victory, and after that, the enjoying the riches of the Orient. Against
these Darius led his Army into the field, consisting of 600000 men; in whose
valor and fortitude, he had such confidence, as that he neglected to take
any advantage which was by policy to be acquired: Affirmans suis occulta
consilia victoriae furtivae non convenire; and upon this conceit he refused
to prevent his enemies landing, but received them into the very heart of his
Kingdom: Gloriosius ratus repellere Bellum quam non admittere: which thing,
though it showed a magnanimous and great spirit, yet it argues weakness of
understanding: for truly so victory may be gained, it sticks not whether it
be obtained by valor, (...) ^acilius re^^^^tur qu^m expellantur. (...).
or policy: the safest therefore for him, had been to have prevented their
landing if possibly he could; for enemies are more easily repelled from the
Coasts, then expelled after they have got footing. But this out of a Millitary
bravery he neglected, and it cost him no less then the loss of the battle,
and afterward of his life and Kingdom.

The first battle between the two Kings was in the field of Adrastia, Plut.
in vita Alexand.
where the Persians were vanquished: Non minus art Alexandri, quam virtute
Macedonium: After this, Alexander fought another Battle with Rhaesaces and
Spithradates, two of Darius his Captains at the River Granicus: quos jam non
tam armis quam terrore nominis sui vicit: and in this encounter, both the
Persian Chiefetaynes were slain: Rhaesaces by Alexanders own hand, and
Spithradates by the hand of Clytus. After their overthrow, (having yet no more
to do in the Field) he fell to taking in of Cities, Sardis, Miletus,
Helicarnassus, and all such places as bordered upon them, were taken in: and so
coming through Pamphilia, he tamed the Inhabitants of of Pisidia and Phrigia.
At last he took the City of Gordis, which above all other he desired to
take, not for the spoil, but because he had heard, that there in the Temple
of Jupiter was kept the consecrated yoke of Gordians Waine, whose bindings and
knots whosoever could unloose, Eum tota Asia Regnaturum, antiqua oracula
cecivisse: these knots when he could not unloose them with his fingers, he
cut them in pieces with his sword: and truly there was no knot so hard, but
with his sword he could undo it to make way for his conquest of Asia. While
he was in this City, he received tidings of Darius his approach: wherefore
with great speed he passed over the mount Taurus, and came to Tarsus; with
which extraordinary March, his body being over heat, he cast himself into
the River Cydnus, whose virtues being extremly cold, cast him into a sudden
and almost irrecoverable disease: but having with much ado recovered health,
he marched forwards to meet his enemy, who was coming against him with a
very great Army. When they were met, Justin* 400000. Plutarch in vita
Alexander, decies centena militum millia.
Alexander riding about his Troops, encouraged the Illirians and Thracians
with the show of riches, the Grecians he inflamed with the memory of former
Battles, and the ancient hatred between them and the Persians: He likewise
tells his Macedonians of there conquest of Europe and Asia now so much desired;
boasting that they had not their matches in the World, and if now only they
would show them selves men, this Battle should be the end of their toil and
labor, and the very pride of their glory and honor. Neither was Darius all
this while idle, but like a good Captain, rid about his Troops ordering and
exhorting them to be mindful of the ancient glory of the Persians, and of the
honor of their Empire which they had received of the immortal gods: Then
joining Battle with great courage on both sides, for a while what the success
would be was doubtful: but both the Kings were wounded, and Darius after his
hurt fled; and then were the Persians slaughtered on all sides until they fled
as their King did before. After this Battle, there were found in the Persian
Tents, much gold and other riches; and together with many other noble prisoners
there were taken, the Mother, Wife, and two Daughters of Darius. This victory
did well-neere settle the Crown upon Alexanders head; for after this he took
Babylon, and the royal City of Susa, where he got inestimable riches: and
being at a feast one day under the gilded roof of the Royal Palace, he
said; Then have I obtained the fruit of my labor, when I can feast so
magnificently within the Palace of proud King Xerxes. After this he besiedged
the City of Tire, and within the Month took it: And from thence passed
forwards against the Jews, Josephus Lib. 11.
with whom he was displeased, for that they refused to assist him in the
siedge of Tire: Ant. Iud. cap. 8.
but the Jews now fearing the Kings displeasure; Iaddus the High Priest that
he might pacify the Kings mind, met him upon the way clad in his Priests
vestures, and accompanied with a great number of Priests and Elders, desiring
the Kings favor: There did Alexander alight from his Horse, and in a reverent
manner salutes the High Priest, promising Peace: at which sight his Captains
wondering, asked why he received the Priests so honorably: To whom he
answered, that in Macedonia before the beginning of the Wars, he had seen
one habited in the like vestures, calling him into Asia, and commanding him to
make War with the Persians, reaching forth his right hand toward him, as if
he would be his guide: and seeing the Priest in that similitude, he thought
God had some special regard of this People, and that he himself was assisted
by that God whom they served: and therefore he resolved to be merciful unto
them and to show them favor, From hence did Alexander March into Egypt, which
he took without resistance: here he visited the Temple of Jupiter Hammon,
Justin. Lib. 11.
whereby the Priest (whom before for that purpose he had corrupted) he was
styled Hamonius filius: from hence he returned into Syria, where he received
letters from Darius concerning the redemption of his Captives; for whom he
promised to pay a great sum of money: Sed Alexander in pretium captivarum
regnum, omne non pecuniam petit: Afterward Darius sends a second Embassage,
proffering him his Daughter in marriage, and with her a portion of his Kingdom
for a Dowry: To this Alexander answered, that as yet he had proffered him
nothing but that which was his own by right of conquest; but if he were
desirous of Peace, he must come and render himself and Kingdom to the mercy
of the Conqueror. Darius now perceiving that all hope of Peace was taken away;
begins to leavie his third Army; resolving to try if with his sword in hand he
might obtain that, which by Ambassadors and treaties he could not: With this
new Army, consisting of 500000 Horse and Foot: he hunts after his Adversary,
but in his March he hears of the death of his Wife in Childe-bed, and how
Alexander in whose custody she was, had exceedingly bemoaned her loss, and
given her honorable burial, agreeable to her estate and condition: Idque eum
non amoris, sed humanitatis is causa fecisse: which when Darius understood, he
ingeniously confessed that now he was truly conquered, Ab hoc enim quis non
^^^it (...).
when after so many bloody Battles, his enemy now at last would overcome him
with courtesy, but herein he said was his comfort, St vincers nequeat quod a
tali potissimum vinceretur. After this Darius writes the third letter to
Alexander, rendering him many thanks for his courtesy to those that were his
Captives, offering him also his other Daughter in marriage, and the greater
part of his Kingdom, even to the banckes of Euphrates for her Dowry, and
30000 Tallents, for the redemption of the Captives. To this Alexander answered,
that it was a thing too too vain to receive thanks from an enemy; neither had
he himself done any thing to flatter his Adversary; that which he had done,
was out of the greatness of his mind: which, as it had taught him to contend
against the force of his foes, so not to triumph over their calamities: neither
would he have Darius to think him so simple, as to suffer the victory to be
taken from him, with hope of a marriage; No, no, he would have Darius know,
that there was no way so safe as to come yield to his mercy: which if he did,
he would promise in the word of a Prince, freely to bestow upon Darius all
those things that now he proffered unto him, upon this condition, Si secundus
fili, non par habere velit: For as the World could not be governed by two
Suns, so neither by two Kings with any safety: therefore either that day
Darius must prepare himself to yield, or the next day bring his Army into the
Plains, where he should find the like entertainment that he had before.

The next day both of them took the Field near unto Arbela, and were ranged
in view one of the other: The Kings on both sides rid about their Troops,
exhorting them to demean themselves like Soldiers in the Battle. Darius
assured his Persians, that if a strict account of his own and Adversaries
number were taken, he was ten for one: On the contrary Alexander admonished the
Macedonians, that they should not be moved neither with the enemies multitude,
nor with their Gyantlike bodies, no, nor with the glittering of their Armor;
only they should do well to remember that twice before they had encountered
them, and doubtless in this third Battle they should not find in them
greater courages then at first: for having already twice put them to flight,
and that with a great slaughter, the sorrowful remembrance thereof he knew
would much daunt them, who had no overplus of courage before: Furthermore, he
assured them, that though Darius had the most men, yet had he the greater
forces: wherefore there was nothing remained, but that they should scorn those
Bands that glittered in gold and silver, among whom they should find plus
praedae quam periculi, more treasure then danger, since that victory was
usually carried rather by the sharpness of the sword, then the garnishing of
the Armor.

After these encouraged on both sides, the onset was given, the Macedonians
rush^p in upon the enemies weapons with much contempt, because so often before
they had been conquered: On the other side, the Persians because they had been
so often soyled, wished rather to die, then to lose the day: In fine, seldom
was there more blood spilt in any Battle, both sides resolving to do their
utmost for gaining the victory: Chron. Carionis.
But at last the Persians were overcome with the slaughter of Ninety thousand
of their men. Darius, when he saw the Battle lost, would needs dye upon the
place; but yet was compelled by those that were about him, by flight to provide
for his own safety: and some there were that advised him to break the Bridge
over the River Cydnus, that so his flight might be secured from the enemies
chase: but Darius refused that counsel, resolving not to provide for his own
safety; by objecting so many thousands of his men as were yet ungotten over the
River, to the fury of his Adversary: Debere and aliis fugae vtam patere, quae
patuerit sibi. This Battle finished the conquest of Persia, and set the Diadem
on Alexanders head: for now the Cities yielded on all sides, the Persians
patiently submitted their necks under the yoke of the Macedonian servitude;
themselves having ruled the space of 200 years and upwards.

Darius in his flight was slain by Bessus and Nabaczanes, two of his near
kindred, whose body was found by Polystratus, one of Alexanders Soldiers,
lying in a Chariot after a squailed manner, goared with many wounds, and
weltring in that Royal blood that had issued out thereof: Which woeful
spectacle after that Alexander beheld, he took it heavily; first mourning and
weeping for the Royal Corpse, then covering it with his own cloak; and
lastly, causing it to be buried in a most solemn and Princely manner: neither
did he ever cease, till he had attached Bessus the murderer, and put him to a
shameful and ignominious death. This was the end of this mighty Prince, and
also of this mighty Empire, which was now brought out of Asia into Europe, from
Persia into Macedonia; where the third Monarchy was settled on Alexander and
his Successors.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Macedonian Monarchy, and the Wars thereof.
AS the Persian Monarchy was infested with War, so was the Macedonian: for
no sooner was Alexander estated in the government, but presently he received
intelligence of the overthrow of Alexander King of Epirus his kinseman, and
Ally, in Italy; as also the destruction of Zopirion his Perfect in Pontus,
together with 30000 men in Scythia: and lastly, of the dangerous War that was
moved against him in Greece: For after he had over-intangled himself in the
Asiatique War; almost all the Grecian Cities betook themselves to Arms, for
the recovery of their liberty, moved hereunto by the authority of Spartanes,
who neither regarded Philip, nor Alexander his Son. The Captain of this
War, was Agis King of Lacedamonia. But Antipater calling his forces together
in good time, quieted this commotion, yet not without slaughter on both sides:
King Agis when he saw his own troops turn their backs, forthwith dismissed
his Guard; Et sia multitudine victus, gloria tamen omnes vicit.
yet he himself by his proper valor (Vt Alexandro si non faelicitate par;
virtute non inferior videretur) made great havocke amongst his enemies: and at
last though he were overcome by their multitudes, yet in glory he overcame
them all. After this, some time was spent in the Indian expidition, and being
arived in the confines, Chronicon Carionis.
Taxiles was the first that he assaulted; but he like a wise Prince giving
way to Alexanders good fortunes, of his own accord came into his presence,
telling him there needed be no War between them two: for as for himself he
had rather contend with benefits, then weapons. Et si sit potentior se daturum
esse munera Alexandro, si inferior se gratum fore; si beneficia ab ipso
acceperit. Alexander thought it not to stand with reason, to exercise hostility
against him, who thus fairly yielded himself: wherefore he dismissed him in
peace, after the exchange of some Princely gifts.

Next he marched against Porus, Justin. Lib. 12.
a Prince very famous both for courage and strength, who resolved to make
resistance: before the battle Porus charged his men to assail the
Macedonians, and he himself would graple with their King: neither did
Alexander refuse the combat: Sibi Regem ^orum privatum ^^stem dep^s^u.
but in the first encounter (his Horse being wounded) he fell headlong on the
ground, but was rescued by his Guard; who both wounded, and took King Porus
prisoner: of whom Alexander demanded what he would have done with him, Plut.
in vita Alexandri.
if he himself had got the victory: to which Porus answered, Pro utriusque
regalis fastigij dignitate se fuisse facturum. With the virtue and personal
valor of this man, Alexander was so well pleased; as that he sent him safely
into his own Territories. Tantum pro Rege nominari jussit Satrapam. After
these victories, Alexander grew very luxurious, insolent, and cruel: he slew
old Parmenio, Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis.
and his Son Philatas, and that incomparable Clytus, three of his prime
Commanders: yea, and Colisthenes that Philospher (kinsman of his Master
Aristotle) whom he had of purpose trained along with him for the writing of
his Acts. All these and many more he slew; either for defending of the
reputation of his Royal Father King Philip: or else for refusing to adore and
worship him as a god, at his drunken banquers; so that now it is hard to say,
Number armatus in acie vel in convivio sedens teribilior. These things made many
mutinies in the Camp, and provoked the old Soldiers so much, as that they
reproached him to his very head. Jubentes eum solum cum patre suo Hammone
finere bella: Yet this sedition was afterward well quieted.

Yet Natheles Antipater, Justin. Lib. 12:
who was now sent for out of Macedonia with a supply of fresh Soldiers, seeing
so many of his dear friends put to death; began to conjecture, that he was
called for rather to partake with his friends in their punishment, then with
Alexander in the Warfare. Wherefore he most wickedly plotted with his Sons
Cassander, Philip, and Iolas (attendants on the Kings Person) about his
poisoning: which was afterward performed at the house of one Thessalus, who
had invited the King to a Banquet, they all giving it out, that he died of a
fever, caused through excessive drinking. His sickness lasted the space of
eleven days: during which time, their happened a tumult amongst the Soldiers,
who suspected the King was poisoned: this he himself pacified, by showing
himself unto them; and permitting such as he saw weeping, graciously to kiss
his hand; yea when all about him fell a weeping, yet was he without any sign
of grief. Adeo sicut in hostem; ita and in mortem invictus animus fuit. When
as those about him perceived no hope of his recovery, Quem Imperii faciat
haeredem. Respondit dignissimum.
they desired to know whom he would assign for his Heir, and successor in
the Empire, he answered the most worthy. Such was the greatness of his mind,
that passing by his own Son Hercules, his brother Arideus, and his Wife
Roxana great with child, he declares the most worthy Person to be his
Heir; quasi nefas esset viro forti alium, quam virum fortem succedere. And
this had like to have set all together by the ears, every one of the great
Captains esteeming himself most worthy; begun privately to procure to
themselves the Soldiers favor. But this growing dissension, also was pacified
by Alexander himself: for upon the sixth day of his sickness when his speech
failed him, he took his Ring from his finger, Justin. Lib. 13.
and delivered it to Perdiccas: by which sign it appeared that he appointed
him for his Successor. After the death of Alexander, some time was spent in
settling the affairs of Estate; for this purpose they met in the Royal Palace
at Babylon, and being set in Council they were divided into three several
opinions: First, Perdiccas was of opinion, that they should expect till Roxana
(the late Wife of Alexander) who was great with child. should be delivered;
and if she brought forth a Man-child, he should be declared Successor to
his Father.

But Meliager was of another mind; for he thought it not safe to suffer their
certain consultations, to depend upon an uncertain childe-birth: neither is
it fit (says he) that we should expect till a King be borne, when as we
may have one that is borne already: and if a Child will please you, there is
Hercules the Son of Alexander begotten of Arsine: if a young man will like
you better, there is Arideus Brother and companion of Alexander in the Camp,
and one that is beloved of all; not only for his own sake, but for his Father
King Philips. And furthermore for Roxana; he said she was descended of the
Persian blood: and was it right, that they should appoint a King to rule over
the Macedonians: which should spring from them, whose Kingdom they had now
conquered? Ptolemy differed in opinion from both the former; and first he
utterly rejected Arideus, and that not only for the baseness of his Mother;
for he was begotten by Philip ex Larisco Scorto: but also for a greater
infirmity, want of wit; for as Ptolemy said, if he were admitted to the
Crown; Ille nomen Regis, alius Imperium teneret: for his part he thought it
better, that out of those who for their virtue and prowess were near unto
Alexander, some should be elected to govern the Provinces, and manage the
Wars.

Of these three opinions the first was best approved generally: wherefore it
was agreed upon, that they should expect till Roxana were delivered: and if
she brought forth a Son, Leonatus, Perdiccas, Craterus, and Antipater should
be his Guardians. Confestrimque in tutorum obsequia jurant. The same oath of
Allegiance was also given to the Horse-troopes. But the footmen perceiving that
there advice was not required in those great affairs, took it in ill part,
wherefore they proceeded to a new election, and saluted Arideus King, and
appointed him a Guard out of their own Troops: which thing so soon as the
Horsemen heard of, they sent two of the Nobility, to wit Attalus, and Meleager
to pacify their minds: But these two desiring to increase their own power by
the flattery of the common Soldiers omitted their Embassage, and conspired
with them; And now that they had gotten a head, they presently armed themselves
with purpose to break into the Palace for the discom^ture of the Horsemen:
which being once known, the Horsemen in fear departed the City; and having
fortified their Camp, the footmen themselves also began to doubt of the
success. Perdiccas who commanded in chief amongst the Horsemen, perceiving
the danger likely to ensue upon this division: resolutely went unto the
footmen, and having called an assembly, he spoke unto them as follows.

Soldiers and fellows in Arms, I desire you would consider what an horrible
crime you now commit in arming your selves, and raising a sedition: Remember I
pray you against whom you attempt these things; they are not Persians but
Macedonians, not enemies, but Citizens, and for the most part of your own
blood and kindred, Fellow Soldiers of the same Camp, and Companions of the
same dangers together with you. Consider betimes I advise you, what an
egregious spectacle you are about to set forth to the view of your Adversaries
the Persians; look how much they grieve to see themselves vanquished by your
conquering arms, so much will they rejoice to see you embruing your swords in
the blood one of another: by which means it will come to pass that they shall
offer sacrifice with your own blood, to the souls of those enemies which you
have slain.

With this Oration the footmen were so moved, as that presently they approved
his council; chose him their Captain, and by his means also were accorded
with the Horsemen: but yet so, as that Arideus should have the Empire; and
only a portion thereof should be reserved for Alexanders Child, if it happened
to be a Son.

These matters being thus composed, the Empire is divided into many
Lieutenantships: but there were four chief ones, who were more remarkable
then the rest: Qui Reges ex perfectis facti magnes opes non sibi tantum
paranerunt; Verum and posteris reliquerunt. And these were first, Ptolemy,
Son of Logus who possessed Egypt: Secondly, Seleucus, who possessed Babylon
(as Josephus says) Cum vicinis gentibus. Thirdly, Antigonus, who possessed
Asia the less: And fourthly Antipater, and after him Cassander, who possessed
Macedonia, and Greece.

By this we see the Prophecy of Daniel fulfilled, for he had long before
Prophesied that the great horn of the Goat being broken: For it, should come
up four notable ones: Dan. 8. 8. Which prophecy is expounded in the 21. and
22. verses of the same Chapter, in this manner. The Rough Goat is the King of
Grecia; and the great horn that is betwixt his eyes, is the first King (which
was Alexander the Great.) Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it:
Four Kingdoms shall stand up out of the Nation, but not in his power. Now
these Kingdoms are the four I have last spoken of: for however by the first
composition, they were to be but Provinces; and these Princes forenamed, to
rule in them only as Lieutenants to Arideus; yet afterward that agreement was
rejected, and every of these made themselves absolute Kings, 1. Mac. 1. 9. And
this was the first occasion.

Perdiccas (to whom nothing fell in this division, but the tuition of the weak
King, and the conduct of the best Army) cast about how he might make himself
equal with the rest: for this purpose he set upon Ariarathes King of
Capadocia, in which War he proved victorious; yet gained little more then
the bare and naked Kingdom; for his enemies being overthrown, they fly to
their chief City, where they burnt themselves, their houses, and all that ever
they had. Vt nihil hostis victor suarum rearum preter incendii Spectacula
frueretur: This Kingdom he left to the custody of his best betrusted friend
Eumenes, to be a place of sure retreat upon any occasion, but as for himself
he aspired after greater matters. Power enough he had in the Army he
conducted, but he wanted Royal authority to countenance his Power; and
Capadocia was to little to limit his high thoughts: Now that he had proved his
strength to make himself equal with the other, he would try one cast more
too for the superiority: to this end he secretly treated a match with
Cleopatra the sister of great Alexander, by whom he hoped to attain the
Soverainty of all the rest: but belike he was jealous that Antipater (in whose
power the Lady was) would cross this marriage. Wherefore to cover his intents,
he fained love to Nicaea one of Antipaters Daughters, hoping under that
pretext to gain the Lady before any were aware of it, but the old Fox quickly
espied his drift: Et dum duas eodem tempore uxores quaerit neutram obtinuit.

This plot of his being overthrown by the cunning of Antipater, he sets his
wits abroach again upon another design for the winning of the Lady; Sir
Walter Raleigh*
and that was to transfer the Army into Europe under the pretense of bringing
the King into Macedonia the seat of his Ancestors, and head of the Empire;
whose presence he knew would actually make void for the time, the office of
the Viceroyes: and so Antipater with Craterus being once in case of private
men, and himself only in authority, the match with Cleopatra then might
easily be effected; and so should his greatness meet with a good title, and
what obstacle then could there be, to debar him from the Empire?

There are two men taken into consideration, which he thought might be some
hinderance to him in that accomplishment of this project: And they were
Antigonus Lieutenant of Phrigia, and Ptolomie of Egypt. For the first, he
caused to be accused of certain crimes, which might very well have served to
take away his life; which Antigonus would not seem to take notice of, but
prepared himself in show to come to his Answer: but in the mean while he
made an escape, and came into Aetolia, where Antipater and Craterus were with
their Armies, about the conquest of the Country. These tidings which Antipater
brought, quickly finished the Aetolian War, and caused both Antipater and
Craterus to foresee their own danger. Ptolomy also being advertised of these
passages; apprehended them deeply; and therefore was easily drawn to side with
Antipater his Coleagues, Craterus and Antigonus.

Being thus joined in League, they begin to prepare for defense; And Perdiccas
(understanding by the flight of Antigonus, and the League that now was between
him, and the aforesaid parties, that all his drifts were discovered) resolved
to carry all before him by fine force, having both the strongest Army, and the
Kings name to countenance all his actions. But the thing that troubled him was,
against which of the Coleagues he should first attempt. This being propounded
in Council, some advised he should transfer the War into Macedonia, where
Olimpias the Mother of great Alexander then was; Justin. lib. 13.
whose presence and the peoples favor, would much promote all their
enterprises. Others advised that they should first attempt on Ptolomy in
Egypt; least while they were in Macedonia, he should invade Asia; and this
advice prevailed; whereupon Eumenes is charged to have regard of Asia, and to
him were joined Alcetus Brother of Perdiccas, and Neoptolemus as assistants, in
case Antipater or Craterus should invade those parts. Sic Macedonia, in duas
parts discurrentibus ducibus; in sua viscera armatur ferrumque ab hostili
bello in civilem sanguine vertit. When as Perdiccas had wafted his Army into
Egypt, like a wilful man he tired his Soldiers in hard enterprises without
success, which brought their hatred upon him; which Pithom perceiving, called
an hundred of the Captains, and some of the Horse unto him, and so entered his
Tent and slew him: Thus, qui primus inter duces bellum movit, Sir Walter
Raleigh,
primus interfectus est, says Caryon.

Eumenes who was left by Perdiccas for the defense of Asia; when he understood
of the great preparation that was made by Antipater and Craterus for the
invasion of those Provinces committed to his charge; presently sent for Alcetus
and Neoptolemus to come to his aid; letting them know, that the Adversary had
already passed his forces and the Hellesponte. Alcetus flatly denied his
assistance, alleging the backwardness of his men to Bear Arms against so
great a person as Antipater, and a man so honored as Craterus. Neoptolemus,
was content to make a fair show of ayding him, but had secretly covenanted
with Antipater, to open for him a way to the conquest of Asia: which thing
Eumenes carefully espied, and prepared in time to prevent his evil designs.
And this he did in a fierce battle, wherein he put him to flight; and
received his Foot-forces (from whom he was fled for his own safeguard) into
his service: Ad Antipatrum and Polyperchont^ pro^u^it. Justin.
Neoptolemus after his overthrow, fled to Antipater, and Craterus; persuading
them, that if by great journyes they would hasten their march, they might
certainly take Eumenes napping, being now joyful of his late victory, secure
by reason of his flight. This council was put in execution, but not with such
success as was hoped for: because Eumenes was watchful over their
proceedings, perceived all their intents; Infidiae in infidiato re^ verse.
wherefore they that thought to entrap him on the sudden, were unexpectedly in
the trap themselves; being set upon while they were secure in their march, and
much wearied with night-watches. In this battle both Craterus, and Neoptolemus
were slain, and their Army routed and overthrown.

After the death of Craterus whom the Soldiers exceedingly loved; Justin. lib.
14.
they chose Antigonus their General, against Eumenes; whom earnestly they
desired to punish for the death of their beloved Captain. Eumenes perceiving
how that by the Macedonians he was adjudged an enemy, and that their new
Captain Antigonus had decreed to make War upon him, of his own accord
discovered these things to his Soldiers; promising, that if any were terrified
with these news, he would give him free leave to depart: with which words
they were so animated, as that they promised him faithfully, Rescissurus se
ferro decreta Macedonum.

Antigonus understanding what a Soldier Eumenes was; thought it a far safer
way to cut him off by policy, then by force: wherefore taking the advantage of
Eumenes absence from his Army (for he was now visiting Cleopatra, the sister
of great Alexander, at Sardis) he caused letters to be spread through his
Army, wherein was promised great rewards to those who could bring Eumenes his
head unto him. Eumenes at his return finding out the project, called an
assembly, giving his Soldiers great thanks, that amongst them all, none was
found that preferred the hope of a bloody reward, before the faith they had
given to their General: but withal, politickly telling them, Confictas a se
has epistolas ad experiendos suorum animos esse. And by this policy he did
not only afright those that were wavering; but also did provide against future
times: that if any such thing should afterward happen, the soldiers might
suppose; Se non ab host corrumpi, sed a duce tentari. Antigonus when he saw
that he could not entrap his Adversary by cunning, then prepared to set upon
him by force. And Eumenes accordingly prepared to entertain him; but through
the treachery of Apollonides, general of his Horse (who in the heat of the
battle fled to the Adverse part) he was overthrown. Plut. in vit^ Eumenes.
After which, he betook himself to Nora, a very strong Fort; which he
manfully defended, until such time as Antigonus heard of the troubles in
Macedonia (which were raised by the seditions of Cassander, and Polyperchon,
Prius vitam se quam fidem relicturum.
after the death of Antipater,) which coming to Antigonus his knowledge,
caused him labor to conclude a Peace with Eumenes, knowing him to be a man
fit for his purposes (if he could win him to his side) both for his known
faithfulness, and excellent skill in Martial affairs; for of all Alexanders
Captains, he skarce had his fellow.

A Peace forthwith was concluded between them, but long it continued not;
because not governed by the like minds: for Eumenes was most faithful, but
the other treacherous to Alexanders kindred: wherefore they fell again to the
Wars, wherein (after Eumenes had been victorious in many battles,) at last
by the mutinous Argyraspides, he was betrayed to Antigonus, who put him to
death.

And now let us leave Antigonus a while, Justin lib. 14.
and see how the affairs of the Empire were managed in other parts. Euridice
the Queen, Wife of King Aridens, so soon as she knew of Polyperchons return
into Macedonia, and that he had sent for Olimpias the Mother of great
Alexander, grew full of envy and emulation: wherefore she writ letters in the
King her husbands name to Polyperchon, commanding him to deliver up the Army to
Cassander, whom she knew to be an enemy to Alexanders posterity. For which
courtesy Cassander was bound unto her, and did many things according to her
mind: and afterward he marches with his Forces into Greece, making War
upon diverse of the Cities. With whose destructions, the Spartans terrified,
walled their City, which in times past they had defended with Arms, and not
with Walls; Olim interrogatus Agesil^us quare Sparta sine muris, ostendens
Cives armatus dixit (...).
so much now did they degenerate from their Ancestors: for in times past the
virtue of the Citizens, was the Wall of the City, but now the Citizens thought
not themselves safe, unless they were enclosed with Walls.

But the troubles of Macedonia, quickly called Cassander out of Greece; for
Olimpias coming toward Macedon; Aeacides King of the Mollosians also
following her: they were forbidden to enter upon the borders by Arideus, and
Euridice. Yet by means of the Macedonians, who flocked to her apace, she got
entrance; and being entered, by her Commandment, both Euridice and the King
were quickly slain, and she her self ruled not long after: For the
Macedonians seeing what cruel massacres she made amongst their Princes,
turned their love into hatred: So when Cassander approached, she having no
confidence in them; retired her self to Pydua a strong City, where Cassander
straightly besieged her, and forced her by extreme famine to yield to his
mercy: yet he showed her but a little, when she came into his power; for by
the counsel of the Macedonians, whose Children she had slain: she was
(without any respect to her former estate) condemned to dye. When the
Executioners came to do their office; she never shrunk for their swords,
neither shriked like a Woman for the smart of her wounds: Vt Alexandrum posses
etiam moriente matre conspicere: and when she was breathing her last gaspes,
she covered her body decently with her hair and garments; Ne quid posset in
corpore ejus indecorum videri. This was the end of this Royal Queen so famous
through the World, for being Wife to such a Husband, and Mother to such a Son.

Perdiccas, Justin. Lib. 15.
Alcetus, Eumenes, Commanders of the other faction being all slain; one would
have thought the War should have ceased amongst Alexanders Successors: but it
fell out otherwise; for the Victors fell at ods amongst themselves, and this
was the occasion of it. Ptolomy, Cassander, and Lysimachus required that the
Treasure and Provinces taken by Antigonus, should be equally divided amongst
them; but this Antigonus denied: Affirmans, se non in ejus belli praedam socios
admissurum, in cujus periculum solus descenderat: Hereupon War was decreed on
both sides. Antigonus feared them not, only he wanted a fair pretext and
color for his War: wherefore he cavsed it to be divulged, that he would
revenge the death of Olimpias, upon Cassander the murderer, and deliver Roxana
and her Son out of the Tower of Amphipolis, wherein the said Cassander had
imprisoned them.

These things being once known abroad, Ptolomy, Cassander, Lysimachus, and
S^leucus, all join in League against him; and so on all sides make their
preparations both by Sea and Land. The first battle was fought at Callamos,
between Demetrius Son of Antigonus, and Ptolomy, wherein Ptolomy got the
day. Afterward these two Generals fought at Sea, and Demetrius got the
victory, and that a very great one; which filled the heart of Antigonus so with
pride: as that he commanded both himself, and Son to be styled Kings:
Ptolomy, that he might not seem to have less authority amongst his men, is
graced also with the same Title: and after their examples, Cassander, and
Lysimachus did style themselves also Kings, Sic nona Regna ex Alexandri
Monarchia orta sunt, sicut Daniel predixerat.

After these private encounters with Ptolomy, follows the general War
between Antigonus, and his Son on the one side, and Ptolomy, Lysimachus,
Scleucus, and Cassander on the other: In vita. De^ ^.
but when they came to join battle Antigonus was slain, and the battle on
his part lost. And as Plutarch says, through the too violent chase that
Demetrius gave to young Antiochus Son of Seleucus; For Demetrius having
overthrown that part of the Army which Antiochus led, and put him to flight:
he pursued so far, and with such heat, that before he came back again;
the Macedonian Phalanx, and body of his Fathers Army was overthrown:
wherefore finding the affairs in such ill case at his return, he was glad to
fly hastily toward Athens, with 5000 Foot, and 4000 Horse: where, for all
his former kindesse unto them, he was forbid to enter the City, quoniam regum
neminem tu^^ recipere statuissent.

This victory was the occasion of new trouble among the Victors; Dum ^^nis os
rodit socium quem diligit odit.
for Seleucus (who was present at the battle) in parting the prey, pleased
himself, but displeased his adherents (who were absent.) Wherefore Ptolomy,
and Lysimachus join against him, supposing him now as dangerous an enemy, as
Antigonus was before. Seleucus to strengthen himself, joined with Demetrius;
and to make this League the firmer, takes Stratonice, Daughter of Demetrius, to
Wife. And about the beginning of these troubles, Cassander died in Macedonia,
and so did Philip his eldest Son.

After whose deaths, Justin. Lib. 1^.
another War also happened between Antipater, and Alexander, the two
surviving Sons of Cassander: Thessalonica Mother to them both, seemed to take
part with the younger Brother; wherefore Antipater the elder, slew her. The
younger Brother to ^ee revenged for his Mothers death, called in Demetrius for
his aid: wherefore Lysimachus, who was Father in Law to Antipater, persuaded
him to reconcile himself to his Brother, rather then to admit his Fathers
enemy into the Kingdom. But Demetrius would not now be kept out, with their
reconciliation; but by treachery murdered Alexander, and possessed that part
of his Kingdom that was fallen to his share: and Lysimachus (being at that time
entangled in a dangerous War against Doricetus King of Thrace) that Demetrius
might not be his enemy, delivered also up to him the other part of Macedonia,
which was Antipaters, his Son in Law. Thus Demetrius being wholly possessed of
that Kingdom, begins a fresh to prepare for the recovery of that which he had
lost in Asia, which occasioned a new League between Ptolomy, Seleuchus, and
Lysimachus; into which society Pirrhus King of Epirus was drawn: and so to
prevent the invasion of Asia, they send against Demetrius their Armies into
Europe; with which, he being circumvented, Cum posset honest mori, turpiter
se debere Seleuco maluit

After the end of this War, died Ptolomy Son of Lagus King of Egypt:
leaving for his Successor, Justin. Lib. 17.
Ptolomy Philodelphus his youngest Son: After whose death, there were left
alive no more but two of Alexanders great Captains, to wit, Seleuchus,
Assiduum inter pacet discordia malum
and Lysimachus; and these two being equals, quickly fell at difference, both
striving for superiority. And this was the last Battle that ever was fought
between those great Captains that accompanied Alexander in the Persian
expedition: and truly the sudaine fall of the City of Lysimachia by an
Earthquake, did foreshew the event of the battle, which immediately followed,
for therein Lysimachus fell; and Seleuchus was not more joyful of the victory,
then that he was the last of Alexanders train; and that he was victor over
those that had been Conquerors over others: but this his great joy did not
long continue with him; for about seven months after he was circumvented by
Ptolomy Cerannus, whose Sister Lysimachus had married: Regnumque Macedoniae,
quod Lysimacho eripuerat, cum vita pariter amittit: and within a while after,
this Cerannus was slain by the Gauls, under the leading of their Captain
Brennus.

Thus have you seen the horrible Wars, and bloody Massacres that happened
during the time of this third Monarchy, among the Successors of great
Alexander: neither did these Wars end, when they had brought these great men to
their graves; but continued still, as fierce as before amongst their posterity,
until they had greatly spoiled all those Countries, and prepared a way for the
Romans entrance. Of which it is high time that I now speak; for I suppose I
have already said enough, to satisfy any man, concerning the troubles of the
third Monarchy* although a great deal more might be said of those Wars,
which happened between the Kings of Syria and Egypt; Dan. 2.
which took beginning at the murder of Brenice widow of Antiochus Theos, and
Sister of Ptolomy Enargetes, of which the Prophet Daniel has so plainly
spoken; as that those that are acquainted with the Story, will I am sure
testify with me, that he seems rather to write a History, then a Prophecy.
But these and many more troubles I must of necessity pass by, to come to the
fourth Monarchy of the Romans, which was not in strength inferior to any of
the other. Dan. 7. 7. Yet could it not perpetuate Peace to it self, no more
then any of the former Monarchies, as the next Chapter will make it evidently
appear*

CHAP. V.
Of the Roman Monarchy, and the Wars thereof.
THe Roman Empire, whose foundation was first laid by Romulus their first King,
was at the beginning of all other Empires the smallest: but in process of
time, it did become the most ample and large, that any History mentions;
containing within the limits and bounds thereof, all that ever any of the other
three Monarchies had in Asia, and Africa, besides all Europe into the bargain.
Lucius Florus considers in the Commonwealth of the Romans four degrees or
Ages: the first under Kings which continued about 250 years. During which time
Rome strove for mastery with her mother, the City Alba, (...) fore unde
victori^^u^^t. Livy.
under the leading of their third King Tullus Hostilius, who was the first that
taught them martial Discipline, and the Art of War: in which War happened
that famous Combat between the Horatii, Faedus inter Romans and Albanes.
three brethren of the Roman party, and the Curatii, three brethren of the City
Alba; upon whose victory depended the well or woe of both Cities, Vt cuius
populi cives eo ^ertam^ne vic^ssent is alteri populo cum bona paceimperitare^.
Livy Dec. prim. Lib. primo.
auceps and pulchra contentio; a brave but a doubtful fight: wherein three of
the one side being wounded, and two of the other slain, that Horatius which
survived, helping out his valor with his wit, feigned himself to fly, so to
single forth the enemy, and then turning upon each as they were to follow,
overcame them all. Sic (rarum) unius manu parta victoria est. Besides this
War between Rome, and the City Alba; there were other between her and the
City Fid^na. To be breife, under the rule of Kings, they conquered all the
Towns round about for some fifteen miles space, as Suessa, Pometia,
Otriculum, and diverse other Towns in Latium: but because Rome was now but in
her infancy, and had not obtained the Monarchy, I let these pass in silence.

The next Age of Rome (says Florus) was from the time of Brutus, Livy dec. 1.
Lib. 2.
and Collarinus, their two first Consuls; until such time as Apius Claudius,
and Quintus Julius obtained the Consulship, which was about 200 years after.
During which time they had many sharp Wars: as first with Tarquinius, their
expulsed King, who was aided by the Vrientines, and Tarquiniences, for the
recovery of his Kingdom. In the very first onset of this battle, was Brutus
the Consul, and Aruus Tarquinius the Kings Son, Alterius uterque telo
transfixus occubuit Plut. vit. Val. Public.
both Generals of the Horse, slain one by the other: for as Livy says,
Adeoque infestis animis concurrerunt neutrum dum hostem vulneraret sui
protegendi corporis memor; ut contra^io ictu par parmam uterque transfixus. The
victory was very doubtful, for the right Wings of both the Armies overcame;
so that both sides feared the worst, Vno plus Hetruscorum cecidisse in a^^e,
vincere bello Romanum. Livy. Dec. 1. Lib. 1.
till the doubt were removed by a miracle, a strange voice out of the Arsian
wood, which affirmed, that the Romans had lost one less then their enemies*

The next War was against King Porsenuae, who would have re-established
Tarquinius, and he wanted but little of taking the City; for he had already
surprised Mountain Ianiculus, on the other side of Tiber; from whence he had
a fair way to the City over the Bridge called Sublicius: where by good hap,
Horatius C^cles a valiant Roman was present, who placed himself upon the
Bridge; and with his sole body defended the passage against all the Kings
Army; until such time as the bridge behind him was broken down: neither
could they be freed from the danger of this King, until Mutius Scaevola had
made an attempt to slay him in his Camp; of which nevertheless he failed
through his ignorance of the Kings person, killing his Scribe, instead of him:
for which fact being had in examination, he cried out says Livy: Romanus sum
Ci^is Quintus Mutium vocant; hostis hostem occidere volui: When they threatened
him with punishment: Nec unus in te ^go hos ^nimos gessi, lorgus post me ordo
est idem petentium decus, Livy. Dec. 1. Lib. 2.
he answered, he was as resolved to die, as to have killed the King: for
says he, Facere and pati fortiae, Romanum est, and forthwith he thrust his
hand into the fire, until it were past sense. Vt sciat Rex (says Florus) quem
virum effugerit. Telling the King that there were 300 valiant young men of Rome
had conspired his death: with which the King was so terrified, that he
presently dissolved the siege, and made peace with the Romans.

To be breife, besides this War, they had also within the 200 years before
named; wars with the Lattins, Thuscans, Ga^^es, Sabines, Sa^^ites; and
lastly, with the Tarrentines, and King Pyrrhus, but all these within the
confines of Italy, which by this time they had mastered and made their own:
yet were they so far from the Monarchy, as that they had never led their
forces out of Italy, and therefore I pass by these also.

The next Age of Rome (Lucius Florus) was from that time Apius Claudius,
Inquibus totum orbem pecavit Florus.
and Quintus Fulvius were Con^ulls, until the time of Caesar Augustus, which
was 250 years, about which time they obtained the Monarchy of the World.
Which before they could effect, they endured many sharp Wars: as with
Carthage three several times: Simili^r victo sit populus qui vicit. Florus.
In the second of which Punicke Wars, Rome was in as much fear as ever since
her walls were builded. Livy says, adeo varia belli fortuna; ut proprius
periculo fuerint, qui vicere. Three overthrowes Haniball gave the Romans one
after another, the first at Tic^num, now called Pavia, where the Consul
Publius Cornelius Scipio had been slain, but that he was rescued by his own
Son young Scipio, afterward called Affricanus. The next was at the flood
Trebia, where he overthrew the other Consul Titus Sempronius, who was very
eager to fight with Haniball, before his fellows were healed of their hurts
received in the former battle. The third was at the Lake of Th^asimene, Caius
Flaminius being Consul, who very rashly lost both Army and life. The ill
success of which battle was foreshowen before it began: for Titus Livius
says, Aquile prodi^e n^lu^runt. Flouus.
the Ensign could not with all his strength remove his Colors, which with
some other ill signs put all the Army in afright: which thing when it was told
to the unadvised Consul, Livy dec. 3. Lib. 2.
he said to the messenger, Abi nuntia, signum effodiant; si ad conv^llendum
manus prae metu obcorpuerint. The news of this overthrow made the Romans
speedily nominate a Dictator, and in good time they chose Quintus Fabius
Maximus, one that followed Haniball wheresoever he went: but with this
purpose, Cunctando (...).
Vt cunctando non bellando inimicorum vires attereret, says Plutarch: Thus for
a while he wearied Haniball, but his own people also were wearied with this
lingering War. Minutius who was Magister equitum he cried out in the Army,
Tandem eum militiae magistrum delegisse Romanos qui bellum ratione, non fortuna
ger^ret.
Do we come hither to behold the slaughter and destruction of our Confederates
and Companions? are we not ashamed that those Citizens which our Fathers sent
as Colonyes into S^ssa, that this coast might be safe from our enemies the
Samnits, which now not our Neighbor Samnite, but a Carthagenian stranger does
waste and spoil, having marched from the further parts of the World, to this
place by means of our delays? So far (ah the grief) do we degenerate
from the virtues of our Ancestors, that near our Coast they thought it a
dishonor to their Empire, but to suffer the Carthagenians Navy to sail: the
same we now see repleate with the Numidians, and Mores our enemies. It is
great folly to believe that we are able to subdue our enemies with sitting
still: (...) credere posse* Livy.
it behooves us to arm our troops, and bring them down into the plains, and
encounter them man to man. Audendo, agendoque res Romana crevit, non his
sensibus, Consiliis neque timidi cauta vocant.

This trouble happening in the Camp, and the like in the City, causes the
Senate to join Minutius in equal authority with the Dictator: but still the
War is prolonged by Fabius his cunning: Then does Bebius Herennius Tribune of
the people, declaime both against the Senate and Nobility for trayning Haniball
into Italy and prolonging the War, which might sooner have been put to an
end if a Plebean Consul had been chosen. Hereupon Quintus Terentius a Plebean
is created Consul; and Lucius Aemilius Paulus is his Colleague: They follow
the battle of Cannae by the rashness of Terentius Varro the Plebean Consul,
wherein the Romans were overthrown, Entrop^us.
and one of their Consulls slain; and with him twenty more of the order of
Consulls and Praetors: of Senators there were taken and slain thirty, of
Noblemen to the number of 300, of Soldiers, to the number of 40000, and 3500
gentlemen besides. Haec est pugna Cannensi clade nobilitata (says Livy.) There
had been no doubt, Vincere s^^s Hanibal victoria uti rescis. Livy
but that Rome then might easily have been taken: if Haniball (as Maherbal
said) had but known how to use a victory as to get one: But Hanibal quum
victoria posset uti, Quos nulli m^li vicer^t vis, perdidere nimi^ bona ac
voluptates immodicae.
frui maluit. And so leaving Rome, he hastens to Capua, the pleasures of which
town, utterly effeminated his whole Army, and as (Florus says) Capuam
Hanibali Cannas fuisse, for him that neither the snowy Alps, nor the Roman
Armies could overcome (who would believe it) Campaniae soles and tepentes
fontibus Baiae subegerunt. After this diverse of the Roman Generals durst meet
Haniball in the field; and first Cloudius Marcellus the Roman Praetor, in the
first year of this War, raised his siege from before Nola, and slew of his
men as some affirm, 2300, himself losing only one: but Livy dares not
affirm so much of his own credit; yet acknowledges a victory gotten of
Haniball, which he accounts a very famous exploit, if not the most famous that
happened in all that War: Non vinti enim ab Hanibale, vincentibus difficilius
fuit, quam postca vincere.

At last it happened that Publius Cornelius Scipio was created Consul, who
chose Africa for his Province, and had it granted, contrary to the opinion of
Fabius. When he was entered Africa, he overthrew the forces of Asdruball, and
King Siphax: and forthwith besieged Carthage it self close up to the gates,
which so afrighted the Citizens, that presently they sent for Haniball to come
to the defense of his own City: but Haniballs Army which was effeminated
before with the immoderate pleasures of Capua, was now overthrown before his
own Carthage. Premiumque victoriae Africa fuit, and seguntus Africam statim
terrarum orbis (says Florus.) Besides these Punicke Wars, they had many
other; as in Macedonia with King Philip, in Syria with Antiochus, in Greece
with the Aetolians, Histrians, Gallo-Greekes, Illir^^ns, and Achaians: in Asia,
with Aristonicus, and Mithridates: in Africa, with Iugurth: and in Europe, with
diverse, which would be to long for me to nominate.

We will come therefore to those times wherein Rome had settled the fourth
Monarchy, by making her self the Lady and Mistress almost of the whole World:
which was about the time of Pompey the Great, and Julias Caesar, two the most
famous Captains that ever Rome had.

In their times says Lucius Florus, ipsum ^ludin exitium suum armavit. Flor.
Majus erat imperium Romanum, quam ut ullis exterius viribus extingui posset.
Fortune therefore envying that people, which was sovereign of all other, armed
their own selves to their own destruction: and this grew through the discord
that was between Pompey and Caesar before named. But the ground of this
controversy took first root from the civil Wars between Marius and Silla:
Pompey following Sillas faction, and Caesar, Marius, whose kinseman he was,
Amentes estis si multos in Caesare Marios non videtis cavendum est a puero.
Plut. in vit. Caesar.
which could not but breed a mislike each of other: and the rather, because
Silla had given his friend a caveat to beware of Caesar: this dislike of each
other was increased by both their ambitions: Pompey would endure no equal, nor
Caesar superior; but hitherto their intents were smothered, two obstacles
being in the way: first Pompey had married the Lady Julia, Caesar's Daughter,
and during her life, friendship was preserved, Nec hic ferebat parem necille
superiorem. Flor.
at least in show. Secondly, Crassus through his inestimable riches, Lineage,
and eloquence, was almost in as great reputation as either of the other; and so
long as he lived, the scales were equally balanced through mutual fear:
Exinde a Crassi Juliaeque morte statim aemulatio erupit. Flor.
but Crassus being once slaughtered by the Parthians, and Julia dead; the spark
of emulation that long had laid smothered as it were in ashes, now quickly
burst forth, both of them being ambitious of honor, and each of them jealous
of the others authority; but their emulation brake forth into open War, upon
this occasion.

Caesar having finished his Wars in Gaul, sent his friends to Rome in his
name to demand the Consulship, himself staying behind within his own
Province; the reason why he desired (though absent) to be declared Consul,
was for fear of some enemies that had threatened to accuse him: this honor was
decreed him at the first, by ten of the Tribunes with Pompeys good liking. But
some of Caesar's enemies withstanding this decree; Pompey quickly altered his
opinion, and then was Caesar again denied that honor, Veniret and peteret
malorem more. Flor.
unless he would lay down his Arms, and come in person to Rome, to crave it
after the accustomed manner: this Caesar yielded unto upon condition that
Pompey also should give over his Army which he had in Spain; but Pompyes
friends would not agree to that: hereupon Caesar refuses to dismiss his Army,
unless the Senate would make good their first decree. Forthwith at Rome are
Lentulus and Marcellus made Consulls, and have charge to look Ne quid
respublica detrimenti caperet. By and by, a peremptory decreee is passed, that
Caesar must dismiss his Army by such a day, and that he should not therewith
pass the River Rubicon, that utmost bounds of his Province; declaring him an
enemy, if he dared to do the contrary: this decree being resisted by two of
the Tribunes, Lucius Antonius and Quintus Curio, they were both abused and
thrust out of the Senate, after which they fled to Caesar: Hereby Caesar
perceived the intent of the Senate, and therefore sent speedily for all his
Legions, marching with them to the River Rubicon; he stayed there a while,
considering with himself the danger that might ensue, if he should pass the
River with his Troops. After consultation, he cried out, The Lot is cast; and
giving his Horse the reine, began to march and pass the River, all his people
following him, and so was the civil War begun.

The very next morning after he had passed the River, (...) Caesaris.
he seized on Arimanto, and so upon all Towns and Castles that lay in his way:
which tidings troubled not only Pompey, but the whole Senate and people of
Rome; whereupon, they all resolve to forsake the City. Pompey went to
Brundusium, whither he sent for the Consulls to pass thence to Dyrrachium, a
City by the Sea coast of Macedonia, there to raise as great power as they were
able; being now out of all hope to resist him in Italy: he having now taken
Corsin^o with Thirty of Pompeys Cohorts, and brought them to his own
denomination. Having once intelligence that Pompey made head against him in
Brundusium, thither he hasted: and though Pompey had fortified the City against
him, yet was he glad to fly for his safeguard by night, in a torn and almost
naked Vessel over the Sea (oh the shame) which not long before he had
triumphantly passed.

Nor was Pompey sooner driven out of Italy, then the Senate out of the City;
into which he entered, made himself Consul, seized on the common treasury,
and then began to consult about his proceedings: To follow Pompey into Greece,
he could not for want of Shipping; neither would he though he could, because
of some enemies behind, who were needful first to be dealt with all. Into
Sicilia the Roman Granery, he sent Deputies to make all sure there, and
himself resolved for Spain, against Petreius and Affranius the Commanders of
Pompeys choicest Legions. Having therefore dispersed part of his forces
throughout Italy, to stop Pompeys return; and having charged Dolabella to
provide shipping against his coming back: away he goes and finds no
resistance till he comes at Massilla, where he left Brutus to subdue them,
which he did.

Caesar after a few incounters, drives Petreius and Affranius to a composition;
and having tamed Spain, he returns for Italy: where leaving all to the
charge of Servillius Isauricus his fellow Consul; Caesar Lib. 3. bellorun.
civilium.
he prepares to go into Macedonia against Pompey himself: When he came to
Brundusium, though he wanted sufficiency of shipping, with those he had, he
embarked seven Legions; and though it were in winter, yet he put out to Sea,
and landed the next day about the hills of Epirus, and other dangerous places,
and forthwith sent his Navy back to Brundusium, for the residue which were
left with Antonius; which staying somewhat to long, (impatient of delay in such
important affairs:) he embarked himself at midnight in a Frigot; Lucius
Florus*
and though the Seas went high, yet would he needs venture over: The Master of
the vessel perceiving how boisterous the Seas were, grew fearful and would
have returned: which Caesar perceiving, presently starts up saying; quid times?
Caesarem vebis. When all his forces were come together, he hasted to
Dirrachium with purpose to surprise it; thither also come Pompey to defend it:
their Camps now being somewhat near, many skirmishes happened; in one of
which, the valor of Scena was wondrous, Cuius in scuto centum atque
quadraginta tela sedere. Florus.
in whose shield was found sticking 140 darts. Nevertheless in the mean
space, some overtures of Peace were made by Caesar, but none would be granted
by the Pompeyans: For Labyenus cried out; Definite ergo de compositione loqui:
nam nobis nisi Caesaris capite relato, pax esse nulla potest. Whereupon Caesar
provoked his Adversaries to the battle, Caesar. Lib. 3. bellorum civilium.
but Pompey knowing Caesar's wants, and himself having the benefit of the Sea
to relieve his Army, chose rather to draw the War out in length; and to waste
his Adversary, without putting his own estate in hazard. But this liked not
his Associats, the Soldiers, blame lying idle, the confederates, cry out upon
delay; the great Lords tax him with ambition: so that contrary to his own
opinion, he is in a manner forced to give battle in the Champion field of
Philippi.

After that both the Generals had put their Armies in Array, Pompey gives these
admonitions to his Soldiers, Aperto Late^^
that when the right Wing of Caesar's battle drew near, they should assail it
on the Flancke, so might they chase the disordered Army being oppressed in the
rear, before themselves came to cast a dart in the face of the enemy, neither
is this thing very hard to be done (says he) cum tantum equitatu valeamus.

Caesar observing the order of his enemies Battles, doubted that his right Wing
might be oppressed with the multitude of the enemies horse; wherefore from his
3. Battle, he drew certain choice companies, which he opposed to the enemies
horse, showing them what he had appointed them to do, affirming that the
victory that day, depended upon the valor of these Cohorts. The signal of
Battle being given, in Caesar's Army, Crastinus (a man of tried valor one
that the year before had the leading of the Primipili in the tenth Legion) was
called forth to begin the fight. He forthwith encourages the appointed bands,
saying; Follow me you that have been my Maniples, perform that duty to your
Emperor that you have promised, there only remains this one Battle, which
finished, both he shall recover his dignity, and we our liberty. They looking
upon Caesar, he said; Fac^am hodie Imperator, ut aut vivo mihi, aut mortuo,
gracias agas; after which he marched against his enemies. The charge being
given, all Pompey's horse, according to his direction, passed from his left
wing, and and forced Caesar's Cavallery to quit the field, and then begun the
troops to set upon his battles in the Flancke: Which Caesar perceiving, he
made a sign to those selected Cohorts (which for that purpose, he had set
apart from the other squadrons) to charge upon the enemies Cavallery, which
they performed with such force and fury, striking them (according to Caesar's
directions) no where but in the face, Miles faciom feri. Flor.
which Pompey's horsemen unable to endure, turned head and fled to the
Mountains. Which service finished, with the like force and fury, these Cohorts
invaded the rear of Pompey's left Wing; also at the same time Caesar commanded
his three Battalia's to charge, which as yet had not moved, so that Pompey's
men, being now with fresh Companies charged, both in the front and rear, were
not able any longer to sustain the Battle, but all of them turned their
backs and fled. The victory being gotten in the Field, Caesar followed Pompey
to the Camp, which he easily took; and then Pompey fled for his life, first
to Larissa, from thence to the shore of the Aegean Sea, where finding a
Merchants ship, he sailed to Mitylene in the I^le of Lesbos, where remained his
Wife and family; from thence he sailed into Egypt, where he was murdered by
the sword of Septimius his fugitive, before the eyes of his Wife and Children.

This victory being gotten and Pompey slain, the war was not presently
ended, new troubles did arise in Africa: thither many principal Romans, which
had escaped from the battle of Pharsalia resorted: to wit, Publius Cornelius
Scipio, Marcus Petreius Afranius, Quintus Varus, Marcus Portius Cato, Labienus,
and Lucius Cornelius Faustus, son to Silla the Dictator: these had associated
to them Juba King of Mauritania, and altogether had raised a great Army:
whereof Scipio was made General, Cato having refused that honor.

Caesar hearing of their preparations, hastens into Italy, and from thence
waftes over into Africa, lands about Adrumentum, and from thence marches to
the City Leptis where he is received: and while he lies thereabout, Labienus
comes against him with his multitude, thinking to distress Caesar's small
numbers: Caesar perceiving his intents, Artificio magis quam viribus
decertandum* Hirtius debello Afr.
resolves to deal with him rather by cunning than force. And first, he
charge his men not to stir above four foot from their standards, which the
horsemen of Labienus perceiving, presently compassed them about, so that
Caesar's people were compelled to fight as it were in a circle: There, Labienus
shows himself unto them, having uncovered his face, saying withal to one
whom he saw most forward: Quid tumiles Tiro tam feroculus es?
Why are you so arrogant O you fresh water soldier? I much pity your hard
fortune, for sure I am, Caesar has brought you into eminent danger. To whom
the soldier replied: Non sum tiro Labiene, sed de Legione decima veteramus.
Hirtius.
I would thou should know Labienus, that I am no freshman, but an old
soldier of the tenth Legion: and forthwith he threw at him his dart, saying,
Decumanum militem, qui te petit, scito esse. Caesar in the mean while, seeing
himself encompassed, draws out his Army in length, and divides the circle in
the middle, excluding the one part from the other on both sides, charging with
his horsemen on the inner part of the circle, and with his footmen, their darts
being thrown, he puts them to flight.

Caesar after this Battle, perceiving the multitude of his enemies, sends for
more aid of men and victuals into Sicily, which were sent him: but diverse of
his Ships miscarried, and fell into the enemies hands, in one of which was a
Centurion with some old soldiers, and some newly taken up, all of them were
brought before the General Scipio, and to them thus he addressed his speech. I
know and am assured (Soldiers) that it is not of your own accord, that thus
wickedly you pursue and prosecute good men your fellow-Citizens, but rather
that you are forced thereunto by the command of that wicked Emperor of yours:
since therefore fortune has brought you within our power, if you will (as your
duty binds you) with other good men labor to defend the Commonweal, you
know that we will not only spare your lives, but also take you into our
protection and pay, wherefore answer us what you are minded to do: To this the
Centurion of the 14. Legion (having liberty to speak) answers: For thy great
good will, noble Scipio, I give thee hearty thanks, and happily I should make
use of thy proffered courtesy, if too great a wickedness were not coupled
therewith, wherefore know you that I will never bear arms against Caesar my
Emperor, from whom I have received my order, and for whose dignity and honor
I have fought more than 36. years: moreover, I would counsel you, noble
Scipio, to desist from thy enterprise, for if hitherto thou have had no
experience of him against whom thou do contend, yet now at last take him into
consideration: choose among all thy soldiers one whole Cohort, which thou
think to be most strong and valiantest, and I will take but ten of these my
fellow soldiers, which now are within thy power, and by our valor you shall
understand, what trust and confidence thou can have in thine own Troops.
Scipio was so enraged with this answer, that he slew the Centurion and all the
old soldiers immediately.

After this Caesar at Thapsus fought with Scipio and King Juba, and overthrew
them both in one day: ^rjussu Caesaris (...) ^anere ^aepit. Hirtius.
at which Battle one strange thing happened, the Trumpets sounded a charge,
through the soldiers forwardness, without the command of the General. The
overthrow began at Juba, whose Elephants not thoroughly manned to fight, being
but lately drawn out of the woods, at the sudden shrilnesse, disranked their
friends Army, Ante Imperium ducis sua sponte sgna cecinerunt. Flor.
and presently all fled. After this overthrow, Scipio and Cato slew themselves,
and Juba and Petreius after they had feasted themselves at a banquet, slew one
the other, this was the direful end of those brave Romans, and of this African
war.

But out of the embers of this war, Pro uno duos s^are Pompe^os. Flor.
sprang another in Spain more dangerous than the former, wherein Cneius and
Sextus the two sons of great Pompey were the Generals. They, having gathered
great forces amongst their friends in Spain, reduced the greatest part of that
Country under their obeisance: against them Caesar goes with his choicest
Legions, Sed nusquam atrocius nec tam ancipiti mart concursum est: Their last
and chiefest Battle was at Munda, wherein Cneius Pompeius fought with such
resolution, as that Caesar's squadrons began to give ground, and were ready to
forsake the field: what danger Caesar was then in, any man may know by his
demand: San^ and ipse Caesar ante actem mestor non ex more, and^.
Lucius Florus says, he was seen before the Army sadder than he used to be,
yea it is reported, that in that perturbation he consulted what he should do
with himself if the worst befell, and that his countenance was as one that
meant to make his own hands his own executioner. He was heard (say some) to
have uttered these words to his old soldiers: If ye be not ashamed, leave me,
and deliver me into the hands of these boys. In good time did Labienus
(Pompey's Lieutenant) send Caesar five Cohorts of horse cross the Battle, to
guard that which was in some danger: Caesar takes hold of this advantage, and
makes his soldiers believe they fled, and charge upon them as open flyers,
and did thereby both put fresh courage into his own soldiers, and also daunt
his enemies: for Caesar's men followed on boldly, thinking themselves to have
the upper hand, and the Pompeyans (supposing their fellows to run away) fell
themselves to running, what slaughter then was made amongst them, Faedum etiam
inter Barbaros. Flor.
may be conjectured by this: Caesar made a Rampire about Munda, by pyling up
bodies dragged together from all about, and fastened together with spears and
javelins. Caesar himself esteemed so much of this Battle, as that he used to
say many times: In other Battles he fought for victory and honor, but at Munda
he fought for his life. Cncius Pompeius after his defeat fled, but was
overtaken and slain: but Sextus, the younger brother, was reserved for another
war.

Caesar now being victor returned to Rome, where he makes himself perpetuus
Dictator, and had titles of honor given him by the State, as, Imperator, and
Pater patriae: now his accepting of these titles, and some other signs of
ambition, drew upon him both the envy of the people, and of some great Lords.

Hereupon, his death was conspired, by 70. of the principle men of Rome: his
friends misdoubting somewhat, advised that he should ever have a guard about
him, but he rejected their counsel, saying: Mori satius est semel, quam timore
semper torqueri: Neglecting this counsel, he was slain by the Conspirators in
the Senate House, and fell at the foot of the Base where Pompey's Image stood.
Sic ille qui terorem orbem civili sanguine implenerat, tandem ipse sanguine suo
curiam implevit.

Caesar being slain, Plut. in vita Ant^n.
new troubles arise about his death: the people which desired it before it was
effected, yet after hated the doers. Anthony and Lepidus instigated them
against the melefactors, so that for their safeguard they were glad to fly out
of the City, their houses being first burnt with brands which the people raked
out of Caesar's funeral fire. Caesar's old soldiers also had a mind to be
revenged of these Conspirators, Nec illis deerat animus adultionem, sed ducem
non habebant. Flor.
had they but had one to lead them on to take it. Wherefore, after that
Octavianus Caesar, Anthony, and Lepidus, were agreed upon the Triumvirate, they
called these old blades of Caesar's together, and with them Anthony and
Octavianus marched into the East against Brutus and Cassius, the chief of the
Conspirators, and fought with them twice in the field of Philippos, a City in
Macedonia: In the first Battle, the right wing which was led by Anthony,
overthrew the left wing of the other Army led by Cassius, but the right wing
of the other Army led by Brutus did as much for the left wing of his Army led
by Octavianus. Plut. in vita Anton.
Augustus being overthrown, secured himself in Anthonies Camp, but Cassius
contrariwise, not knowing how it fared with his companion, caused one Pindarus,
a slave that he had maintained and manumitted, to cut off his head. Brutus the
next day gathered up the scattered troops, but was loath to hazard battle any
more, for two reasons: first, because he knew his enemies were pinched with
want of victuals, and some other necessaries: secondly, because he saw the left
wing of his Army which had been overthrown under Cassius his conduct, to be
somewhat fearful. For these reasons, he desired to shun the second Battle,
but his people were too violent, and forced him in a manner to fight, and were
overthrown for their labor. After which overthrow, Brutus slew himself.

Now that the murderers of Caesar were overthrown, Non been cum sociis cegna
venusque manent. Ovid.
and their faction extinguished, one should have thought there should now have
succeeded a general peace, being there were but three men, Augustus, Anthony,
and Lepidus, to divide (in a manner) the third part of the world between them:
But, Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas impatibus consortis erat:
Lucan. lib. 1. Augustus and Lepidus, fell first at variance, about the Isle of
Sicily, after they had there overthrown Sextus Pompeius: In which debate,
Lepidus was not only stripped of Sicily, but also of Africa, and his
Triumvirate: yet because he submitted himself, Caesar spared his life, and
gave him the dignity of highest Priest.

Now were there but two to divide the worlds Empire between them, Anthony in
the East, and Augustus in the West, and these two sought each others ruins,
that himself might rule over all, so hateful is a companion in authority.
Both of them had their pretenses for their quarrel: Caesar sororem videns;
pell^is amore esse rerectam saep^us accusavi^. Plut. in vit. Anton.
Augustus objected against Anthony, that for the love of Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt, a light woman, he had left his own wife Octavia, a virtuous Lady, and
Augustus sister. Anthony objected against Augustus, that he had deprived Sextus
Pompeius of Sicily, and Lepidus of Africa, and held them both unjustly, without
imparting to him any share at all of them, and that he had also divided the
lands of Italy amongst his own soldiers, and never had any consideration of
those that were his. Romanum imperium petit mulier Aegyptia and promisit,
Anthon. quasi facilior esset Partho Romanus. Florus.
Besides, Lucius Florus says, that Cleopatra desired of Anthony the Empire of
Rome, and he as rashly promised it to her, as if the Romans had been more
easy to be conquered than the Parthians. Both of them in this quarrel,
resolved to try their fortunes in a Sea-battell, leaving their landforces
which they had prepared, the one with Taurus, the other with Canidius, and this
was effected by the power Cleopatra had with Anthony, Cleopatrae voluntas plus
potuit. Plut.
contrary to the advice of Canidius his Lieutenant General, and other of his
Council of War. Both of them taking the Seas, they came to grapple one with
the other, within the sight of their Land-Armies at Actium, a Promontory in
Epyre. Anthony's ships, by reason of their greatness, were very slow and
unweldie, but Caesar's were yaire and nimble for all kinds of service, whether
to charge, recharge, or levere about: so that three or four of Caesar's, could
at once set upon one of Anthony's, and ply them with Darts, Prowes, and
castings of fire on all sides, Prima dux ^ug^ Regin^. Florus.
with which they scattered them at pleasure. The first that fied was the
Queen, and herein she was to be pardoned, doing ^ut her kind: But (oh the
mischief) with her she carried Anthony's heart and courage away, who all his
lifetime had been a valiant Captain, but now is mollified by a woman: She
being fled, he forgets his Armies both by Sea and Land, and makes a maine after
her, and Caesar as fast after them both, but with a conquering mind; in
Alexandria he besieged them: During the siege, he corrupted Anthonies
Sea-forces, so that they came over to his part, which Anthony understanding,
supposed himself betrayed by the Queen* this suspicion of his, puts her into
a fear of his fury; this fear of hers, separateth her from his company, and
being separate, she causes to be given out that she had slain her self; Ad
motis ad venas serpentibus quasi somn^ (...). Flor.
which Anthony no sooner heard but believed (oh wicked belief!) in which he
slew himself: and being dead, Cleopatra would not live without him, but
clapping Serpents to her breasts, she dyed in a slumber.

This War being thus finished, Augustus had none to oppose him. wherefore he
commanded the Temple of Janus to be shut up, which had happened so to be, but
twice only, since the building of Rome, till that very time. But this peace
lasted not long, it was first disturbed by the Celtiberian War; and next by
the Germane: where the Romans, through the security and neglect of Quintillius
Varrus, lost three Legions, and two Standards with the Imperial Eagles. But oh
the cruelty that these Barbarians showed after their victory, especially
against men of Law; plucking out the eyes of some, and lopping off the hands of
others: one had his mouth stitched up, after his tongue was cut out; Lucius
Florus.
which the Savage grasping in his hand, said to it: Tandem vipera sibilare
desiste.

These, and many more wars since these, has this fourth Monarch of the
Romans endured, with which it is now so wasted, as that the Empire is at this
day confined within the limits of Germany as we see; which once spread it self
over the face of the earth. But I will say no more: I hope, by this that is
past, any one may see that none of the four great Monarchies of the world, how
strong and settled soever, could perpetuate peace to themselves; and therefore
much less can it be hoped, that this little Island of ours, or any other
Kingdom, can preserve it self for ever from the danger of War. Wherefore, I
will now proceed to the second part of the Proposition. It is good in time of
Peace, to provide for War.

HOW TO PROVIDE IN PEACE FOR WAR. SECT. II.
CHAP. VI.
It is good in time of Peace, to provide for War.
HE that will go to Sea, must beforehand provide himself of Biscuit; and that
Kingdom that cannot avoid War, Non minus in secundis adversa, quam in
adver^s secunda ^^^tanda sunt. Just l. 31.
must before hand be provided of means to withstand it: for nothing can be
more unseasonable, than to be about provision, at such time as we should be in
action. A wise State (like Haniball) will in prosperity provide for
adversity, Cane ne Clip^um post vulnera sumas.
as well as in adversity, hope for prosperity; if they do otherwise,
peradventure they may have their heads broken, before they betake themselves to
their bucklers: As may appear, by the example of Katherine Queen of Navarre,
and John of Albert her Husband; whose want of timely preparatio, gave occasion
to Ferdinand the Catholic King, not only to invade their Kingdom, but also
after invasion, easily to subdue it. Had this Queen and her husband, been in
time provided, Ferdinand would either have desisted from enterprising any thing
against them, or else he would have capitulated with them concerning a peace,
in which they might have had the better conditions, being provided for war:
Pacem sub Clipeo parate. Salust.
for the best treating for peace, is with the sword in hand. Or if he would
have been so hardy, as to have given them battle, they being provided, sure
might have expected far better success than they found: but they were found
unfurnished, and that was the loss of their Kingdom. And the same, may be the
loss of any other. For how hard and difficult will it be, for any Nation, to
resist an Enemy invading, Inopinata magis premiunt male. Seneca.
if they prevent not his arrival by their provisions. People are discouraged,
by the suddenness of danger, and rather study how by flight to shift for
their particular safety, than by making head, to preserve their Country from
the Enemy.

But, if any be so virtuously minded as to make resistance, how difficult will
it be for them to draw together, in such a Kingdom as ours, where we have no
fortified Towns, to hold the enemy play? The enemy shall no sooner hear of
any assembly, but presently he will be upon them with his horse, to sever them
before they can be able to make head against him: unless they willl fly to
the utmost limits of the Kingdom, there to make up an Army in haste; suffering
in the mean time, the Enemy to enrich himself with the spoil of the
Country; and when such an Army is composed, what good can be expected from it,
seeing it must needs consist of raw, and untrained people, hastily gathered
together, and altogether unskilful in the use of Arms? When Caesar came
against Pompey the Great into Italy, Pompey and the Senate, being unable to
make resistance for want of timely provision; they were glad to forsake, not
only the other parts of Italy, but Rome it self, and fly into Greece, before
they could draw any competent numbers together, to give the Enemy Battle. Let
Pompeys carelessness be condemned, and let wi^e Estates imitate Augustus
Caesar; who at the first brute of Anthonies stirring, Ad priv^am novorum (...).
Caesar (...). l. 4. c. 1^
provided himself, and crossed over from brundu^um, to give War the meeting;
thinking it more safe so to do, than to receive it within the limits and
borders of his own Italy: By these precedent relations, I hope any man may
see; That it is good in time of Peace, to provide for War.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Things necessarily to be provided; And first of Victuals.
THe things especially to be provided; are Victnals, Weapons, Money, Ships, 1
Ma^ch. 8. 16.
and Men: all of them needful for the maintenance of War, Ne ^ut Romanae
dit^o^ is ^um Judais bellum gerere li^^at, nequ^ prabere hostibus eorum,
trit^cum aut n^vis, aut pecuntam. Joseph. An^iq. l. 12. c. 18.
and such as if they be not provided in time of Peace, can hardly be procured,
the war being begun. And first for Victuals; so needful they are, as that
without them no Army can be maintained, neither by Sea nor Land, nor any Town
(how strong soever) without them can be defended. This want of victuals was the
^os^e of Jerusalem, of San^erra, of Paris, and lately Rochel, to the French
King. Stowes Annals in vita Elizabeth.
The like want of victuals and other necessaries, hindered our Navy in 88. so
that it could follow the Spaniards no further; whereby we lost a fair
advantage that God had given us, of destroying that whole Fleet. If in the
Field an Army be pinched with want, it must starve or fight, be the
disadvantage never so great; whereas that Army that is well provided, can fight
when it sees advantage, and can forbear till it have got it. And by this
means alone, would Pompey have beaten Caesar out of Greece in despite of him,
Lucius Florus l. 4. c. 2.
had not the Senate (in a manner against his will) forced him to fight in the
field of Philippi. It is requisite therefore for a Prince when he is to use his
forces either by Sea or Land, to appoint, not only experienced, but also
faithful mento be his Stewards, to make his provisions for his Armies; such as
will faithfully lay out his Treasure, according as the affairs in hand
require, and not imbeazell them in riotous courses, nor hoord them up for their
own private gain.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the preparation of Armor and Weapons,
Look how necessary Victuals be for the maintenance of a Soldiers life;
Plurimum adterrem hostium, splendour ^orf^rt, a^ competens armorum aparatus
plurimum facit (...) recessitatem. Po^lybiis hist. l. 11.
so needful is Armor for the defense of it: Nature has furnished us ^ut with
a thin and weak defense, against either shot of Musket, Armanon Supellectilem
decar^esse. Salust bello Jugurth.
or push of Pike. Herein must be a supply of Natures defect; good Armor and
Weapons must be provided, else we can neither defend our selves, Studium illud
vestimentis sese ornand^ mulieris esse, idque non admodum pudicae, armorum vero
sumptum and serium studium bonor^m, virorum qui and se and patrem serv^r^
cupiant, Polyb. l. 11.
nor offend our foes; as may appear by the ancient Britains, whose naked
valor (though as great as might be) could not gainestand, much less offend,
the Roman Arms. Wherefore, it were to be wished that all men, especially
those who have the name of Soldiers, would transfer the care of apparel,
which so much troubles this age of ours, unto the study of Arms, and
provision of Armor; and that their former negligence of Armor, might be
transferred to apparel; for so should they both provide for their own
particular safety, and for the general safety of the Kingdom. But because
some private men will be negligent this way, whatsoever be said to the
contrary; it were requisite therefore, that those that have the oversight of
the Musters, should be careful to see all Companies full; and be more
diligent, to certify the defects in Arms, to them that have power to punish;
and that they would have regard, that all Muskets be of one bore, and not of
several, as now they are; from whence a great confusion would arise in time of
need, if it be not amended: (which must be by some strict order taken with the
Gun-makers, that the Kingdom be not so abused.) Also they must have regard
that when a Trayning is done in one place, Armor be not borrowed to show in
another; for such errors as these, may be very prejudicial to a Kingdom in
time of danger: There must be care had also that the enemy have no odds or
advantage of us in weapons, whether Musket or Pike, if we look for good
success in the War; for odds in this kind, will carry a victory both
against valor and number; as appeared in the Wars between Pope Alexander
the sixth, Guiccardi^e.
and the Orsini, where Vitellozze having provided his soldiers of Pikes two
foot longer than ordinary, carried away the victory from the Ecclesiasticke
soldiers, who had the odds of him, both in courage and number.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Provision of Money.
IT suffices not to the strength of the Arms, Quemadmodum homines sine nervis
ambulare ne^^^unt, ita nec bellum of ^ua^ progredi sine p^cu^a. Lips. pol. l. 5.
to have flesh, blood, and bones, unless they have also sinews, to stretch
out and pull in, for defense of the body; so it suffices not in an Army to
have Victuals, for the maintenance of it; Armor and Weapons for the defense of
it; unless it have Money also, the sinews of War; which above all things
bears sway with the common soldier, and causes him to venture upon any
danger, which oftentimes for want of pay he will refuse. Viget. l. ^
Wherefore Vegetius gives this advice; Antequam inchoetur bellum, de copus
expensisque solicitus debet esse tractatus: I do marvel not that she is
called Regina pecunia; seeing that all men yield obeisance to her, she it is
that traineth the soldiers to the Wars, who otherwise would sleep quietly
at home. The Bayliffe of Diion sent by the French King into Swisserland to hire
soldiers, could train none along with him, Guiccardine. (...) pretium nunc
est, dat (...) honores, cersus amic^^a^. Ovid.
because his Masters coffers were known to be empty: but so soon as the Kings
Exchequer was well filled with the money which he had of the Florentines, for
the restitution of Pisa and other cautionary Towns, the Swissers came down to
his aid, in greater numbers than he required. So when Rezin and Pekah Kings of
Syria and Israel, 2 King. 16. 8.
made war upon Ahaz King of Judah; he with a present of Silver and Gold,
easily drew Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria, to his aid and succor. Imperat
aut servit collecta (...). Horat Sermon.


It is likewise Money and pay, that keeps the Army in good order, and makes it
strictly to observe discipline, the preserver of all; Pay is the poor
soldiers Aqua vitae, Dis^iplinam non (...) servare (...). Cassi^dor.
which makes him comfortably undergo the hardest command; but want of it is
such an Aqua fortis, as eats through the iron doors of Discipline, and
causes whole Armies to rush into disorders: and ever when they are commanded
upon any Servi^e, their usual fashion, is to demand their Pay, and refuse the
employment.

Furthermore, Money is of such force, as that it will not only prevent an
Enemies invasion, Salustius in bello Jugurthino.
but also beat him back, and cause him speedily to retire; when as Arms are
no way able to do it: As may appear by the example of Jugurth; who having
sorely incensed the Romans by the slaughter of Hiempsall, yet nevertheless
prevailed so far upon them with his money, Haec fuit de nobis ejus prima
victoria ^lorus.
as that he drew, even the Senate, to take his part against Adherball his
accuser. Afterward, this same Jugurth was so hardy, as to cashiere Adherball
out of that part of Numidia, which the Romans had estated him in; then was
War decreed in the Senate, and Calpurnius Bestia the Consul, Rex peritus
fortius adversus Romanos aurum esse, quam ferrum pacem (...). Florus.
sent into Numidia against him; but the crafty King, knowing that Gold could
do more against the Romans than steel, bought his peace. Now being assured,
that all things for money, were to be bought and sold at Rome; he slew even
within the walls of the City, Massina grandchild to Massinissa his Competitor
in the Kingdom. Now had the Romans a third cause of war against him, which
was likewise decreed; and the managing of it was committed to Albinus: but (oh
the shame) Jugurth so bribed this Army also, that it voluntarily gave away,
and suffered him to take from them, Salust in bello. Jugurth.
both the Victory and their Camp withal. Neither could the Romans ever have
any hope to withstand the force of Jugurths money, until M^tellus came to
deal with him, of whom they expected very much; especially, Quod adversus
divitias invictum animum gerebat.

The like example, Phil. de Com l. 4.
Philip de Comines reports of our Edward the fourth; who by the solicitation
of the Duke of Burgundy, passed into France, with greater forces than any of
his Predecessors had ever done; and yet this valourous Prince, who had been
Conqueror in nine several Battles before, suffered the victory at this time
to be taken from him, with the payment of 72000. Crowns: as Lewis of
Brettailles, one of King Edwards servants, affirmed to Philip Commines; for
which we were derided by the French, as we well deserved. To conclude, money
is of such matchless force, as nothing almost but a free and liberal mind
(which few men have) can withstand it; there is no bait to the golden hook,
nor weapon to the silver spear, nor Fort, be it never so strong, that can hold
out against the Mulet charged with Treasure; Vrbem venalem and mature
perituram, si emptorem munerit. Salust. Bello Jugurth.
It was the opinion of Jugurth (as Salust reports) that Rome it self, even
then when she was at her highest pitch, was vendible; and would quickly come to
ruin, had she but had a Chapman, that would bid fair for her: Wherefore
seeing that money is such a real advantage in the Wars, we may conclude;
that whosoever prepares for War, must first be provided of Money, the
Sinews thereof.

CHAP. X.
Of the provision of Shipping.
SHipping is so necessary in Maritine Countries, especially in Island* (as
this Kingdom is) who on all sides, coast it upon the Sea; as that no War,
neither offensive nor defensive, can be well managed without it. If we be on
the offensive part, our forces cannot be transported without Shipping; and if
we be on the defensive part, we cannot well keep out an enemy without the
same. For though the Enemy may make his approaches in one place, and endeavor
to land there, yet then will the strength of the Island be drawn thither to
impeach his landing; which the Enemy perceiving, can easily put out to Sea
again, and by next day be in another part of the Country, where he may gain
landing peradventure, with less hazard: But suppose resistance be made there
also, yet can he by putting to Sea again, find out a third, fourth, or fifth
place, as convenient for his landing as either of the former; and I am sure we
cannot have an Army in every Harbor to impeach him, much less can we with
one Army so speedily follow him, as to prevent his gaining the shore; because
he can sail farther in one night, than we can march in diverse days, and if he
has gained our shore, he can either sufficiently entrench himself, before we
can possible come to impeach him; or he can pillage and waste the Country, and
be gone again to another part of the Island, when he perceives the approach of
our Land forces; and there also do according to his own discretion.

An example hereof we have in our own Chronicles; Stowes Annals in vita Edmund.
Canutus the Dane, entering the Thames with a mighty Navy, besieged the City
of London; but being unable to prevail there, he re-imbarkes his men, and
sails into the West of England; where at his pleasure, he landed them again
in Dorcetshire; there Edmond, surnamed Iron-side, after a long and tedious
march met with him; which Canutus perceiveing, ships his men again, and
enters the Severne; causing Edmund to beat upon the hoof, to relieve
Worcestershire; which the Dane had much pillaged. No sooner was Edmund arrived
there, but Canutus re-imbarked again, and came for London; after him speeds
Edmund: and then the Danes repair to their ships, and so returned for the
Western parts. Thus they tired Edmund and his whole Army, with continual
marches; ever wasting the Country, before resistance could be made.

The like example, we have in Maurice Earl of Nassaw, who in the year 1590.
shipped his forces, with forty Canons, pretending for Gertrudenberg; and to
make the Enemy believe so, he sailed up the River so far as Breda; the
Enemy presently thrust into Gertrudenberg, such men and provision as was fit
for resistance; which the Grave understanding, changed his course and sailed up
the Rhine, and thence into the River Yssell; and so fell down the stream
before Zutphen, which he surprised, before the Archduke (who was 80. miles
from thence) could come with his succors; when the Archduke approached, the
Count retyres to his ships; and changing his course, arrives before Hulst in
Brabant, which he surprised, ere the Spaniards well understood where he was;
when the Archduke approached near Hulst, Prince Maurice returns to his
Navy, and presents it before Nimmegem, in the Confines of Guilders, which he
also surprised before the tired Spaniard could come with his forces.

By this I hope, Atheniensibus Delphios Oraeulorum consolentibus, responsum
fuerat, salutem Mu^is ^gn^is tucrentur, id est, Navibus. Justin. l. 2.
you may see; how difficult it is for Islanders, and Maritine Countries,
without Shipping, to make resistance against an invading Enemy; wherefore
Mariners and Shipping, must be maintained by us that are Islanders; else can
we not long abide in safety; and so I will conclude with Saint Paul's speech,
Acts 27. 31. Unless the Mariners abide in the Ship, ye cannot be safe.

CHAP. XI.
Of the provision of Soldiers, and Landforces.
AS it is needful for Islanders and Maritine Countries, to maintain Shipping
and Mariners; So is it as needful for them to maintain Soldiers and
Landforces; which though they be the last refuge, yet are they the safest and
strongest defense, and must wholly be relied on: For it is possible that the
enemy may overpower us at Sea, or he may by help of Winds and Mistes, or
other advantages that may be gotten, gain footing on our shore, though we
have a more potent Navy than he on the Seas; and how shall we deal with them
on land if we maintain not our Landforces and Martial discipline? for which
this Island has been very famous in times past; Should we suffer our
soldiery and the Art of War to decay amongst us, ten thousand of the Enemies
well trained, would foil forty thousand of ours, that are not flesht, nor know
the use of their arms, were they never so valiant; For Valor in the wars
without skill, avails but little: As may appear by the example of Alexander
the Great; who with no more than 40. thousand well-trained soldiers
(Macedonians) in the fields of Adrastia, overthrew six hundred thousand
Persians, that were unskilful in the use of their Arms.

I would to God that notice might be taken hereof, and that greater care might
be had of our Trainings than is; that they might no longer be used as matters
of disport, and things of no moment; but as needful for the training up of
soldiers, and enabling of men for the Wars, against times of danger and
hostility; so should our Prince and his Kingdoms, receive both honor and
security: But as Trainings are now used, we shall I am sure, never be able to
make one good soldier; for our custom and use is now adays, to cause our
Companies to meet on a certain day, and by that time the Arms be all viewed,
the Muster-master has had his pay (which is the chiefest thing many times he
looks after) it draws toward dinner time; and indeed Officers love their
bellies so well, as that they are loath to take too much pains about
disciplining of their soldiers. Wherefore, after a little careless hurrying
over of the Postures, with which the Companies are nothing bettered, they make
them charge their Muskets, and so prepare to give the Captain a brave volley
of shot at his entrance into his Inn; where having solaced themselves a while
after this brave service, every man repaires home; and that which is not well
taught them (oh the shame) is easily forgotten before the next Training.
Whereas, if we trained but twice in the year, and at each time kept the
Companies together, but three or four days at the most; they would be better
acquainted with their Arms and the use of them: so often practicing of them at
one time, would make them remember what is showed, better than seven years
practice as now we go to work.

But, peradventure some will think, that to keep soldiers so long together
at once, would damnifie the Country, by reason of neglect of husbandry: But as
far as I conceive, it would rather be beneficial to the Country; for now
every Month in the Summer, they lose a day by reason of the Training, and the
greater part of the Soldiers use to fall a drinking after the Training, and
happily lose the next day also; and so in the Months of June, July, and
August, which are busy times for Hay, and Harvest, they lose three days or
more; which is more damage to them, than eight days in May and September, for
these are the two times in the year, wherein husbandmen have more leisure,
than in any other of the Summer-Moneths; in May, because all their seed is then
in the ground, and no Hay nor Corn ready; in the latter end of September,
because Harvest and Hop-time, for the most part is over, and wheat-seed not
fully come; wherefore I think, with less damage, they might spare four days
together in May, and so many also in September, than to spare in every of the
Summer months but one.

We have other inconveniences also which attend our Trainings, and hinders our
breeding of Soldiers; for we appoint our meetings, commonly near some great
Town, as indeed it is meet for the relief of the Companies, but this
inconvenience follows thereon: when we are in the Field, many of our
soldiers (so regardlesse are they of the Service) slip away, and are in the
Innes and Tavernes tippling, when they should be exercising in the field. And
this is another cause, why diverse of them are so ignorant in the use of their
Arms; hereby also they get an ill habit of drinking, which is the disgrace of
our Nation and the loss of many of our soldiers, at such times as they are
employed in foreign service: As appeared in the taking of the Groyn, Stowes
Annals in vita Elizabeth.
where by immoderate drinking, many of the soldiers became senseless and
unserviceable, being altogether careless both of their proper healthes,
present danger, and employment. By this inordinate drinking, the Plague was
bred among them; and (which is worse) the sword of the Enemy might have cut
them off; Priusquam Scythae ebrietate, quam Bello vincuntur. Just* lib. 1.
had not the General, for redress hereof, caused the head of all
Wine-vessels, to be stricken out: according to a former president (upon the
like occasion) in the conquest of S. Dominigo Jago* etc. For prevention of
which abuse, the Captains must either have more power to punish, or if they
have power enough already, they must better put it in practice upon such
malefactors, or we shall never be able to make them Soldiers.

Secondly, we admit into our trained Bands, without judgment or discretion,
any that are offered, how unlikely, or incapable soever they be of the Art
military; yea, which is worse, we suffer them almost every Training to alter
their men, and put in new ones, and how is it possible, with our best skill and
pains, to make such men soldiers? Mercuries Image is not to be made of every
wood, nor every dull heavy fellow, to be made a Mars or man of War; care
must be had to correct this abuse also, if we will have able soldiers to
oppose against an enemy. We must therefore herein imitate the worthy Citizens
of London, Stowes Annals in vita Elizabeth.
who in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, chose out of their several Companies,
three thousand of the most likely and active persons, whom they appointed to be
Pikemen and shot: These that we admit into our trained Bands, must be likely
and active; for every one that will be a soldier, must have these two
qualities in him; Likelinesse, and Ingenuitie to conceive the use of his Arms,
and then Activitie and Ability of body, to put it in practice.

Thirdly, some be admitted for their wealths sake, into Captaineships, which
neither have courage, skill, nor delight in Arms themselves, nor discretion to
command others; but I hope of these not many, yet if any, it is too many; for
how can we hope to make our people soldiers, when they be under blind and
ignorant guides; Matthew. 15. 14.
If the Blind lead the Blind, the issue (as our Savior says) will be; Ambo
in foveam cadunt: We will not commit the teaching of our children to a Dunse,
and what reason is there we should commit the leading of our soldiers to such
a one? wherefore this must be remedied also, and I suppose it may easily be
done by the honorable care of the Lord Lieutenant in every County: Had we but
all these abuses well corrected, me thinks we might make our English trained
Bands, parallel the best soldiers in Europe.

Now because in times of danger, it is requisite that the trained soldiers
should be drawn to the Coasts to resist the Enemies landing; it were fit that
men should provide themselves of double Armor, that we might also have an Army
of the best men of the Kingdom, to guard the heart of the Land; and to keep
under disaffected persons, if any such be; which Army as occasion served,
might give succor to the Trained Soldiers, Stow in regno Haroldi.
in case they should be in any danger; for it is not safe to hazard all upon
the fortune and success of one Battle; as King Harold did (contrary to the
advice of his brother Girthe) by means of which he was defeated, his people
disheartened, his Enemy Duke William animated; and finally, thereupon followed
his own and all his subjects confusion: For upon his enemies marching forward
after the Battle, every man for his own particular safety, reconciled
himself to the Conqueror; whereas, if there had been an Army in the heart of
the Land, to have seconded the other, it would both have bridled the Enemy,
succored the distressed Army, and have kept the Natives from revolting.

For the better composing of such an Army, in the heart of the Land; it were
well also if all our great Cities and Towns, would imitate the famous Cities
of London, and Westminster: which have instituted the two Artillery yards, for
the training up of their ablest Citizens, in the use of their Arms; from
whence not only good soldiers, but also many good Leaders and Officers might
be drawn, for the conduction of our forces in the heart of the Kingdom.

Furthermore, whereas diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen keep proper men to attend
them; if they would but take care to have such Servants well instructed in the
use of their Arms, both on Horseback and Foot, what exceeding profit and
honor might redound to his Majesty, and his Kingdoms, if he should have any
sudden employments? And those Servants thus souldier-like qualified, were as
easily maintained and kept, and as fit for any other service, as those brave
swaggering fellows; who had rather be like Sardanapalus among light women,
than among Troops of armed soldiers: And truly such Noblemen and Gentlemen
their be in diverse places, who to do their Prince Service, are at great
charges to keep diverse good and well ridden Horses, and diverse Gentlemen with
good furniture, to serve both on Foot and Horseback.

Besides if every private man, whether in the City or in the Country, which
keeps Coaches for their own ease and reputation, would but have furniture for
the riding and managing of such Horses, what an increase of strength would this
be in sudden danger?

Lastly, whereas diverse Gentlemen of the lower rank, and rich Yeomen, keep
very good Teames of Horses for their private use; if such would but have
furniture for one of their principle Horses, which when they had leisure, they
might ride and manage for their recreation; this would make his Majesty, if
occasion served, equal if not superior in Horse, to any Prince in Europe;
neither would it be any great charge to any man, only the purchase of the
furniture, and arms, which once gotten, would last to Generations.

We would easily be persuaded to these things, Publica privatis ante ferenda
bonis.
had we but as great a care for the general safety of the Kingdom, as we have
for our own particular security: which of us in there, that is not at great
cost and charges, for provision of strong Gates, doors, and locks, without;
and of strong Closets and Chests within, for the preservation of our own
private wealth and substance; but what will this private care avail us, if we
be negligent of the general safety of the Kingdom? Should we by our
senseless security suffer an Enemy to pick the locks that are to keep him
out of the Realm; What good would all our private Gates, Doors, Locks,
Closets, and Chests do us, for the preservation either of our Estates or
Lives? Wherefore, let us be persuaded rather to respect the common good in
keeping out an Enemy, by provision of Arms, and able soldiers, than in
looking to our own private honor and security, by building our houses strong
and stately.

But some peradventure will think, this provision of landforces, is
altogether needless; because no Enemy can make war upon us, we living in an
Island; but upon very difficult terms: First, in regard of our dangerous Seas
and Harbors. Secondly, in regard of our Navy and shipping; which upon
intelligence, will be fitted to entertain them. Thirdly, in regard of our
strong Castles, and Blockhouses; which will be able to impeach their landing.
As for our Seas and Harbors, true it is they are dangerous, Histori^ Natural.
l. ^ c. ^7.
in regard of their high Tides; which flow (as Pliny says) 80. Cubits in
height: yet for all this, our own, and Neighbors shipping, (having good
Pilots) daily frequent them without damage or danger: and doubtless, what
Enemy soever assaulteth us, will store himself with Pilots, which knows our
Seas and Harbors as well as our selves; as may appear by the practice of the
King of Spain, in the year 1588. Wherefore, we may not be too secure, upon
conceit of our dangerous Seas and Harbors.

Secondly, for our shipping; true it is, if we have sure intelligence, we
should be provided: and doubtless, would quell an enemy that should dare to
approach them: But the Enemy to blind our intelligence, may carry his designs
in the Clouds, by making his preparation in diverse parts and Ports of his
Kingdom; as if they were to be sent to sundry places, and about sundry
employments; and yet all these several Heets, after some time beating on the
Seas, may meet and join; cutting a speedy passage through the waters to
accomplish their designs. By such courses as these, our intelligence may be
deceived, and so our Ships unfurnished. Yet suppose we have sure knowledge of
the enemies purpose, and have our Navy in readiness, yet are there 32. points
in the Compass to sail by, and our Island the Center; in one of these 32.
points, must our Navy await the approaches of the Enemy; and he to eschew
their opposition, and gain our shore, may sail by 20. other. Yea, though he
sail upon the same point whereon our Ships do lie, yet may he without
discovery escape them, by the help of a Mist or night. Or suppose our ships
discover and fight with them, yet we know victory in every fight is doubtful;
because no understanding Enemy will put out to Sea, but with such a Fleet, as
he thinks is proportionable to his adversaries, whom he assayleth. Therefore,
you see we must not rely upon our shipping.

Neither may we rely too much upon our Block-houses and Forts, for the sure
keeping out of an Enemy; for they are not very many: I am sure we have them not
upon every Harbor where the Enemy may land; and those we have, are not very
strong, not answerable to those Forts beyond the Seas. But though they were,
yet experience teaches us that upon swift currents they are of little use; for
in such streams, if a Navy have but a merry Wind and Tide, a hundred sail
may pass by one of them, without having much damage; as was seen in the three
years siege of Ostend, Grimston.
where the Archduke had planted two Batteries, one on the West, and the other
on the East side of the Haven* yet the ships every day passed too and fro
from the Town, and scarce one vessel touched, when 70. shot had been made at
a Fleet; and in the whole three years siege, scant 50. Vessels were sunk,
when thousands passed too and again, every year.

Likewise, in Queen Elizabeth's time, the King of Denmark threatened to stop
our Eastland Fleet at the Sound; Sir Walter Raleigh.
yet they passed by his Castles, having one of the Queens ships called the
Minion, to lead them, and received no hurt; this so provoked the King, that he
made the best provision he possible could, to sink them at their return; but
the Queens ship led the way back again, and did not only pass in safety,
but beat down part of the Fort of Elsenore.

So in the siedge of Antwerp the Duke of Alva so planted his Ordnance, that it
was thought to be impossible for a Boat to pass them; yet the Zealanders
having fair Wind and Tide, passed by daily without damage. Wherefore, you see
notwithstanding all these colorable objections, Landforces must be provided,
if we will be in safety.

Now Landforces being (as is afore-sayd) provided: Mr. Edmunds in his
observations upon Caesar's Commentaries, would have them thus ordered; Those
that are appointed for the guard of the Coasts, he would have divided into
three divisions; viz, a Body, and two Wings; the Body to double the strength of
the Wings, and to be quartered in this manner: the Body to attend the principle
place supposed for the Enemies landing, the two Wings to lie upon some other
Haven, where also is danger of landing, being about ten miles distant on either
hand of the Body. If the Enemy shall assail either of the Wings, the Body
being quartered between them both, easily moves to either of their aids. Or
if he assault the Body, they from either side being alike distant; as easily
moves to its succor; and so doing, they may hold an Enemy play, till the
forces of the Country comes down. But in regard the Land is spacious and wide,
it were well that soldiers should learn to ride on Horseback with their
complete Arms, for so might they move further (if a sudden Alarm should ^e
given) in one day, than on foot they can march in two. These are of great use
in Germany, where they want Vessels for the speedy conveying of their men,
which they call Dragons, which both on horseback and on foot do very good
service; and here might they be brought in use as well as there, we being as
well furnished with swift highway Nagges, as any Nation in Europe.

And for further indangering of an Enemy, if there were good notice taken
throughout all the Coasts of the Land, of those Marks which serves for the
direction of Ships to recover their wished Harbor; these in time of danger
being removed (unknown to the Enemy) might bring him in very great hazard of
our dangerous Rocks and Sands; and in regard our Seacoasts are so large, and
our Harbors so many, as that in every one of them we cannot have an Army to
defend it, it were well that in places of advantage (such as winding waters be,
which are commonly slow, and where at every turn they cannot have the help of
the Wind) some more Forts were built; in such places they would endanger an
Enemy, if he should dare to approach them; how ever they would secure the
Coasts from rifling and robbing by Pirates, as often they be in times of
Hostility.

THE MANNER OF FORTIFICATION. SECT. III.
CHAP. XII.
The Abridgement of Geometry, so far as belongs to the Art of Fortification.
BEfore we can enter into this discourse of Fortification, we must first take a
Survey of the Abridgement of Geometry; so far as is necessary to be used
in this Art: Wherefore to begin with the first Proposition.

Proposition, 1.
To divide a Line equally in the midst as A B, you must make two Arches C D,
placing your compasses at the extremes A and B, closing them more than half
of the Line; your Arches being made, draw your line of Intersection from C to
D, and this line shall equally divide in two parts the line A B.

Proposition, 2.
To draw a perpendiculer upon a line (viz.) a line that falls in such sort
upon another, that it makes two equal Angles; neither inclining to one side
nor the other, so that it falls plumb as the line A B, upon the which you must
raise a perpendiculer; you must demean your Compasses as in the first
Proposition: and the line C D shall be the perpendiculer; so that it falls
right upon the line A B, making two equal Angles.

Proposition, 3.
A point given upon a line, let fall a perpendiculer; as the point given is C,
upon the line A B, you must place your Compass in the point C, and draw the
Arch D E, then place your Compass again in F, and make the Arch H, and
likewise in G, making the Arch I: lastly, draw from the point C, which shall
answer to the point K.

Proposition, 4.
To draw a perpendiculer at the end of a line, viz. at the point A place your
Compasses; making the Arch C and D: then place your Compasses in C, making the
Arch E; and at the point E, draw the Arch F G: Lastly, from the point G, make
the Arch H, then draw the line I A, and that shall be the perpendiculer upon
the end of the line B A, at the point A.

Proposition, 5.
To make a line parallel by another (viz.) of equidistance; so that if they be
drawn never so long, they shall never touch nor cross one the other; let
there be a line drawn as A B, above the which, there must be a Parallel made:
to perform this, place your Compasses in A, making your Arch: E D, place them
likewis^ in B, making the Arch F G: Lastly, you must draw the line I K, which
must touch the ends of the two Arches; and those lines shall be parallel or
equidistant.

Proposition, 6.
To make one Angle equal to another, as the Angle A B C, of the which we
desire to make one equal: First, draw the line D E, then place the point of
your Compasses is B, making the Arch F G. Likewise, draw another Arch in the
point D. Lastly, take the distance F G, and put it from H to I, drawing the
line D K, which shall pass by the point I, and you shall find the angle K D
E, equal to A B C.

Proposition, 7.
To make a square of a line given; as the line A B, we must draw the
perpendiculers at each end of the same length, the square will have then four
right Angles, and the sides equal.



Proposition, 8.
To make a Paralellagram (viz.) a long square having both the sides equally
opposite; and four right Angles: this is effected by the same rule the Square
is made.



There are three sorts of Angles (viz.) a right Angle, as when a Line falls
perpendicularly upon another; as,

The pointed Angle is more sharp than the right, and is called Acute; as,

The Angle Obtuse, is more open than the right Angle; as,

Likewise the Triangles, are discerned by their Angles, when they have one
Angle right; they are named as this Figure demonstrates.

When they have their three Angles pointed, they are named Origons.

When they have an Obtuse angle, they are termed Ambligon.

The Figure Rhombe has four equal corners, only it has two Obtuse Angles,
and two Acute or pointed; this makes them differ from the Square.

The Circle, is a Figure made of a bending Line, the which is called a
Circumference; and the line which passes by the midst or Center thereof, is
termed a Diameter; and the point in the midst is termed the Center: The
Circle is divided into 360. Degrees, the half of it being 180. the quarter 90.
degrees, being the contents of one right Angle, in regard the Circumference
which closes the said Angle, contains 90. parts of the said Circle.

Likewise, if we would know the contents of an Angle viz. how many degrees an
Angle may be divided into; the Circumference will demonstrate by the parts that
are contained in it: As you may perceive the Angle to be of 45. degrees,
because that from B, to C, there are 45. parts in the Circle, and from B, to D,
is 90. being the fourth part of the Circle.

For the raising of Fortifications, we must observe what Figures are capable of
Regular Fortification, and what are incapable; which are termed Irregular.

Regular Fortifications are such forms or figures, which contain in them
Angles sufficiently equal, and capable for the direct answering one to
another; six points being the least that may be admitted, and so upwards: all
figures under, are termed Irregular; as the figure Pentagon consisting of Five
points, the Foure-square, the Triangle, etc.

We will first begin with Irregular-figures used in Fortification; of which the
Pentagon is the best, in regard it has more capacity in it, than the
Fouresquare, or Triangle, or Halfe-Moones, etc. The form of this Figure has
five points, by reason of five Lines that divide the Circumference in five
equal parts, as by this Figure appears.



The next Irregular Figure, is the Four square; and is capable of four
Bulworkes, upon each point one; and is termed a Skonse, as the Figure
demonstrates.



The next Irregular Figure is the Triangle, being far inferior in strength
to the former, in regard it is capable but of three Bulworks, upon each point
one; as the Figure demonstrates.

The next Irregular Figure, is the Horne-worke; and is most proper for the
lodging of men in it, and for the securing of the principal walls and
Bulworks of a Fort, from the ruining of the shot.

All Forts framed without Bulworks, are either Redoubts, or half Moons; of
which are diverse fashions: as first, a quadrangle Redoubt.

The next is a Triangle Redoubt.

A Redoubt flanquer'd.

Of half Moons, there be two sorts; the first,

The second kind of half Moons whose strength consists in being flanquered
from other Works, as after shall more fully be demonstrated, and deciphered;
after we have demonstrated the first Regular figure, which is the figure
Sexagon.

The first Regular Figure is called Sexagon, because it has six equal sides,
dividing the Cord in six points (upon which points are six Bulworkes to be
raised) The same proportion of distance your Compasses take, in making the
Circumference, without stirring them, being placed six times upon the
Circumference, makes the said Figure in the Margent.



The second Regular Figure is termed Septagon, because it contains 7. points
of equal distances in the Circumference, and this is of greater defense than
the former; for the more points the Circumference is capable of, the greater is
the resistance; as the Figure in the Margent shows.



The third Regular Figure is termed Octagon, because it contains eight sides,
the Circumference being divided by eight points of equal distance; the rest,
for brevity sake, we will only name: by these already described, any Figure,
of what diversity of sides soever; most easily may be framed.



Nonagon, Nonagon.
is a Figure of nine sides.

Decagon, Decagon.
a Figure of Ten sides.

Vndecagon, Vndecagon.
a Figure of Eleven sides.

Duodecagon, Duodecagon.
a Figure of Twelve sides; and sic usque ad infinitum: These are sufficient to
serve for the use of Fortification; because it is very rare, that any Town
has more than twelve Bulworks; and as I have said before, these Figures are
called Regular, because they have their sides, and their Angles equal: all
other forms are called irregular.

CHAP. XIII.
How to Line and Stake out any Bulworke upon a Regular Figure.
THere can be no perfect Fortification made, without the use of these precedent
Figures: as for our example, the Figure Sexagon is to have six Bulworks (viz.)
one upon every Angle; and so accordingly of the rest of the Figures, so many
Angles as many Bulworkes. But first, before we begin to fortify any place, we
are to consider the situation, and the form and fashion of it; to the end we
may the better know how many Bulworkes will be requisite: wherefore we will
begin to fortify the Figure Sexagon, because it is the first Regular form; as
for the Triangle it self, it is altogether unproper to be fortified, because
the Angles of it are too sharp, and pointing out: and likewise for the
uncapablenesse of the place: for such Bulworkes as are made upon three Angles,
do so far point out and extend themselves, that they are of no strength to
releeve each the other: Likewise the square Figure is very rarely fortified
with Bulworkes, unless in case of necessity, where it may be helped and
assisted by some natural strength, as Skinkens-Skonse by Cleve, is naturally
fortified and strengthened with two great Rivers surrounding it. Likewise the
Figure Pentagon, although the points of it are more apter to be fortified, yet
it is not capable of all those essential parts, that a perfect fortification
ought to have. Therefore we will begin to comment upon the Figure Sexagon; and
as we have showed before, this Figure is to have six Bulworkes (viz.) one upon
every Angle: We are further to suppose, that the Figure aforesaid contains in
circuit 180. Geometrical paces, and five feet to every such pace; so that
every side between Angle and Angle, will contain 30. paces; and being thus
divided into six equal distances, of 30. paces in each, the whole amounts to
180. paces; for six times 30. makes as before, 180. Now it remains to make a
Scale, as you may perceive in this Figure following, marked with A B, with the
which Scale we will give all the proportions of this Fortesse, which we now
intend to set forth for an example to the ingenuous Practitioner.

The manner how to Line out a Fort, with the Bulworks belonging to it.



The Figure being drawn, and the Scale made after the form in the precedent
Figure described; then place the point of your Compass to the Scale, and take
30. paces: and setting the point upon each Angle make therewith a
Circumference, as you perceive upon the angle marked with the letter C, which
Circumferences will justly proportion the signs of each Bulworke, as you may
perceive it to be 30. paces on each side, Note the line of defense is 150.
paces, and not longer, because it is taken from the ^ part of the Curtin
total, and not from the Angle of the Flank, as Errard Be^lay, Flam Catanes,
and John Cales would have it, wherein they much err, as afterward I shall
demonstrate.
which makes 60. Then for the making of the Flanckes to the Bulworke, you must
take 30. paces also: Then you must draw a perpendicular line from P to Q, of
30. paces, as the figure next following does teach you: next we are to draw the
line of defense, by which the Bulworke is defended, drawn by the Curtain
(viz.) from S, and passes by the point Q, and runs into the Bulworke R:
View the following Figure.

Lastly, the Ditch ought to be drawn with a parallel line by the face of the
Bulworks, (viz,) from the lines R q, the length of 30. paces, for to proportion
out the length of the foresaid Ditch; as appears by the line drawn from M to
N, the Bastions of this Fortress are almost flanquered, with the third pa^ of
the whole Curtain: And this Fortress has the Flanckes Fichans, as some
Enginieres term it, because the line of defense which proceeds from the
Casmats, is not parallel; and besides, the Flancke Fichant produces a longer
Pand, This kind of Bulworke that takes its defense from any place or part of
the Curtin, does cause the Line of defense proceeding from the flanked Angle to
the flank, to be a Flank Fichant, as the French terms it*
than the other kind of shouldred Flanckes do; as appears in the figure, by
P and S. for the line P q, is a Flancke Fichant, and very serviceable in two
respects; as appears by Mounsieur Bellayes discourse, Page 11. Touching the
Enemies securing himself from the Canon, in the point of a Bulworke, after a
breach made, that the Flancke Fichant will be most offensive to him in that
place; as will appear if a line be drawn from the Angle of the flanck, to the
flancked Angle, for from thence a piece of Artillery will fetch him out of the
point, or cause him to go far in, or you may fetch him out from any place of
the flancke near to it, also by taking the defense from that part of the
Curtain, you may place shot betwixt it and the flancke to defend the flancked
Angle: Indeed Errard has made mention of a cheaper way of fortifying, by
deciphering a Bulworke with a more obtuse Angle, a shorter Pand, and a Bulworke
with a shorter Diameter than this I have set forth: and as it is of less
charge, so it is of small defense, in regard it is deficient of parts to defend
it self: Now I will further show, both by discourse and figure, another kind
of fllancking, of this Exagon form in the next Chapter following:

The figure of this precedent discourse follows.



CHAP. XIIII.
How to fortify the Exagon Figure, with the second kind of Flanks.
IN the precedent Figure, you are directed how to line out the Bulworkes upon
an Exagon Figure; and although the Flanks thereof are so much discovered, that
the enemy may ruin them in a short time: I shall now endeavor to show you
another kind of Flancke with a shoulder, as the next following Figure has,
marked with, a a to the end that the Flancke B should be covered from the force
of the shot; So that if the enemy should plant his Ordinance upon the battery
C. to shoot against the Flancke B. it cannot possibly make a breach, because it
must first ^atter down the shoulder A. which will nothing advantage them to
do; or if the enemy thinks to pass by the shoulder with his shot, he cannot
possibly hit the Flancke, but must grase against the Curtin: And for this only
purpose the shoulder was first invented to join to the Flancke. Now for the
forming the Shoulder, you must part with your compasses, the length of this
Flancke into three equal parts, and take two of these parts to frame the
Shoulder A. the third part is the length of the Flancke B. which shall be
ten paces long, and fifty foot deep into the Bulworke: Likewise the said
Shoulder ought to be drawn right opposite to the point of the Bulwork D. view
the Figure, and you shall perceive this allowance of depth into the Bulworke,
makes a short line betwixt the extremes of the Curtin B. B. especially if the
Wing be allowed but 120 feet: whereby some may judge it the less defensive,
yet it will not prove so, in regard the Defendants (in case the enemy has once
gotten the Bulworke) may place more men upon the reintrenchment, then the enemy
can place upon that line: But indeed the Flancke lies more open, whereby the
Artillery therein may be dismounted more easily, then if the defense did
proceed from the Angle of the Flancke, as you may perceive by the pieces of
Ordnance planted upon the Catte E. how they directly beat into the midst of
the Flancke of the Bulworke, passing down by the Line of defense: View the
Figure following. I shall take an occasion to frame a Table of the dementions
used in Fortifying of Bulworks: with the Perapets, Footsteps, Counter-skarps,
False-brayes, and Sally-ports described.



CHAP. XV.
How to Fortify a place that is not capable of a Regular Fortification.
SVch Figures and places may be termed Irregular, which have not their Angles
and sides equal; and being constrained to fortify such places as for example,
For the guarding of some ^oords of Rivers, or Fortifying upon some Rock, or
upon some point of the Sea, for the preservation of some Port. In these
necessities, we are to accomodate our selves according to the nature of the
place, and save the expense of money and time, which a royal Fort would cost:
for indeed there is nothing so strong as such places that are strong by nature,
as you may perceive by the subsequent Figure, which has two broad Rivers
compassing two sides, which makes it very strong; so that the simplest
Bulworkes there, are as defensible as the artificiallist: observe the Figure,
and you shall perceive the two half Bulworkes in the farthest sides of the
River marked with E. and F. are but half Flanckes, because it is not to be
feared that the enemy can gain the work by any of those sides, but rather on
that side where there is firm Land, wherefore the Bulworke C. is as a perfect
form. Likewise you may take notice of the half Moons, M. and N. which are
places of retreat, for those that shall defend without, beyond the Mote. The
Port of the Town is at P. the Bridge is O. upon that side of the great River
B. because there the enemy cannot so easily approach to raise a battery, being
scanted in ground, the said River not allowing them space: The place you see
marked with H. and L. are the Platformes, and so called, because they are a
plain form without Flanckers, and are very commodious to plant along by the
Rivers. Further, observe that the Enginiere is to consider in all such
irregular places, how many Bulworkes it can well contain: for to raise more
Works then needs must; or to place fewer, whereby the distances from one Work
to the other will be too far, will prove a great fault; wherefore by the
scale, you may take all the true distances; as for those sides the Rivers
surrounds, few Works will serve: provided always, they be well guarded and
Manned; for oftentimes the enemy will put in practice some strattagem against
that side you think your self securest of: For he may make Bridges of Cords,
and scale the Walls, which will be a most difficult thing for him to do, if
you be provided for him before hand, for such an encounter: Nevertheless it
will be very good to make a half Moon, where the Guard may have certain
Boats secure, to take a view up and down the River; especially the head of the
River, toward X. least any Boats should come down the streams; and likewise
to stay all Boats that shall pass by day and night, and search them, least
they taste the same sharp sauce that Skinkens-Skons, and Breda once tasted of:
the one having Soldiers embarked under Hay, the other under Turffe; who took
their opportunities and surprised the Fortes, view the Figure.



CHAP. XVI.
Another Irregular Figure fortified.
IN the next Figure following you may perceive fortified (being surrounded with
water) only one open space, betwixt A and B. which must be very strongly
Fortified, because it is the likeliest place for the enemy to make his
approaches: For prevention whereof, the two half Bulworkes C. and D. are
raised, with two Flanckes toward one side, to the end it should be double
defended (viz) from the Flancks A. and B. Likewise upon each side by the Sea,
there be simple Bulworkes for to lodge the Cannons there, for the defense of
the Port, the which is to be shut with a Chaine-bridge or Drawbridge: Next
you may behold a Work called a It borrowes the name from the ^^shion of it.
Horne-worke, which is framed of two half Bulworkes E. F. the which
Horne-worke is defended from the bulworkes C. and D. and in the midst thereof
is a half Moon, which serves for a retreat and defense of the Port: H These
out-workes are excellent good, to cause the enemy to lose a great deal of time
in winning them; and when they be gained, they shall immediately be
constrained to forsake them; for they lying open to the inward Works, will
soon force them out with the shot that shall be made from the Bulworkes C. D.
Lastly, these half Moons are of excellent use to hinder the enemy from mining
under the Bulworks, as the Hollanders and others have found by experience. The
Figure follows in the next page: Viewing the same, and examining the
particulars of it with your Compasses, and comparing it with this demonstrative
discourse, will make you familiar and better able to understand it.



CHAP. XVII.
A third Irregular Figure fortified.
THis third Figure is fortified with five Bulworks, insomuch that it may be
called Pentagon irregular; wherein we must consider, the diversity of sides,
some being long, the rest short; and raising Bulworks upon these points, which
falls accidentally irregular: some being too short, the rest too long, as you
may perceive by the side NO, to be more by the Scale than 180. paces, which
ought to be the ordinary distance between Bulworks, E^ards opinion is
otherwise, which I shall after in this Book confute, as erroneous.
or 200. for the longest: Likewise you perceive QQ, is less than 180. and 160.
shorter than the rest; here you may observe these faults, which a Regular Fort
has not, every Bulworke being of an even distance, either of 180. or 200.
paces at the most, or 180. and 160. at the least, is the true distance, to
raise your Bulworks in an equality of distance; that which you see in the
figure to be advanced beyond the shoulder, and likewise above the Curtain, as
you may see from N to R, and from O to S, and from P to T, and from Q to V, and
so of the rest; not taking the like distance for the other flancke, as you see
by PX, and QY* the ordering of these differences ought to lie in the judgment
of the judicious Enginiere: Let us observe the Bulworke N, which ought to be
sharp pointed, because it is upon an Angle very sharp, long, and crooked, and
out of distance to be flancked as you may see by N. To prevent the advantage an
enemy might take if the point should be made out its full length, Maro does not
allow any acute Angle to be fortified otherwise then with a half Bulworke, or
else to be made the Flanked angle of a Bulworke, as appears by his discourse
upon the first Irregular Pentagon.
according as the ground would require, it is thought the safest way to cut off
the said point M, and to fashion it with a double point, so as it may defend it
self, and strengthen the Bulworke the better, and a great deal less pains
and travel in raising of it; for indeed the very point of the Bulworke must
have been raised a great way in the water, as you may observe by the pricks.
Take notice likewise of the two half Moons before each port, which have their
defenses from the two Bulworks on each side of them; and as I have said before,
they serve for a retreat to those that guard without, and likewise defend the
Ports from sudden surprises: Further, observe that the Flanckes are but 20.
paces, because of the small distance, for indeed their needs no such large
flanckes; for if they were bigger, then the Bulworke should extend it self
further into the River, which would be a mighty charge, and unprofitable; as
you may perceive by the Bulworke q, the pricked lines that are marked in the
water. Lastly, observe for a general Rule, that in all works of this nature,
if the line total of any side, be 170. paces, or thereabouts, that then the
Curtain flanckes is made about 200. paces; if shorter, then the Curtain
shorter proportionably; always provided, that the flanckes looking each upon
other, upon each Curtain, be near of of equal length: for the shoulders, it
makes not much if they differ in the line, so they be of a sufficient
thickness. View the subsequent Figure.



CHAP. XVIII.
A fourth Irregular Figure fortified.
IN this fourth Figure, you may perceive two several Fortifications; the
Angles being accordingly divided by the waters branching out, the one being
marked with A, the other with B; you may suppose it to be an Arm of the Sea,
branching it self into three Rivers, in the form of a Triangle; and is
fortified only upon the sides, toward the Land D, for on the waters side they
are sufficiently fortified with the wall made defensive with platformes E.
Likewise you may observe the forked Bulworkes. FF. This trianguler work, is of
no strength to be used upon Plains, (as before I have showed) but only where
great waters are; wherein consists their chiefest strength. And they were
invented, to keep and secure the mouth of Havens; where the Governor of the
^ort is to command the Ships that ride by, from the Rampart G, and cause them
to pay Toule; the Water-Port is to be below the Rampart G. The Figure follows
in the next page, being the 52,



CHAP. XIX.
A fifth Irregular Figure fortified.
YOu may suppose the one side of this Figure marked with H, to be some Rock or
Moorish ground unaccessible; the other side, at the letter L, is firm land:
wherefore it behooves that the side L, should be very well fortified, according
to the rules of a Regular figure, that the Enemy may find it very difficult to
gain the place; upon the other side, the Walls are to be made very high, for
fear of surprizall, without any works of great consequence, will suffice.
There ought to be also, upon the Moorie or Rockie side, H, a good Ditch, yea
though the Rock be so high, that no water can come into the Ditch; and if it
should likewise happen that the other ditch L, on the Land-side should be dry,
and without water, yet there is a little Wall that runs along the Ditch at
BB, which is very profitable, to defend the said ditch: as you may perceive by
those soldiers there defending, for they cannot be annoyed by the Enemy,
because they are below and under the shot of the Canon: Note this kind of
Fortification is to be used but upon necessity; for no Fort whatsoever can be
accounted strong, unless the ditches of it will stand full of water: Those
ditches that are dry, serves only to defend the Counterscharpe, that which is
full of water hinders the Enemy from making his surprises; as we shall more at
large discourse of afterward. View the Figure following in the 54. Page.



CHAP. XX.
A discourse how the Ancients fortified their Towns.
HAving sufficiently discourst about Irregular Figures of Fortification, it now
remains, that we should take notice of such Fortifications, as in former ages
have been used for the safeguard of Towns; and so take an occasion to
discourse of the imperfections of our walled Towns here in England, that we
may not be deceived in putting our confidence in the strength of them; and
afterward we shall observe the strength and perfection that our modern
Enginieres have brought this Art unto: Wherefore note, the first Fortifications
that the Ancients made use of, was natural; as strengthened by Waters, by
Rocks, by Mountains, inaccessible and Moorish quag-mires. We may see this by
the King Atilla, entering into Italy with great force and strength, in such
sort, that he vanquished all; except, such as escaped and fied for their
defense, into an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, where they releeved
themselves; The place is now called Venice, being partly situated in the Sea,
and partly upon Moors and Quagmires; so that the Enemy could not come at them,
neither with Horse nor foot: but finding these places naturally strong, not to
be sufficient to defend them, they began to join Art to help fortify Nature;
laying a foundation round the Town, of Brick, Stone, and Lime; building
thereon very high Walls, with square Towers, some 60. paces a sunder; from
whence they did defend themselves and their Walls. Rome is the most antientest
Fortification; which by the aforesaid Walls, the River Tyber, and the great
Hills, they made shift to increase their Dominions. Likewise, in England we
have diverse old Towns, as Colchester, etc. But in short time, Art grew more
perfect; and finding those four square Towers to be weak and unprofitable, by
reason of the Corners, being broken, the rest of the Wall soon gave way to
their Engines; wherefore they invented Towers of a rounder form, as being
far stronger, like to the Fortification about Ipswich, and Norwich, as in the
next Chapter we shall discourse of: View the Figure belonging to this
discourse, following.



CHAP. XXI.
A Second way which the Ancients used to fortify their Towns.
THe former ages finding a disability in this former Fortification; they
invented round Towers, being far stronger by reason of their equalness in
strength on all sides; so that the Enemy with their Rams and battering Engines,
could not demolish those round Towers, until they had learned a way to get the
foot of them, and to inmine themselves under, so that the Defendants could not
spy them; as you may perceive by the Letter A. at the foot of the Tower: So
that in short time, by help of their Engines, they would overturne their
Towers; and they within could not offend them from the next Tower, as you may
see by the Line drawn from A. to B. Wherefore they were constrained to find
out a remedy to strengthen themselves better. By this you may see what poor
strength our Ancient Walled Towns are of, if an Enemy should oppose: I could
wish better Fortifications about some eminent Towns near the Sea. View the
Figure.



CHAP. XXII.
The Third way the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns.
THey having found the defects by woeful experience that accompanied this
simple kind of Fortifications, they invented a third way, which was to
Fortify with a kind of Angled Figure; which Angles extended equally out, and
the former Ages termed them Bastions: And these kind of Fortifications were so
equally framed, that the Enemy could find no place to secure themselves under
the Walls of it; but that the Defendants could easily annoy them: then they
thought themselves their Crafts-masters, and that they had attained the
perfection of the Art of Fortifying: But experience soon taught them, that
their Bastions were some longer then the other, and being altogether too
little; and so consequently of small defense: wherefore they were constrained
to make another Work in the midst of the Curtin, within the Ditch, as you
may perceive at A. the which they called a Platform; which they thought could
strengthen the defense of the Curtin: but they found it did them more hurt than
profit; because it hindered the Passage of the Shot, from the Flancke of the
Bulworke C. that it could not Scower to the point of the other Bulworke B.
because of the hinderance of the Platform A. So that they were new to begin,
as by the subsequent Figure you may perceive.



CHAP. XXIII.
The Fourth way the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns.
THe Platform in the Precedent Figure, which was devised to defend the
Bulworkes, were soon found to be of small resistance: Whereupon they did not
much change the fashion of the Figure, but the place of the Platform, whereas
before it was set below: Now they placed it above upon the Rampiere, in the
midst of the Curtin, in the form of a Quadrangle; the other being in form
of a Circle, being in a place the enemy could not approach to: they counted the
matter not great, of what form it was, so it could lodge four or six Pieces
of Ordance to defend on both sides of it, as you may perceive by this
Perallellagram B. So that this has changed its name from a Platform to a
Cavallier.



But as before I have said the perfection of Fortification being not fully
found out; they found this kind of Caviliere to be a very feeble defenc,
because it stood in such an eminent place: For we must take this for a Maxim;
that all such high places, if they be not natural, are subject to be
Battered and Ruined by the enemy: wherefore in short time they invented another
way; yet indeed, not very proper to defend the Bulworkes, yet very good to
discover into the Plains, about the Fort; and to hind the approaches of the
enemy, and to beat down their Gabions and Trenches at their first coming.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The Fifth way the Ancients used to Fortify their Towns.
THe Ancients having found out the precedent defects to have proceeded from the
smalnesse of their Bulworkes; they thought the best way was to make their
Works bigger: So they began to frame them according to our modern fashions,
of which we shall afterward discourse; only we will content our selves to
observe the Figure following, being the first invention of Fortresses: and this
kind of Fortifying was in those days thought to be the most perfect, until
our modern Wars found out the way to frame their Bulworks, with round thick
Shoulders to cover and secure the ^^anckes from the violence of the Shot, as in
the beginning of this Book I have showed: Now it remains in the next Chapter,
to show the reasons of our modern Fortifications, with all their dependancies;
And first we will discourse of the true measures and proportions of them,
which at this day are in use, and accounted the most perfectest that ever were
invented; which we account now to be infallible Maxims of this Art: View the
Figure following.



CHAP. XXV.
Of the Measures and Proportions of our modern Fortresses.
WE have formerly discourst of ancient Fortresses, of their defects and
remedies; Now it remains we should entreat of our modern works, which are
now brought to be most perfect, in regard of those Ancient Fortifications
before mentioned: And first we will speak of their measures and proportions;
the which must serve us for Maxims, because they are grounded upon very good
and infalible reasons, as experience has showed, and does teach us daily.

I. That Fortresses are composed of many Bulworkes, and that the said Bulworkes
should be of equal distances, and of equal Angles; the ground being so
large, that a Regular work may be raised thereon, as near as may be
equally: As for Irregular works, necessity must drive us to make them; wanting
the commodiousnesse of ground, that the Regular Figure should have.

II. The Bulworkes ought to be large and spacious, to the end they may
Re-intrench themselves, and the point or Angels as blunt as possible may be
made.

III. That the entery or mouth of the Bulworke, ought to be from Sixty to
Seventy paces (viz.) Thirty or Thirty five from each end of the Curtin, to the
midest or point of the entrance into the mouth of the Bulworke.

IIII. That the defense of the Bulwarks, ought to be taken from the third
part of the Curtin; at the least, as in all Forms or Figures of 6. 7. and 8.
and of those of 9. 10. 11. 12. of the half of the Curtin. As for the Pentagon,
it will permit the taking of the fifth part of the Curtin, because the Angels
are not so much pointed. As for the square Figure, it ought not to be put
amongst the number of Fortresses, and much less the Tryangle; for they only
are to be raised in places of advantage, which are strong by nature, or in a
Camp or siege of a Town.

V. The Line of defense (viz.) the distance that is taken from the Flank, to
the point of the Bulworke opposite to it; ought to be 180 paces (viz.) five
foot to each pace at the least, and 200 at the most: Although Erard allows
not above 122^ Toyses, six foot to the Toyse Amounts to 735 feet: But his
error I shall afterward show; and likewise the reason why I allow 265 foot
more then he does.

VI, The Line of the Flancke ought to be Thirty paces, and if the Shoulders of
the Bulworke be comprised in it; then the Flancke ought to be larger by the
third part, (viz.) ten paces, and twenty paces for the formi^g of the
Shoulders.

VII. The Ditch or Moate, ought to be thirty paces broad, and running even by
the sides of the Bulworkes.

VIII. In the midst of the Ditch, there ought to be a Cave dug deeper
then the rest, some four paces broad.

IX. The Counter-scarpe there, ought to be framed, with Stones without Lyme.

X. Upon the Counterscarpe, there ought to be an Alley three paces broad, with
a breast-worke ready to defend them; so that they may kneel and lay their
Pieces over it to discharge: and the Ground is to be made all even beyond it,
that the enemy may have no Bancke to defend himself.

XI. All the good earth which is beyond the Counterscarpe, ought to be thrown
away, a Musket shot from it; and all kind of Stones to be placed there in
the room of it, which will infinitely offend the enemy, being battered about
with the shot from the Walls of the Fort.

XII The half Moons which are placed in every Angle between two Bulworks,
ought to be forty paces (viz.) twenty on either side; and the defense thereof,
ought to be always taken as near as possibly may be toward the Curtin; the
Ditch thereof being four Paces at least in breadth.

XIII. The Ditch or Moat, ought to be Thirty foot deep; being well stored
with all kind of Fish, which may be a great help to sustain them in the
time of a Siege.

XIIII. The Wall or foundation of the Fort, ought to be thirty foot high.

XV. The Rampire above the foundation of the Wall, ought to be likewise 30.
foot in height, and 20. foot broad; both Curtins and Bulworks, are to have a
Parrapet answerable, and a foot-step for the Muskatiers to step upon, to make
them of sufficient height to discharge their Muskets over.

XVI. Upon the entery or mouth of every Bulworke, there ought to be a
Cavaliere eight foot high, and twenty paces large: So that three or four
Pieces of Canon may be planted there for the making of Counter-batteries.

XVII. The place of the Hankes ought to be fifty foot broad, and 75. or 80.
foot long.

XVIII. The rightnesse of the Shoulders ought to be 50. foot long, in such
sort that it may shoot right to the point of the opposite Bulworke.

XIX. That such Sally-Ports as are necessary, ought to be 15. foot broad, made
under the Wall in the Hancke, between the Shoulder of the Bulworke and the end
of the Curtin, to be Brick't over like a Vaute; and at each end of it, a very
strong foulded Gate. These Sallyes are for the Soldiers to pass into the
False-Bray to defend the Moat, and the foot of the Bulworkes and Curtins.

XX. The False-^ray, ought to be 15. or 16. foot broad from the foot of the
Bulwork, to the Moat: At the very foot of the Rampires, is planted a bed of
quick-set, two foot broad, which will not only hinder the enemy from sudden
running through it; but also stays up such earth as shall be battered down,
from falling into the Moat: Next the Moat, the False-bray has a breast-worke,
three or four foot high for the Musketeers to shoot over to defend the Moate.

XXI. That above the end of the Shoulder called the Orillion, there ought to
be an Imbracer, for to place a Piece of Ordnance, to batter against the Ruins
that the Enemy should make, in the face of the Bulworke.

XXII. That the Rampires ought to be made as much sloping, as they are high;
which is their natural sloping: pinching inwards, that the Water may shoot
off: View the Table following, and reason will not only allow it, But will also
reprehend Mounsier Bellay, page 21. who allows only one foot slope, in 8. or
10. foot height: So that a Wall being 60. foot high, by his Rule shall have but
6. foot slope; which would make it so steep, that without the battering of the
Canon, every shower of Rain will wash it and moulder it down: Observe your
best Fortifications, as Zutphen, and Densburge, in Gilderland are by this rule
framed.

XXIII. That such foundations of Stone or Bricke-workes as are made against
Waters, or otherwise to bear up the Fortifications of Earth; ought to be 5.
foot broad below, and 3. foot above, and to slope half their height: Mounsier
Bellay would have them Perpendicular, but he is wide from the true mark.

XXIIII. There must be a Parrapet or brest-worke, upon the outside of the
Rampire, 8. foot high, and 30. foot broad, only upon the Bulworkes: the
Curtins needs not be so thick by ^ parts: at the foot of the Parrapet is a
banck a foot and half high or more to stand upon, for their easy shooting
over: The Parrapet is to slope upon the top of it, that they may level down
to the Motes side by the False-bray.

Now because these proportions, of Heights; Depths, Lengths, and Bredths, with
the true slopings, cannot so well be demonstrated by Figure, in the deliniating
out the parts of a Fort. I have devised a way by making a Table which shall
give you satisfaction: wherefore suppose every of the little squares to be
five foot, every way square: So that by the number of them, you may easily
perceive the Dimensions of every part of the Fortress: The Table follows in
the next Page.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Fortresses in general, and of their Perfections and Imperfections.
A Fortress may well be compared to a man: The Bulworkes are the Head; the
Hanckes, the Eyes; the Curtins, the Arms; and so of the other parts: Now if
the Head be not wel-disposed, then all the other Members will be found ill:
even so those Bulworkes which are not formed according to the disposition which
is requisite, all the Fortress is imperfect; and is subject to five kind of
maladies, or imperfections.

The first is the Battery, The first imperfection of a Fortress.
when the Enemy raises his Cavaliers, and with his Canon, batters down the
Walls, ruining them to nothing which the Art of man artificially had built:
showing that nothing can be made so perfect, but it may be defaced.

The second is the Mine, The second imperfection.
which is made under the Earth, and passes under the Counter-scarpe and Moate,
until it comes under the Bulworke, and so blows it up with Powder.

The third is Treason; The third imperfection.
enticing the chief Officers with gifts and moneys, and gaining the
affections of inferior Soldiers, by fair promises and gifts; whereby they
are allured to yield up the Fort into the hands of the Enemy.

The fourth malady, The fourth imperfection.
is sudden surprises: as when an Enemy betakes him to a course, contrary to the
opinion of many, faining some other design, Marching all night, Arives at
point of Day, without making any noice: Plants his Petards against the Ports,
and his Scaling-ladders upon the Walls, making himself Master both of
Bulworkes, Rampars, and Ports, before those of the Guardes are sensible of it;
especially before they can be capable of resistance.

The fifth and last is a long Siege, The fifth and last imperfection.
which ruins the Works of the Fortress, wastes their Men, Money, Provision,
and Ammunition; whereby the Fort and Soldiers should be sustained, being
thereby brought to such an exigent of distress; that they are constrained to
render up the Fort, The remedies to prevent these former imperfections.
rather then perish by famine, sickness, and the like. For the remedying and
preventing of these grievous maladies and imperfections; we ought like the
wise Physician, always to have some sovereign Salve or Antidote to apply
according to the cause thereof: wherefore it is great wisdom for us to
examine from point to point, the defects, that we may attain the perfect
knowledge of them; whereby we may gain honor by making the perfecter cure:
Wherefore first let us examine the Battery, and the defects thereof; that we
may apply the remedy that is proper to it. Batteries are made after diverse
fashions, as first, the Enemy making diverse Gabions or great Baskets, placing
them accordingly, and filling them full of good earth, which serves them for a
shelter, in making their first approaches: Afterward approaching nearer, they
raise their Cavaliers, and plant their double Canons thereon, to batter down
the defenses, and ruin their Bulworkes; then by their approaches in Trenches
under the earth, just to the side of the Counter-scarpe, How to help
themselves against the Enemies batteries made with Gabions.
they may come to ruin their Flanckes, which the defendants cannot see to
prevent; when at the first approaches they make use of Gabions: Those within
the Fort must help themselves by making Counter-batteries of their Cavaliers,
and batter down their Gabions; which may easily be done, if the Cannoneers
be skillful, whereby the Enemy will be kept in continual action; for there
is no doubt but that the Enemy makes approaches, to the end (as being Master of
the Field) he shall gain his desires in a short time: But the Defendants
within the Fort, may make him loose his time, which is the principal thing a
good Fortress can do, for they must expect relief to assist them, to cause
his departure sooner; or that the deadnes of Winter will make the Enemy retreat
against his will. The principal thing to be required from the strength of a
Fort, is to keep off the Enemy, and delay him; making him loose his time,
Answer to an objection.
nothing being more precious then the same: As to be always blockt up to
perpetuity in a Fort, is not the thing requirable: To answer the objection that
the Enemy may batter down our walls, and ruin our Bulwarks, A Table of the
Heights and Proportions of every particular Limb of a Fort, belonging to a
Fort.
L The Counter scarpe and the Brestworke. F The Walls. A The Monnt of the
Rampart within. M The Curider. G The Ditch or Mote. B The Rampart. N The
Fote-banke to step on, to discharge over. H The Defense in the Mote called
C^^e. C The Parrapets. O The plain Field lying shelving. I The little Ditch in
the midst of the Mote. D The sloping of the Parrapets. E The way for the
Rounds. Place this Figure betwixt folio 62. and 63. from their Cavaliers or
Batteries; For the effecting of this they have but small time; and it will
prove very troublesome and dangerous to scale the same Breaches; because our
walls shall be raised in such sort, that the Counterscarpe shall be almost of
equal height with them; so that the Enemy shall not come at them with their
Ordnance, to make any deep breach; for from their Platformes they shall no
more then see the top of the Works, as you may perceive by this subsequent
Figure at A. B. And as for the Works of the Fort, they are made so sloping,
that the Cannon Bullet cannot possihly batter it down: and they are so thick,
that the Bullets rest in the midst of the thicknes; they being 36 foot thick,
and above; so that a Cannon cannot possibly pierce half thorough, especially
if the earth be good, and well rammed down together.



You may perceive by this precedent Figure, that the enemies Ordnance being
planted upon the level ground; or if the ground be somewhat rising toward the
Fort, as the line C. D. demonstrates; that then he is constrained to raise a
mighty high Battery, as E. before he can see the top of the Walls of the Fort:
as you may perceive from the top of the Cavaliere at the point F. Whereupon he
is new to begin his Battery near the Counter-scarpe, so that he may make his
Breach the deeper in the Bulwork; for the farther he is from the
Counter-scarpe, the less he can descrie of the Wall; As the subsequent Figure
demonstrates, by the (...) G. H. from the battery A. Wherefore this Battery
cannot ann^y the Fort; if the Counter-scarpe L. be raised so high that it may
defend the Wall. Now for such Batteries as the Enemy shall make upon the
Counterscarpe; having made their approaches, by the help of their
Roling-Trenches close to the Mote; or if they cannot come so near but they
must raise their battery at the foot of it, so that they are in possibility to
batter down the Flanckes, and the Defenses to the ground, to make their
Assault easy: How to remedy the Enemies Battering the Flanks when they have
planted their batteries near the Counter scarpe.
These inconveniences are to be remedied, by making good Shoulders to the
Bulworkes, which will defend the Flanckes a longer time then an Enemy can
possi^ly stay: wherefore they must again be constrained to make a small
Battery at the point of the Counter-scarpe of the next Bulworke; the distance
being so small, that they cannot possibly Plant above six Ordnance, that will
shoot even down the Line of Level into the Flancke, which can do no great
hurt, unless the Shoulders be ^attered down first, which is impossible,
inregard of the thickenesse, and the sloping of it; whereby the earth will not
tumble down, but keep its place: But suppose they should ruin the Flanckes,
the Wall called the Cunet that runs along in the midst of the Mote, A
remedy to hinder the Enemy from Assaulting the Breach after it is made.
as you may perceive at the Figure F. will defend the breach in despite of
them: beside^ let them batter as deep as they can, yet the Flanckes will be
left high enough to make resistance. And moreover the Cavaliers, and one part
of the Curtin, will help defend the Bulworke: These remedies you see will
supply the defects; only view the Figure following carefully, and it will give
you better satisfaction.



The Cannons A. is the Enemies Battery, which cannot hold possibly but six
Pieces, because it cannot be broader then the Mote: and these are Planted
there to batter down the Flanckes; which will be difficult to do, in regard
the Defendants in the Fort have six other Pieces to oppose them, and a good
thick Parapet for their defense, as those of the Flanckes ought to be. B. is
the other Battery of the Enemy which they Plant to batter down the Shoulders
of the Bulworkes; which they will find hard to do, in regard of their
thickness and roundnesse.

Now let us discourse of the defects which may come by springing of Mines,
which is the most dangeroust disease incident to the ruining of Bulworkes:
Wherefore observe, when the Enemy first maks his approaches with Trenches and
Vaults under the ground, being conveyed under the Counter-scarpe and Mote, and
so under the Bulworke; having there placed a sufficient quantity of Powder,
Fire being given to the Train, will blow up the Work and all within it. To
redress this inconvenience, and to hinder the Enemies Mining: There must
instead of good Earth, be Gravel and Stones, which would hinder their Mining:
and besides these Stones would fall down upon their heads, unless they framed
supporters to stay it, which would be an infinite charge and trouble: those
Stones would be very offensive to the Enemy being battered about amongst them
by the Ordnance from the Walls; it would more hurt and annoy them, then the
Ordnance themselves: Further if the Mote be full of Water, and the Graft in
the midst of it made so deep as before is declared; it will be a means to
drown them in their Trenches and Mine: if the Mote ^ee dry, they may easily
Mine under it: How to prevent the Mining under the Bulworkes.
But for prevention of this their Mining, there are diverse ways to discover
it; As first, by making a Vaut down deep into the Earth in the most suspected
place; and there placing a Drum braced, laying Di^e or small Stones upon the
top of it; if the Enemy be working in the ground, the Reverbe^ation of their
strokes, will make the Dice or Stones skippe up and down: or a Basin of Water
upon a Wooll-sacke, works the same effect; this being discovered, you may
suffer the Enemy to dispose his Powder in the Mine, and when they are gone to
give fire to the Train, in the interim to Mine to it and take it away: The
like has been done many times in the Netherlands: But the surest way to
prevent the force of the Powder in the Mine (if all other devices fail) is by
making a Vaute down deep into the Earth in the most suspected place^ and from
it make diverse vents for the Powder to breath out of, and cover the ho^es
slightly over with Bushes and Earth to darken the place. Now when the Enemy
shall come to undermine the Bulworke, he shall come to work into that Vaute;
where diverse Soldiers being within it ready provided for their coming, shall
repulse the Enemy, they having great advantage over them because the Vaute is
large, and formed proper and fit for defense: The Trenches of the Enemy being
so small, they cannot stir in them; and suppose the Enemy should work into
the Mine, and finding no resistance, places his Powder, and makes his Trains;
yet it cannot take any effect because of thoses hole, which let out the force
of the Powder.

Thirdly, A remedy to prevent Treason in a Fort.
for the prevention of Treason, by the seducing the Captain, and gaining the
Soldiers loves by gifts and promises: In this case we must make choice of a
trusty faithful Captain for Governor, which must be allowed sufficient
maintenance, and having a good estate of his own: Likewise the Soldiers must
be well paid, and suffer no discontents to be given them; there is nothing
in the World discontents a Soldier more, then debarring or misreckoning him in
his Pay: Further you may by the demeanoure of Soldiers perceive if they be
bribed; First they cannot contain themselves when they have money, but they
will play or drink more then ordinarily before, or show their moneys, or buy
themselves Apparel. Notice being taken of these things, the judicious Captain
must have them in examination, and search them, and upon the least suspicion
commit them.

For the prevention of Surprises that the Enemy may suddenly make, How to
prevent surp^^zes that may be made against a Fort.
by placing his Petards against the Ports; and hanging up his Scaling-ladders
in the Night, or at point of Day; this may easily be remedied, if the Garrison
be well ordered and disciplined, if they keep their Guards and Sentinels, as
they ought to place them in every apt and convenient place, (viz.) every
Bulworke to have a Corpse due Guard in it; and the Centuries placed some ten
paces one from the other: Likewise at the foot of the Bridge, ought to be a
half Moon with a continual Guard in it; and the said Bridge being made
winding, ought to have two or three Draw-bridges, and between each Drawbridge
a Standing gate; all the Ports or Gates ought to have a Grate before it, after
the fashion of a Gridiron, which must bear out from the substance of the Gate
half a foot: this will prevent the Enemy from blowing open the Gates, because
the force of the Petard will be spent before it can touch the massy substance
of the Gate, the Grate giving way to the force of it: Besides in the midst of
the Bridge ought to be a Guard built, where continually a Century must stand
to open and shut the Gates upon all occasions: Further, the Captain of the
Watch must send out his Rounds, and Counter-rounds one after the other; whose
duty is, to see every Guard and Centinell do his duty, and likewise to be
vigilant to discover the Enemies approaches. Further, upon the highest Steeple
or Tower within the Fort or Town, ought to be a Centinell day and night, to
overview the ways and passages, and to take notice of all noise and deanes, or
the sparkling of Matches; and by the sound of a Trumpet to give an Alarm: if
in the daytime any Troops are discovered, he is to give so many sounds as
there be several persons; if the Troops be Footmen, then the Sentinel is
to hang out a white-Flag, on that side the Tower which the Port is of they
come; if Horsemen, then he is after the same manner to hang out a red Flag: by
this the Guardes are warned to be in a readiness, and the Ports (if it be
daytime) immediately to be shut up, and Spies sent out to discover what they
are, and their intents. Further, if intelligence should be gained that the
Enemy is a Foot, then to be more wary and set a double watch; these things may
seem sufficient, for prevention of the premises.

The last malady or imperfection, is a long Siedge; which spends both Men and
Munition, Remedies to be used in a long Siedge, to prevent the Enemies purposes.
their Food and Provision to maintain them. To this we must reply. that a
Fortified Town, ought always to be provided with Men and Ammunition, and all
kind of other Provisions; as Corn of all kinds, Beer, Wine, Salt-fish,
Bacon, Vinegar, or any thing else that is sit to sustain the life of man;
sufficient of Saltpeter, Brimstone, etc. for making of Powder, and Wildfire;
store of Lead for Bullets, and the like. Further, such a Fort ought always to
have a Troop of Horse in it, and store of Provision for them; whose Office are
to make incursions upon the Enemy, and to discover his marches and designs.
Moreover, there must be good store of Ordnance; The difference in a Siedge
betwixt great and small Ordnance, for their service.
especially some pieces, for they will be able to do better Serviue than the
great Canons, in two respects; as first, the expense of Powder will be less;
Secondly, they are easier to be removed from place to place, as occasion shall
be offered: The well managing and orderings in such a Fort, is of great
consequence; for we must conceive, an Enemy is at three times the Expenses, let
him be as provident as he can; Further, the Enemy being constrained to lose his
time and spend his means and Treasure, by bringing an Army against them; which
shall either cause them to raise their Siedge (as Grave Maurice Van Nassaw did
at the Siedge of Bergen-up-zone, he marching his Army to Rosand^ll, caused
Marquess Spinola to raise his Siedge) Otherwise a greater advantage may be
taken, as the same Noble Prince once did: Ost-end being beleaguered, he
thinking to have raised the Siedge of Duke John de Austria, finding him so
strongly intrencht, retreated with his Army, and pitched before Sluice, and
suddenly took it. Thus you may see the properties of a strong Garrison, how
necessary they are in all respects; such imperfections as cannot be eschewed,
must be borne withal, seeking to prevent them in the best and safest manner we
may. I hope this discourse will give a reasonable satisfaction to any man that
is an ingenuous Soldier; as for others, I leave them to censure like
themselves. In the following Chapter, we will discourse of the diversity of
Modern Fortifications.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of four kinds of Fortifying now in use; French, Spanish, Italian, and
Holland; and first of the manner of Fortifying in France.
HAving formerly spoken of the first inventions of Fortifications, and how they
have been reduced from imperfect, to better forms; but because all men's
opinions and judgments are various, and not a like assenting, one esteeming
one fashion to be best, and others of a quite contrary conceit, maintain that
another form is better. Therefore principally I have made choice to discourse
of, and decipher these four kinds of Fortifyings; and the rather, because
these Countries lying open to their Enemies, have been very ingenuous to
fortify their Towns for their better security, very strongly; for in such
places, there is nothing of greater consequence belonging to State affairs,
than an absolute form in fortifying, and in discoursing of their several
inventions: we will compare the properties and improperties of them together,
and so follow the best form, and eschew the worst. The French Engineeres
opinion of their Fortification.
The French are opinionated, the face of the Bulworke should be defended by
Musketeers, therefore they will not have the defense of the flank to the point
of the Bulworke, to be of greater distance than musket shot: which is not above
120. paces. The proportion of a Muskets shot, is 120. paces.
Likewise they will have the defense of the Bulworke to be taken only from the
Flank, the reason is, because the Angle of the point of the Bulworke is more
obtuse, then if they should take the defense from the Curtin, and so
consequently more firm and strong, for to resist the Battery: They will
likewise have a good Mote with a kind of Parapet running in the midst of it,
which between the two Bulworkes has a kind of work for soldiers to defend
the breach of the flanks, which they term Cune, this Mote is to be full of
water; at Deusbrough in Gelderland they raised in the Mote, in the equal
distance between the Bulworks only, a kind of half Moon, extending it self
like to this Figure. These kind of works, they hold very necessary to prevent
an Enemy from any sudden surprises, by laying over Bridges, or coming over
in leather Boats; a continual watch being kept there, prevents their
designs; the Figure follows.



CHAP. XXVII.
How the French fortify their Irregular Figures.
Upon a Line of 100. Toises, they will have formed a single Tenaille.

Upon a Line of 100. or 150. Toises, Note, a Toise is 6. feet by the Rule, 12.
inches to each foot.
they will have raised two Bastions.

Upon a Line of a 150. or 200. Toises, they raise a double Tenaille, or two
half Bulworks.

Upon a Line of 250. Toises, they raise one Bastion and two half Bastions.

For better demonstration of this, we will suppose an Irregular piece of
ground, to be fortified; as Q, R, S, T, V, and in regard no ground is to be
lost, we must first consider all the several measures at the out-most sides of
it; and first, drawing a right Line, as A, B, of 250. Toises, and upon the same
Line follows these precedent Rules, they raise there one Bastion, and two
halfes taken from the Octagon, look at the point A. Likewise, from the point
A, draw a Line from A. P, of 150. Toises or thereabouts, upon the which they
raise two half Bastions, then drawing the Line P, O, upon the which they raise
one Bastion, and two halfes, according as the first is; and also as the Line O,
X, has: and also of all the rest, according as they shall find the length or
distances. Many times they desire the wall of the Town should be secured from
the Curtin. Next after this following Figure, I shall draw another Figure, that
shall demonstrate that kind of flanking from the Curtin.



Moreover, when your French Engineeres fortify an Irregulrr Figure, and that
the line of defense is to be taken from the Curtins; then suppose the place to
be fortified, to be B, A, P, L, N, M. O, and that the Wall being set in the
outmost verge of the ground, must serve for the Curtines wholly: The figure
being proportioned as you see the next following is, they draw a Line from C,
D, E, F, of 400. Toises, where they find there must be raised upon the same
Line, one Bastion, and two halfes, and one simple Tenaille (viz.) the Bastion
E, the two half ones D, and F, and the single Tenaille D, C, and having drawn
the Lines round the Town, leaving sufficient distance between the Walls, for
to raise the Bastions; then they take the space of 100. or 110. Toises, from
the flank of one Bulworke, to the point of the other. Thus every Bastion will
stand right within musket shot to be defended as the Regular Figures are. This
they use only for the fortifying of some old Wall in haste, and without much
charge; otherwise a Rampart may be raised of earth, and these Works made to
it. The Figure follows.



CHAP. XXVIII.
The manner of the Spaniards fortifying.
THe manner of the Spaniards fortifying, differs nothing from the French; for
they hold the same Rules; (viz.) They take their defense from the Flanks, and
they observe the same distance from the flank, to the Point of the Bulworke:
only they use greater compast shoulders to cover their flanks, as you may
perceive by the Figure following marked A. Note that he that intends to
fortify, must have a special regard to the matter he intends to put in
execution, and to the potencie of his Enemy, to the end he may apply a
convenient remedy, to every thing that shall require it: for if we have to do
with a puissant politic Enemy, we must spare no cost and charge; not only to
fortify, but also to make the works large, and spacious, and of able strength
to resist the battering Canon; to the end likewise, they may make diverse
re-intrenchments; lest it should happen as once it did to the Spaniards, at the
Fort called the Golette, which was made to keep the Haven for the King of
Spain; but having by experience found the defects of it; (they having observed
the true rules of forming it) their error was in making the Bulworkes too
little; so that when the Turk came with his great Army, there could not men be
placed to defend it. As we shall afterward discourse of the Line of defense, of
the perfection of it, as I may term it, because in the just proportion
thereof, depends the conservation of the Fortress. Wherefere now we use to
make our Bulworkes larger, when we first raise them; for should they be too
small, there were no help; but if our Enemy be but weak in his forces, in
such a case we shall not need to be at that cost and labor to make our Works
so large, only the Walls, raised with earth, and Palizadoed about with
Bulworkes, without shoulders: Likewise the out-workes, as Halfe-Moones, and
Horne-workes, and the like, may be spared, so that the Works be made
according to Rule, and the Mote full of water will be sufficient to keep the
Enemy from surprising it. View the Figure following.



CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Venetians manner of Fortification.
THe Venetians have found by experience the Rules and Maxims of the Spaniards,
touching the manner of their defenses, they having small differences as is to
be seen by that admirable fortified Town in the Isle of Crete named Nicolia;
with his Bulworkes well ordered, only they were too little, not having space
sufficient in them for retrenchment; the Turk besieged it, and won it with
the Fort of Fumogasta, and all the Isle of Crete; which the Turks possess to
this day; they finding the inconveniences insident to these small Works, they
began to make their Works more spacious in the Town of Palma la nova, upon
the flanks thereof they might place more men for defense; and likewise they
might re-intrench the oftener: For their Enemy the Turk was most potent, and
likewise the Emperor, wherefore they made spacious Bulworkes, which they termed
Bulworkes Royal (viz.) large spacious works, with large bouted shoulders, as
the Figure following will better instruct you.



CHAP. XXX.
A Comparison between the Rules of Fortification handled in this Treatise with
the Rules of others; with certain Answers to diverse Objections in
Fortification.
IN the beginning of this discourse of Fortification, we have fully described
the Rules; how to fortify after the Low Country manner, being the most
absolutest manner that can be invented; we will not lose the time to repeat it
again, they being drawn with the same proportions, that at this day is, or
ought to be used in all places in Europe, that is famous for Fortification:
And in our progression we will endeavor to make some comparisons, betwixt our
modern way of fortifying, and the ancient manner formerly used: From thence we
shall draw the knowledge of the perfection of this Art, how far it exceeds
the writings and practices of former Ages. First, we will begin with the
Spanish and French; and by the way, let us observe the oppositions that the
French will have about the Line of Defense, in their Fortifications, The
principal Enginieres in France, as also Errard de Barledce, which has writ of
Fortification; and he would have the defense of the Bulworke to to be 100.
Toises, which is 120. Venetian paces, that is 60. feet English by the Rule, A
Toise is 6. Foot.
12. inches to each foot; to the end (says he) that it may be defended with
Muskets; ^lledging further, that the Canon can do no great hurt or damage, in
regard of the uncertaintie of the shot; and because they cannot be discharged
so often as the Muskets, but there will be a great deal of intermission
betwixt shot and shot. He further opposes, that the defense ought to be taken
from the Flank: because says he, it makes the Bulworke more obtuse in his
Angle-Flanke. To these oppositions we must make answer altogether, because the
remedies of one of these faults, depends upon that of the other: And first; we
must know and hold for a Maxim infallible, that no Fortress but ought to be
made with all advantages: so that it may be able to defend against a great
number; as if I should say; the advantage must be so great, that one man may
resist ten, this being taken for a ground and Rule, we come now to confute this
French opinion. (viz)

The Line of Defense they hold ought not to be above 100. Toises, or sixty
feet English, or 120 to be the most; because (says he) 120 or 144. Toises is
the furthest a Musket can shoot, to defend with them; further, the Canon they
allege is of small validity, in regard of its uncertaintie in shooting, so
that it does small damage to the Enemy. If the French Enginieres will maintain
this Argument, they must of necessity destroy the Flanks; making them so small
for the lodging of Musketeers in them; but I say that cannot be done, because
they must be larger to lodge far more Soldiers, for the defense of the
Fortress; for they ought to be 17. Toises large with the Shoulders, as Mr.
Errard intends to give to each Flank; which amounts to some 20. paces, 5. foot
to each pace, and this is but capable to lodge 34. Soldiers on the said
Flank, allowing 3. foot distance for each Soldier to use his Arms in: Now
do but observe, how the Enemy will have a wonderful advantage, by making his
approaches in his roling Trenches, and Mines under the earth, which shall bring
them to the Counter-scarpe, where being arrived, they can raise their
Batteries, and cause their Ordnance to beat continually upon the heads of the
Musketeers that defend the Flanks, or the place that is to be assaulted; so
that they cannot be able to make resistance, or to do them any hurt from the
Walls; besides, the Mote being large, the Enemy may lodge in his Works, three
times as many Soldiers, which shall continually shoot against the Hankes of
the Fort, and keep them under; so that their defense will be to no purpose:
Moreover, the Enemy having raised his Batteries within distance, The opinion of
defending the Flanks with Muskets disproved by argument and reason.
he will soon beat those Musketeers from off the Shoulders of the Bulworke,
causing them to retreat; they having then but the space, which is rescued by
the Flank, being but 6. or 7. Toises, which is but distance enough for 12. or
14. Soldiers; how do you think then, they shall be able to resist 300.
which shall be upon the Counter-scarp, and under it? Furthermore I demand, if
he will not have the Flanks defended with Ordnance, how will he be able to
impeach and hinder the Enemy from making their Traverses or Galleries over the
Mote, View the Figure where the manne^ of the Galleries and the Ordnance
planting is desiphered.
for to march over and assault the breach the Canons have made in the
Bulworkes. Now if you will please to observe the excellency of the Canon for
the defending and offending which in a most absolute way is performed; namely,
if the Enemy makes his approaches close to the Mote as before is said, yet he
durst not enter the Mote, because of the shot that shall come continually from
the Flanks; wherefore to prevent the danger of the shot, they are constrained
to take the earth that is taken out of the Trenches, to make a sufficient
Barricado against such places as they shall shoot from; so that the force of a
Canon shall do small hurt, and shall not be able, A reason produced why the
Musket is not of validity to secure the Works from the Flanks.
without great trouble, to hinder their approaches, they being secured by their
Works. Much less then can the Musket Shot prevail to hinder them, so that
they will soon gain the Bulworke, after the Gallery is put over the Mote;
because they may have a recourse securely from Gunshot, and by this means
undermine the Bulworke or scale it, as the Figure before named will demonstrate.

Moreover, the Enemy may make Galleries over of Timber, covering it over with
earth, to prevent the firing of it with Wildfire, which they within the Fort
may cast upon it for that purpose. Likewise, the Mote being full of water, they
may prepare Bridges of Boats, covered over with earth or raw Hides, to
preserve them from fire: The Musket is not able to beat down the Enemies
Galleries: wherefore they must have Canon shot planted on the Flanks.
I would gladly know, how these proceedings of an Enemy might be prevented
without the Canon, only by Muskets, as the French Engineere would have it?

Moreover they do reply, that although they would have the Musketeers to
defend from the Flanks, yet not at all times would they be destitute of the
Canon: which may serve for such purposes as to hinder the Enemies designs. I
say all good Orders and Rule so ought to be necessarily observed; contrarily,
Disorder and Confusion ought to be echewed, as the greatest discommodity. The
French replies, yes, he intends good order should be kept and observed, that
every one may know what he ought to do: and that they should put all their
strength and industry to to acquit themselves from the Enemy. To which we may
truly object, that the Flanks being the eyes of the Fortress, they ought not
to be employed about any other thing, but to spend the time in hindering and
offending the Enemy, from making his Galleries or Traverses: Now the
Musketeers are not able to perform that duty, but altogether hinders the
operation of the Canons; for if the Canons comes to be discharged, they must
hinder the Muskets from defending the face of the Bulworke, for they being two
different things that cannot stand together, one of the two must be slighted as
insufficient; wherefore we must conclude, that Muskets are not proper to be
placed in the Flanks, because they are not of force to beat down the
Traverses, and hinder the Enemies approaches unto the Bulworke. The Engineeres
in France, The fond opinion of the French Engineers.
can hardly be brought to believe this; but that the Canon is altogether
unprofitable, and and that the Musketeers are all in all; to this we may answer
without contradiction, that in all things due order is to be observed, as
Errard himself confesses: Wherefore take notice, the Office of the Flanks is
only to pierce and batter the Traverses, and Crosle-workes, which the Enemy
shall raise upon the Counter-skarpe, and that the Muskets ought to be placed
in another place, more apt for them to do the same Office, which he would have
them perform in the Flanks. Now I dare say their ears glowes to hear what
place is aptest to place the Musketeers in, to perform the same Office they
would have them do in the Flanks, (which is only to defend the face of the
Bulworke) they being ignorant of any other place from whence they may defend.
The defense of the Bulworke is to be taken from the third part of the Curtin.
Now you shall both see and judge their imbecility, whether it be more apter
and convenient to take the defense with Musketeers from the Flank, or from the
Curtin, which is far better, and also from the Cavalliaris; whereby the
defense is made threefold: Let us but weigh the discommodity we have, with the
commodity we ought to receive, and then make choice of one of the two, which
seems probablest for our best service. Wherefore it is not to be doubted, but
that a Bulworke well guarded with Soldiers, is far stronger than one that is
only defended with a stone or earthen Wall without men. The strength that is
to be expected in a stone or earthen Wall, is the forming of the Works more
obtuse, and so consequently the stone Wall is strongest: and yet there is no
comparison or proportion in it, to a Work that is defended with men. Further,
as before we have related, that a spacious obtuse Bulworke is compared to a
strong man without Arms, for his Arms are his defense, that is, the Soldiers
which continually shoot from either side of the Bulworke. Wherefore we may
safely conclude, with that Maxim which the Hollanders and Venetians hold to be
most proper and profitable; to take the defense from the third part of the
Curtin: If you please to observe in the first figure of Fortification the
commodiousnesse of it, It is most safe to take the defense from the third part
of the Curtin.
that then I make no question, you will consent with my opinion, and conclude I
have made those former Propositions clear. Now it follows I should answer
another Objection of Errards, and withal, give some good instructions about
the length of the Line of Defense. (Viz.) The distance from the corner of the
Flank, to the point of the next Bulworke opposite. He maintains, it ought not
be above 100. or 120. paces, for if it be longer, he says it is out of
Musket Shot; All good Rules are to be grounded upon firm reasons and sound
grounds, wherefore we will discourse and illustrate this proposition, that
thereby we may gain experience and profit. Because a Musket cannot possible
convey a Bullet so far as a Canon, therefore the Line of Defense should be
answerable to their shooting, or conveying their shot; by this we intend that
the Musketeers which are ordained for the defense of the Bulworke, should have
their distances 100. or 120. paces, being placed upon the third part of the
Curtin; and those that are placed below upon the Work in the Mote before the
Cunette, which is to be esteemed one of the principal defenses; and likewise
the Canon may have for his Line of Defense from the Flank and Cavalliares to
the point of the Bulworke, 180. or 200. paces at the most; whereby the Enemies
Galleries and Traverses may be hindered and broken down. Suppose this to be
the advantage and commodity we gain by this large distance in hindering the
Enemy from having a distance, which otherwise he will take by reason of the
breadth of the Mote, from battering down the Flanks, for he is able to batter
182. or 200. paces; yet in regard the Mote is so large, and the Works he is
constrained to make before his Battery for to preserve it, causes the Battery
to stand at the least 260 paces from the Flank: Now I would gladly know what
hurt a Battery can effect, shooting such a distance against a strong Bulworke
well Shouldered, and if he bring his Battery nearer; into what eminent danger
he brings himself you may plainly perceive by this Figure following, which
being viewed, we will proceed and answer other of his objections.



You see we have fairly gotten the day of the French Enginiere, both by
grounds of solid reasons, and by our demonstrative Figure, which clear all his
objections: Now it remains to have another Veny with him about the Mote or
Ditch, which they would have full of Water to the brimme; because says he, it
is very difficult for the Enemy to get over to scale the Works: Wherefore he
demands, whether a dry Ditch or Mote be better then that: To which I make
answer, that betwixt two extremes we ought always search out the middle
proportion (viz.) not to decline too much to the one, nor the other; but to
keep the Golden mean, and part them in the midst equally: Therefore we
will not condemn a full Mote of Water altogether, neither will we condemn a
quite dry Mote; but we will participate of both, (viz.) that one half of the
Mote or Ditch should have Water, the other half should be without; so by
consequence, it should be half full, one should serve to prevent Surprises,
the other should be the defense thereof: Experience teaches, that such a Mote
is the best and perfectest of all; for the Mote which is brimme full, is a
hinderance to them in the Fort, and keeps them as if they were in a Prison,
and disables them from defending the Ditch but only from above the Walls, which
is but a poor defense, Reasons why the Mote ought not be brimfull.
in regard the first thing an Enemy practices at his approaches, is to batter
against the top of the Walls, and beat the Defendants under; so that there
remains no defense for the Ditch, The Work in the midst of the Mote is of
great defense and safeguard, as you may perceive in the precedent Figure.
but from the Flanks: Now on the contrary, those that have their Motes half
dry, they can Entrench themselves therein, and keep off the Enemy without any
danger to themselves; without the which the Enemy would soon find great
advantage by annoying the tops of the Walls from their Batteries; so as you
should not be able to shoot over without great loss of men: The first thing
to be done in an Assault, is to batter the tops of the Walls.
and if the Enemy should give an Assault, he must first be constrained to win
this Work made within the Mote by great difficulty: The Defendants are
secured from the Flanckes, and from the Works above them; they having a good
Parapet before them for their Cover, and half the breadth of the Mote for
their security; Note this Work within the Mote must not be made so low, that
the Counterscarpe may command it; for then it will be of no force.
and likewise upon all occasions to retreat into the Bulworkes by the
Sally-Ports that are placed in the Flanckes: And in regard this kind of
defense lies so low that the Enemy cannot see it, whereby it the harder to be
gained by him; by these circumstances we conclude, that a Mote or Ditch made
in this kind, is the most safest and most defensive against the Enemy. I hope
this discourse will satisfy any Soldier of reasonable capacity: In the next
Chapter we will frame our discourse about the manner and proceedings that
ought to be observed in Assaulting and defending these Fortresses.

CHAP. XXXI.
The manner how to gain and defend these Fortresses.
THe Enemy having viewed a Fort, and found out the fittest places to gain it,
(which are to be supposed these following,) First, the ground being proper and
easy to make the Trenches in; or if the defense be not strong and good upon
that fide, whereby any advantage may be gained; then you must begin to raise
your Trenches as you may perceive in the Figure following by N. N. drawing them
right to the point of the Bulworke, because those that defend within may not
annoy the Pioners; and they are to cast the earth always toward the Enemies
Works, the better to secure their own bodies: as you may perceive by the
Trench O. and G. they being drawn crooked like a Serpent; and so directing
them until they come close to the Counterscarp of the Mote at the point of the
Enemies Bulworkes, When to mount the Canons for Battery.
where being arrived, the Enemy will be glad to quit the two half Moons that
are without the Mote, whereby the Work is half won: for now you may safely
mount your Canons, and make your Battery K. K. which shall shoot against the
Flanks at the bottom of the Ditch: The rest of the Canons at the point of the
Bulworke E. (at the same instant the Enemy that is under the Counter-scarpe)
shall pierce the said Counter-scarpe, and enter the Mote, and there make a
Gallery over at F. F. not forgetting to cast up the earth for your safeguard
always toward the Enemies Works, How to cast the earth for your safeguard.
that Flankers you, from which you must continually shoot to beat them from
their Flanks: But how ever the Ordnance planted upon the Battery K. will
hinder the Enemy; How to preserve the Galleries from shooting down.
so that they shall do you small hurt, from their Flanks to your Galleries:
The Motes having water in them, you must frame your Galleries over them of
strong Timber, and so make your assault over them by the point of the Bulworke
C. and by the Breach E. Now for to prevent this assault, How to prevent an
Assault.
the Enemy within the Fort prepares to Reintrench himself, as you may see by
the Reintrenchment D. by the which they are able to defend the Breach: they
must have always in readiness earth Wood and Timber, and all such things as
are necessary for Coverture, and are proper to resist the Enemies Batteries:
but the Reintrenchment is not to be feared, because they within the Fort will
be easily constrained to quit it; as they were first made to leave the point
of the Bulworke. Their next refuge is immediately to begin a new Intrenchment
within the other, as you may perceive at S. S. to the end the other being lost,
they may Retreat into this; and there they ought to plant their Canons to
defend the Breach.

And now it is high time to entreat of Conditions for the rendering up the
Fort, this being the last intrenchment they can possibly make; and it shall be
honor sufficient unto them that they have held it out to the last: But if the
Defendants expect any Troops that are suddenly to come to their aid; or that
the Works be so great that they may raise the third Reintrenchment, then let
them hold it out still: But if the place be so small that they cannot
Reintrench, they must give place to Fortune. Thus by these demonstrations, you
see it is possible to enter any Fort that is accessible: wherefore to delay
time, Werefore Outworks were devised.
and to waste Men and Treasure of the Enemies, we must use means to prevent
an Enemy from making his approaches near the Ditch and Works: Therefore
Outworks are devised, as Horne-works, Skonses, Halfe-Moones, Redouts, Lines,
Crosse-Lines and the like, which are to be raised in the convenienst places
beyond the Mote, for defense of the Ports, Mote, and Wall; whereby the Enemies
appreaches shall be hindered: not forgetting if their be any way by Water to
relieve the Town, that then you raise such able Skonses, that may beat off
the Enemy from hindering the passage; Passages by water carefully to be
fortified.
as was at the famous Siege of Bergin-up-Zone: there were two Skonses which
secured the Haven, so that upon all occasions relief did enter: For had
Marquess Spinolla gained those Skonses, the Town had been famisht: There are
only three ways whereby Fortified Towns may be gained; The first is by
Stratagem, as Breda, Skinkins Skense were unawares assaulted and taken: The
second is by Intrenchments and Batteries to prepare a Breach, and so to make
the assault, as in this following Figure I have demonstrated: The third is
only by Intrenching an Army about a Fort, whereby all passages are Baricadoed
up; so that relief cannot possibly come to enter the Town, so that by mere
hunger they are constrained to yield upon such conditions as they may: Lastly
for the defending of Works or Breaches, there must be a special care had,
that all Warlike instruments be in a readiness for to beat off the Enemy,
All warlike instruments are to be in a readiness to repel the Enemy from the
Breach.
as Granad^s; to throw amongst them Wilde-fire, Pitcht-Ropes, Hoopes, Frames of
Muskets, Flayles, Stones, Pieces of Timber to role down, and the like: The
Fireballs will do much good when the Enemy is wrought under the Walls, so as
the Shot cannot command them: Diverse things considerable in the defending a
Breach.
The most principal thing is to Fire the Galleries; Likewise if you see you
shall be forcd to leave the point of the Bulworke, or any Work else
whatsoever: Then privily to make some Mine well planted with Powder, the Train
being drawn into your Reintrenchment or Retreating place; that so soon as the
Enemy is entered: Fire may be given and blow them up: Further, observe when a
Breach is made, By the ceasing of the Canon, you may know when the Enemy
intends to enter the Breach.
you may know when it is high time to make resistance, by the Enemies leaving
giving Fire to the Canons; for when he assaults, he cannot shoot toward the
Breach for destroying his own Men, but bends his Ordnance against the Flanks
and Bulworkes on either side of the Breaches to hinder them from shooting,
whereby their assault may be safer and easier. View the Figure following in
the 78 Page, where you shall see how it is defended and assaulted.



Note what is not here expressed in this Figure answerable to the discourse, you
shall find by the Letters in the Precedent Figures plainly demonstrated.

CHAP. XXXII.
Diverse observations, Rules, and Orders, which all Generals ought to observe
in the Besieging, and defending of Fortes.
He that will Be-Leager a Town or Fortress, ought to have three things in
his consideration: Diverse considerations for a General, before he enterprises
any attempt against the Enemy.
First, whether he can derive any right or true Title to it; Secondly, whether
he be of Power sufficient to manage the Siege (viz) all kind of Provision, as
Meat, Drink, Money, Soldiers; all kind of Ammunition, Ordnance, Pieces,
Arms, Powder, Bullets, Match; all Warlike Instruments, Grenades,
Morter-Peeces; all kind of Wilde-Fire, and the like: Thirdly, he must
consider whether the profit he shall gain by it, will countervaile the charge
that must be spent in the Siege: Having thus well considered of all these
precedent things; then he must get a true description of the frame and fashion
of the Fortress, with the Ways and Paths; the condition of the grounds about
it, and the number of Defendants in it: Then sharpening his valor upon the
Grindstone of Resolution, let him lead his Army in good order against this
Fortress, where he must be careful to quarter his Men in the best and
aptest places of security; then having Environed the Fort on all sides with
Skonses and Redoubts, so that there can be no Recourse too nor from the Fort;
then he must Fortify against the face of the Canon, to the end it may serve
for an advantage as you may see by the Bulworke marked G. The other part of his
Army are to be placed to keep the passages, least the Enemy should come in
the Rear of them and beat them out of their Trenches* Therefore strong Works
must be raised well Pallizadoed to prevent them; Next he must look that his
quarters be well Intrencht with Crosse-Workes, and defended by the Forts and
Redouts raised for that purpose, as you may see the Trenches C. are defended
from the places R. and from the Redouts P. He ought likewise to make choice of
a fit place for the Army to make it his Field for Battle, as you may see by R.
S. T. Next you must raise good and sufficient Batteries as near to the Enemy
as possible may be; which must be secured and faithfully Guarded by a
sufficient number of Soldiers, as the Battery A. is well Retrencht with the
Bastions R. and beset with good Gabions filled with good earth, having a great
care their be no Stones in it; least the Canon shot from the Fort should beat
them about, and do more harm to the Soldiers, then the Bullets themselves:
They ought also to do the same on all sides, as we see by the Cavaliers A. D.
E. Q. the which must be raised at the same instant, beginning to make the
Canons Play, to batter the tops of the Works in the Fort, with all fury without
intermission; to the end the Pioners may have time to make their Trenches and
approaches in greater safety and more strongly: for the Canons beating against
the top of the Works of the Fort with such fury that the Defendants have no
leisure to discover the design of the Assaylants, and much less shall they
know how to use means to prevent those blows and batterings; besides the
great fears and terrors that the poor Soldiers will be in all the while*
Wherefore there must be great diligence used, for fear they should lose that
good and favorable time, wherein they may make their Intrenchments without
danger: Those within the Fort in this case, How those should defend themselves
in the Fort against the Assailants.
ought to have very experienst Soldiers and good Canoniers; and likewise all
the Platformes for the Artillery or Cavaliaries should use their best
endeavors by continual shooting to prevent the raising of the Enemies
Batteries and Trenches, and not to fear any colors, being they are protected
with a good Parapet from the dinte of the Shot: Likewise oftentimes they ought
to change the places of the Musketeers, How the Musketeers ought to be
demeaned at the Enemies first approaches.
those which were upon the Curtins, shall be placed upon the face of the
Bulworke, and so to the Shoulders of it; continually thus changing the
Musketeers from place to place, as occasion shall be offered: this will much
annoy the Enemy, and the rather, because they know not how to bend their Pieces
against them; because of the uncertainty of their places. Moreover the Enemy
having battered those places that hindered him most, cannot help it, but he
must suffer your Soldiers to set every man his Basket, being set close
together that they may put their Muskets between them, and shoot continually
for all the blows of the Canons; whose shottes are made very uncertain: above
all things we must have an eye, that the Musquetier discharges not by Vollyes,
but by degrees; so that some may be always giving fire, whilst their
Fellow Soldiers charge. And likewise, to take good aim from between the
Baskets; which ought to be placed upon every Work near the Enemy; after the
manner deciphered in this Figure following.

They use to plant the foot of the inside of the Walls, with Osiers and
Willowes, to make Baskets, and mend Breaches.




A, B, are the Baskets filled with good Earth or Dung to cover the Musketeers
upon the Breach, made in the Parapet C; they are to put their Muskets between
each Basket, taking their level to shoot; wherefore there ought to be great
store of these Baskets, and Wheele-barrowes in the Fort, to be used upon all
occasions.

If these should be wanting, they must have Sackes filled with good earth,
placeing them accordingly to shoot through. The Enemy seeing such prepared
resistance within the Fort, will begin his Trenches the profoundlier, to the
end his Soldiers may be preserved; for it is the duty of a good Captain, to
have a special regard to the safety of his Soldiers: For that is a practical
policy used always by the Prince of Nassaw, whereby they conceived he would
not cause his men to run headlong to destruction, which made them the more
forward in Service, and the valianter to execute what they were commanded by
him; this ought to be a thing remarkable, for otherwise a world of Soldiers
are lost, and the Captains are discomfited, for not gaining an impossible
victory.

The Enemy is to conduct his Trenches to the Counter-skarpe, How the Enemy
ought to draw his Trenches.
and make them so deep, that the Defendants within the Fort cannot possibly
hurt them; they being brought always toward the point of the Bulworke, as you
may perceive by the Trench C, C, because they should not be so much molested by
the Ordnance and the Muskets from the Works of the Fort: and when the Enemy
has gained the Counter-skarpe, they shall make their Crosse-workes as you may
see by the distance X, X, where they shall lodge a good number of Canons;
raising their Batteries or Cavalliaries more spacious, although they serve for
little or no purpose, only to batter against the Flanks, and make them
unprofitable; during which time you ought to follow the speedy making of your
Trenches, and bring them to their half Moons, and then by the assistance of
your Pioners, they raising a sufficient able high Traverse, to shelter them
from the force of the Cavalliaries and Bulworkes within the Fort, which
otherwise would command them, and is most easy to be effected, especially if
the More or Ditch be not spacious; and at the same instant your Soldiers are
to make their assault, be it by Scaling-ladder or otherwise.

The General must cause diverse Pieces to be brought, which shall be to
discharge upon all parts of the Wall, to hinder their annoying of the
Assaylants; who must enter the Breach with a brave resolution. The roaring of
the Canons having so astonish those within the Halfe-Moone, and battered their
Parapets, that they have no time to see if the Battery be finished or not, and
they being not provided for the Assault, it will wonderfully puzzle them, the
assault being followed with good order and resolution; this being the time and
place, where men ought to purchase honor: and these Assaults will discover,
which are the valiantest spirits. The Officers at the Siedge of Rhineberg,
showing their resolutions to their Soldiers, threw their Colors into a
Halfe-Moone, from which they had been repulsed three or four times, by the
Musketeers and Pikes within the said Work, whereupon they ran furiously to
redeem their honors upon the Pikes and Muskets, rather choosing to dye with
honor, than to lose their Colors with disgrace: this Onset did so revive the
Soldiers, they seeing the Noble resolution of their Leaders, at one instant
assaulted the Work, and discomfited the Enemy, so as they gave way to their
magnanimous resolutions.

Having gained this Halfe-moone Y Y, the Defendants for their safety retreat
into the Ditch, What the Defendants ought to do, the Enemy having gained the
half Moon.
behind the Parapet of the Work called the Cunette, with short Cudgels and
Flayles prepared for that purpose, to defend the entering of the Enemy into the
Ditch; which will be a hard work for them to enter and obtain it, before they
can be in any hopes to win the Fort, by reason they cannot come to batter
this work, it being so low in the Ditch, with force of Canon.

Now for to hinder the defense of the Work within the Ditch called the
Cunette, How the Assailants may hinder the defense of the Cunette, or Ravelin.
the best way is to stop their passages from coming upon it; which may be
effected, if there be two pieces of Ordnance planted within the Ditch by the
Halfe-moone M, where they must batter down the Earth right against the
Sally-port, or place they are to enter unto the Work, to defend it, whereby
their ways may be discovered; Their sallying out upon this work being
hindered, there must be a Gallery ready prepared, made upon Barrels or
Hogsheads; these must flote upon the water, and from hence the Flank that
defends that side, must be battered with all fury, without giving space to the
Defendants to get upon their Trenches, which they will do if there be any
intermission; wherefore immediately they must fa^l to intrenching, and cast the
Earth toward the side of the Flanks, making the Traverse M; during which
time, the Battery must shoot furiously on all sides, then those which are upon
the Counter-skarpe, must be provided with good store of Grenades, which they
must cast over into the works called the Cunette, to the end they may cause
them to quit the Work; then the Traverse being made M, M, they shall have the
better freedom, to transport a great number of Soldiers over the Mote to make
their Assaults: and being arrived at the foot of the Bulworke, they may
presently undermine it, if it happens that the Breach be not sufficient for
them to get over.

Now the Defendants within the Port, have for their refuge the Bulworke, to
re-intrench in, as you may perceive at V; causing a sufficient Parapet to be
made for the coverture of those that defend the re-intrenchment: Having always
a sufficient company of Soldiers, with all kind of warlike instruments, ready
and in good order for to releeve them, the Enemy being so near them wrought,
that they are like to be surprised and beaten back; the best defense they can
then have, will be the Grenades and Artificial Fire-workes, which they must
cast over into the Ditch or False-Bray, for to annoy them that are undermining
the Bulworkes.

But the Enemy standing upon his honor, How to prevent the breaking of
Grenades.
seeks all ways to prevent the breakeing of the Grenades, and burning of the
Fire-workes, by choking them with water or raw Hides, so as they fall to the
ground, so that they work small effect.

Likewise, the Defendants place great pieces of Timber upon the Walls, to role
down upon the Assailants as they are climbing the Bulworkes: But when the
Defendants have used all their endeavors to no purpose, and the Enemy being
got into the Work, then it is time to entreat and provide for a Composition:
yet for all they are reduced to these extremities, they ought to make choice of
such inconveniences as are least hurtful to them. How the Defendants ought to
make their Composition with the Enemy.
The Composition is to be made, according to the Forces they have, and the
hopes they have to releeve it, and according as they are able to sustain
themselves, if they should put it to the last brunt. It is no dishonor for a
Captain to entreat with his Enemy, in two respects; the first is, the
conservation of their Arms, and Baggage: the second is, the Pillage which may
be made within the Fort; the which may possibly be regained again by some
stratagem, from this Enemy, in a short time after.

Now having the Fortress surrendered upon composition, the General must
consider, whether he be able to maintain it, and whether the profit of it will
be answerable to the charge; which if it be, he must raze down all the
out-Trenches which the Enemy made, and repair the Breaches of it: and then to
draw his Army into convenient Garrisons, that they may be fit for the next
employment of the Prince. Thus taking Reason and Experience for his guide, in
all his enterprises, which must be just and equitable; will cause the Honor
and glory of a General to shine.

Thus have we finished the discourse of Fortification, and in regard the use of
great Artillery is the chiefest thing to be used in a Fort, I have thought it
fit to frame a discourse of the use of Artillery, having taken the opinions and
rules of the best Authors, either ancient or modern, to steer my course by:
only I shall show you a Figure of a Fort beleaguered, and of a Fort assaulted
upon the Curtin. View the Figures following.

ssss ppppppp ssss ssss ppppppp ssss ssss ppppppp ssss ssss ppppppp ssss ssss
ppppppp ssss ssss ppppppp ssss ssss ppppppp ssss



Here you perceive the breach made in the midst of the Curtin. At the letter
B, is a Catte with Ordnance on it, to batter against the Re-intrenchments, and
to (...) it: There is a Work raised at C, to prevent them. I would wish you to
peruse Jerome Cataneo, by him you shall receive further instructions. If the
Breach may possible be made in the Point of the Bulworke, it is far better
than the Curtin; because the Defendants have far the odds, in defending the
Breach from either Flank, and from the Re-intrenchment; besides the Gallery
that shall be laid over the Mote, will sooner be battered down from the
Flanks. The next is, the Paralellagram of a Fort beleaguered; And then the use
of Redouts: And then after that, the duties of Soldiers in Garrisons; shall be
plainly showed.

CHAP. XXXIII.
A Triangular Skonse, with directions for the best scituating of it.
THis kind of Triangular Skonse, must be situated in a place strong by
Nature, otherwise it is of poor resistance, and little better than a Redout:
they were invented to be placed in some spot of ground, naturally environed
with strength, being a place that could not be capable of any other Figure, in
regard of the smalnesse of it: Likewise, it is a small charge to raise it, and
speedily done; the place must not be of any great consequence, where this
Figure is situated, for it cannot withstand any great resistance: it is formed
with earth, after the same manner the other be: only high and thick to resist
Ordnance.



CHAP. XXXIV.
The manner of framing a Triangle Redout.
ARedout is a kind of slight Fortification, used for the defense of some few
men; And of these principally there are three kinds, which are to be made use
of, according to the quantity of men you place in them, and the consequence of
the passage they are to be raised in, for they are not to be used but for
Out-guardes, to prevent the Enemy from making any sudden surprises: the
greatest defense they can make is against the Horse, to hinder them from
passing by any Foord of Water, or other Passage, if the Passage be thought
convenient for the

The Paralellagram of the discourse desiphering the manner and order observed
in the Siege and defense of a Fort.



Pla^e this Figure betwixt ^olio 84. and 85.

Enemies approaches, then place two of these Redouts a square, on one side the
way, and this Triangle a little wide of the other, on the other side of the
way; the Brest-worke of them is to be some four or five foot thick, and eight
foot high, with a good broad foot-step, and convenient height to stand on; so
as they may discharge over the Work.

The Pallizadoes are to be wrought in two foot from the top of the Work, the
grea^ends to be laid downwards into the Work, so that the sharp ends may
rise upwards, they are to lie three foot into the earth, and as much out: the
outside of this work ought to be good sollid earth, being dug taperwise
(viz.) six inches thick at the end that should lie outmost, and some two
inches the end that lies inward; by this means they will not slip out, and
make the work decay; in the midst is your rubbish earth to be rammed down:
the Ditch ought to be six or eight foot wide, with a Drawbridge to enter
into the Work.

Note, if there be 60. men to guard the passage, the Redout must be 60. feet
square on all three sides, allowing, 3. feet for each man to use his arms in,
viz. 20. men on 1 side.




CHAP. XXXV.
The manner of framing a Quadrangle Redout.
THis four Square Redout, is to hold a hundred or 150. Soldiers, and these
are to be raised, where you conceive the Enemy has most advantage to gain a
passage to come to annoy your Camp; it serves also in the beleaguering of a
Fort, to place one or two of these Redouts betwixt two Forts, that they may
flanker it, and so to Trench in the Fort round, that no access may be, either
to or from the Town; it must be well Pallizadoed, as you see by the Figure;
especially, if it stands upon any passage of consequence. The Prince of Orange,
made use of these Redouts to surround his Camp, one to stand Musket Shot from
the other, so that the Enemy could not possibly pass, but to the loss of his
Men; but however the Enemy could not possibly do any design upon his
quarters, but there would be a convenient alarm; so as the whole Army would be
at the Brest-worke of their Trenches to entertain them: In the discourse of
Incamping, we have taken occasion to speak of these kind of Forts more fully



CHAP. XXXVI.
The manner of framing a Quadrangle Skonse.
THis Foure-square Skonse, is of greater strength than your Triangle, and if it
be favored with a strong Situation, as great Rivers, or upon a Rock, or
where it may be flankered from the Bulworks of a Fort, it will stand in great
stead; otherwise it is not to be taken for a strength of any moment: The
Bulworkes and Curtines are to be made very high, thick, and strong, that it
may endure the battering of the Enemies Ordnance.



CHAP. XXXVII.
The manner of framing a Skonse with six Points or Angles.
THis Figure following, is a kind of Fort, and is used in the Intrenching or
Belaguring a Town round; it is spacious to hold 200 Soldiers or more, as
occasion shall be offered; You may perceive by the Lines drawn how every
Angle is Flanked one from the other: It is made of good Earth very
substantially after the same manner the former are; you shall see how they are
situated in the Page in the Figure of the Fort Beleagured.





CHAP. XXXVIII.
The manner of framing a half Moon.
This precedent Figure, is a kind of a half Moon and is thus formed, because
it lies open to some Curtin or Bulworke behind it, so that if the enemy
fortunes to gain it, he shall be beaten out from the Bulworke that Flanks it:
the Brest-worke of it ought to be of the same thickness and height that the
former Redouts were.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The manner of framing a Horne-Worke.
THere are two kind of Horne-Workes which are to be made without the Fort of
great height and strength, being the only place of safety for all the
out-workes to Retreat into when occasion is offered: it likewise safeguards
the Counterscarpe, keeping the Enemy from approaching; it defends the Works of
the Fort from being battered by the Enemies Ordnance; it lies open to the Fort,
so that if the Enemy should gain it, they should be Repulst from the
Bulworkes; It is to be situated betwixt two Bulworkes, and it has its
defense from them, they Flankering each side: The other fashioned Horne-worke
is made out with two Points, and is of greater strength then this, as in the
next Page we shall discourse of; It is called a Horne-worke from the fashion,
being like a Beaugle-horne; some halfe-Moones are of this form, but not of
half the greatness this is to be of, in regard this is always well Manned;
For those that have the Works against the Enemy one night, are relieved the
next, and here they repose themselves; the third night they take their ease in
the Town.



The manner of framing of a Horn-worke described; with diverse Ou^ works
belonging to it, whereby it may be defended from all Assaults, most proper to
be placed before some weak Bulworke of a Town beleaguered, or any other part
of the Walls thereof, that may seem easy for the Enemy to batter down. By
the Letters you shall find each Circumstance described, belonging to this work.

A. The Front of the Horne-worke. H. The Ditch of the Towne-walls. B. The Ditch
30. foot broad. I. A Fortification before the Out-workes 140. spaces distant
from the Horne-worke. C. The half Moon. D. The Parrapet. K. A three-pointed
Fortification before the Front and corners of the Horne-worke. E. The Ditch
without the half Moon. L. The Ditch. F. The Counterscarpe. M. The Pallizadoet
upon the Counter-scarpe about the Ditch. G. The Towne-walls.

Place this Horne-worke between Folio 90. and 91.



CHAP. XL.
A second kind of Horne-worke, with its proper place.
THis second kind of Horne-worke, is of greatest strength to resist the Enemy
next the Bulworke, they are to open toward the Works of the Fort, and to be
situated betwixt two Bulworkes that it may be Flanquered by them: These are
made without the Mote and Counterscarpe, a Muskets shot, or not all so much,
according as the situation shall permit: These ought to be always in
readiness, if the Town be a Frontier, and according as the fieldding may be
favorable for the Enemies Intrenchments their to raise one of these Works, or
if any place of the Wall of the Fort should be weaker then the rest; We had
three of these ready raised at Zutphen in Gelderland to prevent the Enemies
approches in those great Marshes about the Town; there is no watch kept in
them except the Enemy be at hand: They are to be framed as your Bulworkes,
Canonproofe, and of height sufficient to secure the Walls of the Fort; Likewise
they must be well Pallizadoed and strongly Manned, View the Figure.







The Figures of the three famous Batteries, which were raised by Spinola at the
Seige of Breda.



CHAP. XLI.
The description of the Redonts, Forts, and Batteries, which were raised by
Spinola at the Siege of Breda.
YOu must observe in these Precedent Figures (both of the Forts and Batteries
which were raised by Spinola at the Siege of Breda) Those sides of them which
looked toward the Town, were made Canon-proofe (viz.) 25 foot thick.

The first of the three Batteries was 160 foot long, and 125 foot broad; in the
Rear and Flanks of it, it had a Wall 15 foot thick, saving that one side of
this Wall was thicker then the rest, rising with a walk and a Parrapet on the
inside: in the Front it was lined with two exterior Angles, the face of it
rising with Nine open Windows, for so many Pieces of Ordnance to play out at;
each Window was 2 foot 1/2 wide, opening wider outward by degrees: On the
inside a Groundselling was raised like a bed of Turffe and Faggots, 8 foot in
height, and 35 foot broad, covered over with Plankes, for the speedy removing
and recoyling of the Artillery: Behind this Groundsell, was a place of Arms
130 foot long, and 50 foot broad. The outside of the Wall under the Canon
Windows, was Pallizadoed with sharp long Stakes.

Before the Battery there is a halfe-Moone raised, wherein was a Guard of
Musquettiers, and compassed with a Counterscarpe and Pallizado, these were for
the safety of the Battery: Round about the Battery a Ditch was suncke seven
foot deep, and 48 foot broad; the sides of the Ditch were cut sloping from the
top to the bottom, so that in the bottom it was but 38 foot broad; Upon the
outmost shore of the Ditch, was placed a long Pallizado to hinder all sudden
assaults, View the Figure.

The second and third Battery had their dementions much after the former, only
the least being the second Batery had a Fort about it for its defense, by the
Figures you may perceive the difference both in their length, breadth, and
corners: The foregoing Forts which Spinola raised against Breda, I have drawn
the Figures of them, which if you please to view, you may observe that the
Walls of them were 28 foot thick at the bottom, and so were raised 15 foot
high with a Parrapet upon the top of the Wall for the safeguard of the shot, 6
foot high the Parrapet; the Wall was made sloping and Pallizadoed round; the
Ditch about these Forts were 22 foot broad, 10 foot deep, and 12 foot wide in
the bottom, View the Figures.

A Redout made o^ Turffe used by Spinola at the Siege of Breda.




A Fort made of Turffeused by Spinola at the Siege of Breda.




A Battery raised by Spinola at the Siege of Breda, upon the Heath near
Osterhout.



A Battery joining to a Fort, raised by Spinola at the Siege of Breda, upon the
Heath toward Osterhout.



CHAP. XLII.
Diverse choice Observations worthy to be taken notice of, concerning the
Beleaguering of a Fort; Collected from the famous Siege of Breda, Anno 1624.
With the Description of the chiefest Trenches, Forts, Redouts, and Batteries,
which were raised by Marquess Spinola, against it.
YOu having taken a view of the precedent Figure of a Fort beleaguered, being
surrounded with Trenches, Redouts, Forts, and Batteries; for your better
understanding the manner and way how an Army should be brought and pitched in
convenient Quarters, and how the Trenches and Redouts, Forts, and Batteries,
are to be placed in places convenient: I have taken some pains to bring to
your view the orderly way which that famous General Marquess Spinola
observed, at the remarkable Seige of Breda: It being the Queen of Garrisons
in the Netherlands, beautified and strengthened with the absolutest
Fortifications that either Art or Nature could afford: So that it was conceived
to be impregnable.

Wherefore in the first place, take notice how Spinola divided his Army (which
consisted of 198. Foot Companies, and 32. Troops of Horse) into three parts;
purposely to distract the Hollander: to which end they took their marches
severally to other places, then that which was intended; but at last they met,
and joined together at a Dorpe near Breda.

The Town of Breda fearing their design, did immediately strengthen their
Garrison, with 45. foot-Companies, and only two Troops of Horse: these Forces
of the Town were quartered in the Out-workes, and Walls, where they caused
immediately to be raised diverse Horne-workes and other Fortifications beyond
them, as the precedent Figure of the Horne-worke will demonstrate: the
Soldiers of the Town past into these Out-workes through Sally-Ports, made
under the Wall of the Town.

Spinola having encamped his Army two Leagues from Breda, he rested certain
days not doing any thing; which made the Hollander think they had some other
design: But having weighed all difficulties in his Balance of reason, upon
the 26. of August about twilight, he sent Medina with 10. Troops of Horse,
and 4000. Foot, to pitch down upon one side of the Town of Breda.

Ballion had order the same time, to march with his own Regiment, and 14.
other Companies of Foot, and a certain number of Horse, with diverse Canons;
and these were to pitch down in another Quarter, near the Town, just
opposite to the former Troops, and there they raised diverse Works, and
entrenched themselves.

The next Morning, by break of day, Spinola arrived with the rest of the
Forces, and intrencht them upon the other two sides of the Town: Then from
these four several quarters, they began to draw a Trench of earth, from
quarter to quarter, in which they raised diverse Redouts and Forts, about 400.
paces one from the other, which served for a prevention of all sudden Sallyes
out of the Town; each Colonel from his own quarter wrought toward the next;
and manned the Works with parties of Soldiers: The first, Trench was but 5
foot high, and 7. foot thick at the bottom, and three foot broad at the top;
the Ditch was 6. foot deep and 7. foot broad at the top, and two foot at the
bottom. This Trench was 3600. paces in circuit, but in regard of the
overflowing of the grounds in Winter, they quitted these first Works, and were
constrained to raise more solid Works further off from the Town.

Wherefore they raised a second Trench near ten foot high, and fifteen foot
thick at the bottom, and made somewhat sloping; there was two foot banks for
the Musquetiets to step upon, to give fire over the Brest-work, this Brest-work
was raised above Foot-bankes, five foot high; ten foot thick at bottom, and
six at the top: This second Trench contained in Circuit 16000. paces.

Likewise, beyond this second Trench from the Towne-wards, distance about 200.
paces, they were constrained to raise a third Trench, with diverse Forrs,
Redouts, and Batteries, as the precedent Figures will show you; this Trench was
of the same demention that the former was; being made very solid and strong to
defend their quarters from the Prince of Oranges his Forces, who did seek to
raise their Siege, or to releeve the Town; This last Trench fetched a Circuit
round about the former Trench, it being 52000. paces in compass.

Upon the outside of both these Trenches, a Ditch was sunk seven foot deep,
15. foot broad at the top, and 8. foot at the bottom. The Soldiers of Breda
sallyed out upon Spinola's men, as they were raising the first Trench next the
Town; and if they had fallen upon them in several places at once, they would
by all probability have beaten them from their quarters, they being very weary,
and but few in number at the first: So that they were constrained both to fight
and fortify themselves, the space of three hours: afterward a greater
resistance was made to beat them back.

The Redouts of Earth were made of a quadrant Figure, The Description of the
Redouts.
and were so placed in the Trench, that no Angle or corner appeared outward,
they were 50, foot wide in the inside, and on the outside 80. and strongly
fortified with a Pallizado of sharp sparres, placed in the outward edge of the
Parrapet, they had a ditch about them, and a Counter-skarpe beyond the Ditch,
and upon the verges of the Counterskarpe another Pallizado of Spiles was
placed, to hinder the Enemies approaches.

The Forts were raised with green Turfe, The Description of the Forts.
with four irregular Bulworkes 35. foot thick, and 13. foot high; their
Curtins 100. foot long, as the Figures of them will show you: These were of the
strongest sort which were placed near the Town, their Ditches were 12. foot
wide, The Description of the rest of the Forts and Redouts.
and 8. foot deep, these were to endure the battering of the Canon from the
Town. The other Forts and Redouts, were raised 13. foot high from the ground,
and 15. foot thick, the Ditches 12. foot broad, and 8. foot deep, the inside
of these Forts and Redouts were but 8. foot high, and raised perpendicular; at
which height, a walk was made five foot high and broad: and upon this was a
Parrapet round the Works five foot high, and ten foot thick, this was to
shelter the Musketeers from the shot of the Town.

These Works had a kind of Planke to lay over the Ditch, for the Soldiers to
go over into the Works; and being these Bridges were drawn up with Pullies
and fastened with iron haspes to the Posts of the Gate they both served for
Bridge and Gate; And before these Works, upon the outside of the Ditch was a
halfe-Moone raised well pallizadoed, to defend the entrance into the Forts.

These mighty vast Trenches, with the Forts, and Redoubts, were (by the
diligence of the Soldiers which wrought both night and day, they being
continually releeved with fresh-men) finished in 17. days. You shall find
amongst the precedent Figures diverse great Forts, one of them was formed in a
form quadrant, with four half Bulworkes, made very sollid for Artillery to
be planted upon; it was Canon proof. The Curtins were 120. foot long, 28. foot
thick, and 15. foot high, pallizadoed round, to hinder the Enemies assaults.
Likewise, you shall find the Figures of 4. Forts more proportionable in
strength to the first; these had a Trench raised, which ran from one to
another, very strong and solid, as before is showed: these Works differed in
form, but were of one and the same demention; these were placed upon an
eminent passage, upon a little heath; by which the Prince of Orange might
possibly have conveyed provision to the waters side, by which means the Town
might have been releeved.

There were two Batteries raised at the entrance of each quarter, with half
Moons before the entrance upon the out side, and diverse Forts besides,
according to the different situation and danger of the place: the Figures of
these Batteries I have likewise drawn for your better information.

There were three great Batteries raised, in three several places near the
Town, which battered against the Flanks of the Bulworkes of the Town, and
those sides both of the Batteries, Forts, and Redouts, which beheld the Town,
were made Canon proof, 25. foot thick.

The greatest of these Batteries was 160. foot long, and 125. foot broad, in
the Rear and Flank of it, it had a Wall fifteen foot thick, it was made
rising with a Walk, and a Parrapet on the inside; in the Front it was lined
with two exterior Angles, the face of it rising with nine open Windows, for
so many Pieces of Artillery to shoot out at, each Window being a foot and a
half wide, opening more and more out wards by little and little. On the
inside, a Groundfell was raised, like a bed of Turfe and Fagots, eight foot
high, and 35. foot broad, covered over with Plankes, for the speedy removing
and recoyling of the Artillery.

Behind this Groundfell, was a place of Arms 130. foot long, and 50. foot
broad, the outside of the Wall under the Canon-windowes, were pallizadoed; and
before the Battery was two half Moons, guarded with Musketeers, and
compassed with a Ditch and Counterskarpe, and a Pallizado of Spiles upon the
Counterskarp, for the safety of the Battery, the Ditch was 7. foot deep, and
48. foot broad, at the bottom but 38.

The two other Batteries were raised indifferent large, the manner of framing
them, was much after the former; saving that the least of the two became the
largest, by the Addition of a Fort: the Figures will better inform you, in the
difference both of length, breadth, and Angles.

Spinola raised upon all Passages, very strong Forts; and upon the Causies
(where there was no passage on neither side of it) he caused very strong
Pallizadoes of young Stadles droven into the earth, and framed together 15. foot
high. Likewise, cross the waters that drowned the Meadows, he made a double
Pallizado, to prevent the Boats from going to the Town.

Also, he blockt up the Rivers with a strong Bridge, and a guard of Musketeers
upon it, with sharp pieces of timber lying pointing out of split their Boats.
Also, he had Boats lay at Anchor in the River, to hinder the passage; besides,
diverse Boats bored through at the bottom, which were to be sunk upon the
sudden; and diverse other Boats of Combustible stuff, to burn the Enemies
Fleet. Also, within the River, at four several places a good distance one
from another, there were strong Spiles of timber droven down, and coupled
together with Crosse-beames, in manner of Pallizadoes, which made the River
unpassable.

The Townes-men raised five great Horne-workes, to secure their own
Counterscarpe and Mote, before every Port of the Town one, and the rest in
other convenient places; the Levell-side of these Horne-workes, were 210. foot
long, and 150. foot broad. I have presented to your view, the Figure of the
largest Horneworke, which was raised before the Castle, it is 240. paces long,
and 200. paces broad, it was pallizadoed thick round about, to hinder the
Enemies assault; beyond this Horne-worke is a Halfe-moone, fortified with a
Counterscarpe a cubit high, and environed with another Ditch, as the Figure
thereof will better inform you: these Out-workes, were flanquered from the
Town walls; there was a Trench drawn from one Work to another, to beat off
the Enemy from the Counterscarpe.

The ordinary Carrison of this Town, which consisted but of 15. Bulworkes,
were 1600. Foot, and five troops of Horse; but the brute of this Siege caused
them to be reinforced with 28. Companies more; besides there were 1800. able
Townes-men, which were to manage the Walls.

The Governor sent away 3. troops of his Horse, because they could afford
them no service in the Siege.

The Provision laid in against winter for these Soldiers, was 8200. measures
of Wheat, of Oats 2800. 3600. weight of Cheese, and as much dried Haberdine;
and every Townes-man was (besides) to furnish himself for a year.

And in regard Spinola could not have his Provision for his Army come by Water,
he was constrained to convey it by Land, it being 12. hours march; for the
same purpose, he had all his Provision brought to one of his own Towns that
lay nearest to the Camp, named Lyre. But the Prince of Orange his Camp lying
at Ros^ndall, they were constrained to march about, and to fortify diverse
Dorpes in the way for the resting and securing of the Convoyes and Provisions.

Count Henry Van den Bergh, had the greatest part of the Horse, and as I take
it, 4000. foot with him; besides, there was 1000. Horse more newly raised; with
these forces he was to conduct the Provision.

His manner of proceeding was this; In the morning before day, he gave
Commandment to put in order the disordered multitude of Carriages and Wagons;
then he sent some Troops of Horse before to discover: He commanded them to
March, he placed Artillery both in the Van, and in the Rear to give warning by
their discharging, of the Enemies approaches; so that his men might gather
together as he had given them order, for to repair to the place which stood
most in need.

He guarded both sides of the Way near where the Prince of Oranges Army lay
with loose Wings of Horse; and he lined these Horse with Guards of
Musketeers, and with the rest of the Horse he brought up the Rear.

Upon occasion of fear he made use of his Wagons instead of a Trench, drawing
his Foot-forces within them: He had daily and hourly Spies to know the
Hollanders intentions and proceedings; He cut down all Bridges that might
afford the Hollander a Passage to come at him in his March: By this means they
sustained their Camp in despite of the Hollander: And as Vanden Bergh was to
make his Retreat, he fearing the Prince of Orange would have set upon his
Troops, he ordered his Forces accordingly, by dividing them into three grand
Squadrons; and so Marched ready to receive any charge.

The Prince of Orange then having Incampt his Army at Mede a Dorpe 2 hours
distant from Breda, thinking to have relieved the Town; So soon as Spinola
understood it, he left all the Works about the Town well Manned, unto the
charge of Medina, and Marched himself with 7000 foot, and 30 Troops of Horse
to a convenient place near Osterhout, where he Encamped within three miles of
the Enemy, where he confronted the enemy, and anticipated the place of great
advantage for the Prince of Orange to have relieved the Town by it.

After that the Prince of Orange did perceive their was no hopes of relieving
the Town; he provided for his safe Retreat, to which end he raised diverse
Works to hinder Spinola from pursuing him: As first upon a convenient passage
he raised a Fort to Retire his men into, and to defend them from the sudden
pursuit of the Enemy; and upon the side next Spinolas Camp by which he was
to make his Retreat, he raised a Brest-worke along the Causie, with a deep
Ditch to cover his men from the Enemies shot, and also to obscure them in their
Retreat: Spinola fearing the Prince of Orange should have assaulted some of
their Garrisons with his Army, He commanded Grave Hendrick Vanden-Bergh to dog
him with his Army to prevent his designs.

This Siege having lasted part of Summer, all Winter, and part of the Summer
following; which was a thing thought impossible to have bin done being eleven
Months: The Governor of Breda founded a Parley, and was content to surrender
the Town (they being almost famished) if Spinola would agree to such Articles
as he should propound: For the performance of which Articles there were
sufficient Hostages from either side to confirm the Agreement.

I have set down the Articles, they being a most fit pattern for all
Governors to shape their Agreements by, The Articles follow.

First a Captain of the Garrison of Breda, brought Spinola two Copies of the
Articles betwixt them, that he might first sign them both; which done he
carried them back to the Governor for him to sign, one part of them was
brought back to Spinola: Upon the signing of these Covenants, the Governor
demanded 1200 Wagons, and 60 Boats, to carry away sick and ma^med persons,
and others with their Carriages and Housholdstuffe, which was by Spinola
granted.

Imprimis, It shall be lawful for the Governor of the Town; with the rest
of the Officers and Souldies, both of Horse and foot, to March out of the Town
armed Soldier like, (viz.) The Foot with flying Colors, Drums beating,
completely Armed, Bullet in mouth, Match lighted at both ends, their charges
full of Powder and Shot: The Horse, with their Trumpets founding, Standards
displayed; Armed in such sort as when they March toward the Enemy: And that no
Soldier shall be (of what Nation soever) questioned or detained for any cause
or pretext whatsoever; not though he had formerly bin in the Enemies service;
All without exception, having free liberty to march the best and most
commodious way to their next Garrison, without injury, hinderance or wrong
done to their own persons, their Arms, Horses, or Baggage, and this with all
safety and assurance possible: And further, it shall be lawful for them to
take their Wives, Children, Household, Housholdstuffe, Horses and Carts, with
the Arms of all Soldiers dead or hurt, sick or run away without any search
or inquiry made after them.

Item All Ministers or Preachers of the Word, Commissaries of Musters, Officers
of Contribution, with their Clerks, Ingineers, Gentlemen of the Artillery, the
Auditor of the Soldiers, Masters of Fire-workes, Captains of Pioners,
Canoners, Surgions of Regiments, and private Companies; with all such as belong
to the Train of Artillery, Mariners, Notaries, Overseers of Works, Provosts,
Pioners, Carpenters, Smithes, Commissaries of the Victuals, and all persons
whatsoever, any way belonging to the Artillery or Engines, with their Wives,
Children, and Servants, Horse, and Arms; shall be comprehended in the former
Article, and enjoy the same privileges.

Item All Boats found about or in the Town at this present, as well those
which arrived last with the Colonells, as with any others; shall be permitted
with all their necessaries and tackling, to return to their next place of
refuge, guided by their own Pilots and Mariners; in which it shall be lawful
for them to Imbarke their Families, and Housholdstuffe, with the Arms and
Baggage of the Colonells, Captains, and other Officers of the Army, sick
persons, with such as attend them; and all others whosoever desire to pass by
Water into their next safe Garrison: And to this purpose the River shall be
open for them, during the term of twelve days, and then within that space
they may safely repair to -- and join themselves with their other men of
War; and from thence take their journey to what place they please, the Boats
remaining still to their own Masters and owners: And during the said term of
twelve days, no man shall dare to molest or hinder those Boats, but shall
permit them to pass freely with their Passengers, without searching them, for
any cause or pretext whatsoever: And if it chance that the passage of the River
be not yet freed and made Navigable again, (by which their journey may be
any way hindered) the time in which by that means the journey has been
stayed, shall not be reckoned amongst those twelve days; which term they
enjoy freely and withal assurance, as well in the River it self, as upon
either shore of it, where Mariner or any other Passengers shall have occasion
to land, for their commodity or affairs: And if any of the Boats belong to any
man, who shall desire to reside still in the Town of -- they shall be tied
notwithstanding to help to transport Passengers, and Baggage out of Breda, and
afterward return home to their Masters.

Item Spinola shall allow the Governor any reasonable and sufficient number of
Wagons as he shall demand, to transport his own, the Colonel, Captains,
Officers, and other men's Baggage of the Garrison, to their next Garrison, from
whence they shall return them safe and faithfully again.

Item It shall be lawful for the Governor to carry out with his Garrison any
four Pieces of Artillery, and two Morters he shall make choice of, with all
their appurtinances, and as much Powder and Ball as they will bear at six
charges; and it shall be at his choice to transport them with their Carriages
either by Water or by Lane: And for this purpose the Marquess Spin^la shall
allow the Governor if he shall demand it, all Canon-Horses and others, with
their Wagons, and Waggonmen, as shall be requisite for the transporting of
these Pieces of Artillery and Morters, with all their appurtenances.

Item What goods or Housholdstuffe belongs to the Prince of Orange, it shall be
lawful for him or his Deputy to transport them to what place he pleases,
within the time of six Months; at which time a free passage shall be given
without any molestation or hinderance, in the mean time the goods to be
safely preserved.

Item If it chance that any man comprehended in the two first Articles, shall
be unable for his sickness to go out of the Town with the Garrison: it
shall be lawful for such to remain in the Town, with their Wives, Families,
and Servants, without any wrong offered them, until they have recovered their
health and strength again, and then a free pass shall be given them to
depart to what place they please.

Item No Officer of the Army, Soldier or Captain, or any other whatsoever
comprehended in the aforesaid Articles, who shall now go out with the
Garrison, or shall remain in the Town till he have recovered his health,
shall afterward be troubled, as not being comprehended in the said Articles;
for by virtue of these Articles, it shall be lawful for him to go freely at
any time, and he shall have credit for Money upon his Bond, or any other
assurance he shall be able to give.

Item The Governor, Captains, Officers, and Soldiers comprehended in these
Articles, or any other whatsoever being in Pay, and subjection of the united
States; shall have in Breda any houses or possessions, movables, or
immoveables (comprehending as well the Captain, Officers, and Soldiers of the
Companies of -- as the Widows and Children belonging to those Troops etc. or
any other Companies, which for two years before have been in Garrison in
Breda) shall have a year and a half (beginning within a Month after the
signing of these Covenants) to transport their goods to what place they please;
or to Sell, Morgage, Alienate, or exchange them, according to the Laws and
Customs in that particular: And in the mean season they shall enjoy all
Rents, Profits, and Commodities of their Inheritance, accrewing to them for the
present, or to accrue; and in conclusion they shall enjoy any thing belonging
to them in the Town.

Item The Soldiers either of the Garrison, or our Camp, being now Prisoners
either in the Town or in the Camp, at the signing of these Covenants, shall
be set at liberty without Ransom, paying only their charges, according to
the taxation of the place.

Item No man shall take any thing from any of the Garrison of any price he
has made; all such things being to pass under the title of the Soldiers own
goods.

Item After the signing of these Articles, it shall be lawful for the
Governor of Breda, to send any Officer or whom so ever else, to the Prince of
Orange, who shall be permitted safely to go and come.

Item After the signing of these Covenants, there shall be a suspension of
Arms on both sides: Howbeit, on each side the Soldiers shall maintain their
Works, permitting no man to come near them either by day or night.

Item Before the Garrison march out of Town, two sufficient Hostages shall be
given, who shall accompany the Garrison to the next Fort or Town of strength;
and shall remain there the twelve days in which the River is to remain open,
and the Covenants to be fulfilled; and this term being expired, if the
Covenants in any point have not been broken, they shall return back again.

Item These Covenants being signed, Hostages on both sides shall be given of
equal number and quallitie; and ours shall return home again upon the
delivering of the Town.

Item It shall be lawful for the Hostages of the Garrison of Breda, to
return as soon as the said Garrison has quit the Town, that they may depart
away with the Garrison.

Item The Governor and Garrison of Breda, promise to march away upon Thursday
next ensuing, early in the morning, being the fifth day of June.

Under the place of the Seal the Governor wrote as follows;

We, Justin of Nassaw, do promise to see the contents of the former Articles
fulfilled as much as lies in us: In Witness of which, with the consent of the
Colonells, and Council of War here, We have signed these this second day of
June, 1625.

In the next place you shall see what Articles the Magistrates and Burgers of
Breda, did demand of Spinola, as follows.

Imprimis, Pardon is granted to all Burgers, and Town dwellers of Breda, of
what quallitie or condition soever, for any offense committed before or since
the surprising of the Town, which was in the year -- no inquiry or
information shall be taken against any man, not so much as under the pretext
of Treason, or of other offense whatsoever.

Item All the said Burgers or Town dwellers either absent or present, of what
condition soever, whether they be actually in service of the States, or the
Prince of Orange, or the Town, or whether they be not in service, may safely
remain in Breda the two first years, no inquiry being made after them for
matters of Religion; nor having no obligation to change their Religion
(provided they carry themselves modestly, and without scandal) that in the
space of these two years, they may resolve either to continue their residence
here, or to go to any other place, and whenever they shall desire to depart,
they shall be permitted to go freely; and in like manner they shall be
permitted to enjoy their goods, carrying them with them, Selling, Morgaging, or
Alienating them at their own liberty, or at the liberty of such as shall have
the administration of them: The goods of such as dye within or without the
Town; shall accrue to them to whom they shall leave them by their last Wiils,
or if they die Intestate, to the next Heirs.

Item It shall be lawfully for any of the said Burgers or Town dwellers,
whether he be now in service or no; (if after these Covenants he have a desire
to depart out of the Town, either to change his habitation, or for any other
respect) to depart at any time either by Water or by Land; with his Wife,
Children, Family, Housholdstuffe, Merchandise, or any movables whatsoever,
without any impeachment for any respect whatsoever, only by virtue of this
Covenant, without any other Pasport: And such as desire to make choice of their
residence in the Kingdoms, Estates, or Provinces, either neuterall, or such as
pay contribution; may at any time pass, or repasse into the Towns and
Countries subject to the King of Spain, and traffic or dispose of their
goods, movables, or others whenever they think good: And the Catholics
shall not stand in need of any other deed more then these Covenants, by virtue
of which, to return and make their residence here, and possess such Houses as
they have in Breda.

Item It shall be lawful for all such as desire to go about their occasions
into any of the united Provinces, to take their journey thither four times in
the year; giving first the Governor notice of it, of whom they must of
necessity demand license, who shall not refuse them without just cause; and
they shall return within the two years agreed upon in these Covenants, to
continue their residence in the Town, or make choice of any other place under
contribution, in all which places, they shall enjoy the aforesaid liberty of
passing freely to any place about their businesses, and make use of any other
benefit of these Covenants.

Item, All Ministers may depart freely with their Wives, Children, Families,
goods and movables, without any wrong or offense offered them; for which
purpose they shall have Boats or Wagons allowed them, and the aforesaid term
to dispose of all their goods.

Item, All such, as since the taking of the Town have executed the Office of
Elders, Deacons, or any other Ecclesiastical charge, shall be comprehended in
these Covenants.

Item, All Officers, Commissaries, Receivers, and other Burgers or Town
dwellers, who have had any Office about the Money, Rents, or Pays of the
Soldiers; or any Office whatsoever, shall enjoy the same conditions and
privilege, to depart with their papers and other movables; and all other
benefits (jointly with other Townsemen) of this agreement.

Item, The same is uuderstood of all Mariners, and others who have Boats here;
with which in like manner they may lawfully depart.

Item, If it chance that in the Town there be no Wagons, or Boats sufficient
to accomodate the Burgers, or Town dwellers who shall desire to depart with
their Movables and other goods; it shall be lawful for them, within the
aforesaid term of two years, to cause Wagons or Boats to come out of Holland
or any other place for this purpose, which may return freely by virtue of
these Covenants, without any other Pasport.

Item, No other impost or taxes shall be imposed upon the Burgers or Town
dwellers of this Town, then such as generally all other Towns of Brabant
great and small, Pay.

Item, The Garrison of the Town both Horse and Foot, shall be orderly lodged,
with the least hurt or damage that may be of the Townsemen.

Item, All such as are now absent about the Town business, or their own;
shall participate of these Covenants, and may freely return to the Town: And
the Peasants who had retired themselves to Breda, may as freely return again
to their own Villages.

Item, All such of other Religion as shall chance to die in Breda, within the
aforesaid term of two years, may be honorably buried in any Garden, or
their bodies if it please their friends carried out of Town.

Item, All sentences pronounced by the Magistrates or other criminal Judges
called etc. shall hold and be in force; if no appeal have been made from
them in time.

Item, It shall be lawful for all such as have lent any Money to the Town,
to demand their Principal, and their Interest; and all Rights and Rents which
fall; shall in like manner be yearly paid.

All these Covenants, Points, and Articles have been concluded, agreed on, and
granted, by the Marquess Spinola, and the Commissioners of the Town; who have
signed them severally: The Marquess undertaking to procure to have them
rattified and approved by the Infanta within 15 days, with her Letters Patents
and broad Seal; Dated the 2. of June 1625.

Thus much concerning the siege of Breda I thought good to insert; and I rather
made choice of this, then of the taking of it again by the Hollander, because
they trod the same steps to regaine it again, that Spinol a had before made
use of: Neither had Grolle, Mastrike, or Skinkin Skonse in their Besiegements
such choice circumstances belonging unto them, as this famous siege ^ad*
Neither had any Town in Germany beleaguered by the Swedes, the like passages
that were made use of at this Town. And this Compendious discourse, may serve
to give a better light into our former discourse of Fortification; whereby the
Ingenious Soldier that has not seen the manner of a Siege, may hereby
inform his judgment, and better his understanding.

Let me request you to take a view of the precedent Figures, which will
represent to you all manner of Redouts, Horneworkes, Forts, and Batteries that
are to be raised against a besieged Town; and the foregoing discourse will
direct you in the circumstances belonging to the framing and ordering of them.

CHAP. XLIII.
How to frame a Flankered Redout.
THis kind of Redout is the strongest, and can best defend it self, in regard
every side has an Angle to Flank it, this is to be placed for the safeguard
of some Siege, or to prevent the Enemy from making there excursions over
Rivers; this may be built of Brick, and Rooft over with a Soller and a falling
door for the Soldiers safety if the Enemy should break in: Likewise on every
Flank, loope-holes to shoot out at; from the top of the Roof is a kind of
Pully set out which draws up a Pitch-pan, which they must fire in manner of a
Beacon to warn the Country, and the next adjoining Redout, of the Enemies
being there. The Hollanders made diverse of these along the River Isell in
Gelderland to prevent the Enemies getting over into the Vello.



If it be pallizadoed it is the stronger, the principal defense is the
Flanks and the third part of the Brest-worke, as by the two Lines, one drawn
from A to A. the other from B to B. View the Figure.

The next discourse is the use of Artillery, and then after that the duties of
Soldiers in Garrisons, shall be plainly showed.

THE USE OF ARTILLERY IN FORTS. SECT. IV.
CHAP. XLIV.
The Office of the Master of the Ordnance, and other inferior Officers; and
Munition, with diverse other Circumstances thereto belonging.
HAving finished the former discourse of Fortification; we are now to proceed,
and take a Survey, how both in Ancient and Modern times, Artillery has been
used; and so collect from the best Writers, such observations as shall be most
pertinent for our discourse; and add such things to this Work, which others
have been defective in, and so we will endeavor to make it perfect. And as
there is great variation in Authors opinions, so the Reader may make as
various constructions in his contemplating on them. Therefore, I shall endeavor
to reconcile their opinions, and reduce all things material to a perfect
method.

Wherefore, first we must begin with such instructions, as ought to be inherent
to the Master of the Ordnance; and in this discourse, for brevitie sake, we
shall give a touch of all other inferior Officers duties, and of what things
particularly are to be committed to their charges: And in regard it is an
Office of great importance, and diversity of things run through his hands,
and are by his wisdom, to be rightly ordered: Therefore it behooves him to be
a man of excellent performance, both in Valor and Learning, and not daring to
thrust himself into this great Office, not being well qualified and fitted for
it. The parts a Master of the Ordnance is to be endued with.
He must be a geod Arethmetician, Mathematician, Geometrician, and besides an
expert old Soldier: for in this, if the Practicke be not joined with the
Theoricke, and so both inseparable in this Officer, there will be a deficiencie
in the execution of this Office. The care and charge of this place being so
weighty, and impossible to be performed by one man, therefore diverse
Substitutes and inferior Officers, are allowed for his assistance, and the
chiefest under him, is his Lieutenant; who must be a man most able, in his
judgment and carriage, to take a great part of this heavy weight off the
Masters shoulders. Wherefore, in what place of consequence the Master of the
Ordnance is absent, there the Lieutenant is to be present: if the Master be in
the Camp, then must the Lieutenant be at the Battery, Breach, or Curtin; if
the Master be present in the aforementioned places, then ought the Lieutenant to
be at the Storehouse, the Mines, or some other place of most necessary
importance and employments.

The residue of the Sub-Officers are these, Master Gunner, under Canonires,
Wagon-Master, the Furrier, and diverse Clerks, besides Gun-makers, and
Carriage-makers, and others of meaner dependency. Great care is to be taken,
that the Gunners perform their duties, in managing their places, both in
mounting, dismounting, charging, levelling: and where he sees a defect, these
superior Officers being expert and skillful in this Art, may be able to
instruct, correct, and control the ignorant, and see those escapes amended,
in what sort soever committed; he is to make an Inventorie of every small and
particular parcel that accompanies the Pieces of Ordnance, and of them the
service being performed, to give his account.

Against the Army march, it is requisite he make provision, that every Piece
has his sufficient number of draught-Horses, and Oxen, apt to draw the same
according to the nature of the ways, Those that wait upon the Ordnance, must
lodge near his own Piece, day and night, to be in readiness to execute such
commands as shall be delivered to them.
with sufficient Attendants to assist upon all occasions. Likewise every Piece
has his Gunner, with his Co-adjutor or Mate, and a man to serve them both, and
help them charge, discharge, mount, wadde, cleanse, scour, and cool the
Pieces being overheated. Further, there must be a Master of the Timber or
Wood, and a Smith; their duties must be to see the Garriages fit, or to amend
them.

Over the aforesaid Gunners, there is a Corporal or Constable chosen, to view
or take charge of all the inferior Gunners, The Gunner must be careful in
giving directions for the safe placing and keeping the Munition and Powder.
and of their actions. The Master of the Ordnance must be very careful, to see
his Storehouse be continually furnished with all manner of Provision; both for
Artillery, Munition, and manner of Arms, and Engines; both offensive and
defensive; all kind of Ordnance ready mounted upon the Carriages; Quintals of
Canon-powder, and other powder, Oxe-hides to cover and defend the same, shot of
Iron, Lead, and Stone, in great quantity, fitted for all manner of Pieces;
These Tools ought to be marked with the Gallows, he that steals them dies
without mercy.
Match, Iron-shovels, Mattockes, Pick-axes, Axes, Hatchets, Hooks, Plants,
Boordes, H^rdles, Mandes, Baskets, Wheele-barrows, small Tumbrels for one
Horses draught, Nails for the Tyres, and all other purposes; Sawes, Sledges,
Iron Bars, Crows, A^gers, Skrewes, Chargers, Ladles, Rammers, Spunges,
Chains, Cart-clouts, Weights, all sorts of Smiths-tooles, Horshooes, and
Nails, Cordage, Coffers, Candles, Lanthornes, Scarclothes, Soap, Grease,
Tar, Scaling-ladders; all sorts of Small-shot, Weapons and Arms belonging
both to Foot and Horse; he is likewise to have those that are skillful in
making Trunkes, Balls, Arrows, and all other sorts of Wildfire, and
Fire-workes; and for the continual supply of them, there ought to be had in a
readiness; great store of Sulphur, Saltpeter, Rosin, Caly-vine, Quick-peall,
Lint-Seed oil, common Lamp oil; Pitch, Tar, Campher, Wax, Tutia, Arsnick,
Quicksilver, and Aquavitee; hereof are to be framed Balls of fire; Cressets,
and Torches; that storms of Rain and wind, cannot extinguish, Murdering
Bullets; to be shot out of pieces and the like; as shall particularly be shown
hereafter in this discourse: Further the Master of the Ordnance upon the receipt
of a Ticket from any of the Captains of the Army, is to give speedy order to
his Clerk to deliver both Powder, Match, and Bullets; He must have under his
Command a Band of Pioners, the Captain over them ought to be very discreet and
careful; he must likewise see these Pioners be sufficiently guarded, whilst
they are at work, lest the Enemy surprise them, he is to see every man
carefully paid his means, he is to be a very expert Engineere, with a most
approved judgment in all kind of Fortifications, and able to direct all kind
of Officers under him, as the Lieutenant of the Ordnance, Engine-Master,
Captain of the Pioners, and the Trench-master; he is to have all kind of
Boats and Bridges, he is also to appoint under his handwriting, the number
and proportion of all manner Provision of Munition, which shall attend the
Army: and the Lieutenant must see it performed and distributed, to the
inferior Officers. Lastly, he is wisely and discreetly to order all his
affairs, and whatsoever he is put in trust with, for his own honor, and the
welfare of the Army. In the next Page, follows a Table of all kind of
Ordnance, with their names, and proportions of Weight, Length, and Bigness,
etc.

CHAP. XLV.
The Names of all kind of Ordnances whatsoever, both for Field and Garrison,
now in use for offensive or defensive Service, with the height of their
Diameters, their weight, and length; The thickness of the Metal at the
Breech, Trunnions, or Neck; The number of Men, Horses, or Oxen, requisite for
the draught of each Piece; the height, weight, and compass of the Bullet,
belonging to each Piece; how much Corn or Serpentine Powder, is requisite to
charge every several Piece; and also the length and breadth of the Ladles fit
for every Piece; the distance every Piece shoots at Point-blanke and utmost
Randon, etc. First invented by Mr. Smith, but in some kind rectified, with
Additions thereunto, Fit for all kind of Officers to understand and observe;
ut sequitur.
The Names of the Pieces of great Ordnance now in most use. The height of the
Diameter of each Piece. The height of the Bullet. The weight of the shot in
pounds. Compass of the shot in Inches and parts. Weight of Serpentine Powder.
Weight of Corn Powder. Weight of the Piece in Pounds. Length of the Piece in
Feet. Thickness of Metal at the Touchhole, inches. Thickness of the
Metal at the Trunnions. Thickness of the Metal at the Neck. Ladles length.
Ladles breadth. Length of the Planzes of the Carriage of the Piece. Depth of
each Planke in Inches at (...). Depth of the Planke at the lower end in feet.
Thickness of the Planke in inches and parts. The number of men to draw each
Piece in service. The number of Horse to draw each Piece. The number of yoke
Oxen. Distance of pace the Piece carries at point-blanke. Distance of paces
each Piece carries at utmost randon. Length of the Coyler Repes. Canon of 8 7
64 25 1/7 40 32 8000 12 8 6 1/4 4 23 1/2 15 16 ^/4 32 20 8 90 16 9 300 1500 70
Canon Serpentine. 7 1/2 6 3/4 52 23 4/7 25 1/4 26 7000 11 1/2 7 1/2 5 1/3 3 3/4
22 14 1/2 16 1/4 20 18 1/4 7 1/2 80 14 8 340 1600 66 French Canon. 7 1/4 7 46
1/4 22 11/14 25 23 1/4 6500 12 7 1/4 5 2/^ 3 5/^ 21 13 3/5 16 1/4 29 18 7 1/4
70 12 7 360 1740 64 Demi-Canon eldest. 6 3/4 6 1/2 36 5/8 21 3/14 20 1/4 20
6000 11 1/4 6 3/4 5 1/^ 3 ^/^ 22 12 15 1/2 27 16 ^/4 6 3/4 65 11 6 370 1800 60
Demi-Canon Ord. 6 1/2 6 1/4 32 20 3/7 20 18 5600 10 1/2 6 1/2 5 3 ^/8 20 11 1/2
15 1/^ 26 16 1/4 6 1/2 60 10 5 350 1700 54 Demi-Canon. 6 5 3/4 24 1/2 18 6/7 18
16 5000 11 6 4 3/^ 3 ^/^ 21 11 16 24 15 6 56 9 5 340 1600 46 Culverin. 5 1/2 5
1/4 19 17 ^/7 16 15 4500 13 1/4 ^ 1/2 4 1/^ 3 22 9 ^ 18 1/4 22 13 1/8 5 1/2 50
8 4 420 2100 40 Ordinary Culverin. 5 1/4 5 16 1/4 16 1/2 15 12 1/2 4300 12 5
1/4 4 1/^ 2 3/4 21 9 17 ^ 21 13 ^/4 5 1/4 46 8 4 400 2000 36 Semi-Culverin. 4
1/2 4 1/4 11 3/4 14 1/7 9 9 3000 11 4 1/2 4 2 1/^ 20 8 ^/^ 16 3/^ 18 ^1 1/4 4
1/2 36 7 4 380 1800 34 Dem-Culverin less. 4 1/4 4 9 13 5/14 8 7 1/2 2300 10 4
1/^ 3 ^/4 2 2/3 19 1/27 7 1/4 14 ^/^ 17 10 ^/4 4 1/4 28 6 3 320 1600 30 ^^ker
ordinary. 3 1/4 3 1/2 5 1/4 11 11/14 5 1/2 5 1900 9 1/2 3 3/4 3 1/4 2 1/2 16 6
3/4 14 15 9 ^ 3 3/^ 24 5 3 300 1500 28 ^^keret or Minion. 3 1/4 3 3 1/4 10 3/14
5 3 1/2 1100 8 3 1/4 2 1/4 2 1/4 14 5 11 1/2 1^ 8 1/^ 3 1/^ 20 4 2 280 1400 24
^^wcon. 2 1/4 2 1/2 2 1/3 8 9/14 2 1/2 2 1/4 750 7 2 3/4 2 1/3 2 12 4 1/2 10
1/4 11 7 2 ^ 16 3 2 260 120 20 ^^^conet. 2 ^/4 2 1 1/7 7 1/14 1 1/2 1 1/2 400 6
2 ^/4 2 1 3/4 10 3 3/4 8 2/3 9 6 ^ 2 1/4 10 2 2 220 100 20 ^abinet. 1 ^/2 1 1/4
3/4 3 2/4 3/4 2/4 300 5 2/^ 1 1/2 1 1/2 9 1/2 2 1/2 7 1/2 8 5 1/2 2 8 2 2 150
700 18 ^^se. 1 1/4 1 ^/^ 3 2/3 1/4 200 4 ^/4 1 1/2 1/4 8 2 6 1/4 7 5 2 6 2 2
100 560 18

In the precedent Table of Mr. Smith, he has only named such Ordnance as are
most usual in England. Wherefore, before we proceed to our intended discourse,
we will observe the conditions of diverse Canons of a larger extent, Note, there
is but 14 ounces haberde poyze, to each of these Venetian pounds.
as the Canon of 9. inches Diameter, the shot weighes 110. pound, and has in
Corn-powder 76. pound for her Charge.

The Canon of 10. inches, the weight of the Bullet is 174. pound, and requires
for her charge in C. powder, 136. pound.

The Canon of 11. inches, the weight of the Bullet is 205. pound, and requires
146. pounds of C. powder for its charge.

The Canon of 12. inches, has for its Bullet in weight 245. pound, and
requires 162. pounds of C. powder for her charge.

The Canon of 13. inches, the weight of the Bullet is 285. pound, and requires
190. pounds of C. powder for its due charge.

Canon of 14. inches. has for the weight of its Bullet 348. pound, and
requires 232. pounds of C. powder for its charge.

There are likewise diverse of those Ordnance specified in the precedent Table,
that are reinforced, The description of Ordnance reinforced
as the

Dragon, or double Culvering, whose metal weighes 14000. pounds, and shoots
357. paces Level, and 4252. paces at its best randon.

The whole Culvering weighes 8500. pounds, Master Norton says these kind of
pieces requires the just weight of powder, with the iron cast shot for their
due charge.
carries Level 315. paces, and at its best randon 3703. paces.

The Demi-Culvering weighes 4600. pounds, shoots level 235. paces, and at its
best randon 2796. paces.

The Saker or halfe-Culverin weighes, 2650. pounds, and shoots level 183.
paces, and at its best randon 2181. paces.

The Fawlcon weighes 1500. pounds, shoots level 889. paces, and convayes his
shot at its best randon 1659. paces.

The Fawlconet weighes 850. pounds, shoots point-blanke 107. paces, and
convayes its shot at best randon 1280. paces.

The Rabinet weighes 425. pounds, shoots point-blanke 82. paces, and convayes
its shot at best randon 669. paces.

The Base weighes 300. pounds, A difference in legitimate Ordnance, in regard
of their debility in metal.
shoots point-blanke 63. paces, and conveyes its shot at best randon 725. paces.

We are further to observe, that there are of these kind of Ordnance, of a
less weight and force in metal, and yet of the same Diameter or Bore; as
first,

The Dragon or double Culverin weighes but 11000. pounds, shoots level but
325. paces, and at the best randon 3164. paces.

The whole Culverin weighes 6300. pounds, shoots level 285. paces, and
convayes its shot at its best randon 3391.

The demi-Culverin 3150. pounds, shoots point-blanke 217. paces, and convayes
its shot at the best randon 2588. paces.

The Saker weighes 2000. pounds, and shoots point-blanke 167. paces, and
convayes its shot at best randon 1838. paces.

The Fawlcon weighes 1100. pounds, shoots point-blanke 127. paces, and convayes
its shot at best randon 1514. paces.

The Fawlconet weighes 600. pounds, shoots point-blanke 98. paces, and convayes
its shot at best randon 1163. paces.

The Rabinet weighes 350. pounds, shoots point-blanke 75. paces, and convayes
its shot at best randon 482. paces.

We are further to observe, The nature of bastard pieces reinforced and
lessened.
that there are diverse Ordnance that bears the same denominations, the former
legitimate Ordnance did, which the Gunners term bastard Pieces, in regard the
length of their Chase, and height of their Bore differs: and of these, there
are some reinforced by Metal, and others of the same Nature are lessened;
those that are reinforced, I will first describe; as the Ordinary Basiliske,
or Bastard double-Culverin, Ordinary Basiliske or Bastard Double-Culverin.
is about 26. Diameters in length, shoots an Iron castshot of 48. pounds, and
requires in powder for her charge 30. pounds of fine powder, or 39. pounds of
common; the weight of her Metal is 14660. pounds, shoots by Metal 659.
paces, by level 329. paces, and at best randon 3511. paces.

The Serpentine or Bastard-Culverin, Serpentine or Bastard Culverin.
is in length 27. Diameters of her Bore, and shoots 24. pounds shot, with as
much Common powder, or 19. l. 1/^. of (...) powder for her charge; her weight
in metal is 8100. l. shoots by metal 590. paces, by level 295. paces, at
best randon 3511. paces.

The Aspike or Bastard-demi-Culverin shoots 12. l. shot, Aspike or Bastard
demi-Culverin.
with 12. pound of fine powder, and is 28, Diameters long; weight is 7600. l.
shoots by metal 440. paces, by level 220. paces, and by its best randon
2618. paces.

The Pelican or Bastard quarter-Culverin is 29. Diameters of her Bore in
length, Pelican or Bastard quarter-Culverin.
the weight of her shot is 6. l. with as much fine powder for her charge, the
weight of the Piece is 2550. l. she conveyes her shot by metal 344. paces,
by level 172. paces, by best randon 244. paces.

The Bastard Fawlcon shoots 3. l. shot, Bastard Fawlcon.
with t^ree pounds fine powder, and is 30. Diameters long, and weighs 1500.
l. conveyes her shot by metal 261. paces* by level 131. paces, and by her
best randon 1553. paces.

The Bastard Rabinet discharges an iron shot of one pound and a half, Bastard
Rabinet.
with so much fine powder, and is 31. Diameters of ^er Bore in length, weighing
800. l. and shoots by metal 200. paces, by level 101. paces, at her best
randon 1198.

The Base weighes 450. l. and shoots by metal 120. paces, Base.
by level 72. paces, and at her best randon, 916. paces.

As for the lessened Bastard Pieces, The description of the lessened Bastard
pieces, their weights* and the distances of conveying their shot.
I shall now describe the weight of metal and the distance in conveying their
shot.

The Basiliske weighes 10500. pound* shoots by metal 595. paces, by level
298. paces, at best randon 3540. paces.

The Serpentine weighes 6300. l. shoots by metal 530. paces, by level 275.
paces, at best randon 3153. paces.

The Aspike weighes 3700. pound, shoots by metal 400. paces, by level 200.
paces, at best randon 2028. paces.

The Pelican weighes 2100. l. shoots by metal 310. paces, by level 155. at
best randon 1844. paces.

The Fawlcon weighes 1200. l. shoots by metal 212. paces, by level 118.
paces, at her best randon 1407. paces.

The Rabinet weighes 650. l. shoots by metal 182. paces, by level 92. paces,
at her best randon 1086. paces.

The Base weighes 155. l. shoots by metal 136. paces, by level 70. paces, at
her best randon 825. paces.

Thus much shall suffice in describing the Names and natures of these kind of
Ordnance; We shall afterward take occasion to speak of all kind of
Morter-Peeces, and the like; and draw out some particular discourses of the
conditions and qualities of all sorts of Ordnance whatsoever, and the right
uses of them. Thus taking it for granted, you are perfect in the Names and
conditions of these Ordnance, I will proceed in the next Chapter to speak more
fully of the Canon; how they are divided according to their conditions, for
several services either offensive or defensive.

CHAP. XLVI.
How the Gunners of our Times do divide these Ordnance, according to their
quallities for several services.
IN this Chapter we are to take notice how our modern Gunners divide these
Ordnance, To what use the Canon is employed in service, and of their several
kinds.
according to the condition of the Piece for each proper service; and we are to
take them in Four kinds; as namely, First of the Canons, which are divided
likewise into 3. sorts: The particular use of the Culverin in service, and of
their seve^all kinds.
The Canon Royal or double Canon; Secondly, the whole Canon, or as it is
called the Canon of 7. Thirdly, the Demy-Canon, whose diameter of the Bore is 6
Inches 1/2 parts; these three kinds are only used in Batteries against strong
Walls and defenses of the Enemy, Note, these kind of Ordnance shoot iron
bullets; but if the marks be soft substance, then stone bullets will do as
well, and save great charge.
because their shot being so weighty, does shake and ruin more then the
inferior Ordnance: Note by the way, that all Foreign Ordnance are called or
named according to the weight of the Shot: and for the most part 18 times the
diameter of their Bore is the true length of their Chases, yet many times they
are more and sometimes less. The second kind of Ordnance used in service are
the Culverins* which we will reduce to five sorts, The use of the Canon
Periors, and of their several kinds.
(although the table mentions more) Culverins and demy-Culverins serve to
pierce and Slice out in Batteryes, what the Canons have loosened and shaken;
The fashion and bo^e of outlandish Periors
The Saker and Faulcon serves to Flanker any Bulworke or half Moon; the other
smaller sort of this kind serves for Field-Peeces, for assaults, or to shoot
at Troops of Men or Horse: Note, the difference between the lower end of the
Chase, and the upper end of the Chamber is this; the upper end of the Chamber
is called the Orloe, or Relish.
The third kind of great Ordnance are Canon-Periors, and Perieraes; and of
these there are four kinds which are used for several purposes; these kind
of Pieces never shoot any Iron or Leaden Bullets, but Stones, Grandoes, and
other murdering Shot and Fireballs: The Canon-Perior is most serviceable to
defend a Breach, keep a Passage, and to murder and spoil the Enemy being
within its reach; All Foreign Pieces of this kind are either Taper, or
Belbored in their Chambers; the mouth of the Chamber is either 2/^ or 1/2 in
Calibre of the height or Calibre of the mouth of the chase of the Piece; The
Canon Priors before mentioned shoot ^/3. parts of the weight of the Stoneshot
in corn powder, only abating proportionably 5 pound of powder for every 100.
weight of shot:
their Chambers are to be in length 4 Diameters of the mouth of the said
Chamber: Our English Pieces are equally bored the length of their whole Chases,
but the other Taperbored, are better and stronger, so that the mouth of the
Chamber be equally in height with the rest of the Bore forwards toward the
mouth.

The next sort of these kinds are termed Perieraes, and they are far
inferior Fortified with metal to the former: For the Canon-Perior is usually
allowed 80. Pound of metal, The length of the Canon Perior are about 8.
Calibres of their Bores at the mouth of the Chase; the thickness of the
Chambers are 2/^. parts in metal at the touch hole.
for every Pound weight of their Stone-shot; and these Perieraes are allowed
but 60 pound, the Chamber thereof is 1/2 parts in bore of Calibre at the mouth;
her charge is 1/4 parts of the weight of her Stone-shot in corne-Powder.

The third kind of these sort of Ordnance are the Port Pieces, and
Stock-Fowlers, these are likewise cast in Brass, but are open at both ends,
and are to be loaded with Chambers at the breech fitted close thereinto, with
Shoulders as your wooden Pipes which conveyes water, are tapewise fitted in.

The fourth sort of this third kind of Ordnance, are Sling-Peeces, and
Portingall Bases, The length of the Portingall base is about (...) times ^her
Calibre, the sling-pace 12.
which have Chambers fitted likewise into their breeches as the former had:
both in these kind of Pieces and the former, the Shot and Wadde is first put
into the Chase, and then is the Chamber to be firmly wedged into the tail of
the Chase and Carriage: These last mentioned Pieces have no Carriages, but
stand upon a strong forked Prop, The murtherors port-peeces, and Fowlers, 8 at
the most, besides their Chambers, and their Chambers about 3 times the Diameter
of the Bore in length, and weighes the 6 or 8 part of the whole Chase.
upon the ends of which the Trunnions rest, and unto the end of the Chase is a
long steal of Iron with a Cord tied unto it, which raises it higher or lower,
according to the assigned mark these Shoot: Base, Burre, Musket, or any kind
of murdering Shot, being put up in Bags or Lanthornes fitted to the Bore;
these are usually loaded with 1/4 or 1/^ of the weight of their Shot in
corne-Powder, and most usually made of wrought Iron.

The fourth and last kind of Ordnance, are likewise subdivided into four
several kinds, and not only differ from the former Pieces of Ordnance, but
diverse in themselves, and are various in their uses one from the other: The
names are these, the Morter-Peece, Square-Murtherers, Toctles and Petards; the
Morter-Peeces are very necessary and useful, as well for the Assaylants, as
Defendants; for being duly used, they annoy the Enemy much in his Forts or
Trenches: First, by s^ooting Grenades either single or double, Iron Bullets,
Stone or Leaden Shot.

The nature of other Ordnance is, to convey the shot in a right line, to
perform such service as they are assigned to, and there must be no hinderance
neither of Hills, Houses, These pieces are likewise used in besieged Towns to
shoot blazing Fire balls in a dark night into the Enemies* Works to discover
what they are a doing ^or it the Enemy be approached to the foot of the wall
to undermine it, or to enter a breach when no other ^^ot can hinder them, then
these will work good effect.
or Walls betwixt the Pieces levelled, and the mark intended to be hit: but
these kind of Pieces are ordained and fitted to shoot in an oblique or crooked
line, to convey their Fireballs or other Shot, over Walls, Hills, or any
obstacle that may hinder other Pieces at 90 degrees of the quadrant they shoot
right upwards; but most commonly they are mounted from 80 degrees, to 70. 60.
50. or 45 according as the distance is in farnesse from the Piece, or the
height of the Hills, Walls, or Houses shall hinder: Some of these Pieces have
their Trunnions in the midst, some a little lower, and many even with their
Breeches; they are Fortified with metal 1/2 of the height of the mouth of the
Chamber at the touchhole, and ^ of the Calibre or Bore of the mouth of the
Piece; the length of their Chases are diverse, some are two, others 3 Diameters
of their mouths Bores, in length; the Charge in corne-Powder is 1/1^ part of
the weight of the Shot; if it Shootes at Mounture above 40. Degrees, but if it
Shoots Level or downwards ^ parts of Powder of the weight of the Shot; not
forgetting to put a good Wad always between the Powder and the Shot, unless
it be charged with Fireballs; then nothing is to be put to hinder the Powder
from firing the Balls.

Moreover, great care is to be had least crackes or holes be in the Grenades,
least they Fire in the Piece; and endanger the breaking of it, wherefore it is
safest to coat it over: If these kind of Pieces be loaded with Grenades of
Potters-earth, or Glass; then 1/2 parts of their weight in Powder will be
sufficient, otherwise they will break; But if Stone, or Iron Bullets 1/^ or
1/4 of Powder; for the less you mount your Piece, the more Powder is required
to charge her.

For the charging of these latter sorts of Morter-Peeces, You may charge these
pieces with cartouches.
is sufficiently discourst of; only much care is to be taken in spunging and
cleansing the Piece before the Powder be put in, the mouth of it ever standing
upright: The due charge of Powder being put in the Chamber, there must be a
Wadde rammed down either of Hay, or Ockham, Note the Wadde between the Tamkin
and the Shot, is to save the Shot from being broken by the Tamkin.
and after it a Tamkin of some soft Wood, of such breadth and thickness as will
fill up the Chamber, that no vacuity may be between the Powder and W^dde, or
Wadde and Shot; after the which the Shot being put in, with another Wadde after
it, to keep the Shot from too speedy flying out: Note that in mentioning the
Morter-Peeces, I intend the other two, namely the Square-Morters, and Tortles.

The fourth and last which remains to be discourst of is the Petard, which
are only used to blow open Ports, and Portcullis; they are diverse in their
magnitudes; according to the strength of the opposition they are to Ruin:
Their proportions are some to hold one pound of Powder and less; others to
hold 50 or 60 pounds or more: They are fashioned like to a Mortar or
Saints-Bell* somewhat tapered, they are 1/4 parts Diameter of their mouths
Calibre at the bottom of their Chase; and in thickness of metal 1/8 parts
Diameter at their Breech, and up toward their mouth, lessening in thickness;
there is usually allowed five pounds of Metal, be it Brass or Iron to every
pound of Powder, according to the proportion of the greatness of it; so that
for 50 pound of Powder, your Petard must weigh 250. pound, or 300 pound weight
of metal: a strong hook is to be scrued into the substance you intend to
ruin; and upon this hook hangs the wringle of the Petard, and likewise to be
shored up with a strong forked Rest to stay the Reverse of it; the chargeing
them is after this manner.

First, the true quantity of Corne-powder being rammed down hard to the
bottom of the Chase, little by little, until it be fil^ed within a fingers
breadth of the mouth, then bore a hole down to the bottom of the Powder,
through the midst of it with some square piece of Iron, into which concavity,
diverse quilles of quicke-silver are to be put; then a planke made fit of 3 or
4 Inches thickness to lay on the mouth of it, which is to be strongly plated
with Iron; between the planke and the top of the Powder, you are to place a
waxed cloth just the wideness of the mouth of the Petard, then fill up the
residue of the Chase between the cloth and the top of the mouth with molten
Wax, mingled with Flax, Hurds, or Towe, there is a Pipe to come from the
touchhole, The Petardire must be careful to avoid the danger of her reverse,
by retyting in a side line from it.
which is to be filled with slow and sure receipt of Fire-workes, which by a
priming of quick-powder fire may be given safely.

For to prove the strength and sufficiency of these short Ordnance whether
they will hold and endure; you must charge them with once and parts of powder
of the weight of the Shot: They are to be cooled with vinegar and water, or
wine lees, or urine and water.
Note that when any Piece of Ordnance of what kind soever grows hot, there is
a discretion to be used in lessening the Charge of Powder, otherwise the Piece
will break; the Figure of this Petard shall afterward in this discourse be
described.

CHAP. XLVII.
How a Gunner is to Tertiate and measure a Piece of Ordnance that he be not
deceived in Charging it; And also how to despart any kind of Ordnance.
ALthough we have formerly spoken in a particular way of all kind of Ordnance
which our modern Gunners make use of; yet we must be farther instructed
before we can attain the perfection of this Art, how each sort of Ordnance
differs in their Fortifications, be they of the kinds either of Canons, or
Culverins; for there is a great difference in these, as formerly we have
discourst of, in regard they are either more Fortified in metal, or lessened
and abated: So that those ordinary Pieces expressed in the precedent Table, are
as it were a mean betwixt these extraordinary Pieces discourst of in the
foregoing Chapter.

Wherefore if a Gunner do not rightly conceive of the constitution of each
Piece, he will fail either in overcharging the less fortified or weaker, or
under-charge the more fortified or stronger Pieces: Three differences in
Fortification of each sort of Ordnance.
For prevention whereof, Gunners have distinguished them into three sorts; As
namely, first either ordinarily fortified, or lessened, or double fortified;
that is to say, common or Legittimate Pieces, Bastard-peeces, or extraordinary
Pieces: Common or Legittimate Pieces, are those that have a due length of their
Chases proportioned according to the height of their proper Bores, The
difference of Pieces described.
as the Table aforegoing has demonstrated: Bastard-peeces have shorter Chases
then the proportion of their Bores do require; and extraordinary Pieces are
such Ordnance as have longer Chases then the proportion of the Bore allows:
Therefore to be certain of what constitution the Piece is of, the readiest way
is (if your Calibre compasses be wanting to measure or tertiate her with) to
take a cord or packthred, and girding the Piece at the Touchhole, at the
Trunnions, and at the Neck, taking. parts thereof, for the Diameter of the
body of her metal, in each place after this manner following.

The Canon or ordinary Culverins have about 11. Diameters of their Bore at the
touchhole, at the Trunnions 8. and at the neck 6. Diameters in their
circumferences; How to tertiate piece of Ordnance.
But the Canon commonly employed in Batteries, have but 9. Diameters at their
touchhole, at their Trunnions 7. parts, and at their necks 5 2/^. in the
circumference of their mettalls there: Lastly, the Demy-Canons are but 1/8 of
their Bores, in thickness of metal at the touchhole; If any Piece be more
or less, then they are either reinforced, How to konow when a Piece is
reinforced.
or lessened, and according to the force or feebleness of the Piece, to allow
her a convenient charge of Powder: The double Fortified or reinforced Canons
of Battery, have one whole Diameter of their Bore, in thickness of metal at
the touchhole, and 11/16. at her trunnions, and 7/16. at her neck, and can
endure to burn 34. pounds 1/2. parts of fine powder, or 43. 1/2. parts of
common powder: Contrarily, the lessened Canons of Battery is ^/4. at the
Chamber, at the trunnions, 9/16. and at the neck ^/16. of the Diameter, of
their Bores in thickness of metal, Note, every Piece (...) Ordnance that is
truly Fortified with metal, ought to contain as much metal in thicknes
round about, so far as the Chamber where the powder lies as the Bullet is in
height.
the poorness and debillity of her constitution in metal will not endure
25. of fine powder; or 31 pound of common powder notwithstanding her Iron
Bullet weighes 60. pound.

Moreover, if a Piece of Ordnance be not truly cast, so that one side is
thicker in metal then the other; She ought to have but such a proportion of
powder, as the thinnest part will bear, otherwise it is in danger of breaking,
besides it will never shoot right: Therefore to examine the Piece, you must
mount the mouth of it upon a Skidde or piece of Timber; then you must divide
the circumference of the Base-ring at the Breech into four equal parts; and
in the same manner likewise divide the circumference of the Mossell-ring at the
mouth into four parts, How to know when one side o^ the Piece is thicker then
the other.
every particular point of the Base-ring answering unto each point of the
Mossell-ring, in a right superficial Line; then stretching a chaulke Line from
the uppermost mark of the Mossell-ring along the Cillender of the Piece,
unto the uppermost mark of the Base-ring; then striking the Line that it
leaves a perfect mark behind it, then in the same manner strike the rest of
the points; so that there will be four equal Lines dividing the body of the
Piece into four equal divisions: then take a straight rod, and put it into
the mouth of the Piece holding it close to the side of the concave, directly in
it as the Lines directs; one Line whereof lying directly upwards, the
opposite will lie directly to it underneath, and the other two Lines will be
on both the sides of the Piece: Then take the quadrant, and place one side
thereof even with the Rod; and look what degree the Perpendicular plumblyne
entteth thereon, How to know when a Piece of Ordnance is truly bored.
and so turning the Piece that one of the Side-lines may lie upwards as the
former Line did; and if the plumblyne falls not upon the same degree at each of
the 4. Lines, the quadrant being applied in manner aforesaid, then the Piece is
truly Bored: Likewise if the Bore of the Piece lie awry in the metal, either
to the right or left hand under or over; it must be truly disparted before a
true shot can be made: How to despart a Piece of Ordnance Arithmetically, he^
bore not lying right.
To perform the which, take with a pair of Callibres the greatest height of
the metal at the mouth of the Piece, and likewise at the Breech, abating the
less out of the greater. parts, the remainer is the just disparture of the
Piece, as for example, A Culverin that is 19. Inches high at the Base-ring,
will be 13. Inches high at the Mossell-ring; which 13. Inches abated from 19.
rests 6. which being divided into two equal parts, the quotient being three
Inches, shows the true disparture of the Piece: It may also be done by taking
a Line and measuring the greatest circumference of metal in the Base-ring;
multiplying that measure by 7. dividing the product by 22. the quotient is the
Diameter or height of the circumference; likewise measure the circumference of
the Mossel-ring; and multiply that measure by 7. divide by 22. as before, the
quotient will show the Diameter of the metal at the mouth; then substract the
diameter last found, from the diameter of the breech. that remains is the true
disparture: Or for want of Callibres, take a cord and measure the greatest
circumference of metal at the Breech, then multiply that measure by 7.
dividing the product by 22. the quotient is the Diameter or height of the
circumference: Likewise measure the greatest circumference of metal at the
mouth, multiply that measure by 7. divide by 22. as before, the quotient will
show the Diameter at the mouth of the metal; substract the Diameter last
found, from the Diameter at the Breech ^. the remainder is the true disparture,
Exempli gratia. Suppose a Piece of Ordnance 132. Inches circumference of
metal at the Base-ring or Breech, and at the Mossel-Ring or mouth, 88.
Inches: To know the Diameter of metal at Breech and mouth, and the true
disparture; you must multiply 132. by 7. the product is 924. this being divided
by 22. the quotient is 42, the height of the metal at the Breech; likewise
multiply 88 by 7 you have 616, divide this by 22, the quotient is 28, the
height of the metal at the mouth; which 28. abated from 42. rests 14. the
which 14. being divided into two equal parts, Note, which side of the Piece is
thickest of metal, toward that side the Bullet will fail, because the
thinner side is more smart, and the thicker side more dull in heating.
yields 7. Inches for a part, the true disparture of the Piece.

Moreover, if you find your Piece thicker of metal in one part then another,
she will convey her Bullet toward the thickest side; wherefore after with
your instruments, and such Rules as before is described for the finding it out,
you understand where the fault lies, and which side is the thickest; you must
to remedy it, divide the overplus of metal in two parts, setting the
disparture of your Piece, one of those parts toward the thickest side of the
Pieces mouth, and bring the middle part of metal at the Breech of your Piece,
that disparture, and the midst of the mark, taking a direct level with your
eye, and laying it in a straight Line, Fire being given the shot will hit
right; but if the thickest part of the metal be above, then you ought to
make your disparture one Inch more, if under toward the Carriage, then one
Inch less.

Now to know how far such a Piece will shoot wide, A general rule to know
how far a Piece that is thickest of metal on one side will carry wide to
any mark assigned.
there is a general rule set down by Gunners; that so oftentime the length of
the Cillender or Concave of the Piece is to the mark, and then knowing how
much the Piece is thicker on the one side then the other; the one half of that
overplus being multiplied by the quotient first found, the product will show
how much the Piece shoots wide of the mark; (as for example) If a Governor
finds a Canon to be thicker of metal by two Inches on the right side then on
the left; she being 9. foot in length, and the mark assigned to be shot unto
is supposed to be 500. paces from the Piece: To work this, you must bring the
500. paces into feet, which makes 2500, feet, the which being divided by 9.
feet, being the length of the Concave: Cillinder of the Canon, yeildeth in the
quotient 277. feet 7/9. the which multiplied by 1/2. the superfluity of the
metal being one Inch, makes 272. feet 7/9 still, and so much wide the mark
should the said Piece have shot at such a distance, although she had been
laid full against the midst of the mark.

These observations I thought fit to gather and present to the view of the
Studious Soldier, which I question not, but will be taken well by any Soldier
that understands himself: As for Imbellicke fools, I leave them to Travel
for more wit, Valor, and experience.

So let this suffice for the Tertiating and measuring a Piece of Ordnance,
which otherwise the Gunner may be deceived in Charging it; and also it shall
be sufficient for the disparting any Piece of Ordnance, otherwise their will
be great errors in making a true Shot: In the following Chapter we will
discourse of diverse circumstances and causes, which a Gunner must take into his
consideration otherwise great errors will ensue every shoot he makes.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Diverse circumstances and causes to be considered and avoided, which causes
error in Shooting.
THere are such diversity of Implements, Materials, and circumstances,
belonging to great Artillery, which being not truly planted, formed, and
framed, causes sundry accidents to proceed from them; so that if a wonderful
care and vigilancie be not had to prevent and amend the same, it will be
impossible to make a true shot in all kind of Pieces, and upon all kind of
Platformes: Therefore it will be most convenient to discourse of every
particular thing that may let and hinder the true performance of a Shot, and
likewise show the best remedies to redress them: Rules to be observed in
laying Ordnance upon their carriages, so that they may shoot truly.
And for the performance thereof, we will take the Rules and advises of the
best and ablest Gunners that have wrote upon this discourse: Wherefore first
observe if a Piece of Ordnance be not truly laid upon her Carriage, or her
Carriage not truly framed, will produce an error; the remedy for this, is
helped by this Rule: Lovis Collado, and Alexander Bianco differ about the
dimentions of the carriages.
First measure the just length of the Cillender or Bore of your Piece, then
note, the Plankes of the Carriage ought to be once and a half that length;
also measure the Diameter of that Piece, and the said plankes at the foreend
shall be in depth 4 times that Diameter, and in the midst three times. the
Diameter, and at the end next the ground, two times and a half the Diameter,
and in thickness once the Diameter.

Next observe whether the wheels have their due proportion in height, or
whether one wheel be higher then the other, The second observation, is about
the wheels and the parts belonging to them.
or one wheel reverse faster then the other: Observe the due proportion for
the wheels should be. parts the length of the Piece: The Saker and Minion,
the height of their wheels must exceed this former proportion by ^. parts: For
the Faulcon and Faulconet 1/6. and for the Base one quarter; The Vellowes must
be in length 4 Diameters and 11/1^. of the Bore. and six of these makes the
whole circumference, and each of them one Diameter in breadth, and one in
thickness; The Nave ought to be three Diameters thick, and three Diameters
and a half long; The Spokes are to be two Diameters in length, and let into
the Nave one half Diameter, and into the Vellowes one half Diameter more;
each Wheel is to have twelve Spokes, and each Spoke, a quarter of a Diameter
square; The Axle-tree must be one Diameter ^. in thickness; The Arms thereof
must be in the thickest place one Diameter, The third observatio^, is about
the trunnions if not placed in a diagonall line, with the Axis of the Piece, it
will shoot wide.
and at the ends thereof ^. parts of a Diameter in thickness, and where the
Limbs or sides of the Carriage rests on, it must be one and a quarter in
breadth, and one and 2/^. parts in height.

Thirdly, if the Trunnions be not duly placed directly in a diagonall Line
with the axis of the Piece, it will shoot wide: Therefore observe, first to
measure the length of the Concave, Cillinder, or Bore of the Piece from the
mouth to the Breech; divide that measure by 7. then multiply that sum that
comes in the quotient by 3. the product will show you how many Inches or
other measure the Trunnions ought to stand from the end of the lowest part of
the concavity of the said Piece at the Breech; Note, the trunnions ought so to
be placed, as ^ parts of the circumference of the piece may be seen in that
place whereas the trunnions are set, and one right against the other.
or otherwise you may multiply the length of the concave of the Piece by 3. and
divide the product by 7. the quotient will show the true place how far the
Trunnions ought to stand from the lowest part of the Bore: For Chamber bored
Pieces, this Rule fayles, for they must be placed more backwards, because the
thickness of metal toward the Breech, exceeds in comparative proportion to
equal bored Pieces, which would become Breech-heavie and very troublesome in
managing; If the carriage or trunnions ^ares lie higher or lower, one then the
other; or the carriage be to wide, so that the piece lie not fast, but starts
aside in her discharge, causes error in the shoot.
and if the Trunnions should be placed according to the former Rule, the
metal of such Chamber bored Pieces would be thin and weak at the
proportioned place, so that a due place must be found to place them more near
the Breech, the better to support the great weight of the metal, and the
better to keep her steadie in her discharge, and not to be too unwildie, but
near equi-ballancing for the mounting and managing thereof.

Fourthly, if the Platform be not laid with planks very level and smooth, so
that neither of the Wheels, nor neither side of the tail of the Carriage
takes a rub in the reverse, The fourth observation, is about the platform,
etc.
or rest harder on the Platform upon one side more then upon the other.

Fifthly, when the shot is too low for the Bore of the Piece, and at the
delivery touches upon one side, The fifth observation is about the bullet.
causes the Shot to err, and if the Shot be not equally round, or the bore of
the Piece not lying straight, but more on the one side then the other; or if
the Shot be rammed too far home, or too short.

Sixthly, The sixth observation is the wind, etc.
if the Wind be too vehement either with you or against you, the thicknes, or
thinnes of the Air will cause error.

Seventhly, Note, a piece of Ordnance will shoot further from sea to land, then
from land to sea; the thickness of the A^re at sea hinders the passage.
the heating or cooling the Piece, and Note that a Brass Piece being made hot
with often shooting, is more apt to break then when it is cold; and any kind
of Artillery of what metal soever, is more apt to break in a great Frost
(being cold) at the first or second shot, then afterward being hot with often
shooting: Moreover a Piece of Ordnance over hot with shooting, will not raunge
so far not pierce so deep, as being temperately cold, and the slower the
Powder is in firing within the Piece, the greater her reverse will be, and the
shot of less execution: In the next Chapter we will observe some Rules in
charging great Ordnance, with their due proportion of Powder and Shot to every
particular Piece, with sundry other circumstances thereto belonging.

CHAP. XLIX.
Observations in charging great Ordnance, with their due proportion of Powder
and Shot to every particular Piece belonging: with their Ladles, Tampions, and
Spunges, and all kind of Circumstances; Fit to be learned of every Commander,
both concerning Pieces, Powder, and Bullets.
WE having travailed thus far in observing what our famous Gunners of this
latter Age, have through their industry and experience found out, to perfect
and beautify this noble Art, which is now brought to a most excellent
perfection; I hold it most fit to discourse of every particular branch in an
orderly way; and to perform this, I shall endeavor to pick and cull out of
the ablest Authors their best practical experiments, and so briefly and
distinctly handle them, that the ingenuous Commander may profit thereby. And
first, not forgetting how we have formerly showed the nature and quality of
all kind of Ordnance, Note, in spunging your piece, you are to stand on the
right side, the sponge being drawn out, you must give it a knock on the
outside of the mouth of the piece to shake off the foulness.
their due due strength and Fortitudes, with diverse accidents that may hinder
their true shooting; Now remains, diverse further Observations and Curiosities,
which may not be omitted in lading or charging them Gunner-like: Wherefore
having Powder, Bullets and Match, with other implements in readiness for
Service, and before you charge your Piece, you must clear the Touchhole, and
sponge the Piece well.

A Piece of Ordnance is either to be laded with Cartrages or with the Ladle,
Cartreges is the readiest way, How to frame Cartrages of Canvas or paper, which
shall hold the due charge of powder for any kind of piece if they be made of
paper, then the seames are to be glewed, if cloth, then towed.
they are framed either of Canvas or paper royal: For the making of these in a
due proportion; that they may neither hold more nor less, but a due charge.
You are to take the height of the Bore of the Piece without the vent of the
shot, then cut the cloth or paper of the breadth of three such heights, and if
it be for a Canon, the length must be three Diameters of the Bore, for a
Culverin 4 and for a Saker, Fawlcon, and other inferior Pieces 4. parts of the
height of their proper Bores: Note, you are to leave in the midst, top, and
bottom, one other such height, at each of these places to lie over, and make a
Cover and a bottom for the Cartreges; Some use Formers of Wood, made the just
height of the Bore, to wind the paper or cloth about to fashion it.
moreover, you are to augment or diminish these Cartrages, according as your
Powder is in strength or weakness, or according as your Piece is hot.

If your Piece be an ancient cast Piece Taper bored, the former of Wood must
be made accordingly, that the Cartreges may go to the bottom; if
Chamber-bored, The papers of the Cartrage must be oyled, and the canvasse must
be tallowed over to defend them from wet*
the Cartrage must be laid in a thin instrument called a Chassela, which will
convey it into the Chamber, but if right bored your Rammers head put it close
home, and with a three-square sharp priming iron make a vent through the
Cartrage at the Touchhole; so that the priming powder that is to take fire may
come to the powder in the Cartrage.

The next thing considerable, How to charge a piece with a Cartrage.
is to know how to give a true charge with a Ladle; First, we are to consider
(as formerly I have said) whether the Piece be double fortified or not, How to
give a Canon her true charge.
or whether inferior in metal; a double fortified Canon, is to be charged
with two Ladles full of powder, A Ladle containing a true charge for a Canon,
described.
the Ladle is to be two Diameters and a half of the shot in length, the
socket of the Ladle-plate that is fastened on to the Staff, is to be one
Diameter more of plate, the breadth of the plate of this Ladle must be two
Diameters. An exact Rule to make a Ladle by, which shall contain the due
charge of any piece of Ordnance.


Or rather observe this Rule, take a Cord and measure the Circumference of the
Bullet in the midst, laying the same measure to an inch Rule, then divide the
same measure 5. into equal parts; Note, that three of these parts, is the just
breadth the plate of the Ladle ought to be of: which being orderly placed on
the Staff as before, and bent circularly, serves to hold the powder in; the
other 2/^. parts being cut off, and so left open, serves to turn the powder
into the Piece: the Length of this Ladle, is to be made according to the
fortifying of the Piece with metal. For a Canon, the length is to be 23.
inches 1/^. parts. For a Canon Serpentine 22. inches, a French Canon 21.
Demi-Canon eldest 22. Demi-Canon ordinary 20. Demi-Canon 21. inches, and so for
all inferior pieces, according as the Table in the beginning of this
discourse, does plainly demonstrate.

To charge with this Gunner-like; How to charge a piece Gunner^like with a
Ladle.
so soon as this Ladle is filled so full that it may be struck off with a
Rule, the same being put into the mouth of a Piece, and your thumb being fixed
upon the upper part of the Staff, so thrusting it home to the bottom of the
concavitie of the Cillender, turn the Staff so, as your thumb falls
directly under the Staff, so the Ladle will disburthen it self orderly.

Now to know the ^/5. parts of the Bullets Circumference, that the Ladle may
fitly hold her true charge; How to find out the ^/5 part of the bullets
circumfere^ce, that the Ladle may truly* be made thereby.
Lay the measure of the Bullets whole Circumference to an inch Rule, then
multiply the same by 3. and divide the Product by the Denominator 5. the
quotient will justly tell the breadth the plate ought to be of; As for example;
You shall find in the Table, a Canon whose Bullet is 7. inches high in
Diameter, this will be 22. inches in the Circumference, An arithmeticall
example, etc.
that multiplied by 3. makes 66. which divided by 5. the quotient is 13.
inches, 1/2. the true breadth of the plate, for a Canon Ladle of 7. inches
Diameter.

But if it should so happen, An observation how to charge a piece of Ordnance
truly without ladle, cartrages, or scales, or balances.
that neither Ladle nor Cartrages were to be had, nor balances ready to weigh
out the due proportion of powder for a charge, then thrust your Rammer into the
Cillender of the Piece just to the Touchhole, and there mark the Staff even
with the metal at the pieces mouth: then pull the Staff back three
Diameters for the Canon, and 3 1/2. for the Culverin, and 4. Diameters for the
Saker, ^awlcon, and the rest inferior Pieces. Likewise, mark there another
mark, between these two marks, is the place of distance, the powder will
supply in the Chamber of the Piece. Then take Paper, Parchment, or Cloth, as
long as the distance betwixt the two marks, then being wrapped up round,
equal with the Bore of the Piece, only 1/20. part less; the sides and
bottom being glewed, fill it with powder, and gently put it into the mouth of
the Piece, and thrust it home with the Tampion, and see there be just so much
powder, as will occupy the place between the two marks, so as the last mark
be equal to the s^atte of the mouth, the Rammers head being home to the powder.

But by the way, Observations about the strength and conditions of Gunpowder,
and accordingly to order the charge to make a perfect shot.
let us take some observations of the mixture of Gunpowder* so that the Gunner
may not deceive himself, in the over or under-charging his Piece, according as
the strength or weakness of the powder shall happen, by means whereof it
shall be impossible to make a true shot; for there is a certain proportional
charge of powder to be found for every Piece, according to the strength of the
Piece and the weight of the shot, some hold that the truest charge is a just
quantity of fine powder, that shall all fire within the Cillender of the Piece,
and what is more is superfluous.

Now we are to observe, The three sundry e^gredients that powder is made of,
with the quantities of the composition described.
there are three sorts of powder in use of several forces; the first is a
small corned powder for Birding-peeces, and Fowling, the ^ngredients is 7. or
8. of Peeter, and one of Cole and of Brimstone, and this is quickest and of
greatest force; the second is for Muskets and Pistols; called sine-powder, the
Composition is 5. or 6. of Peeter for one of Cole and of Brimstone. The third
is called Ordnance powder, and that has 4. or 5. of Peeter for one of Cole,
and of Brimstone: to distinguish the force of these several kinds, or of any
powder decayed, there is an instrument invented, the Figure and use of it
follows in this Book, in the discourse of Warlike instruments. How to know
when powder is decayed through mutation or corruption, three several ways.


Besides, it is easy for a Gunner to know if powder be decayed through
mutation or corruption, three several ways; the first by the sight. Secondly,
by the se^ling; the third and surest way, is by firing it: If it looks black
and dark, or if it moulders or clammes together, it is naught and decayed; for
good powder will feel nimble, and look of a blush or tawny color: if good
powder be fired upon a piece of white paper, if it rise quick being fired, and
spread in a moment, smoke little, but rise in a clear flash, and leaves no
pieces upon the paper, but carries all away clean, without firing the paper,
the powder is very good, otherwise not; by these symptoms, a Gunner cannot be
deceived in proportioning his due charge.

Next, we are to know the difference of Bullets; both in their heights,
weights, Circumferences, and Metals, which being not observed, a world of
errors will be committed, and a true proportionable charge can never be found
to make a right shot.

Wherefore, first observe our best Gunners do allow for all kind of Bullets
1/^. part of the Diameter of the Pieces Bore for vent.

Secondly, According to the weight of the shot, the powder must be
proportioned, whether it be Iron, Lead, or Stone-shot.
according to the weight of the shot, the charge of powder must be
proportioned. Therefore it is most necessary, first to know the true weight of
any shot by the Diameter thereof. Secondly, to know the different weights of
Bullets, being of one and the selfsame Diameter, proportion, circumference,
and height, but of several substances: as Iron, Lead, Stone, and the like.
Wherefore take notice, the proportion in weight of Iron to Lead, is as 30. to
46.

Likewise, The difference in weight betwixt a Bullet of Lead, Iron, and Stone,
they being all three of one Diameter and Circumference.
Stone to Lead is as 18. to 72. and Stone to Iron as 18. to 48. the powder due
to every charge, must be proportioned according to the weight of the Bullet, be
it more or less, as Mr. Digges in his 17. Theorem does show, and as Mr. Norton
Comments upon it: That if a Gunner shoots three several shots in a Saker, the
Bullet of the first being Lead, the second Iron, the third Stone, the true
charge of powder being 12. pound as the leaden Bullet requires, then the Lead
out-rangeth the other two, and that of Iron will out-range that of Stone; but
if these three several Bullets be discharged with other several proportions
of powder, as the Iron Bullet requires 8. l. of powder, The true quantity of
Powder each kind of Bullet requires for its proportional charge.
then will the Iron out-range the Lead, and the Lead the Stone-shot. But
thirdly, if these three kind of Bullets be severally shot with 4 l. of
powder, being the true proportional charge for the Stone-shot, then will the
Stone-shot out-range the Iron, and the Iron the Lead.

Further in his 18. Theorem, the convenient weight of a Bullet alters according
to the quantity or validity of the powder, Zote, these proportions have been
observed to do best execution.
for as formerly is showed, that the Lead shot requires the whole weight of
ordinary powder, or ^. of Corn powder, and the Iron-shot ^/2. of ordinary, or
2/3. of the best powder; and the Stone-bullet 2/^. of ordinary, or 1/^ of the
best powder.

Moreover, these precedent things being considered, yet there is further to be
observed the length of the Piece, The length of the Piece is to be considered,
before a due proportion of Powder can be allowed for its charge.
for although there be a convenient ponderositie of Powder and Bullet,
answerable one to the other, which might cause a perfect shoot, yet if the
Cillender of the Piece be not proportioned in length, but is either longer or
shorter, it will cause alteration; for the longer Piece will require more
powder to be fired in her, before the shot can arrive just at the mouth of the
Piece to be discharged than the shorter will, A difference in firing the Powder
in a long, from a shorter Piece.
for if all the powder be fired before the shot arrives at the mouth, the after
running thereof within the mouth of the Cillender, will hinder the swiftness
thereof: So likewise if the Piece be too short, so that the Bullet be out of
the mouth of the Piece before all the powder be fired, having received all the
force of powder, for want of sufficient length in the Cillender of the Piece,
it cannot possible do the true execution. For conclusion, we are not to forget
to learn the weights of all kind of Bullets by their Diameters, and by having
the true weight of a small Bullet, thereby to find out the weight of a
greater; as also, by having the weight of an Iron Bullet, thereby to find out
the weight of a Bullet of any other metal.

An Iron Bullet; whose Diameter is 12 inches, the weight thereof is 240. l. the
same Diameter of Lead weighes 360. l. and the like in Marble Stone, 90. l. as
you may perceive by a Table following, exactly calculated by Mr. Norton.

In the next place, An example, whereby to find out the true weight of a great
Bullet, by having the true weight of a small one performed by Arithmeticall
Rules.
by having the weight of a small Bullet, thereby to find out the weight of a
greater, is performed by this Example following.

An Iron Bullet of 6. inches Diameter weighing 30. pounds; by this I would
know, how much a Bullet of 12. inches Diameter weighes, being of the same
metal. This is performed by multiplying the Diameter of each Bullet
cubically, where I find the Cube of 6. to be 216. and the Cube of 12. to be
1728. Then by the Rule of proportion I say, if 216. weighes 30. l. weight, what
shall that Bullet weigh whose Cube is 1728. So multiplying 1728. by 30. l. the
weight of the lesser Bullet arises 51840. which being divided by 216. being
the Cube of the lesser Bullet, yields in the quotient 240. l. So much shall the
Bullet weigh, that is of 12. inches Diameter.

How by the weight of an Iron Bullet, to find out the weight of a Bullet of
Marble Stone, being of the like Diameter, or by the weight and height of a
Marble Bullet, to find out the weight of an Iron Bullet of like height, is
thus performed.

As for Example.

An Iron Bullet of 12. inches height, is of 240. l. weight; to know the weight
of a Marble Bullet of like Diameter: How to know by Arithmeticall Rules the
weight of a marble Bullet by an Iron, they being both of one Diameter.
You must first observe, that a Bullet of Iron to the like Bullet of Marble
Stone, shall bear such proportion as 18. to 48. (as before is showed) and
therefore I multiply the weight of the Iron Bullet known, being 240. l. by 18.
the proportion the Stone Bullet bears thereto, of which arises 4320. this
being divided by 48. the quotient is 90. l. Thus much shall the Marble Bullet
weigh, that is in Diameter equal with the Bullet of Iron of 12. inches
Diameter.

After the same manner take the height and weight of a Stone Bullet, By the
same Rule to find out the weight of an Iron Bullet, by a Marble, being both of
one Diameter.
being 12. inches Diameter, which weighes 90. l. and multiply this 90. l. by
48. the Iron Bullet bears to the Stone, which Product being divided by 18.
which is the proportion the Stone bears to the Iron* the quotient will be
240. the number of pounds the Iron Bullet weighes.

After the same manner, a Leaden Bullet being of the same Diameter that either
an Iron or a Stone Bullet is of, by knowing the proportion between Iron and
Lead, or Stone and Lead, you may find out the weight either by the other, as
before is showed.

Moreover, if there be two Bullets, one higher in Diameter than the other, if
you want a pair of Callibre Compasses to take the just height, you must take a
Cord and guirt the Bullet or Bullets (whose height you desire to know) just in
the midst, then lay the measure to an inch Rule, observing how many inches or
other measure the same contains, which being done, multiply the said measure
by 7. and divide by 22. the quotient will show you the just Diameter, A Rule to
find out how much one Bullet is higher in Diameter then another.
then abating the less Diameter from the greater, the remainer will show you
how much the one is higher than the other.

As for Example.

If the Circumference of one Bullet be 20. inches, and the Circumference of the
other 30 inches; in working as above is taught, I find the Diameter of the
less Bullet to be 6 4/^. and the Diameter of the greater Bullet to be, 9 6/^.
so abating the lesser from the greater, the remainer is 3. inches 2/11. parts
of an inch, showing the great Bullet is so much in height more than the less.

To find out the Circumference of any Bullet, A general Rule to find out the
circumference by the Diameter.
there is a general Rule for it; first, the height of the Diameter being
known, you are to observe in the next place, that the height of the
Circumference is as 7. to 22. As suppose the Diameter to be 12. inches, which
12. I multiply by 22. the Product is 264. which being divided by 7. the
quotient is 37 ^. the true Circumference of a Bullet 12. inches height.

Likewise, having the Circumference of any Bullet, you may find out the height
of the same; but this is to be wrought contrary to the former conclusion. As
suppose the Circumference to be 37 ^/^. as in the former demonstration you may
perceive. Therefore, first you are to reduce both the whole and broken numbers,
being 37 ^/7. into his proper fraction, and it will be 264/7. then observing
Archimides doctrine, multiplying by 7. and dividing by 22. the quotient will be
12. so many inches is the Diameter of the same Bullet. And for your greater
ease, I have borrowed Master Nortons Table, wherein is plainly showed the
height or Diameter from one inch to 14. with the weight of every particular
Bullets Diameter, both of Iron, Lead and Stone, fitted to the Assize of our
English Measure of inches and parts.

Likewise, The use of the following Table described.
according to our weight of Haberde-pois of 16. Ounces to the Pound, the left
Margent is to find out the height of the shot, in the first two Columes of
inches and quarter of inches, in the two second Columes under the title of
Iron, pounds, Ounces, you shall find the weight thereof: The like may be
understood if the shot be Lead, by the third Columes, or of Stone by the two
last Columes, each under his proper Title, and over against the height assigned.

As for Example.

An Iron shot of 6. inches the weight will appear to be 30. l. and if it were
of Lead, it would be 45. l. and of stone 11. l. 4. ounces, view the Table
following; only learn these Rules following for your help, if an exact Table
should be wanting.

First, take the disproportion that Iron bears to Lead, and Lead to Marble
Stone; for as formerly is showed, Iron is in weight to Lead as 30. to 46.
Lead to Stone as 72. to 18. and Stone to ^ron as 18. to 48. An Iron Bullet of
6. inches Diameter that weiges 30. l. to know what a Leaden Bullet of the same
proportion weighes; First, multiply the weight of the Iron Bullet known being
30. l. by 46. the disproportion Lead bears thereto; there arises 1380.
which being divided by 30. the quotient is 46. As appears in this Table.

Secondly, if you would know what a Stone Bullet weighes, of the same
proportion a Leaden is of, being 6. inches Diameter, and weighing (as in the
quotient before is showed) 46. l. and likewise observing the disproportion in
weight to be 72. to 18. as before; you must multiply the weight of the Leaden
Bullet known being 46. l. by 18. the disproportion the Stone bears thereto,
so arises 828. which being divided by 72. the quotient is 11 ^/4. and thus of
the rest of those weights.

A Table, showing the height, and weight, of Iron, Lead, and Stone-shot; The
use of this Table, is demonstrated in the foregoing Page.
Inches high. Quarters. Iron pounds. Ounces. Lead pounds. Ounces. Stone
pounds. Ounces. 1 0 1 0 0 3 0 1 1/4 1 1 ^ 0 0 6 0 3 1 2 ^ 0 0 9 0 4 1/2 1 3 1 0
0 13 0 5 ^/4 2 0 1 1 1 11 0 7 2 1 1 9 2 0 0 9 2 2 2 2 3 0 0 12 2 3 2 14 4 3 1 0
3 0 3 12 5 0 1 4 3 1 4 12 6 9 1 8 3 2 6 1 8 1 2 0 3 3 7 5 9 14 2 7 4 0 8 15 11
5 2 13 4 1 10 10 15 15 3 10 4 2 12 10 17 15 4 3 4 3 14 14 21 5 5 9 5 0 17 5 24
12 6 3 5 1 20 1 30 0 7 8 5 2 23 2 35 10 8 14 5 3 26 6 39 9 10 10 6 0 30 0 46 0
11 2/4 6 1 34 0 51 0 12 12 6 2 38 0 57 0 14 3 6 3 42 0 63 0 15 12 7 0 48 0 72 0
17 10 7 1 53 0 79 8 19 14 7 2 58 0 87 0 21 12 7 3 64 0 96 0 24 0 8 0 72 10 106
8 26 12 8 1 78 0 117 0 28 8 8 2 87 3 130 8 32 8 8 3 95 0 141 8 35 10 9 0 101 0
150 0 37 10 9 1 109 6 161 8 40 4 9 2 121 10 181 13 44 2 9 3 132 11 198 5 49 8
10 2 138 0 207 0 51 10 10 0 164 2 246 0 61 2/4 11 0 184 0 275 8 69 8 11 2 216 0
324 0 81 0 12 0 240 0 360 0 90 0 13 0 305 0 457 8 114 8 14 0 389 2 583 8 146 8

A Table, showing the Square Root unto 3848. and the Cubicke Root, 238328.
1 1024 32 32768 4 2 8 1089 33 35937 9 3 27 1156 34 39304 16 4 64 1225 35 42875
25 5 125 1296 36 46656 36 6 216 1369 37 50653 49 7 343 1444 38 54872 64 8 512
1521 39 59319 81 9 729 1600 40 64000 100 10 1000 1681 41 68921 121 11 1331 1764
42 74088 144 12 1728 1849 43 81307 169 13 2197 1936 44 85184 196 14 2744 2025
45 87120 225 15 3375 2116 46 97336 256 16 4096 2209 47 103823 289 17 4913 2304
48 110592 324 18 5832 2401 49 117649 361 19 6859 2500 50 125000 400 20 6800
2601 51 132651 441 21 9261 2704 52 140608 484 22 10648 2809 53 148877 529 23
11197 2916 54 157464 576 24 13824 3205 55 166375 625 25 15625 3136 56 175616
676 26 17576 3249 57 185163 729 27 19683 3364 58 195112 784 28 21952 3481 59
205379 841 29 24389 3600 60 216000 900 30 27000 3721 61 226981 961 31 29791
3844 62 238328 The Square Root. The Cubick Root. Square Root. Cubick Root.

I have adjoined this Table, of the Square and Cubicke root; to the Table of
the height and weight of iron, Lead, and Stone Bullets; because Mr. Norton
conceives that a man of a small capacity and practice, may find out the
weight of any Bullet by the help of this Table of the Cubick-root.

As for Example.

Suppose an Iron Bullet of 4. inches Diameter and 1/2. now by dividing the Cube
of the Shot by 8. and take the quotient for pounds, Note, to perform this the
solid square inches must be found out, by multiplying the measure of the known
inches of the Diameter of the Bullet cubically, and then again multiply the
Cube by 1^, and divide the last Product by 21, and the number in the quotient,
is the solid square inches: The square inch of an iron Bullet, weighes four
ounces, and so of the rest.
and each unite of the Remainer for two Ounces; and so the Cube of 4. being 91.
and divided by 8. the quotient will be 11. l. and the 3. remaining will be 6.
ounces; the like in all kinds may be done for Stone-shot, by the Rule of 3.
only: Saying, if 48. the proportion of Iron* give 202. ounces, what shall 18.
the proportion for Stone give? 76. ounces, which is 4. l. and 12. ounces for
the weight of the Stone-shot, which is 4. inches 1/2. in height.

Now to proceed in our discourse, the powder and length (being considered) of
the Piece, and the Bullets weight observed, to the end that a convenient
proportion of powder be found, answerable to the heaviness or lightness of
the Bullet. For if one proportion of powder should be taken, for the three
several weights of Bullets, being of diverse metals, as this Table does
distinguish the disproportion between Iron, Lead, and Stone, there would
prove an infinite variation and confusion. As Mr. Norton well observes, that a
man's hand is able to throw a weight of four pound Lead, further than a weight
of 20. pounds of Iron; or then two pounds of feathers: Mr. Nortons Art of Great
Artillery, p. 36.
As he exemplifies it by a Saker, having made 3. shots; the proportion of
powder being 12. pounds, as the leaden shot weighes; in this case the shot of
Lead, will out-range the other two, and that of Iron will out-range that of
Stone But the quantity of powder being altered to 8. pounds, as the Iron shot
weighs; then the Iron will out-range the Lead, and the Lead the Stone-shot,
Thirdly, these Bullets being severally shot again out of the same Piece, with
the proportion of 4 pounds of powder, then will the Stone-shot out-range the
Iron, and the Iron the Lead Bullet.

Moreover, this observation is not to be forgot; the higher a Piece is mounted,
the more does the weight of the shot resist the powder, Mr. Nortons
observations, about the true charging a Piece of Ordnance, with the due
proportion of powder allowed to Bullets of each kind of metal, prescribed.
and the lighter the shot is, the easier it is forced out of the Piece; so that
if the Bullet weighes either too much or too little for the force of the
powder, the motion thereof will be various. Wherefore he holds, the Leaden shot
requires for its due charge, the whole weight of ordinary powder, or 4/^. of
Corne-powder; and the Iron-shot 4/5. of ordinary powder, or. of the best; and
the Stone. of ordinary, or. of the best. This shall suffice; next, we are to
entreat of the Levelling of Ordnance, with the instruments for that purpose,
showing the several proportional ranges, according to the mounting or
imbasing of the same, as follows.

CHAP. L.
Diverse Rules and observations to be used in levelling of Ordnance, by the
Gunners quadrant, Scale, Inchsight Rule, and other Instruments very material
for every Commander to understand.
IN levelling of Ordnance to make a true shot, Three things to be considered
in making a true shot.
there is three things considerable; The first is the distance to the mark
assigned within the reach of the Pieces level, The first is distance to the
mark.
called point-blancke, and in this there is neither mounting nor imbasing of
the Piece.

The second, is when the mark assigned is far beyond distance of a true
level, The second is beyond the distance of point-blancke.
or point-blancke; and for the bullet to reach this, the Piece is to be
mounted unto some one degree or other of the quadrant, according as the
distance of the mark shall be found.

Thirdly, The third is under point-blancke.
if a Piece of Ordnance be to shoot at a mark which lies under the true level
of point-blancke, then accordingly she is to be imba^ed: Now from these
observations there is a fourth arises of equal consequence to be observed
with the former (viz.) the finding out the true proportion of distance or paces
of ground, whether it be to shoot beyond, or under, or near the true level
of point-blancke; If both Art and judgment be not used in this, it will prove
impossible ever to mount or imbase a Piece to any point to perform a perfect
shoot.

Wherefore I hold it best to discourse of the diversity of ways used by most
experienced Gunners in levelling of Ordnance; wherein we shall be something
large, in regard the subject requires it; and in the next Chapter I shall
discourse of the instruments and rules which which are to be used in taking a
true distance of paces to any mark assigned.

And in this our present discourse, I shall first describe a quadrant, and then
show the use of it; and so breefely proceed to other instruments invented for
the like uses, with such due observations as befits this Theme; for indeed
this quadrant is an instrument by which diverse conclusions belonging to this
Art may be wrought,

This Gunners quadrant is a Geometrical instrument, containing in
circumference one quarter of a circle, The quadrant described with its parts,
which is to be made of Brass or some hard Wood.
divided into 90. equal parts or degrees in the outmost limb; and in the
second limb within, there is 12. equal parts or divisions, and likewise each
of those are subdivided by means of parallels, and diagonalls, into 10. equal
parts so that each side will be thereby found distinctly divided into 120
equal parts; the use of them is to take all Geometrical mensurations, both of
distances, heights, breadths, and depths, which are either accessible or
inaccessible, as shall in the next Chapter be declared.

But as for the degrees and points, principally they are to help the Gunners
practice to level and shoot at the best certainty, both in the right line
called point blancke, and also upon the advantage of all kind of Randons or
marks assigned; only you are to make use of certain Tables, Scales, and
directions which I shall entreat of and demonstrate by Figure.

Wherefore observe this quadrant must have a ruler made very straight about two
foot long, which is joined firmly to one of the sides or Semi-diameters
thereof; or rather to have one of the sides extending it self out in form of
a ruler; this subsequent Figure represents the true proportion of it, as for
the several parts of this Instrument, which only belongs to the taking of
heights and distances, I omit altogether in this place, reserving it for the
next Chapter.



Now therefore observe this Ruler to which the qudarant is artificially joined,
being two foot long, divided into equal Inches and parts, with a hollow S^^t
in the amidst, upon which is placed a plate with a round hole in the amidst
thereof; The use of it is to set the ruler upright at the breech of the Piece,
the plate before named moving up and down as you shall see cause, to take a
perfect sight; by this you may know, what length, or what Inches and parts any
Piece requires to reach any mark.

Moreover, before you go about to level your Piece by the quadrant to make a
Shot; you must first by the use of this ruler, take a true view through the
two ^ight holes, upon the back of the same, then accordingly let the plumbline
fall at liberty on the degrees of the quadrant; and if the plumbline falls on
the line of level, then the mark is of equal height with your eye; but if the
thread falls toward you, the mark is above point blancke; otherwise, if from
the Line of level, it is under point-blanck* by this you shall know whether
your mark assigned be higher or lower then your platform or the Cillender of
your Piece, for it is most necessary, first to see whether the Base or lowest
part of the said mark or altitude be above or under point-blancke.

Now in levelling your Piece, you are to put the ruler into the mouth of the
Piece close to the lowest side of the metal, The mounting o^ imbasing of a
Piece is performed by putting in o^ drawing out the quines, as reason shall
direct.
within the Concave, Cillender or Bore; then mount or imbase your Piece in her
Carriage, until the plummet fall directly upon the Line of level, and then the
Axis of the bore or Concave or Cillender thereof, will lie straight and level.

But if the mark assigned be found by this instrument to lie beyond the reach
of the Piece at point-blancke, so as she must be mounted at some one degree
or other* according as the distance shall be found; in this you must make use
of certaine^Tables exactly framed, which hereafter shall be demonstrated. But
before you can attain to any understanding in them, you must first learn to
find the right Line or right Range of any shot discharged, (out of what kind
of Piece soever it be) for every elevation.

Next you are to find out how much of the Horizanticall Line lies under the
crooked range of the Shot, at any elevation that shall be assigned.

Lastly, Read Mr* Nortons practice of Artillery page 97* 98. and it will show
you by example how to perform these things; but you shall find error
committed by the Printer, which must be amended.
the knowledge of the violent, crooked, and natural motion or course of a shot
discharged out of a Piece, at what distance soever assigned.

Further by observing the several Diameters of diverse Pieces, and their
various lengths, causes much alteration in their ranges; yet for the ease of
the lngenious Soldier, our modern Gunners have taken wonderful pains in
framing a Table of the proportions of right ranges; the use of it is thus to
be understood: Let your Piece be of what kind soever; you must first know and
prove how far this Piece conveyes her shot at any one degree of the quadrant;
as suppose you find your Piece shoots at 6 degrees of mounture, 200 paces in a
right Line, not sensibly crooked; now your desire is to know how far the same
Piece will further convey her shot in a straight Line, she being mounted to
ten degrees.

For this you must repair to the Table following, and propound to your self,
if 285 the number against six degrees gives 200 paces, what will 354 the
number in this Table against 10 degrees give.

A Table of proportions of right ra^ges or point-blanks:
0 192 1 209 2 227 3 244 4 261 5 278 6 285 7 302 8 320 9 337 10 354 20 524 30
695 40 855 50 1000 60 1140 70 1220 80 1300 90 1353

This being wrought by the Rule of 3, the quotient will be 242 paces, view the
Table of the proportions of right ranges in the Margent.

Yet by the way observe these Tables are not absolutely true, nor cannot
possibly correspond in a just exactness, in regard of diverse Fractions;
wherefore practice must be the best Schoolmasters in these conclusions.

Now to proceed in our discourse; the next thing to be observed, is the finding
out how far a Piece shoots at every degree of mounture at its dead range, and
for to perform this, the right range and crooked being added together into
one, is then called the dead range, which is to be understood the whole
distance from the platform, from which the Piece is discharged, unto the first
fall or graze of the Bullet upon the level Line, or Horzianticall plain.

And likewise as formerly is said, the differences in the Bores and lengths of
Pieces, and likewise the strength and feebleness of the powder increases or
diminishes the course of the Shot, and therefore most difficult to find out
the true range, but by Diagrams, Tables, or Scales made from experiments; and
to that end and purpose our late practitioners in this Art, have beaten their
brains and labored to arrive at some exactness; by their experiments and
industrious endeavors they have attained to some seeming perfection, far
better then uncertain guessing, and for that purpose framed Tables, as
appears in the Margent, which Mr. Norton has as he confesses grounded upon
often observations and trials; the use of this Table of the proportions of
dead ranges he has thus demonstrated; First you must take the right range of
the Piece experimented, from the right range of the mounture assigned, and
divide the remainder in such reason as the said angle of mounture is to the
angle of the complement thereof; and to the quotient add the said right range
found, and the product thereof will be the dead range for that Piece: he
further gives this example, Suppose a Piece mounted at 30 degrees, shoots 300.
paces in the right range, and 300. at the dead range; if you would desire to
know the dead range at 40 degrees; to perform this you are to work in this
manner following: First divide the dead range into any number of parts as you
shall please, which being set out in a Line, at one end of the right line make
an angle (as Euclide demonstrates by his 23 proposition) and from the other end
of the aforesaid Line, you must erect a perpendiculer Line (by Eucledes 11
proposition) until it intersect the Line that framed the angle given, and note
well how many such parts it contains; then you must multiply the parts of the
dead range, by the parts of that line which framed the angle contains; then
the product being divided by the number of parts, which you divided the Line of
the dead range into, and the quotient will be the secant range, which being
known, then you must work after this manner following.

A Table of the Proportion of dead Ranges.
Degrees. Paces. 0 192 1 298 2 404 3 510 4 610 5 722 6 828 7 934 8 1044 9 1129 10
1214 11 1396 12 1394 03 1460 14 1544 15 1622 16 1686 17 1744 18 1792 19 1849 20
1917 25 2013 30 2185 35 2249 40 2289 42 1/2 2296 45 2289 52 1/2 2283 60 1792 67
1/2 1214 75 1000 85 1/2 0192 90 0000

As suppose by the rule before, you find the secant range to be 1555. paces;
And for the dead range 1000. paces given: Then by the Rule of three you must
say, if 1555, gives 1000. the whole sign, what shall 1000. the dead range
give? 643 1/^. the right sign of the angle the Piece must be mounted unto,
upon the advantage to shoot 1000. paces.

Further this industrious Gentleman Mr Norton has made use of a Table of
Randons, calculated by Alexander Bianco, which he has reduced for the six
first points of the quadrant, with a Table of secant ranges thereunto annexed,
as follows very necessary to be understood and made use of.

1 2 3 4 5 6 Double Canon of 8. 750 1275 1690 1710 1785 1800 Whole Canon of 7.
675 1147 1431 1489 1606 1620 Demi Canon. 625 1602 1325 1425 1487 1500
Culvering. 750 1275 1590 1710 1785 1800 Demi Culvering. 725 1232 1537 1653 1725
1740 Saker. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 Minion. 450 765 954 1026 1071 1080
Faulcon. 550 935 1166 1254 1039 1320 Faulconet.. 375 637 795 855 892 900

The Table of secant Ranges.
0 1000 1 1000 2 1000 3 1001 4 1002 5 1003 6 1005 7 1007 8 1009 9 1013 10 1015
11 1018 12 1023 13 1026 14 1030 15 1035 16 1040 17 1045 18 1051 19 1057 20 1064
30 1154 40 1305 50 1555 60 2000 70 3923 80 5758 98 Infinite

Wherefore observe, if you have mounted your Piece to any of these six points,
you must look against the name of the same Piece you intend to use, and right
under that point you mount it unto; In the common angle, you shall find the
number of paces of her Randon; Likewise this Table of secant Ranges are numbers
proportional, whose use is easy to be understood by the former examples.

Moreover, we may further observe by the Inch-sight rule, any Piece of
Ordnance that is not in length above fifteen foot, and not shorter then six,
may be mounted to any degree of the quadrant under twenty Grades, as well as by
the quadrant it self or any other instrument: The Table follows in the next
Page, and by the help of the Inch-sight rule it is to be made use of.

^ Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. Foot. ^ 6 1/2 7 1/2 8
1/2 9 1/2 10 1/2 11 1/2 12 1/2 13 1/2 14 1/^ 15 ^ Inch. ^ 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1
7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 3 0 ^ 2 5 2 7 2 9 3 1 3 3 3 5
3 6 3 8 4 0 4 2 4 5 4 7 5 0 5 2 5 4 5 6 5 8 5 9 6 0 ^ 3 7 4 0 4 3 4 6 4 9 5 3 5
5 5 7 6 0 6 3 6 7 7 1 7 4 7 7 8 0 8 4 8 8 9 0 9 2 ^ 5 0 5 4 5 8 6 2 5 5 7 0 7 5
7 9 8 4 8 8 9 2 9 6 10 0 10 4 10 8 11 2 11 6 12 0 12 4 ^ 6 2 6 8 7 4 7 8 8 2 8
7 9 3 10 0 10 5 11 0 11 5 12 0 12 5 13 0 13 6 14 2 14 8 15 2 15 6 ^ 7 5 8 2 8 9
9 4 9 9 10 4 11 0 11 9 12 6 13 4 14 6 14 8 15 0 15 7 16 4 17 1 17 8 18 3 18 8 ^
8 7 9 5 10 4 10 9 11 7 12 1 12 8 13 8 14 5 15 3 16 0 16 7 17 4 18 2 19 0 19 9
20 8 21 3 21 8 ^ 10 0 10 8 11 9 12 3 13 3 13 8 14 2 15 8 16 6 17 5 18 3 19 2 20
0 20 8 21 ^ 22 7 23 0 24 2 24 6 ^ 11 3 12 3 12 5 13 7 14 5 15 1 15 9 17 7 18 7
19 7 20 6 21 5 22 4 23 4 24 4 25 0 25 8 26 6 27 3 ^ 12 3 13 0 13 8 15 4 16 7 17
7 18 7 19 8 20 8 21 9 22 9 24 0 25 0 26 0 27 0 27 8 27 9 29 2 30 8 1 13 7 14 8
16 3 17 0 18 4 19 4 20 4 21 7 21 7 24 0 25 4 26 8 27 4 28 5 29 6 31 1 32 6 ^3 3
34 0 2 15 0 16 2 17 5 18 7 20 0 21 1 22 2 23 9 24 8 26 2 27 6 29 0 30 0 31 2 32
4 33 7 35 0 36 2 37 4 3 16 2 17 6 18 9 20 3 21 6 22 9 24 2 25 6 26 9 28 2 30 0
31 6 32 4 33 9 35 2 36 5 37 8 39 2 4^ 6 4 17 4 18 9 20 3 21 8 23 3 24 6 25 9 27
5 28 9 30 4 32 0 33 ^ 34 8 36 5 37 8 39 0 40 6 41 9 43 6 5 18 6 20 2 21 7 23 3
14 9 26 3 28 1 29 8 30 9 32 8 34 3 35 8 37 2 34 8 40 4 41 9 43 4 45 0 46 6 6 19
8 21 5 23 1 24 8 26 5 28 1 28 8 31 4 33 0 35 0 36 8 38 4 39 8 41 5 43 0 44 8 46
2 47 9 49 6 7 21 2 22 8 24 0 26 3 27 9 29 8 31 2 33 5 34 9 37 1 38 9 40 0 42 4
44 0 45 8 49 3 49 0 50 8 52 6 8 22 4 24 1 25 9 27 1 29 9 31 5 33 0 35 4 36 8 38
3 41 2 43 8 44 8 46 5 48 2 51 0 51 8 53 7 55 6 9 23 5 25 3 26 9 29 3 31 4 33 2
34 8 37 5 38 7 40 2 43 5 45 7 47 0 48 8 50 6 52 0 52 9 55 5 58 6 ^ 24 6 26 7 28
7 30 8 32 8 34 9 36 9 38 9 41 0 42 1 45 8 47 6 49 4 51 3 53 4 55 4 57 4 59 5 61
6

Further we may observe another ready way to level, mount, and imbase a Piece;
by a Holbert, Linstocke, or any other staff, which Mr. Norton has been very
industrious in making and inventing of it, the manner of performing it is in
this kind.

First mark from one end of the staff a distance equal unto the pummell or
height of the Caskable of the Piece being placed level upon the platform. The
staff to level or imbase a Piece of Ordnance described, read page 13^. how to
imbase a Piece by this staff.


Next you must take the distance betwixt the Center of the Truan^o^s, and the
pummell o^ Caskable; which make or imagine a Semi-diameter of a circle, and
divide it by diagonalls, and paralells, or otherwise into 1000. equal parts.

Thirdly, you must repair to the Table of Sines, and take the number answering
unto every degree out of the said 1000. parts, and set that distance from the
said mark downwards; and if the total sign of the Table be 100000, you
must omit the two last figures of each number thereof toward the right hand;
and if it chance to be 10000000, then you must omit 4 figures of each number
you find in that Table, and the remaining number will show how many of those
1000. equal parts are to be set downwards upon the staff; from the mark
beneath the said level for each several degree,

Fourthly, Note you must place your Rule upon the highest part of the metal
at the breech of the Piece, coining the Piece up or down* until through the
fight o^ (...) the rule (be listed to the part or divisio^ in your rule that
answers that degree you desire) you epsy the Corno^ze or highest part of
metal at the Pieces mouth, and the mark, all 3. in a straight Line*
you must draw 10 paralells and diagonalls, from the first degree to the
second, and from the second to the third, successively continued from each to
his next, making every degree with arithmtticall Caracters; by this you may
from six minutes to six minutes, by those right Sines mount your Piece.

This staff being this framed and ordered, the use of it is thus; You are to
bring down the Center of the pummell or Caskable of the Piece, to any number or
degree thereon so marked for the Piece, you setting the lower end of the Staff
to the platform, which being performed; the Axis of the Bore of that Piece
will be found to be elevated unto the degree assigned.

Further, if all these instruments should be wanting, yet the industrious
Gunner by arithmeticall skill, may by an Inch rule mount any Piece of Ordnance
unto 10 dedegrees of the quadrant, by measuring the just length ^f the Concave,
Cillinder, or Barrel of the Piece; then reducing that measure into Inches, and
double the same, afterward multiplying the number of inches so doubled by 22,
and divide by 7 taking notice of the number of the quotient, which last
quotient being likewise divided by 360, the degrees contained in the whole
Circumference of every Circle, the last quotient Number, will demonstrate the
number of Inches, and parts of an Inch that will make a degree in the quadrant
for that Piece, as Smith in his Art of Gunnerie demonstrates it, by example of
a Saker, whose Concave Cillinder or Bore is just seven foot long, if you would
desire to know what parts of an Inch Rule, will mount her to one degree of the
quadrant you must work it thus.

First, Note, the like order is to be observed in mounting any other Piece of
Ordnance by an inch Rule, of what length soever ^^e be.
reduce the seven foot into Inches, and there arises 84, that 84 Inches being
doubled makes 168, the which being multiplied by 22, arises 3696, the which
being divided by 7, the quotient will be 528; then again dividing this
quotient number by 360, that will yield 1 1/^, which is as much as one Inch
1/2, wanting 1/15 part of an Inch; by this example you see it confirmed, that
any Piece of Ordnance, whose Chase is but seven foot long, being mounted by an
Inch Rule, unto one Inch and ^/15 parts, that Piece shall lie just the height,
she would have done if you had mounted her unto one degree of the Quadrant.

Moreover, if you would mount the same Piece unto two degrees of the Quadrant,
by the inch-Rule aforesaid; then you must multiply the measure in your Rule
last found, being one inch ^/^ parts, by 2 in the order of Fractions; and you
shall have 4/^ the which 44 being the Numerator of the fraction, being divided
by the Denominator, which is 15, the quotient being two inches 14/^ is your
desire; by this you perceive three inches wanting 1/1^ part, makes two degrees
of the Quadrant.

Lastly, observe if you would have your Piece mounted by an inch Rule, for to
answer any number of degrees under 10, either you must Multiply that number, by
the number of inches, and parts of an inch, that makes the degrees of a
Quadrant, otherwise you may work as you did the first Conclusion, Multiplying
the first product by the number of inches desired, and dividing the product by
the numbers before mentioned, your last quotient will resolve you.

As for a further example, the piece of Ordnance before mentioned, you desire
to elevate by an Inch rule to answer to 8 degrees of the quadrant, first you
reduce the length of the Bore into Inches, as formerly is showed, doubling that
measure, and it makes 168 (as in the first conclusion) which 168 Inches,
multiplied by 22, yields 3696 Inches, the which Product being now multiplied by
8, arises 29568, which sum divided by 7, the quotient is 4224, the same
divided by 360, yields in the Quotient 11 Inches 1/15 parts of an Inch. So many
Inches, and parts of an inch, must the same Piece be elevated unto, with an
Inch-Rule to answer unto 8 degrees of the Quadrant. But to lay your Piece
point blank without instrument, you must bring the height of the Mettle at the
mouth, equal with the Horizon, and then the Concave Cillinder will lie
point-blanke.

But Master Norton does mislike Master Smiths ways in shooting by the Metal
or Mira Comune; and he has been very zealous in finding out a more perfect
way, and Says to shoot with any Piece by the Metal, or Mira Comune; the
difference or mount, about the level which the Metal causes being
considered, and exactly examined, will show the angle of the Pieces Mounture,
with the which you must repair to the precedent Table of proportional
Mountures for the several Randons upon each point or degree of the Gunners
quadrant in page 127, which is thus to be appropriated unto any Piece; first
having made one shoot with her at the Mounture of a certain mark assigned,
and finding her dead range for the same; which being reverted to the given
elevation, will soon yield the range required; the example is after this
manner given; That suppose by examination it be found out, that by reason of
the eminency of the Mossell Ring; and length of the Chase of the Piece; the
directions of the Metal at the breech, and the Mossell ring, to mount the
Piece higher then it would, if the assise of her Bore were duly directed by a
true desparte unto any Mark assigned by six degrees, and let it be imagined
that the Mark is elevated six degrees above the Horrizon, so found by the
Quadrant, and observing that at the mounture, the Piece did shoot 850 paces for
her dead range; the question is, how far the same Piece would convey the like
shot, with the like loading and accidents, if she wear by the highest of her
Metal at Britch and Mossell, directed to the same mark.

Say then if 722, the number in the Table of dead ranges against 6 degrees
gives 850 paces being the measure of the shot made in her at six degrees of
mounture, what shall 1394 the number against 12 degrees of Mounture give? By
making use of the Rule of three* and multiplying the third of these three
Numbers, by the second dividing the Product by the first, the Quotient will be
1534 paces. Thus having collected, and fitted this discourse, so that the
ingenuous Soldier may gain some profit by it, I leave it to his discretion,
to cull out such Rules and Examples, as shall best fit his practice.

CHAP. LI.
Diverse brief Observations, most necessary to be learned and understood,
concerning the Imb^sing of Ordnance, and shooting in Morter-peeces.
IN this Chapter we must observe, that as formerly we have spoken of Mounting
a Piece of Ordnance, from degree to degree, until she come to about 45
degrees* causes the Piece to convey her bullet at each elevation, one time
farther then the other; but being elevated past those degrees, she shootes
every degree shorter than the other, until she come to shoot perpendiculer,
or in a Line right up; and this last kind of elevation is only used in
levelling of Morter-peeces; whose use is to convey her shot upwards,
according to the distance of the farnesse, or neerenesse of the mark assigned;
And so the shot falls right down out of the air upon the mark; of this we
shall speak largely, toward the finishing of this Chapter.

Now, for these long Pieces of Ordnance; to cause them to shoot under
point-blanke at any mark of neerenesse; they must be imbaced (as your Gunners
term it) or their mouth laid in some proportion nearer to the ground,
according as the mark is in neerenesse; and so to perform this, we will only
make choice of the Staff before in that Chapter described, invented by Master
Norton for that purpose, where you may please to remember, the Staff was to
have the lower end of it set upon the platform, and so to bring down the
center of the Caskable or pommell of the ^eece to any number of degrees thereon
^o marked for that same peace, and then the Axis of the Bore of that Piece will
be found to be elevated unto the degree assigned. The manner of ^^aming this
Staff is described, page 129.
But for the Imbasing a Piece, we must use a contrary way, by advancing the
breech of the Piece upwards, above the first named mark unto those lines and
numbers there decyphered, which will direct the Shot to any mark that lies
under point-blanke; Likewise diverse other instruments are invented for this
purpose, but in regard there asks small cunning to perform this only
practice, and use will guide a man to direct the shot by Imbasure to her right
mark; I will leave it, and proceed to the use of Morter-Peeces, The best of a
Morter-Peeces Randon is between 50 and 45 degrees of the Quadrant. For what
end Mortar Pieces were invented* and of the things to be considered in the
true levelling of it, for the less way she shootes* the higher must her mouth
be raised to some degree above the best of the Randon as is sufficient to
reach the mark.
only by the way observe, there must be less ^owder used in the charge, and
the Bullet must be very fully and strongly rammed in; and further, that it is
the nature of all Pieces to shoot above the level of the Mark, if the object
be upright, as a side-banke, or the like.

Now for the Morter-peeces, how they are used, and levelled we shall crave
your patience to be more large, in relating the Collections of the rules, and
observations of those that have been ablest practicioners in this Art.

The Invention of these Morter-Peeces was to annoy the Enemy, when other
Ordnance cannot possibly be used against them: and for the making a perfect
Shot in one of these pieces two things are requisite to be known.

First, how far your Morter-Peece will carry a Bullet or Fire-ball at the
best of her Randon.

Secondly, you must know how far it is from the Piece to the mark you intend
to shoot; these being known, you may make a perfect shot; as for example, if
you find your Morter-Peece will shoot a Bullet, How to make a perfect Shot in a
Mortar Piece, proved by example.
or fire ball, 700 paces at 45 degrees of the Quadrant; and that the mark you
intend to shoot at, is but 500 paces* then (by the Rule of three reverse) you
must say, Note the due charge of a Mortar Piece is 1/10 part of the weight of
the shot in powder, shooting upon any Mount above 45 degrees, but with 1/2
parts shooting level, or downwards.
if 700 paces requires 45 degrees, what will 500, thus multiplying the second
by the first, and dividing the Product by the third number, you shall find it
must be mounted to 63 degrees of the Quadrant to hit that mark.

Further, observe if a Mortar Piece will shoot 450 paces, at the best of the
Randon, if you should elevate her one degree above the utmost Range, she will
shoot 10 paces shorter: to prove this you must divide the distance of the
utmost Range (being 450 paces, as before is said) by 45, the degree of the best
of the Randon, and you shall find the quotient to be 10, as before is related.
But by the way, great care must be had in ordering your Mortar Piece, so that
she shoot not wide, either upon the one, or other hand; Wherefore to prevent
it, you must lay a strait Ruler, upon the mouth of the Piece, and upon it
place a Quadrant crosse-wayes, and the plumbline will direct you; but withal
observe how the winds blow, and so accordingly order your Piece.

Then if you please, you shall make use of such further Rules and Tables, as
have been approved to be certain and good; the Table follows, and the use of
it is after this manner;

Having once made known the distance the Piece did shoot at, being mounted to
what point or degree you have first resolved upon, as suppose it be 53 degrees
from which she conveyes her shot 700 paces, to know how far she will shoot
at any other degree of the Quadrant, the Example is this;

You shall level your Piece at 60 degrees, now because 700 degrees is not at
all in this Table, but you shall find against 60 degrees there stands 529
paces, therefore say by the rule of 3, if 562 being the number against 53
degrees, gives 700 paces, what shall 529 the number against 60 degrees give;
now according to the Rule, if you multiply 700 by 529, Note your Piece must
have the same proportional charge of powder and shot, that it had at 52
degrees.
and divide the Product by 562, the quotient will be 649 ^/4, the number of
paces which the said Mortar Piece will shoot at 60 degrees mounture. Thus for
any other number of paces or degrees, you may help your self by this Table
following, which was Calculated by Captain Vffanio, for every degree between
the Level, and 90 degrees for the Randons of the Mortar Pieces.

Degr. Paces. degr. 0 100 89 1 122 88 2 143 87 3 164 86 4 285 85 5 104 84 6 224
83 7 243 82 8 262 81 9 280 80 10 297 79 11 314 78 12 331 77 13 347 76 14 393 75
15 377 74 16 362 73 17 406 72 18 419 71 19 432 70 20 445 69 21 457 68 22 468 67
23 479 66 24 490 65 25 500 64 26 510 63 27 518 62 28 524 61 29 529 60 30 534 59
31 539 58 32 543 57 33 549 56 34 552 55 35 558 54 36 562 53 37 568 52 38 573 51
39 477 50 40 580 49 41 582 48 42 583 47 43 584 46 44 582 45 582

Now for the mounting your piece to any of these degrees, it is not so proper
to put the Ruler of the Quadrant into the mouth of the Piece, in regard there
may be error, because many of these kind are taper-bored, or galed at the
mouth: to rectify this, your Gunners have invented a very apt instrument,
framed after this manner; First, there is a Ruler of 18 Inches in length; at
the middle point or prick thereof must be another shorter Ruler framed
artificially above a foot long joined close, and falling perpendicularly on the
middle point of the longer Ruler; Whose containing Angle lights justly on the
middle point of the longer Ruler, from which point is drawn by Art the 1/^
part of a Circle, and divided into 45 equal divisions or degrees, so as the 90
degrees stand just on the Center, or middle point of the longer Rule.

The use of it is thus, by laying the longer Rule cross the mouth of the
Piece, you shall immediately perceive at what degree the said Mortar Piece is
elevated by the Plumb-line, the Piece being mounted at any grade above 45,
observe the Figure.



And for to conclude this Chapter remitting all further Circumstances, we will
only take notice of another Table which Vffanio has likewise Calculated for a
Mortar Piece to shoot thereby, fitted to the 12 points of the Gunners Quadrant,
as you may perceive; Thus having run over such rules and examples as I
conceive most apt and necessary for the true levelling of Ordnance; It now only
remains in the Chapter following to take a view of such Rules, and
Instruments, as are most proper and commodious for the taking of heights and
distances, without the which it is impossible ever to accomplish any design
belonging to this Art of Gunnerie, or to the Art of Myning; Wherefore be
pleased to take a Survey of the subsequent Chapter.

Points. Paces. 0 100 1 24 2 377 3 468 4 534 5 570 6 583 7 566 8 532 9 468 10
377 11 243 12 0^0

CHAP. LII.
The Description of such Instruments with the best selected Rules, which have
been invented, and practiced, for the taking of heights and distances, whereby
a Gunner may make his Shot at more certainty.
IT is one of the most necessariest things, (and not to be sli^ghted) the
knowledge and understanding of these kind of Instruments, the true use of them,
with the Rules and documents, which our ablest Practitioners have through their
pains and industry, invented for future ages to practice; For the ignorance
of this, makes both the Art of Gunnerie, and Myning, lame and imperfect;
wherefore I will endeavor to be as brief, as the matter will permit in
discoursing of the several parts of it. And by the way you may remember, that
in the fiftieth Chapter, page 125. I began to describe the Instrument, called a
Gunners Quadrant; but I left the description how it should be used, about the
taking of heights and distances, to be discoursed of in this Chapter; only be
pleased to have a regard, and reference to the precedent Figure of the
Quadrant; and then I shall indeavoure to describe those parts of it; that serve
for our purpose.

Wherefore observe, as I have said in the Figure, that from the Center A, there
is a line drawn aslope (called the Hipothenusall line) which comes to the
corner C. upon which if the plumb-line falls upon the Center A, looking through
the sights OF, and withal, beholding the extremes or highest parts of any
Altitude; Note, then the distance from the middle part of your foot, to the
base thereof, is the just height of the said Altitude, adding thereto the
height from your eye; But if the Plumb-line, falls on the line A. B. then that
mark you view through the Visuall sight OF is of equal height, or level with
your eye; Now the square lines or Scale, which extend it self from B to C, and
from C to D, are divided into 12 equal parts; and if it were divided into 90,
or a 100 divisions, or ten times as many, the better it were for the use of
Shadows, Length, and Heights. Now by the way forget not to remember that the
side C D, is called the right Shadow; and this serves to measure all the
Heights, with the length thereof; but the side B C, is of contrary shadow, and
that serves to measure all heights, without the length thereof; the Rule we
have described the use of it in page 125.

Now, suppose we were to take the height of a Castle wall, of a Fort, or any
other Altitude aproachable; first we must aproach as near to the object, that
we guess we are near about the length of the height of the same, then set
your quadrant to your eye looking through your visuall sights, beholding the
extreme or highest part of the Altitude, then moving too, and from the same,
until the thread and plummet cut, or fall upon the part 12 of right shadow;
then measuring how far it is from the middle part of your Foot, to the base
of the said Altitude; You have the just height of that Altitude, only adding
the height from the ground to your eye. You may further find out any upright
height, with the length thereof, both by the shadow and without shadow, if the
ground be plain; wherefore you must aproach as near to the Base or foot of
the Altitude, that the plumb-line may fall on the part of Right shadow; then
measuring the distance from the midst of your foot to the Base thereof,
multiplying the measure by 12, adding thereunto the height, to your eye, from
the ground, and you have the true Altitude.

Or letting the Sun beams pierce through the Vissuall sights, the Plumb-line
falling at liberty upon that part of Right-shadow (then measuring as before is
showed) and multiply that measure by 12, and dividing by the parts whereon the
Plumb-line cuts, the quotient will tell you the true height of the same
Altitude.

And note this for a general rule, General Rules ^ for the taking the heights
by the right Shadow.
that upon what part of Right shadow the Plumb-line cuts; if you measure the
height or Altitude, it will prove more then the shadow by such proportion, as
12 exceeds the part or division of the Scale, where the Plumb-line pointed
unto; As for example, if the Plumb-line be found to fall on the part 2 of right
shadow, if you measure the distance, from the midst of your foot to the Base
for the Altitude six times, that measure is the height of the same, adding from
your eye to the ground, for you must observe that the part 2 is contained in
12, being the division of the Scale 6 times.

Likewise, what part soever the Plumb-line falls on of right Shadow, look how
often that part is contained in 12, just so many times as the measure is from
your foot to the Base, is the height of the thing you measure, adding from the
ground to your eye.

The contrary Shadow shows to measure all Altitudes without the length
thereof; first multiplying the length of the shadow, by the Point or, division
of the Scale, where on the Plumb-line falls, then dividing the Product by 12,
the quotient thereof, is the true height of the Altitude.

In measuring any Altitude without shadow, you must go as near to the same,
that you perceive you are within the length thereof, then lifting up your
Quadrant, orderly going to, Note, in this rule the farthest stationis twice the
length of the height of the Altitude, adding the distance from the ground to
your eye.
or from the same, until you epsy the top of the Altitude through the Visuall
holes, then the thread falling upon the part 12, standing upright with your
body; at the midst of your foot make a mark, then go directly backwards
from the same, until through the visuall sights you epsy the highest part
again; the plumb-line falling on the part six of contrary shadow; and as
before make another mark; the distance between these two marks, the height
of your eye from the ground being put to it, Note, the farthest station is
three times the length of the Altitude, if you measure from the Base thereof.
is the true height of the altitude.

Further observe, if the plumb-line falls on the part 6 of contrary shadow; and
at the second station on the part 4, the distance betwixt these two marks is
the height of the altitude, adding as before.

Or if the plumb-line falls on the part 4 of contrary shadow at the first
station; then upon the part 3 at the second, you shall find the distance
between your two stations to be the just height, and the furthest station is
four times the length or height thereof.

Or suppose your Plumb-line falls upon the part 2 of contrary shadow; Note if
the Scale of the Quadrant were divided into 100. or a 1000 divisions, by so
much further from the thing to be measured, you may find out the height thereof*
and at the second station, it falls on the part one, then the space between
the two standings, will be six times the length or height of that Altitude, or
the sixth part of the measure is the height of it, and your further station will
be twelve times the height thereof.

In the next place we must observe some rules for the taking of distances from
the Platform, or Batteries your Ordnance are planted on, to any Mark you are
to shoot at; Diverse Rules how to take the true distance from the platform to
any mark assigned by the help of the Quadrant.
And to perform this, you must lay your Quadrant flat upon some steady thing,
as a stool or staff, firmly and perpendicularly set up, then placing your
Quadrant upon the same, and turning the edge of the Rule to the mark you
desire to measure the distance of, then espying the Mark through the Visuall
sights, at that place or station set up a Staff; then turning your body round,
not altering neither Rule nor Quadrant by the Line of level; then through the
Visuall sights, make choice of some other Mark athwart the ^rst, and set up
the second Staff, the distance whereof suppose to be 60 feet; then coming to
the first station where the Quadrant is placed, viewing through the visuall
sights upon the Rule, some other mark in a strait line back from the first
station, the distance whereof suppose to be 100 feet, and there place a third
Staff, so as the first and the third Staff, will be in a strait line with
the mark, then removing the Quadrant to the third station, turning the right
Angle or Line of level overthwart toward the second station, so as the
Visuall line may be paralelled to the Line that crosses from the first station
to the second, there you must place a fourth Staff, so as the Visuall line
passing from the same, and running by the second Staff may cross the mark,
or end in a point there with the first Visuall line; The distance between these
two last stations, suppose to be 65 feet; The Staves being thus orderly placed,
you must abate 60 feet the distance between the first and second Staff or
station, from 65 the distance between the third and fourth Staves or stations,
the remainder is 5 for your Devisor, then multiply the said 65 by 100 the
distance from the first to the third there arises 6500, the which divide by 5,
the quotient is 1300 feet, the distance from the first Staff to the mark;
Observe this figure following, where the Tower represents the mark, the Unit.
1. the first Staff or station; the figure 2* the second Staff; the figure 3,
the third Staff; and the figure 4, the fourth Staff.



Or you may find out the distance to any mark near hand by the quadrant and
Gunners Staff divided into even portions; First placing the angle of the
quadrant upon the top of the Staff, it being erected perpendicularly; and
then through the sights of the rule view the mark you desire to measure,
letting a long thread fall to the ground, from the center of the quadrant
whereon the plum-line hangs; which thread must be drawn along the Line of
level or edge of the quadrant to the ground, observing where the thread points
at on the ground, and beholding the mark through the visuall sights, and
looking what proportion that part of ground between the Staff and where the
thread points at, has to the Staff, the same proportion shall the length to
the mark have to the height or length of the Staff, as by this subsequent
Figure more plainly appears.

Wherefore observe the Gunners Staff A. B. is to be supposed eight foot long,
and the distance between the Staff and the ground where the thread points you
to; (being the space C. B.) Note, the higher the Staff is, the further may you
measure any distance by this Rule.
is but eight Inches; Therefore look what proportion C. B. bears to the
length of the Staff, (which being reduced into Inches, will be 96 Inches) the
same proportion shall the length to the mark D. have to the Staff, which by
making use of the Rule of three, will discover unto you in this manner; for
example; If eight Inches yields 96, what will 96 Inches; if you multiply 96 by
96, the product is 9216 Inches, and this divided by 8, yields in the quotient
1152 Inches, the true distance from the Staff to the Mark.



Moreover, by the quadrant you may foresee whether Waters or Springs may
possibly be brought to any place desired, which indeed is a thing of much
consequence in the Wars; Wherefore observe, that by going to the head of the
Spring or Waters, and by setting your quadrant to your eye, being in height
equal with the Water, so that the plum-line falls preciesely on the Line of
level; now if you may see above the place through the sights, then you may
judge the Water is possible to be brought; but if you sight falls under, then
it is impossible: It comes commonly to pass when the place to the which you
would have Water conveyed, is of any great distance from the head of the Spring,
or Rivers banckes; the Hills, Valleys, and such like impediments, hinder the
visuall Line from having its free course: wherefore observe this remedy.

At the head of the Spring or River-bancks you intend to cut out; you shall
look through the sights of the instrument (as before) and take notice of some
mark in in the next Hill toward the place, then go to that mark, and in
like manner observe some other mark if any other Hill happen to be, and so
proceed until you may see the place desired; if then your sight running
through the sight of the Rule, (the thread ever falling upon the Lane of level)
exceeds that place, the conveying of that Water is possible, otherwise not.

If it should chance that a quadrant be wanting, yet you may take the distance
to any place by the Carpenters square; First you must have a Saffe divided in
certain proportions, Euclid shows this 33. pro^^^ Book, and the fourth
proposition, 6 Book.
a 100 or a 1000 parts; at the beginning of your length upon the very top
directly standing, set the inward angle of the square; lift up or put down
this instrument, until you see the farthest part of your longitude, your sight
running through the visuall holes of the square; The square so remaining, and
the Staff not removed from his height, mark where the other end of the square
next unto you noted upon the ground, see then what proportion the Staff then
bears to the part of the ground, which the nearest end of the square pointed
unto from the Staff, the same shall the length have to the quantity of the
same Staff, as you may more plainly see by the next Figure; where the Staff
A. C. is imagined to be 6 feet, and the space A. D. 2 foot; Considering now
that 6 the length of the Staff, contains 2 thrice; therefore the longitude
desired A. B. must consequently contain three times the Staff being 6 foot
long, that makes 18 foot, as by the Figure following you may view the truth of
it. Note, you cannot take any far distance, unles you ascend some Tree or
Tu^ret, the length thereof being known, must stand instead of your staff.


But if the ground be not level and plain, their will arise error: Moreover
it behooves you to have a fine cord made fast to the upper part of your Staff
C. which must be tied even with the inward edge of the square, and so drawn
to the ground, where the near end of the square, from the Staff pointed as
you perceive at C. D. the other end directs truly to the object or distance
desired.



The square is here deciphered, and one side of it is supposed to be two Foot
long from the inward angle, and the other a just foot; the longer side is
divided from the angle A. unto B. into 24 equal parts, and each parts
containing 10 minutes; also the side C. D. is divided into 12 equal portions,
and each into 6 of the value of 10 Minutes; the plumbline falls from E. to F.
the moveable sights are placed in A. G, or a parallel from that Line, whereby
all Altitudes are found; the plummet centered in the sixth point cutting H in
the middle A G. View the Figure.

Now it remains we should take farther observations concerning latitudes and
bredths; the which upon the matter may serve for the taking of any distance
either in the way of latitude or lo^gitude, being a thing most requisite in
diverse respects. As suppose diverse Ordnance being planted upon a Battery
against the Enemy, and having Battered sufficient for an assault; the breadth of
this breach is to be required that the forces may accordingly be ordered for to
enter it; And this may be done either by the help of the quadrant, or the
Iacobs-Staffe, if by the quadrant, then you must suppose two marks at each end
of the breach; then going directly toward one of the said Marks, that by
supposition you are ^istant from the same about the length betwixt the two
marks, whose distance you would measure: Then laying your quadrant^ flat upon
some Stool, or placing the same upon some skrew of a Staff being
perpendicularly erected, moving the same to or from the mark you stand
against, placing the quadrant so as the visuall sights passing from the Center
of the quadrant by the Lines of level, may direct you to the said mark; and
the visuall Line passing from the Center of the quadrant, by the 12 point or
division of the scale, which is called the Hipothenusal line, may direct you to
the other mark, and then the length of your standing to the mark, which the
Line of level does direct you to, is from the same just the distance between
the two marks you intend to measure; then looking athwart by the other edge of
the quadrant, or through your sights on the Rule, epsy another mark directly
against the mark you mean to measure, and the visuall Line passing between
the station and the said mark will be parallel to the Breach of the said Wall
or Line passing between the two marks, whose distance you would measure; then
removing your quadrant before the other Mark, placing the same so as the Line
of level may direct you to the said Mark, and the Line passing by your sights
on your Ruler may direct you to your first station; the distance betwixt your
two stations being measured, is the just space betwixt the two Marks or two
ends of the Breach, as by this demonstrative Figure appears, where the Line A.
B. shows the length or distance of the Breach to be measured, as suppose it
to be 100 paces, and the like number you may perceive to be in C. D. as also
in the Line C. A. and D. B.



Moreover, the distance of both the Marks may easily be taken by the former
conclusion at one Station; The Table of the square and Cubique ^oot, is joined
to the Table of the several weights of Bullets, page 123.
As suppose the Windmill C to be your first standing, and the distance C to
the end of the Breach A which the Line of level directs you to, is just 100
paces, that some being squared, makes 1000 paces; the like number of paces you
may perceive in the Line between the two ends of the Breach A. B. being
multiplied in it self: These two sums being joined together, make 2000
paces, the quadrant Root hereof, makes 141 paces and almost 1/2 parts, showing
the true distance from your standing to the farthest Mark B.

Likewise by the divisions of the Scale of your quadrant, by knowing the
distance to any Tree, Windmill, or Steeple or other mark not far distant,
you shall thereby know how much the same is higher or lower then your standing;
as suppose from your standing to such a Steeple be 200 feet, then in viewing
the same mark through the sights on your Rule, the index or plumbline falls on
the part six on the scale of your quadrant being contrary shadow: Wherefore
you must divide 12 by 6, the quotient is two, then by the same quotient number
again, I divide 200 feet the space betwixt my standing and the mark; and so I
find 100 foot higher then your eye.

If you turn the contrary angles of the quadrant to your eye, you may find
out all defents.

If a quadrant be wanting, by the help of a Iacobs-Staffe any height or
breadth is to be taken by setting the end to your eye, and taking your visuall
Lines by the end of the little Staff that is cross the long one, which is
called the moveable Rule; then go forwards and backwards, until you see the
foundation and top of the Mark you intend to measure, as the example
following shows, where I desire to take the height of the Tower A B, I take my
first station at C, and my eye runs in the Line by the end of the Cross Rule
to the top of the Tower B; and at the same instant without moving, my
eie-sight runs by the lower end of the Crosse-Staffe to the Base of the Tower
A, for so you must order the Crosse-Rule on the Staff D ^ So that at once,
both head and foot of the said mark may be seen; then where you stand, set a
mark at C, then measuring the distance betwixt the Lines D E, putting the
Crosse-rule to G, at the second station, you must go back until you can the
second time see the two points A B, then from that station, I measure how many
feet betwixt C and H, where you shall find 25 feet, and so much is the Tower
in height from A to B; View the Figure following, which will give you a farther
insight how to work it.



For to take a distance either accessible, or inaccessible, as suppose we are
to take the distance of A. B. and that the place were accessible only in the
midst upon the Line C. F. Then you must dispose your Instrument as before is
showed, and the cross Rule that moves up and down, must be set firm upon the
first point of the Index: then advancing frowards, or backwards, upon the line
C. F. and viewing with your eyes from the end of the Staff, each end of the
cross movable, so that a true line may go to A. and to B. then measure the
distance of C. and F. and that shall be the half of the distance A. B. But if
the place be inaccessible that you cannot approach near enough to make a right
Angle, as in C. then shove up the cross rule two points on the Index, and fall
back into the point D. and as before, bend your visuall rays toward A and B.
setting there a mark in D. then once more shove up the Cross rule a point on
to the Index, then again retreat back upon the line C D E just to the point
E, there taking your sight again toward A. and B. then measure the distance
between D and E, and you shall find it the just half between A and B. by
this Rule you may perform it, were it of a further distance, the figure
belonging to this discourse follows on the next page.



A second way to take a distance inaccessible; Let it be the distance A B, that
is to be taken, and that B is the nearest place that can be approacht; you must
therefore stick down a Mark at the point B, and retire directly backwards
toward C, and count the distance between D and C, and there stick down
another Mark in C, then retire directly to the place F, counting your paces to
the just number found between B and C, there also stick down a third mark;
then taking your Instrument, view into the Points B and C, either putting up or
pulling down the Crosse-rule upon the Index, as you shall see it meet: your
Instrument being set fit, without any more removing the Rule, go from D
toward F, and in your going, have a regard in what place your sight does agree
with the point A and C. So that you may arrive at the point E, The
Demonstration of this proposition is grounded upon the second and fourth
Proposition of 6. of Euclid.
and not otherwise; at which place stick down another mark: then let the
distance be measured between the two observations D E, and that shall be the
just distance you desire to know, between A and B. View the Figure following.



The third may take a distance by the Jacobs-Staffe at one place; as suppose
we should take the distance A B, the which is not to be approacht unto no^ to
be (...) upon the Line K C, and that we must work only upon that Line. We
must f^^^t take a right Line as K C, where must be placed a mark parallel to
the Line A B, the mark being placed in K, then retyring back to the point D,
taking your sight by your instrument toward B and K, by the two extremes of
the moveable (...) G H, then leaving your instrument so fitly placed without
varying of the Rule, leaveing a mark in D, you must retire back again
toward C, until you come to such a distance that your visuall lines accord in
A, The Demonstration of this Proposition, is grounded upon the 29 and 33
Proposition of the first of Euclid.
and K, being arrived at the point C. and not otherwise, and there place
another mark; then measure the distance between C and D, and the same breadth
you find the distance between C and D to be of, the like shall be between A
and B, which is equal to C D. View the Figure following, by the help of your
Compasses you shall find the truth of it.



We might have proceeded further, to have shown how to have taken any height
or distance by the Compass of proportion by the way of Sines, Tangents, and
Secants; but herein I should be tedious, desiring the courteous Reader to be
content with these Collections, Rules, and Demonstrations, which I hope will be
acceptable to the ingenuous: as for others, the hurt I wish them is, they were
bound to take the same pains to amend them, that I have taken to fit them for
their Service.

THE ART OF CONVEYING LETTERS OVT OF A FORT, DESCRIBED. SECT. V.
CHAP. LIII.
IN regard the secret conveying of Letters is of great consequence in the time
of War, I have thought it very necessary to discover such secret ways, as
have formerly taken effect; and likewise, some new ways in writing of Letters
whose secrecy cannot possibly be discovered, the use and knowledge whereof may
bring a double convenience to Soldiers. First, in making them cunning to
interpret and discover an Enemies Letters and intentions. Secondly, in causes
of extremity to make use in conveying such Letters, as they conceive may be
most prevalent, and difficultest for the Enemy to discover, if they should be
surprised. For great inconvenience attends the surprising of a Letter, if the
Enemy should understand the contents of it; as was well seen by Claudius Nero,
interpreting Asdrubals Letter directed to his Brother Haniball, to meet him at
Vmbra to join both their powers together, for the subversion of the Romans;
presently upon the intercepting and reading it, he left his fellow Consul in
the night unknown to Haniball, and with 6000. Foot and 1000. Horse, came to
Livius, another Roman Consul, who lay to intercept Asdruball, coming from the
Mountains into Italy; and there joining force with his, gave battle to
Asdruball, in the fight overcame him and slew him, before ever Haniball knew of
his being in Italy. Thus was Haniball brought to distress, by the knowledge of
the Contents of a Letter, whereby time and opportunity was taken to fight: the
consideration of which, has made me larger in this discourse following.

Paradine in his History of our times writes; That when as Rhodes was besieged
by the Turk, a Friar being treacherous in the Town, made show of careful
looking to the Watch, and finding his fit opportunity, shot a Letter from the
Walls bound about an Arrow into the Enemies Camp, whereby he gave them
adverstisement in what estate the City stood.

Hystiaeus desiring to write to Aristagoras, did shave the head of one that was
his trustiest Servant, and wrote upon the Skull-skin the scope of his mind in
certain brief Characters, then kept him in his house until the hair was
grown as thick as before; then sent him to Aristagoras, willing that he
should cause his hair to be clipped close at his first arrival: by this he
understood his friends intents.

Some Philosophers, and others of great insight in the hidden qualities of the
Magnes-stone; Have recorded how two friends may discourse upon any subject,
although they be a thousand miles distant: the manner to perform it is thus.
Take two pieces of round Bords being smothed, about the bigness of the top of
an houre-glasse, upon these must be glewed a piece of clean paper, which being
done, a Circumference must be drawn on either of them, and the Letters of the
Crosse-row being set down distinctly a pretty distance a sunder round the said
Circumference, of each of them. Then after the manner of a Sunne-diall, there
must be a Steele-needle placed in either of them, of one length and weight,
these Needles must be touched with the Magnes-stone both at one instant; your
Friend is to have one of these instruments, the other to remain with your
self; the just time of the day being appointed when the discourse should
begin, you must with your finger direct the Needle to such Letters, one
sensibly after another, for the making up a word, then pauze so long as you
think he may well write it down; then removing the Needle again to those
Letters, which do spell such words as your mind may be understood, and as you
remove your Needle, so voluntarily will your Friends Needle point at the same
Letters, whereby you may discourse what you please. Viginerius in his
Annotations upon Titus Livius 1316. Column of his first Volume, does report
that a Letter may be read through a Stone-wall three foot thick, by this
only device.

Harpagus writes to Cyrus concerning the treason of King Astyages, having
cunningly unbowelled a Hare, put his Letter therein, and after he had
ingenuously sowed it up again, delivered it with the Nets to one of his
Hunts-men, the faithfullest of all his household, and he carried it to King
Cyrus.

Frontinus, Lib. 3. Chap. 13. Many (says he) being desirous in actions of
War to send their Letters missives secretly, whereby their friends may know
their minds, and yet to avoid all means of discovery, have written within the
Scabbards of their swords, and sent them as acceptable presents.

Machi^vel in his Art of War makes mention, how a Captain in a besieged
Town: may cause his friends to understand his mind; the manner of acting it is
thus. He that desires to relate his mind, must write his whole scope down in
paper first; and holding it in one of his hands, and a Torch or two Torches in
the other hand* Likewise, taking the advantage of a high Steeple or Tower, and
the opportunity of a dark night, whereby the Lights may be further seen by
his friend, that should observe the same; (wherefore having Ink, Pen, and
Paper ready) and for the better understanding how it should be performed, take
notice of the Letters of the Crosse-row, how they are placed, that you may
discern how the Lights shall describe every several Letter for the making up
a word.

A B C D E F G H I K L This part of the Crosse-row with one light. 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
M N O P Q R S T V W This part of the Crosse-row with two lights 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
2 2 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Now observe that all the Letters of the first Division of the Crosse-row, are
to be demonstrated with one light; As for example. If you would Copy down the
Letter A, you must hold up one Light but once, if you desire he should copy
down B, you must show one light twice, likewise C, one light is to be shown
thrice, and so of the rest* as the Figures underneath the Letters will guide
you.

The second part of the Crosse-row beginning at M, is to be demonstrated with
two lights once N, with two hights twice, O with two lights thrice, and so of
the rest, as the figure underneath each Letter shows how many times you must
hold up your Light to demonstrate such a Letter.

Suppose I would have my friend Copy down the word Man, M, being the first
Letter of the second part of the Crosse-row, must be signified with two lights
showed once, then obscuring the lights until you think he has copied it
down; next you must show one light once which signifies A, then obscuring the
Light as before, you must next show two lights twice which signifies N, being
the second Letter of the second part of the Crosse-row; the word being
finished, you must obscure the Light twice as long as you did it for a Letter;
otherwise, a Letter cannot be distinguished from a Word, nor a Word from a
Letter; by this you see the word Man, signified by the help of the Light: and
by this device your friend may understand your mind being a mile off.

If you desire to let your Friend, understand your secrets so that they should
not be discovered, take a whole sheet of Paper, and with Pen and Ink write
upon one side some formal Letter of discourse, far from the matter you
intended to participate in secret to your Friend, which being finished, turn
the Leaf over, and with the juice of an Onion or Leman, write your secrets
between the Lines written with ink; your Friend knowing the secret of it,
will read it against the fire-light, or putting it into water.

Demoratus desiring to make known to the Lacedaemonians, how King Xerxes was
armed, and prepared for his journey against Greece, did write the counsel of
the King in small Tablets of wood, which he covered over with wax; and in that
manner sent them to the Lacedaemonians, they taking off the wax, read all the
Contents thereon written.

^ontius likewise reports, that Pachorus sent Letters in a Nosegay of Violets
to his beloved Lucretia, likewise he wrapped letters in Balls of wax, and threw
them in at his Mistresses Window.

One of the surest ways to write a Letter, which is not possible to be read,
but by him that is to receive it and knows the device, is in this kind to be
performed; First, you must have two flat Rulers, three or four inches broad,
and half a foot long, they must be both of a breadth, to a hairs breadth,
then take a sheet of clean Paper, and cut it out into narrow pieces like your
smallest Tape, then with mouth-glew fasten the ends together, and wind it even
about the Rule, giving the end you begin to write at a privy mark, then write
your secrets upon the Paper, either in Letters or Characters, which being
unwound from the Rule, can never be possibly brought together to be read,
unless it be wound about your Friends Rule, whereby he may understand your
mind.

There is a most excellent way to write, so as it is impossible to be
understood, which is performed after this manner; Take two half sheets of
Paper, and Rule them one upon the other, so as the Lines may be of equal
distance, then take your Penknife, and just upon the Lines cut through both
the half sheets of Paper a Loop-hole, so broad and long as a man may write a
word through it; then a pretty distance from that hole in the same line, and
after the same manner, cut another; thus doing through the whole Paper in
convenient distances one from the other; this being done, let your friend keep
one of these papers, and your self the other, and when you intend to write
your secrets, lay this paper upon a clean sheet, and write your mind through
those holes, which being done, take off the paper, and with your Pen write some
other circumstance in the line between word and word, which may alter the
sense, and make it more obscure; this being sent to your Friend, so soon as he
places his Paper with the holes over it, he may read through the holes your
intentions, and without this it will seem impossible ever to make sense of it.

Further, you may take notice of certain Characters whereby a man may express
his mind freely, and secretly, to his friend; the manner how to perform it
follows.



First, you are to observe the fashion of each Character, whose property is to
demonstrate the Letter that stands within it, as you may perceive by the first
^ which has a standing in it, and represents the Letter a. Likewise ^ has b
in it, and represents the letter b; and so of the rest. Further, you must take
notice, that the Characters of the first figure are without any pricks; the
Characters of the second Figure, has to each of them one prick, as ^ which
represents k. and ^ represents l, the third Figure has to each Character two
pricks, as ^ represents t. ^ represents u. As for example; If you would write
this word Acknowlidg in Characters, ^^^^^^^^^^ This kind of writing cannot
possibly be understood, if it were writ upon the Paper wound about the Rule,
as before is showed.

We may likewise write without ink, that it may not be seen nor read, unless
the Paper be wet with a kind of water prepared for the same purpose; To
perform this, you must take some Vitriol and powder it finely, then temper it
with fair water in a clean thing, when it is dissolved you may take a Pen and
write what you please, and it cannot be read, except you draw it through water,
wherein some powder of galls has been infused, and so it will show is black
as if it had been written with ink.

Further, we may take the yelke of a new-laid Egg, and grind it upon a Marble
with fair water, so as you may write with it; having ground it on this wise,
then with a clean Pen dippe into it; and draw what Letters you please, upon
fair white Paper or Parchment, then being through dry, black all the Paper or
Parchment over with ink, and let it also dry on; afterward you may scrape it
with a knife, and all the Letters you wrote with the yelke of an Egg will be
fair and white; those that knows not the devise will take it to be a blurred
Paper.

There is likewise a most excellent way to send Letters by wild Pigeons out of
a beleaguered Town; the manner to perform it is thus; When you suspect a Fort
shall be beleaguered, take diverse old Pigeons, from such a place as you intend
to send your Letter to, which being kept in a Basket, and let loose with a
Letter fastened about the neck of it, she will speedily ^lee home; where he
that knows the mystery of it, may take the Pigeon, whereby he shall
understand his Friends intentions; This shall suffice for the secret conveying
of Letters.

THE ART OF CONVEYING A MINE UNDER A FORT. SECT. VI.
CHAP. LIIII.
How to conduct a Mine under ground to blow up a Bulworke.
THis kind of undermining has been very Anciently used both by the Greeks,
Note, the Trench is to be made 7 foot in height, and 5 foot in breadth.
and Romans, and of late days by the Hollander, whereby they have much annoyed
their Enemies, and blown up their Out-Workes, yet many times it proves
dangerous to the Pioniers, if they be not careful to sustain the earth over
their heads with props and boords of two inches thick; if the ground be moist
and full of Springs, a gutter with a descent must be made that the Water may
run to some lower evacuation; if that cannot be, a Well at the month of the
Mine must be made for a receptacle for all the Springs to run into, and
Pumpes and forcers are to be set sufficient to mount the Water.

There are four principal causes to impeach the working of a Mine; first, the
ill stopping of the Forne; 4. things that hinders the effectual working of a
Mine.
secondly the weakness of the sides by Countermines or Caverns; thirdly by
failing of the Train through moisture or ill contriving; fourthly, the most
important is, that the Frame whereon the Barrells stand be not placed too low,
as under the level of the entrance, which it must ever exceed, because the
quality of fire is ever to ascend.

Now for the conducting of this Mine, their are diverse circumstances to be
considered; First, the distance from the place you intend to sincke your Mine,
to the Wall or Bulworke you intend to blow up; Secondly, whether the ground be
rising or declining toward the object; Thirdly, whether there be any Rocks
or Ponds which may hinder the direct carrying your Trench to the place
assigned: These circumstances being considered, there are diverse Instruments to
be used in the orderly conveying of them;

As first, the quadrant or Iacobs-Staffe to take the distance; Secondly, the
Mariners Compass, (if a fitter instrument cannot be had) by this you must
observe in what point of the Compass the place you intend to Mine unto stands,
from the place you intend to break ground first; then you must have a level
by which you may see how the ground rises or declines, and accordingly be
guided, so that you work not your self too far out of the ground, nor too
deep in.

The Rules with the demonstrative Figures for the taking of heights and
distances, you shall find in the latter end of the discourse of the use of
Artillery. Here I will show you a figurative example for the taking the
profunditude of a Valley, whereby you may the better learn how to conduct your
Mine toward a Valley if occasion should be; and although it be somewhat
difficult to be done in regard there are diverse observations to be made; and
for to begin, we must from the point B take notice of some opposite object in
the plain Horizon as the letter A, the sight whereof you may in a right Line
take with this instrument by the help of a Plumb-Rule; View the third Figure
of distances by the Jacobs Staff in the end of the discourse of Artillery.
then from the point B, you are to take the distance B C as formerly is showed;
that being done, from the point B let your visuall Lines from the moveable Rule
of your instrument agree in A and C, your instrument being so set, do not
alter it, but take again the angle A B C upon the plain fielding; then
turning you about, form the Angle F B H which is equal to the Angle A B C,
then stick down some mark upon the Lines B F B H, and upon the Line, B H;
count how many paces or feet you can find between B and C, and stick down a
mark at the end of the last pace or foot, which shall arrive in E; All these
things being thus disposed, apply your instrument to make a right Angle,
putting the moveable Ruler upon the first point of the Index; for always the
instrument makes a right Angle when the Rule is upon the first point of the
Index: The instrument being thus placed that the visuall Lines extends by the
points of the Rule upon the Line B and F, so that you may make your sight agree
in B and in E or in F and in E, The demonstration of this proposition, is
grounded upon the 26 of the 1 of Euclid.
that it may arrive in D, and not otherwise: Then measure the Line D E, and
that shall be equal to the depth of the Valley G C where the Tower stands to
be blown up; but to build Forts upon the foot of the Valley is not usual, in
regard the Ordnance will command it: Wherefore I have showed this example but
by the way of discourse, If the ground be level, you are to Mine in, then at
every 15 or 20 paces you may by the instrument know how much above or beneath
the Line of level you have erred.
yet for better explanation of our former discourse, the depth of a Valley
being found, or the true height of a steep Hill, it will be very easy to
find how many inches or feet you must rise or decline in every five paces of
your Mining, by the help of the level; An easy Arithmitician may perform
this, whereby they may easily perceive when they go too far outward, or too
deep inward, and for the erring of either side, the Compass will direct; If
in the conducting your Mine you fear the Enemies Counter-Mines; you must have
a Wimble 15 or 16 foot long to pierce the earth in all places, by which you may
discover what the Enemy does.

Moreover, when you have brought the Mine almost to the place, you must then
begin to make the Trench very narrow, and Angling about as this figure shows
you, the Barrells of Powder being placed as you see with vents one to take fire
from the other, with sufficient Rafters and Plankes on the top to carry up
all before it, then must there a pipe of Lead, or Reed run from the Powder
along the Mine, to the place where fire is to be given, filled with Powder,
and raised from the ground, lest the wet should take it, then must the Mine be
rammed up close, that no vent may proceed; the arching about will much
strengthen it, and stay the reverse of the powder. The manner how to discover a
Mine, is in the discourse of Fortification.

THE DVTIES OF SOVLDIERS IN GENERAL, BOTH IN FORT AND FIELD. SECT. VII.
CHAP. LV.
The duties of Soldiers, both Gentlemen and Senteries, generally discourst of.
NOw before we proceed any further, it seems to me convenient to take a
Survey of the duties, and complements every Soldier is to be fitted with;
wherein I shall be somewhat large, in regard I must handle two subjects (Viz.)
Valor, and Obedience, being things most requisite for a Soldier to
understand; and I hope this discourse shall teach every man how to be
quallified, and bear the honorable name of a Soldier, well beseeming a
generous person of that Noble quality; And as in a great building there are
several Pieces fitted to such places, as they shall be used in; The like
course I intend to take, to fit and show every Soldier and Officer their
duties, to fit them for the weighty employments of war; Four principles
each Soldier should ground his worth on.
Wherefore they must ground their obedience, valor, and noble deserts upon
these four principles follow^ng; First, to show their Magnanimity and
forwardness to the uttermost of their powers, to the last breath and drop of
blood, in the defense of true Religion. Secondly, we are tied in a strict bond
of obedience, to seek, gain, preserve, and defend, the honor of our King.
Thirdly, we have all a share and real interest in the defense of our Country,
our lives, lands, wives, children goods, which are as goades to prick us
forwards to trample upon all miseries, and to level all oppositions that
should seek the ruin of our Land. And fourthly, for the better performance of
the precedent principles; every man, of what degree and quality soever, must
and ought to be diligent, and careful to learn the art of War; Whereby we
may not only be equal in skill and judgment to our Adversaries, but also to
exceed and transcend them, so that our Valor, Obedience, and Policy, may be
antidotes, sufficient to qualify, and reprocusse the venomous treachery, and
subtle actions of the Enemy. And to move people to be in love with this most
necessary profession, let them take notice how very mean men of birth, have
been laded with Honors and Riches gained by their prowess, and valiant
performances, as Caius Mazzius, Valentinan, Maximinus, Nicholas Pichinino, and
diverse others that were of base birth.

In the first place, let a Soldiers resolution be truly, and sincerely to
serve God; keeping a quiet conscience within their breast, which otherwise will
gnaw at the roots of valor, and undermine all resolutions, wherefore a just
and righteous conversation ought to be a Soldiers companion, for his life is
daily in danger.

And for our obedience to our King and Officers, that are in authority under
him, we may learn even of the brutish Turk, as Pietro Bizari has recorded in
his History, the mavelous obedience that those enumerable Armies, honor
their God and King withal, they being in their warfare so just and strict,
that they would not transgress their Edicts in war, The obedient behavior
of the Turks in their wars.
nor abuse one another, when their Armies consisted of 400000 Soldiers, yet
not one of them durst transport a woman for his delight, but contenting
themselves with mean diet, (as Alexanders Army did) who in a Famine were
constrained, throughout their Army to eat bread made of Roots and Herbs,
they banished Wine or any delicasie that might effeminate them; And this mighty
Army of the Turks were so well governed, that no quarrels, mutinies, nor
distractions was ever seen, nor heard through the whole Army, but low and soft
speeches; Always both evening and morning recommending themselves, their
safeties and prosperous success of their actions to their God; The
consideration of this should make us that are Christians, if not surpass, yet
equal them in such laudable actions.

In a Soldier is required six special virtues, Six special virtues required
in a Soldier.
as namely obedience, which is a duty both to God, and to Kings duly to be
administered: and as a learned Gentleman has demonstrated Authority, in the
resemblance of diverse Pictures, as the principal in authority, whose
commission from God is very large, he is therefore pictured or portrayed, amply
and fully, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, in token of
his great Soveraigntie.

The next in authority is drawn but to the middle, his Commission being but
limited, having but part of authority.

The last is portrayed but with a face only, An Illustration of Authority, by
the draughts of Pictures.
or visage of a man drawn to the neck, his commission being of the meanest
extent; Yet all these, though they have not the amplenesse that the principal
Picture has, yet they bear the face of it, and so ought to be honored and
obeyed; How Soldiers must be obedient to th^r Officers, be they of never so
low a degree.
So that Soldiers must be circumspect in obeying all those that have but the
face of authority, so far as their Commission extends, in as due and
obsequious manner, as those in higher authority; for the meanest Officer in a
private Band, resembles the authority of the greatest General.

The next thing that is to be attributed to the honor of a Soldier, is
silence, and that is to be taken in a very large sense, but intending brevitie,
I will be concise.

First, Soldiers are to be silent in the times of their exercise, that the
words of Command may be understood, which are delivered by their Officers.

Secondly, they are to be silent upon their Guards and Watches, lest any Enemy
discover any thing by them.

Thirdly, they are to be silent in the execution of any assaults, which are to
be made in the night, lest the Enemy discover the design, and prevent it.

Fourthly, they are to be silent, when Authority commands any one Regiment,
Division, or private Company in the Army, to give an assault, or onset, they
are not to murmr and cavil, as if they were the men appointed for the
slaughter, as the Frenchmen did before the City of Antwerp, whereby the whole
enterprise was frustrated; But Soldiers ought rather to take it as the
greatest honor to be employed upon any onset; for indeed no wise man can
think the General does it upon a spleen, in regard every Regiment, throws
the Dice upon the Drums head, and as his chance falls, so he is to take his
fortune.

Fifthly, a Soldier is to be silent in all adversity, as when penury,
Famine, wounds, or if pay grows short (if the General cannot help it) these
things happening in an Army, every man ought to lay his hand on his mouth, and
wisely to bear the affliction and cross, otherwise confusion would soon
betide an Army, as appeared by Duke Albert at the Siege of Ostend, he being in
some wants, both of money and victuals, some few foule-mouthed fellows, raised
a Mutiny, so that 2000 of his Soldiers fled to the Enemy, and had like to
have confounded his designs; so that a Soldier in all his ways and cariages,
must have that ornament of silence never wanting.

The next thing required in a Soldier, is to be secret in all his ways and
actions, fearing lest he should disclose any thing which might be advantageous
to the enemy; as many times when Soldiers have been taken prisoners by the
enemy, they have out of a base cowardly fear revealed what they knew
concerning the state of their own Army, which many times has proved obnoxious
unto them.

The next thing required in a Soldier is Sobriety, which is a virtue that
makes a Soldiers honor to shine most bright, and advances him into the
stirrup of preferment; for drunkenness is such a Lethargy in a Soldier, which
brings present confusion and death to himself, and utter ruin to a whole Army.

The next thing which should adorn a Soldier, is Hardiness; and this is to
be taken in a double sense; viz. Hardy in manly carriages and performances, and
likewise, hardy to endure and undergo any misery or pains that accompanies
the Wars.

Lastly, every Soldier is to be guirt with Truth and Loyalty; not only to his
Prince, but to all in authority, even to the meanest in Office; this Truth is
such a virtue, and that it exceeds the capacity of man to discourse of it, it
is such a precious jewel, that neither promises, gifts, affections, nor hopes
of preferment can undermine; and likewise no torments, threats, or miseries,
are able to make Truth and Loyalty change that unchangeable color, which duty
and affection has dyed it in. This makes Soldiers ever bound to obey the
Commandments of Superiors, and Superiors likewise are to love and embrace
such deserving Soldiers; And further, if Soldiers desire to be prosperous and
to attain to honors, let them be chaste and honest in their living,
refraining all sensuality, and avoiding all occasions which might seduce them
to that vice; for those that give themselves that base liberty, are ever
infected with cowardice, and are most fit to attend upon that lascivious
General Sardanapalus, whose pastime it was to exercise himself with Queanes,
in all base postures of dalliance.

Hanibals Army, by woeful experience, knew what it was to be lulled in the
pleasures of women, having been Garrisoned but one Winter in that delicious
Town of Capua, the edge of their valors, and their steely hardiness, was
softened to poor base cowardly dispositions; so that Marcus Marcellus took
his opportunity to conquer them.

Further, Soldiers must be obedient in every respect unto those in authority
over them, although such Officers should be infected with any notorious vice;
as very few but have been blemished in one kind or other. As Cyrus was cruel,
covetous, and miserable, yet obeyed and beloved of his Soldiers; in the same
kind was Cambises and Marcus Cato; also Marcus Antonius swomme in his
Dalliances, Gluttony, and Riotousnesse, yet his Soldiers would have suffered
themselves to have been crucified, to have done him any grateful service; and
the reason was, indeed his excellent way of Justice, which he caused to be
administered duly and daily in his Army; this did work upon his Soldiers more
than his defects in virtue could infect them. And indeed, it is very requisite
for all Commanders to beware of giving ill examples, and to be charie how they
do or speak any thing, that has but the shadow of unseemelinesse; For as one
says well, Multa sunt honesta factu quae sunt turpia visu; Plato in lib. 1. de
Legib.
There are three principal parts in the body of Man; wherein are lodged the
three principal powers of the Soul; Concupiscence in the Liver, Anger in the
Heart, and Reason in the Head, as being the Citadell; in like manner, there are
three several virtues that do command and govern them; Sobriety or
Temperance to over-sway Concupiscence, Courage against Anger in the Heart, and
Wisdom in thinking and judging with reason.

But here I must take an occasion to speak of our Trained Soldiers, which are
or should be fitted for a defensive War; they do not consider how deeply
every man is interessed in it, for if they did, our yeomandrie would not be so
proud and base to refuse to be taught, and to think it a shame to serve in
their own Arms, and to understand the use of them; were they but sensible,
that there is not the worth of one penny in a Kingdom well secured, without the
due use of Arms, and that the Gospel, which is the Garland of our Kingdom,
cannot prosper and flourish but under the shadow of a sword: This should
encourage all Gentlemen and Yeomen to be forward in the practice of Martial
Discipline, I am certain we can find times large and sufficient to negotiate
trifles, and to hunt after our own pleasures, solacing our selves in vain
delights, which produces naught but folly, and ends in grief; half that
time, and charge so ill spent, would make us expert; and gai^^ us honor; for
as one truly says, that our times are consumed, either Male agendo, Nihil
agendo, vel Aliud agendo; either in doing naughtiness, or nothing, or
impertinences; and by this means the principal is neglected.

And because that people are ready to make their excuses, to be spared from
serving in their Arms, either for their youth as being too young, or for their
age, as being too old; to decide this question, we will borrow the opinion of
the ancient Warriors, and as Caius Gracchus, one of the Consuls of Rome,
instituted a decree that none should be exercised in Arms under 17 years of
age. Which questionless is a fit time for the inition of young Soldiers,
having more aged to sort with them, for they prove the best and ablest
Soldiers, that profess the use of Arms from their youth.

And whereas some imbellicke fellows holds the opinion that forty years is
too late to receive them into the Wars, they are deceived: for a man is of
ability to do good service at 50. years and upwards. Besides, their wisdom
and judgments are more settled; and indeed, your Romans would not admit of a
Commander, unless he were forty or fifty years of age: But some may object,
that nature is decayed in this last age, men's strengths are not as formerly
they have been? To this I answer. That the world waxes old, yet not in
post-haste; although Sensim, and sine Sensu, it is soft and fair, and by
degrees insensible; as in reading Hackwels Apology you may find sufficient
satisfaction to confute this Objection.

And as Crinitus in his Seventh Book de Honesta Disciplina, reports of
Terentius Varro; from the authority of Discorides, a great Astrologer: That the
Egiptians, who took especial care by the imbalming of dead bodies, and by
their witty reasonings, found out how the utmost age of Man was confined,
taking their estimate from the weight of the heart; which every year receives
the increase of two drammes, until 50 years be expired; after which period,
it decays yearly two drammes* until fifty more be expired: So that by this,
it should be fond for any man to plead insufficiency, unless at the least
50 years were past.

Likewise, we find in Demosthenes; that the State being in danger, men of 45
years of Age and upwards, did tugge at the Oars; and certainly, a man at 50
and upwards is of more sufficiency to do service, than youth at or under 17:
As in the second Punicke Wars they made choice of, as Livie reports; Tum
decretum vt Tribuni plebis ad populum ferrent, vt qui minores annis 17
Sacramento dixissent, iis perinde stipendia precederunt, ac si 17 annorum aut
majores milites facti essent; It was decreed that the Tribunes should tell the
people, that such as being under 17 years of Age, and had taken their military
Oath, should in like sort receive their pay, as if they had been full 17 or
past; but the hopeful age for performance, is between 20, and 50 years,
because strength, gravitie, wisdom, and experience, at such years, has a
corrivall in managing the actions of men; King Edward the fourth, was
Conqueror in 8 or 9 several Battles, before he was 41 years old. Likewise,
Alexander the Great, had in a manner conquered the known world, at 33 years of
his Age.

I confess, Nature is sooner perfect and ripe in some men, than in others; and
likewise, decays sooner in some constitutions than in others; for if Strength
be not the comfort of Age, and Wit the grace of Strength; and Virtue the guide
of Wit, in all Soldiers, they are not to be allowed of, either young or old;
for Strength without Wit is dangerous, Wit without Virtue hurtful and
pernicious; so likewise, Age without Strength is but tedious. Therefore
Commanders ought to be of a prime judgment in making choice of such Soldiers
as are likely to prove serviceable. And in regard our Weapons are of a diverse
Nature, as Pike and Musket; it is to be observed, that Nature has framed men
fit in stature and qualities to use them The tallest and ablest men, ought to
be trained up to manage the Pike, the men of meaner stature are to serve in
Muskets; and to enable them the better, every man from his youth should
exercise themselves in manlike actions, which might make them hardy, settling
their joints, and breeding strength; so that in a short time their Armor and
Weapons would seem very easy and light.

Likewise Soldiers must be very careful to observe their Ranks and Files,
and especially in time of Battle, taking notice that upon all occasions they
must make their Leaders place good, if he should chance to be slain before
him; for if the Front of the Battle be not kept complete, the en^my will soon
ruin it: The consideration of which, caused Manlius Torq^^tus for example to
p^steritie to put his Son to death, because contrary to command he observed
not his Ranks.

Likewise, no Officer nor Soldier ought to go beyond his Commission, although
a Conquest might ensue; the reason is, because none may trench upon the
jurisdiction of Authority, and also in regard, for the most part, a thousand
times more mischief may ensue than good possibly can, which made Posthumu^
(...) use martial Law against his Son Aulus Posthumus, at his return from
his conquered Enemy.

If an Army be so fortunate as to gain a Conquest: so many as are appointed
for the execution of the victory, must be diligent in the execution; and not to
fall to pillaging, whereby the Enemy may take an opportunity to rally his
broken forces and overthrow you.

It were very good for Soldiers to practice all kind of Weapons, and to be
singular in the use of them. Likewise Soldiers must be very perfect in the
diverse beats of the Drum; they ought to be very expert in swimming, by
reason many exploits are to be achieved by it, and the lives of many Soldiers
saved by it. They should use themselves to carry heavy burdens, that they may
be the fitter to carry provision in a March, and to carry earth up the
Trenches without wearisomnesse; for a Soldier must look to be exposed to all
manner of toil, upon occasions of necessity; In consideration whereof, the
worthy Commanders of ancient times (...) choice of Country laboring fellows
to be their Soldiers, because they could endure pains and hardiness, rather
than out of Cities and Towns, for such are fittest to be Horsemen.

Soldiers are further to take notice, that in Garrison or in a settled Camp,
their duty is upon all occasions (not making any delay) at the sound of the
Drum, to repair to his Colors, with his complete Arms be it to answer an
Alarm, or to releeve the Watch; where no Soldier, of what birth or degree
soever, should not take it in scorn, or hold it a disgrace to stand Sentinel,
until such time as he understands himself better; and then being a Gentleman
of a Company, he must not refuse to be instructed and taught by the meanest
Officer; it must be far from any Soldier to disobey any of his Officers
precepts, and especially, such as are given in charge by the higher Authority;
neither to contemn or slight the Martial laws, lost death be his reward.

Soldiers must be very wary how they undervalue their Officers, especially
their General; or how they speak invectively, or reproachfully of any service
or design that has not taken effect.

Soldiers must rather choose death then cowardly to run from their colou^s,
neither must they have any converse with the enemy, either by speech, sending
or receiving of Letters, were it from his dearest Friend without the Generals
License. A domesticke Traitor is a Monster amongst enemies; and let such a one
know that never any prospered. There may be use made of the Treason, but the
Traitor shall nere be trusted.
For as Queen Elizabeth once said in the like case, that she would make use
of the treason, but never trust the Traitor.

Now lastly, we must take notice of each Soldiers particular duty, both in
Garrison, and in field, as the next Chapter shall declare.

CHAP. LVI.
The duties both of Officers, and Soldiers in Garrison.
EVery Fort or Garrison has a Governor, a Major, and a Captain of the Watch,
these are the principallest in authority; Next, there are diverse other
Captains and Officers, both of horse and foot, with their Companies to each
belonging; of the duties of each I will discourse briefly of, and I thought it
fitting to place this discourse here, rather then in the end of the tract of
Fortification. The duty of a Governor is to be vigilant and careful, that all
Officers and Soldiers under his jurisdiction, The duty of a Governor of a
Garrison.
do punctually perform their duties, and where default is, according as the
offense is to punish; he is to have daily intelligence of the enemies
proceedings, which he must procure, either by sending out parties of Foot, or
certain Horse, or else by the Country people; he is to see all the Works,
and Fortifications about the Town preserved, and kept; and what defenses else
he in his wisdom shall think necessary to be raised, the Garrison must
endeavor to do it; what out-Watches, either of Horse or Foot, he sees sit to
be placed upon places convenient for the prevention of the enemies secret
approaches, he must command it, and his Major must see it executed, he is the
chief judge in place of judicature, only assisted by the chief Officers, who
have each of them a voice, and the Governors stands for two; by which means a
Malefactor is according to his demerit punished or freed, according as most
voices shall agree upon; by his authority he may commit the chiefest Officer
for any misdemenour, and cause him to be brought to his trial. By his care and
wisdom all things are to be managed; his Major, The office of the Mayor of a
Fort.
is his eye, mouth, and hand. His duty is to see the Watches set, to see the
Gentlemen of the round do their duty; the Sentenells stand at their postures,
the Ports well guarded, he is to receive no Troops into the Fort, but first
he must go to them with a sufficient guard of Pikes and Muskets; he is to
receive the patent from the Captain of those troops, which if he finds it to
be the Princes hand and Seal, he is immediately to acquaint the Governor
withal, and by his permission to conduct them in; if there be diverse
Companies, that Company which first enters the Town has the preeminence, the
rest inccessively in order, and so accordingly they are to take their turns to
watch, the Major is to give to every Officer his billet for his convenient
lodging, and the like to every Soldier. At the Drums beating for the
releeving of the Watch, the Major is to have a billet for each several guard,
which being put into a hat, A Corporal is to order his Watch by the burning of
a piece of Match so many inches for an hour.
one Serjant of each several Company, or in his absence a Corporal shall draw
one of those Lots or billets, and accordingly is to conduct his squadron to
that guard which is specified in the billet, and there he is to set out his
Senteryes in convenient places, the Corporal has the chief command of that
squadron, and is each hour to relieve his Sentries, if his squadrant be
complete, otherwise he is to order their standing according to the strength of
his squadron. The Major is likewise to see the Ports shut, and the keys
brought to the Governor, he is to receive the watchword from the Governor,
and after Port-shutting, he is to deliver it secretly in the ear of every
Serjant, who immediately must carry it to their Officers.

Every morning the day being perfectly broke, The Mayor by the Governors
commandment is to see every Captain exercise his company twice aweeke at
least in the Summer time, and the Squadrons upon the guard in the Wint^^ every
night.
and the Sun up, the Major is to come to the Captain of the Watch, and cause
his Drum to beat, then the Captain of the Watch, and all the Gentlemen of
the guard, with the guard of Burgers or Citizens, are to troop to each Port,
and stand ready upon their postures; the Major is to go out at a wicket, with
a small guard to discover if the enemy should be near, the coast being clear,
he sends out certain Horse a mile or two, fearing lest the Enemy should lie in
ambush; the Ports being opened, the Squadrons are brought thither to guard,
there is one Sentinel to be placed without the Ports at the Turne-pike, who
is to suffer none to pass, unless well known; there is likewise a Centrie to
be placed upon the Portculli^, who is suddenly upon occasion to let them fall,
he is to let fall the middlemost first, because then no Cart, nor Wagon can
be brought to hinder the fall of the rest. Always at twelve a clock the
Major must see all the Ports shut for an hour or more until dinner time be
past, if he finds any Soldier negligent in passing upon his duty, whether by
day or night, he must imprison him; the easiest punishment is bread and water
two or three days, or the strappado, or present death; He is to suffer no
Cart, Wagon, nor Boat to arive at the Ports of the Town, but he must gage
them with Iron Spitts, fearing lest the enemy should be hid in them. If any
party of Soldiers should be appointed to be sent out upon any service
toward the Enemy, the Mayor must cause the Ports to be shut a long time
after their departure, fearing lest some intelligence might be conveyed from
the Town to the Enemy, which might mar their design, but for the most part
they are sent out in the night to prevent all surmises.

If the Enemy should send his Drum or Trumpet for a Prisoner, or upon some
Embassage, he is to have a note written, and sewed on to his h^t, what his
business is with the Governors hand to it, he is not to come within Musket
shot of the Town, but he must beat, or sound a parley; to whom the Mayor must
go with a guard, and blindfold him, and so conduct him into the Town first to
the Governor, and then to the Prison; where being courteously used, and his
business dispatched, he is again to be blinded, and conducted out of the
ports; The like is to be done to any prisoner that is brought in, lest they
should discover the weakness of the Town; every Sunday, and Holy Day in the
afternoon all the Summer long, the Mayor is to see the companies in complete
armor about five a clock to stand in parrado in the chiefest street, the
Governors Company first, then the eldest Captain, etc. The Companies being
viewed by the Governor and the Mayor, they are to march every Company to his
guard, and the Captain of the Watch to the round-house, which is a guard so
termed, because the Gentlemen of the Round, watch there.

The duty of the Captain of the Watch is to see his guard complete, and
toward evening shut; He by himself, or the Mayor with him, and a sufficient
guard are to walk round the Walls of the Fort, and every Corporal is to come
to him from his guard, and give him the word, whereby he understands they have
the word right* Thus having viewed every guard, he is to return to the
Round-house, and immediately is to send two Gentlemen, who are to have the word
given them; With these should go a Burger or Citizen, for they watch by
Companies, and have their Captain of the Watch also; every Centeries is to let
these pass until they come to the guard where that C^ntry is to make them
stand, and not suffer them to come within him; he is to call the Corporal, who
is to command one or two to attend him to them; then the Gentlemen of the round
must softly give the Corporal the watchword, which if they cannot, the guard
is to take them in, and not to suffer them further to pass, fearing that they
should be enemies: the Gentlemen having past by all the guards, and seen all
things right; if they should hear any noise, or discover the lights of any
Matches; then they must acquaint the Captain of the Watch with it at their
first coming in, who must send out double rounds; and perceiving the truth
must raise the Town: If any Alarm should be given, the Captain of the Watch
is to keep his guard in the chief street: and every Captain, Officer, and
private Soldier, at the first beat of the drum must repair to their Colors
with their complete Arms and there attend the Governors pleasure; but for the
most part they are speedily to repair to that Port or guard, which their
Squadron have the Watch at.

The Captain of the Watch may commit any Soldier for his misdemeaner as well
as the Governor or Major, for he is chief next the Governor for that time
being; he takes his Place from the Watch setting until the Watch be relieved
the next evening following.

If any execution of Malefactors be, he must command his Guard, and such other
Companies as the Major shall appoint to guard the place of Execution.

The Captain of the Watch with the Major and his guard are to go the (...)
about the streets, to (...) there be no abuses plotting, nor quarrel, fire,
and the like, he is not to be absent from his guard: every Captain is to take
his turn to be Captain of the Watch, beginning first with the Governo^rs,
then the (...) Captain; and so in order.

Every Company is divided into three Squadrons, if the Company be 200 strong,
then they are to be divided into four Squadrons, In every Bulworke ought to be
a Corpse (...) Guard, and over each Port, for the Soldiers to guard by night in.
and one Squadron of each Company is to watch from Sun to Sun; the rest have
their freedom, unless the Enemy be at hand; then happily, half Companies or
whole Companies, must watch in complete Arms.

The Governors Drum, with the Captain of the Watches, are to beat about the
Streets to gather the Soldiers together, to cut the ice in Winter time, the
Burgers and Citizens do the like; every Company has his just allowance to
cut, it is to be cut 16 or 18 foot wide, that the Enemy may be hindered to
pass to the Walls.

The Mayor is to deliver out Powder, The Mayor must see his storehouse be filled
with Ammunition and Victuals fit to entertain a long Siege.
Match, Bullets, and all kind of Tools, to the Sergeants for the use of the
Soldiers, the Tools are to be returned safe again; this shall suffice at
this time: Next, I will briefly discour^^ of the duty of Officers in the
Field, and also of Soldiers.

CHAP. LVII.
The duties of Officers and Soldiers in the Camp or Field.
THe duties of Officers and Soldiers in the Field or Camp, do not much
differ from those in Garrison; wherefore I shall be very short in this, and
then I will proceed to discourse of the particular Office of each Commander,
beginning at the meanest; and so proceed to the chiefest in Authority;
demonstrating every particular thing belonging to their Offices. Now by the
way, observe that every Army consists of a General, Lieutenant-Generall,
Field-Marshall; Treasurer, Master of the Ordnance, Sergeant Major General;
These are the chief Officers of the Field, and are ^mployed daily in the
Council of War with their Prince, about State-affaires; then the Troops are
divided into Colonies, both the Infantry and Cavalliary, the chief whereof is
the Colonel, the the Lieutenant Colonel, the Sergeant Major; these are the
chiefest in command in each Regiment. Every Regiment is compounded of diverse
Companies the chief of them is the Captain, the Lieutenant, Ensign,
Sergeants and Corporal^; These last, are exposed to do their duty in person,
with their Companies; the other in higher authority for the most part, leave it
to their inferior Officers, unless it be in times and cases of Danger.

The Army being Encamped, the Colonels Lieutenant of each Regiment, who bears
the titular name of Captain, takes place to be the first Captain of the
Watch* then successively according to the antiquity of the Captain: Their
watch is set after the same manner as it is in Garrison, only no drum is to
beat neither for the setting of the Watch at night, nor for the releeving of
the Guards in the Morning, until the Drum-Majors drum beats, then all are to
imitate him. The Captain of the Watch is to go no further than the Limits of
his own quarters, where he is to be attended with the Gentlemen of the round,
and to take the Word, as before is showed; that Night his turn is to be
Captain of the Watch, the whole Company is to watch upon some convenient place
by the Brest-worke before their quarters. The Serjeant-Major of each Regiment,
Colonel, or Lieutenant Colonel, may walk the limits of his own Regiment.
The Serjeant-Major General of the Army may ride through all the quarters of
the Army, Note it is not above one or two Companies of a Regiment that guards
in the outworkes at one time.
and take the Word.

If there be any Out-workes, as Redouts to be guarded; then the Serjeant-Major
of each particular Regiment, is to give Billets to every Captain, what guards
they shall keep; then accordingly the whole Company is to march to those
Redouts, leaving their colors in the head of their quarters, which is to be
guarded by certain Senteries appointed out of the next Company, whose duty is
also to guard the quarters and Hutts, that no abuses be committed. The Arms
that the Captain and Ensign bears with them is a Pike, and his Armor of
proof; he is to set out his Sentrye Perdues upon all passages; and likewise a
Sentery within the Redout, these are to be relieved by the Serjant or other
Officers every hour or two at the most: That Company which shall come to
relieve the Watch, must stand in their complete Arms, until such times as
their Senteryes be placed out and the Bridge drawn up, least the Enemy should
take an advantage to fall upon them when they are in a confusion: To resist the
Enemy in their work, they are to place betwixt each two Pikes a Musket; Any
of the chiefest Officers in high authority may command a Guard from one Redout
to another, and visit them at any season of the day or night, and are to take
the Word from the Captain himself.

Every Soldier must be very careful of giving a false Alarm, because all
the whole Army will be disturbed and presently in Arms: If the Enemy comes
upon the Sentry perdue, he is to retreat to the next Sentry behind him, then
if the Enemy seem many, they are to retreat into the Work and prepare to
give them a Vallye: Those Horses that watch, must be placed to keep some
passage, they must send out their Horse Centryes to stand upon some way (which
the Enemy must take,) their stations are to be a quarter of a mile beyond the
foot; the whole Company must not move off their saddles until they are
relieved.

Those Perdues that are laid out against a besieged Town, Unless some trees
or banks may safeguard them.
are to lie flat on their bellies because of the Enemies neerenes and
continual shooting; and this shall suffice, and before I proceed any farther,
I will have a more particular discourse of the obedience and valor both of
Soldiers and Subjects.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of the due obedience, both Subjects, Officers, and Soldiers should bear to
their Prince or General; with a demonstration how Mutinies and Treasons have
been rewarded with infinite miseries.
NO Kingdom so Fortunate and happy, as those where obedience flows in a
clear stream; so far from the power of gusts and storms, that gentle
calmes are perpetuated to times, and all seasons are as Halcion days; when
Subjects of all conditions, and in all respects simpathize with their
Sovereign in authority to his lawful behests and commands, as the shadow
imitates the body, or as the parts of the body are ready bent to observe and
execute the pleasures and intents of the heart and faculties of the mind;
Obedience and loyalty are the Nerves and Sinews which strengthen and unite the
members of a body politic to the head, and the strongest Fortifications that
Kingdoms can be defended with; These are they which are the only conquerours
in War, and steadfast preservatives in Peace; these are the precious jewels
which make the Crown and dignity of a King most splendent and glorious; these
are the most precious Diadems that a State can be adorned with, the commanding
power thereof is so potent, that in an excellent transcendency they daunt the
puposes of an Enemy, forfeiting his designs; they so far strengthen the body
of authority, that none of the members can possibly be infected where these
Cordialls are placed next the heart; without these, Kingdoms are falling into
a consumption, and nothing can be expected but ruin and destruction, as may
evidently be seen by taking a survey of such Histories which record the
confusion of Empires and Kingdoms: And first the flourishing Romans whose
hearts were elevated by their famous conquests; the whole Orb of this
terrestiall World was filled with the Echoes of their resounding honors. So
long as they stayed themselves upon these Diamond Rocks of obedience and
loyalty; their loyalties being ready imbarqued to steer such courses in the
streams of fidelity, that their Princes and Generals (which were their
Consulls) should direct and command, by which they victoriously not only
conquered their Princes love and affections, but withal gained Cities and
Countries to be in subjection to their Royal Scepter; As Italy, and the
Carthagenians, whose conquests made a fair way, for sundry other spacious
possessions to be cast into the lap of Rome; they not forsaking their
Generals until they had gained footing in all quarters of the earth, both in
Europe, Asia, and Africa, subduing people of all conditions, as the Helvetians,
Germans, Gauls, Belgians, Swissons, Neruijans, Sedunians, Veragrians,
Aquittanians, and Britains; So that they made themselves to be admired of the
World, that with such constancy they should persevere and trample over such
eminent dangers, wearisome toils, and pinching penuries, as there
indefatagable constant spirits led them through.

But at last, the pride and ambition of those Cheifes in authority being
confultiated and propt up with their infinite treasures, and vastness of their
Territories, began to draw a Regency to themselves: The heat whereof, melted
their loyalty and obedience into a Sea of Factions, Mutinies, and dissentions;
the Waves and Billows sometimes flasht and foamed between the Nobles and
Commons; Sometimes the Tribunes swelled over the Banks, and many times the
Consulls prevailed: So that in Towns and Cities were light Skirmishes.

The seed of Civil War being sown, soon sprung up like an ill weed in
fertile ground, choking, and extirpating that tender precious Plant of
Loyalty; they most inhumanely, like Beasts of prey, conspire the destruction of
their valiant Prince they had chose their General, Caesar; which was wrought
by degrees through the frets and wounds which they secretly made in the Empire,
that a daily falling off from the State was exercised; until Constantines
Reign, who neither by Art nor Physic could keep it from falling into the
Hectic consumption: So continuing in a decaying condition, until Augustus; In
whose days the whole Monarchy suncke under the burden of their base
disloyalty. They not only slighting such commandments as Authority commended
to them, but altogether neglected the use of Arms, and became most degenerate
spirits, made up of nothing but Mutinies, and perverse courses, Hist. Italy,
whereby the Barbarous Nations ad-joyning, made use of those times, and took
their fit opportunity with advantage to invade the Romans, and brought Italy
seven several times to the brincke of destruction by fire and sword.

Attila, King of the Hunnes, spoiled Florence, and Lombardy. Genserius, King of
the Vandalls, Biergus, King of the Lithuani; fifthly, Goacer, King of the
H^rulij, who drove Augustulus quite out of Italy: The Heavens in reward of
their disobedience, neglects, and factions, laid the Country dessolate twice
in thirteen years: Sixthly, by Theodoricus King of the Goths; Seventhly, by
Gundiball, King of the Burgundians; he had the pillaging of all Lombardy, and
so left it to the Goths, they enjoying this perfidious Country 17 years, and
had nothing to trouble them, but that they were troubled with nothing; which
caused the Moss of security to grow on their backs, so that pride, and riches
made them esteem themselves too great to live under the Rules and Commands
prescribed by sovereignty; but grew factious and rebellious.

Whereupon Bellisarius, and Narses, took a fair opportunity to destroy them,
being a just reward for such mutinous Rebels.

Likewise in what a blessed estate and happy prosperity did the Subjects of the
house of Burgundy live in, until divisions and rebellious thoughts were
hatched and nurtured: And though they were a free State of themselves, whereby
they might have assumed some color for their detractions and rebellions, yet
the Heavens would not be propitious to such monsters, who were bound in
Allegiance to Lewis the King of France: But they slighting that regal bond
(which men and Angels honor with titles of dignity) began to conceive and
project how to set a foot diverse inovations, thinking politiquely the greater
part would have sided with them, whereby they should have wrung themselves out
of their golden fetters of Allegiance, which their base minds (delighting in
charge) esteemed a heavy yoke: The Fates would not suffer their expectations
to be answerable to their thoughts and wished desires.

They having prepared an Army, and brought them before Paris; (their baseness
was repayed with their own base Coin) their own Soldiers refused to be
subject to their Officers, and would not be commanded by Authority, neglected
altogether their duties (A long peace having worn out the stamp of Mars) they
were routed and defeated by the King of France, suffering the sword to range
amongst their Troops, their blood being the sacrifice which made their new
atonement.

In the Reign of Henry the First who invaded France, and prosecuted Wars
many years; his Subjects and Soldiers being very loyal, trusty, faithful,
and obedient unto him, that neither penury nor death could betray their
fidelities which they had sworn unto him, was the chief and principal thing
(adding their valor) which possessed him in most of the chief Cities, Forts,
and Territories in France, whereby they had heaped up such infinite store of
riches, Comines lib. 1. Page 22.
which was the imediate occasion of puffing up his Subjects and Soldiers,
thinking then most arrogantly their abilities would bear them out to peeke
beyond the Pillar of obedience; although they very well knew it had the
Herculian inscription; Nil ultra: Whereupon the Nobles began to fume, and parts
taking amongst inferior Subjects, whereby their happy Peace was turned topsie
turvey both in France and England; so that by degrees, that which by their
loyalty and valor they had gained in France, now by their baseness and
discords, melted away like Ice against the Sun.

Then Henry the Sixth Reigned in those critticall days, when Samsons Foxes had
swinged their fiery tails of dissension about this Kingdom, that no security
could be enjoyed neither by Peer, nor poor; so that this Ratsbane of
disloyalty wrought so strongly, that the murdering of three of their lawful
Kings was hellishly effected.

But mark what was their success; The vengeance of Almighty God would not be
appeased, until these abominable Traitors were scourged with their own rods;
They employing their disloyal malicious brains, like mad dogs to tear and
devour one the other: The chief of these Rebels being the Duke of York was
slain In battle, and his head smitten off; all the Nobility of the house of
Warwick and Somerset were either slain in these civell broils, or by due
course of Law beheaded; The Duke of Gloucester most inhumanely murdered his
Brothers Sons, to usurp King Edwards Crown.

But was not the Almighty a just avenger? yes questionless; He stirred up a
poor prisoner the Earl of Richmond, (who had been in durance in Brittany in
France) who by poor means, and altogether unexpectedly, was furnished from
those parts with aid to come against England; and at his arrival gave the
usurper battle, and ^^ue that bloody butcher.

Thus the Almighty avenger, rewarded disloyalty, stubbing them up root and
branch; as Edward at Fourt^ was constrained to hazard his Person in six or
seven bloody battles, to suppress the distempers of his disobedient Subjects,
wherein the sword of vengeance cut off most of his Nobility, and much of the
Comonalty flaine and put to flight: Some young Noblemen made an escape into
Burgundy, thinking to have been there secured from the fury of Gods revenging
sword; yet they were deceived, for Gods Justice did not only prosecute them
thither, but persecuted them there with overwhelming penury, and reduced them
to the greatest exigent of misery that nature could possibly undergo; as was
seen by that young Nobleman the Duke of Excester, who was constrained by
extreme poverty, to run (bare-legged up to the ancles in dirt) after the
Duke of Burgundies train, begging an Alms for Christ's sake.

The serious contemplation of this very one thing (a man would think) should
make the hair of a disloyal, treacherous hel-hound to stand upright, and that
it should be a president of matchless misery for such future times, wherein
such Vultures, and Bafilisks, and Cockatri^es should be hatched in; for did
these devouring Dragons consider how in all ages God by his mighty Arm in a
transcendent way, has used the height of severity against such delinquents,
they would not dare to harbor the least thought of disloyalty, no not in their
seeretst Closets, fearing least the Birds of the Air should reveal it; for
God will have Subjects know how he is interrested and stands engaged to defend
the right of Supreme authority with his right Arm; establishing and
supporting such Laws and Edicts, as the Royal Majesty of a King shall
constitute, being lawfully grounded upon the Laws of God, of Nature, and
Nations.

Kings Prerogatives must and will swim above the infectious distempers of
seditious Subjects, like the precious oil over the billows of putrified
waters; and as one truly says, Lex est Sanctio, Sancta, Jubens honesta,
prohibens contraria; had wisdom been the guide to those geare-braynd
transgressors, they would have had a respect to the end; whereas their fancy
extended no farther then the beginning; for had they fixed one eye upon the act,
which is both in the sight of God and man detestable: and the other eye upon
the consequence, which determines their own confusion; They would have prized
obedience and loyalty, (although a severe government had been exercised over
them) as the most sovereign preservative against all mortal infections that
might betide a Kingdom either in War and Peace. But as Salust: well
observed, Illis quieta movere, magna merces videbatur; the baseness of people
is such, that they think the very disturbances of things established to be a
hire sufficient to set them on work; and as in times of Pestilence, all
diseases turn to the Plague; so, in general discontents, all turns to
Mutinies, Tumults, and Rebellions: And this is the Sunshine wherein an Enemy
desires to make his Hay in; and they expect the best crop when their labor and
tillage has made fit to receive the seeds of Sedition and strifes, wherein
they spare no cost in manuring such persons with great sums, as they shall
find fit and tractable for their purposes; for neither gifts nor promises of
honors and preferment shall be wanting to accomplish their ends, as was well
seen by Barnavelt, who was an Annual Pentioner to the Court of Spain, whose
deeds and projects are yet fresh in memory. How had they seduc't those monsters
of Men by their gifts and promises, to the subversion and cloudie destruction
of State, King, and Nobles, had not God been propitious to our Land by a
miraculous discovery; Daniel 2. 28.
which suits with that of the Prophet Daniell; There is a God in Heaven (says
he) which reveals secrets, and makes known to the King what shall be.

How had Lewis the Eleventh of France, wound in diverse of the chief Subjects
of King Edward of England to be his Pentioners; he distributed 16000 Crowns
a year amongst them: Comines.
The chief whereof, was the Lord Chancellor, the Master of the Roules, the
Lord Chamberlain, etc. These were to dissuade the King from assisting the
young Lady of Burgundy; and likewise when any Embassage came, they were to set
it forwards: Though these things might seem tolerable, yet few Kings would
like such familiarity; though a wise Statesman may perform wonderful good
service to his King, by being inward with the Estates of another kingdom; but
there must be a great deal of grace and honesty to the groundwork, for a
King and State to build their confidence upon.

In all the Histories that either I have heard or read, either divine, or
profane, those Subjects never escaped unpunished, which had maliciously and
wrongfully perpetrated any disloyalty to their Sovereign, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
nay not amongst barbarous Nations; much rather Gods correcting hand will be
known amongst Christians; Joshua 1. 7. and 7. 13.
but that either they have perished before the act of their conspiracy, Pro. 30.
6.
or in the act, or after the act: The holy Scriptures make mention of diverse
punishments inflicted upon the Israelitish Forces, Revel. 22. 18.
for their Murmurings, Numb. 16. 3.
Mutinies, and disobediences committed against their chief General Moses.

Divines distinguish obedience in a double respect, as filial and legal,
which holds good in the duty of a subject to his Sovereign, or to such as he
shall constitute over us in the managing of public affairs; and I hope none
are so devoide of reason, but will submit to what Soveraigntie shall lawfully
injoyne, in regard punishment attends in a readiness to be put in execution.
But those are a degree nearer, who wear the true character of obedience wrapped
up in a tender loving heart, fearing to displease, because love injoynes them
to obey; and the frowns of their Sovereign are like needles at their hearts
ever pricking, until the sunshine of his favor be regained. This was the
obedience and loyalty the ancient Romans honored their Senators withal, for
their loves did flow in a freer current then their Laws and Edicts did
injoyne; they were prodigal in bestowing their lives and goods (when
Authority commanded) in their Countries behalf. How famous was Artillus
Reg^^us that noble Consul of Rome being taken prisoner by the Carthaginia^s,
and by them sent home to redeem diverse of their Captains which the Romans had
in custody; He made a learned Oration to the Senate, letting them understand
that he was old, and worn out with years, and that his zeal for the good of
his Country was such, that he would not admit of the sending back those able
Carthaginian Officers, The bound him and cut off his eyelids, and set him in a
hollow tree upright, filled full of sharp nails, there continuing in horrible
pain till he dyed.
who might do much harm to Rome, but would rather return back, and suffer a
cruel death with his enemies; Further in the same Wars which the Romans
managed against the Carthaginians, by the unexpertnesse of the General their
whole Navy was overthrown, yet the wonderful love and loyalty of the
Commons, freely demonstrating their sincerity and obedience (as a rule for
Subjects in future ages) at their own proper costs and charges, built a new
Fleet in all points fit for service; I would this age wherein we live, were so
mindful of their loyalties and obedience, and not to mutter and repine, when
Authority justly commands such a poor thing as an Annual stipend for the
setting forth a Navy, for the honor and safety of our Kingdom. The
Netherlanders are to be admired and commended, for setting their loves afloate
above their Laws, daily tendering their lives and goods, in doing their States
service; they are so free from grumbling, or having any seditious thoughts or
actions, that even voluntarily they condescend to pay an Impost out of their
Meats and Drinks, toward the maintenance of their Wars, besides their
patience in enduring their goods many times taken, and their houses ruined by
Soldiers; they are so far from repining, that they think all well bestowed
that tends to the public good; they banish desire, and will not acknowledge it
an act of their obedience, the property thereof being only to look at things
to come, but rather ground their actions upon Love, which points at things
present. We can protest we desire his Majesty's wants were supplied; but where
is the love that should command our purse-string? I say no more, let every
obstinate fellow blush, and see if his desires without performance can command
the advice and costly Drugges from his learned Physician, for the prevention of
some eminent sickness, which the Physician by his wisdom and skill foresees,
that without speedy prevention will prove an incurable destruction to his body;
let him rest upon it that has a desire, that either his body or his estate
should languish.

Let us but take a further survey of this duty of obedience, and you shall
find it defective, where fear only binds, and love does not join with it;
Triplex amor, as Scholars define it; Emanans, imperatus, and elicitus; Natural
love, all sensitive creatures participate in, being led by an instinct to their
objects, there being a kind of necessity enforcing; as the Pismires love and
care is to provide in Summer against Winter; Even so Man in the same kind
guided by certain reasons, is by love transported to his object. Commanding
love is, when firm reasons demonstrate some good thing fit to be beloved, and
then our wills command us to affect the same; Free love is when the affections
makes choice of some good thing of excellent quality, freely; and in
contemplation of the goodness and privileges, that is thereby enjoyed, drives
the spectators into admiration, and the circumstances that attend the actions,
and demeanours of the object, begets his free love, and the prosperity and
welfare that it is possessed withal, satisfies the whole desires.

Natural love, seeks only its own profit; but that is not here meant, nor
commendable in a Subject, when he loves his Prince, only for the quiet gaining
or enjoying of gooods; in this a Prince is not really to return love again.

Secondly, when a Subjects will and affections, commands love for by-respects,
and ^inister ends, as to be favored in wicked and impious courses, this of all
the rest is not to be respected, but utterly rejected.

The third kind of Love, is the true root from Whence Loyalty and obedience
springs, and that is pure without by-aymes or ends, of an enargeticall and
working quality, ever seeking and working such things as may bring Honor and
safety to their Prince and State; Nam anima magis est ubi amat, quam ubi
animat; The members of a Commonwealth, should take instructions from the
Philosophers, who hold that the Parts love the being of the whole, better then
it self; As for example, the water being but the fourth part of the Elements,
that the great World is compounded of, ascends up to the air, that there
should not be a Vaccuum or emptiness in the universe, for the Elements touch
one the other, as may be further proved by a small-mouthed glass, the water
contrary to the nature of it, runs up to the air, as it is pouring out,
that there may not be a void place, it preferres the good of the whole, to its
own proper Center; and so in the little world Man, when occasion of danger is
offered, the hand is ever ready to defend, and preserve the head; Even so ready
bent and pressed, should every member of a body politic be, to defend and
preserve their Prince and State, and to administer such helps, as his
necessities require with a free consent: he being our head, and all in all to
us, we should, and are bound in duty to hazard all for him; For if we consider
the large commission which Almighty God has been pleased to give to his
Viceroys upon earth, and in such a copious manner estated them in their
thrones of Regencie, that the sons of men never had the like privileges, as
may be seen by the large Commission granted to Moses, his chief, and
General over his peculiar people, where God commands him, to make him a
Trumpet of silver, to assemble the people, and to remove the Camp; Numb. 10.
12.
It was a thing of such great importance, that in the infancy of the world, God
himself did immediately by his own mouth assemble the Congregations, and
directed them how, when, and where to incampe, limitting the times of their
removals; But after he had made choice of a chief, to be his General over the
people; he committed his care, and his office of command over to Moses, and
left him ample power to go in and out before his people, as formerly he
himself had done, and to take and claim such privileges as are due, from
inferiors to a Majesty: Which made our Savior Christ very forward for
examples sake, to work a Miracle, rather then he would stand in contention
with Caesar, he would disburse for himself and his friend, (although he might
have pleaded his freedom, as being a man freeborn, or might have claimed the
due to himself, as being King of Kings) but he well knew affairs of
importancy belonging to a State, could not be compassed without daily
revenewes, this made him so willingly pay his tribute, which the wisdom of
Caesar had imposed upon his Subjects, for the securing of his kingdom, and
especially in times of war: as our Savior Christ drawing a Parable from the
chargeablenesse, and dangerousnesse of it, wished a King first to sit down and
count, before he entertaines war; Whether his power and ability, that is to
be understood, not only the quantity of armed men, but the quality, to
sustain them with; which is Money, Munition, and Victuals; and these are to
be derived from the inferior members; as they may well be paralelled to the
roots of a high spreading Ceder, which draws the sap out from the earth,
and by the influence of the atractive rays of Sovereign authority, forces
it up to the head; so that both blossoms and fruit may ensue; Without this
neither War nor peace can be safely managed; This made David send to Nabal
for relief (after he was anointed King) whereby he and his Army might subsist;
And although the wisdom of Abigal diverted his intentions from shedding his
blood, and destroying his goods, for his base denials; Lactantius.
Yet after the omnipotent hand had enlightened his dunghilly conscience, as a
just reward, he gave up the ghost; Vt poena impii sit cruditio justi; Though
Princes are as men before God, Virgil.
yet they are as Gods before men; Virgilius says that Princes are merely by
Gods providence placed in the highest seat of honor, and owe equal justice
to their Subjects; so ought the people to owe dutiful obedience to their
Prince, Tertul.
in reverencing his Person, and fulfilling his commandments. Tertullian says,
he that honors and obeys his Prince, honors and obeys God; for the
Prince is Gods Vicegerent upon earth, and represents amongst meant the
glorious state, Romans 13. 1, 2.
and high Majesty of God in heaven. And St. Paul's holy counsel was that every
soul should be subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God
and the powers that be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God; But do you think this disobedient
resisting shall vanish without it is due recompense? no certainly (says St.
Paul) they that are so audacious to resist, Proverb. 19. 12*
shall receive to themselves condemnation: For says Solomon, The Kings wrath
is like the roaring of a Lion, but his favor is like the de^w upon the G^asse:
Titus 3. 1.
And in Titus, there is urged a subjection to Principalities and powers, with a
due obedience; and further, exhorting Subjects to be forward and ready to act
and perform every good work that shall be required.

But how far are Subjects in all Nations sweru'd from this straight rule of
obedience, and follow the Serpentine parallels of some factious spirits, sprung
up from some selfe-conceits, or discontents, as there are too many in this our
age, by the strength of their windy Oratory, moves the Sea of waves and
billows of common people to inveigh and batter against their shores, and rocks
of Authority, and to their powers ready to submerge them; And this arises from
the curiosity of diverse Subjects of our Litigious times; who strive to soar
above their own Sphere, to peep into the Arcanity of State affairs, and
their fond and false commenting upon the actions and passages of those in high
Authority, and according to the fancy of their distempered brains, shape to
themselves improper Hyerogliphicks, whereby they would demonstrate as on a
stage, what Comedies or Tragedies are in their weak judgments to ensue. These
are to be likned unto unskilful Astronomers, that only have heard of the
operation and influence of some Stars and Planets, and in perusing their
Almanacke find some one to have the predominancy for that day, they presently
conclude, that according to the disposition or efficatious working of the said
Planet, such ill seasons, or such weather must consequently follow; they not
having a respect to the Fortunate Conjunctions, and favorable Aspects that
may, and does moderate and allay the malignitie of the most ominous influence
(if they so shall deem it) they being ignorant of that primum mobile that
fools, both Astronomers and Astrologers; Astra regunt homines, Sed regit astra
Deus.
These are the Novelists, which (ever since there was a Monarchiall government)
have been very pernicious, both to Generals and chief Officers of the Field,
as also disturbers to the quiet of the State at home. For like unskilful
Pesants that desire to pry into the Art of Navigation, and for Noveltie sake
repair to some promontory that looks over into the Sea, where they epsy a
careful Pilot well experienced in the conducting of the Vessel he had charge
of; and according to his Rules steereth his course, striving might and maine,
to gain the wished Haven of his harbor; yet being denied the direct course,
which formerly a fair wind and Tide did gently waft him in, the gusts of wind
and waves of the Sea being opposite, he in his wisdom is constrained to
leviere about quite from the wonted Channel, and all to fetch the wind, and to
gain the best advantage to sail safe by the waves and gusts, for the security
of the Bark, and in this tempest if a leake chance to spring, which might
endanger the Vessel and all in her; How is this careful Pilot constrained to
lay her on one side, that the expert Shipwright may securely stop the leake!
These simple fellows being not acquainted with such Maritine affairs, are
presently conceited that this Vessel cannot but suffer shipwreck, when alas a
General or Princes greatest and insupportablest burden, pains and care is to
safeguard, and defend his charge, and seek the safety of those under his
authority.

This age of the world has hatched such a strange Brood called Novelists; these
are always possessing the brains of simple people, with such strange fixions,
either deifying some one man for deserts which they esteem consonant to their
minds and courses, or otherwise vilifying others, and detracting from their
goodness and worthes, making them a scorn, and rediculous to all such as
shall join in their factions, and favor such vituperating courses, that it is
a wonder how those in authority should have a heart to bear such callumnyes,
did not their wisdoms and goodness pass by with a smile the simplicity of
such creatures, although many times their aspertions are credited, whereby men
in high Government and authority are by their means hated, and ill opinions
and false censures always opposing any action that shall be intended, or put
in execution for a general good, either in time of peace or war: For the
nature of these Novelists is such, that those they cannot fancy, let their
actions be never so good, and politiquely carried for the public welfare, yet
to them it shall be distasteful, they being clothed with jelousie and
suspicion, that they look for that they do not desire to see nor find; for
under every fair harbe they dream of a Serpent lurking, and that every
laborious Be, which strives to extract Wax and Honey for the preservation of
its Commonwealth, in their squint-eyed opinions are Spiders which gather
poison to ruin the same; it is a cruel reward which is returned as a
recompense to those which these kind of people hate; Quem metuant oderunt, quem
quisque odit pruiise experit: To verify this I shall need make choice, but of
one example still fresh in memory, which will serve to exemplify and prove
the truth of this discourse, and that is the Duke of Buckingham, who once, none
then living so highly in favor, and generally honored of the Cominalty, and
especially at his return from Spain, with our gracious King that now is, it
was their whole discourse to magnify him with their applauses of his worth,
wisdom, and fidelity; but how suddenly those of the Corporation of novelists
had changed the wind of his true fame into a contrary quarter, blowing their
flie-blowes of aspersions and disgraces so fast upon him, that he grew more
hateful and odious in the same men's conceits, which formerly so highly
honored him, (and yet for his own particular the same man, and to his power
endeavored to do the same good for the Commonwealth which formerly he had
done) so that what design soever the people conceived his finger to have but
touched, was by them vilified, or some doubtful various constructions made of
it, which at length grew to the height of censuring, that when those Foot
forces which returned from the I Will of Ree were to be quartered, and Billited in
Towns, until his Majesty's pleasure was to dismiss them, or farther to have
employed them; the common voice was, it was the Dukes plot to detain these
forces, to take his occasion to side with the Enemy, and so to ruin our
Kingdom: and what base Libells and scurulous songs were made of him? so that
at last they did hate his very person, so that by their callumnious reports,
and invective inventions they had set on his shoulders (according to the
fiction in Ovid) another head, so that his own friends and Soldiers did not
know him for their friend, but wrought their own Masters death most
villanously by their wishes, which was acted by the cruel hand of a hellish
Murderer to their contents; but let them put the gains they purchased by his
loss in their eyes, and I believe they may still see, whilst he lived the
Commonwealth fared not the worse; I think none can be ignorant of the
mischiefs and inconveniences which are engendered by these Monsters of impudent
censurings, and bold scrutinies of these Novelists, which they ingrosse to
themselves to please their pallats of a covetous desire of news, and then to
gain a popular applause, or to maintain Table-talke they retayle it out
again, either to the honor or disparagement of some one or other, as they
shall stand affected; or as the time, place, or occasion shall be offered:
Reports soon works upon the weakness of ignorant people, who are apt to
believe any thing, especially if it comes from one that has a habit of seeming
sanctity, and by such they will be drawn, and lead to any thing. These
Hitrogeniall courses either of Subjects or Soldiers used to those in Authority
over them, makes an Enemy rejoice, they perceiving by such ways and courses,
their paths are ev'ned and swept; and at their pleasures they can shape their
designs and projects, according to the distempers and humors of the time,
sailing with full wind and tide unto the haven of their expectations; for men's
fancies are like to surfeited blood, that what infection soever comes first, is
most surely taken; and indeed an enemy will not lose his opportunity to fish
where the waters are troubled.

And as in the little Empire of the body natural, the beginning of all motion
is from the head, having the Conjugation of all sinews, and the architecture
framed, built, and fashioned with joints fit for motion, and by a secret
instinct and light of Creation annexed to the head from whence the whole
strength is produced; now if any of these sinews or joints are shrunk or
dislocated, it marres and hinders the sudden motion of the whole frame, causing
the limme where such a defect is, to be altogether unusefull, and much
hindering the orderly work of the rest of the limbs, which would be more
quick and apt to help and defend the head; the Magnanimous Eagle is easily
surprised if but the least joint of her wings be perished. This corrupting,
putrefying, and dis-joynting the members of a Commonwealth, has been a
policy ever used by the Enemy, and has afforded him more freedom to set
afoot his projects and designs, then any one conclusion he has made use of;
And such dislocations and distempers are usually the forerunners of confusion.
Histories make mention of many Nations that have been infected with this
Con^^gion, and have languisht in this dea^ly sickness, when as the art of
Physic was not able to purge the glut that lay in the stomachs of these
diseased persons, so that their breaths infected all that came near, and made
them unusefull burdens to their heads, so that the Engines of Wit, Art, and
Policy, was not able to set them in a right frame and temper.

France once deeply tasted of this deadly cup, until ruin and confusion
rent them from their head to a deeper destruction, like gangreene members they
were cut off from the body Politic; the residue being weary of their former
smarts began then to comply with the times, and saw it the peaceablest and
safest way for all degrees to join in one, for the ayding and supporting their
King, and honoring and obeying all in Authority under him; then they showred
their transcendent terms of loyalty and obedience upon Lewis the ninth;
Jo^^^ille* cap. 16.
(and indeed he truly deserved them) the Commons with one voice styled him
their Father; the Nobility reverenced him with title of just Prince, and
faithful preserver of their Laws; The grave Doctors and Fathers of the Church
ascribed to him the name of Tutor, and Defender against all oppositions, and
the whole body of France viva voce, and with one consent proclaimed him the
King of truth, and those in Commission under him, true Preservators and
Administrators of Justice: the crabbed fruits of their former follyes had
wrought good effects, so that contestings, scrutinies, censurings, and
oppositions, Licurgus* his witty answer.
were quite banished; They having learned of Licurgus, to answer those that did
desire to meddle out of their Sphere, as he once answered one that was
oppinionated, that a Democrasticall government was most pleasing, he wished him
to try it first in his own house if such Corrivals in authority would breed
any content; If every busie-braind fellow would make trial of this, shame
would make them blush, and ill-shapt discontents would stop their mouths,
causing them to be ready to imitate the Egyptians, who anciently consecrated to
their God Harpocrates, the Peach tree, the leaves thereof resemble a Tongue,
the fruit a Heart; simbolizing thereby, that their hearts should henceforth
serve him, and their tongues set forth his praise. The same Emblem should
every loyal and obedient Subject and Soldier have within his breast and
mouth, which he should dedicate to Supremacy, and to all in subordinate
authority under him; then every door would turn merrily upon the hindges
without jarring, and a gentle stream of Peace would have a current channel
through Kingdoms; then there would be no fear of an enemies sowing his seeds
of discontents amongst the inferior members, nor enticing them by gifts and
promises to disloyalty or distractions.

It is recorded of Caesar, De Bello Gallico, lib. 6.
that he conquered more in France by complying with the people, profering them
favors and courtesies, and giving them large gifts, to those that would yield
to maintain Disputes, factions and contentions against Authority, he thus
exercising his wits but one Winter, gained more Towns and Provinces, then he
and his potent Army could conquer of them in ten years wars.

Factions, Murmures, Mutinies, contestations, oppositions, detractions,
disloyalty, and disobedience, are far more dangerous in an Army, then they
possibly can be in a settled Kingdom, in regard the members of an Army are to
be ready pressed to go upon execution, upon every sudden occasion, being
always in action tending toward the finishing of the design it was provided
for, so that if any Mutinies or detractions should be, it would fare with that
Army, as with a Traveller that by some dangerous slip in his earnest
journeyes over a dangerous Forest is taken lame, so that he is disappointed of
his expected ariving: being exposed to the dangers of the night; and bereaved
of his means of defending himself from the cruelty of devouring Beasts, which
most certainly will take the present opportunity to fall upon and devour him;
Whereas in a State (no Foreign enemies being near) such distempers, bruses,
and dislocations, time it self may wear out the mallady, or some sovereign
course may be used to supple and lythen such dislocated joints, and stiff
members, so that use may be obtained of them, before any urgent occasion shall
command their assistance. It is not the least of all things to be thought of,
if occasion should offer it self to make use of the Commonaltie, for a speedy
defense against an approaching enemy, those that have been so offward, and
refractary in obeying the Edicts of Sovereign authority, and in yielding the
least of their assistance in contributing toward the mighty charge which is
expended both by Sea and Land, for our peaceable and safe preservations; how
strange shall these men be found in subjecting themselves to Marshall laws,
and to such Commanders as shall ^ee in command over them; or how will they
venture their flesh, which were scrupulous in venturing a few shillings: Besides
their ignorance in the use of Arms; and no marvel, because our Yeomondry
scorn to subject themselves under a Captain to be taught, but put their
servants into the List: And the cheifer sort that should be the strength of
our Kingdom, slip their necks out of collar, and every silly poor mecanicke
fellow must make the Soldier: Thus dishonouring our Sovereign, and weakening
our State, by putting trust in a company of poor ^^eas that have neither
estate nor reputation to loose, but are fitter subjects to entertain mutinies,
or commit mischiefs, then to be brought into orderly subjection.

You may give Officers leave to complain, being too well acquainted with their
wonderful disorders in our daily musters, which being not redrest will be
pernicious to our Kingdom.

Moreover, our people are so metamorphiz'd from that true worth which in former
ages was inherent to our English, but now so effeminiz'd by their voluptuous
living, that they are not fit to undertake the pains and care of a Soldier;
their hearts melting like butter, upon the supposition of meeting death in the
face; as was seen not many years since by the manly carriages of brave
fellows, when the rumor was of the Enemies landing at Wackring, betwixt
Maulden, and Lee in Essex; what uproares and disorders it bred, two or three
^estriding a Horse to eschew the danger, partly naked, fearing least the Enemy
should have over-taken them, being so stupid, that many of them knew that it
was so far from affording an Enemy a landing, that a Goose might be
gravelled, before she could obtain shore.

And I think the two fearful mistakings of the Enemies approaches at
Wethersfield in Essex, 1623.
the people being Congregated in a time of Fast; at the discharging of a poor
Pistol by a Horseman returning from Trayning, all the Church was in such a
strange uproare, every one running to hide himself; tearing the Air with
their shrikes and cries, deeming they had seen their Neighbors slain; when
they in their have tumbled one over another, some running a Mile or two before
they durst look back.

Likewise some few years after in the same Church, at the running down of the
weight of the Clock (which made to their thinking a fearful noise) caused
such an uproare as if the Devil and a lease of Bears had been amongst them:
these things plainly shows the pusillanimity and imbellick constitution that
Peace and security, with the laciviousnesse of the times has hatched in them;
it would have been hard for a General or Captain to have gotten these people
to have made a stand, and opposed the Enemy at push of Pike, if occasion had
been of the Enemies landing: A County might have been pillaged before they
would have assumed the countenance of a Soldier, they being so fearfully
affrighted. If we did but truly weigh these things, it would make every man
more forward in his contribution toward the maintenance of the Navy, which
must secure us from these panicke fears.

The ancient Gauls accounted no man further worthy then to serve in the
affairs of the house, that was not publicly called and generally thought
worthy and meet to bear Arms; and being Armed before the general Counsel,
then he was acknowledged a Commonwealths man, and fit to be employed to do
his Country service: And these were of the best and cheifest sort that strived
to obtain these honors: How far are we dissenting from those, yet we
would be accounted good Commonwealths men; but we must first leave our
factious jarres and disputes, by which we think to attribute to our selves
the name of good Commonwealths men; and as the Gauls did, betake our selves
to the service of our King, and the good and safety of our Country.

Tacitus makes mention, Tacitus.
that the youth in those days did use no other recreation, but in preparing
themselves and fitting themselves for the Wars; having that expertnesse, that
they would leap voluntarily being naked against swords and Iavelins opposed
against them, wherein they had an Art to disarme their Enemies, and defend
themselves: He adds moreover, that they would play upon such dangerous
adventures, as would make a man blush to be a spectator.

The Ancient Romans upon their Theaters, tutored up valiant young men in the
Art of Fencing; and when they grew expert and hardy, they were renowned with
the name of Gladiators, our Gentry and Yeomen are not of that metal; for
either they through coveteousnesse, are adicted like Boares to root up the
earth, to scrape base dross together, (which they deifie as their god) or else
they swim in a more dangerous stream of drunkenesse, and riotousnesse, which
weakens both their bodies and estates, making them not fit to do neither King
nor Country service; for it may truly be said of those that sail in these
extremes, that they are ignorant to what end they were borne into the World;
which next their duty to God, they are bound in all loyalty and obedience to
do their best service to their King and Country; men's own private ends ought
to be the last thing to be thought upon.

The Ancients in former ages were not acquainted with such baseness, as this Age
is addicted unto; they would not suffer such distempers amongst them: for as
Caesar reports, that the Nervians were the most couragio^est of all the
Belgians; his reason was, their Governors would not suffer any Wine to be
brought amongst them; Strab. lib. 3. of the Venet.
or any thing that tended unto delicacie; they held it for an infallible rule,
that such things would abate the courage of men: And Strabo further testifies,
that Caenus a grave wise Commander persuaded the Getes to pluck up their
Vines, for fear of effeminatizing their people; Tacit. lib. 4. cap. 5.
they neither delighted in delicacies nor riches; as Tacitus speaks very nobly
in the behalf of the ancient Germans; who so highly hunted after honors,
condemning base cankered wealth, that in their marriage circumstances instead
of a great dowry, the husband presented a yoke of Oxen; a Horse furnished and
fitted for service, a Target with a sword and Iavelin: The Virgin likewise
presented her beloved with some weapons of War, simbollizing that in all
perrills and dangers be it either in peace or War they join to run in one
fortune. Our age is so far from this, that although by Statute they are bound
to find Horse and Armor, they will have tricks to shift it, or being
compelled, will borrow of their Neighbors to blind the eyes of authority; so
that in a Troop of Horse of a 100, there is not 80 of these Horse their own,
which ought to be employed for the Kings service; were these people allotted
their possessions, and yet bound to find Horse and Armor, as Aristotle,
testifies of Phaleas, the Calcedonian that he first published in the
Commonwealth; Aristot. lib. 4. de anim. cap. 6.
that all goods and chattells should be equally divided, to the end that two
principal plagues to mankind (which are Riches, and Poverty) might be
banished their Cities.

The Warlike Germans put this in execution, by a custom received amongst
themselves; as Caesar avoucheth in his sixth Book of his Comentaries; that they
had no certain measure of Land, nor any particular habitation limited them,
but as the Princes and Magistrates assigned every year unto particular
kindreds and Parentages, so much ground or Land, or such a City or situation
as unto them seemed best and convenient, and the year following they were
constrained to seek elsewhere: The reasons of this used by the same Author,
were first, least the people being retained by customed continuance, in one
place they should be out of love with the profession of Arms, taking more
delight in their beneficial and pleasing courses of life: secondly, from the
occasions of withdrawing their minds from the enlargement of their
Territories: thirdly, least they should be over curious in building and
defending themselves from cold and heat, and so prove stark cowards:
fourthly, least a coveteous desire should arise amongst them, scraping and
gathering goods together, whereon customarily issues threats, dissensions, and
blood.

These inconveniences former ages have been reduced unto, to deter them
from effeminate courses, and were constrained for all their uncertain means
to furnish themselves with Horse and Armor for the Wars: We have our
complete possessions from generation to generation defended by his Majesty's
Laws; Yet how grievous it is to diverse men to have a just taxation of Moneys,
Horse, or Arms imposed upon them; when they know without it, the Realm cannot
be secured. Let any sensible man compare these our days with these precedent
circumstances; and let him judge what good service, or what loyalty and
obedience may be expected of a people, either merely given over to
sensuallity, or altogether begrumbled with covetousness, for we are now grown
to that height that we make it an Article of our faith; that the possessing of
goods and enjoying of pleasure, is the Sumum bonum required.

When as the people of the Jews, that God so highly delighted in; that he
would give kingdoms for their ransomes, and hedged them about with his
favors, whereby they might have presumed to have lived in security: Yet it was
the Almighties pleasure so far to weane them from their eager dispositions of
fortifying themselves, which they aimed at for their better security, that they
might live uncontrolled, and wallow in their pleasures, and some in their
covetousness, void of fear of the Enemies surprizalls; both their hands were
commanded to be employed, the one about their daily and common affairs, the
other was to manage the sword: So that one eye was employed about finishing
and contriving their livelihood; the other had due respect to the Enemy to
prevent and resist them upon the first view: Is our Nation more confident of a
miraculous preservation, then they might have claym'd? I rather believe the
contrary, for it is just we should suffer, if we slight (as most of us do)
both Gods precepts, and the commands of Authority which enjoyne us to a due
preparation and daily vigilance, which now is generally disobeyed and slighted,
the noise of the Enemies Canon sounding so far off, neither as yet has the
Enemy played his part upon our Stage; so that we shall fear like the
Shepherd when the Woolfe comes; indeed we shall hardly gain succor and
resistance, in regard the common people take all warnings but as mockes and
scare-crowes, which by these consequencies following may be plainly seen.

First, in our refractory carriages, when Authority commands any service for
the gayning experience in the use of Arms, as namely our Musters; what
murmurings are breathed out for the expense and charge of a little Powder and
Match, and the loss of a days Work.

Secondly, what boysterings and stomackings there is against Officers that
shall give true information of men's sufficiency, when accordingly Arms by
Authority are imposed.

Thirdly, what strange circustances are used to gain freedom, and the posting
it over to another, happily far insufficienter then himself.

Fourthly, when necessity compells the finding of Arms; what fond delays, and
slight excuses are set abroach to defer the time; and in this they have a
double aim: First, either that the dallying with time shall be the means to
bury it in o^livion, or, Secondly, the removing themselves out of the division
they conceive to be prevalent, until notice be taken of some other to
amplify the List: Others of less rethoricke, take it to be the cheapest way
to borrow their Arms; so that many times one Horse or one Armor, is fitted to
the service of diverse bodies.

Fifthly, those that are complete in appearance, will hardly be entreated to
be tutored one third part of the day, but some one evasion or other is put in
execution; many times they are so brittle, that they can hardly endure the
calling over, which makes them so skillful at the years end, that they can
hardly distinguish a Rank, from a File.

Sixthly, their backwardness and unwillingnesse in answering to the commands
of Authority, and many times some of them are altogether deficient both in
their Arms and appearance, and usually all or the greater part will borrow two
or three hours of the set time, before they come to the place where they are
to be called over; that days work above all other is so tedious, that they
desire only to trifle it to an end.

Seventhly, a base scorning and inveterate hating of such Officers as have a
desire to take pains with them, in exercising them and showing them their
postures, and causing them to bring in complete Arms.

Eighthly, the negligent and beastly keeping of their Arms, that hardly half
the Arms of the Band are fitted as they should be for a present use, but
altogether defective, and making any trash serve to pass the Muster, not
regarding future services: In all these particular faults, our Horsemen are
guilty of, and may blush for their shameful abuses to King and State; and in
one thing they s^rpasse our Foot-troopes, and that is the employing of such
Horses as are sequestered from common rural uses, and only appropriated to the
Kings service; they instead of riding them and managing them for the War, set
them to Plow and Cart, or to perform some journeys either in a Coach or
otherwise; or rather more absurdly make a Cart-horse or Coach-horse serve to
bear the great Sadle, which they think sufficient to blind the eyes of
Authority; should there be any sudden use that our forces should stand in
competition with an Enemy, I fear we shall fall short of what is to be
expected.

And although these defects may seem but as a shadow to such points of
disloyalty and disobedience, as formerly we have discourst of; yet these
defects argue and savor of stupid security, and a base undervalluing esteem
of the use of Arms, which all Nations do most highly honor and esteem, as
the means for safety of Kingdoms, the preserver of Laws, and above all, the
preserver and defender of Gods Gospel, which without it, would soon be dashed
under feet, and a confusion overflow our Realm: Therefore let us endeavor to
amend what has been amiss, and in all dutiful obedience follow such
directions as Authority shall prescribe, banishing our own ends, and every day
furnishing and fitting our selves to the largest extent of our abilities and
powers to do our God, King, and Country the faithfullest, and best service we
possibly may, and that willingly, and with a delight; for this end we were
first borne, as was truly veryfied by Pompeius Magnus that famous Commander,
he having shipped his men, and ready furnished them with Victuals and Munition
for the relief of the City of Rome, which was then by the Enemy besieged and
in great distress: In the interim, a wonderful tempest of Wind, Rain,
Thunder, and Lightning arose, so that nothing but ruin to him could be
expected; his friends and Soldiers besought him not to venture his life and the
Navies loss; He returned this noble answer, I am borne to obey Authority; Et
necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam: He knew the Rules and Edicts of Sovereign
Authority were not to be deferred, but he took them as his Card to steer
his course of loyalty and obedience by.

If we should but draw examples of obedience from the Creatures, and observe
how in all things they stand conformable and obedient to the Laws of Nature;
How the great unruly Ocean observes the course of the Moon in bringing in her
tides: The Massy earth waits the time and pleasure of the Suns revolution,
to yield up the fruit and hidden treasures contained in her bowels to the
uttermost of her power: All Creatures both Vegetative and Sensitive, are
precise and ready bent in all obedience when Nature enjoynes; And yet Man a
Rational Creature most obstinate and hetrogeniall in his duty, loyalty and
obedience to his Superiors, which Nature does not only challenge as a right,
but God claims it as a due: And how siily and foolish are men above all other
Creatures in making provision for their safety there is no Creature but Nature
has armed it with some defensive weapon, not so much but the poor Be has
his Pike, which most valiantly and skilfully he can use for his defense and
preservation: But the times we live in are such, that we have neither will
nor skill; but we refer all to a general Providence, thinking it sufficient
if they be roughcast with riches and prosperity: and the liberty and peace
which here has been plentifully enjoyed, breeds a boldness and fool
hardiness to do evil; for long peace and large freedoms makes men as unfit
to follow the Wars for the present, as pampering and youthfulness does a
Colt unridden; he that should have a sudden occasion to back him for present
service, cannot but expect the Ryder should be overthrown, and work confusion
to himself and all that depend on him.

It was partly seen and tried at the Isle of Ree in France at the Siege of
Rochell, and although our English had been some short time tutured and
exercised under the banners of Mars; yet the right valiant and judicious
Captains had no more command of them in the time of need, when the trial of
their obedience, skill, and valor should have been brocht, then of a Herd
of Dear: For all they saw by flight there was no safety but eminent
destruction, yet they could not be persuaded to make an honorable resistance,
whereby they might either have freed themselves, or have died like men with
their faces toward the Enemy: Now judge you, if such cowardly baseness was
found in those that scorned to give their heads for the washing being the prime
spirits of our Kingdom, we cannot but expect worse of these here behind
remaining, which will fall short many bows length of their worth, (if we do
not flatter our selves) for they will find war a wearisome stage where
Soldiers must play their parts against their wills; for truly it may be said
of a people that are unexercised, and know the Wars but by hearsay: quod
valentes sunt, and prevalent ante pericula, in ipsis tamen periculis discedunt;
They have ability enough and to spare, until danger appears; but when peril
indeed comes, they get them gone as Vigetius says, there is a rule in the
Philosophy of the War; In omni praelio non tam multitudo, and virtus
in^^cta, quam ^rs and exercitum, solent prestare victoriam; In every Battle,
skill and practice does more toward the victory, then multitudes and rude
audacity. But certainly our age is possessed that an Enemy will dare at our brave
cariages and gay clothes, as the Lark does at the Hobby, until they beat
them down with their bolts. Let such make trial that please, it will prove
but Dulce bellum inexpertus. Matters not useful prove inductions to terror;
for there are three things which agravates fear; Inexpectation,
unacquaintance, and want of preparation; The first distracts the mind, and
flai^es the faculties and affections from their due consultations of remedy;
the second makes an earthquake in the soul, being not sensible of the event,
as the Imbellicke Pesant quakes at the report of a Musket at his first hearing
of it. The third dejects the spirits being void of all hopes, either of
evasion or defense, much less of conquering; Therefore lest we should make
our Enemies more terrible to us then indeed they can be, let us daily expect
them, that when they come we may not be to seek how to expulse them.

And for conclusion of this seventh Section; The wonderful loyalty and valor
of Pro^es^l^us.
let every true-hearted Subject imitate the Thracian Captain Protesilaus,
son to Iphiclus; who to show the truth of his love and loyalty to his
Sovereign, would be the first man of all the warlike Greeks, that should set
foot on Troy; albeit he knew that he should surely die that first touched the
Trojan Land, which came to pass, for he was slain by Hector, about whose
Tomb the Poets were pleased to record to his perpetual honor, that diverse
goodly tall green Trees did divinely spring up, whose branches covered the
ruins of Troy; By this we may see in what estimation and honor, loyalty and
valor was honored withal; as one truly says, such men deserve all respects
and honor that may be to mortal men ascribed, for they are as the Locks and
Bars of the Kings Palace, and so long as they are kept, fix, strong, and
close, they preserve all in safety; but if infected with Cankered disloyalty,
rustie cowardice, and mossie security, they leave all open as a prey to
Thieves and Robbers.

THE TRVE VALOVR OF SVBIECTS AND SOVLDIERS IN FORT AND FIELD. SECT. VIII.
CHAP. LIX.
The true nature of Valor described, and how men ought to be qualified with
it, to make them sit Subjects and Soldiers.
TRue Valor in Subjects and Soldiers, is the summoning of the Faculties of
the irascible parts to a mature Consultation with Reason, Judgment being the
principal Engine, and Resolution the Model that turns all the Wheels, both
of Invention and execution, which makes a man truly valiant, to undertake
without rashness, and to perform without fear, bearing down dangers with a
lofty courage, trampling on them with success; it makes a Soldier look
Death in the face, and pass by it with a smile; it makes him afraid of
nothing, but to be betrayed by fear, desiring rather to have his blood seen,
then his back; it makes a Soldier disdain life upon all base conditions;
Making him prodigal of his blood, when God, his King and Country shall
command it; His boldness proceeds neither from Ignorance nor senslesnesse;
But first he values the danger, and then disdaines it, having his fears least,
when perils are greatest; His Magnanimous mind scorns flatteries, esteeming
such as Flies blowing corruption upon sweet virtues; he hates to feed his
spirits upon the fulsomnesse of surfeiting ease; his confidence keeps him
safe, and his unapaled looks does daunt a base attempter; it is more prevalent
then Briareus with his hundred hands, and more potent then Chiron the Centaure,
whose strength and wisdom was matchless; Valor has double odds of a
fearful Coward, for the undaunted carriage of a valiant man, drives fear up
to the hilts in a Cowards heart, so that he has no ability left to offend his
enemy, or defend himself; This makes victory so easily gaind, for the spirits
of a Coward are so retired, and pent up with anguish and distress, being wrapped
up with fear of the approaching evil, and dispayring of his fortitude to
avoid it, that there is hardly strength left to make the least resistance;
whereby Valor takes his advantage to atchieve his Honorable ends without much
trouble, and less danger; for as boldness fortifies the passions of the soul
against the greatest miseries which are most difficult to be avoided, and
incourageth it to pursue Honorable achievements that are most hard to
obtain; so many times fearful cowardice does wanness in it self its
strength failing; many times fearing that which is not to be feared; having
only but a show of danger, Saepius opinione laboramus quam re, Many times more
troubled and dejected with conceits then the thing it self. A Cowards eye is
of the nature of an augmentation glass, dilating a small danger, and causing
it to appear ten times greater then the accident can be; whereas Valor
accords with the deminution glass, contracting the dimentions of perils into
so small an Image, that they appear as shadows. In a poor faint leaden spirit
there are four kinds of fear that undermine the Heart; first a natural
fear, whereby every thing shunnes the destruction of it self, and this is
most proper in beasts. Secondly humane, which arises of too much desire of
this life. Thirdly a base worldly fear, when a man despaires to hazard the
loss of goods and credit. Fourthly, a stinking servile disposition which
causes a fear of receiving wounds and death; any one of these is able to
subvert the whole fabric of Valor. That warlike Caesar was free from the
least tincture of any of these fears, when his boiling worth in the midst of
eminent perils, cheared up his Soldiers and Mariners, and banished their fears
with the comfortable words that Caesar and his fortunes were aboard: He was
very expert in the opperations of conceits, and passions of the mind upon the
body; He being a warlike Physician (in the prescription of Regiments to his
fearful Soldiers) he did always consider Accidentia animi to be of greatest
force to further or hinder the atchieving of Victory and fortune; for
questionless imagination is prevalent in altering the faculties and spirits of
the imaginant, having a manifest power to hurt, deject, and weaken, the
opperation of the spirits; so that there is to be observed an art in war, and
to be used to coroborate, and strengthen the imagination, that they may like
the Loadstone, fix their conceits upon nothing but honors, victory and riches,
which elevates the spirits into a majestic Sphere.

There is a great deal of difference between a natural inbred hardiness,
and a soffisticated valor; a silly sheep may be made, managed, and tuter'd,
to oppose and use violence to a dog, but when the victory comes to
competition, the wing is preferred before the claw, whereas in a Lion his
natural inbred magnanimity cannot be altered, without the bereaving of life.
The subject of War is variable, and is only judged by the success and event;
Whereas other Arts and Sciences are judged by acts, as the Pilot is judged by
directing his course aright, and not by the fortune of the voyage; it is
otherwise with valor, for that may have an aspertion of timerosity, and taxed
with indiscreet judgment, when the event is not answerable to the acts
performed, when as Imbellick fellows may stumble on a victory by some strange
accident, when neither art nor courage did attend them, which by the weakness
and credulity of men shall be highly esteemed, as may be manifested by the
overthrow of the Duke of Brunswickes Army, who were known to be very valiant,
and had so declared and manifested themselves in diverse bloody skirmishes, and
principally in a battle fought against Seignior Tilly, where he had all the
advantage both in force and place, yet most valiantly the Duke forced a way
through the enemies Army; the greatest loss to himself was only the loss of
his hand; yet these brave Soldiers not long after were routed and ruined, by a
few base country Bores joined with a few Soldiers which were privately drawn
out of the adjacent Towns, to hinder the Enemies pillaging; these in the dead
time of the night found sufficient advantage to set their base metal a work,
the Brunswickians being confusedly quartered (and their guards neglected) upon
a plain near Brafford in Gelderland, so as the divisions could not have the
privilege to draw themselves into order of Battle to make their resistance,
for I dare then say those Grollians and Bores would have fled at the first
charge, like Sheep from Wolves.

True valor is of the nature of perfect coin which goes current in all places
without contradiction, and dares endure the touchstone, when as seeming
hardiness, like base metal will not endure the trial, nor pass current in
valuation, yet happily it may to the view seem very splendant, as courage
raised by the spirits of Wine, may seem more headstrong and violent (as one
truly terms it a madness, or a worth out of the wits) then the true valor
which goes upon the feet of judgment and resolution, yet it will be nipt in
the bud, and fall before the fruit be mature; when as true hardy^Souldiers well
exercised, and acquainted with dangers, fear them not; Neglecto periculo
iminentis mali opus ipsum quantumvis difficile agrediuntur; They go about the
business it self, how hard soever it be, although they consider the danger
with the mischief over their heads it may probably bring, which would distract
a Coward.

A Soldier must be so qualified, that adversity must not lessen his courage,
nor prosperity his circumspection; our English in former Ages, have been
esteemed the best tempered metals, transcending other Nations of the world for
true valor, and expertnesse in the use of Arms; whereby they have achieved
great victories: as in the Battle of Poictiers, where the French had all
advantage against the Blacke-Prince, both in number, force, show, Country and
conceit, with the chief strength of the Horse of his Kingdom, which were
esteemed the best in Europe, assisted with the greatest and wisest Captains of
his Realm, so that the French Army consisted of 40000. men well appointed, and
expert Warriors, nothing wanting in them; but the golden spirits of our
English, whose Army consisted but of 8000. men, overthrew the French Army, and
took their King Prisoner.

The like difference of worth in Soldiers, was manifestly seen at the
Battle fought by the Estates of the Netherlands, and the Archdukes forces,
near Newport in Flanders, where our English did works of Supererogation, by
the prudency and valor of the Veres, with a handful of disbanded men, routed
the Battalia's of the Enemy, and redeemed the victory lost of their own side,
snatching it out of their Enemies hands, when in the judgment of all men it
was lost. And that incredible animosity and courage of a poor handful of
Soldiers, which attended Charles King of France, in his junenesse unto the
Wars which he intended in Italy! after the sacking of diverse Towns there, he
marched with his Army to the Gates of Rome, and entering a breach in the Wall,
drove the inhabitants to such perplexities, that the Pope gladly condiscended
to any conditions which they should propound; so as the World did admire their
valor, wondering to see that no opposition could withstand their warlike hands;
so that Kingdoms trembled to see with what facility they suodued in all places.

Alphonso understanding this Army approacht near Naples, fear so far
possessed him, that he crowned his Son Ferand, thinking that he more valiantly
would have defended his Country; for his own security he fled into Sicily,
being indeed touched in his conscience, for his abominable wickedness: but no
sooner were the French arrived at the Ports of Naples, but the sheepish
Neopolitans durst not once offer a repulse, but yielded themselves with their
Kingdom to his mercy, where he was crowned King of Naples. By these examples
we may see the wonderful difference betwixt an inbred natural valor, and a
forced made hardiness.

As there is a virtue in the Lodestone to draw Iron or Steel to it, the
virtue not extending to other metals; of the same nature is Valor, which in a
valiant Commander, will draw all his Captains, Officers, and common-Souldiers,
to step the same paces to gain honor and renown; so that they will follow
him in all desperate attempts, if they have the least grain of steel in them;
which being wanting, all the policy in the world is in vain to seduce or draw
them to any performances; but like Lead (before other metals) when it comes
to the fire of trial, will soonest melt and run.

As much may be said of an Effeminate Commander, whose metal is no better,
than the Mineral which Saturn ingenders; if he be infected with the Pestilent
disease of Cowardice, all his Soldiers under his command will soon be
infected, and participate in his running fore, before his begin to rise;
Soldiers are very superstitious, dreaming there is more worth and wisdom in
a Commander, than many times is found; and when they perceive timerosity,
doubts, and no apt performances in him, they conceit some strange effects are
approaching, that may tend to their confusion; and so like valiant Cravens,
bethink themselves best how to be secured, reposing more confidence in one
pair of Wings, than in two pair of claws; as was well observed by the
Battle between Po^^bus Diazius a famous Leader of the Portugals, and Alvara
King of Congo, who had in his Army 1200000. Soldiers, who by the poor spirits
of their Commanders were so astonished, Heylin.
not daring to maintain the ground they stood on, were utterly ruined by a
handful of Portugals.

Caesar one of our Schoolmasters in the Rudiments of War, was not ignorant
of the strange effects that the worth of a Commander begets in a Soldier, and
what poor Spirits and aghast countenances are bred by the sickly courages of
Commanders; which made him haste to the Seacoast, understanding his Navy was
assaulted by Achillis, Heylin.
as it lay at Anchor by Pharas in Egypt, over against Alexandria, he being
intercepted of his passage by the Egiptians, was compelled to leap into the
Sea, swimming for his life, diverse times being constrained to dive into the
water, to preserve himself from their Darts, with much difficulty and danger
arrived at his ships, whose presence, with his valourous animating of his
Soldiers, got the victory; which otherwise had been doubtful.

Likewise, to confirm the base impression of fear that a cowardly Commander
stamps in his Soldiers dispositions; and likewise to manifest the worth and
courage which is wrought in poor imbellicke Creatures, by the forwardness and
bold hardy courage of some in chief, you shall find by the Story of
Contarenus the Venetian Governor; Knoll^s.
he having intelligence of the invasion of Vluz Ali with a Navy of 60 Gallyes,
was so stricken with a quaking agne, so that by his cowardly and unmanly
carriage caused all the Townsmen to run after him, leaving the strong Town
of Curzola to be defended by none but their silly wives; the simple women
perceiving eminent danger and destruction to approach, pluck up their womanly
spirits, and defended the Walls with stones, fire, and such other weapons as
they had, beat the Enemy from the Walls, and God being propitious to them in
sending a sudden violent Tempest, which forced the Turks General to remove
his Galleyes to a place of more safety.

The like pusillanimity was found in King Etheldred, who in the year 978.
swayed the Scepter in this Kingdom, being invaded by Swayne King of Denmark,
with a Navy of 350 Sail, durst not withstand the storm, but took his
opportunity the speediest way into Normandy, leaving his Subjects to the mercy
of the Danish King, who tyrannized over them until his death. In all the
passages of Martial Affairs, I have only observed three several passages,
whereby valiant men have been subdued.

The first may be said miraculously, as when God is seen plainly and
manifestly to be the Author of a Conquest by a secondary means of less worth
and power used; and that is most usually, when God and his Glory is interressed
in it: as in sacred Scriptures, the overthrow of Goliath a man of mighty
strength and valor, by David although valiant, yet a Child in comparison to
the Giant: (for valor and strength must have a cerrivall to make a man
complete) Also the overthrow of King Saul and Jonathan, who had ever been
victorious against their Enemies: Yet the Almighty being at ods with them for
their rebellions, in not performing execution against Agag, they were subdued
by their Enemies; yet David styles them (in his Lamentations for them) valiant
men.

Also Marcus Antonius the Emperor making War against the Quadi, Xiphilinus.
being a Warlicke people that inhabited Silesia; who by their worthes and
policies had gotten the Emperors Army in such a straight, the mountains
invironing them on the one side, and the Quadi ready to give battle in their
teeth; And as calamities seldom walk alone, the season of the year was very
hot, and infinitely dry; the Emperor being ready to compound his safety with
his Enemy rather then hazard all, fear had taken such possession of him and
his Army: being in this deep agony, a certain Captain presents himself,
letting the Emperor understand that he had diverse Millitents, meaning
Christians, which by their prayers to their God could obtain victory, for
whose sakes God was pleased to interest himself in this conquest, by sending a
miraculous Thunder and Hail, which so beat in their Enemies faces, that they
with ease vanquished them.

Secondly, Valiant Commanders may be foiled by their own presumption; it
being a domesticke traitor which attends the ruin to valor, and so near
allied to it, that it is hard to be separated, and many times it does train
and usher forth valor upon extraordinary disadvantages, or blindes it with a
superstitious remissness and looseness, in suggesting and acting such things
as should be requisite for safety; abandoning all such rules and means as
might tend to preservation and furtherance in their designs, making mere
naked valor the Rock to ground their confidence upon, as in the Battle
between L. Silla and the Romans, against Archelans General to Mithridates
King of Pontus, whose Army consisted of 120000 Soldiers, these reposing their
confidence in their valors, and great multitudes of men, having an
overweening presumption of their own strengths and deserts, caused them to
neglect such courses and advantages as might have been prevalent to a
victorious conquest, whereby L. Silla took an occasion to give them an
overthrow with the loss but of fourteen of his own men; But Archelans paying
for his presumption the lives of 2000 of his valiantest youths.

Thirdly, as we have discovered Valor to be of too high a temper, that is
compounded with presumption; so likewise when it is of too soft a temper being
compounded with fear, as in Instruments of Steel, that which is absolutely
Steel, and of too high a temper, is of hardness sufficient to file in pieces
any Metal of a softer temper, only it is brittle and subject to break
through its own hardness; So that Sword that is partly Steel, and partly
Iron, so far as the Steel is in it, and of a true temper it will endure the
stroke, and will give no more way, but equally to that which is all Steel,
but when the Steel is chopped, and hackt through to the Iron, then that which is
all Steel, soon destroys and cuts through the softer Metal; accordingly
when two valors meet in opposition, happily both sides indures the brunt a
long time, so far as strength and worth will give way, but being cut and
worn to the quick, the tempered edge is taken off, and a softer metal
appears, which is soon fretted asunder by the true tempered weapon, that has
not that quantity of Iron in it to soften it; So that that Army which indures
the assault longest, is most sure of the victory; so that too hard is better
then too soft, but the golden mean betwixt them is the best temper of all,
which is tough and apt to endure any hardship that shall be opposed; as that
famous Battle fought for a Kingdom, between King Harold and William the
Conqueror, their Metals were so near of a temper, and so truly tempered,
that the victory was uncertain which side it would favor, until the edge of
the English valors was worn through by the ominous death of King Harold, then
their courages grew so soft and poor, that the hardy Normans destroyed them
like Grasshoppers.

It was far otherwise with the true mettalled Swedes, although the Emperors
Army had deeply worn into them, by seeking to blunt their edges by the
slaughter of the most valiant King Gustavus; Yet in regard there was nothing
but true tempered metal remaining, they endured the force of their Enemies
opposition, and enduring their greatest onsets and assaults, they were
predominant over their enemies, standing to their tackling until they had
consumed their foes; Thus you see the two ill tempers (as before I have said)
which attends fortitude is fear and rashness; The golden mean between these
two, is only to be chosen by a Soldier; this is a path so difficult to walk
in, that few there are but erres; As one compares this mean to the roof of a
Church, on whose top there is scarce room to turn a foot upon, but on either
side a broad rode to ruin, if once falling, the stay is rare, and a recovery
miraculous.

There are sundry opinions argued between Valor and Policy, some are
opinionated that policy transcends valor, having a respect to the speech of
the Philosopher Achimedes, who saying of himself that he could conquer more
with his gown in his study (meaning his studious way of contriving of
Politic plots) then all his Enemies could perform in the field by their
valors; others hold Valor of most force, comparing it to the Saltpeeter in
gunpowder which is irresistible; and Policy to the Gunne, which being not
charged with this spirit of Saltpeeter, it cannot of it self be prevalent; but
from both these arises a third thing which effects all, and that is the
Bullet; Wherefore Valor and Policy must go inseparably together for the
effecting of any matter of consequence; For the policy which Judith had
contrived within the City for the destruction of Holofer^es, had been to no
purpose, Two things requireable in a valiant Soldier to make him fit to
undergo the greatest misery war can reduce him unto.
had not her valiant hand put it in execution.

In a valiant Soldier there are two things required to make him able to
sustain so honorable a weighty burden; First, a love to the Wars;
Secondly, a contented mind to bear any misery, that the fortune of the Wars
may reduce him unto; he that has a love to follow the Wars, takes a
pleasure and delight in it, which arises from the sweetness of the object,
which is honor and riches; All the passions of a man's soul depend upon
pleasure or pain, which arises from contentment or distaste received from the
object; Contentment is a firm prop to sustain a Soldier in the bloudiest
Wars, after the love of that profession has invited him to the managing of
Arms; and unless a Soldier keeps these two companions close to him in his
Warlike progress, the stamp of Mars will soon be eaten out; For although
content be of an excellent virtue to qualify a Soldiers disposition in all
matters of grief and misery, yet there was never any but had some occasion of
grief betyded him, War having so many alterations and sudden changes
attending the issue of it: But however it bears him up by the chinne from
sincking into a muddy sadness, The definition of grief and sadness.
which is a base humor properly hanging about the understanding, which heavies
and dulls the spirits, and extends to evils past, present, and to come,
following the understanding which comprehends all these times.

There are three kinds of this blemish of valor which a Soldier should not
once communicate with: Three kinds of sadness which blemish the valor of a
Soldier.
The first is a sadness which arises as Scholars define it, praeter rationis
Imperium, besides the command of reason; as motions suddenly ejaculated into
the affections, do surprise a man.

Secondly there is a sadness, Erga judicium rationis against the judgment of
reason, and this subdueth reason for a while.

Thirdly, there is a sadness, Secundum Imperium rationis, according to the
command of reason, for his reason commands to be sad: These sadnesses dim the
bright spirits that should enlighten a Soldiers actions; and as Seneca says,
Tristitia turbans non est in sapiente, Although sadness may trouble a wise
man, yet it perturbs him not.

Comines makes mention of a noble Family known by the names of the Laylands in
France, Philip de Comines.
who held the Wars in such high estimation and love, and received such
joyful content in them, that diverse generations of them spent their blood and
lives in their Majesty's service, so that scarce one of them but died in some
honorable attempt.

Also Verticus, a chief Commander over the Rhemi, whose worth neither War
nor age, could consume or blemish, having always borne a love, and taken
content in that honorable profession; that even in his decreped age being
hardly able to bestride a Horse, he would not consent that any Battle should
be fought in his absence.

Of the same disposition was Camilogenus a noted Soldier amongst the Alerci,
Treasury of time.
he could not be importuned to favor his aged body and to bid the War adue,
but returned this answer; that although his strength failed, yet his judgment
and counsel should be of value and esteem.

Also Strabo makes mention of certain Frenchmen which were taken prisoners;
Alexander taking a survey of their manly dispositions and carriages; Strabo.
lib. 7.
demanded of them if they were not fearful in the Wars, and what it was
they most feared; they returned unto him this peremtory answer, (we, said
they) fear nothing, except the Heavens should fall on our heads.

Times have wonderfully altered those noble conditions which former ages have
bin endued withal; for in this age we fall short, (being altogether
effeminiz'd, and for want of exercise and experience) even of diverse feminine
Sexes, whose worthes are recorded in history for our learning and imitation,
and to their immortal praise. As first the Warlike Amazons, after their chief
Leaders Plinos, and Scholpythus were treacherously murdered with all their
Warlike forces, Pezelin Sl^id.
which inhabited in Capadocia; their Wives with the rest of the feminine Sex,
being possessed with grief and fear which bred desperateness in them; like
Bears ravished of their Whelps, they plucked up their mad desperate spirits,
making choice of Lampedo and Marpetia for their Conductors, who furiously set
upon the conquerours, and in battle overthrew them, and afterward wonderfully
enlarged their dominions.

After this Hippollite and Menalippe challenged the single Combat of Hercules
and Theseus.

Likewise Penthesilea assisted Priam King of Troy with a brave troop of
Virgins; the valor of these Feminines was grown to that height, that they
scorned their male kind which proceeded out of their own loins, banishing
them their society; and only chose to train up the Females in the feats of
War; they invented diverse Warlike weapons, that the lubberly Males were not
capable of the use of them.

Further, in the Province of Palmira in Syria lived a famous Governesse named
Zenobla; being of such worth that she stood in contestation with Gallienus for
the Empire of the World, She swayed all the Eastern parts.

Also the unconquered spirit of Semiramis, who led in her Army 100000 Chariots
of War, three Millions of Foot, and half a Million of Horse: She subdued the
Ethiopians, the Indians; and She having re-edified Babylon, news was brought
her (as she was playting her hair) of the revolt of this Town; whereupon
leaving her hair half undrest, shoe went and besieged it, never ordering the
rest of her hair until she had again recovered it.

And our late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory may be a pattern to the world
for her true worth and undaunted spirit, She managing both her foreign and
domesticke affairs beyond the capacity of man to conceive, that the World
admired her high temper: Which was well seen in 88, with what a brave
undaunted courage and heroyicke spirit of resolution, she comforted, her
Subjects in their fears and eminent dangers: The consideration of these
unmatclesse spirits might beget worth in our effeminate age, to drown our
childish spirits in their seas of valor, or cause us to imitate the worthes
and valors of former Ages, who plucked out their Calvish hearts and infused the
spirits of Lions into themselves, whereby they accomplished deeds which merrited
wonder; and the rather the more to be admired because of their mean breeding
and simple parentage which could not afford them education; As we find it
recorded in holy Writ, David, Saul, Gideon of mean parentage brought up in
rural affairs; one keeping Sheep, the other Asses, the last with his Flayle;
yet when they assumed the countenance and spirits of the Valiant, what wonders
they wrought, and with what honors were they dignified; the dangerous't
enterprises that ever happened in their times they feared not to attempt, which
was the stirrope that elevated them into there Thrones of highest dignity.

Likewise we find in Histories, what admirable parts men of mean parentage
have attained unto, and what Warlike wonders they have wrought; As Achilles the
Son of Aeacus, was a long time hid under the garments of a Woman amongst the
daughters of Licomedes; yet afterward his spirit aspired so high, that he
concluded the Trojans greatness, and overthrew their City from the top to
the bottom.

Galerius Maximianus borne and bred up basely; wherefore he was termed
Armentarius, because he was a Neat-heards Son: he grew very fortunate in
the Wars, being endued with great valor and courage, was after for his
deserts made Emperor.

Iustia was first a Swine-heard, afterward a Cow-heard, next a Carpenter, a
common Soldier, a Captain, and by his conquests which he obtained by his
valor was made Emperor.

Pompienus Maximus Son to a Smith, gave himself to virtue, and Millitary
services, proving fortunate against the Polonians and Germans in diverse
valiant Conquests, was after created Emperor of Italy.

Also Maximinus a silly Shepherd, at his first inition into the Wars,
behaved himself so honorably, that he was by the Soldiers made Emperor.

It is wonderful remarkable what strange adventures the worth and valor of
men have spurred them unto, to undertake for their Countries good, and their
immortal honors: It were worth the observation, if one of a thousand in these
our days would endeavor to perform the like, either for their private or
popular good; As the Phileni did for the Carthagenians, Heylin.
who were in controversy with the Cyrenians about the bounds of their
Territories: They being willing to end the quarrel, chose certain men of
either City that should set out at one instant, and where they met, there the
confines should determine; These Phileni being swift of foot, got far into
the Country of Cyrene before they were met; whereupon the Cyrenians being
enraged, wished them either to return back into their Country, or dye on the
place; the valiant young men preferring the common good before private safety,
accepted to be slain.

That Reverent Fether of the Church Swinglius, a man not only endued with
divine knowledge, but great learning, thought it a dishonor to him to withdraw
his hands from the Wars for his Countries good; and the rather because he
had incited others to be valiant in their Countries behalf, and to spend their
blood in the defense of it; was himself the foremost man in the Battle fought
near Zurich in Helvetia, where by his eager valor pressing upon all
disadvantages, he was slain: Many Divines of our Age are not of that temper,
but had rather appropriate some strange irregular ways to themselves, whereby
contentions and factions may breed at home amongst their brethren, then to
exhort men to do their Couutrey service; but by their detractions rather
diswade them, then stretch out their own hands or hazard their bodies for the
good of their King and Country; for we are grown so far from encouraging
one the other to follow the Wars, or to distribute any maintenance toward
them, that we altogether discourage those that would venture their Purses, and
hazard their bodies for the good of their Country: But we may learn of that
ever renowned Lady Tiphania, Wife to Bertran du Gues^lin, and let her be the
pattern to all such detractors which seek to deter men from their due
service and honorable performances: This Warlike knight renowned in diverse
Histories for his worthy enterprises, espoused himself to this fair Lady of a
noble Family; his fame and honor being one chief cause she settled her
affections; perceiving she by her amorous courses did withdraw his spirits and
love from following the Wars, whereby his honor began to diminish; she
gently reproved him (as he was courting of her) and blamed him for
effeminizing himself, and leaving the Wars, whereby formerly he had
achieved his greatest reputation; and that it neither suited with the nature of
valor, nor duty of a true Gentleman, to lose the least repute of honor wone
before, by over much affecting his new made choice; as for my part (quoth she)
I ought to shine by the bright radience of your splendent fame; and shall
think my self too much dejected, if you do not prosecute so honorable a
course begun, and loose your spirits in doting on love: These her noble and
wise corrections, did so near touch and trench upon the knights worth and
valor; that he reassumed a Warlike course, presenting his body against the
hottest assaults that ever our English Nation tendered to the Kingdom of
France; he fought against Edward called the black Prince; He restored Henry
the eleventh king of Castile in his Kingdom, maugre the English Forces; he
was after made Constable of France, and highly indeered unto Charles the Fifth.

I could gladly wish all Ladies and Gentlewomen of so noble a temper, esteeming
no honor to the fame purchased by Warlike actions, and instead of their tears
and fond embraces, to rouse their noble Husbands to prosecute the use of Arms;
as the brave spirited women of former ages have done; and for an example of
their worths it is recorded in History, how the Women of Aquilegia a City in
Italy, did so animate and assist their Husbands and other Soldiers being
beleaguered by Maximinus, that when their Bowstrings failed, they cut the hair
of their heads and made them new strings, all other materials being spent,
whereby they preserved their City, and confounded their Enemies, to their
never dying honors. I hope I have said sufficient concerning this subject, and
I take it for granted, that all men's spirits have taken this Cordial of
valor; so that now it stands requisite we should give some Rules, how and when
we should set our Valors a broach, and when to refrain.

First, when two Armies are daily in readiness to give Battle, Upon some
occasions Soldiers ought not to misconster the forbearing to join Battle,
and take it as cowardice.
there are three principal things to be considered; as namely, if we shall
gain less profit by the Victory, then we may fear detriment if we should
suffer an overthrow, upon this occasion we are to forbear, and Soldiers must
not construe it as a trick of cowardice: To give you an example of the Duke of
Guise when he invaded the Kingdom of Naples; the Duke of Alva had been
unwise if he had given him Battle, for the French could have lost no more but
their Army in that battle; but if the victory had inclined to the French, the
Neopollitans had lost their Army and Kingdom with it; for it is a maxim
amongst the rules of Mars, to delay an Enemy that is of greater Potency and
far from his Country to gain relief, whereby his Victuals and Ammunition
may be wasted, so that distractions and mutinies might breed in the Army, the
Soldiers being over-wearied in expecting the fatal day of loss or gain; so
that the Natives may take at pleasure their best and safest occasion to give
Battle, so that victory may be atchived.

The second reason why an Army may refuse to try their valors in a pitched
Battle, A second reason, why a General may refuse Battle without the
imputation of a Coward.
and shall not be imputed as cowardice unto them; is when a General
understands that his Enemies Army will be broken and scattered without fight;
whereof the Emperor Charles the Fifth may be example: For when he made War
against the Protestants in Germany he would never join in Battle with them;
for he was credibly informed that their Army consisting of diverse Nations
could not long agree, but be dispersed without Battle.

Thirdly, an Army may shun Battle and yet be void of Cowardice, if he
certainly knows his power to be inferior by much to the Enemies, The third
reason why a General may refuse Battle without the imputation of a coward.
so that he can in no wise hope for victory: In this case a General had
better do as once a famous Warrior was wont to say; He would rather make his
Enemy a Golden Bridge to March away, then give Battle upon unequal terms,
for it is never good to assault an Enemy if he be perceived to make means to
March quietly away without blows; for many times an Enemy having been brought
into a desperate case, has been the only thing which has gained them the
victory; as was well seen not only by the black Prince in France, but also
by the Duke de Alva; he having beleaguered Aultmore in Holland, having blockt
up his Enemy in the Town, would neither cappitulate of quarter, nor suffer them
to steal out of the Town by flight; this made the Townsmen and Soldiers
resolute, in regard they expected no favor* and with their manly courages
resisted the Duke and put him to the foil, who otherwise would have fled and
left the Town to the Conqueror: For indeed it is a great indiscretion to
detain an Enemy that is flying to stop his passage: for without question,
such valors are deprived of the sinteresis and light of natural principles,
becoming equal to beasts, managing their proceedings without fear or wit;
that will wilfully spill the precious blood of man, and may accomplish their
ends without the hazard or loss of it: This was the honorable observation of
a famous Warrior who left it in Ryme for future Ages to consider of; the words
were these,

Spill not the blood of man, to win that hold,
At which an Ass may enter at with gold;
A Soldiers honor shines as bright
In politic Conquest, as in bloody fight.
Now it still remains we should take some observations, in the true discerning
of Valor in an Army, that Soldiers may not flatter themselves with a false
gloss of Magnanimity; The first observation of an Army endued with valor.
and in the performance of this, there are diverse circumstances to be
considered;

First, whether any sudden news or Alarums, amazeth or fears them.

Secondly, Second observation.
in time of danger, whether the current of all men's opinions are levelled a like
in their resolutions, to encounter and withstand those storms of perils to
their utmost abilities.

Thirdly, Third observation:
when danger has invellop'd and surrounded them, that nothing but Herculian
blows can free them; whether then they manfully heaw out their safeties, or
basely yield, upon conditions far baser.

Fourthly, The fourth simptome of valor in an Army.
whether their great brags and high ostentations in time of safety and peace,
continues in the same strain of action in time of danger; for Cowards are
forwardest in words, and backwardest in actions.

Fifthly, when an Enemy shall have the better of some one Wing or division of
the Army, The fifth simptome of valor in an Army.
whereby they seem to be distressed; and for their particular safety, seek
to save themselves by flight, or to desire quarter, by which others may seek
to do the like, preferring their lives before their honors; thus disheartning
the rest that would sell their lives at the dearest rate, such must be branded
for Cowards, and are fit for no use but to make a Barricadoe for the Enemy to
shoot against.

Sixthly, when Victory is obtained, if there be not clemency and mercy used, as
discretion shall see it meet, The sixth Simptome.
without an insulting way over poor Captives* for it is natural and consonant
to the disposition of a Coward, to use all rigor and severity as he is a
conqueror, that the World should take notice of him to be that which he is not.

Seventhly, an Army being only in a supposed danger* and to eschew it, run
themselves into an eminent destruction; The seventh Simptome.
for a Coward thinks the presentest danger greatest, and will strive to
preventit, though a thousand times greater does imediately by this occasion
ensue.

Eighthly, The eight Simptome.
if there be disputes and detractions upon the point of service who shall give
the onset; for it is far from a cowards temper to give an Assault, but valor
will strive to have the honor of the onset.

Now it remains to show how Warlike valor may be begotten bred and cherisht
in the breasts of Soldiers. How valor may be begotten and bred.


The first is, to be conversant in reading such Histories as treat of Warlike
actions; this will beget a speculative knowledge of all actions honorably
performed by valor, and withal, it will acquaint them with the events that
have happened, whereby dangers will be made more familiar to them; so that by
this the least spark of valor will be kindled in a kind of emulation, to be
possessed of the same honors in performing the like victories or undergoing the
like perils; as we read of famous Tamberlin, who made it his practice to read
often the heroicke deeds of his Progenitors, which did so inflame his virtues,
that he proved the mirror of the World. For noble acts of Predecessors are as
flaming Beacons that fame and time has set on hills to call us to the like
occasions.

Secondly, the Theorie of War being truly understood, the stomachs of the
valiant will boil with the conceit of the due honors and renownes that are
thereby to be attained, and will force a man of courage to enter into the Lists
of Mars, to perform in action, what before he only conceived
incontemplation; in which large field he shall see all proceedings and events,
whereby his body and min^^ will (...) habituated unto it, so that the very
jaws of death cannot affright such a Soldier, who will sooner choose to be
bereaved of life, then stain his honor.

Lastly for conclusion, such valiant Soldiers as take delight in the rudiments
of War, will always have the faculties of their mind busied in plotting and
projecting all kinds of circumstances, which may tend to the beautifying of
this Profession; as it is recorded in the commendations of that valiant
Soldier Pyrrhus; that in what place so ever he became, he in his walking
would take notice of the Situation of each place he came into, and in his
fancy would contrive how he should order his Battle there with the best
advantages; observing the fittest places to hide some Ambusheadoes in to fall
upon the Enemies Flanks or Rear; and also which were his convenientest places
for his retire, or for the safe encamping his Army, what passages were fittest
to be guarded, and the like: Also in Fortified Towns he would observe the
strength of their Fortification, and which place he could have best advantage
to make his assault; with the nature and quality of the ground for the most
advantageous placing his Engines of Battery, with millions of plots and
devices, which in his fancy he contrived; whereby he grew so expert, that
neither time nor place could poze him: This caused Haniball to answer Scipio,
that Pyrrhus was the best Soldier.

And to conclude this discourse, let us observe and follow the command that God
himself gave to his General Joshua in charge, which was That he should be
strong and of a valiant courage, Joshua 1. verse. 6. 7.
whereby prosperity should follow him wheresoever his Army should go: The Lord
of Hosts seeing it was a thing of such high consequence, He reitterated his
former charge in a more emphaticall speech, being a charge so special, that
only and above all things, they should be strong and of a valiant courage,
for without this nothing could be effected in the Wars.

In consideration of this necessity of courage and valor, that valiant
General Consalus, when he had drawn his Army before Naples; he gave his
Soldiers to understand by his earnest protestations, (hoping they would
imitate him) that he had rather dye one foot forwards, then to have his life
secured for long, by one foot of retreat: Such noble acts and honorable deeds
of valiant Soldiers cannot be buried in oblivion; but like the Phoenix, from
whose preserved ashes one or other still does spring up like unto them.

The Ancients did so esteem of a famous name that they deemed it immortal,
which made them ever ready to sacrifice their lives to gain honor, which was
esteemed above the Worlds endowments: Thus according to my poor ability I have
finished this discourse, though not so exactly as the subject requires, in
regard my Schollership and capacity are corrivalls in simplicity.

In the next place I intend to bring in a discourse concerning Duells, being a
thing which assumes the cloak of valor, and may challenge a place in this
discourse: but I have thought it most fit to make a particular draught of it by
it self, wherein is showed, who has favored this kind of vindicating of
honor by the sword; and what circumstances may be alleged for the supposed
lawfulness of it, with diverse admonitions for the regayning of friendship; and
lastly the unlawfulness of it, proved both by Laws divine and humane.

A DISCOURSE UPON VNIVST VALOVR IN DVELS. SECT. IX.
CHAP. LX.
Of the opinions of diverse Learned men concerning Duels, with the chiefest
Circumstances that can be alleged for the lawfulness of it, and so confuted
both by Divine and humane reason; and so concluding with diverse exhortive
reasons for Enemies to entertain a reconciliation.
IN regard this discourse of Duels has so near a correspondency to the former
discourse of valor, I thought it meet to entreat of it in this place; and I
must confess it is a high pitch of Magnanimity could it be warranted by
divine and humane authority; and having duly weighed the nature of Duels, and
likewise observed the oppinions of diverse learned, they holding it altogether
unlawful in regard it is repugnant to Gods commandments, and the Laws of all
Nations, which hate the idle expense of such precious blood, and will not
license the spilling of it, without a lawful calling for the preservation of
King and Country; to these I must assent; Yet diverse hot spirits have desired
to pry further into this subject, thinking to skrew out a lawfulness, of the
which they have fallen short; I have therefore used my best endeavors to summon
up the likeliest arguments, and pregnantest examples that my poor reading can
afford, to set the best gloss on it for their sakes, although to little
purpose; wherefore give me leave to speak my best in the behalf of the
Duellist, and afterward I will be an Attorney of the other side; wherefore
suppose there are diverse probabilities that may induce to conceive a
lawfulness in some particular cases, having a respect to the limitations, and
cautions that ought to attend upon Duels; and first having a regard to the
necessity of War, and then duly weighing the circumstances belonging unto
it; we shall find a secret policy lie hidden, which will plead for it self,
and will go near to prove that combats are necessary, and happily within the
limits of lawfulness.

And although Yno Bishop of Chartres did complain against the French
Churchmen, and especially in his letter to the Bishop of Orlians he assenting
with diverse other learned men, which had taken a mature consideration of the
good effects, the which might be produced from it; and having likewise scand
the ill and mischief that might consequently follow, did manifest and ratify
the lawfulness of challenging the Combat, which I must likewise suppose they
did upon good grounds, they having considered the manifold abuses, and most
horrid aspersions that the (...) of some degenerat spirits would invent, and
falsely lay to the charges of those they hated, whereby both reputation and
life of innocent men are endangered by false accusations, which being beyond
the wit of man to screw out the truth, in regard no proof can be produced, to
lead Authority to discern where the abuse lies, but only the justifying and
denying of the parties accusing, and accused; so that the Engine of wit cannot
invent a more politic and discreet way, A safe argument to prove the
lawfulness of duells.
then by decyding the controversy by their Weapons; for reason tells a man,
that in a just cause there is no man but will be resolute to defend his honor,
and put forth his best valor to offend his Antagonist, his Combat being to
maintain the truth, and having a good conscience on his side, does add vigor
to his courage; whereas contrarily a guilty conscience will so detract from the
worth and valor of the false accuser, that fear will under mine his heart,
whereby he cannot perform in such a manly way, as that party which has right
on his side; But admit there were no such thing in it, yet it would be
prevalent to make men cautelous in abusing their Neighbor, causing to weigh
the peril they must hazard; And although some have made this objection, that
all men are not of like strength and valor, so that in that kind it may seem
unjust; Yet it is to be supposed in way of answer, that an inferior man will
not offer his superior in skill and valor, to scandalize him; and if a
Superior in skill and valor should be so base, as to abuse or lay aspersions
upon his inferior, yet the inferior has the advantage to choose his weapon,
which shall be fitting to his strength and skill, whereby he shall be able buth
to defend himself, and offend his enemy; for we daily see by experience that
very little weak men have had the better, as by the example of Sir John Vere,
he (being a very little Gentleman) to maintain his reputation, being abused at
the Hage in Holland by a French Colonel, being a proper brave fellow, who so
far undervalued Sir John, that at his coming to the place appointed for
their Combat, seeing a Country Bore at work near that place, he demanded of
him if he did not see de cline manicke, meaning the little Gentleman, who
presently came, and at a few incounters at single Rapier, slew the brave
Caviliere. And for my own part I have observed, that in all quarrels that were
decided by Duels, he that had done the injury, and did justify it by his
Sword, did ever go by the worst, if not lose his life. But some may further
object, that there is provision appointed by Authority to take up, and decide
quarrels, and that the party abused shall have satisfaction by compelling the
abusive to ask pardon, and to show contrition for the wrongs offered.

I must confess this is somewhat and very colorable, yet reason and
experience tells that such forced acknowledgements of satisfaction, does not so
fully cover the sore of dis-reputation, as when the party grieved compells his
Adversary, either to give him satisfaction by justifying the disgrace he has
done, with his sword, or otherwise to bethink himself and cry peccavi; for
although the Gentleman abused has satisfaction before Authority, which God
forbid but every man should obey, yet there remains a secret tincture of
disrepute, which will sum in the stomachs of Soldiers, when they conceive
Authority binds the hands of the offendo^, and strengthens the proceedings of
the offended; a Soldiers honor and reputation ought to shine so bright, that
no blemish should be descride in it, for the smallest stain of baseness or
cowardice pierces through the heart of Honor and Valor, reducing them to the
secret scorn of all that knows them, in which respect it behooves Gentlemen
and Soldiers to manage their actions and courses without giving offense, that
they may live blameless and untaxt. Besides these reasons let us take a survey
of the proceedings of the ancient Worthies of former ages. Amongst the Saxons
Duels were very frequent and upon such occasions, which indeed are not to be
tolerated; But I find principally in History, that the Gauls and the Saxons
ordained a Law to decide such controversies, as no certain proof could be
produced, and that by four ways, as Aenius Silvius reports.

The first^was Camp fight or Combat, the accuser was with the peril, of his
body, to prove the accused guilty, and by offering him his Glove or Gauntlet to
Challenge him to his trial, which the other must accept or acknowledge
himself culpable of the crime; if the crime deserved death, then to fight on
horse or foot until one were slain; if imprisonment, then the vanquishing of
the Adversary was sufficient, and to take him Prisoner; In this kind of Combat
the accused had liberty to take another in his stead, but not the accuser.

Secondly, they had another kind of way to try out the truth, which they used
to Imbellick persons, and to feminine spirits, they termed it Fyre-ordeall,
and was used upon accusations without manifest proof, although not without
suspicion: He or she was after many prayers and invocations to take in their
hands a red-hot Iron, or else to confess guilty.

Thirdly, they were to be blindfolded, and diverse hot Shares and Coulters
laid, and the parties offending were led over them; if they escaped without
touch, or received no harm by touching them, then they were adjudged
guiltless; it was practiced upon Emma the Mother of King Edward the Confessor,
being accused for dishonesty with Alwin Bishop of Winchester, which she
performed without hurt; It is likewise reported of Runigund, Wife to the
Emperor Henry the second, being falsely accused of adultery, that she to prove
her Innocence, took seven hot Irons one after the other in her bare hands,
and received no harm thereby.

Fourthly, Numb. 5. 26, 27.
in holy Writ Almighty God himself ordained, that such women as were suspected
of Adultery should drink of the bitter water of the Sanctuary; which if she
were guilty, it should make her thighs rotte off, and her belly burst; if
innocent she received no hurt.

Before we travel any further in this discourse, let us but duly weigh Gods
omnipotency, and his forwardness from time to time in protecting and
assisting the innocent, which hunts after no wrong; and how ready and near he
is in power to inflict vengeance upon those that are abusive, and seek the
disgrace and detriment of their Friends and Neighbors; which power of the
Almighty questionless did inflame the heart of David to answer the just Combat
with Goliath, who had vilified, and dishonored the Host of Israel.

Solomon the wisest that ever the heavens shadowed, has delivered it for
Divinity in his book of Proverbs, that an evil tongue wounds like a two-edged
Sword, and if it wounds so deep, it may endanger a man's life; therefore by the
law of God and Nations, a man may make use of his weapon in his own defense,
and his blood be upon his own head, that dares give the occasion, and stand to
justify it; let this be but by the way.

The third trial of hot water was used after the same fashion that the
former was.

Now the last was the trial of cold Water, which they performed in this
manner, the party suspected to be guilty had a rope put about him, then being
thrown into a deep Pond, if he sunk then he was freed, but if against nature
he swome, then he was adjudged guilty, because the water abhorred to receive
such a base person.

Such hidden secret injuries, scandals, and abuses, perpetrated against the
innocent; God did ever favor the manifestation of them, pointing out the truth
in a miraculous way by his own finger: and in the bosom of the Church, where
the horns of the Altar were a refuge for base bloody Malefactors, yet God
would have the Lotte to be in use for to discover, and make manifest the truth.

Likewise David a man after Gods own heart, could not brook the scandalous
railing of Shimei, although he would not act it himself in person, and in hot
blood, he considering his own gross sins deserved no less, and that his
invective vaporings somewhat trencht upon the truth; Yet the good King upon
mature consideration gave express command, that his hoary head should not go
in peace to the grave:

There has been, and still remains a custom of challenging the Combat for
title of Lands, where the truth cannot be otherwise decided; as Corbius
challenged the Combat of Orsua for the title of a Lordship, which was performed
upon a solemn day of Tilts and Tournyes.

In England, Edmond Ironside fought a Combat with Can^tus the Dane for a
Kingdom.

In Edward the thirds time there was a fight between the Earl Momfort, and
the Earl of Bloys, their contending was for the Duchy of Britanie; there were
thirty English fought against thirty Britains. Likewise upon the accusation of
life, the Lord Henry Bullinbrooke Duke of Harford, and Moubray Duke of Norfolk.

Also between Sir John Ansley, and one Catterington, whom Ansley charged with
Treason, and proved it upon him being victorious.

The like between the Navaroys and one Welsh of Grinsby; this Navaroys having
accused Welsh upon Treason, was by him beaten, and confessed he had
maliciously wronged Welsh; whereupon he was drawn out and hanged. These and
diverse other examples do plead hard for an Implicit lawfulness, seeing God
does by a supernatural hand favor it by bringing the truth to light, and that
the Innocent are never put to the foil; thus former ages were opinionated of
the lawfulness of Duels, and did give free liberty to Challenge an Adversary
in the upholding their honors and rights; yet they would not make it a thing
common, neither would they urge it upon every petty trifle, as now^adayes it
is, who upon the giving the lie, will be ready to take the life of his
Adversary: although indeed of it self, it is a very unsufferable thing, yet it
is a thing the truth of it may easily be construed; for if he that gives the
Lie do speak falsely, the dishonor redounds to himself, and shall need no
greater punishment; but if he to whom the Lie is given proves guilty of it,
indeed it were unconscionable and dishonorable to challenge him to do you
right, that has told you the truth (and he that gives the Lie, although it be
upon good grounds shows ill breeding, and no gentle carriage) but this humor
we have borrowed from the French, which they have held for a custom ever since
Francis the French King, upon a breach of Faith, sent the Lie unto the Emperor
Charles the fifth, thereby to draw him to a personal Combat, which afterward
grew to an humor through the whole Realm to make the Lie mortal, whereas
formerly none would presume to challenge a man, unless it were upon some
peremptory abuse done to their persons, or to their honors and reputations,
which by it was so far ecclipst, that it was irrecoverably staind, unless
they skrewed out the truth by this means, and before they would adventure to
challenge their Adversaries, they would search and seek out the best means to
gain the truth, and did use the fairest means they could devise, to bring
their Enemies by fair means to confess his abuse, so that the Sword was
their last refuge. Many times Authority would undertake the sifting out of the
injuries, and then they were very punctually to observe, and stand to such
Injunctions as should be given them in charge to observe or perform.

Many times Friends would seek to mediate peace, and to sift out the truth; to
this they would not be refractory, but did condescend to whatsoever might stand
with their reputations and honors.

Moreover, if their Enemies did desire to be reconciled, and would voluntarily
ask pardon, and acknowledge their fault before such Friends, as best knew the
carriage of the quarrel: then the party offended would not refuse this
satisfaction, unless it were such an injury as did touch his life.

Further, those that were injured, if they were constrained to challenge the
field of their Adversary, in regard of their Enemies peevish refractarinesse,
yet they would banish all envy, hatred and malice; not once admitting any of
these to be the subject of their strokes, and that the ground of their
challenging was rather to gain their wounded reputations, then thirsty to shed
blood.

In the next place the ancients of former ages did attribute a great deal of
honor to such persons as were injured, yet were not furious and speedy to
challenge his enemy, but would wait a convenient time to see if his enemy will
come in, and acknowledge his abuses, for it could not be accounted a dishonor
if the party offended did challenge his enemy within a year and a day; of all
the dishonours that might be done a Gentleman the lie with a blow was held the
greatest, and deserved presentest rebuke, because they esteemed a blow an
absolute undervaluing, and a high disgrace which had no circumstances of
arguing belonging unto it, for it did argue a voluntary and envious act, and
there could be no plea of mistaking in it; but in all other abuses they
conceived there might be a mistake which being argued might be acknowledged and
reconciled.

Lastly, they held that a noble enemy would bear himself so valiantly that
he would scorn to take any advantage, although his judicious forwardness
might have put his enemy to the worst.

Now I have showed you how former ages did account of this kind of duells, The
Combat is denied to a Christian in action, sufferance and right.
and how they did tolerate them as lawful, now I can do no less but like
Penelopes web, unweave what before I had done, and show you how in diverse
respects these kind of Combats are unlawful and not to be tolerated amongst
Christians.

In the first place the Duel or single Combat is denied to a Christian man, to
do it, to grant it, and to see it, by reasons both divine and humane, as well
Canonical, as Civil.

It is prohibited by divine reason according to this argument, every act
whereby God may be tempted, is prohibited to a Christian by the Commandment of
God; for it is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: That God is
tempted by the Duel or Combat, I prove it in this manner; To make trial of a
thing, which cannot be reduced to an end by natural means, but only by the
hand of heaven: such attempting is to tempt God, as it happens in these cases
of Combats, where it is plainly and evidently seen (that by natural course
and disposition) the strongest, active, and most powerful person ever
vanquisheth the weaker, and of less ability; Contrariwise that the stronger
body shall be overcome by the weaker, cannot happen but miraculously.

Bringing then two such unequal persons into the field, victory is desired for
him that has the right on his side, to the end that the truth may be made
apparent; But then God is tempted, Miracles only pertain to the power of God.
in seeking that he should perform a miracle; which must needs be so, when
the weaker man conquereth the stronger, being a thing as it were directly
against nature. I prove it further forbidden by divine reason; after this
Argument, when a Law prohibiteth a thing, it forbids also the doing of it,
and a man performs an especial inhibited thing, when he knows (by the
divine Law) that he is not to kill a man; Murder may happen by Combats.
the Combat then is flatly forbidden, because thereby murder may happen.

I prove it otherwise thus; The divine law forbids every action, that
differs from the fountain of Charity, which is the scope and end of all
virtues, and utterly expels vice; the act of Combat is far off from
Charity, leaning unto vice, because charity is nothing else, but to love God
and thy Neighbor, and he that enters the Combat to kill his Neighbor, is out
of obedience to God. The act of Combat kills charity.


It is likewise forbidden by the Canonical Law, because it ever-more follows
the divine Law, and in plain reason what the one inhibiteth, the other never
allows. Combat is also forbidden by the Law of men; and the proof is, that
every thing, which repugneth and contradicts natural equity, is likewise
prohibited by the reason of Man; because reason is grounded upon natural
equity: the reason of equity amongst men, wills that he which commits a
crime, should be punished, and the innocent cleared: not withstanding by
Combat it falls out many times quite contrary.

It is further proved by this Argument; Natural equity whereon (as we have
already said) all reason in men is grounded, Natural equity is for the
conservation of mankind and combat is for his destruction.
is entirely for the conservation and increase of them. The act then which
turns unto the diminution and destruction of men, it is quite forbidden: so
ought Combat to be, because thereby men kill one another, and men are of
greatest price in the world.

Moreover, every act which repugneth the Precepts of natural equity is
forbidden by man's reason, because it is grounded thereupon: one of the Precepts
is, that no man shall desire profit or honor, The two maine precepts of
natural equity are broken by the act of Combat.
by the prejudice of another. The second is, that no man shall wish that to
another, which he would not have done to himself. The act of Combat
contradicts them both, because he which comes so prepared into the field,
coveteth his own glory, by the shame and harm of him against whom he
fights, which is his Neighbor, and wishes that to him which he would not
have executed on himself, for he would vanquish and kill him.

It is also forbidden by civil reason, and this is the rule; Civil right
prohibiteth every act whereby Justice may be denied to men, or injury done
them; Now in the case of Combat, oftentimes it falls out quite contrary for the
innocent man dies, and the guilty offender remains alive, so that by this
means Justice cannot take her due place.

Last of all, the honor of God, and the honor of men are laid into the
Balance, or stand in competition; King James his observation upon Comb.
if Gods honor be slighted to set up the wounded reputation of a man, it
makes the sin most damnably presumptuous, and not to be tolerated amongst
civil men. Now if you please, we will take a brief survey of what King James
has delivered in his publication against Combats, and Combartants; where he
says, Page 2. Page 2.
that the Law of Nature, never warranted the presumption of a Subject, to
challenge any person to the Combat for his life, in cold ^loud, and upon
advisement, nor any other act, then a necessary defense upon a violent assault,
because a life might otherwise be lost before a complaint could be made, the
weapons working their outrageous effects and ends in an instant, and without
hope of redress. And yet the Civil Laws, which speak with the voice of
Nature among men, do not admit so much as this defense of life by the sword,
but upon necessity, and as they speak themselves, Ratione inculpatae tutelae,
which is in such distress, as destruction cannot be declined, nor avoided
otherwise: For if it fall out that the party set upon, Page 3.
be able to secure himself without sword, either by stepping aside, or by
craving aid at the same leisure, that a Gentleman or any other wronged in his
reputation, may take his remedy without rage or violence, before a lawful
Judge. The Duellers of these days must want this thin cover for an excuse of
their audacitie.

For nothing can be more certain (says he) then that Gentlemen do first
offend against the Law of Nations, Ibidem.
which is indeed the Law of Nature among men that are endued with Reason, and
created according to Gods own Image.

They spare not in like manner to transgress the written Laws of God
himself, which providently referres all kind of complaints, actions, and
suits that concerns the bodies, Page 4.
and fortunes of men; all kind of strife between Title and Title, Plea and
Plea, blood and blood; not to the humorous construction of the parties humor
that is interessed (and therefore partiality corrupts) but rather to the
strength of testimony, to the justice of Laws, and to the conscience of an
upright Judge; who bending neither to partiality nor prejudice, but looking
upon the matter with uprightness of conscience and knowledge, is more likely
then the persons whom the case so nearly and dearly concerns, to resolve
according to the straight level.

We make no question but that if honor had been reputed such an Individuum
vagum, or such a wild transcendent in former ages, as neither Civil Courts
were able to contain (which notwithstanding judge of all matters concerning
liberty and life, Page 6.
which are reckoned with reputation, Inter res inaestimabiles) nor the Court of
Honor to confine (which was errected to no other end but to preserve men's
reputations, and prevent the effusion of blood; which the other Laws of the
Land did omit as things not appertaining to their ellement) some other course
would have bin found before our days, that had been more indifferent to have
decided between the sense of honor, and the severity of Law: But we see the
Laws of the Kingdom proceed capitally against all those that are found to
kill their Enemies upon private quarrels in the field after a fair manner
(according to the phrase) that is without treachery or fraud; and that there is
no protection for such offenders either by the Court of Chivalrie, or those
strict Laws qualified or repealed by Parliament; although there have been
many members of the said house, which have been Allied near in blood to those
Gentlemen that have been guilty of these crimes.

Thus you see it evident, Page 8.
how far all Challenges in cold blood swerve from all prescription and forms
of justice that ever were; We may further add, that against the State of a
King (whose Office is to take a precise account of all wrongs) and the Justice
of a Kingdom, that make distribution without defect, they transgress
wilfully; for what can be more repugnant both to duty and humanity, than to
snatch the sword of Justice out of our hands, which these Duelists draw and
exercise in their own wills, as if it lay in their own election to obey or not
obey, as if they might keep a Posterne Gate ever open, without Watch or Ward,
to which it should be lawful for young Gentlemen, without consulting either
Prince or Judge to run headlong to their own ruin, or as if it could stand
with the tender care, which we profess of concerning the Subjects in security,
the State in strength, the Government in peace, to open the great vain, by
which the Commonwealth might bleed, not as Fevers pestilent, ad animi
diliquium, but rather as in the heart of Seneca, when hopes are desperate, ad
vit^ exitum; For this must be the issue of an unlawful act, which excludes all
manner of satisfaction for wrongs, besides that of the sword, which observes no
measure.

These Challengers, Page 9.
do likewise strongly cross the line of their own pretended level, and if
malice did not stand too much in the light of reason, they would easily
confess. For they pretending above all things to regard honor for a flourish,
yet to satisfy their own inordinate desires, they fly the certain judgment
of the Court of Honor, which is purposely erected to scourge such delinquents,
as shall dare to transgress, causing them to give sufficient satisfaction, for
the regaining of the Honor lost.

The wrongs which are grounded of quarrels, Page 4^.
are either verbal; that is, when one Gentleman accuses another of some
dishonest fact, The distinguishing of abuses from whence quarrels arise.
or gives the lie: Or Real, by which is meant blows, stripes, or hurts in all
degrees, though they differ in proportion; and besides, all scornful looks,
acts, or figures, that implie contempt; all Libels published in any sort to the
disgrace of any Gentleman, or person, whom that Gentleman is bound in credit to
defend as himself; for all these (says his Majesty) trench as deeply into
reputation, as the stabbe it self does, into a man that esteems honor;
wherefore whereinsoever reputation is agrieved though it be but in the weight
of one grain, it ought to be repaired and as much restored as has been
diminished; by which the seeds of Quarrels shall be bruised in the bud, before
they come to bear the bitter fruits that are ever gathered in storms.

Wherefore, he has commanded the Lord High-Marshall, and the Lords Lieutenants
and their Deputies in their several precincts, Page 45.
that so soon as they shall have notice of any abuses either by blows, or
speeches, whereby a quarrel may be grounded, The party offending is to be
immediately committed.
that they commit the party thus offending either to his own house or chamber,
only in respect of disobedience to his royal prohibition: Leaving him to the
Earl Marshals discretion in what kind he shall give the party agreeved
satisfaction, according to the rules and forms, which upon like occasions;
as well within our Kingdom, as in foreign States are usual, before he be set
at full liberty: For it is true, that this small instrument, the tongue in the
body of man, being kept in tune, by the wrest of awe, prevents many fearful
accidents that are apt to spring up out of neglect of discipline.

If from a foul word, upon which a quarrel is begun the answer leap at the
first bound to the lie* or a blow be given from which a Challenge is produced,
or if Choler breaks apruptly into a Challenge at first; (as many times it
happens, because the property of distempers is to confound all dealings, and to
put custom out of course, it ought to be punished both for it self, and in it
self ab origin;) the Saxons laid a fine of six shillings, as appears by
antiquity, upon every one that uncivily misgreeted his Country men. In Spain
Un hombre dislingado, a man that uses ill language, out of his liberty or
looseness, according to his rank, is either whipped in the open streets or
sent to the Galleys, and especially for this verbal injury the Lie, which
works such conceit of horror unto gentlemen well borne, The Lie, ranckt with
the highest Verbal wrongs.
that they had rather endure the rack, then the reproach; this his Majesty was
pleased to rank with the highest verbal wrongs and to be punished by the
Earl Marshall accordingly.

Wherefore his Majesty leaves the Earl Marshall and other Lords authorized by
Commission, to use their best discreet endeavors, in devising means to
satisfy the party that is wounded by the giving of the Lie; wherefore his
Majesty manifested his pleasure, that whosoever should stand convicted thereof
in the presence of the Earl Marshall; Page 50.
or of the Lord Lieutenants, or their Deputies; by proof sufficient, should
be presently committed to prison; and that he be not suffered to depart out
of durance, before he shall acknowledge both an error in his Judgment* and a
breach in duty, in vpbrayding anyman with that uncivil term, which his tender
caution has very sharply prohibited; he shall also ask forgiveness of his
fault in presence of the Lords, and renounce that interest which men claim in
these days, in righting themselves by the fury of the sword, when Justice,
either Marshall, or Civil, or both, provides with so great tenderness for
their indemnitie.

Touching the first branch of actual offenses by blows with the hand, stripes
with a rod, page 52:
bruises with a Cudgel, stabbes with a Dagger, or hurts with a Rap^er, his
purpose was out of the sense of honor, to extend his punishment, as far
above those ordinary degrees which are now in use, as the facts themselves
exceed all humanity; wherefore he leaves the proportions and degrees of
satisfaction, for such inhumane wrongs; to the caution and temper of the Earl
Marshall, or the Lords Lieutenants or their Deputies: page 53.
For we resolve (says his Majesty) in this offense by blows, as in the other
coming upon words, to punish the breach of order before, or in a higher
strain then wrongs of reputation; wherefore all offenders in this kind that
shall be convicted orderly before the Lords, either by the strength of witnesses
or by their own confessions; of striking hastily for any other cause, then
their own defense upon assault, shall instantly be committed to prison; to the
end, that during this time of breathing and respiring, they may learn, that
Princes remit not actions, of such high presumption and contempt, page 54.
without due punishment; So that if any man shall so transgress by
quarrelling, if he were not in commission of the peace before the fact
committed, it was his Majesty's pleasure he should be peremptorily disabled
from being put in, for the space of seven years next ensuing, and if he were
of the peace, upon notice given to the Lord Chancellor, from the Lord high
Marshall or the Lords Lieutenants, he is to be removed and put out instantly;
beside such parties offending shall not be quite free before they have
acknowledged their offense at the Council Table, for breaking the Kings
ordinance; he shall promise before the said Lords sollemnly never to offend
upon like occasion in the like contempt; he shall be bound to the good
behavior, page 56.
during the space of the next six Months ensuing; and if they be of his
Majesty's household, they are to absent the Court; besides his Majesty's
pleasure is, that the person which is either hurt or stricken shall (besides
these satisfactions given him) take the benefit of his action of battery at
common Law, with a meaning that such censures be reputed rather Cumulative,
then privatiue, of any lawful help that justice yields.

Further it is his Majesty's pleasure; page 57.
that the very least abuses should not pass with out due correction; not so
much as the trippe of a Foot, the thrust of an Elbow, the making with the
Mouth, or the hand an uncivil sign; and although these do neither bruise the
bone nor mayme the parts; Yet since the malice, the disgrace, and scorn in
these things do so far exceed the fact it self (expressing the base and
disgraceful reckoning, Ibidem.
which they that offer these contempts make of the person upon which they brave
them) is to be taxed and corrected by the Lords, upon like terms, and with
like severity.

The party that killes, page 67.
if he escape with life out of the Field, shall be brought by a course of
ordinary proceeding, without dispensation, or connivancie to the common Barte
for trial of the fact: And (for a greater discouragement of all men that
prefer their passions to civil duties) His royal Majesty does potest and
promise by the word of a King, that he would never by the strength of his
royal prerogative, grant to any such offender; any pardon for his life, or any
lease for life nor any other kind of grace or favor that might put such
audacious adventerours into the least hope of life.

But if it happen both parties after meeting, page 8^
upon Challenge in cold blood return alive out of the Field, (though generally
we may observe, that neither the principals themselves that went of purpose to
make good their agreements, nor the Seconds, that in a sort assisted, are
punished by an ordinary course, which slacknesse rather multiplyes offenders,
then cuts off offenders) yet it was his royal purpose without regard of issues
or events, page 86.
to punish very sharply and severely the presumption it self, in seeking
either by the sending or accepting of a Challenge, to revenge that out of
passion which Justice would examine and correct, with greater indifferency.

Whosoever therefore shall presume; (as it were in despite of Laws and
Magistrates (either to send any Challenge, or to declare a voluntary
acceptance, of the Challenge that is sent, page 87.
whereby Subjects may be drawn to trial by the Sword for their lives in the
Field, his royal pleasure was that he or they, as number hit, be first
committed to some prison used in the County for Malifactours that they may
learn at good leisure to repent with sorrow what was committed with temerity.
The punishments prescribed against reproachful quarrellours, (...)
and strikers, with provisionall regard and tender care, shall be added in like
manner Cumulative, to the censure of these Chalengers in cold blood, as the
wreckfull executions of all passions, that those preparatory means, and
outrages have kindled; They shall moreover for the space of seven years be
suspended from the Court, page 88.
without hope of forgiveness, that it may be found more easy for the Sea to
brook a dead carka^^e, then the Court a quareller.

Wherefore beside the penalties expressed in that which goes before, not with
the quill of an Ostrich which may bow; but as the Prophet speaks, Vngue
Adamanti^^, which cannot break; He does further bind his purpose, Verbo
Regio; that during the seven years suspension formerly decreed, both from the
Royal presence and his Court; He would never use nor employ any Gentleman,
etc. in Peace or War, at home or abroad, page 90.
directly or indirectly in his Royal affairs: He vowed never to bestow on
them the least fruit, or effect of his grace or favor, in Land, Lease,
Pension, or by Letters commendatory to their advantage in the least degree, nor
repute them other then as Sear fruitless branches, cut off from the body of
the Vine, being made thereby incapable both of sustinance and support, by which
the members of all bodies as well Natural as Oeconomicall and Politic both
subsist and flourish.

His Royal Majesty did further commend unto the Lords; page 93.
the binding of all men to the good behavior, that after fighting upon
Challenge, happen to return alive out of the field for six months at the
least: for as the plagues that hang upon this censure are both many, and those
very heavy; so does the quality of the contempt deserve them all; moving busy
fellows that are giddy, rash, and inconsiderate; to be well advised before
they leap. page 97.
Those that think themselves secure by agreeing to fight in Foreign parts,
where the Kings Writ runs not, neither can the Laws of the Kingdom take
hold of any Subject in that case, though the Romans, and in the Reign of the
first potent Emperors, would have thought it strange, that the life of any
Subject, taken by another Subject wrongfully, should not be lawfully accounted
for. This reason happily did move the States of Brabant, before the dutiful
admittance of Duke John to be their Lord in the right of his wife, page 98.
to bind him by oath never to spare the life of any Subject in that State, that
should kill another in the field, though the act were done in a Foreign
Government; the same reason may be, why the Lord Segrave (as appears upon
Record) attempting only to pass over into France from Dover, for to perform a
private quarrel, was condemned Iudicio Parium, by the judgment of his Peers,
as if he had preferred by this act, the Justice of Foreign Countries before
his own.

But for a redress of this, page 100.
his Majesty having conferred with the learned Judges upon this point, that
though there can be no proceeding by the Common Law against one Subject that
has slain another, by agreement upon Challenge to fight in Foreign parts:
Yet by appeal, so often as it shall please his Majesty to appoint a Constable
and Marshall of England (for the present only) both to hear and ad judge the
cause; the party thus offending may be condemned in that Court to death (as by
an Act of Parliament, made in the first year of King Henry the Fourth is
evident) and to this his Royal Majesty did protest by the word of a Religious
just King, to put this in execution; wherefore there should be no hope of
former impunity, but that such offenders thus condemned, should without
remitting or forgiveness be executed.

As for Seconds which these Combatants make choice of, (to make the best of
them) they are only stout assistants to bad ends, and their supporters being
restrained upon pain of so deep penalty, they cannot but shrink Sublato
principali, omnia cadant accessario. Between an Actor and an Abettor the
difference cannot be great, wherefore his Majesty did find by the modern use
of France, of the Archdukes Dominions, and many States in Italy, that the
carriers of Chalenges, and they that bring back answers, are both condemned
and punished in a very high degree, upon a violent presumption, that they
either blow the cole, or endeavor not to quench the fire; wherefore his Royal
Majesty lays the same proportion of punishment upon the Seconds, the
Carriers, and Intercommuners that is due to the principalls themselves.

His Majesty charge all persons of whatsoever rank or quality, Page 17*
which are present in the place where a quarrel first begins, that upon pain
of his Majesti^^ high displeasure, they first apply their best persuasions and
endeavors, to the taking of the ground of the contention away, and the
reconcilement of the parties minds if it be possible, if not, to call in with
all expedition an Officer of the peace, that may bring the matter before the
Lords in Commission before it be too far exasperated and ^nvenomed.

Further, Page 113.
his Royal Majesty's pleasure was, that whosoever published a Challenge, or
any one that did but relate any part of the quarrellous business should be
brought Ore tenus, or otherwise as the cause requires into the Star Chamber,
and there be punished at the discretion and censure of the Court for their
high contempt against his Majesty, and to be banished the Court, etc. And which
is heaviest of all, his Royal Majesty did protest for his own part, he
should never account of them but as Cowards; for it is ever held the part of a
man to show his courage, when he is by Authority put to it in action: but he
that seeks his reputation by plurality of voices amongst simple people, it is
to be accounted to proceed from the knowledge and jealousy of his own weak
imbellicke parts, as if a man could not winn^ honor, but per ^^^dicata
suffragia, in Ordinaries and Taverns.

And to conclude his Majesty's publication; Page 114.
he wills every man that should find himself grieved with any whisperings or
rumors spread abroad, or any other way abused, to resort to the Earl
Marshall, who shall right him in his reputation, if he finds he be wronged.
Thus you see what a sovereign salve it has pleased his Majesty to prepare
for the saving and repayring of Gentlemen's reputations; so that now you must
confess with me, that there is no door left open for the Sword to pass out
at, unless men would run willingly to destruction, by undergoing the penalty
of the Law here, and the eternal wrath of the great God of heaven, who has
reserved revenge to himself, and none but himself shall repay it; and let us
bless God that his Royal Majesty has Authorized an Earl Marshall of so
Noble blood, and so conscious and respective, in desciding such affairs; he
according to his own worth has a tender care to render the due rights of
honor and reputation to those that shall sue to his Nobleness, giving them a
free admittance to crave his honors warrant for the conventing any such
delinquent before him, and upon conviction, imposing due punishment upon such
refractary fellows, with his Noble Injunction to the party offending, to
restore the blemished reputation of the complaynant, before he depart his
presence, so that never any that came before his Lordship had ever cause to
complain of partiallitie, or remissness in his Honored course of Judicature.

And for mine own advise to gentlemen, having three several times tasted of
this bitter fruit which has grown by the Sword in the field, not so well then
understanding my self, as riper years and more mature considerations has
since engraven in me, I do rather wish a fair reconciliation then a foul
fray, for the reconciling of an enemy is more safe then to conquer him; my
reason is because victory only deprives him of his power, but reconciliation,
of his will, and there is less danger in a will that will not hurt, than in a
power that cannot, and again power is not so apt to tempt the will, as the
will is studious to find out means to provoke power; if the enemy be base it
is a dishonor to meddle with him, if he be worthy let his worth persuade thee
to atonement, for he that can be a worthy enemy, if once reconciled may be
thy worthy friend, for if in a just cause he dares fight against thee, in the
like cause as valiantly fight for thee.

It is policy to be reconciled to a base enemy, be it but to charm his
slandrous tongue, and use him as a friend in outward fairness, but beware him
as an enemy, apt to reassume his base quarrels, for a base foe cannot but
prove a false friend.

And further let Gentlemen know that take a delight to busy themselves in such
litigious affairs, Sicut not Martyrom pana, sic non fortem pugua, sed causa;
as it is not the punishment that makes the Martyr, so it is not fighting that
declares a valiant man, but the fighting in a good cause, when his King and
Country injoynes: And he that makes use of this dangerous Salve to skin up
his Honor, let him not use it as a delight, but as a necessity to constrayne
him; for the lawfulness is not to be questioned when a man is pressed with
injuries or violent abuses* he may by the law of nature and of all Christian
Kings fight in his defene^ to preserve his person and honor.

I have taken the greater pains in this discourse, in regard Gentlemen and
Soldiers might be fully satisfied of the unlawfulness of Duells, which is
proved by undeniable arguments: likewise to inform them if ^ase injuries be
offered them how they may gain lawful satisfaction by the aid of Authority
provided for that purpose. In the next place I shall proceed to discourse of
the particular duties of all Officers, beginning at the meanest, and so
proceed until I shall come to the office of the General of an Army.

THE OFFICE AND DVTY OF EVERY PARTICVLAR OFFICER IN AN ARMY. SECT. X.
CHAP. LXI.
The Duty and Office of a Drum to a private Company, and of the Drum-Major of
the Regiment.
BEfore we can further proceed in our intended discourse I hold it fit to
entreat of the duties and offices of all the officers belonging to an Army,
and that for two respects; first that all young Officers that never followed
the Wars, might at the first view know their places, and the duties belonging
to them; Secondly, that all Soldiers might likewise observe and take notice of
every particular Officers duty he is to perform, and the Command he is to
bear, that they may the better learn to obey them, and obs^rve such documents
as their Officers shall give them in charge; wherefore first I intend to begin
with the meanest Officer of a private Company, and then proceed to discourse of
every particular Officer of a Regiment; and likewise of the chief Officers of
the Field, with their dependan^es.

A Drumm^ is one of the (...) Officers to a Company and diverse (...) of weight
and moment he is to be employed in; for many times they are sent to Parlie
with the Enemy, and to redeem Prisoners from the Enemy; therefore he ought
to be a man of personage, faithful, secret, and trusty; He ought to speak
several Languages, especially the Drum of a Colonels Company ought to be
thus qualified, he has the command of all the Drums of the Regiment, and
upon a March he appoints every Drum his place, and time to beat, using a
due proportion to every one for their times of relief; In a Camp or Leaguer,
no Drum must offer to beat for the releeving of the Watch before the
Drumme-Major first begins; Most usually he is sent upon all employments too,
and from the Enemy; he ought to have a small Drum for lightness to carry
with him; he is also to have a paper wherein is writ the Contents of his
Message, which is to be placed upon his Hatte; When he approaches near the
Enemies Town, he is to make a stand a Musket Shot from the Ports, and to
beat a Parley, whereby they may know his intent; he ought to be of a singular
good carriage, and discreet, to observe and take notice of all passages, that
may give any intelligence to his Officers of the state of the Enemy; He must
be very wary that nothing be screwd from him, neither by ^ayre nor foul
means; wherefore he must be wary of the Enemies friendship, in bestowing
courtesies upon him especially in giving him drink, least in his cupps he
reveal any secrets: When a drum is sent out of the Enemies Camp, he must
not be suffered to approach near the Guards nor Ports until an Officer ^ee
sent unto him (who must be attended with a guard of Musquetires) and having
blind-foulded him; he is to be conducted into the Camp to the Generals
Pavillion where a guard must pass on him least he should discover the
weakness of the Camp. A drum ought daily in the day time in time of peace,
to frequent the Guards and beat to the Soldiers, that they may distinguish,
and know one kind of beat from the other (viz) a Call, a March, a Troop, a
Charge, an Allarm, a Retreit, etc. He ought to pass precisely upon the hours
appointed for the releeving of the watch, to beat their drums for the
summoning of the Soldiers together, and to do such other duties as shall be
required: he must be obedient to his Captain, and the rest of the Officers,
whenever they command him to go, or stand, or to beat any point of war,
every private Company ought to have two Drums at the least.

CHAP. LXII.
The Office of a Corporal and his Lansprezado, and how they are to demean
themselves, both upon their Guard, and in the Company.
A Corporal, being an Officer a degree above a private Soldier, ought to be a
man of stayed years, of no less Wisdom, Valor, and Experience, then a
Serjant of a private Company should be; in regard many times, he is to
officiat for him, his duty; his carriage and behavior should be, such that
all his Squadron might take good example thereby, he should be free from all
Vices, especially the be^o^ting Vice of drunkenness, by which infection a
whole guard will soon be taynted; he ought not to suffer any drunkenness or
misbehaviour upon his guard; for by this abominable vice of drunkenness, an
Enemy has had the advantage to cut off whole guards, and thereby have
surprised Towns and Forts, as by diverse examples may be seen; as that of
Breda, when the Turffe-boate lay before the Town with diverse Soldiers immured
in it, the Enemy had no way to gain the wall but by the Skipper, who had
recourse to the next guard and made them drunk: So that their duties were
neglected; some being a drinking and most a sleep, the Enemy stole upon them
at unawarres and slew them, and having gained the watchword from the Corporal,
they soon surprised the rest of the guards, and by a sign given to the
Troops that lay in ambush without, they entered the Forts and surprised the
Garrison before there was any alarm given.

Wherefore he ought to pass precisely upon his watch and guards; and to be
very vigilant and careful in setting out his Senturies and duly releeving
them, dividing the time of their standing, by the number of Soldiers in his
guard, so that they may bring evenly the seasons of their watch about, one
Soldier not standing longer then another; which he may do by the burning of a
match, so many thumbes breadths allowed to each; he is duly to frequent and
visit the Senturies fearing least they should miscarry or be negligent, or
sleeping: it is at his choice to command any one of his guard to stand at
Sentury, first or last.

He may make choice of one of the sufficientest Soldiers of his guard to be
his Lansprezado, who shall negotiate his duty and office upon all occasions;
and all the Soldiers upon the guard are to obey him; the Corporal is bound
once a day to teach his Squadron their postures, in the presence of his
superior Officers; he is to observe the same order and dutiful obedience that
the rest should do; his Command is no further than upon the Guard, where he
bears his Captains authority; upon all Alarmes, he is to draw out his
soldiers, and to order them so, that the best and safest resistance may
speedily be made, until more aid shall come to succor them; He is to have
continual fire upon his Guard, to refresh his soldiers in Winter, and (...)
to light their matches thereby; He is to be allowed certain Candle, that every
man may see to arm themselves; he is to examine every Soldiers Bandiliers,
what powder is in them, and what Match and Bullets they have; and in time or
War, every (...) is to be loaded with powder and Bullet, and every man his
match continually light^ After the Watch is set, and he has the Watchword
from the Sergeant; neither himself, nor any soldier shall depart the Guard,
upon pain of death, until the Watch be releeved by sound of Drum; their
duty is to keep their Guard from Sunne-setting (...) the Evening following,
and then they are to be releeved by their Sergeant with another Squadron, at
which time they are to stand ready before their Guard in complete Arms, until
that Squadron which releeved them, have set out his Sentinels.

Every Sentinel that is placed before the Corpse du Guard, is to stay and
change his weapon against any man that shall come upon the Wall, not suffering
him to pass, until he calls out his Corporal to take the Word of him, which
Word is very secretly to be given and taken; he is to give the Word to the
Governor, Major, or Captain of the Watch, but to none else; The Corporal is
to command two or three Soldiers to guard him; he is to have his sword ready
drawn, and to place the point toward the breast of him that gives the Word,
for fear of treachery, and if he faulters in the Word, and cannot deliver it
right, he is to take him into his Guard, and there keep him until the
morning, and then send him with a guard before the Governor; also in times and
places of danger, he is to set out double Senturies, a Pike and a Musket, so
that if the Enemy approaches, he may discharge his Musket, to put the Guards
in a readiness to make their resistance; The Corporal is to be a Musquetier,
and is to have the chiefest place in his Squadron, according to his eldership.

CHAP. LXIII.
The Office of a Sergeant to a private Company, and his duty both in Garrison
and in the Field, declared.
A Serjant of a private Company ought to be a man of good experience; and
sufficiently instructed in all Marshall exercises, and if it were possible he
should not be inferour in knowledge and skill to his superior Officers; he
ought to have a quick spirit, and active body, able both suddenly to
conceive, and painfully to execute, his superior Officers, orders, and
commands, it imports much that he be a skillful valiant Soldier; in regard
he is put upon weighty and dangerous services; he ought to be very ready and
skillfull, in ordering and rancking the Company, and in knowledge of exercising
the same, he ought to take all occasions in time of peace, to call forth such
squadrons as have the guard, and duly to exercise them there, also to show
every particular Soldier their several postures, and so fit them in
readiness for the chief Officers to exercise in gross; he ought to be
learned both in writing and in Arethmaticke, he is to have always a
Squadran-rowle about him, wherein he should distinguish every man by the arms
he bears; his duty is when the drum beats for the watch setting, to repare
with his Holberd to his Colors, where he ought to call over particularly every
Soldier of that Squadron, and view the fixenesse of their arms, and what
match, Bullets, and powder every man has, he is to rank the Squadron, and if
no superior Officer be there, he is to troop away with them to the guard
with his Holbert advan'd.

He is to attend the coming of the Major of a Garrison, or the Serjant Major
of his regiment, What orders the Governor gives him in charge, ^he is to let
his Captain understand of it.
(if they be intrencht in the field) for the watchword; and to receive such
orders from him, as he has received from the Serjant Major general of the
Army; or from the Governor of a Garrison, he is to give the word to his
Captain first if he be in place, and then to each superior Officer, and
lastly to the Corporal; The eldest Serjant in a March leads up the division
of Musqueti^es in the rear, (...) of training they are to look that every man
keeps his Ranks and files duly, help order the company all the time of
exercise; in time of War he is employed upon parties which are sent out to
discover, or to fetch in Booty and Farrage; likewise many times to the
guarding of passages; also in laying out of Perdues and visiting them: Also in
ordering of Troops that are drawn out to charge some part of the Enemy, where
he is to bring up the Musketeers to his superior Officer in good order to
skirmish, and to give fire upon the Enemy, and so orderly to lead them off
again, seeing them rank themselves fairly, and causing them to make ready
their pieces to come up to give fire again; also in retreite, he ought to
assist the Soldiers discreetly in keeping their orders, lest confusion betides
them; Also in time of fight to see the Soldiers Bandaliers filled ready that
no stay be made, and to see the Powder transported after them securely; he is
also (when his Captain, is Captain of the Watch,) to call out the Gentlemen
of the Round to do their duties, and to give them the Word, he ought to
assign every Soldier his due and proper place to March in, that no contention
may arise; he is to place the chief Gentlemen in the Front on the right hand
file; the next in degree is to lead the left hand file, so placing every man
according to his degree; he ought to see that every Corporal be a
Musquetiere; he is to fetch the powder, shot, and match from the Magezine, and
distribute it to each Corporal, and so to each Soldier of their Squadron: He
is at his Captains command to carry all delinquents to Prison, and see Irons
put upon them; If scarsity of Victuals should be in the Camp, he is to procure
it from the Ammunutioner of the Army, lest the Company fall in want, which
being procured, he is to distribute it to the Corporalls, and they to their
Squadrons; He is also to instruct the Drums the true tone of beating, viz. a
Call, a March, a Troop, a Charge, an Alarm, a Retreite, etc. He ought to be
resolute and forward in times of skirmishing, showing worthy examples to the
Soldiers, that they might imitate him; He ought by his serviceablenesse, and
care to gain the love of the whole Company, it must be far from him to be
addicted to the hellish vice of drinking, drabbing, or dicing, using his best
endeavors to shame such as should in that kind transgress; Also he is not to
permit any Soldier that is in drink to perform any duty of charge for that
time, for fear of sleeping or quarrelling, whereby much inconveniences may
ensue, but rather seek to punish him severely, that all may take example by
him to beware of the like oversight; He is every night at Drum-beating to draw
Billets for his Guard, and accordingly to lead his Squadron to it; and thus
behaving himself wisely and valiantly, If the Guard be at a Port then the
Serjant is to guard with his Holbert all the day with the Squadron, and many
times all night in times of danger.
he shall gain honor and reputation, which will be steps to advance him to
higher fortunes: And to define the office of Serjant truly, he is to be the
eye, ear, mouth, hand, and feet of his superior Officers; I could wish our
Serjants of Bands here in England were thus qualified for their Captains
sakes; but I fear the blind will lead the blind, and so fall both into the
ditch; it were happy if they would endeavor to learn to understand their
office, against his Majesty should have occasion to use them.

CHAP. LXIIII.
The office of an Ensign to a private Company, and his duty both in Garrison
and in Field declared.
AN Ensign being the foundation of the Company, ought to be endued with
Valor and Wisdom, and to equal his superior Officers in skill if it were
possible; The honor and reputation both of Captain and Soldiers, depends
upon the welfare of the Colors, and contrarily there can be no greater
dishonor then to lose them; Ensign Epps at the Battle of Flanders, etc.
I have read in History of Ensigns that rather then they would undergo the
dishonor of losing their Colors, being so dangerously charged by the Enemy,
that either they must yield them up, or be slain, have chosen rather to wrappe
them about their bodies, and have leapt into the merciless waters, where they
have perished with their Colors most honorably to their immortal ^ames: after
any Company is (...), if the Ensign has behaved himself honorably, the
Captain ought to bestow the Colors on him as a favor; in the absence of his
superior Officers, he is punctually to supply their places, and to pass upon
those duties which they should, whether it be to be Captain of the Watch, or
to be commanded our with some Troops for the guarding of some passage to
prevent the Enemies approches; He is to exercise his Company in all their
postures; he ought to be gallantly apparelled* with a fair Sword and
Brigandine; if he be commanded to pass upon any Service with part of the
Company, he is not to carry his Colors; also, if the (...) Company are to
guard some dangerous Out-workes, as a half Moon, or a Redou^, the Company is
to troop thither, and he is to leave his Colors in the quarters with a
sufficient guard over them, and he is to take for his weapon a good Pike.

Also, every Soldiers honor is highly engaged to defend and preserve their
Ensign, and if occasion of necessity should happen, they must not spare to
run upon the Pikes to releeve him, as diverse valiant Soldiers formerly have
done: Histories have eternized to their immortal fame the honorable exploits
of Captain Morerula and his two Brothers, one of them being his Ensign at the
siege of the City of Africa in Barbary, in Charles the fifts time, when John
de Vega Viceroy of Sicilia scaled the Walls of it; this Ensign being sore
wounded and overthrown his Brother being Sergeant seconded him, and recovered
the Colors, who advancing forwards like a valiant Soldier was slain; the
Captain Brother to them both, took up the Colors, and performed the Ensigns
office, who in the scaling of the Wall, was sore hurt and died thereof; thus
three valiant brethren died honorably in defending their Colors: if an
Ensign should lose all his Colors from the staff and hose, it is no
dishonor; When an Army is drawn into Batalia, the Ensign ought to stand out
before the front of it some five paces, and if the General, or some other
chief Officer of the Field pass by, he is gently to veil his Colors holding
the butte end of his staff at his girdlested: Also a maxim that no Soldier
moves Hat or Helmet to the greatest Commander that is, but only to bow his body
to him; Likewise in time of Battle the Ensign is to withdraw himself for his
safety into the middle-most Rank of the Pikes. Likewise in a March the Ensign
is to march before the first division of Pikes with his flying Colors.

If a King or great Prince passes by, the Ensign is to veil his Colors
close to the ground with his knee bending, in token of Alegiance and
submission; every Ensign of private Companies ought to observe how the Ensign
of the Right hand of the Battle orders his Colors, after the same manner he
is to order his; every Soldier upon an Alarm is speedily to repair to his
Colors; likewise not to forsake them until they be lodged; when any Company
shall march either into Camp^* Guard, Fortress, or Castle, no Soldier ought
to disarme himself, until they see first the Colors placed, and the Ensign
disarmed; Likewise, no sooner shall a Soldier see the Ensign take up his
Colors, but they should arm and rank themselves immediately.

No Ensign ought to disarme himself upon any Guard, Camp, or Field, until
he sees that with safety he may do it; Likewise an Ensign should show
himself forwardest with his Colors in assaulting a Fort, or entering a Breach
to encourage the Soldiers manfully to fall on to defend, and make way for
them; he ought to behave himself so, that he may gain the love of all the
Soldiers, whereby his own person shall be in the more safety, when he shall
attempt any perrillous exploits, for love will command a Soldier to fight,
when all things in the world else (...) him forwards, and let him know that the
virtue of the Ensign (...) the virtue and valor of the Captain, and his
whole band; I could wish (...) Captains would be pleased to be more
circumspect in their election of (...), and not to put undeserving fellows, of
base birth and quality into place of (...), which deserves Gentlemen of
quality to officiate, the Office of (...) place of repute and honor, does not
s^te with every Yeoman, Tailor, or Fiddler, as I have known to one Company in
Essex, all these o^ the like Mechanic fellows have had the honor to bear
the Colors before a generous Captain of Noble birth, whose name I forbear to
relate, but let it be an (...) to all generous Captains to make choice of
Officers that are well bred and deserving, otherwise they do but disgrace
themselves, and abuse his Majesty's service, and the reputation of our Country.

CHAP. LXV.
The Office of a Lieu^tenant to a private Company, and his duty both in
Garrison and in Field declared.
A Lieuetenant is an Office of high credit and reputation, and he ought in all
respects to be well indoctrinated and qualified in the Arts Millitary, and
ought not to be inferior in knowledge to any Officer of higher authority; for
an unskilful Captain may better demean himself with an experienst
Lieuetenant, then an unskilful Lieuetenant can ^adge with a skillful Captain;
because all business belonging to a Company, is for the most part ordered by
the Lieuetenant, the Captain having other employments of great importance;
he is to see the company fitted in all respects for service, he is the right
hand to his Captain in ayding and assisting him as well in the brunt of
Battle, as in Peace; he is to see to the fitting and furnishing of all things
necessary belonging to the Company; he is to keep a perfect roll of all the
Soldiers in the Company, and to observe that every Squadron be complete, he
is to view the sufficiency and ^^^enesse of the Arms, and to give order for
the repayring of such as shall be found defective: he is to order and rank
the Company fit for his Captain to March with; he is to divide his Company
into four divisions, making two divisions of the Pikes, and two of the
Musquetieres; he is to rank the first division of Muskets in the Front, and
the second division of Muskets in the Rear of the Pikes; he is to March in
the Rear of the Company into the Field, and in Marching out of the Field, the
Captain is to March in the Rear and the Lieuetenant in the Front; he is
carefully to pass upon his duty to see the squadrons drawn to the Guards for
to Watch; he is to be very careful and diligent in exercising his Company,
either by squadrons upon the Guards, or the whole Company in the Field,
assuming fit and convenient times; he is to lead on the left Wing of shot in
time of service; in time of exercising he is to help order the Company so
that his Captain may have the more ease and freedom; he ought to be silent,
and to cause silence in the Company during the time of his Captains exercise;
he ought to be in the Rear of the Company to instruct the Soldiers how to
act and observe the Captains commands, he ought to call over the Company, and
take a particular survey of every defect; he ought to rule over the Company,
and take a particular survey of every Soldier in his Captains absence, for
then he is in absolute authority, and the Soldiers are bound to obey him as
their chief in all respects; he ought not to refuse to be put upon any
service by his Captain; or Colonel, or any chief Officer of the Field; also
he is not to be sent upon any convoy, or to guard any passage without a
sufficient Troop of Soldiers, fifty or sixty at least, if less, then the
Ensign is of sufficiency to command them: he is to view his Captain thrice a
day, Morn, Noone, and Night, but especially in the time of War to see what
he has to command him; he is to take notice of what discords, quarrels and
debates arise amongst the Soldiers of his Band, he is to pacify them if it
may be, otherwise to commit them; he is to judge and determine such disputes
with gravity and good speeches, and where the fault is, to make him acknowledge
it and crave pardon of the party he has abused; he is duly to see the Watch
set, and to follow them to the Guard and see the Sentinells set out, and give
them their charge what they are to do: If he be in the Field, he is to visit
the Sentry Perdues very often, he is to command the Soldiers in a kind of
perswasory way to obey their Corporalls, and Serjants; wherefore he ought to
give good language, in a discreet and wise manner to move and persuade them,
with (...) reasons to the observation and obedience of Millitary discipline,
(...) his Captain of many ^oyles; he is to be careful that every Soldier
have a sufficient lodging in Garrison and in the Field a Hut: he is also to
take due care of the sick and maimed, that they perish not for want of means
or looking unto; he is also to take care that the Sutlers do not oppress and
rack the poor Soldiers in their victuals and drink; he is to see the Company
provided with all kind of Ammunition, with Axes, Mattockes, Spades, and the
like to build their Hutts withal; these instruments are to have the mark of
the Gallowse set on them, in token of death to them that steal them; He is in
his Captains absence to sit in the Christrade or Marshalls Court, to define of
the punishments which are to be inflicted upon Delinquents and Malefactorus,
their punishment going by most voices; he is to set a Guard at his Captains
Tent, and likewise at the Colors, where he ought to give order for a fitting
place to hang up loose Arms; His Hutt ought to be in the head of the quarter
upon the right hand, and the Ensigns on the left, and the Serjants at the
Rear of the quarter; he is to be always in a readiness to answer an
Allarum, and with all speed draw his men if they be in Garrison, to that Port
or Guard his squadron has the Watch at; if in the Camp, then to the
Brest-worke before their quarters, where he is to place betwixt each Musket a
Pike for their better defense: In Garrison he is to be Captain of the Watch
in his Captains stead, only for the ease of his Captain, where he must be
very circumspect upon his Guard; he is to have his Ensign and his Serjants to
attend him, he is to go the first round with a Serjant and two Gentlemen at
the least to attend him, where he is to take the Word of every Corporal, and
to see that the Sentinells be duly pla'ct out, and to give them charge to be
very circumspect in their Watches, that upon the sight of the Enemy, or the
seeing of their Matches sparkle, or hearing their Armor clatter; they
presently inform the Corporalls, so that an Allarum may be given to the
Town, but he that shall give a false Alarm is to be imprisoned; The
Lieuetenant is to go the Patroule with a sufficient Guard about all the Streets
within the night to prevent treason in the Town, or to discover fire or ill
orders as quarrelling, etc. He is to March in the morning with the Major of
the Garrison at the Drum beating to the opening of the Ports; he is to be
guarded with all the Gentlemen of the round; In Summer time at Watch set, he is
to draw his men in Parrado in the Market place, with all the rest of the
Companies in the Town, their Companies being complete: If in the Field and to
go upon service, he ought to see prayers read in the head of the Troops
every night, and every Sabbath all those Soldiers that have not the Guard, he
is to compel them to go to their Colonells Tent to hear Prayers and
preaching; he is to be religious, valiant, and wise, his Arms is only a
Gorget and a Pattisen.

CHAP. LXVI.
The Office of a Captain of a private Company, and his duty both in Garrison
and in the Field briefly declared.
THe Office of a Captain being so honorable, and a place of such great
consequence that it ought not slightly to be considered of; wherefore they
ought to be men of excellent quallity and of undaunted valiant resolution; he
should not be inferior in knowledge and skill, in all the circumstances and
actions belonging to War, in as profound a manner as the chiefest Officer of
the Field, for he has a charge of great importance committed unto him, he
being many times called to execute the Office of Serjant Major, or Lieuetenant
Collonell; besides he is exposed to all manner of danger in the Wars, for no
Captain but must lead on his men in the face of the Enemy, and charge them in
the teeth, which if he be not skillful as well to lead them off as draw them
on, he may be the occasion of spilling of much blood; he ought not to be a
man chosen altogether for Birth, Means, Personage, favor or affection; but
for his wisdom, civility, valor, and experience; the unexpertnesse of a
Captain has been the ruin of Armies, and destruction of Commonwealths; In
the time of peace every brave fellow desires to be honored with the name and
charge of a Captain; but when War approaches and the Enemy is at hand, they
quake their swords out of their scabberds, and had rather make use in fight of
their Wings, then their tallents: A Captain ought to be well seen and read in
all the Liberal Sciences, to be acquainted with History, and to have what
speculative knowledge that may be to join with their practice, all kind of
Stratagems should be similiar with him, and nothing should be wanting that
might make him an accomplished Soldier: A Captain ought to have regard to the
due exercising of his Soldiers, fitting them in all points for service; he
ought to see his Soldiers furnished with all things needful; as Arms,
Munition, and their Weekly pay duly at the appointed times; he is to be
very conscionable in delivering them their off-reckonings and apparel; he is
to pass very strictly (if it be in time of War) upon his Watch; being
Captain of the Watch, he is to command the Gentlemen of the Rounds to be set
out, and to have the Word given them. If he be in the Field, he should lead
out the Perdues and see them visited in due season; then afterward his
Lieuetenant, and other inferior Officers are to do the like: If he be in
Garrison, in time of danger, he is precisely to go the first Round himself,
being aided with his Serjants and diverse Gentlemen, where he must view the
strength and sufficiency of every Guard, and how every Officer does dispose of
his Soldiers; he is to take the Word of every Officer in his Round at every
Corps-du-guard* If he be In^ampt in the Field, then he is to go the Patroule
through his own Regiment, and cause all Sutlers to exstinguish their Candles,
and to suffer no drinking after the warning Piece is discharged: If his Company
be 200 strong, he is to have four Corporalls, and to divide his Company into
four even parts (viz.) Fifty Soldiers in a Corporal-ship: In the time of
Peace and being in Garrison, one Squadron only watches, beginning with the
eldest Corporal-ship the first night, and so successively one Corporal-ship
relieving the other: In time of War, half or whole Companies, specially
being in the Field, no Guard shall be relieved but once in 24 hours; he is
to make choice of the chief and ablest Soldiers being men of quality to be
Gentlemen of his Company, and they are to Guard with the Captain of the Watch
by turns, and to walk the Round about all the Walls and Bulworkes; they are to
give the Word to the Corporalls at every Guard; they are to discover the Enemy,
and to see the Sentinells do their duty; which if they cannot or mistake it,
the Guard is to charge them with their weapons and apprehend them as Enemies;
The Captain is to lay out these Gentlemen Perdue upon convenient passages and
apt places, to discover if the Enemy should Sally out, according as the place
is in distance from the Enemies Trenches, so must the number of Perdues be
laid, one a pretty distance behind the other, so that if occasion be they may
retreat back one to the other, and so give notice to the Camp that they may
prepare for an Assault: those are to be relieved every hour or half hour;
also the Captain is to instruct his Soldiers how to make an Assault against
the Enemy, and also how to defend an Assault: He must be a good Enginiere, to
know how to raise all kind of Works and Trenches, and how to place his men
upon the Flanks to scowre the Bulworkes by the line of Level; upon a
Brestworke in the Camp he is to place betwixt every two Muskets, a Pike, the
Musketeers are to give fire and fall off, and another imediately to present in
his place, the Pikes are to stand firm: the Captain is to have his Armor of
proof, and a fair Pike for his defensive and offensive Arms: He is to have
two great Bougets made of dry Neats-leather, which will hold a hundred weight
of Powder a piece to furnish his Musketeers withal: He is to see the
Bandyliers filled with Powder, with sufficient Match, and Bullets; he must be
ever in a readiness to answer an Allarum, and the first that shall charge the
Enemy: If the Enemy makes his approaches against the Camp, after the Captain
has drawn his men up to the Parrapet to make resistance, and being all ready
to give fire, he is to command that no man gives fire until he gives order,
and so suffer the Enemy to come up as close as may be, and then give him a
brave volly of Shot altogether in his teeth, If it be in the dark, or night
season.
one Musquetire relieving the other, the Pikes charging manfully and
steadfastly; at all convenient times he is to drill his soldiers very
accurately, showing them all the postures of the Pike and Musket, then how to
march, countermarch, to double their Files, and Ranks, the middle men to
double to the Front, to advance forwards, and to retreat backwards at the sound
of the Drum, to wheel about his Musketeers, to make ready, present, and
give fire, to give fire in the Front, in the Rear, and upon either Flank, to
fall off by Files and give fire, as we shall hereafter more largely discourse
of. A Captain ought to march into the Field in the Front of his Company, and
his Lieutenant in the Rear; but marching out of the Field, the Captains place
is to bring up the Rear, and the Lieutenant to lead the Company; the Ensign
is to march before the first Division of Pikes, the eldest Sergeant is to bring
up the next Division of Pikes, and another Sergeant the last Division of
Musketeers.

The Captain ought not to do any real act in the Wars, without Commission
from higher Authority, he is to lead up the right Wing of his Musketeers to
charge the Enemy, and his Lieutenant the left: when a Captain makes choice of
a Lieutenant or Ensign, he is to draw his Company into Arms, and one of the
Gentlem^n is to carry the Pattisen or Colors, and being marched into the Field,
the Captain is to deliver the Pattisen or Colors (in the head of the Troop)
to the Officer he has made choice of, commanding the Soldiers to take notice
of him, and to obey him as their Officer; he is to make choice of diligent
Sergeants, and vigilant Corporals, a trusty Clerk, and good Drums; he ought
to have one Wagon at the least, to carry his Baggage, and to conduct sick
soldiers; he is to be as little pestered with luggage of his own, or his
soldiers, as possibly may be* lest it should hinder their march, and also upon
any service, be rather forward to fight for goods, than have their minds
homewards, fearing to lose their own; he ought not to be covetous nor
niggardly, but forward to gratify all good services with some gifts and
courtesy, whereby he shall indeere his Soldiers to be prodigal of their
lives to do him service: he must be familiar, and eloquent in persuading and
diswading his Soldiers, and to stir up their valors to undergo pain and
peril; if a Souldior transgress, Note, the Captain is not to release any
prisoner that is committed by any of higher authority, without their consent.
he ought not to beat him, but to send him to the Provost-Marshall to have
Irons laid on him, by beating of a Soldier, a world of hatred will be stirred
up, and happily private revenge; he ought to be very careful to keep his
Soldiers in action, whereby idle expense of time (as drinking and playing) may
be prevented which usually ends in quarrelling and bloodshed: He is to have
Lanthornes and Torches, such as will burn in any Storm and Tempest, for they
may stand him many times in great stead: he is to have his Tent in the head of
all his Troop, and to be conversant with them, showing them ensamples of
hardship; he ought always to have his Colors and his Drum in the Field when
he exercises his Company, as well to give the more reputation unto the action,
as also that the use of them may be well known.

Lastly, Quem (...) oderunt quenquisque odit perisse experit,
a Captain ought to carry himself in such a way, that his soldiers may both
fear and love him, too much familiarity breeds contempt, and too stern a
carriage begets hatred; and so let him not overvalue his life, but expose it
to the fortune of the War, using his best skill and endeavors to annoy his
Enemies, and to be diligent and forward in executing such commands as Authority
injoynes him, and so to persist in a resolution to fear nothing but infamy.

And I will conclude, with an Exhortation to all Noble Captains, desiring them
for their credits sake, and for the honor of our gracious King, and welfare of
our Kingdom, to be more diligent in the discipling of their soldiers, and not
to chop and change so many new men into their Companies that between muster,
and muster the third part of the company are new untutored fellows, that
knows not their right hand from their left, so that it is a labor in vain to
instruct them; and they are the means of putting all those that have some
knowledge out of square, by their awkward doings, besides all base beggarly
fellows are admitted into the muster Roll, when as the best and chiefest
yeomen ought to do their King and country service in their own persons. Then
lastly that every Captain would command his Officers to instruct the pikes and
muskets whilst the rest are a calling over, and then either himself or his
Lieutenant to exercise them in gross all their postures; and cause them to
give fire in way of skirmish; and not to go into the Town until all the
exercise be finished.

CHAP. LXVII.
The Office of a Serjeant-Major of a Regiment, and his duty both in Garrison
and in the Field, briefly declared.
A Serjeant-Major, is the third principal Officer in a Regiment; and in regard
he is an Officer of the Field, he ought to participate of all the perfections
that Officers of higher Authority should have; His Place and Office does
somewhat correspond with the Major-Generals; only his duty is tending to
Officiate between the Colonel, and the Officers of the Regiment; he is to be
learned in all the Liberal Sciences, he ought to have both Speculative and
Practicke knowledge in all things belonging to his profession; he must be very
civil, wise, and discreet, in his carriage and actions, in regard he is to
manage a world of affairs of high consequence, which may serve to the
conserving or ruining of the Army; he is duly to attend his Colonels pleasure;
and Morning, ^oone, and Night, he is to wait upon the Major General, and to
receive such orders, as are by the General of the Army delivered unto him; he
is speedily to certify his Colonel what the orders are, and what the Generals
pleasure is, and also, with all celerity, to execute such things as his
Colonel shall give him in charge: He is not only to be a good Scholar, and
witty, but he must be quick in apprehension, and furnished with an able memory;
he must have a Paper-book, with Pen and Incke, to set down all Orders and
Commands that he, may not err nor vary one title from what was delivered him
in charge; at Drumsbeat, he is to repair to the Generals Tent, and take the
Word of the Major General, and Orders for that Nights proceedings, then he is
to repair to his Colonels Tent, where he is to deliver him the Word, and to
his Lieutenant Colonel, with such orders as he has received.

The Sergeants of every Company of his Regiment; Many times the Captains
themselves are sent for to take the Word themselves, and the Orders, if they be
of importance.
are to repair to him to take the Word from him, with such Orders as he shall
give them, and they are speedily to acquaint their Captain, and other Officers
with it, all the inferior Sergeants are to stand round about him, and he is to
deliver the Word very privately in the ear of that Sergeant which stands at
his right hand, and he is secretly to whisper it in the ear of the next, and
so from one to another round, and the last man is to give it to the
Serjant-Major again, if the last man gives it to him wrong, then he must give
it over again. The Serjeant-Major is to draw the Bille^s from the Major
General, and the inferior Officers to tak^ them from him.
He is to have them draw Billets for their Guards, in regard much disputes may
arise, because many Guards are more subject to the danger of the Enemy, than
some others are, and also to prevent treason, so that no Officer knows his
Guard beforehand; he is also to provide Powder, Match, and Bullets, and
distribute it amongst the Officers of his Regiment; he ought to have able
Officers to his own Company because he cannot tend unto them his employments
are so great; he ought to have a swift Nagge to carry him about the Quarters,
and to visit his Guards, for his business lies very confusedly in the Army; he
is likewise to view all outward Gvards, both in the day time and in the night,
where his Regiment has command, every Captain is to give him the Word, and
from one Guard to another he is to be guarded with certain Musketeers; He is
to instruct and show such of his Officers, as are to pass upon Watch, where to
place their Sentinels and Perdues, he is likewise to show every Officer,
whether to draw his Company, to join with the rest in Battalia, if the Enemy
should give an Alarm. He is to exercise all the Companies of his Regiment at
convenient times.

CHAP. LXVIII.
The Office of a Lieutenant-Colonell of a Regiment, and his duty both in
Garrison and in Field, briefly declared.
A Lieutenant Colonel to a Regiment is a place of high consequence and great
dignity, being the second person in the Regiment, he is not to be deficient
in all kinds of Literature, but to be as able both in valor and experience
as the Colonel, in regard in the Colonels absence, he has the sole ordering
of the Regiment, and upon all occasions as his Colonel shall command, he is
to be ready and dutiful to perform: there is much toil and pains belonging
to his office, in regard he frees his Colonels execution^^ (...) his duties;
he ought in time, and causes of present peril to give his best advise to his
Colonel, and to give him notice of every particular passage in the Regiment;
he is not of his own authority to act any thing without his Colonels command;
All the Captains and Officers of the Regiment ought to respect and obey his
commands; He is to see the Regiment well ordered, the Watches set, and the
guards duly releeved; in time of Battle he is many times commanded to draw up
divisions to charge the Enemy: In besieges he relieves his Colonel, taking
his command by turns, it is his charge to see to the Regiment that all things
are orderly performed, and that all necessaries be provided both for food and
Ammunition; he is to see every Captain demean themselves fair to their
Companies, that their pay be duly distributed amongst the Soldiers; he is to
see their Arms fixed and fitting for service: Every Captain is to have two
Powder bo^gets with Powder, Bullets, and Match; he is to command the Captains
to draw out their Companies into the field, and to see them exercise them; he
is to exercise every Company in the Regiment himself at his pleasure; he is
to observe how every Captain clothes his Soldiers, and to have his ear open
to the complaints of poor distressed Soldiers, and see them righted; he is
to take notice of all quarrels and disputes amongst the Officers, and endeavor
to reconcile them, otherwise to lay his command on, them, and to confine them
to their lodgings until his Colonel understands of it; he is to release no
delinquent from Prison, that is laid in by the consent of his Colonel; he is
to sit in the Marshalls Court in the absence of his Colonel; he is to see the
Serjant Major order the Regiment for the march, and he is to assist him in
ordering and drawing up the divisions into Battalia; And to conclude, he ought
to be discreet, wise, valiant, and religious, so that he should be a pattern
to all the Officers of his Regiment to steer their courses by.

CHAP. LXIX.
The office and duty of a Colonel over a Regiment, and his Command both in
Garrison, and in the Field.
THe office of a Colonel is very honorable, and a place of great consequence
in the Army, wherefore he ought to be a grave experienced Soldier,
religious, wise, temperate, and valiant; his Command is not of so high an
extent as the Serjant Major Generals is; for his command extends no further
then ten or twelve Companies, which he is to see well ordered, and strictly
governed; he that has his Commission first, is to be accounted the eldest,
and is to take place, both in the quarters, and in the March, and so every one
successively according to the date of their Commission; He has under his
command two special Officers, his Lieutenant-Colonell, and Serjant-Major; His
office is in time of War to see his Regiment complete, and to order his
Divisions, and draw them into form of Battle; His place in the Battle is
various, according as he shall be commanded by the General, but most usual,
he takes his place before the right Wing of his own Regiment, ordering his
Officers as he shall have directions from his Superiors in authority; He is
to be forward in showing good examples to his Officers, that his worth and
valor may not be blemished; his eye is to be duly upon his own Officers and
Soldiers, to rebuke them that are negligent, and cowardly, and to animate
those that are forward; he ought to have all the Colors of his Regiment to be
alike both in color and in fashion to avoid confusion, so that the Soldiers
may discern their own Regiment from the other Troops; Likewise, every
particular Captain of his Regiment may have some small distinction in their
Colors, as their Arms, or some Emblem, or the like, so that one Company may
be discerned from another; he ought in the time of skirmishing in Battle, to
pry and take serious notice of the Enemies Battallias, how they are ordered,
and what advantages are to be gained, which suddenly he is to encounter and
atchieve* he must be as cautelous and circumspect in taking notice how the
Enemy plays his game, as himself is to be wary and cunning in (...) and
managing his own; he is not to be put upon any desperate service, unless
(...) ^ath the command of five hundred, or a thousand Soldiers; he ought to
be very expert in raising of Fortifications, and in all kind of stratagems, in
as ample manner as the General, because many times he has the sole command in
beleaguered Towns, and in certain quarters in the Trenches against a Fort
beleaguered; Also many times he is to command diverse Troops as General in
some kind of services; he is to have a well-governed and Religious Preacher to
his Regiment, so that by his life and doctrine the Soldiers may be drawn to
goodness; He is to cause so many of his Regiment as are to releeve the Watch,
morning and evening to be drawn in parado before the head of the Quarters,
where Divine duties are to be performed by the Preacher amongst them: Every
Sabbath day he is to have a Sermon in his Tent forenoone and afternoon, and
every Officer of his Regiment is to compel his Soldiers that are freed from
the guard to repair thither; and that no Suttler shall draw any Beer in the
time of divine Service and Sermon: He is to have a special care to see such
duties performed by his Officers as are given them in charge: there is no
impunity or remissness to be used in the Wars, to any one that shall neglect
or slight any duty b^ command: He is to see that all guards, passages, and
Fortifications, wherein any of his Regiment are to guard or maintain, that it
be sufficiently guarded with Soldiers; He seldom watches himself in person
in the Camp, only in beleagured Towns he passes upon his duty; he is to
cause his own Drum to beat to prepare for the relief of the Watch morning
and evening; Likewise, all the Drums of the Regiment are at the same time to
beat; He is to appoint the Captain of the Watch in his Regiment; the eldest
Captain first begins, and successively one after another according to their
antiquity; he has only a Lieutenant and Ensign, his Lieutenant is titularly
called Captain; he is to have a sufficient quartermaster to his Regiment;
he is also to have an under-Marshall, whose office is to lay Irons upon such
delinquents as shall be committed to his charge, he is likewise to look to
all the Suttlers, that no abuse be in their excessive prices, or ill measures;
There are able and sufficient Sulters to be provided for his Regiment: The
Colonel is to sit in Counsel with the General, and to advise according to
his wisdom and experience about all States affairs: He is to sit in the
Marshals Court, and to give his voice for the punishing of delinquents; He is
to be a man free from all vices; he is to be religious, grave, wise, and
truly valiant.

CHAP. LXX.
The office of a Serjeant-Major-Generall of an Army, and his duty both in
Garrison and Field briefly declared.
THee office of a Serjeant-Major-Generall of the Army: is a place of great
honor and renown, there being committed to his charge, the affairs of a
whole Army, for through his hands all the affairs, practices, and actions that
betides an Army daily runs; He being the conduit-pipe to convey all orders
and instructions from the General, to all the subordinate Officers, wherefore
he ought to be a man of a ready wit and conception, of a sound judgment, of
a strong memory, so that he must conceive and retain such things as are given
him in charge, for (...) mistake may prejudice the proceedings of a weighty
consequence; therefore his Pen and Paper-booke must be ready to take the true
notes from his General, that he may not err in delivering of his orders to
the Majors of each Regiment: He is to be at his Tent ready at a prefixed hour,
both morning and evening, to deliver them such orders and instructions as are
delivered unto him, that so speedily they may be conveyed to each Officer in
every particular Regiment throughout all the whole Army; He must be very
vigilant and circumspect, to pry and dive into all passages that concerns the
good or safety of the Army: Above all other Officers, the Major-Generall ought
to be a good Scholar, and well indoctrinated in the Liberal Arts; He is to
have a Catalogue of the just number of the Army, together with the true
sortment and division of every weapon, and in his memory he must have the
forms of all kind of Battles.
he is to be a good linguist, he is to be well skilled in ordering and
forming of Battles, and in speedy reducing them from one form into another, as
occasion shall offer; He is to inform his General that such things as he
sees needful and of consequence, either for the safety or good of the Army may
be put in execution, as the raising of Skonces, Redouts, etc. for the
fortifying of passages, and securing of Bridges, and guarding of shallow
Fordes, by which an Enemy shall be impeached from taking an advantage to
endanger an Army; he must take a serious view how every Officer, both Colonels
and Captains perform their duties; he is at his convenient leisure to ride
from guard to guard, being conducted with a sufficient guard of Musketeers, to
see such orders put in execution as was given the Captains in charge, and that
their Guards be not too slightly manned, and where neglect shall be, he is
to punish the delinquents, and to see those defects supplied; He is to be in
his Generals presence as often as his occasions will permit, but especially
morn, noone, and night, either to inform the General of such news, and
passages as are of consequence, or to receive instructions from him, which he
is suddently to put in execution: he is by the Generals command to call his
Officers before him to sit in Council upon such things as may seem difficult,
so that the best advice may be taken. Every Officer is to order and demean his
Troops according as he shall please to give them directions; he is of
himself warrant sufficient to order and dispose all Commanders, and they are
to obey him and execute what he is pleased to give them in charge. Every
Officer ought to relate unto him what wants and defects are to their knowledge
in the Army, whether Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, or the like, that there may
be present order taken by the General, to supply all wants and defects; all
the Serjeant-Majors of every Regiment in the Army are to attend the
Major-Generall morning and night, to receive the Word and Orders, which they
must take from his secretly, and as secretly impart it to the inferior
Officers: his command extends over all Regiments whatsoever, and in time of
Battle he may draw forth what divisions he pleases, he may command what
Officer he pleases to lead them to such services, as he shall in his wisdom
think convenient, either to assist the Wings that are in fight, or to
strengthen some one part of the Army that is most assaulted, so that he is to
be endued with all the properties that the General should be accomplished
with; He is also in time of Battle to be near the General to advise in
cases of extremity, what is best and safest to be done: also to go from
Regiment to Regiment, to give Commanders such orders as are delivered to him:
he is of power sufficient to command the Captain of the Watch, and if he
perceive any disorders or neglects in his duties, he may punish him: The
Sergeant Major ought to premeditate how to bring his men into order the easiest
and most readiest way in time of Battle, causing every Major of a Regiment to
draw up their divisions into even squares, or otherwise as he shall please to
think fittest; he is to give order to the Quarter Masters how they shall
pitch their Standerds that accordingly the Troops may range themselves, what
distances betwixt the Forlorn hopes, and the maine Battle, and betwixt the
maine Battle, and the Battle of succor, etc. What distance betwixt the Horse
and the Flanks of the foot, and where the Ordnance are to be placed most
convenientest, etc. He is to draw out no Wings of shot to give fire upon the
Enemy, but must have a competency of Pikes to guard them from the fury of the
Horse; he is lisiewise in time of Battle to appoint every Colonel his place,
and every other chief Officer their places, some in the Front of the main
Battle, others to command the Forlorn ^opes, some in the Battle of succor,
others in the Rear.

Likewise in Marches, in regard diverse Officers i^ high authority are not to
March with their private Companies, but are employed (...) General upon other
weighty affairs; the Major may command such Officers as he shall think
fitting to lead such Troops as he shall command them; and such Officers as
he places, are to command with as much Authority, and the Soldiers bound to
obey them with as much diligence and dutifulness, as if they were their own
Officers; also he may command any Colonel or Major of a Regiment to send out
what Officer of his Regiment he pleases, and what forces he shall think
fitting either upon Convoyes, or to the guarding of passages or the like. And
to conclude, he is to be the eyes, ears, mouth, hands, and feet of the
General.

CHAP. LXXI.
The Office of the Lord Marshall in the Wars, and of his high jurisdiction
and Command in the Army.
THe Lord Marshall of an Army above all other Officers ought to be a most
approved Scholar, in regard his Office is to sit many times in the seat of
Judicature, he is also to be a most approved Soldier; for howsoever in the
greatness of other great places in the Wars there may be a dispensation of
skill, yet in this Office it may not be so; for above all others it has the
greatest place of action and direction in all the Army, and he Commands in a
higher strain then any the fore mentioned Officers in the Army, he having
them all at his command; yet all of them cannot assist him to dispense or
lessen the least duty belonging to his place or person; for though the General
or Lieuetenant General preceds him in place, Some have held that the Earl
Marshall i^ chiefest in the Generals absence, and ought to have the principal
command of the Army.
yet they ought not in knowledge and experience, in regard both themselves and
the whole Army both Horse and Foot are bound to move at his directions; and
though he may not command his General, yet he may in a directory way advise,
and say your Excellency ought to stand here in this place, or order your Armies
according to such rules; Wherefore, he must be a man of great performance,
accomplished with Wisdom, Temperance, Valor; and Virtue; It will be hard for
a Prince to find a man fit and suitable for this employment.

Next the General, the Lord Marshall is said to have the supreme command of
the whole Army; wherefore usually his Trumpet is first in the morning to
discharge the Watch, and his Troop ought first of all to be mounted; for it is
an honor due to his place, and allowed him by the Army, by reason of the
infinite pains which he takes in his own particular person; neither ought
his Troop to Watch or Ward, but are freed of that duty, by reason of their
more serious occasions; After he and his Troop are mounted, he ma^cheth to the
out-m^st borders of the Camp, and (...) his stand until the whole Army are
R^^ged, neither ^^its his station until the last man be Marched away: He is
himself in all things both assistant and directive to the General of the
Horse, and the Sergeant Major General; all the day long he is tied to no
Battalion, but at his pleasure may dispose of his own Person, sometimes
accompanying the General, and sometimes conducting his own Troops; and
indeed always where the greatest occasion of necessity is, and where the Enemy
is most likelyest to assail, there he should be to make resistance: Also as
his Person, so is his Troop not tied to any especial or certain place, but
may vary and alter, as danger shall offer it self for them to oppose, still
supplying whatsoever is weakest, and ever ready to entertain the Enemy upon
all his approaches, upon all Retreats; the Rear is his place which he is to
bring up with safety, and to defend it with courage: When the Army is to be
Encamped, he stays until every man be dismounted and the whole Army lodged;
then he with his Troop dismounteth; he takes order for the Scouts, he
advises with the Sergeant Major for the Guards, vieweth the strength of the
Camp, etc.

When the Army is to be Encamped in any new place, the Sergeant Major General,
the Quarter Master General, the Sergeant Major of Regiments, the Scout-Master,
and all inferior Quarter Masters, with a sufficient Guard of the best
Horsemen, are to attend the Lord High Marshall; and he out of his own power,
with the discreet advise of the Sergeant Major General, and the Scoute Master
General, shall assign the Camp where the fittingest place is to pitch it in,
the manner, form, and proportion it shall carry, the bounds it shall contain,
and the distinction of every place and commodity, advantage, strength, or
discommodity, which it shall please him to annex unto the same, and according
to his pleasure and demonstration, so shall the Quarter Master General see it
divided, leaving the Intrenchments to the Trench-Master; and the other
inferior divisions to the Sergeant Major General, the Sergeant Major of
Regiments, and their Quarter Masters.

It is in the power of his Office also (after the Army is Encamped, having
taken a survey of all the convenientest places for the Guards) to appoint all
the Regiments, in what manner they shall place their Corps-du-guards, the
Scouts, and Sentinell^, so as no man may pass either in or out, but to be
continual upon their discovery; and likewise to provide for the raising of all
Out-workes, as Skonses, and Redouts upon all passages and Fordes, for the
safety of the whole Army.

And as in the constant settling of the Army, so in the Marching and removing
thereof; the Lord Marshall is to have a special regard to his strength and
ability to encounter with the Enemy, and whether it be meet to enter into the
face of Battle or no, or whether the time be mature and ripe for matters of
execution; or else to defer and prevent all occasions of encounters, in which
if he find himself the weaker, he shall order his March through woody places,
and places inaccessible; thereby to add a natural strength to his Army, and
to hinder the execution of the Enemies Horse; he is to have the lighter sort of
Horsemen to March so near unto the Enemy, that continually upon every
alteration he may have sudden intelligence of the Enemies designs: But if the
necessity of the March be through the Champion and Plains, where the nature
of the ground affords no assistance; then the Lord Marshall must so order his
Horse Troops in such sort, to make them show great and innumerable, for to a
maze and distract the Enemy in his approaches.

He is to have a most special regard in removing his Camp, whether it be by
night or by day; it is very bold and audacious to remove a Camp in the day if
the Enemy be near hand, but to remove in the night, it argues a weakness
and di^ability in the Army, In the Discourse of the marching of an Army you
shall more fully read how to dislodge a Camp by night.
for it is little better then a flight: Wherefore there must be great licie
used with silence and diligence, and the March and good Array to be held with
all care and industry; and therefore it requires all the skill and Art of the
Marshall, and all the care and obedience that can be required in a Soldier,
for it is a Rul^ in Martial Discipline, that no remove by night can be
absolutely secure.

It is the Office of the Lord Marshall, to give order to the Master of the
Ordnance, both for his March and his passage; both where, when, and which way
all his Provision shall go for the best advantage and safety: And at the
planting o^ Artillery or making of Batteries, the Marshall is to oversee the
proceedings, and to give directions upon any doubt or misse-adventure; He is
to give order unto the Victual Master, Wagon-master, and all Officers of their
natures, both for their allodgements, stores, and all other necessary
accommodations, and against all violence and injuries which shall be offered
them, he is to see careful and speedy reformation.

The Lord High-Marshall, is the supreme and only powerful Judge, in all
causes of life and death, in criminal offenses and controversies in the Army,
of all manner of natures, and provideth for the due execution of all the Laws,
Articles, and Institutions, which shall be appointed by the General to be
observed, and to see due punishment executed for any breach of the same:
Wherefore he ought to be exceedingly well read, and learned in all Marshall
Laws, the custom of Countries, the degrees of Honor, and the distribution of
Bloods, places, and employments; and that he may the better proceed in these
affairs, he is to be assisted with diverse learned and experienced Officers
under him, as the Iudge-Marshall, and Provost-Marshall, an Auditor, and two
Clerks, the under-Provost, etc. He is to have twenty or thirty Gentlemen for a
continual guard about him; the Iudge-Marshall is to assist him in all
difficult and curious interpretations of the Law, and in deciding such
controversies, as shall happen in the taking of Prisoners, etc. He is to direct
the Scout-master in all his proceedings, and to receive from him all the
intelligence and observations which he has found out in his discoveries, and
to deliver unto him any other instructions, which had formerly been neglected:
what the Lord Marshall is to do about the restoring of Gentlemen's honors
which have been maliciously disgraced, and his deciding of all quarrels, I
have formerly entreated of, in the Discourse of unjust valor; but this will
suffice to let the ingenuous soldier see a glimpse of this noble Office.

CHAP. LXXII.
Of the Council of War and of their Office and duties in the time of War,
the Army being in Camp or otherwise.
THere is nothing in this sublunary World, which requires more mature
Consultations, Deliberations, and grave advise then the Subject of War; in
regard the welfare of Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, wholly depends upon it:
Wherefore, above all other Marshall men, those of the counsel of War, are to
be best experienced, and of most approved judgments: And that General is
happy that has for his Counselors, grave, wise, skillful, experienced,
virtuous, and painful men, for his assistance, to expostulate all matters, and
occurrences, which shall appertain to the good and safety of the Army; and to
the weakening and ruining of the Enemy.

When a General is engaged in these great businesses of the Wars, and has
for the government and ruling of his Army and the affairs thereunto belonging,
appointed his superior Officers; he is then out of the whole and entire
number to select an especial company of the most religious, valiant, expert
wise men, whose years, and judgments, are mature, to be of his Counsel; as
namely all Colonells, and their equals: Yet it is to be understood; that from
hence, has grown a distinguishment of Counsels, and according to the
variation of Marshall Courts, so they have altered both in emminency and
application, some being General, as in the trial and judging of criminal
offenders; and to this all Captains enrowled within the Generals list, may
freely and by their own right be admitted; others are more especial, as where
the debatement of provisions, the Raising of Taxes, and the ordering of the
public affairs of the Camp are handled; and to this all Colonells and
Officers within their rank are admitted; and do consult and conclude with
the General, for all the welfares and benefits which do appertain unto the
Army; But the last Council of all is a great deal more private, and the
matters which are handled therein are of that consequence, for secre^ie and
^ffect; that it were unfit and not allowable so many should be drawn
thereunto; ^or that all sorts of men should partake of every Stat^ Negotiation;
or those powerful stratagems which indeed should lodge in the strongest and
safest bosoms; for notwithstanding men of great experience and valor, or men
of high birth and Rank may in a short space of time, ascend to command a
Colonells place in the field; yet may Learning, Judgment, Secre^ie, and diverse
other virtues (without which a privy Counselor cannot subsist) be so far
removed and distant from his nature; that it were a great solicisme in State to
admit such trust to his Bosom: So on the other side men of meaner and lower
advancement; who are not capable of those high places in the Army; may yet be
much apter to advise, and have a better and stronger Fort wherein to keep
secrets from perishing, then those of a higher calling; and therefore (not
without good warrant) are many times chosen and admitted to this noble place of
trust and preferment; Alexander took ^armenio, Clytus and all the ouldest of
his Father Philips Commanders; to advise, counsel, and strengthen him in all
his Warlike affairs: Caesar likewise made choice of Cato that by his advice he
might ruin Pompey; thus Antony prevayled during the life of Publicalo; and
Augustus held himself fortunate in the Councels of (...). Likewise we have
modern instances how Philip of Spain gave to Don John Duke of Austria; (that
brave Soldier) Don Lewis de Zuniga to counsel him in all Marshall occasions:
and our Edward the third did the like for the black Prince, He made choice
for his Counselors the Earl of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, and Oxford; by
the strength of whose advice in the Battle of Poicteirs; he not only
overthrew all the Flowers of France; but also took John their King and Philip
his Son Prisoners. Those Generals that have run in precipitate courses
rejecting both Councillors and Counsels, have soon ruined themselves and
their Armies; as Crassus, when he brought himself and eleven Legions to be
rowted and massacred in Parthia; and Tyberius Gracchus when he had his brains
dashed out in the Capitol: After the same manner did Caius Gracchus, who was
made a bloody sacrifice on the top of Mount Aventine, for the much advised
tempting of his fortunes.

By this we may see, there is nothing more necessary, than a sufficient
Council of War, for their counsel and advice is more prevailent in
Marshall-discipline, than either Armor or Weapons, and more brave exployts
have been achieved by wisdom and policy, than ever could be brought under
by violence and daring.

To speak generally of this especial and private Council of War, The
especial Officers named for the private council of War.
and who are to be supposed meetest to succeed and rise unto the same, they are
these especial Officers following, who by virtue of their first place, are
ever capable of the second; because none of less merit and desert, may or
ought to assume unto the sway or command of this prime dignity. Of these privy
Counselors, the Lieutenant-Generall of the Horse has the first place, the
Lord Marshall has the second, the Master of the Ordnance has the third, the
Treasurer of the War the fourth, and the eldest Co^^^ell in the Field the
fifth: But if the number of Counselors arise to any great extent, then they
are chosen out of other great personages of eminency and worth, at the
discretion of the General; these private Council of War, are to negotiate
and deal in matters that are profound, dangerous, and difficult, and are to
argue and dispute them, with sound understandings, and deep judgments; And
this shall suffice to conclude this discourse. As for other Officers belonging
to the Army, I omit to discourse of their Offices, in regard they have no
charge of Soldiers under them; as the Treasurer, the four Corporals of the
Field, the Quarter Masters, the Muster-masters, Scout-master, Provost-marshall,
Victuall-master, Forrage-master, Wagon-master, Trench-master, Captain of the
Pioners, etc. Happily, I shall take occasion to discourse afterward of some of
these Offices, in the Treatise of Incamping the Army, and in the Discourse of
Framing of Battles, where I shall more fitly give a touch of them: We are in
the next place to discourse of the Exercising of the Foot and Horse.

THE ART OF DRILLING, OR EXERCISING A FOOT COMPANY. SECT. XI.
CHAP. LXXIII.
The manner how every Officer should drill, and exercise their Companyes of
Foot in all their Postures, and motions with the several ways of giving fire.
ALthough it be a thing familiar to diverse men to Drill, and exercise a Foot
Company, and that some men have formerly to good purpose, entreated of the
Postures both of Pike and Musket; yet in regard my intent is to write a
general discourse of every part of the body of War, I think it convenient
in as short and brief terms as the subject will require, to demonstrate the
parts requisite to be understood in the exercising of Companies; showing the
grounds and reasons of every Posture and motion that is material, either to
offend or defend, the reasons why they were invented, and what advantage is in
them; for although a Soldier should know how to order, and demean himself
exquisitly in this Art of drilling, yet if he does not conceive the reasons to
what purpose they were invented, and the several advantages they afford
against the Enemy, in time of necessity he will be to seek, whereby the whole
grounds of Souldiarisme may miscarry, and the ends they were invented for, lose
their effect; and let no man expect that I should invent any new anticke
Postures, there being more already in use then are profitable; But I could wish
a Soldier should only make use of such circumstances as are really most fit,
and apt for employment of Wa^res, and of quickest dispatch in execution. Far
be it from me to discommend a comely manlike gesture and a correspondency in
the agitation of the limbs, when a Soldier handles his Arms; yet upon the
point of service all superfluous Postures are lopt off, and reduced only to
these three actions, The three usual words of command in time of Service.
Making ready, Presenting, and giving fire. For should a Commander nominate all
the Postures in the time of service, he would have no breath to oppose his
Enemy, neither could use any circumspection how to encounter with him;
wherefore I would rather wish all Commanders to affect the plain and readiest
way in exercising, which may best suit with the actions and capacities of
plain Soldiers, which will prove more substantial and essential; and those
thus educated, are men likeliest to sustain the brunt of an Enemies fury, and
stand to their tackling, when others with their Circumstantiall complements and
superfluous slender devices, may take a retraite for a charge, Wherefore in the
first place let us observe that in composing of multitudes into an orderly way
of exercising, they must be reduced into Ranks and Files,

A File is a certain number of Soldiers standing in a direct line one behind
another face to back, which number must not exceed ten in depth.

A Rank is a number of Soldiers standing in an eeven line side-wayes,
shoulder to shoulder, and this is not limited to any certain proportion of
number, but increases or decreaseth accidentally, according to the greatness
or smallness of the number.

A Company being thus ordered into Rank and File, the next thing considerable,
is the distance, or orderly space between File and File, Rank and Rank.

There are four orders or distances, observable between File and File, or
Rank and Rank, being these under mamed;

Close order Order Open order Double distance which is both in Rank and File
one foot and a half. three foot. six foot. twelve foot.


There is further to be considered in distance, three especial circumstance,
viz.

Distance For March. For Motion. For Skirmish,

The distance for March is to be three foot between File and file: and six
foot between rank and rank.

The distance for Skirmish and for wheeling, is three foot in rank and file;
only in receiving a charge from the Horse, it is convenient the Files of
Pike-men should be at close Order.

CHAP. LXXIV.
How a Captain shall cause his Officers to order and rank his Company sit to
march into the Field.
THE Drums having called the Soldiers together to their Colors, the Ensign
standing forth with them; then the Lieutenant and Sergeants shall command the
Pikes and Musquettiers to rank them selves 4. 5. or 6. abreast as the Captain
shall be pleased to command; observing the Files to be at order, and the Ranks
at open order.

If the Commander will observe the French manner of Marching, Note the
Musketeers of the right Flank are to make the Van.
then you must divide the Muskets; the first Division is to March in the Van
next after the Captain, Note that between each division in march there ought
to be 12 foot distance, viz. 6 foot before the Office^, and 6 foot behind.
the Pikes are to make the Battle, and to March after the Ensign in two
Divisions, the second Division being led by the eldest Sergeant; the
Musketeers of the left Flank (called the second division of Muskets) makes
the Reare-gaurd, which is to be led commonly by the second Serjant; the Drum
is to be placed in the third Rank of Musquetieres; the second Drum between
the third and fourth Rank of the second Division of Pikes; The third Sergeant
is to march in the left Flank of the Muskets in the Rear; the fourth
Sergeant is to be on the right Flank of the Musketeers, and the Lieutenant in
the Rear, Note in march the Files must be at order and the Ranks at open
order.
as by the sequent Figure you may perceive two hundred men in order to March
into the Field, the Captain leading his Company with a Souldier-like gesture,
the rest of the Officers following in their due places in a fair equipage: And
being arrived at the place of exercise, you are to draw your Company into
Battalia after this manner: First you are to command your Front division to
stand, then the Ensign is to draw up his division of Pikes upon the left
Flank of the first division of Musqueteires, with his Colors flying, and the
Pikes to continue shouldered so long as the drum beats a March; but if it
beats a Troop, then they are to advance and close their Ranks forward to
their order, and then the Ensign is to Troop them up with his Colors firled:
The eldest Sergeant is to lead up the second division of Pikes. The second
Sergeant is to lead up the second or Rear divisions o^ Musketeers; each
division still marching up to the left of that division next before it; the
manner you may plainly see in the Figure upon the right side of this Page;
where the first division is marked in the Rear with the Figure 6. the first
division of Pikes with the Figure 7. the second division of Pikes with the
Figure 8. the second division of Musquettiers has in the rear the Figure 9.
In the next Page you shall find a Figure in form of a square, as they stand
in a Battalia.

Front.
C
s s s s s S 4 s s s s s s s s s
D. 1.
s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s
E
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p
S. 1.
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
D 2
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
S 2
s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s s
s s s s s s s s s s s
L
Rear.
C
S 4. sssss sssss sssss
D
sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss 6
E
ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp 7
S
ppppp ppppp ppppp
D 2
ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp ppppp 8
S 2.
sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss sssss 9.
E C
S. 2. sssss D pppppppppp D sssss S. 1. sssss pppppppppp sssss sssss pppppppppp
sssss sssss pppppppppp sssss sssss pppppppppp sssss sssss pppppppppp sssss
sssss pppppppppp sssss sssss pppppppppp sssss sssss pppppppppp sssss S. 3.
sssss pppppppppp sssss S. 4.

In this precedent Figure, you see the divisions of the Company drawn up into
an even body or Battalia, all the Fell-leaders standing even in Front together
making one Rank.

CHAP. LXXV.
How the Officers are to draw both Pikes and Muskets (one File sequenting
another) into a Ring for the better and speedier exercising them in their
postures.
THe Company standing in an even body as the former Figure shows, before the
Captain shall exercise them in gross as they now stand; the easiest,
readiest, and most convenient way, is to see every man particularly do his
postures both of Pike and Musket; Wherefore first draw out the body of Pikes
from the shot, then command the right Wing of shot to face to the left hand,
and the left Wing of shot to face to the right hand; then Marching forwards,
join their Files together, so facing as they were makes them stand in an even
body: That Officer which intends to exercise the Pikes, is to draw them into
one side of the Field, and some other Officer is to take the Muskets and draw
them another way a convenient distance apart, so that one division may not
interrupt the other; then either Officers drawing out their Files one following
another, leading them round into a Ring, the Officers standing in the midst,
every Soldier facing toward him so that he may see all their actions; and
likewise they may hear his words of command, and observe how he handles his
Arms, that they may imitate him, and where he sees any one aukeward and
ignorant, he is speedily to step to him and to show him how to demean
himself, the words of Command and the postures follow in the next Chapter.

CHAP. LXXVI.
How an Officer is to demean himself, in the Exercising of the Musquetieres,
and how every Soldier is to observe and imitate him punctually, from Posture,
to Posture.
THe Officer having disposed his men as before is showed, himself standing in
the midst of them, taking a Musket in his hand, and Bandelieres about him,
he shall command silence, and being presupposed they stand with their
Bandiliers on, their match between their fingers, their Muskets shouldred,
and their Rests in their hands; the Officer commands them to

1 Rest your Musket. This Pocture is performed, the Musket being shouldred;
First by slipping it, Note, in all the Postures of a Musket, the hand and foot
must move at one instant, for the better grace of the posture.
then bringing about the right hand, and grasping the Musket at the breech,
and at the same instant drawing in your right heel to your left ankle, with a
small jutte of the shoulder, you raise the Piece, and poise it in the right
hand being stretched out, with the Musquet-rest in the left hand likewise
stretched out; then bringing about your left hand and foot, you meet the
Musket with your Rest, placing it upon the ground aslant from you, your Thumb
pressing the side of the Barrel and the Forke of the Rest together, your right
leg being brought a little forwards, standing with a full body toward the
mouth of the Piece, the But end close to your side above your huckle bone.
2 Poise your Muskets. This Posture is performed, Note, the Musket is rested
when this Posture is to be performed.
by bringing up the right leg to the ankle of the left, the Piece being stayed
upon the Rest by the pinching of the Thumb, the right hand at the same motion
graspes the Piece at the Breech, the middle joint of the forefinger placed
under the Pan, The Musket being shouldred, it is to be poised as I have
showed you in the first Posture here mentioned at Resting your Musket.
the upper joint next the hand just with the breech-pin, the Thumb upon the
inside of the Stock, a little pressing down the right hand, and raising the
left with the Rest, you receive it and hold it at arms end, with the mouth
plum upwards, the Rest in the left hand, with the Arm out-stretch'd, the right
foot being removed side-wayes, at the same instant with the right hand, the
body will stand full and comely.
3 Shoulder your Musket. The Musket being poised, Note, after the Musket is
settled on the shoulder, the Rest must hang almost perpendicular toward the
ground.
you must bring about your right hand, drawing up the heel of your right foot,
to your left ankle; and as your Musket is ready to touch your left shoulder,
you must at the same instant, bring about your left hand over the But end of
the Piece, with the Rest in it, the ground end of your Rest pointing toward
your right thigh, joining the Sear^ of the Piece close to your shoulder; Note,
when you intend to poise it as in the former posture, you must turn the point
of your Rest inwards toward your left thigh, and withal let the Piece slip a
little, the Breech will lie fit for the right hand to receive it.
4 Take your Rest in your right hand fit for march. There needs no great
commenting upon this Posture, only when the Musket is shouldred, you are take
the Rest into your right hand, for to be a stay unto you in your march.
5 Take your match between the fingers of your right hand. Note, here they
begin to make ready, which they may do either standing or marching.
This Posture is performed by bringing about your right hand, and between the
forefinger and thumb thereof, take the Match within an inch of the Cole, from
between the little and third finger of the left hand, then holding your right
hand out from your body.
6. Put your Rest string about your left wrist, and carry your Rest in your
left hand. There needs no great circumstance about this Posture, only you
having the Rest in your right hand upon a March, you now put on the String upon
the left hand, holding the Rest in it over the But end of the Musket, by which
you are in a readiness to make present use of it.
7 Return your Match between the fingers of the Left hand. This Posture is
performed, having the Match between the finger and the Thumb of the right
hand; you are to bring your Arm about toward the left hand, there placing the
Cole end of the Match between the middle and third finger thereof, the light
end to the back of the hand-ward, then taking the other end of the Match, and
place it in like manner between the third and little finger, by this means it
is not troublesome, but ready to be used upon all occasions.
8 Vnshoulder your Musket. This Pcture is performed, by turning the point of
your Rest outward toward your left knee, and withal letting the Musket slip
a little down your breast, the Breech of the Piece will lie fair for the
right hand to take it with a graspe, just under the pan, with the middle joint
of the forefinger; the uppermost joint next the hand against the Breech-pin,
and the thumb upon the Stock on the inner side, and with a small jutte (the
left hand with the Rest being taken off from the Stock) the right hand will
poize it up, standing with a full body, the mouth of the Piece right up, and
arms out-strecht, as more plainly in the first Posture is discourc'd of, not
forgetting to let the foot act with the hand.
9 Join your Rest to the outside of your Musket. The Musket being poised,
you are to step forward with your left leg, and withal bringing your left hand
with your thumb pressed against the inner side of the Forke of your Rest, then
drawing in your right elbow, you gently let the Musket and the Rest meet, the
upper side of the Forke placed against the outside of the Stock, the thumb
pressing the lower; and the end of the Rest locked in the in^ide of the But end
of the Piece, it rests in an equal balance in the left hand.
10. Open. 11. Clear 12. Prime 13. Shut your Pan. The Musket and Rest being
joined together, with your two fore-fingers thrust between the Barrel and the
tippe of the Pan, thrusting them side-wayes makes it open with ease, then with
the boale of your thumb pressed down into the Pan and wrung about cleeres it;
then take your Primer in your right hand, and knocking it gently against the
side of the Pan, until the concavity of it be filled, then with your fingers
shut ti, and a little turning the butte end of your Musket from you give te a
jogge or two.

14. Cast off your loose corns. The Musket being primed, This Posture is as
usually done when the Musket and Rest is joined together.
and the Pan shut, you are to turn the butte end from your right side a little
distance, as the Piece rests upon the Rest, then with a shogge or two shake off
the superfluous corns of Powder, to prevent taking of fire when you try your
Match.
15. Blow off your loose corns. 16. And cast about your Musket to your left
side. This posture of blowing off the loose corns is to be performed, either
the Musket being rested (as I have said before) or when the Musket and the
Rest are joined together; for the first you are only to stoop with your head,
and with a puff or two blow them off, otherwise you are to bring the Musket
toward your head, tilluing the pan somewhat from you, and with a sudden strong
blast beat them off, so that when the Match is tried, it may not endanger the
firing. Now for the casting about your Musket after the loose corns be blown
off, it is but slipping back your left leg, and you holding your Musket and
Rest together in your left hand; with your right hand you convey the butt end
of the Piece on to the left side, and in the motion turn the stock upwards,
and letting your Rest slip, you may easily charge.
17. Trayle your Rest. 18. Balance your Musket in your left hand. This
posture is performed after the Musket is brought about to the left side, Note
you ought to take the Piece in such an even balance, that the butt-end rests
not against the ground.
stepping forward with your right foot, and at the same instant you bring about
your Musket; and withal your right hand graspes the barrel of the Piece some
foot from the mouth, until the Rest be slipped and trayled, and the Piece
balanced in the left hand fit for to charge.
19. Charge 20. with Powder, Bullet. This Posture is performed after the
Musket is balanced in your left hand, by taking one of the Charges of your
Bandelieres in your right hand, and pulling the lidde of it off with your
teeth; then thrusting the mouth of the charge into the bore of the Piece,
giving it a shogge or two, that the Powder may empty into it; then giving the
Piece another jogge with the butt end of it against the ground, to make the
Powder sink to the bottom of the barrel; then having your bullet ready in
your mouth, and taking it in your right hand between your forefinger and
thumb, setting your right leg forwards toward the mouth of the Piece, as
you bring your hand to the same, letting the bullet drop in with a jogge to
sink it to the Powder; or by ramming it down with the Gunne-sticke.

21. Draw forth 22. Shorten your scowring-stick. This Posture is performed by
drawing forth the Scowring-sticke with the right hand, at three even pulls, the
lower side of your hand toward the upper end of the Musket; the
Scowring-sticke being thus produced, you are to shorten it against your breast,
your hand slipping down almost to the lower end of it, so that with ease it
may be put into the mouth, then thrusting it down part of the way, at the
second motion, and ramming down the Powder at the third.

23. Put your Scowring-stick into your Musket. This Posture is performed (as
before is said) after the Scowring-sticke is produced and shortened, the right
hand holding it close by the lower end, the right foot being set out a pretty
step toward the mouth of the Piece, is with ease put in, and rammed down.
24. Ram home your charge. This is performed after the Scowring-sticke is
entered the Bore of the barrel about a handful, then at two motions more you
thrust it down to the Powder or Bullet, giving a good jobbe or two down, that
the Bullet may be home to the Powder.
25. Withdraw 26. Shorten 27. Return your scowring stick. This Posture is
performed by taking the Scowring-stick in your right hand, the upper-side of
your hand toward the mouth of the Piece, so that all your fingers takes the
stick flat about the middle, the joints upon the outside of it, and the thumb
upon the inside, then making three even distinct pulls in withdrawing it,
turning your hand, so as the small end of the stick is toward your breast,
then shortening it against the same, you have it fit to return into the
stock, which is to be done likewise at three even portions.

28. Bring forward your Musket and Rest. This Posture is performed after the
Scowring-stick is returned by drawing back your right foot, and bringing your
Musket with your left hand before you, so as the barrel of the Piece may be
toward your breast; the Rest is to trayle after by the string that hangs upon
your wrist.
29. Poyze your Musket, and recover your Rest. This Posture is performed, your
right heel being drawn in toward the small of your left foot; at the same
instant your right hand is to take the Piece below under at the great screw;
then poyze it upwards, setting your Right foot out again, then bringing your
Rest forwards with your left hand, so far as the string will permit, you
shall easily receive it, and so with a full Body stand poysed.
30. Join your Rest to the outside of your Musket. The Posture is performed
after the Musket is poyzed, by drawing in your left heel toward the small of
your right foot, your left hand holding the Rest close by the forke; and your
thumb pressing the end of the forke close, you bring it to the Musket; then
joining the Rest to the outside of the Musket, and locking them fix together
by pressing the lower side of the forke with your thumb, the Piece lies firm
in your left hand in one even balance, your right hand being at freedom, and
your left leg set out again.
31 Draw forth your Match. This posture is performed by drawing in the right
heel to the small of the left foot, at the same instant bringing your right
hand with a kind of circumference toward your left; you are to take the Match
betwixt the thumb and second finger, then holding it out toward your right
side, at the same instant you are to set out your right leg again, your
Musket being held in a due height.
32 Blow your Cole. Having taken the Match from between the little finger and
the third finger of the left hand, betwixt the thumb and second finger of the
right hand within an inch of the coal of it; then bringing it toward your
mouth, turning your head toward your right side stooping very little, you
gently blow it, your right leg being let out forwards.
33 Cock 34 Fit Your Match. Having blown your Match as aforesaid, you are to
bring it with a little circumference to the Cock, and are to fit it into the
same with your thumb and finger, not screwing it in, having before directed
the wideness of the Cock to the thickness of the Match; your left leg
being set forwards with the knee somewhat bending out.

35 Guard your Pan. Having tried and governed the Match with your thumb and
second finger, to the end you may set it higher, lower, shorter, or longer; and
your left heel being drawn toward the small of your right foot, you are
gently to lay the two fore fingers of the right hand full upon the Pan to
defend the Powder from the sparkles of the Match.
36 Blow the ashes from your Cole. Having guarded your Pan as aforesaid, and
your left heel being drawn toward the small of your right foot, you are
gently to raise the Piece up toward your mouth, and without stooping, blow off
the ashes from your Cole.
37 Open your Pan. Having blown off the ashes from the Cole (standing in the
same posture as aforesaid) you are at the same instant, handsomely with your
middle finger to shove aside the Pan lid; and removing your left leg forwards
with the knee bending out.
38 Present upon your Rest. Your left leg being set out as aforesaid, and your
right hand having graspt the Musket with your thumb in the small of the
Stock, and your middle finger placed against the tricker; then having placed
the Musket in the Rest, the mouth of it being kept at a reasonable height, and
the lower end of your Rest being set forwards, the Butt end of your Piece will
be placed full upon your right breast; then setting your right leg somewhat
out side-wayes, standing with a full body toward the mouth of your Peeece, you
shall be ready to give fire.
39 Give fire breast high. Having as before is showed, presented well (viz)
holding the Musket and the Rest in the left hand, bearing the right Arm or
elbowe somewhat up, and turning a little the body to the left side, the left
knee bowed, and the right leg straight, and not laying your cheek to the
Stock before you shall set the Musket to your breast; then taking your aim
breast high, without starting or winking, you are gently to pull down the
tricker, and so give fire with a full body upon the Enemy.
40 Dismounte your Musket, joining your Rest to the outside of your Musket.
You having discharged, must pull in your right leg a little; then thrusting
your Musket a little forwards, you shall join your Rest to the outside of
your Musket, holding it in an even balance in your left hand, not forgetting
to hold the mouth up; (especially if it has not gone off) for fear of hurting
any man.
41 Vncocke and return your Match. Your right heel being drawn toward the
small of your left foot; you are to bring about your right hand in a comely
manner, and with your thumb and second finger pull the Match out of the Cock,
and return it between the two last fingers of the left hand.
42 Clear 43 Shut your Pan. You standing in the same posture as before; after
you have returned your Match, you are with the thumb of your right hand to run
the Pan and clear it, that no sparkles may remain: then with your forefinger
you are to thrust the cover of the Pan close: after you have blown off the
sparkles.

44 Poize 45 Shoulder your Musket. After you have cleared and shut your Pan,
you must graspe your Musket with your right hand close by the britch-pin, as
in the second Posture is showed: then raising the Musket with your left hand,
you poize it up, holding the mouth of it right upwards, your right arm being
stretched out, your rest remaining in your left hand likewise extended: then
drawing your right heel to the small of your left foot, at the very instant
your right hand brings the Musket to your left shoulder; your left hand with
the Rest in it being ready (the same moment) to embrace it at the butt end, the
Sear being thrust close to your shoulder; then removing your right leg
again to his former station, you stand upright with a full body.

46 Take the Match between the fingers of the right hand. To perform this,
view the posture before described at the figure 5. only the Match is to be
placed between your fingers of your right hand; as before it was in the left:
47 Take your Rest into your right hand, clearing your string from your wrist.
This is to be performed first by drawing in your right heel to the small of
your left foot, and withal bringing your right hand to your left, you receive
the Rest, clearing your left wrist from the string.
48 Return your Rest into your left hand, the String loose. This is performed
as the former Posture is, at the Figure 47 in reverse.
49 Return your Match into your left hand. This is performed as the former
Posture is at the Figure 5.
50 Vnshoulder your Musket and Poize. This is performed, as the former Posture
is; at the Figure 8.
51 Rest your Musket. This is likewise performed, as is showed in the former
Posture, at the Figure 1.
52 Set the But end of your Musket upon the ground. You are to dismount your
Musket off the Rest, then placing the But end of it upon the ground, close by
the outside of your right foot, with the Stock toward you, your right hand
holding it somewhat more than half way toward the mouth; you stand with a
full body boult upright, with the Musket in the same manner by your right side.
53 Lay down your Musket and Rest. Match This Posture is performed, by
stepping forwards with your right foot (your self and Piece, standing as in
the precedent Posture) then declining with your body, you lay it down gently
with the mouth in a right line from you, and and the lock upwards; after the
same manner also your Rest and Match is to be disposed of.

54 Take off 55 Lay down your Bandeliers. After your hands are free from your
Musket, Match, and Rest, you may with your left hand take off your Hat, which
may hinder you, and with your right hand neatly convey them over your head, and
so (as before) lay them down along by the side of your Musket, but so as the
Match may not fire them.

56 March from your Arms. This is principally used to make the Soldiers apt
and ready to find their own places again, and to be quick in re-arming
themselves upon a sudden Alarm.

The Sentinel Posture is no otherwise, then having your Musket rested,
primed, and charged with powder and Bullet, for your better ease and readiness
to give fire upon the Enemy, to make an Alarm, you, stand at that Posture
with the But end of your Musket at your right huckle bone, with a light match
cockt, the mouth of the Piece somewhat mounting, and your hand grasping the
Stock, with your finger upon the Sear: And this shall suffice for the
Postures of the Musket, only you are to draw your Files into an even body
again, fit to join with the Body of Pikes.

CHAP. LXXVII.
How a^ Officer is to (...) himself, in the (...) of the Pikes, and (...)
Soldier ^s to imitate him punctually from Posture to Posture.
THe Officer having disposed his Pi^^emen as before is showed, and standing in
the midst of the Ring with a Pike in his hand, after he has ^^^^^^ded silence,
and being presupposed that the Soldiers stand with their Pikes advanced; The
Officer commands them to

Order your Pikes. This Posture is performed (the Pike being advanced) by
drawing in your left heel toward the small of your right foot, and at the
same instant raising your left hand as far as you can indifferently stretch
it, you graspe the Pike in it, toward the top of your head, then loosening
your right hand which holds the But end of the Pike, and withal sinking your
left hand with the Pike in it as low as your skirts, you again raise up your
right hand, and guiding the Pike with your left, you place the But end of it by
the outside of your right foot, your right hand holding it even with your eye,
and your thumb right up, then removing your leg to his former station, your
left arm being set a kimbo by your side, you shall stand with a full body in a
comely Posture.
Advance your Pikes. The Pike being ordered as in the former Posture is showed,
without changing of your hold, you must with your right hand lift the Pike a
little from the ground, and taking it suddenly again with the left hand
toward the (...) end, leaving so much length below, as you can afterward
reach well with the right hand, where it is stayed in the fist at the full
length of the arm, hanging right downwards; your forefinger and thumb close
at the But end, resting it close to your thigh, and bearing against the
shoulder close to your breast, causes it to stand firm and upright, without
wavering.
Shoulder your Pike. This Posture may be performed, either when the Pike is
advanced, or ordered; (If advanced) then your left hand is to be brought about
to your right side, and being stretched upwards, you are to take hold of the
Pike toward the top of your head, then loosening your right hand which holds
the But end, the left hand sinkes the Pike downwards, sloping in a right line
forwarns; so that the right hand receiving the second hold as high as it can
conveniently reach, and graspes the Pike with the thumb long-wayes upon the
Pike, and underneath it. Then your left hand leaving its former hold,
immediately graspes the Pike just below your right hand, and so both hands
being joined together, they gently conveyes it unto the right shoulder, leaving
the right fist close pressed to the Plate bone thereof; with your right elbow
close down by your side, and your left elbow set a kimbo, you stand with an
upright full body. Note, that in acting this Posture, your feet are not to be
removed either backwards or forwards, but occasionally side-wayes; as the hands
are employed in the executing this Posture: some never stir any foot at all,
I leave it as a thing indifferent.
Level your Pikes. This is performed the Pike being shouldered, by bringing
your left hand to the Pike, and grasping it close under your right hand (and
withal at the same instant drawing in your left heel toward the (...) of
your right foot) then with an even motion of both your hands, you are to raise
the butte end of your Pike, until it lies level upon your shoulder; then
returning your hand and foot to their due places, you shall stand in a fai^^
Posture. This may be performed without moving the foot, but then it has not
the like grace with it:
Slope your Pikes. This Posture is performed in the same kind the former was,
only the hands presses down the butte end of the Pike, within half a foot
of the ground, which causes it to lie right sloping.
Charge your Pikes to the Front. This Posture may be performed; either when the
Pike is advanced, or shouldered; wherealso you must further observe, whether it
be to be acted standing, or Marching; If so be your Pike be advanced, and you
are to act this Posture standing; Then you must only slip back your right
hand, and your right foot a good stride, placing your foot side-wayes from
your body; Then with your left hand, you are to receive the Pike about a yard
from the butte end, holding your elbow, in an even distance from your body,
with your hand close to your breast, so that the Pike may have the more
freedom to play forwards and backwards, just breast-high of a man, your left
knee being bent for wards, and your body yielding toward the point of the
Spear, so as you may not easily be thrust back by the Enemy. If your Pike be
shouldered, then you must receive the Pike in your left hand a pretty reach
downwards, t^wards the butte end of the same; at the same instant you are to
raise the Pike with your right hand from your shoulder, and with your left hand
draw in the butt end of the same toward the outside of your right thigh, then
slipping back your right foot and hand, you receive the butt-end of it, you
charge it as before is showed. If this Posture be to be performed Marching
(your Pike being shouldred) then first step forwards with your right foot,
and let your left hand receive the Pike, and equal distance (from your right
hand) toward the butt-end of the same, raising your Pike forwards with your
right hand from your shoulder, then at the same instant step forwards with your
left foot, and receive the butt-end of the Pike, with your right hand, just
behind the side of your right thigh. But to perform this Posture, ^rooping,
and your Pike advanced; then you are only to step forwards with your left foot;
and with a little shogge of the shoulder, and drawing back the butt-end of
your Pike in your right hand, will cause the Pike to fall forwards, where your
left hand is at the instant to be ready to receive it between the Thumb and
the forefingers at a convenient distance.
Charge to the Horse. Note in charging to the Horse it has been in former
ages used, to place the but-end of your Pike in the ground by the inside of
your right foot, and so to draw your Sword over your left arm; and diverse
Ranks of Musketeers placed to shoot over their heads behind them: No question
it is a very good way for your Bow-pikes; but the former charging is most in
use.
Charge to the Rear. You may by the precedent Posture conceive how to charge
your Pike, either to the right or left hand; But for the charging to the Rear,
the Pikes being either shouldered or advanced, is somewhat difficult. Therefore
you may please to observe, that if the Pike be advanced, you must with your
left hand take it in his proper place up toward your head, then suddenly
turning your body about toward your left hand, and being faced about, you are
to thrust back your right hand with the butt-end of the Pike in it, and
withal your right leg is to be set out with it; this will bring you into the
right Posture. But if your Pike be shouldered (and you are to charge to the
Rear) then you must take the Pike in your left hand, a good distance from your
right hand toward the butt-end, and at the same instant with your right hand,
raise the Pike from your shoulder as high above your head toward your left
side as possibly you may, then standing firm with your left leg, you are to
bring about your right side and leg toward the left hand about, and being
half turned, you are to let loose your right hand, and with your left hand you
are somewhat to advance the point of the Pike forwards, so that the butt-end
may be drawn back by your right side for your right hand to receive it, your
right foot also at the very instant being stepped back, makes you stand fully
charged.
Port your Pikes. This Posture is performed by holding the Pike a half
distance between advancing and charging; and was only invented to case the
hind most Ranks from the intolerable labor of continual charging, and to
secure the Pikes from the Bullets, which would have more power to break them
if they hold them advanced. Besides, it is the most aptest and comliest Posture
for a Company to use in marching through a Port or Gate, and most readiest for
to charge upon a sudden.
Check your Pike. This Posture is to be performed at three Motions; First if
your Pike be shouldered, you are to raise it with your right hand from your
shoulder, and with a ticke of your left hand, you are to convey the butt-end of
it by your right side, then thrusting back your right with the Pike in it so
far as conveniently may be; you are to take a fathom with your left hand as
far toward the Spear end of the Pike as possibly you may; then conveying
the Pike in your left hand baackward as before, you are again with your right
hand to take another fathom, within a foot of your Pikes end; Lastly, stepping
forwards with your left foot, you bring your left hand withal, which receives
the Pike within a quarter of a foot of the Spears end, Provided always that
in all the motions of the hands, you suffer not the butt-end to touch the
ground, until you have checked it with your left hand. Pikes as you were.
Trayle your Pikes. This Posture is performed after you have used the
Circumstances in checking (as in the precedent Posture is showed) by bringing
up your Right foot even with your left, and by removing your right hand just
before your left, close to the end of the Pike, then you are to withdraw your
left hand, and place it a-kimbo by your side, and your right hand will hold the
end of the Spear just above your right huckle-bone, with your body standing
full forwards. Pikes as you were.
Lay down your Pikes. This Posture is to be performed your Pike being
advanced, by stepping forwards with your right foot, then your right shoulder
with a small bearing forwards, and with it a little jogge, causes the Pike to
meet the left hand, which gently conveyes the Spears end to the ground, then
turning about your right arm in a kind of Circle, will cause the back of your
hand to be next the outside of your right Thigh; then leaning your body
forwards, you convey the butt-end to the ground, close at the side of your
right foot, so as the Pike will lie in an even line from your foot forwards.
Recover your Pikes and charge. This Posture is performed your feet standing
even together, only owing your body forwards, you cause the back of your right
hand to be put down close by the outside of your right foot, then in the
raising of the butt-end of your Pike, you turn your hand with the Pike in it,
so that the inside of your hand will be toward your right side; Then your
left hand in the raising, takes the Pike at a convenient place or distance,
and elevates it either to the Posture of charging or ordering, as the Officer
shall please to command; The word of Command which the Officer is to use for
the reducing of these Postures to their first station is; Pikes as you were.
There are diverse other Postures which I do here omit, referring you to the
book of Military discipline, Composed by that worthy Gentleman, Master
William Barrife, Lieutenant to the Artillery Garden, who has merited much
honor in performing so Noble a work, in a most concise, and exquisite way,
for the which our Kingdom is much bound to him.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
How the Commanders shall draw their Files, both of Musketeers and Pikes, and
join them in one body, fit to be exercised in gross.
YOu have seen every Soldier perform his Postures well, then you must draw
out the File-leader of the Right-hand-file, with his whole File, Commanding
every File-leader successively to draw up his File, either of other; And being
drawn into a body, command them to advance their Pikes.

In the mean time the Lieutenant or some other Officer is to divide the
Musketeers (they being drawn into a body, as aforesaid) into two equal parts
or Divisions; if there should be an odd File in one of the Divisions, it
makes no matter.

Next you are to draw up your body of Pikes between those Divisions of
Muskets, fronting them with the Muskets in an even line.

Or otherwise, you may draw your Musketeers upon the left wing of your body of
Pikes, their Front and Ranks being placed even one against another; you are to
command the Pikes to open their Ranks, and to order their Pikes; the
Musketeers are to have all their Muskets Rested.

Then commanding the right-hand-division (only) to shoulder their Muskets, and
to face to the Right Hand.

Then commanding them to March even, through the Ranks of the Pikes an
ordinary distance beyond them, and causing them to face to the left hand, will
bring them into true order with the Pikes.

Next you are to command the residue, or left wing of Muskets to shoulder
their Pieces, and to face to the right hand, and advance them forwards to the
side of the Pikes; observing their distance betwixt them; then facing them to
the Left hand makes them stand even with the Pikes.

Or if you please, you may make use of a third way, to draw your Musketeers
upon either Wing of your Pikes.

Your Pikes being first drawn into a square body, and your Musketeers in a
like square body, being drawn up to the rear of the Pikes.

You may command them to double their Front to the Right and left hand by
Division, which is in this kind performed;

One half of the Files of Musqueteirs are to face to the right hand, and the
other half to the left hand, either Division marching after they are turned
right forwards about six foot beyond the flanks of the Pikes.

Then that Division of Musketeers which marched toward the left hand, you are
to command them to face to the right hand.

And the division of Musketeers that marched to the right hand, you are to
command them to face to the Left.

Then both the divisions of Shot at one instant in an even order, are to
March up by the side of the Pikes, until they front even with them.

These things being thus performed, you are to command your Musketeers to
shoulder their Muskets and slope them.

You are likewise to command your Pikemen to advance their Pikes, and then
begin to exercise them in their Motions as follows, having first ordered them
in their distance for Motion at six foot both in Rank and File.

CHAP. LXXIX.
How a Commander shall exercise his Company in gross, in their proper Motions,
after he has drawn the Shot upon either Wing of the Body of Pikes: with
the words of Command for the performance thereof; as also for the reducing them
to their first station.
HAving duly performed those Circumstances specified in the former Chapter, and
now standing in the head of your Company; the Lieutenant in the Rear, and the
Sergeants upon either Flank, after you have commanded silence, and also to
stand right in their Ranks and Files, you shall command them to.

Faces to the right hand.

This Motion is performed only by turning your body to the place where your
right hand stood, Note the Soldiers must be placed in their distance for
Motion six foot both in Rank and File.
not moving your right foot at all, but turning it a little upon the ball; and
to reduce them to their former station, you must use this word of Command (As
you were) so turning to the left hand again, brings them to their former
station.

Faces to the left hand. This motion is performed by turning your body to the
place where your left hand stood, When your Soldiers begin any motion, let
them; advance their Arms when they come to a stand, and have performed their
motion, let them order their Arms.
bringing your left leg somewhat about, and only turning your right foot a
little upon the Ball: and to reduce them to their former station, you must use
this Word of Command (As you were) so turning off to the right hand, brings
them to their first Station.
Faces to the right hand about. This motion is performed, by turning of your
body round about by the right hand, so that your face stands where your back
parts did, and to reduce them to their former station, you must use this Word
of Command, (To the left hand about as you were) so turning back again by the
left hand, brings them to their first Station.
Faces to the left hand about. This motion is performed, As for the causing
your Soldiers to face to the right and left, or to the right and left inward,
or to the right angle or left angle, or to the four Angles, I leave it to the
discretion of the Commander, either to do it, or leave it, and the like for
the facing of half files.
by turning of your body round about by the left hand, so that your face stands
where your back parts did: and to reduce them to their former Station, you
must use this word of Command (To the right hand about as you were) so turning
back again by the right hand, brings them to their first Station.

These motions of facing being perfectly done, you shall command the whole
Company to front to the right hand, and cause them there to begin anew the
aforesaid motions; where ten to one, you shall find them anew to seek; so
fronting them from hand to hand round about, will make them perfect; otherwise,
they will be to seek, as often as you alter your Front.

CHAP. LXXX.
Of Facing Square, and how to perform it; The usefulness of Facings, and the
several parts thereof.
FAcings are so useful and necessary, that a Commander may as well dispense
with any one of the grounds of Discipline as with them; for upon all occasions
in Service they are useful, and not only sooner executed than any other of
the motions, but may be needful when wheelings and Counter-marches cannot be
used, as in a strait. There are no more than four faces entire, besides
Angular; as in the precedent Chapter is showed; But as for your divisionall
there be diverse which I have omitted.

Entire Facings, are so called, when the aspect of the whole Company is
directed one way.

Divisionall Facings are so called, when the aspect of the Soldiers is at one
and the same time directed diverse ways; as to the Front and Rear, the Right,
the Right and Left, or to all four at once, etc.

Angular Facings are so called, when the Aspect of the Company is directed to
the right Corner man, which is the right Angle, or to the left Corner man,
which is the left Angle, or to the four Corner men, which are termed the four
Angles.

These Angular Facings, amongst the Grecians were of great use, for they made
use of them by reducing out of the Square, a Diamond Battle; and from the
Diamond, they reduced two Triangles, by cutting or dividing the same in the
midst at the two flat Angles; and of two Triangles they framed a Sheere
Battle; and of three or four Triangles, they framed their Saw-Battell, etc.

Now for the instructing of your Soldiers how to Face Square (if the body be
but eight in depth) you must command the two first Ranks to stand fast,
likewise the two last Ranks are to face about, the rest of the Body, are to
face to the Right and Left; if the Body be deeper, then you must command more
Ranks to the Front, and so likewise to the Rear; and in the viewing the
subsequent Figure, you shall the better understand the manner of performing
this motion of Square Facing.

Face Square, and March.

Proper Front.

It is nccessary for Soldiers to move 10. or 12. paces upon every motion of
facing, whether entire or Divisionall.


Front accidental.

Front accident all.



The Front of the Reere.

The Words of Command commonly used to produce this precedent Figure, are these
as follows, if they be 10 in depth, and 20 in Rank.

The first three Ranks stand.

The three last Ranks face about.

The rest of the Body face to the Right and Left, (then) March all.

To reduce them to their first Order:

Face all about to the Right; March, and close your Divisions.

Face all to your Leader, (who then stands at his Front proper.)

Another way of facing Square, and Marching upon it.

The Front proper.

The Front of the left Flank.

The Front of the right Flank.



The Front of the Reere.

The words of Command customarily used to produce this Figure, are these as
follows.

Musketeers, face to the right and left.

Halfe-files of Pikes, faces about to the right (then) March all.

To reduce them to their former order.

Face all about to the right, March and close your Divisions.

Face all to your Leader.

In the next Chapter I shall show the manner of Opening and Closing both of
Files and Ranks; and then some instructions of doubling them, with their use
and parts.

CHAP. LXXXI.
The manner of opening, and closing, both of Ranks and Files, and how to
double them with the use and parts thereunto belonging.
IN the opening, and closing of Ranks and Files, there are diverse things
considerable, as first in the motion of Files, you are to observe your Leader.

Secondly, in your motion of Ranks, you are to observe your right hand (...).

Thirdly, when Files open to the right, the Left-hand-file, must stand fast,
every (...) taking (...) distance from the File next his left hand.

Fourthly, when they open to the Le, then the right hand File stands; every
File taking his distance from the File next his Right hand.

Fifthly, in closing of Files if it be to the right, then contrary to the
opening the Right-hand-file stands: the rest closing to the right taking then
Distance, from their next right hand-file.

Sixthly, if you close to the left, then the Left-hand-file stands, the rest of
the Files closing to the left, taking their distance in like manner.

Seventhly, when Files close to the right and left, then they close inwards,
taking their distance from the Files within them, nearer to the midst of the
body.

Eighthly, note when Files are commanded to open to the right and left (or by
division) it must be outward.

Likewise you must observe when Ranks open forwards, then the last Rank
stands, every Rank taking his distance from the Rank next behind him.

Secondly, when they open backwards, then the first Rank is to stand, and
every Rank is to take his distance from the Rank next before him.

Thirdly, if Ranks close to Front and Rear, then the first and last Rank
stands, the other taking their distances from them.

Fourthly, if they close Ranks toward the Center or midst, then they close
toward their two middlemost ranks.

Lastly, you are to observe, that in opening of Files and Ranks, you are (in
the acting of it) either to face to the right, or to the right about; these
things being considered, and you having commanded them to even their Ranks,
and straighten their Files, you are to use these words of Command following

Ranks and Files to your close order. Of the several distances you shall read
before.


Files open to the right Ranks open forwards to your Order.
Files open to the right Ranks open forwards to your open order.
Files open to the right Ranks open forwards to your double distance.
Files close to the Right Ranks close forwards to your open order.
Files close to the right Ranks close forwards to your order.
Files close to the Right Ranks close forwards to your close order.
Files open to the Left Ranks open backwards to your order.
Files, open to the left. Ranks, open backwards. to your open order.
Files, open to the left. Ranks, open backwards. to your double distance.
Files, close to the left. Ranks close backward. to your open order
Files, close to the left. Ranks, close backward. to your order.
Files, close to the left. Ranks, close backward. to your close order.
Files, Ranks, open to the right and left front and rear. to your order.


Files, Ranks, open to the right and left front and rear to your open order.


Files, Ranks, open to the right and left, front and rear, to your double
distance.


Files, Ranks, close to the right and left inward midst, to your open order.



These motions being performed by the Soldiers fairly, and with out mistakes;
you may proceed to exercise them, in their doublings; and show them their use
and parts; as the following Chapter will direct.

CHAP. LXXXII.
How an Officer shall exercise his Company in doubling of their Ranks and
Files with the use thereof, and the several parts and branches thereto
belonging.
THe use of doublings were invented for the strengthening of any part of the
Battle, according to the discretion of the wise Commander, and are
distinguished into these two generals, viz. doublings of length, and doublings
of depth.

Doubling of Ranks does make the number double so much as was before, whereby
the length of the Battle is extended to the double proportion of ground.

Doubling of Files (or Flanks) does likewise double the number in depth; as
the former did in length: and before we proceed to particularize these
doublings; let us take notice of these observations following.

First, that in this motion of doubling there is one part of the body stands
firm and the other part moves, viz. the standing part is to be doubled, the
part moving are those that double.

Secondly, observe that the distance for particular and divisionall doublings,
is open Order in Rank and File.

Thirdly, observe that the ordinary doublings of Ranks and Files is or ought
to be performed by three steps; viz, first stepping forth with that foot which
is next unto the place named.

Fourthly, in the reducement to your former station, you must return by the
contrary hand.

Fifthly, observe in doubling of Ranks and Files, viz, if you double Ranks
either to the right or left hand; if you double your Files to the contrary
hand, reduces them into their former station; or in doubling of Files to
either hand; doubling of your ranks to the contrary will reduce them.

Lastly, observe the several parts or branches of doublings; which are,
Doublings of First, Ranks. Secondly, Halfe-Files. Thirdly, Bringers up.
Fourthly, The Rear. Fifthly, Files. Sixthly, Halfe-Rankes,



The first is doubling of Ranks, which is performed when every Even-ranke is
doubled into the Odd.

The second is, when the half Files double their Ranks forwards into the
Front.

The third is, when the Bringers-up double their Ranks forwards into the Front.

The fourth is, when the Front half Files doubleth the Rear: these first
four being doublings of Ranks, causes the length of the Battle to be
extended either simply in number, or both in number and place.

The fifth is, the ordinary doubling of Files, viz. every one of the even Files
being inserted into the odd Files; accounting from the hand named.

The sixth and last is, the doubling of half Ranks; which is to be understood
when one Flank doubles the other, either by passing through, Countermarch,
doubling entire, or divisionall;

The words of Command most properly used for doublings.

Ranks, to the Right Left. double.

Ranks, as you were. Files, to the Right. Left. double.
Files, as you were.

Bringers up, double your Ranks forward to the right. Bringers up, face about
to the left: march forth into your places. Bringers up, double your Ranks
forward to the left. Bringers up, face about to the right: march forth into
your places.
Files, to the right and left double. Outward, Inward. Files, as you were.


Half Files, double your Ranks forward to the right. Half Files, face about
to the left: march forth into your places. Half Files, double yur Ranks
forwards to the left. Half Files, face about to the right: march forth into
yrur places.
Front half Files, face about to the Left. And double the Rear to the right.
March forth into your places.

Front half Files, face about to the right. And double the Rear to the left.
March forth into your places,

Front Halfe-files double the Rear to the Right by Countermarch. Front
Halfe-files face about to the left; March forth into your places. Front
Halfe-files double the Reere to the left by Countermarch. Front Halfe-files
face about to the right; March forth into your places. Half Ranks to the
Right by Countermarch double your Left Flank, Halfe-rankes that doubled, face
to the Right; March forth into your places. Halfe-Rankes to the left by
Countermarch, double your Right flank. Halfe-rankes that doubled, face to the
Left; March forth into your places; Halfe-rankes of the Right, double your left
flank. Halfe-rankes that doubled, face to the right; March forth into your
places. Half Ranks of the left, double your right flank. Halfe-rankes that
doubled, face to the left. March forth into your places. Halfe-files double
your front to the right entire. Halfe-files face about to the left; March forth
into your places. Halfe-files double your front to the left entire. Halfe-files
face about to the right; March forth into your places. Halfe-files double your
front inward entire. Halfe-files face about to the right; March forth into your
places. Halfe-files double your front by division. Halfe-files, face about to
the right and left; March forth into your places. Front halfe-files, double
your Rear by Division. Front halfe-files, face about to the right and left
inward; March to your places. Front halfe-files, double your rear to the right
entire. Front halfe-files, face about to the left; March forth into your
places. Front halfe-files, double your Rear to the left entire. Front
halfe-files, face about to the right; March forth into your places:
Halfe-rankes of the right, double your left flank, entire to the right.
Halfe-rankes that doubled, face about to the left; March forth into your
places. Halfe-rankes of the left, double your right flanks entire to the left.
Halfe-rankes that doubled, face about to the right; March into your places.
Halfe-rankes of the right, double your left flank by Division. Halfe-rankes
that doubled, face about to the right, and left inward; March forth into, etc.
Double your Ranks to the right entire. Ranks that doubled, face to the left;
March forth into your places. Double your Ranks to the left entire. Ranks
that doubled face to the right; March forth into your places. Double your
Ranks by Division. Ranks that doubled, face to the right and left inward;
March forth into your places. Double your Files to the right entire advancing.
Files that doubled, face about to the left; March forth into your places.
Double your files to the left entire advancing. Files that doubled face about
to the right: March forth into your places. Files double your depth entire to
the Right, Left. Files that doubled, as you were.

Files double your depth to the Right: every man falling behind his
Bringer-up. Files that doubled, as your were.
Thus have I run over the Words of Command, whereby the doubling both of
Ranks and Files are produced, and also the aptest way and terms to reduce
them to their first form and station, as for demonstrating them by Figure, it
would be too tedious; in regard I am to discourse of all the parts belonging
to the Body of War; wherefore I shall only exemplify them, by discourse in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Directions how to perform those several kinds of doublings: and how to
reduce them again, according to the foregoing Words of Command, for producing
and reducing them.
HAving spoken briefly in the foregoing Chapter, concerning the several
kinds of doublings, and mentioned both the words of Command, which produces
them; and also the words of Direction for the reducing of them to their first
Form and Station; In this Chapter, I shall endeavor to set down brief
directions, how they may best be performed; with the readiest way for the
executing of them. The Words of Command (you shall find in the Margent) which
produces each several motion, of doubling both of Ranks and Files.

Ranks to the Right double. This doubling of Ranks to the Right, is naught
else but the inserting of the Even-rankes into the Odde-rankes; wherein you
must note, that in the doubling of Ranks, the Even-rankes are to double into
the Odd, beginning always to reckon from the first Rank; so that the second
Rank doubles into the first, entering in upon the Right hand of him that stands
in the Rank right before him, and so stands even a-Brest with them. The fourth
Rank, after the same manner doubles upon the right hand of him that stands
before him in the third Rank. The sixth Rank after the same manner doubles
into the fifth Rank. The eighth into the seventh, and the tenth into the
ninth. So that the Right Hand man of that Rank that doubleth to the Right, is
always to take his place upon the outermost side of the Right Hand man of that
Rank that was doubled, the rest of his Rank doing accordingly. After the same
manner, it is to be performed to the Left hand, only now you are to take the
left hand of him that stands in the Rank before you after the same manner as
before you did the Right. For the reducing of them, those Ranks that doubled,
must turn off to the contrary hand of that they doubled unto: The Command is,
Ranks as you were. Or otherwise you may reduce them, by commanding the Leaders
to draw out their Files, (viz.) those Ranks that doubled, are to stand firm;
and those that were doubled are to march out, until their last Rank be a
pretty distance before the first Rank of them that doubled, and then they are
to step into their Even distances, and stand even in Rank and File, as before.
Files to the Left double. The words of Command which produces this doubling
of Files is placed in the Margent: The manner of doubling of Files described.
And the way to perform it is as follows; First each of the even Files
doubleth into the odd Files, beginning from the hand named; as in this
doubling of Files to the Left; The Left-hand-file stands fast, and the second
File doubleth into it by stepping behind his Left-hand-man at three steps;
The fourth File doubleth into the third, and so for the rest; If your Command
be to double your Files to the right; then contrariwise the Right-hand-file
stands fast; the rest of the even Files doubling into the odd, accounting from
the Right, as before from the Left; And by the way observe, that as in doubling
of Ranks any way, you are to observe your Right Hand leader; So in doubling of
Files you are to observe your File-leader; so that as near as possibly may
be, you may either in Rank or File, be altogether in one motion; Also take
notice that this kind of doubling, is a doubling of number, and not of place,
for the depth of the Battle is not thereby extended, the words of Command used
for the reducing of them is, Files as you were.
Bringers up, double your Ranks forward to the Right. In this doubling of
Ranks by Bringers-up, as likewise in all other of like nature; The manner of
doubling of Ranks by the Bringers-up, described.
they that are to move, are first to advance their Arms; in the next place
they must be sure to observe their Right-hand-men. This doubling of Ranks by
Bringers-up differs from the other doubling of Ranks before demonstrated,
both in quantity and quality: In quantity it differs, in regard the other
leaves a large distance between Rank and Rank, being double the distance
they formerly stood at. This contrariwise continuing and preserving the same
distance they formerly stood at between each Rank; It differs also in
quality, because it brings the best, and second sort of Soldiers, together
into the Front; The words of Command, and direction (whereby this motion is
produced) is placed in the Margent; The manner of performing this Motion is
thus; the tenth or last Rank, which are the bringers up, are to pass forwards
even in rank, through or between the Intervals to the right of them that
stand before them, until they come even in Rank with the Front; the ninth
Rank following those which marched from behind them, placing themselves in the
second Rank. The eight eight Rank in the third. The seventh Rank in the
fourth. The sixth rank or Halfe-files, in the fifth or rear of the front
halfe-files. This doubling makes a very able Front in bringing the ablest
Soldiers together, and although the depth of the Battle be diminished, yet
the length of it is double in number; this doubling is in quantity of number,
not of ground. When you march into your places, you must not forget, that the
Rank which last took his place in the execution of this Motion, must first
march into his place in the way of reducement, for as they are led forth by
their bringers up, contrariwise they are led off by their halfe-file Leaders.
As for the doubling the Front to the Left hand by Bringers up, it is the same;
only differing in this, that whereas it was to the Right, this must be
performed to the Left; The Words of Command and direction for reducement of
this motion is, Bringers up, face about to the left, march forth into your
places.
Files, to the right and left double outward; I will in the first place
describe the manner of doubling of Files outward; The manner of doubling of
Files outward and inward described.
which works the same effect, as to double Files to the right and left; for
the right Flank is to double to the right, and the left Flank to the left; by
this doubling of Files to the right and left outward both the Flanks at one
instant are strengthened by doubling their number in depth; but it weakeneth
the inward part, where it takes two Files clean away, leaving a large
intervall in the midst; after the word of command is given; the outmost File of
each Flank stands, and the second File doubles into them; the third from each
Flank stands, and the fourth File doubles into the third, the sixth into the
fifth, and so likewise of all the rest. Note, that in doubling of Files you must
always step behind the side-man that you are to double into. If you would
double Files to the right and left inwards; it is to be done the contrary way:
Of doubling Files to the right and left inwards.
for whereas in the precedent doubling the outmost Files stand; and the other
doubling outward in to them: Contrariwise in this; the two inmost Files shall
stand, and the rest are to double inwards to them; and whereas in the other
there is a larger distance in the midst then in any other part; but in this
doubling inwards the midst will be as close as any other part; the words of
Command for the reducing of them into their first form is; Files, as you were.
Then the Files which doubled inwards upon the right Flank are to turn off to
the right, and those of the left Flank to the left; and so step into their
places. This doubling of ranks forewards by halfe-files; The manner of
doubling of Ranks by half Files described.
is a motion generally approved of to be very serviceable. It differs from
the other doublings by Bringers-up in quality though not in quantity (for in
quantity they keep one and the same proportion) In quality it differs thus:
the doubling by Bringers-up does bring the best and second sort of Soldiers
together into the Front; the fourth and third sort into the Rear; so that the
Rear is 4/7 worse then the front. But this doubling by halfe-files brings the
best and the third together into the front; and leaves the second and fourth in
the Rear; so that the Front is made more able then the Rear by 1/3.
Halfe-Files, double your Ranks, forwards to the right. It differs like wise
in motion thus: for whereas in the other doubling by Bringers-up the motion was
begun by the last rank, ever rank following the rank which came from behind
him. But this contrariwise is directly led forth by the sixth rank from the
front (they being ten deep in File) and so is executed more surely and
suddenly. After the words of Command are give (as you see placed in the
Margent;) then the sixth rank passing up into the first; the seventy rank into
the second; the eighth Rank into the third; and so for the rest. For the
reducement the words of Command are, Halfe-Files face about to the left, march
forth into your places. Then as the motion was led on by the half File
Leaders; so in the Reducement they are led off by the Bringers up. You may
double your halfe-Files to the left after the same manner of the former; only
changing to the contrary hand.
Front, half Files; face about to the left, and double your rear to the
right. This doubling the Rear by front half Files; is differing from the
doubling last discourst of more in manner then matter; The manner of doubling
the Reere by the Front halfe-files described.
For they both correspond in Substance, only they differ in circumstance:
After the words of command, and direction are given (as is expressed in the
margent;) then the Front half Files are to face about to the left (the Pikes
being all advanced, and the Musquetttiers all either poized or shouldred) and
so being led by the half File Leaders to the Rear they March directly
forwards to the right of the other part of the body, which stood faced in
opposition, until the Leaders of the doubling have ranked even in rank with
the bringers up; the rest ranking even with the other standing Ranks,
according to their places: If this doubling be used in service, then the whole
body is to face about to the rear, being the part to be doubled; but in way of
exercise the Commander may keep his place, and the doubling being performed;
and the whole body faced to the leader. Then for reducement you may command
Files to the Right entire adllancing; then every man falling before his Leader
will reduce each man to his first station. Or otherwise you may command; Front
Halfe-files, face about to the Left, march forth into your places; which they
performing accordingly will reduce them.
Front halfe-files, double your Rear to the Right by Countermarch. This kind
of doubling of the Rear, by the Front half Files, The manner of doubbling the
Rear, by Countermarch described.
is performed contrary to the former, for it is done by way of the Lacedemonian
countermarch, and does produce the same effect to the rear, as doubling the
Front by Bringers up does into the Front: the countermarch by which it is
performed, is a countermarch of loss of ground: It is at the discretion of
the Commander, to face the Company which way he pleases, either for motion or
Reducement.
where note, one part or moitie of the body countermarcheth; thereby not
altring the number of the length and depth of the figure; but only
transferring one part into another. You must further observe that if the rear
be doubled to the right, then the countermarch must be to the left: If the
doubling be to the Left, then the Countermarch must be to the Left; If the
doubling be to the Left, then the Countermarch must be to the Right. The way
to reduce them is (if the Commander stand at the head of that part that is
doubled) to Command: Front halfe-files, face about to the Right, March forth
into your places. But if he keeps his first standing, and having faced them to
him: Then, Front halfe-files, march forth into your places; To double the Rear
to the Left is the same, only changing the hand.
Half Ranks to the Right, by Countermarch double your left Flank.
Halfe-rankes (or Flanks) are then said to be doubled when the depth of the
Battalia is increased, The manner of doubbling Flanks by way of Countermarch,
described.
to double their former proportion of number, or place, or both; this doubling
of halfe-rankes to the left Flank by Countermarch, is a doubling of number and
not of place, for the depth still retains the same proportion, only augmented
by one man, but the length of the Battalia is diminished both in number and
place, the right Flank being wholly inserted into the left Flank; after the
words of Command is given (that produces this motion) which you shall find
placed in the Margent; then the half Ranks to the Right, are to face to the
Right, and then even in Rank together they are to counter March between the
Intervalls, until to the outmost File to the Right, be come into the outmost
File of the Left Flancke, (the body being 20 in Rank, or breast) then the
second into the nineteenth, the third into the eighteenth, the fourth into the
seventeenth, the fifth into the sixteenth, and the rest in like manner. The use
of this doubling is to strengthen one of the Flanckes; by bringing more hands
to do present execution, the other Flancke being in more surety. The way for
reducement of this motion is after this manner, the half Ranks last doubled,
being faced to the Right; then they which were the Last, which took their
places in the motion; now are the first which take their places in the
reducement, orderly Marching in Rank together until they come to their
places; then facing to their Leader they become Files again. The left Flancke
may in like manner, double the right by Countermarch; the difference is this:
The right Flancke stands, the left Flancke is inserted into the Right as before
the Right was into the Left.
Half Files double your front to the Right entire. If in this doubling of
Half Files to the Right entire, it should be performed, The manner of doubling
Halfe-files to the Right entire, to accommodate the doubling of Halfe-rankes
described.
as the body stands in an ordinary Square, Flanked with Musketeers, then it
would produce a mixture of Arms; wherefore to avoid this, before you enter
upon this doubling of passing in, through or between your half Ranckes: Cause
your half Files to double the Front to the Right entire; which being
performed, you may then proceed to the doubling of your Flanckes, any way you
please without Mixture of Arms. This doubling of the Front by Halfe-files to
the Right entire, is thus performed; After the words of Command are given, the
halfe-files are to face to the Right; then marching out forwards until the
left hand File belonging to the Reere, be marched past the right halfe-file
belonging to the Front, then facing to the left, they march up even abreast,
until the File-Leaders of the halfe-files to the Reere, be placed even in
rank with the File-leaders of the Front; all the rest of the ranks placing
themselves even with the other ranks. This manner of doubling halfe-files is a
doubling both of number and place, for the length of the Battle is not only
double so many a-brest as they were before, but they also have extended their
Length to double their proportion of ground which formerly they did occupy;
now you are to conceive that this doubling of Half Files which I have now
discour'st of, is performed for this purpose, that when the Half Ranks of the
Right, double the Left Flank; there shall by this means be no mixture of
Arms.
Half Ranks of the right double your left flank. In the next place let us
demonstrate the way how the Half Ranks of the Right should double their Left
Flank, How the Halfe-ranke of the Right, are to double the left Flank, is
described.
which is thus performed; the Left Flank stands, the Half Ranks of the Right
are to face to the Left; and then the inmost File of the Right Flank (all the
Files of the Right Flank, being by this facing become Ranks) is the Leader of
this motion, marching forth Right to their Left hands, between the Intervalls
of the Ranks of the left Flank; until the twentieth File (accounting from
the Right Flank which now is become a Rank) have placed themselves orderly in
the fortieth File, The half files having doubled the Front to the Right
entire, causes them to be 40 in Rank or Breast, before they were but 20.
which is the outmost File of the Left Flank; the nineteenth in the nine and
thirty, the eighteenth in the eight and thirty, and so of all the rest; this
doubling is of number and not of place. For reducement to both these doublings;
first cause the half Ranks, which last doubled, to face to the Right, and so
to march out into their places: They that last took their place in the motion,
are the first that take their places in the reducements: the doubling of Half
Ranks being thus reduced, You are next to reduce the Half Files; by
commanding them to face about to the Left, and to March forth into their
places: Note these kind of divisionall doublings requires open order in Rank
and File. And for your Entire doublings there is only the distance of order in
Rank and File required.
Halfe-files double your front to the left entire. All doublings aer either
Entire or divisionall; The difference between entire and divisionall
doublings, and of doubling half files entire, described.
Entire doublings are to be understood, when as Files or halfe-files, Ranks,
or halfe-rankes; (according as the Command is given) do March forth jointly
together without division or dissipation, to double the part Commanded.
Divisionall doublings, are such as formerly is showed (viz.) when the Files or
halfe-files, Ranks or halfe-rankes, are disranked and divided into more parts,
or places then one, This doubling of halfe-files to the Left entire is thus to
be performed, first the halfe-files to the Reere, face to the Left, and March
forwards until they are quite clear of that part of the body, which stands,
then they face to their Leader; and so March up until they are become even in
Rank with those that stand upon the Right Flank, and then, the form is
perfect, the word of Command which produces it, is placed in the Margent. For
the Reducement, the halfe-files that doubled having faced about they March
straight forth until they be clear of the Front halfe-files; then they face
to the Left, and March straight forth until every man has his right place,
and then they are to face right after their Leaders, the words of Command and
direction for this Reducement is, Halfe-files face about to the Right, March
forth into your places. This kind of doubling of halfe-files has been held a
better doubling, then either the ordinary doubling of Ranks, or the usual way
of doubling by halfe-files, or bringers up, the reasons are these, first it
makes no disturbance to the other part of the Battalia; but that it may either
be executed in time of Motion, Exercise or Skirmish: Secondly it appears
another solid body; to the great disheartning of an Enemy: Thirdly it is very
apt for over Fronting; it being a doubling both of number and place.
Halfe-files double your front inward entire. This Motion of doubling the Front
inward entire, has been of great request; The manner of doubling the Front
inward entire described.
and is most commonly used by great Bodies; as when a Regiment, Division, or
Maniple, Moves forwards, between two others, thereby seconding or releeving
them: Whereby the Front of all the three Divisions become ranged in an even
Line; the words of Command and direction that produces this Motion is placed
in the Margent The Motion of this doubling is thus to be performed: The
halfe-files of the Front, faceth to the Right and Left; and either Division
Marches right forth until they have left a distance between them sufficient
to receive the halfe-files of the Reere, and then they are to stand and face to
their Leader: Then the halfe-files March up and even their Front. For the
Reducement of this figure; Let the halfe-files face to the Reere, and March
until they are clear of the Front Halfe-files, then stand and face about to
their Leader or Commander; then the other halfe-files of the Front, are to
close their Division, and they are reduced. The Words of Command used for this
reducement are, Halfe-files, face about, and march. Front halfe-files, close
your Divisions, face all to your Leader.
Halfe-files double your front by Division. This kind of doubling, The manner
of doubling the Frong with half files by division, described.
as before is showed, is of singular good use, because it may be performed in
time of fight, without disturbance to the other part of the Battle. The way to
perform this motion, is as follows; first, the halfe-files of the Reere are
to face to the right and left; and then to march right-forth until they are
clear of the Rear part of the Front-division, then they are to face to their
Leader, and march, until they become even in rank with the Front, and so
stand; which perfects this doubling. The way to reduce them is as follows;
viz. the halfe-files are to face about to the Reere, and to march forth-right,
until they are clear of the Front halfe-files, and then they are to face to
the right and left inwards, and so to march and close their Divisions; then
being faced to their Leader they are reduced. The Words of Command for
reducement, are Halfe-files face about inwards, March forth into your places.
Front halfe-files double your Rear by Division. This doubling of the Rear by
the Front halfe-files, will work the same effect to the Rear, The manner of
doubling the Rear with halfe-files by division, described.
as the last doubling by division did to the Front. It may be useful in the
passing of a River, when the Enemy charge or pursues in the Rear, the
Front-division either opening and suffering the Rear halfe-files to pass
through them, they maintaining the skirmish, until the other have attained the
further Bank of the River: Or else the Front halfe-files being opened to the
right and left, and faced upon the Enemy, march valiantly up and receive the
charge, whilst the other provide for themselves; for the manner and way of
this motion, it may be thus performed. After the Command is given, the Front
halfe-files are to face to the right and left, and march right forth until they
are clear of the other halfe-files of the Rear, then they face to the Rear
and march on, until they have attained to be even in rank with them whom they
had command to double; which perfects the doubling. The way to reduce them
follows; if you keep your place of the first Front, then let your half-files
face about, and march until they are clear of the Rear halfe-files which
stand, then face to the right and left inwards, and close their Division, and
being again faced to their Leader, they are reduced to their first form. The
words of Command properly used for this reducement, is; Front halfe-files, face
about to the right and left inward, March forth into your places.
Front halfe-files double your Rear to the right entire. This doubling of the
Rear to the Right entire by the Front halfe-Files, The manner of doubling the
Rear entire, by the Front halfe-files, described.
is thus to be performed; after the Word of Command is given, the half Files
of the Front are to face to the Left, and march straight out, until they are
clear of that part of the Body which stands; then they are to face again to
the Left (which is the Rear) and march outright until they rank even with
the last Rank of the Reere-division; which gives conclusion to the doubling.
For reducement thereof, your Front halfe-Files face about to the left, and
march right forth until they are clear of the Reere halfe-Files, then face
them to the Right, and let them march into their places; then if the Commander
go to his first Front, and face them all to him, they are reduced as at first.
To double the Rear to the Left entire, may be done after the same manner,
only differing in hand. The Words of Command which reduces it, are Front
halfe-Files, face about to the left, March forth into your places.
Half Ranks of the right, double your left Flank entire to the right. This
doubling of the left Flank by advancing the right Flank, The manner of doubling
by half Ranks entire described.
and placing it before the Leaders of the left Flank, which is a doubling both
of number and place, being very useful for the strengthening of any Flank where
it shall seem needful. And if you desire to have your Musketires to double
even with the Musketires of the contrary Flank; then you must first cause the
half Ranks of the right Flank to march forth-right, until the Rear-Rank of the
right Flank be advanced about 3 foot before the Front of the left Flank; and
then cause that Flank so advanced to countermarch their Ranks to the right,
and then all your Musketires will be together, and the Pikes likewise by
themselves. The manner of performing this motion according to the words of
Command in the Margent, is as follows: First the left Flank stands, and the
right Flank marches forth-right, until the Rear of the right Flank be
advanced before the Front of the left Flank (as before is showed) then face
them to the left, and cause them to march until the Pikes are even in Rank
with the Musketires, which perfects the doubling. For the Reducement, let the
half Ranks that doubled face about to the left, and march until they are
clear of the left Flank, then cause them to face to the right, and to march
straight down into their places: then the Commander being at his first Front
faceth them all to him, which reduces them as at first. The left Flank may
also double the right Flank entire after the former manner, only changing the
hand; the Command for reducement is Half Ranks that doubled, face about to the
Left, march forth into your places.
Half Ranks of the left, double your right Flank by division. This motion of
doubling Flanks by division does make a strong form of Battle to give fire
three several ways at once; The manner of doubling Flanks by division
described.
The manner of performing it after the word of Command is given as follows:
The Rear half-Files of the left Flank face about to the right, and then both
the Front half-Files and Rear half-Files march forth-right until they are
clear of that part of the body that stands; then each division faceth that way
which they are to double (which the Front half-Files must do to the right, and
the Rear half-Files to the left) and so march forth-right until the doubling
be performed. For reducement, if the Commander stands at the right Flank (which
is the part that was doubled) then the reducement is as follows; the half
Ranks that doubled are to face about inwards, and march forth-right until they
are clear of the right Flank which stands; then the Front half-Files face to
the left, and the Rear half-Files to the right, and then close their division.
The Commander going to his first Front and facing the whole body to him, they
are reduced as at first, If that the right Flank would double the left Flank by
division, the way is the same, only differing in the hand. The words of Command
to reduce it, are, Half Ranks that doubled, Face about inwards, March forth
into your places.
Double your Ranks to the right entire. This doubling of Ranks entire to the
right, The manner of doubling Ranks entire described.
is a doubling both of number and place, and in some sort works the same
effect as the doubling of half Files does to the right entire; but differs in
regard of the parties which are the doublers, and in the distance left after
the doubling. The motion of this doubling ought to be thus performed: After the
word of Command is given for the doubling to the right, as in the Margent is
expressed: then every even Rank faceth to the right. The right hand man of each
Rank becoming the Leader of his Rank, likewise leading them forth, and in their
March of moving forwards, a little bending to the left, that when the left hand
man of each Rank (which are the bringers up of the motion) are clear of the
standing part of the body, by only facing to the Front, they may stand even in
Rank with the rest of the Company. For reducement of this doubling, you must
observe that the left hand men are the Leaders of the motion: wherefore command
the Ranks that doubled to face to the left, and march forth-right into their
places. Or you may command the half Ranks of the right to face to the left,
and double the left Flank; this will work the same effect with the former. To
double Ranks to the left entire, is to be done after the same manner, only
observe the difference of the hand. This kind of doubling may also be done by
division. The words of Command used for this reduceme^t, are, Ranks that
doubled, face to the left: march forth into your places.
Double your Files to the right entire, advancing. This kind of doubling of
Files entire to the right advancing, The manner of doubling Files entire
advancing, described.
is also a doubling both of number and place; for it increases the depth, to
double their former proportion of number, as from ten to twenty. It also
gains so much ground the more before the Front, as formerly the Battle did
contain, by transferring the even Files of the body into the ground before the
Front of the odd Files; But this doubling does diminish the number of the
length of your Battle, although it preserves their place. The manner of
performing this motion of doubling is thus to be done; first the word of
Command being given (as in the Margent is specified) the odd Files are to
stand, beginning your account from the outmost File to the hand named; the
Musketires and Pikes of the even Files are to advance their Arms and follow
their File-Leaders, every File-Leader leading his File forth-right before his
next File to the right, until the bringers up of the even Files are orderly
placed before the Leaders of the odd Files. For reducement, Let the Files that
doubled face about to the left, the bringers up of each File leading them
forth-right down the distance or spaces which are on their left hand, until
they are come even with the Rear, and then stand and face about to their
Commander, and they will be in their first form and station. The doubling of
Files to the left entire advancing is after the same manner, only differing in
the hand. The words of Command used for this reducement, are, Files that
doubled, face about to the left: march forth into your places.
Files double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his Bringer up.
This kind of doubling of the depth of Files to the right does sympathize with
the former doubling last discourst of, The manner of Files doubling their depth
described.
both for number and place; only it differs from the other both in the manner
of executing, and in some sort of the matter executed: for whereas the other
doubling by advancing of Files did transfer all the even Files into the
ground before the Front; contrariwise, this doubling does transfer them into
the ground next behind the Rear. And as in the other doublings, half the
File-Leaders did remain in the Front, and the other half were
halfe-File-Leaders. Now in this doubling half the File-Leaders are to remain
in the Front, and the other half are brought down and placed in the last Rank
of the Rear, and those which were Bringers up, are now in this motion become
the middlemost Ranks. The manner of performing this doubling, is thus first
having given the word of Command that produces this motion (as is specified in
the Margent); then every man falling behind his Bringer up, the even Files
(accounting from the hand named) immediately are to face about to the right,
and the Bringers up of each of the even Files are to turn behind the Bringers
up of the odd Files that stand; And so every man as he comes down to the
Rear, turns to the left behind him that marches down the next before him,
until those that were Leaders of the even Files are become the Bringers up to
those that were the odd Files. The reducement is thus to be performed,
according to the words of Command used for that purpose, Bringers up (that now
are) double your Ranks forwards to the left. The instructions for this doubling
the Ranks forwards (by the Bringers up) into the Front, is discourst of in the
beginning of this Chapter: where you shall find in the Margent the manner of
doubling of Ranks, by the Bringers up described. In the next Chapter following
I shall endeavor to show the difference between Inversion and Conversion, with
the words of Command and Reducement belonging to those motions.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
Of Inversion and Conversion with their words of Command, whereby those motions
are produced, and the way of reducing them described.
FOR Etymology of these words, you may be pleased to observe, that Inversion
does always produce File or Files; and Conversion Rank or Ranks.

Inversion consists of the Files filing, or of Ranks filing; but Coversion
consists of Ranks ranking to the right or left.

Or by increase of Files ranking by even or uneven parts, and of Ranks wheeling
to the right or left. But in performing these motions there is a larger
distance of ground required than in any other motion. The words of Command with
their several reducements are as follows.

Files File on to the Right. Left. This word of Command is performed by causing
the right hand File to march away single: Inversion.
the second File from the right falls into the Rear of the first, the third
behind the second, the fourth behind the third, and so consequently all the
rest of the Files fall into the Rear of their next right hand Files, until all
the whole Company become one File. This was invented to pass narrow Bridges or
straight Paths in Woods, where but one at once can pass; for the reducing of
these into their former stations, the word of Command is, File-Leaders Lead up
your Files as your were: which is performed, every File-leader leading up his
File to the left of him that marches before him, until all the File-leaders
are even in Rank together, This sort of inversion is called filing on sequ^nce.
and their Files orderly following of them. For the Files filing on to the left
may be performed after this precedent manner, only altering the hand etc.

This filing by division is to be performed after the same manner the
precedent was, only this difference; that Files, File to the right and left,
by division. The right hand File of the Company, and the left hand File of the
same begin to lead forth at one and the same time, in their several places,
viz. The Files of the right Flank falling likewise behind the right hand File;
the Files of the left Flank falling in like manner behind the left hand File,
so that if the body of Pikes be flankt with Musketires, then this filing by
division brings all the Musketires into the Front-division, and the Pikes
into the Rear of them. The word for reducement, is, File-Leaders, Lead up your
Files as you were.
Ranks, File to the Right. Left. To perform this, all the Ranks are to be
inverted to the outmost File to the right. Wherefore let all your Files be
closed to their order, or close order, and your Ranks opened (either forwards
or backwards) to double distance, or twice double distance (according to your
number of men in Rank). Then let every Rank move after his right hand man
until all the Ranks stand right in one File, after the right hand Leader of
his Rank. If the Commander will perform this upon a March, then the Ranks
shall not need to be opened to any distance, but let them take their distance
in the execution of it, which is the easiest way thus to perform it, viz. The
right hand man of the first Rank marches forth-right, all his Rank facing to
the right, and marching likewise after him. The right hand man of the second
Rank falling immediately after the left hand man of the first Rank, all his
Rank in like manner following of him. The right hand man of the third Rank
falls into the File after the left hand man of the second, his Rank likewise
following of him; and so of all the rest of the Ranks until they become one
File; this kind of filing by Ranks is sooner performed than Files filing; and
is readier to be reduced to make resistance against any opposition in the
Front. The word of Command to reduce them, is, Files, Rank as you were. The
manner to perform this reducement, is, if they were ten men in the foremost
Rank, then the first ten men rank to the left into the Front as they were at
first. The next ten men next after them, which makes the second Rank. The third
ten men ranking to the left, makes the third Rank; and so of all the rest,
until they be reduced into their first form or station. As for Ranks filing
to the left, etc. it is to be performed after this very same manner, only it
differs in the hands: for in this the left hand man of the first Rank
marches forth-right, and all his Rank facing to the left, marches likewise
after him; and so of the rest. If you desire to avoid the mixture of Arms, you
may march forwards your Musketires of each division, and close them before the
Pikes, and invert them first: or you may march forwards your Pikes first, and
leave the Muskets to come in the Rear; or you may invert the Front-division of
Shot, then the Pikes, and last the Rear-division of Shot.

Ranks, File to the Right. Left. Ranks filing to the right and left, is a
doubling of the depth by an unequal proportion: for in other doublings, either
the number of length or depth is augmented. But this doubling of Inversion
makes their depth so many times more in number as there are Files to double; or
half so many, if it be done by division: the use of it is to avoid the Shot of
great Ordnance; it serves also for a guard for any great Personage or Commander
to pass through: It is also commonly used for the Lodging of the Colors. The
manner to perform this motion is the same with the last precedent motion,
differing only in this; that whereas in the former all the whole Ranks turned
to the right, behind their right hand men; in this motion the left Flank (or
half-Ranks to the left) fall into the outmost File to the left, and the
halfe-Ranks to the right behind their several right hand men. For reducement,
the word of Command for it, is, Files, Rank to the right and left inwards, as
you were: viz. the Ranks which before inverted into Files, now are to convert
into Ranks as they were.


The nature of this motion, which is performed by conversion, produces Ranks,
as the former motion of Inversion did Files. Wherefore you may use this word of
Command,

Ranks, Rank. 3. 5. 7. or 9. to the right. 4. 6. 8. or 10. to the left. By
increase, 2. 4. 6. 8. etc. to the right. By increase, 1. 3. 5. 7. etc. to the
left. Entire to the right, into the Front. Entire to the left, into the Front.
By division into the Front. The word of Command to reduce these into their
former station, is. Rank, Ranks as you were.

Ranks Wheel to the Right. Left. Right and left.
Files, Rank. 3. 5. 7. or 9. to the right. 4. 6. 8. or 10. to the left. By
increase to the right, 1. 3. 5. 7. etc. By increase to the left, 2. 4. 6. 8.
etc. To the right, To the left, into the Front. The word of Command to reduce
these into their former station is, Ranks, File as you were.





Now observe, that the several parts of this motion, which is distinguished by
the name of Conversion, consists of Ranks Ranking In equal parts. In unequal
parts. Entire into the Front. By division into the Front. By wheeling to the
Flanks.
Files Ranking By equal parts. By unequal parts. Entire into the Front.



First of Ranks ranking in equal parts, it is thus to be understood; when
there are 12 or 20 (more or less) marching a Breast, and the Commander finding
his passage narrow, or for any other intent, commands his Ranks to Rank 3 or
6 a Breast, or 5, 10, or any other number, every Rank holding equality of number.

Secondly observe, that Ranks then Rank by unequal parts, when they Rank by
increase or decrease: as for example, when the first Rank shall be 3, the next
5, then 7, 9, etc. which is commonly used in triangular figures, as the
Horsemans-wedge, or the Diamond-Battell.

Thirdly observe, that Ranks then rank entire into the Front, when the first
Rank stands, the second Rank places it self upon the right or left of the
first; the third by the second; the fourth by the third; and so forwards for
all the rest, until all the Ranks, according to their Command, either to the
right or left, are become one Rank in the Front.

Fourthly observe, that Ranks then rank by division into the Front, when the
second Rank, and all the rest of the Ranks behind open to the right and left,
the one part going to the right, and the other to the left, ranking even with
the first, as is showed in the former; and all these being joined together,
makes one entire Rank.

Fifthly observe, that Ranks then rank to the Flank or Flanks, when either the
right hand man of each Rank, or left hand man (or both together) are as it were
the Hinge of the motion; the residue of each Rank wheeling about them to the
right or left (or to each hand by division) until that every Rank be brought
into the distance which was before the Rank, between the right-handman of the
Rank next before, and the right hand man of the same Rank you stand in. If it
be to the left, then they wheel into the distance between the left hand
Leaders of each Rank. If it be by division, then half the Rank wheeleth to
the right, and the other half to the left, which produces two Ranks.

Sixthly observe, that Files then rank by equal parts when they rank 3, 4 or 5
a Breast (be it more or less) still keeping the number of men in Rank, of due
proportion. If you rank three a Breast (either to the right or left) and your
Files be but ten deep; then the first nine men makes three Ranks, and the
fourth Rank must be made up by the Leader, and the next that follows him of the
second File: and so for all the rest. If you rank five, and the Files be ten
deep, then every File makes two Ranks, etc.

Seventhly observe, that Files then rank by unequal parts when they either
rank by progressionall increase or by decrease: as when every Rank exceeds the
Rank before it, by two, three or four, be it more or less; or else that each
Rank decreaseth after the same manner.

Eighthly observe, that Files then rank entire into the Front, when there is so
much distance between File and File, as will contain each File Rank-wise, every
man in the File marching forwards to the right or left, as shall be commanded,
until he stand even in Rank with the Leader of his File, which brings the body
into one Rank.

As for Ranks wheeling by Conversion to the right and left, or Ranks ranking to
each Flank by wheeling, it differs from Ranks filing both in manner and
matter.

In differs in manner thus; whereas in Ranks filing to the right and left, the
right and left hand File-Leaders preserve and continue their places: in this
wheeling by Conversion to the right and left, you shall find it contrary to
Ranks filing: for the innermost File-Leaders become the outmost men in that
part where the Front stood, the other File-Leaders rank even within them; for
when the word of Command is given for wheeling, you are to wheel your aspects
unto the hand or part named, whereby you either become a Rank or Ranks, and not
Files.

This way of wheeling is a very speedy motion for a great body (if they have
their due distance) to give fire to one or both Flanks. The manner or
performing it follows.

Ranks, wheel to the right and left by division. To perform this wheeling by
division, the right and left hand men of every Rank are to become the hinges of
the motion; the rest of each Rank wheeling by equal division to the right and
left about, and above the right and left hand Leaders, until they become Ranks
to the Flanks. If you will avoid mixture of Arms, then place all your Muskets
in Front or Rear, or else wheel only your Muskets and leave your Pikes
standing; or else it may be done, the body marching at length, the Muskets
being in the Front and Rear division. The word for the reduceme^t, is, Ranks,
Rank as you were: which is performed by facing to the Rear, and then to wheel
back into their places; then face to their Leaders, and they will be in their
former station.

Now it remains to demonstrate the way and manner of Files ranking by
Conversion in equal parts; the word of Command is, Files, Rank ^our to the
left. To perform this motion, the right hand File-leader leads forth his
File, and the three next men behind him move forwards to the left hand of each
other, until they rank even a Breast with their File-leader. The next four in
like manner ranking to the left, do make the second Rank, they being but eight
deep. The File-leader of the second File places himself next after him that
was the half-File-leader of the first, which now is become the right hand man
of the second Rank: the three next men behind him makes up his Rank; and so in
like manner for all the rest until the motion be quite perfected. This
converts each File into two Ranks, and brings all the proper File-leaders and
half-File-leaders to make the outmost File to the right. The Bringers up both
of the Front and Rear half-Files, makes the outmost File to the left. For the
reducement of this motion of Files ranking four to the left, is thus to be
performed: first cause your Ranks to file (or invert) to the right; which being
done, command every File-leader to lead up his File to the left, and so every
man will be in his first station.



CHAP. LXXXV.
How an Officer is to exercise his soldiers in three manner of Countermarches,
which are to be performed two manner of ways, viz. one by File, the other by
Rank.
THe next thing to be performed after you have exercised your men in the
doubling of their Ranks and Files, Three kinds of Cou^termarches, viz. the
Chorean, Lacedaemonian, and Macedonian, described by Ael^an in his Tac. page^
125 cap. 28.
is, to teach them how to countermarch. Wherefore you may first begin with
entire Countermarches by File. The word of Command which produces it,
follows.

Files, to the right hand Countermarch. As soon as the word of Command is
given, The distance for Countermarch is 6 foot in Rank and File.
if they be to countermarch to the right; then all the File-leaders are to step
forwards with their right-legs, and face about to the right hand: every
File-leader with his File following him, passing down toward to the Rear,
through the Intervall on his right hand, still observing to keep even in Rank
with his right hand man; Note, when there is a Countermarch commanded without
any other addition, then it is always intended a Chorean Countermarch.
and note, That no man must turn until he come to the ground where at first
his File-leader began the Countermarch. This motion is performed when the
Bringers up have attained unto the place where before their File-leaders stood.
Files, to the left hand Countermarch. To countermarch to the left hand works
the same effect, and is done after the same manner, only differing in hands.
For reducing them into their former stations, If you countermarch to the right,
by countermarching again to the left, brings them into their first form.
Files, to the right hand Countermarch, every man turning after his Leader, on
the ground he stands. This Lacedaemonian Countermarch is to be performed as
follows: Of countermarching to lose ground.
the File-leaders of each File are to step side-waies to the right hand, and
therewithal to face about to the Rear, and so march even in Rank down together
between the Intervalls or spaces of ground between File and File; no man
advancing a foot forwards, but turning off the ground they stand on after their
Leaders when they are past by them; still observing to keep their due distance:
and so Rank after Rank, still turning off to the right, until the motion be
performed.
Files, to the left hand Countermarch; every man turning after his Leader on
the ground he stands. To countermarch to the left hand, works the same
effect, and is to be performed after the same manner, only differing in hand.
For reducing them into their former stations, If first they countermarcht to
the right hand, by countermarching again to the left, brings them into their
first form.
Bringers up face about to the right; the rest pass through to the Rear, and
place your selves before your Bringers up. This Lacedaemonian Countermarch does
lose the ground also whereon it formerly stood, and takes the ground behind the
Rear. The manner of the motion is as follows, viz. the last Rank of Bringers
up face to the Rear, and stand: the rest of the Body facing about in like
manner, and passing through, or between their bringers up, and placing
themselves even in Rank before them. The Motion is begun by the Rank next the
Bringers up, and so continued successively by the rest, until the Countermarch
be ended. It is to be reduced by performing the same motion to the contrary
hand; or the next subsequent motion following will reduce this into its former
station.
Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves
behind your Bringers up. This Lacedaemonian Countermarch (by which the former
may be reduced) is thus to be performed. The last Rank (or Bringers up) are to
stand firm, and the rest of the Body are to face to the Rear, and pass through
to the right, and place themselves behind their Bringers up, contrary to the
Countermarch last shown, in which they placed themselves before. The motion is
also begun by the second Rank from the Rear, the rest following successively,
until the File-leaders are become the Bringers up; then face them about after
their proper File-leaders, and they are reduced.
File-Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the right,
and place your selves behind your Leaders. The motion of this Macedonian
Countermarch is from the Rear to the Front: The Macedonian Countermarch to gain
ground.
quite contrary to the Lacedaemonian, whose motion was from the Front to the
Rear. This Macedonian Countermarch makes semblance in the Rear of flight, but
presently produces a settled Front, when perhaps the enemy with a too early
pursuit has broken the order of array. The way to perform this Countermarch is
as follows; The File-leaders or first Rank face about to the right, the rest
of the body pass through between the Intervals (or distance betwixt Files) to
the left, and place themselves behind their Leaders, every Rank (beginning with
that next the File-leaders) passing through successively, and taking their
places, until the Countermarch be fully executed. This may be reduced as the
former were, by doing the same to the contrary hand; or as formerly is said by
any entire Countermarch of File: or it may be reduced by another Macedonian
Countermarch, which in the next place shall be described.
File-Leaders, face to the Rear; the rest of the Body pass through to the
left, following your Bringers up, placing your selves behind your Leaders. By
this Macedonian Countermarch the precedent Countermarch may be reduced to its
former station; and it is thus performed: The first Rank or File-leaders face
to the Rear, then the last Rank begin the Countermarch: passing forwards
between the Intervalls, the seventh Rank following the eighth, the sixth
following the seventh; and so likewise the rest until the whole body be
trans-ferred into the ground before the Front, and then jointly together facing
to the right about after their Leaders: the Countermarch is ended. For
reducement, take this for a Rule, that any entire Countermarch of File may be
reduced by another entire Countermarch by File, of what kind, or to what hand
soever.
File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right and place your selves
before your Leaders. This Bastard Countermarch being partly derived from the
Macedonian and Lacedaemonian Countermarches, is thus to be performed; The
File-Leaders stand, the rest of the Body advance their Arms. The second Rank
first passing through to the right, and placing themselves before the first
Rank, the third Rank before the second, the fourth before the third, and so
forwards for all the rest, until the last Rank (or Bringers up) are become the
foremost, which perfects the motion. You may reduce it by countermarching to the
contrary hand; or if you please, you may reduce it by another like it self.
Ranks to the right hand Countermarch. This Chorean Countermarch of Ranks, Of
countermarching Ranks to maintain ground.
is an altering or changing of one Flank for the other, the Battalia still
keeping the same ground; only the right Flank becomes the left, and the left is
changed into the right. To perform this motion, you are to command your
Company to face to the right (by which the Ranks are become now Files) then
countermarching them down the Intervalls (or distance between Rank and Rank)
marching forth-right unto the part which was the left Flank, with their Ranks
File-wise following them. Being come unto their ground, they face as before;
and the Countermarch is performed. For the reducement, let them countermarch to
the left hand back again, and they will be in their first station.
Ranks, to the right hand Countermarch, every man turning after his right hand
man, on the ground he stands. This Lacedaemonian Countermarch of Ranks is a
falling on upon the left Flank, Of countermarching Ranks to lose ground.
the motion being begun by the right; it leaves all the ground the Battalia
stood on, and assumes in place thereof the ground besides the left Flank,
turning the aspect to the left: It is thus to be performed. The whole Body
faceth to the right, and then the right hand File being faced (becomes a Rank)
begins the Countermarch, turning down the Intervalls of the Ranks (which by
this facing is made the distance between the Files) and so marches forth-right
beyond the left Flank, every man following of him that was his right hand man,
but not stepping forward one foot of ground until the Countermarch be
performed. For the reducement of this Countermarch, you must command them to
countermarch again to the left, and they will be as at first; or if you please,
you may reduce it by another of the same kind as follows.
Right Hand File, face to the right; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your Right Hand men. This Lacedaemonian Countermarch
of Ranks makes a falling on upon the right Flank, the motion being from the
left Flank to the right, leaving all the ground whereon the Battalia stood, and
in lieu thereof takes the ground besides the right Flank. It is performed after
this manner. The right hand File faceth to the right, and passes through the
Intervalls or Spaces to the right, placing themselves before their right hand
men, until the left hand File become the foremost Rank* if you do this
Countermarch by it self; then for reducement, first face them to their Front
proper; then let the left hand Files face to the left, and do as much to the
left, and they will be in their first station.
Right Hand Files, face to the left; the rest pass through to the right,
placing your selves behind your right hand men. This Macedonian Countermarch of
Ranks is contrary to the former, for it dismarcheth from the enemy upon that
Flank where he approaches and presents the contrary Flank to receive the
Charge. It is performed after this manner; The outmost File to the right faceth
to the left; the rest of the Body or Battalia faceth to the right, every man
passing through to the right, and placing themselves behind their right hand
men. For the reducement of this Countermarch, do but command them to do as
much to the left as first they did to the right, and they will be in their
first form. Or if you please, you may make use of this following Bastard
Countermarch to perform the same.
Right Hand file, stand, the rest pass through to the right, placing your
selves on the outside of your right hand man. This Bastard Countermarch of
Ranks does alter both ground and Flank (still reserving the Aspect without
alteration): the manner of acting it follows. The outmost or right hand File
stands; the rest of the Body facing to the right, pass through to the right,
every man placing of himself on the right side of his right hand man, and so
standing even in Rank, the motion still continuing until the left hand File is
become the right, and the right hand File the left. If you command this
Countermarch to be performed alone, then to reduce it, you must cause the
left hand File to stand, then do as much to the left as before you did to the
right, and they will be in their first form.
Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst. This divisionall Chorean
Countermarch brings your File-Leaders and Bringers up together in the midst,
and the Ranks that were in the midst into the Front and Rear. Every man is to
march up into his Leaders ground before he faceth about to countermarch. To
perform this, you must cause the halfe-Files to face about; Note that for
countermarching Front and Reor into the midst, the Front half-Files are ever to
turn off toward the right hand, and the ^ear half-File to the (...); which
being truly ^bserved, they (...) even in the midst of the Battle, otherwise
not.
then the File-Leaders stepping forwards with the right leg, are to face
about to the right, passing down the Intervalls upon the right hand; the rest
of the Front half-Files following their Leaders, and not turning until they
come to the ground where their Leaders turned down before them. The Bringers up
with the Rear half-Files at the same instant are to turn down their Intervalls,
upon the left hand, the rest of their division following them, until the
File-Leaders and Bringers up meet together in the midst of the Battle, and
then having faced all to their Leaders, the motion is performed. You may reduce
it by doing the same thing over again, or any other divisionall Countermarch of
File.
File-Leaders and half-File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves before your Leaders. This Bastard Countermarch
does bring the Leaders and Bringers up together into the midst, Of bringing
Front and Rear together in the midst of the Battle and Countermarch.
and saves two facings, and is more readily performed than the former; The way
to perform the motion is as follows. The first Rank stands, and the
halfe-File-Leaders stand, then those of the Front half-Files are to pass
through their Intervalls to the right, placing themselves before their
File-Leaders: the second Rank are to place themselves before the first, the
third before the second, the fourth before the third, etc. The Rear half-Files
at the same instant are to perform the like, placing themselves before their
half-File-Leaders as the other did before their File-Leaders. This motion may
either be reduced by acting the same over again to the contrary hand, or else
by countermarching the Front and Rear into the midst, or by any other
divisionall Countermarches of Files. Only observe by the way, that as the Front
half-Files emptieth the spaces of ground between the Leaders and the halfe-File
Leaders, placing themselves in the ground before the Front. So in the mean time
their places are to be replenisht by the Soldiers of the Rear halfe-Files, who
are to march up and supply their rooms.
File-Leaders and Bringers up stand; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your Leaders and Bringers up. This divisionall
Lacedaemonian Countermarch makes semblance of falling on or charging the enemy
both to Front and Rear, Of countermarching to make a large Intervall between
the first and last Ranks.
and leaves all the ground whereon they stood, transferring them into the
ground before the Front, and behind the Rear, the ground or place of their
former standing being vacant. The motion is thus to be performed: The Rear
halfe-Files are commanded to face to the Rear; and then the Front halfe-Files
pass through to the right, placing themselves before their Leaders; the second
Rank before the first, the third before the second, the fourth before the
third, etc. The Rear halfe-Files at the same instant passing through to the
Rear, placing themselves before their bringers up. To reduce this motion into
their former stations, (if you have not closed their distance) you may face
them about, and so let them return into their places: or else by doing the
same Countermarch over again, or to the contrary hand, or any such like way
will reduce them. Note, if you reduce them by another Countermarch, you must
first close their divisions.
File-Leaders face about, Bringers up stand, the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves behind your File-Leaders and Bringers up. This
divisionall Macedonian Countermarch does little differ from the last; only
that turned the aspect outward to the Front and Rear, but this Countermarch
turns the aspect inwards toward the midst, placing the best soldiers in the
midst, with a large lane or distance betwixt them, through which any great
Personage may be conducted cross the length of your Battle, whereby the
bravery of the soldiers may be seen. This motion is thus to be performed:
The first Rank (or File-Leaders) face about, the last Rank stands, the Rear
halfe-Files face about, and so the Front-division pass forwards and place
themselves behind the File-Leaders; and the Rear halfe-Files behind their
bringers up. Note, that when the Rear halfe-Files face about, the last Rank
which are the bringers up, are still to keep their standing. The way to reduce
this motion is to be done either by the same word of Command which produced
it, or else by any of the precedent divisionall Countermarches.
Front halfe-Files, interchange ground with the Rear passing through to the
right. This Bastard Countermarch of enterchanging ground is not truly derived
from any one particular ground of Countermarch, but rather participating of
them all; and yet in it self it differs from them all: for whereas the other
Countermarches of Files in division did bring their Front and Rear into the
midst, yet their Front half-Files continued still on the same part, and their
Rear halfe-Files did not alter into the place of the other. But this, contrary
to any other of the divisionall Countermarches, transfers the Front halfe-Files
into the ground or place of the Rear halfe-Files, and them into the contrary
part, bringing the File-Leaders and bringers up together into the midst. For
the performing this motion, you must cause the Front halfe-Files to face about,
passing forwards to the right (being led by the bringers up of the Front
half-Files) between the intervalls toward the Rear. The Rear half-Files, at
the same instant, in like manner marching forwards between the intervals on
their right hands into the Front, until the Front-division have attained the
place of the Rear, and they contrariwise the place of the Front. For the
reducement of this countermarch, do as much back again; or if you would reduce
it some other way, you may first make an entire Countermarch of Files, and then
countermarch Front and Rear into the midst. Under two Countermarches it cannot
be reduced.
Countermarch your Flanks into the midst. This Chorean Countermarch of the
Flanks into the midst by bringing the outermost Files to be the innermost, is
thus to be performed; You must first command the whole body to face to the
right and left hand by division. The outermost Files by this facing becoming
Ranks, every man in the right hand File being a Leader in his half Rank,
File-wise: and so likewise in the left hand File the same. Then you are to
countermarch the right Flank to the right, and the left Flank to the lelft,
which you must always observe to do; and your Flanks will meet just in the
midst of your Battalia. Lastly, having faced them to their first Front, the
Countermarch is ended. To reduce them, you may either make use of the same
Countermarch again, or any of these following divisionall Countermarches of
Flanks, unless it be that of enterchanging of ground. Note that upon the
Countermarching of Flanks into the midst, the right Flank must always observe
to turn to the right hand, and the left Flank to the left hand: for if they
should both turn off to the right, they will meet wrong, or if they turn off
both to the left it, will be as bad.
Outmost Files of each Flank, face outward; the rest pass through to the right
and left, placing your selves before your outside men. This Lacedaemonian
Countermarch of half Ranks or Flanks makes show of charging the enemy with both
Flanks, Of Countermarching to take the ground before the Flank.
but leaves a wast distance of ground unoccupied between the two outermost
Files or midst of the Battle: the way to perform this motion is after this
manner; First you must cause your right hand File to face to the right, and the
left hand File to the left; the rest of the body faceth to the right and left,
the right Flank passing through to the right, and placing themselves before
their right hand men; the second File from the right begins the motion on the
right Flank, the left Flank in right manner passing through to the left, and
placing themselves before their left hand men, the second File accounting from
the left begins the motion on the left Flank: but you must note that the Files
become Ranks with the facing. For reducement, if you will first face them to
their proper Front, you must command the two inmost Files to stand, the rest
are to pass through to the right and left hand inwards and take their place:
or you may make use of a Chorean or a Macedonian Countermarch of Ranks by
division and with a facing, and closing their divisions they will be in their
first form.
The out most File of each Flank face inwards, the rest pass through to the
right and left, placing your selves behind your outside men. This Macedonian
Countermarch corespondes with the last; Of Counter-marching to take the ground
on the outside of the Flanks, and to direct their aspects inwards.
only it differs in turning the Aspct inwards, whereas the former directed
their Aspects outward; and it is thus performed: The outmost Files of each
Flank are to face inwards, and the rest of the body are to face to the right,
the left are to face outward, those of the right Flank passing through the
right, and placing themselves behind their right hand men, those of the left
Flank passing through to the left, and placing themselves behind their left
hand men, the motion is to be begun by the second File from each Flank. For the
reducement of this Countermarch, you must first face them to their first
Front; then commanding the two innermost Files to face outward, and the rest
are to pass through to the right and left inward, placing themselves behind
their right and left hand men, which being done, the whole body will stand
faced to the right and left outward; then being faced to their Leaders they
are reduced into their first stations. Or you may make use of the Counter March
next before, or of the next following, or of any other divisionall
Countermarch of Ranks (which do not interchange ground.)
The outmost file of each flank stand, the rest pass through to the right,
and left, and place your selves on the outside of your right and left hand men.
This divisionall Bastard Countermarch produces the same effect which the
other two next before it wrought, Of taking the ground on the outside of the
flanks, not altering the aspect.
only differing in the Aspect; for the Lacedemonian turned the Aspect
outward, the Macedonian turned the Aspect inwards, and this keeps the aspect
still directed the same way. To perform this motion you must command the
outmost File of each Flank to stand, the rest of the body are to face to the
right and left outward (viz) the right Flank passing through to the right,
and the left Flank to the left; those of the right Flank placing themselves
on the outside of their right hand men; in like manner those of the left Flank
are to place themselves on the outside of their left hand men. It may be
reduced either by any of the foregoing divisionall Counter-Marches of Ranks,
or else being faced to any of the Flanks, then the Ranks become Files. And by
divisionall Counter-marches of Files you may reduce devisionall Counter-marches
of Ranks, or by Ranks Files: only you must observe some facings, yet you may
reduce this motion by commanding the two inmost Files to stand, the rest are to
face to the right and left inwards, and so march into their places.
Interchange Flanks: This exchanging of Flanks or Bastard Countermarch is
differing from all the other divisionall Counter-marches of Ranks, Of
enterchanging ground by the Flanks, and bringing the inmost Files of Pikes to
become the outmost Ranks.
for this transferres the right Flank into the place of the left, and the left
Flank into the place of the right: it is very proper to receive a sudden
charge from the horse, for so soon as they shall be commanded to enterchange
their Flanks they face to the right and left inwards, and then the inmost
Files of the Pikes begins the motion; the rest of each Flank following
orderly, likewise the Pikes are to port so soon as they begin to move, and are
to charge as they see occasion; if need be the Pikes may charge at the foot,
the Musketeers giving fire over their shoulders; if the Pikes have too large a
distance, they may close at their own pleasures as soon as they have past
through. For reducement you may interchange ground again, or otherwise you may
Countermarch your Flanks into the midst, and then an entire Countermarch
either of Ranks or Files will reduce them. And this shall suffice to finish
this discourse of Counter-marches, wishing every commander to be ready and well
verst in all of them, but principally to make use of the three first entire
Counter-marches of Files, as also the same of Ranks, for those you cannot
possibly omit in your drillings, the rest you may dispense with all at your
pleasure: And having thus exercised your men in these motions of Countermarch;
the next things you are to teach them are wheelings, and they are of two kinds,
as in the next Chapter shall more fully be demonstrated.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in the motions of wheeling, with
the description of their kinds and uses, with their several words of command
placed in the Margent.
WHeelings are of two kinds (viz.) wheelings Anguler, and wheelings on the
Center, and these are either entire or divisionall.

The use of entire wheelings is to turn the Aspect of the front proper, either
to the right, to the left, or to the reere, either for the gayning of the Wind,
Sun, or some such like advantages, or to entertain their enemy with their
best Soldiers; and for your better performing of these motions of wheelings,
you must first close both your Ranks and Files to their order, which is three
foot both in Rank and File; and likewise upon all wheelings you must be sure
to observe your Leader, and follow him keeping your due distance, your Muskets
are all either to be poyzed, or shouldred, your Pikes are to be advanced:
further observe that upon the exercise of the motions whether it be distance,
facings, doublings or Counter-marches, or wheelings; the Musketeers ought to
be all upon one and the same Posture either poyzed or shouldred, and the Pikes
in like manner either shouldred or advanced; the words of command follows in
the Margent, and the directions how to perform the motions, right against
them: Wherefore first you are to command them to, Wheel your Battle to the
right. This Anguler wheeling transferres the Aspect or Countenance of the front
proper into that part which was the right Flank: Of wheeling Anguler.
it also remove the Battallia from the ground whereon formerly it stood, and
places it on the part before the front; the Hinge of the motion is the right
corner man which has the leading of the right hand File, he with a gentle
motion moves to the right, and every man the more remote his place is from the
right Angle, the swifter must be his motion, because he is to go a greater
circumstance. For reducement, wheel your Battallia to the left in the like
manner as it was wheeled to the right; but withal note, that this will not
bring you back into the same ground you formerly stood on, because it has
advanced you the length of your Battallia before the place of your first Front,
wherefore to reduce you into the same place you stood on first; you must face
your Battallia to the right, and being so faced whele your Battle to the left,
which being performed, face to the left and then they are compleately reduced
to their first form and station. This also is an Angular wheeling and
transferreth the Aspect of the Front proper toward the Reere; it is performed
after the same manner of the former, only the motion is twice as much,
wherefore observe the directions in the former; Note the ground you formerly
did possess will be twice the length of your Battallia to the left of your
left Flank: For the reducing them as well to their first ground as their first
aspect, you must face them to the right, and then wheel then to the left
about; which being performed, face them again to the left and they are reduced
perfectly to their first form and station: Further observe that every
following wheeling is a reducement unto that which is placed next before it,
and the wheeling next before may reduce that next following: as to wheel your
Flanks into the front, by wheeling your Flanks into the Reere it is reduced;
or to wheel Front and Reere into both Flanks, if you wheel both Flanks into
the Front and Reere, they are likewise reduced as before.
Wheel your Battle to the right on the same ground. This wheeling on the
Center is more suddenly performed then the Angular wheelings, Of wheeling on
the Center.
and may be done in far less ground, for the left Flank advances forwards,
still wheeling to the right, the right Flank contrariwise facing to the left,
and so falling backwards; if you have an odd File then the middle File leader
must be the Center of the motion, but if you have an even number of files, then
the middlemost file leader from the left, or if your wheeling be to the left,
then the middlemost file-leader to the right must be the Center; This has
been used by the Grave van Nassaw in the Netherlands. For the reducement you
must wheel your battle to the left on the same ground and they will be in
their first form and station.
Wheel your Battle to the right about on the same ground. This wheeling is
also a wheeling on the Center or midst of the Front, whereby the aspect of the
Front proper is transferred toward the Reere and withal the Battle is
remomoved from off the ground whereon formerly it stood, and is placed upon the
ground before the front; it requires the very same action the former did, only
the motion is double to the other. To perform this motion every man of the
left Flank is to observe duly his right hand man, and the right Flank must
keep even and straight after their left hand man, which becomes their Leaders
filewise, until they have attained their ground, after which they face as
before, making an even Front. For the reducement, wheel your Battle to the
left about upon the same ground, and they will be in their first form.
Wheel off your front by division. This motion of wheeling by division in
great Battallias is very efficatious to oppose several enemies at one and the
same time with the front of your Battallia, whereby your ablest Soldiers will
be first brought to action; but if you wheel off your Battle by division,
and join them again when they be in the Reere, then all your Musketeers are
brought from the flanks into the midst of your Battallia, and your Pikes will
be upon the flanks; this motion is easy to be performed, for all the
file-Leaders to the right flank are to wheel about to the right, the rest of
each file following their Leaders; the file-Leaders likewise of the left flank
are to wheel about to the left, and then join or close their divisions. To
reduce them you must wheel them off again by division, or the wheeling next
following will perform it.
Wheel your Front inwards to the Reere. This divisionall wheeling of the Front
inwards to the Reere may serve for a reducement unto the precedent wheelings,
(...) wheeling the (...) inwards to the (...)
and so it brings the Musketeers to the flanks again, but if you perform
this motion, the company being first reduced, then it brings the Pikes to the
flanks, if you chance to be anoyed with Horse in the Reere upon a March, you
having gained some place of advantage as aside hill or the like, then by
wheeling your front inwards to the Reere, you may persuade the enemy you are
taking your flight, but you shall be ready to entertayne his aproches with a
settled orderly body, for your shot will be in the midst, and the Pikes
impaling their flanks, so as the Horse can have no power over the shot to
route them, but they shall be able to give fire upon them continually; this
motion is thus to be performed: The right hand file-Leader, with all the
Leaders of the right flank are to advance forwards, and so are to wheel about
to the left, every file still keeping close to their right hand file: likewise
the left hand file-Leader, with all the Leaders of the left flank are to
advance forwards, and wheel about to the right, every file of the left flank
closing close to the left, thus the outmost file of each flank will meet and
become the innermost, the front being metamorphis'd into the Reere. For
reducement you may wheel them again off to the right and left by division, or
else wheel your front inward to the Reere
Wheel your Flanks into the Front. This divisionall wheeling of the flanks
into the front is Cosengerman to a doubling, Of bringing Flanks into the Front
of the Battle.
for by it all your shot are brought from both the flanks into the front, and
thereby so many shot more are brought to do execution accordingly as the depth
will permit. This motion of wheeling your flanks into the front will not only
secure your shot, but also is very proper to baricado up any passage with your
Pikes, so as the enemies horse will be defeated of their expectations; upon the
first motion of dividing, every devision wheeleth about his own angle until
the outmost file Leaders of each flank meet together in the midst, then
facing to their Leader performs it: For reducement of this motion; wheel your
flanks into the Reere, or else four times the same, although the further way
about.
Face all about to the Right, and wheel your Flanks into the Reere. This
divisionall wheeling of the Flanks into the Reere is also near akind to a
doubling, Of wheeling the Reere into the midst of the Battle.
and is to be performed as the other in all respects, for this wheeling brings
your two outmost Files to be the first Rank, the bringers up of the right and
left hand files meeting together, the bringers up of the left flank meeting
face to face with the bringers up of the right flank, and so being faced to
their Leader they which before were complete files, are now become half
Ranks, either to the right or left; but you must note that before you begin
to wheel, you must face your body about to the Reere, and then the action will
be all one as if you wheeled your flanks into the front; It shall need no
further explayning in regard in the motion before this it is fully expressed. But
by the way take notice that in all wheelings you must observe to follow your
Leaders, which must be understood as well of those which are accidentally
become Leaders (by reason of facings) as of those which be the first and propet
Leaders, as for example, in this wheeling you must note that the bringers up
are become the Leaders of the motion; also you may further observe that the two
middlemost bringers up are the Hinges of the wheeling. For the reducement of
this wheeling, the Commander being at his front accidental, may command them
to wheel their wings into the reere, and so passing through to that part where
his proper file-leaders are^, and then face them to him and they are in their
first form. Or else when the Commander has past through to the Reere, and
faced his company to him, then (his pikes being foremost) let him wheel his
flanks into the Front, who being faced to their leader are reduced.
Wheel front, and Reere into the right flank. This divisionall wheeling of
the Front and Reere, into the right flank; does quadruple the depth: as for
example if the body of your Battallia be but ten in depth, Note that if the
length of your Battle be double the number of the depth as is showed in this
mo^^r, then this wheeling of Front and Reere into the right or left flank does
quadruple their form in depth If the number be equal in length and depth then
by this wheeling they will but double. If the number of your length exceeds
more then double your depth; by so much the more, will the extention of the
depth be beyond quadruple.
this wheeling to the right flank makes them forty deep in file, and but five
in rank or breast; you may observe how the Musqueteires of the left flank are
divided (viz) the one half of them wheeling to the front; and the other half
to the reere; Likewise the Musqueteirs of the right flank are to wheel
together into the midst. The Pikes are likewise divided: those that were the
front half files; are to wheel into the midst of the front division of
Musketeers, And those that were the Reere division of Pikes are to wheel into
the reere division of shot; After the word of Command is given to wheel front
and reere, into the right flank; you must cause your Soldiers for to face to
the right: (that being done) they are to wheel together; about the fifth and
sixth men in the right hand file; which is the half file leader to the front,
and half file leader to the reere; this motion being performed right, the two
half files to the right, will be converted into the two middle ranks of the
Battallia; and the file-leaders to the front, and the bringers of the reere
will be the right hand file. For the reducement; there may be many ways;
according as the body of the Battallia may be faced; but suppose they stand
faced in the same form that this Battallia did before the Motion began and
then the wheeling of front and reere into the left flank will reduce them to
their first station, they being faced to their Leader; Or if you please to face
them that way which they wheeled in the Motion which was to the right, then
wheel your flanks into the reere, and then facing them to their proper front
they are reduced.
Wheel front and Reere into the left flank. This divisionall wheeling of the
front and reere into the left flank; Of wheeling the left flank into the
midst of the Battle.
is a doubling of the depth as the former was: and the nature of the Motion is
the same with the precedent, the difference is only in the flanks wherefore
first you must cause the Battallia to face to the left; and then you must
wheel them as before you did wheel the flanks into the front. But suppose
that all the shot are placed upon the right flank before you begin this
motion; then this wheeling will bring the one half of them into the front and
the other half into the reere: and the motion being performed and they faced
toward their Commander they will be 40 deep in file, and five in rank as the
precedent motion was. For reducement: the usual way is to wheel the front and
reere into the Right flank, or if upon occasion, you have faced your Battallia
to the same way they have wheeled (which was to the left flank) and would give
your Command from thence, then you must cause them to wheel, their flanks
into the reere, this being done, you must pass to your first front, then
causing them to face toward you they are in the same form they were at first:
Then cause the five files of shot, to face to the left: and then to pass
through their places. Lastly, you must close their ranks and files to their
due distance and all is performed.
Wheel both flanks into the Front and Reere. This divisionall wheeling of
both flanks into the front and reere: Of Wheeling Front and Reere into the
midst of the Battle.
does double the depth, making them from ten deep to be twenty. It does also
transfer the Musketeers from both the flanks into the front and reere,
making a division between the front half files, and the reere halfefiles. So
that of one Body flankte with shot it makes two, each having their shot in
the front. To perform this wheeling you must take these following directions.
The word of Command being given as in the Margent is expressed, the first thing
the Soldiers have to do; is for the half files to face about to the reere
and then the front half files, and the reere half Files are to wheel at one
and the same instant. The front division are to wheel about their two
innermost file Leaders; until the file Leaders of the right flank meet
together in the midst with the file Leaders of the left flank; the residue of
their divisions orderly following of them. The half files in like manner being
faced about, the bringers up in the same order as the former did are to wheel
together being now the leaders of the motion in the reere. This being performed
and the Commander standing at the place of his first front, he is to cause them
to face toward him: then he is to Command them to close their division, which
being done all your file Leaders are in the two innermost files of the front
division file wise, and all the bringers up, in the reere division of the same
files. For reducement you may face them to either of the flanks, and then
Command them to wheel both flanks into the front and reere: then facing them
again to their proper front, and closing their divisions, they will be as at
first; or if you please the Subsequent motion of wheeling will reduce it.
Wheel front and reere into both flanks. This wheeling of front and Reere
into both flanks is also a doubling of depth. Of wheeling the Flanks into the
midst of the Battle.
So that from ten deep it makes them twenty. And by this motion the shot which
in the precedent wheeling was placed upon the flanks, by this motion of
wheeling are transferd into the midst between the front and the reere of the
Pikes; and whereas in this former motion, their wheeling was about the two
midlemost file leaders, and Bringers up. This wheeling contrariwise is about
the two half file leaders of the outmost files of each flank. In the other
wheeling the file Leaders and bringers up, made the Inmost file, but in this
they make the outermost file of each flank. This motion being performed, it
leaves a large Intervall (or division) from front to reere between the
flanks: which if the Commander pass into the midst, between each division,
and face them all to him, causing them to close their divisions: and then he
being marched forth into his first place, causing the soldiers to direct their
aspects to him, then will the Pikes be in the Front and Reere. For the
reducement of this Motion of wheeling to its first form and station, you must
cause the Battallia to face to one of the flanks, which being done, you must
Command them again to wheel Front and Reere into both flanks, then facing
them to their first Front, and closing their division, they are reduced, or you
may wheel both flanks into the Front and Reere, and then face them to their
Leader and close their division. Thus having showed the ways and properties of
wheelings, in their several kinds wishing every Commander at least to make
use of the Entire wheelings: and to make their Soldiers perfect in them, so
that they may wheel to the Right, to the Left and to the Reere, and as for the
rest you may use your pleasure: (if time will not permit you) to exercise your
Soldiers in them. The next thing that a Commander is to teach his Soldiers,
is the several ways of giving fire, and the fitting and preparing them for
Skirmish which in the next Chapter shall be discoursed of.



CHAP. LXXXVII.
How a Commauder shall prepare his Soldiers for Skirmish, with the manner, and
use of firing by forlorn Files, in the Front.
WHen a Commander has exercised his Company in their Postures, Doublings,
Counter-marches, and Wheelings, the next thing requisite to be taught the
Soldiers, is how they should skirmish, with the manner and use of firing,
wherefore your Company being first drawn in Battallia, every man observing his
order both in rank and file. The Officers in their due places (viz) the
Captain and Ensign in the Front of Pikes, the Lieutenant in the Reere, the
Serjants on the flanks, the Drums on the Front and reere Angle of the Pikes:
Every man thus standing in his right equipage, the Captain shall command the
Drums to beat a march, the colors flying at the head of the pikes, the pikes
and Muskets shouldred marching at their distance of order in file, and at
their open order in rank, the Commander is to give a sign to the Drume to
bear a preparative, at which time the Ensign is to furle-up his colors, and
to retire into the midst of the Pikes, every man is to advance his Pike, and to
close all their Ranks forwards to their order, the Musketeers art to make
ready every one preparing himself for skirmish, But before we proceed any
further it will be very convenient to show the manner and use of firings that
the Soldiers may be the better able to perform them, The manner and use of
firing described.
when they come to the proof and trial, wherefore observe that all firings
are either direct or oblique. The manner of firings, are sometimes advancing
against an Enemy, That General seeks his own ruin, if he assailes an Army
upon all qua^ters unless his power be fouretimes more then his adversaries.
sometimes receiving the Enemies charge upon a stand, or else retiring (for we
may be constrained to give fire in the Reere, marching from the Enemy) or in,
flank marching by an Enemy, or it may fall out that the Enemy may charge in
several places at once, as in Front and Flank or in Front, Reere, and Flank,
these particulars shall be more fully discust in the following discourses.

And first to begin with the firings in Front, both advancing and standing. I
will follow Master Barrifes directions, who has excellently well described
them, both by discourse and figure.

Wherefore first take notice of giving fire by forlorn files, which most
commonly is used two manner of ways in the exercising of companies.

The first is, for the two outermost files of each flank of shot to march
forth (being led on by the two youngest Serjants,) a convenient distance beyond
the Front of the battle, who being there arived ought to make there stand, the
foremost Ranks are to give fire, wheeling off both to the right, (or to the
right and left if it be commanded) and to place themselves in the Reere of
their own Files, the rest of the Ranks firing and doing of the like, until
they have fired once, or twice over, according as they shall be directed, this
being performed, the next two out most files, of each flank are to march
forwards unto the place assigned, and are there to do the like.

Those files which formerly faced are in the mean time to troop back, Note
the Shot are to prime and charge as they troop down into the Reere to place
themselves to the Flanks of the Pikes.
and place themselves next the flanks of the Pikes, upon the inside of the
division of Musketeers.

The rest of the shot after the former manner are to march up and give fire,
placing themselves as before is showed, when they have fired all over and
placed themselves according to these directions they are reduced into their
first stations.

The second way of firing by forlorn Files is thus to be performed: The
outmost files of each Flank are led forth by the Sergeants unto the place
assigned, and then they command their Files to rank inwards, and to present
and give fire all at one instant as by the subsequent figure you may perceive.

Sergeant Sergeant

Captain Ensign

Sergeant Sergeant

Lieutenant.



The first two files having ranked inwards and joined together making one breast
as you may perceive at the figure 4. and having presented and given fire, they
are to wheel off to the right and left, each man following his Leader in
single file (and performing their postures of priming and charging, etc.) as
they troop down to place themselves on the inside of their division of shot
along by the Flanks of the Pikes: The next outmost File which followed the
first in the Reere in the mean time are to rank themselves inwards, and are
to give fire and wheel off as the former did, placing themselves along by
the Flanks of the Pikes, after the same manner all the rest of the Files are
to perform their endeavors. Note the odd Files may either march up and give
fire single or else the next outermost File may sequent them.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers to give fire by two Ranks,
advancing them ten or twenty paces before the Front of the Battalia, then even
with the Front, and lastly even with the halfe-Files.
THis manner of advancing two Ranks a certain distance before the Front of
the Battle is commonly used, when two Battles make their approaches one
against the other, whereby they are brought within distance to do certain
execution; a Sergeant from each Flank is to lead these two foremost ranks up
to the place assigned: The first Rank of each wing of shot is to present and
to give fire, wheeling off either to the right, or to the right and left, the
second Rank stands ready with their Muskets rested, their Match-cocked and
pans guarded, mounting the muzells of their Pieces clear of their Leaders, and
standing the distance of three foot behind the first Rank, are ready to
Level and give fire so soon as their Leaders are wheeled off from before
them. The first Ranks having presented and given fire (as aforesaid) in their
wheeling off they are to march down in single File close by the outside of the
wings of shot, until they come to the Reere of their own divisions where
every man is to place himself in the Reere of his own file. The second Rank
having discharged are after the same manner to wheel off, and to place
themselves in the Reere as the former did.

The next two Ranks are to begin to advance forwards, when they see the last
of the two former Ranks presented and ready to give fire, and they also having
given fire are to wheel off as the former did, and so successively the rest of
the Ranks advancing are to imitate the former in all the points.

The body of Pikes are to march very slowly forwards, all the while that the
shot are drawn up to give fire before the Front, and if the enemies Battallias
be not near, the Pikes may march shouldred.

But when the enemies Battallias be approacht, The shot are to give fire even
with the front of Pikes, when the enemies battle draws near.
within six or eight score, or less, then the Musketeers are to give fire
even with the Front of the body of Pikes, and then the Pikemen are to advance
their Pikes, and close their Ranks to the distance of three foot, and the
shot to advance up even with the first Rank of Pikes, and there giving fire,
they are to wheel off to the right and left, as in the former directions. Note
when the first Rank has given fire and wheeled off, the next Ranks are to
move forwards at three motions into their place, First blowing your cole, set
out your left Leg, next opening your Pan, set forth your right Leg, lastly
presenting, set forth your left Leg again. At the Battles joining, the shot
are to give fire even with the half Files of Pikes. When the battle retreits,
then the shot ought neither to advance nor retreite but every rank is to give
fire upon the same ground he stands on, and so wheel off that the next may do
the like.
and there to give fire after the same manner wheeling away again, and placing
themselves according to the former directions, every Rank still making good
their Leaders ground, by this means they may continue giving fire until the
two Battles are ready to join at push of Pike, at which time, the shot are to
give fire either retiring, or else not to advance further then the half files
of Pikes, for there they shall be secure from the enemies Pikes offending them,
besides they may do as good execution there, as being placed even with the
front.

If so be the Drum beat a retreite, then the shot ought neither to advance
nor retreite, but every Rank is to give fire upon the same ground they stand
on: and then wheel off that the next rank may do as much.

Never the less, when the forlorn files march forth, or that two Ranks march
forth ten paces (or more) before the Front, then they are to give fire as upon
a retreit, unless the enemy flee.

The Skirmish being ended, the reducement is easy, the Leader of each File,
being in his place at the head of his File is to draw up the shot even with the
Front of Pikes, and then they will be as at first.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
How a Commander shall exercise his wings of Musketeers to give fire, they
being advanced a small distance before the Front of the Pikes, in manner of a
Horn battle, and also how to reduce it.
THis kind of giving fire, (the shot being advanced before the Front of the
Pikes, the bringers up of either winge of Musketeers being rankt even with the
first rank of Pikes in the Front) is of the same use that the firing by two
Ranks, ten paces advanst before the Front, is of, and cannot choose but be
more serviceable upon some occasions, in regard the shot do their execution
more readily without intermission of time, or straggling from their bodies;
besides it is an apt form for over fronting, and they are easily to be
wheeled, whereby they may charge the enemy in Flank; each of these wings of
shot may be led up by a Sergeant, (or some other superior officer) unto the
place assigned by the Chief. After the word of command is given for the
bringing them into this form, as in the Margent is expressed, the manner of
giving fire is thus to be performed.

Pikes stand, Musketeers, march until the bringers up rank with the Front of
Pikes. The first Rank of Musketeers presents and give fire wheeling off,
either all to the right, or to the right and left, (according as they shall be
directed) and placing themselves orderly in the Reere of their own Files; The
next Rank (after the same manner) are to give fire and wheel off placing
themselves behind those which were their Leaders; thus is every Rank
successively to do the like, until they have all given fire. If you desire to
continue giving fire still in this form, then your shot must move forwards
into the ground of them that fired before them and the form will be still the
same. But if you desire after once, or twice firing over, to have your shot
flank their Pikes; then the Musketeers, must not advance into their leaders
ground, but contrarily every rank is to present and give fire upon the same
ground they stand on, falling off into the Reere one after another, by which
means they will be brought even with the Pikes. Or if you please, the Pikes
may advance, and march up, to make their Front entire with the File Leaders of
the shot, whereby they will be reduced.
Pikes stand, Musketeers, advance before your Front of Pikes and close your
divisions. The form of this next kind of firing is produced according to the
words of Command placed in the Margent, The several ways of firing belonging
to the Demie-hearse Battle described.
the manner of the form is thus, the two wings of shot are advanced before
the Front of the body of Pikes: and closing their divisions they shelter the
Pikes from the fury of the Enemies shot. And there may be as great execution
performed by this form of firing, as by any of the former, in regard it is so
sollid and stable. In the former firings, the Pikes either ranked even with the
wings of shot, or else the division between the wings of shot being open, the
Pikes are liable to the danger of the Enemies shot, the Pikes are not able of
themselves to do any thing either in the way of offense, or defense, until
the Enemy be within push of Pike. But this kind of Demie-hearse Battle
covers the Front of their Pikes securely with the wings of their own shot,
until the Enemy be come within distance. There are two principal ways of
giving fire belonging to this form, namely first the Musketeers may give fire
in the Front, and so wheel off by division, or if the Commander pleases, they
may wheel all off to the right, placing themselves in the Reere of their own
divisions and Files of shot just before the Front of the Pikes. The next Ranks
are immediately to move forwards into their Leaders ground, and are likewise to
give fire and wheel off placing themselves after the manner of the former, the
rest of the ranks of Musketeers performing the like, until they have all
given fire: Thus having fired once or twice over this way, you may make use of
a second way of firing, which shall serve for reducement of the former.
Wherefore observe that in this second way of firing, when the first Ranks have
given fire, they are to wheel equally off by division, each part faling file
wise down close by the flanks of the wings of Musketeers, until the Leaders
of the ranks of shot are come down as low as the first rank of Pikes, which
being performed they are to face outward: and to move so far forth in a
straight line until they have ranked even with the first rank of Pikes, not
forgetting to leave there a distance betwixt the Inermost Musket of each
Flank, and the outermost File-Leader of the Pikes. So soon as the first Rank
has given fire and wheeled away, the second Rank is to give fire, wheeling
off as before, and passing down between the Intervalls of the Flanks placing
themselves after their Leaders. The same is every Rank successively to do
until all the shot be drawn from before the Front, and placed on the Flanks
of their Pikes. But when all the shot in the front has discharged unto the two
last ranks, then the Pikes are to port, and when they have all fired and
wheeled away, then they are to charge their Pikes; then advancing their Pikes
again, the Battallia stands reduced as in its first form.
Musketeers make ready to give fire by Introduction to the right. Files of
Musquetires open by division to your open order. You shall find in the Margent
the words of Command that produces this form of giving fire, The several
ways of giving fire by Introduction discribed.
by way of Introduction, it being a kind of advancing against the Enemy, and
of gayning ground, although not used (in these our Modern wars) but in way
of exercise. It is to be performed two ways. The first, when the motion is
begun by the second Rank from the Front. The other when it is begun by the
bringers up; wherefore observe before the firing begin, you must open your
Files of Musketeers, to their open order, so that the shot may pass between
the Intervalls of each File to give fire in the Front. The manner and form of
this kind of firing by Introduction may be thus performed. The Pikes being
flanked with the Musketeers, the first rank of each flank is to present and
give fire, and having fired, they stand and make ready again in the same
place. The second Rank passing forwards before the first, do there also fire
and stand. The third Rank then passing forwards, after the second, and
standing even in Rank with them that first fired, that so soon as the second
Rank has fired, they may presently step before them and fire in like manner.
In this firing still the rank which is next to fire, stands even in rank with
them which last fired, until those which stand presented have first given
fire, after which they then pass before them; the Rank which was their next
followers, passing forward, and Ranking with those which last fired, every man
following his Leader successively, until the bringers up give fire and stand
in the Front of all; and then this form will be like the figure of a Horn
battle. All the while that this firing by Introduction is continued, the Pikes
may be shouldred, if there be no fear of the Enemies Horse. If you continue
this firing twice over the Musketeers will have their right place: which being
done, march up your Pikes and Rank them even in Front with the shot, and they
are reduced. The second way of firing by introduction: The first Rank, (or
File Leaders) are to give fire as before, and to stand. The last Rank (or
bringers up) in the interim of their firing marching up, and ranking even with
the second Rank: the rest follow their bringers up, as they do when bringers
up double their Front: the first Rank having fired, the bringers up step
imediatly before them, present, and give fire, the rest still successively
doing the like, until every rank have given fire once over: observe with all,
that the File Leaders are to give fire twice over, being the first, and the
last, and then to stand, the Pikes marching up even with their Front of
Musketeers. And thus they are reduced as at first. If the two first ranks of
Pikes in every Battallia should have bows fastened to their Pikes, The several
ways of bring, belonging to the Diamond form of Battle described.
they might do good service against the enemy whilst the shot performs their
duties in giving fire. The words of Command which produces this form of a
Diamand Battle, is in the Margent, Amongst the Ancients it has bin of great
account, but in these late ages Musketeers, Rank, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, etc. by
increase to the left.
Files of Pikes ranked by decrease after your Musketeers. not used in the
wars, The manner of forming it is thus: first you must cause your Musketeers
of the right flank, to open to the right, to a sufficient distance for the
receiving the shot of the left flank. Then you must Command the left flank of
Musketeers, to pass through into the space of ground on the right. This being
done, for to frame this battle you must command your Files of Musquetires to
rank, 1, 3, 5, 7 etc. by increase to the left, then you must command the Files
of Pikes to rank by decrease after the Musketeers; The Musquitiers may give
fire from this form of Battle two ways principally, the first is the giving
fire in Rank (viz.) the first man (or point of the diamond) is first to give
fire, then he is to wheel off to the right, and place himself just behind the
single Pikemen in the Reere; then the next Rank consisting of three men are to
give fire, and to wheel off by division, and are to place themselves in Rank
behind the single Musquetiere as they were before the firing began, next the
Rank of five Musquitiers gives fire wheeling off in like manner by division,
ever observing that where the number is odd, and they commanded to wheel off
by division, there the greatest number always goes to the right: And after
this manner every Rank gives fire successively, and place themselves after
their Leaders, as before is showed: when all the shot have given fire and are
wheeled off, then let the Pikes charge, which will be fiveteene in the first
Rank, the rest decreasing (having advanced your form) will stand like two
wedges with their points joined. If you would reduce your men from this form,
without giving fire, then let the Musquitiers stand, and the Pikes face to the
Reere, and then the wedge will stand faced in opposition: Next you may command
them to interchange ground, the Musketeers advancing forwards into the ground
of the Pikes, and the Pikes moving into the ground of the Musketeers, and then
by facing the Pikes to the former front, the body will stand in form of a
diamond again. If you would give fire from this form in regard all the
Musketeers are placed in the Reere, the body must face about, and so the
firing will be contrary to the former. But if you wheel them about, then they
may give fire the same way: However after fire is given they must wheel off by
division, and place themselves in the Reere of the Pikes, even in Rank again
as they were when they gave fire: Thus having all fired over and wheeled away,
the Pikes may charge, and being again advanced, the body will stand in form of
a diamond. The second way of firing on this Diamond form is by way of
Countermarch, and is an oblique firing, for whereas in the other firing by
Ranks in the Diamond Battle, each Rank fired by increase of two, beginning
with one, and ending with 15. 17. or 21, etc. (according to the quantity of
your Soldiers) in a Rank; this second kind of firing contrary wise may
begin with 15. 17. or 21, etc. and end with one, still decreasing two; and to
perform this firing your Files must be at open order, because the Musketeers
must Countermarch down between the Intervals of their own Files to the
right, every Musquetiere that finds himhimselfe without a Leader, being to
present and give fire, and then to Countermarch to the right, and to place
himself in the Reere of his own File behind the Pikes, when the first Rank
(if it consists but of 15.) have given fire, then the next Rank of 13. is to
present, give fire, and Countermarch, still placing themselves in the Reere of
their own files; next there fireth 11. then 9, etc. And in this manner of
firing they that fire together stand neither in Rank nor File, but obliquely
when all the shot have fired, and are Counter-marcht into the Reere of their
own Files, then the Ranks will become two, and two of a number. Your men
standing in the form before described if you please you may produce another
form by facing them all to the Reere, then command your Musketeers to march
ten or twelve paces, your Pikes to stand, and your Musketeers will make
resemblance of a hollow wedge, and your Piks of a sollid wedge. Lastly, to
reduce all these several forms into the first proper square battle; first
let the sollid wedge, close forwards into the hollow of the other, then let the
shot make ready, present, and give fire as before (viz.) every Musquetiere that
finds himself without a Leader is to give fire and Countermarch to the Reere
of his own File, and the rest doing the like successively, when they have all
fired and are all Counter-marcht clear, let the Pikes charge and then the body
of your Battallia will have the form of a Diamond again. Next face them all
to the Reere and command the Ranks to file 8. etc. to the right, which being
done, pass the shot through which belongs to the left flank into their
places, and close the Musketeers to the right Flank to their due distance,
and then they will stand in their proper reducement.
Wheel your Flanks into the front, and face the body to one of the flanks,
and wheel your battle into a Unequal half Moon. The manner and use of the
several ways of firing belonging to this form of the Unequal, The several
ways of firing belonging to the semicircular form of Battle described.
half Moon, or semi-circuler Battle, is a form which our Schoolmaster in
the rudiments (Julius Casar) did highly esteem of, it makes show but of a few
Soldiers in regard of the rotunditie of it, yet being drawn out in Length it
makes a very long Front, it may be for the Landing of Soldiers in the enemies
country, or being secured in the Reere with Rivers, Bogges, Ditches or the
like, it has been accounted very prevalent to be opposed against an Army of
greater power, It may be framed either with the shot outermost or innermost or
lined. If your battle be in form of a Hearse then wheel them to the right
and left about, until they have attained this form of a Semicircle, but if in
a square then you must make use of those words of command placed in the Margent
which will produce this Unequal form. Having brought your Soldiers into this
Semicircle, you may face them all inwards the better to hear such speeches or
orations as shall be by the Commander delivered unto them, but for to receive a
charge from the enemy you must face them outward, there must be certain
intervalls or distances betwixt each division for the shot to wheel off and
march down in: The outmost Arch or first rank of each division is to present
and give fire, those of the right Flank wheeling off to the right, and the
left Flank to the left, placing themselves in the Reere of their own
divisions of Musketeers, still making good their Leaders ground, the rest of
the Ranks are to do the same until they have all given fire. Never the less
if the enemies horse should be too potent then let them give fire by division
as is showed before, passing quite through their intervalls, and placing
themselves in the Reere of the Pikes, every rank is to make good his Leaders
ground. Thus also are the rest of the Musquitiers to give fire, placing
themselves in the concave part of the body as aforesaid, following the Pikes
which now makes good the Musketeers ground; the Pikes may either charge over
hand or upon occasion at the foot, drawing forth their Swords over their left
arm, and couching down their heads, by which means the Musquitiers may play
over their shoulders for the first rank having fired may kneel down and
charge again, and so the second rank may give fire, and kneel in like sort
making ready again, and so all the rest, until the first rank rises up with
the rest and give fire over again. So the skirmish may be continued the Pikes
still opposing the Horse.
Pikes stand; Musketeers face to the reere, and march until your are clear of
your body of Pikes. Then face inwards, and close your division, then face to
your Leader and double your Ranks For the reducement of this form, and to
bring every Man to his place. Let your shot (either by firing, or passing
through) be brought into the place they were in, before they first gave fire,
then face the whole body to one of the flanks; and march them until they have
evened their Ranks, and straightened their Files, this done then if all your
Pikes be upon the right flank, wheel your right flank into the midst, if on
the left flank wheel Front and Reere into the left flank. This being
preformed the Commander must pass to his proper file-Leaders, and face the
whole body to him, and they will be in their first form. This way of firing by
extraduction is also a firing in Front, it is of singular good use in a Strait
or narrow passage, Of extraduction, the several uses firings and reducements
described.
where the wings and Reere may be secured from the fury of the Enemies Horse,
you must fill the mouth of the Passage with your Pikes, and if the length of
your Company be not sufficient to do it, then double your Ranks, and your
Pikes being charged, Your Musketeers being in the Reere are to march up into
the Front, and give fire, as in the next place shall be demonstrated, only
first by the way observe the words of directions placed in the Margent, which
produces this form. The battle being ordered as a foresaid Let the first Rank
of Musketeers, (which are those that follows next after the Pikes) face to
the right and march forth (File-wise) up close by the right flank of Pikes,
until he that is the conductor of them become into the Front of the Pikes,
then he is to lead them quite cross the Front of Pikes, until he have
attained the further part of the Front to the left: which being done, they are
all to stand present and give fire. You must observe withal that he in this
firing that was the right hand man of the Rank, and was the Leader of the
motion: now becomes the left hand man when he gives fire, and when they have
fired they are to wheel off to the left close by the left flank of Pikes and
so to fall into the Reere of the Musketeers. In the Interim whilst that the
Rank that first fired, is wheeling away, the second rank is marching into
their places to give fire. And in this manner they may maintain their skirmish
so long as they please: the Pikes either porting or charging all the while. The
Musketeers in their time of their crossing the Front, are to couch, or stoop
under their Pikes, that they may be no impediment to them in their charge.
There is another way of firing by extraduction, which is that the Right hand
Leader of Musketeers places himself before the right File Leader of Pikes, A
second way of giving fire by extraduction described.
the rest all faling beyond him but this is a more imperfect way then the
former and not worth the further describing. For Reducement you must command
your Pikes to stand, and your Muskets to double their Front by division. But
if you want room to do it, then first double your Files to the contrary hand
of that which you doubled your ranks, and so having doubled by division, as a
foresaid they will be reduced as at first.
Wheel your flanks into the front, face to your Leader. The firings belonging
to a broad fronted battle are of singular use either offensive, The several
ways of firings belonging to a broad fronted battle described.
or defensive. The words of direction that produces this form is in the
Margent, and the manner of performing it is thus, first cause your Pikes to
stand, and your Musketeers to march until the reere rank of Musketeers be
advanced a little space before the Front of the Pikes, then let the Musketeers
face inwards, (or in opposition) and close their division, and then face to
their Leaders, And if you would bring more hands to fight, double ranks to any
hand. But the speediest way to produce thus form, is to wheel both flanks
into the Front. For the manner of firing, there are Intervalls made for each
division to the right; that so they may either fall into the reere of the shot,
and there continue the firing; or else fall into the reere of the Pikes: and be
thereby secured from the enemies horse. Wherefore be pleased to observe the
words of Command whereby this form is produced (which is placed in the
Margent,) For the performance of this firing, the first rank is to present and
give fire, then wheel off to the right; all passing down the Intervalls to
the right and placing themselves in the reere of their own shot, the
Musketeers making good their Leaders ground. Likewise after the next ranks
have fired, they are after the former Manner to wheel off and to place
themselves. This way they may give fire once or twice over, and then make use
of a second way. And that is to place themselves in the reere of the Pikes;
either standing or advancing: Or if need be the Pikes may close their
divisions, and charge at the foot, the Musketeers giving fire over them. For
Reducement: If you make this form of battle by wheeling your flanks into the
front and there having given fire, as foresaid; Then you must cause them to
give fire over again, and so fall into their former places: for you must
observe that the second firing will cause the body to face to the Reere, which
then becomes a Front accidental, and then by wheeling your Flanks into the
Front again, and facing them about to the right; will bring them into their
first station: or if you would reduce them without giving of fire over again;
then you must Command your shot to double their Front by division, that being
done, you are to wheel both Flanks into the Rear, then facing to their
Leaders, you must again Command the Musketeers to double their Front by
division, and they will be in their first form and station.

CHAP. XC.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in giving fire to the Reere, with
the several ways there to belonging, and how they ought to be performed.
HAving in the former discourse showed the diverse and sundry ways of giving
fire in the Front. It seems now requisite I should do the same Office, in
demonstrating the several ways of giving fire in the Reere. Wherefore after
the Commander has taught his Soldiers these ways, (or at least the chiefest
of them) in giving fire in the Front, he must perform the like pains in
exercising them in their firings in the Reere. And first having Commanded them
to face about into the Reere, or wheel them about, or perform it by Counter
marching. The Company, we presuppose stands in Battallia, with the wings of
shot, upon each flank of the body of Pikes: the Pikes being shouldred you may
cause them to march easily forwards; the Enemy being supposed to appear in
the Reere, Command your last rank of Musketeers to face about, present, and
give fire, wheeling off by division, File-wise marching uptoward the Front, and
there placing themselves before the foremost rank of shot, (the outmost man of
each rank, being the Leader up of those which have fired) where first taking
their place on the outside, the rest wheeling about them, and ranking even with
them on the inside, ever observing that they rank even with the second rank
of Pikes; the rest of the shot also doing the like, and in this manner to
continue the firing: as occasion shall require. This kind of firing may easily
be performed if Soldiers will but observe these following directions, (viz)
when the last rank of Musketeers have presented to the reere and are giving
of fire, then the rank which marches next before them must blow, open, and
present at three motions In giving fire to the Reere; when you blow your Cole
you must step forwards with your right foot, opning your Pan, stepping
forwards with your lest foot; Present to the Reere stepping forwards with your
right foot ^
still keeping along even with the body of Pikes, until that (lastly) they
present to the reere, by which time the rank that last fired, will be wheeled
away. The next rank so soon as the other has presented, is likewise at three
motions, to do the same; and so successively for all the rest, every rank
observing, upon each ranks firing, to loose one, and to march one rank nearer
to the reere of the battle, that so that part may still be kept absolute,
Captain Swan, (at the giving over of Deventer, in Gilderland, by Stanly, and
York) did defend himself from the enemies Horse by giving fire in the reere
until he had gained a place of strength, which honorable performance will
never be buried in oblivion.

But suppose the Enemies horse shall still pursue your troops in the reere,
you having gained some straight, or place of advantage, then your best way will
be to wheel your Flank into the Front, and then face them about into the
reere, and with your charged Pikes defend your shot, which will be in the reere
of the Pikes, after they have wheeled as aforesaid. The Body standing in this
form, the shot may sleeve up by way of Extraduction, or otherwise you may
cause your Pikes to charge at foot, and the Musketeers to give fire over them.

For reducing them having thus fired, you must command them to wheel their
Flanks into the Front, and to face about after their proper File Leaders, and
they will be in their first form.

A second way to give fire in the reere, A Second way of giving fire in the
Reere described.
is to place all your shot marching, in the reere of the Pikes. The manner of
performing the motion, is as before is showed. But the placing of the men after
they have given fire, may be diversely performed. As to wheel off by division,
placing themselves in the Front of the Musketeers, next behind the reere of
the Pikes.

Or if the Body be Large, to wheel all off to the right, through distances for
that purpose made, and so to march into the Front of the Pikes.

Or otherwise they may wheel off by division and Flank their Pikes, and so
give fire over again as at first.

If in giving fire in the reere, your Musketeers wheel off and place
themselves before the Front of the Pikes, then to reduce them, you may either
wheel the body about, and give fire in Front causing your Musketeers to fail
off by division, and to flank their Pikes; Or if you will reduce them with out
a firing, cause your Musketeers to open to the right and left, and the Pikes
to march up into the midst, and then facing them to their Leader and they will
be in their first form.

Let these Instructions suffice, for the giving fire in the reere: desiring
every Commander to be uery careful, and punctual, in exercising their shot in
these kind of firings in the reere, It being a thing of great Consequence, and
very aduantagious for the preservation of Foot troops from the fury of a
prosecuting enemy, that would seek to cut them off: or at least deterr them
from ariving at their place of strength where they may be secured. In the next
place, shall be shown, the ways of giving fire in the Flanks, so that a
Company may be made complete in their performances of Exercise.

CHAP. XCI.
How a Commander shall exercise his Company in giving fire in the Flanks, with
the Circumstances there unto belonging.
THe Manner of giving fire in Flank is used in two respects; The first is,
when the Enemy shall make his aproaches to charge your Troops on the Flank
in a march.

The second, is when as by some sudden attempt or ambushment, the whole Body of
an Army is engaged: and so forced to stand, and to face to the right, or left,
or both; by which facings the flanks become Fronts accidental, and their
firings will be after the same manner of the firings in Front, wherefore I will
endeavor to show such firings in Flank, as are of use in a march, which are
these following.

The first is for the outmost File to give fire, and stand, until the next
File has fired.

Secondly, after they have given fire in Flank they are to be led up between
Musketeers and Pikes.

The third way of firing in Flank after they have performed it, they are led
off by the bringers up.

The forth way after they have given fire, they are placed as sleeves upon the
contrary flank of Pikes.

The Fifth way is after they have given fire in flank, they are drawn up
between the inmost Files of Pikes: of these I shall discourse severally, in
their due places. In the mean time suppose all your Musketeers to be placed
upon the right wing of your Pikes, and casting your eye into the Margent, you
shall find the words of Command, which produces this firing in the Flank.

Musketeers give fire to the right, and gather up your Files. The Command
being, to give fire to the right, presently the outermost File to the right
faceth outward, and presents, the rest of the body still marching forwards.
Then the presented File gives fire, and stands facing again to their first
Front, by that time the body will be marched clear of the standing File, then
the next outermost File, presents, and fires in like manner, the body facing as
before; having fired they in like manner facing to their first Front and stand,
a Sergeant Leading up the File that first fired on the outside of the File that
last fired, Then they both stand together, until the third File has given
fire after the same manner, and then the Sergeant Leads up the two Files, even
with the third which last fired. And after this manner all the Files of
Musketeers are to face to the Flank, and give fire successively, and stand;
until the Serjant Leads up the rest of the Files which fired, even with the
Front of the File which last fired. Thus having all fired over they are to
march up again even with the Front of Pikes, and this reduces them, as at
first.
Musketeers give fire, in flank, march up be^eene the Pikes and Muskets. The
second manner of giving fire to the Flank is a more secure way, The second
manner of giving fire to the Flank described.
then the former: and yet full as Serviceable for matter of execution, for this
way after the shot has fired, they shall be secured from the Enemies shot,
far better then the former, and also the body shall continue more entire
without separation. And this form is of very good use when two Enemies are
divided by a River, or by some such like means secured from the Incursions of
Horse, for then the shot being drawn up between the innermost Files of the
Musketeers and the outermost File of Pikes to the right, your skirmish may be
continued as long as occasion shall serve. The words of Command which produces
this form is placed in the Margent. And the way to perform this motion of
firing is as follows (Only take notice that as in the former manner of
firing, the shot were placed upon the right flank of Pikes, after the same
manner they are placed now, with a distance betwixt the outerflanke of the
Pikes and the inmost flank of the Musketeers for the shot to march up into
after they have given fire). The outermost File of Musketeers being Commanded
to face to the right, and present: the rest of the body marches away, and the
standing File gives fire. This done and the body is marched clear of the
standing file, the next file presents to the right, and the file that first
gave fire, faceth to the first Front, and is led by a Sergeant cross the reere
of Musketeers up into the distance between the Muskets and Pikes. The
Musketeers are still open to the right, as they march that so there may be
Room for one File to march between them and the Pikes. And so successively
each file having fired marches up next unto the right flank of Pikes: when
all your shot has given fire once over, they are reduced as at first.
Musketeers give fire to the right, wheeling off after your bringers up, and
placing your selves between your divisions. The third way of giving fire in
flank, A third way of giving fire in Flank described.
differs nothing from the former. But only their manner of wheeling off, and
placing them, does differ: for you remember in the former, that the File of
Musketeers, after that they had given fire were led off by their proper
File-Leadere, but this must be led off to the contrary by their bringers up,
and this indeed if the body be upon a slow march is the readiest and quickest
way, and does more speedily secure the shot after they have given fire: The
Pikes and Shot being placed in Battallia as before is described, you may take
the words of command and direction which produces this firing, as it is placed
in the Margent, and the way of performing this firing is as follows. Frst you
must presuppose your body to be marching (as before is showed upon all these
firings in Flank) with their Pikes shouldred. The command being given, the
outmost File presents to the right, and gives fire, then faceth to the right,
after their bringers up who leads them off, cross the Reere of Musketeers
marching them up between the divisions, the bringers up supplying the
File-Leaders place, and marching even in Rank in the Front with the
File-Leaders, and the file Leader of the same File becoming the bringer up in
the Reere. The Files of Musketeers or Pikes, (according as the Command shall
be given) are as they march, to open, thereby giving way to the Musketeers,
after they have fired to come up between the divisions; and so soon as the
first file that fired is clear from the right Flank, the second File is then
to present and give fire, and in like manner to wheel off as before, and so to
march up between the Pikes and Musketeers; every File successively giving
fire, and wheeling off as aforesaid. This firing may be performed as often as
the Commander pleases: Never the less if it be twice performed the men are
reduced as at first, every man possessing his right place. There is another way
for the bringers up to wheel off, and each of them to lead off his File
until he comes to the Reere of his division, which is between the Muskets
and the Pikes, and there he is to stand and rank with the bringers up, the
rest that follow passing on forwards by way of introduction, and every man
ranking before him that was his Leader in the wheeling off, until the proper
File-Leader be come into his place again, and after this way they may give
fire, each firing being his own reducement.
Musketeers give fire to the right, placing your selves on the outside of the
left Flank of Pikes. The fourth way of giving f^re in the Flank differs
nothing from the former, The fourth way of giving fire in Flank described.
but in the manner of placing the Files, that they may be the better defended
from the fury of the enemies Horse, after they have given fire upon them in the
Flank, for the same purpose therefore after the shot have fired, they are to
be drawn up on the outerside of the left Flank of Pikes for their safeguard:
if there be any Rivers, Ponds, Ditches, Hedges, Marish grounds or the like,
whereby the Horse may be disabled from performing any execution against them,
and then the Pikes are to make their best defense, if need be charging at the
foot closely seried together with their Swords drawn, so that the shot may
give fire over them. Now by the way you are to presuppose that the shot and
Pikes are ranged in form, as before is described in the former ways of firing
in the Flank; and taking with you the words of command and direction placed in
the Margent, you shall perceive the manner of firing and placing of the men as
follows: First the outermost file having presented to the right, the rest of
the body continues the march, whilst they in the mean time are giving fire,
which being done and the body clear, the next outmost File presents: The File
that last fired in the interim facing to the left after their proper
File-Leader, who leads them cross the Reere, both of Muskets and Pikes a
good round pace, sleeving them upon the outside of the left Flank of Pikes;
the next File having in like manner fired, does also troop up on the outside
of the File led off before: Every File having given fire and placed ^^^mselves
as before is described then the Pikes may charge. Having ^^^en fire to the
right Flank and drawn all your shot upon the left ^^nke, you may cause them
in like sort to give fire on the left Flank, (...) bring them back again to
the right Flank, by which means they will be reduced into their first form:
Or if you would reduce them without firing, then either pass your Musketeers
through between your Ranks of Pikes, or else let your whole division of shot
be drawn cross, either the Front or Reere of Pikes, into their places. Or if
you please your shot may give fire in Flank by division; the first fire
sleeving on the left Flank, the rest of the Files still falling between the
Pikes, and the Musketeers that wheeled off before the last before them, and
this is a very good way of firing and may be reduced with doing the same way
back again.
Musketeers give fire to the right, marching up between the midst of the
Pikes. The fifth way of firing in a Flank, The fifth way of firing in Flank,
and placing the shot in the midst of the battle of Pikes, described.
and bringing them off between the midst of the Pikes, is to be used at such
times when as you would secure your shot from the enemies Horse, there being no
other natural strength to defend them; and upon occasion you may draw three or
four Files of Pikes (more or less, according to your number, or the danger)
cross the Musketeers both in Front and Reere which (...) in the midst betwixt
the Pikes, which may serve for an impalement (...) defend the shot both in
Front and Reere as in Flank. The form ^f this battle is after this manner;
the shot are placed upon the right ^^ing of the Pikes, as is described in the
former firings, and the Pikes are divided in the middlemost File, leaving such
a proportionable distance as may conveniently receive all the Files of shot
after they have fired. The word of command and direction you shall find placed
in the Margent: The command being given for the outermost File to present to
the right, (as formerly is showed in the other firings in the Flank) the rest
of the body still marches on until that the outermost File has fired, and is
faced to the left again, following their Leader: He now leading them off to
the left, marched up in the distance which is made between the middlemost
Files of Pikes, who are then to open to the right and left, so to give them
room to march up between them; in the mean time the next File having given
fire, wheeleth off in like manner, marching up on the left hand of the File
that fired last before, and so successively for all the rest of the Files of
Musketeers, all which are to give fire and wheel off as before, placing them
still on the left hand of the Files which last fired; wherein still is to be
noted that the Pikes are still to open to the right and left, for the receiving
the shot between them after they have discharged. This firing, as well as all
the former firings in Flank may be led off by their bringers up, as well as by
their File-Leaders, and then the reducement will be answerable. The shot having
all given fire the Pikes may seek to defend themselves by charging at push of
Pike, or at foot; if there be any Bow Pikes they may gall the enemy in the
mean time, or the shot may play over the shoulders of the Pikes as they charge
at the foot, one rank giving fire after another, for the foremost Rank having
fired may kneel down, and there make ready again until the next Rank
behind has also fired, etc. For reducement and to bring the Musketeers into
both flanks again as they were before we discoursed of these several
firings in Flanks; you must first command your Pikes to face inwards, and your
Musketeers to the right and left outward, and so to pass them through and
interchange ground, then facing them to their Leader they will be reduced as at
first. You must observe that all these firings in flank may as well be
performed to the left hand and with the same words, only the words of right
must be changed for left, and left for right. The next discourse shall be of
divisionall firings.

CHAP. XCII.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in divisionall firings (viz.)
front and reere upon a March.
Musketeers give fire to the Front and Reere, and flank your Pikes. YOu may
please to remember how that in the last foregoing firings in the flank, the
Shot were placed in the midst of the Pikes, and now before we can give
directions for these divisionall firings in Front and Reere, we must observe
the way of reducing the Musketeers into the Front and Reere of the Pikes, from
the form wherein they last stood. To perform this, you must command the half
Files of Musketeers to face about, which done, let the Pikes stand and the
Musquetires march, until they are clear both of Front and Reere of Pikes,
then let them stand and face to their Leader, then command your Pikes to close
their divisions, and the shot will be one half of them in Front and the other
half in the Reere, in a readiness to perform this firing which we are now
about to discourse of: The Pikes being shouldred and the words of command and
direction given (as in the Margent is specified) the first Rank in the Front
presents, and the last Rank faceth about to the Reere and does the like, and
so by giving fire together wheel off by division, (viz.) the one half of the
Rank following after the right hand man of the same Rank, the other half
after the left hand man who leads them close down by the sides or flanks of
the Musketeers until they come to the Pikes: The first Rank of Musketeers
in the Front are to rank even with the first Rank of Pikes, and the last
Rank of Musketeers in the Reere are to rank even with the last Rank of
Pikes, leaving a sufficient distance betwixt them and their Pikes for the other
Musketeers to march between. And by the way take notice that he that was
outermost when they gave fire, must likewise be outermost when they have taken
their places on the Flanks; the first and last Rank having fired and wheeled
off, the next ranks (the body marching on, three or four steps) are in like
manner to present and give fire, wheeling off by division, and passing between
the divisions, there placing themselves, they of the Front division are to
place them selves behind those which fired last before them, and they of the
Reere division before them which fired last in the Reere behind them; and thus
they may continue to give fire after the same manner until they have all given
fire over once, then may the body make a stand and the Pikes charge to the
Front and Reere if occasion be; or if the Commander would continue his firing
to the front and Reere still upon this same form, then let the shot of the
Front place themselves (after they have given fire) behind the Musketeers of
their own division, and those of the Reere division are to place themseleves
betwixt the Reere of Pikes and the shot of their own division, and so the body
moving but slowly forwards they may continue the firing.
Musketeers give fire to the Front and Reere, placing your selves between
your divisions. In the precedent discourse after fire was given to Front and
Reere, A second way of firing in Front and Reere described.
the shot flanked the Pikes, now from this form I will endeavor to show you a
second way of firing to Front and Reere, which may easily be effected if the
Soldiers be well instructed. To perform this firing take these words of
command and directions (placed in the Margent) which will produce this form of
firing following. The command being thus given the first Rank presents to the
front, likewise the last Rank of Musketeers in the Reere faceth about and
presents toward the Reere, then both at one instant gives fire, wheeling off
by division, and placing themselves between the Musketeers of their division,
These, namely, which were of the Front half files falling into the Reere of
their own divisions, and those of the Reere half files (contrary wise)
falling before their half File-Leaders, and ranking even with the half
File-Leaders of the Pikes, the next Rank successively firing and wheeling off
after the same manner: Having fired once over they are reduced every man to his
place. The Officer must take some pains in teaching his Soldiers these two
last firings, otherwise they will seem very difficult at first for them to
perform.

CHAP. XCIII.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in giving fire to the Reere and
right Flank marching, and likewise to both Flanks at once marching, and also
to both Flanks standing.
Musketeers, give fire to the right flank and reere, placing your selves
between the Pikes and your own divisions. THis kind of firing in Reere and
Flank upon a march, is very serviceable at such times as the enemy shall
skirmish with the body, to annoy them in their passage in Flank and Reere at
one time, And this kind of firing you may perform two several ways, as
first your Musketeers being placed in their ordinary place upon the Flanks of
their Pikes: The second and more securer way for the Pikes will be, to draw the
Musquetieres from that flank which is least in danger, cross the Reere of
Pikemen. The words of command and direction you shall find in the Margent,
which produces this latter form of firing: the words of command being given
to fire to the Reere and right Flank: The outermost File of Musketeers
presents to the right; and the last Rank of Musketeers presents to the Reere,
and so both give fire; the rest of the body in the mean time marching a
reasonable pace: The right hand File on the right Flank; and the last Rank of
the Musketeers in the Reere of the Pikes, having fired, the File facech to the
left after their File Leader, and so marches up between the Musketeers of
the same division and the Pikes; the Ranks also wheeling off to the right, and
placing it self next after the Reere of Pikes: and if you please you may make
an Intervall or space between the Musketeers in the Reere that so one part
may wheel off to the right on the outside, and the other part wheel off to
the right, and march up between the Intervalls into their places. The first
File file upon the Flank, and the first Rank in the Reere that presented,
having given fire and wheeled clear of the body; the next File and rank is to
present and give fire; after the same manner wheeling off and taking their
places as aforesaid, and so successively the rest, both Files and Ranks gives
fire, observing the same order, and having given fire once, twice or oftener
over they are still reduced to the same they were before the firing began; then
draw your shot from the Reere to the left Flank again, and they will be in
their first form and station.
Musketeers give fire to both Flanks, marching up between the Pikes and your
own divisions. This kind of firing to both Flanks marching, Of firing to
both Flanks Marching.
may be upon some occasions serviceable, and the shot after they have given
fire may be either placed between their own divisions and the Pikes, or
between the midst of the Pikes, for their better security; the shot being
placed upon both the Flanks of the Pikes, as we left them in the former
discourse, you must make use of the words of command and direction (which is
placed in the Margent) which will produce this form of firing. The command
being given the outmost file of each Flank presents outward, the rest of the
body still continuing of the march; the presented Files (in the interim) giving
fire, then facing after their proper File-Leaders, who are to lead them up
between the Musketeers of their own divisions and the Pikes) in the time of
their wheeling away) the next two outermost Files are to present, firing after
the same manner, and leading up as before; the rest successively doing the like
until they have fired all over, which brings them to their former places.
Advance your Pikes, and stand, face to the right and left; Musketeers give
fire and Flank your Pikes. This kind of firing to both Flanks upon a stand,
is produced by the words of command and directions placed in the Margent, Of
firing to both Flanks standing.
only observe, the Musketeers are placed upon both Flanks of the body of
Pikes, as you left them in the precedent discourse. The words of command being
given, the whole body both of Pikes and Shot are to face to the right and left
hand, and then the foremost Ranks of Musketeers (which before the facing were
the outermost Files) are to present and give fire, and then wheel off by
division, Ranking even with the foremost Ranks of Pikes, and leaving sufficient
Intervalls for the rest of the Musketeers to march between them and the
Pikes: The next Rank presenting and firing after the same manner, but not
advancing forwards, only firing upon the same ground and wheeling off by
division: afterward passing down between the Intervalls, and so ranking
after their Leaders; but you must observe by the way, that they that were
outermost when they gave fire are likewise to be so, when they have taken their
places: All the Ranks of Musketeers having fired and wheeled off as before,
the Pikes if need be may charge, and the Musketeers giving fire over again,
wheeling off outward, and placing themselves in the Reere of their own
divisious: Having advanced your Pikes, and faced your body to their first
Front, all your Musketeers will be in Front and Reere, and then if your half
Files about and give fire (after the same manner formerly discoursed of) to the
Front and Reere, having faced them again to their first Front, they will be
reduced as at first into their ordinary square.

CHAP. XCIIII.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in a Triple way of giving fire to
the Front.
BY this triple firing to the Front the precedent form of firing to both
Flanks standing may be reduced, for the Musketeers of the Reere division
opening to the right and left, and sleeving upon the Flanks of the Pikes,
until the Leaders of the Reere division, (who then were the half
File-Leaders) rank even with the Front of Pikes; and those in the front
division are placed before the Pikes in the Front, securely covering them from
the enemy; The word of command and directions that produces this form of
firing is placed in the Margent.

Musketeers of the Reere, double your Front of Pikes by division. The one
half of the shot being placed before the front of the Pikes, and the other
half placed upon either flank even with the first Rank of Pikes, and the
word of command being given, then the first Rank of Musketeers (both of front
and flanks) presents to the front and gives fire, wheeling off to the right
and left by division. The Musketeers of the front division being wheeled off
(as aforesaid) close by the flanks of their own Musketeers, pass directly
down between the Intervals, and place themselves even in Rank behind the
Musketeers of the Reere division, which are upon the flanks, like wise the
Musqueters that fired at the same time on the flanks wheel also off the right
flank to the right, and the left flank to the left) marching directly down
even with the reere Ranks of the Pikes, and there place themselves again even
in rank with the last rank of Pikes; this done the rest of the ranks
successively give fire, and do the like, every rank taking his place, after
the rank that fired last before them; the other Ranks mooving one rank
forwarder; the Musketeers having given fire once over, and falling off
according to this direction, they will all be reduced to the Flank again as
at first. View the figure in the next page.

The Figure of the Triple firing to the Front.

Front.

Sergeant Sergeant.

Sergeant Sergeant



CHAP. XCV.
How a Commander shall exercise his Soldiers in giving fire three ways at
once, (viz.) to the Front, Reere and right Flank.
IN performing this firing three ways at once, first you may suppose the
Musketeers to be placed upon either Flank of the Pikes, then by commanding
the half Ranks of the left, to double their right Flank by division, then
the Reere half Files of the left Flank are to face about to the right, and
then both the Front half Files, and the Reere half Files are to march
forthright, until they are clear of that part of the body that stands, then
each division faceth that way they are to double) which the Front half Files
must do to the right, and the Reere half Files to the left) and so march
forth right until the doubling be performed, then the Reere division that
doubled is to face to the Reere, and the Front division is to face front
proper, and the right flank that stood is to face to the right hand, whereby
they are fast ready to give fire three several ways at once; the manner of
firing is thus performed, the foremost Ranks of Musketeers on each part having
fired, they wheel off to the right or to the right and left (according as they
shall be commanded) placing themselves in the Reere of their own divisions,
the next Rank in the mean time moving forwards into their Leaders ground,
there in like manner firing wheeling off and placing themselves as before; the
rest of the ranks performing the like successively; for reducement face them
all to their Front proper, then command the half ranks that doubled to face
to the left, and so to march into their places, the figure of this precedent
discourse follows in the next Page.

Front proper.

Sergeant

Sergeant

Front of the right Flank

Sergeant

Front of the Reere. The word of command and direction that produces this
triple firing is, Half Ranks of the left, double your right flank by
division.




There are diverse other ways of firings which I am forced to omit, desiring
you to turn into the excellent book of Millitary discipline, composed by
Lieutenant Barriff, wherein you may be further instructed, and see the
Poligons or Figures belonging to most of these instructions which I have
briefly discoursed of, wishing you by all means not to omit any of them in
your exercises, if time and patience may give you leave and if you should pass
by any* let them be only your divisionall Motions, as for your entire motions
either of doublings, Counter-marches or wheelings, etc. you must be very
circumspect and careful to perform them all, otherwise all your pains will
be to no purpose.

Now for the marching out of the field, your Company standing in a square form
(viz.) the shot upon each flank of the Pikes; the Lieutenant leads away the
first division of shot with a Sergeant attending him, the Drum beating
between the third and fourth rank of the same division of shot; the Ensign
is to march before the first division of Pikes, following a pretty distance
behind the first division of shot with the Drum placed as before: The eldest
Sergeant is to march before the second division of Pikes: The second Sergeant
marches before the last division of shot, with the Captain in the Reere of
all: and being marched to the place where the Colors should be lodged, let them
as they march invert to the right and left (viz.) the ranks are to file to the
right and left by division, then all the Musketeers are to face in opposition,
to cock their matches, guard their Pans, and rest their Muskets; the Pikemen
in the mean time are to advance their Pikes, and close their Ranks and Files
to their order, which being done, (the Drum beating a Troop at the head of the
Pikes): All the chief Officers in their due places are to pass through this
guard into the appointed place for the Allodgement of the colors, then the
Sergeant is to cause all the Musketeers to face about to the right, and
present, and upon the first beat of the Drum they are all to give fire in one
volley; then the Drum beating a call and makes proclamation of silence the
captain is to deliver them such orders as he has in charge to acquaint them
with all either from the Lord Lievetenants or the Counsel, which being done he
is to dismiss them until the next summons for their appearance.

In the next discourse I shall entreat about the exercising of Horse-Troopes;
and so make a general discourse of all the parts belonging to the body of
War.

THE DRILLING OR EXERCISING OF HORSE TROOPS. SECT. XII.
CHAP. XCVI.
Of the preheminency and dignity of Officers, for the avoiding of disputes,
with a short Declaration of the high Office of the General of the Horse.
HAving finished those instructions concerning the exercising of foot
Companies; In omni praelio non iam multitudo and virtus indocta quam ars, and
exercitium; solent prestare victoriam, Veg. lib. 1.
by which means they may be fitted and prepared for Service: And before we can
come to entreat either of Marching, Incamping, or Imbattelling; It is
necessary we should show some brief instructions for the Drilling and
exercising of Horse troops; in regard no Army can be complete in power and
strength, for the exercising of such things of Importance, as the cause may
require, unless compounded of Foot and Horse; otherwise it must of necessity
hault, and make use of the stilt of some peculiar place for advantage and
safety, and not to look the Enemy in the face in all places. Montanis locis
and impeditis; quasi nullus equorum usus: ex quo intelligitur magis necessarios
ped^tes; qui possunt ubique prodesse, Veg. lib. 2.


And in regard diverse Nations are diversely opinionated; some esteeming the
Infantrie better than the Caualliary, as our English has done; others esteem
the Cavalliarie better than the Infantry, as the French, yet according to the
nature and situation of the country or place, the Army is to be employed in,
whether Enclosures, or Champion, accordingly it must be compounded, of more or
less, of the one or the other. Vbi bona and composita, millitia, pedes
prevalet: apud rudes, aut Barbaros contra, Lip. pol. l. 5.


But for the avoiding of disputes which may arise amongst the Officers of
either part for place of preheminencie and dignity: you shall find by this
Aphorism amplified with the authority of the Ancient Sages: Ab equite and
pedite, omne Bellicis negotijs proflu^t robur, and sine quibus quamvis egregia
fint illa consillia; sunt tamen invalida, Tacit. lib. 1.
that in profession either Civil or Millitary; those are more honorable,
which have greater charge, or require greater knowledge; as to rule a State is
more noble than to govern a City; and this more eminent, than to order a
Family; In which respect though the true end of Horse and foot be one and the
same, to defend aright, and redress a wrong: and per case that of foot be
generally more useful, yet this of Horse is the more honorable Service; Neque
quisquam expraeciaris pe^sis, usquam pedes incedere sua qui^em sponte
videbatur. Xeno. Cy. lib 4.
because his virtue and knowledge is exercised as well in Managing and
defending of his Horse, as of himself: upon whose safegarde his life and
honor depends, as well as in immediate defense of his own person: thus much
for the dignity of place.

As for the Officers of the Cauallrie; In equite apud antiquos omne Rubur: quia
ratio ordinandi militiam pedestrem illis in^^gnita suit Arist. pol. lib. 4.
I will only with all brevitie touch such things for instruction as are most
natural in every particular Office; and then transfer them to the taking of
a practical Surveigh of what is commended to the General of the Army, and to
the rest of the Officers of the Infantrie; for if it were possible there ought
to be no difference in experience, Wisdom and Valor, amongst all Officers if
they could attain unto it.

The General of the Horse has the eminent control and command of all the
Cavalrie or Horse Regiments, The Office of the General of the horse.
of what nature or composition whatsoever, and is respectively bound, as other
Captains are to look to the happy government of his own Troop, and so
consequently to his own Regiments; which done he is to have a General eye of
Surveigh over all other Colonells of Horse, their Regiments, Officers, and
Soldiers; for that part of the Army which consists of Horse are comprised
within his charge: Quanto quis magis inficiatur vitium suum; tanto magis in
ipsum penetrat, and quanto magis intro fugies; tanto magis in caupona e^is;
Pl^t prop. vic.
wherefore it behooves him to see his Troops fairly de^^e^^ed; for what
offense or disparagement happens amongst them, the spot of it will stain his
reputation: wherefore not only his eye, but the eyes of every particular
Officer ought continually to watch and guard over all their affairs.

The General ought to have delivered unto him by the Mustermaster general;
and the Colonells and Captains of the Cavalrie, a true role containing the
Catalogue or List of all his Commanders belonging to the Cavalrie, with the
distinction of the Arms they serve in, as namely which are Harquebuziers,
Carbines, Curassies or Dragoones; by which he shall the better know how to
order them in Service.

He must be very politic, and wise to set his valor rightly on work,
otherwise he is liable to do more mischief to his own foot Troops, by the
misgoverning of his Horses, then possibly he can offend the Enemy by his well
managing of them.

There is nothing so dangerous in a Camp, Austeri duces, suis facies, hostibus
sunt utiles, Apipan.
as soldiers to contemn their General, and there is nothing breeds it
sooner, than remissness and Lenity: for he that suffers one mischief
pass unpunished inviteth another, which brings his command into discredit;
Corbuloni plsus molis adversus ignaviam militum quam contra perfidiam hostium
erat. Tacit. An. 13.
and the service into despair; wherefore as in men of great rank it is less
blame worthy; to be overstately and imperious, than overfamiliar and base: So
for a General it is a less fault to be over-rigorous, than not to punish
delinquents at all: Likewise not forgetting to reward desert in a bountiful
manner; -- Gaudet tamen esse timo^i: Tam magno po^^lu, and se net ^allet omari,
Lucan. lib. 3. de Civ
for hereby his Officers and Soldiers will be kept in an awful readiness to
do as they are Commanded; for neither his maturitie of judgment to undertake,
nor his alacrity of spirit to execute, availes in the perfecting of his
resolved enterprise, if he want a powerful Majesty in his command: likewise
if he has never such obedient and valiant soldiers, Amil. tibus, imperator
potius quam hostis, metui debet, quem admodum homines fine nervis ambulare
nequeunt; ita nec bellum usquam progre^i sine pecunia, Lip. pol lib. 5.
fitted with all kind of warlike habilliments, yet all his strength is but
lame, and unable to move it self without money the sinnewes of war.

CHAP. XCVII.
The office of the Linetenant General of the Cavalrie.
THe Lieutenant General of the Horse; besides his excellent worth and
knowledge in the Art of war: Is like wise to be the eye and hand of the
General, spying out all defects, and a ready hand to demonstrate and point out
what is to be performed.

The General for the most part is absent from the Troops being with the
General of the Army to assist him in his consultations, and aiding his
judgment, in contriving what shall be best and fittest to be put in action,
for their own safties, and the defeite of the Enemy.

First it is his duty to take notice how the Troops are exercised, and the
Officers and Soldiers dem^ened? Exereitus labor proficit; labor consenescit.
Veget.
next he is to imitate the noble General Pyrrhus, whose daily course was to
bethink himself what ways and courses; or what advantages the Enemy may take
to offend him, Consuetudine levior labor fit. Livi. lib. 25.
as also to consider what places are most advantageous to hinder his
proceedings; he did always premeditate how commodiously he might assault the
enemy when occasion was offered. (...) tantum ad notat^ sed etiam picta habeat:
ut non solum (...) mentis, verum aspectu oculorum (...) profecturis, (...)
i^^doneum, eugat, Veg l* 2.


He had always true and exact map of the place or country he was to go
puon execution, whereby he did the better know, whether and how far to march
always providing commodius places to quarter his Army in; it behooves this
Lieutenant General to do the like; and also to see the Camp well secured by
setting out sufficient guardes, and placing Sentinells; he is to cause the
ways to be discovered by sending out parties of Horse before the Army; he
must have all kind of stratagems and policies at his fingers ends, the which
wisely he is to put in execution.

And let this be a caution to him and to all in authority that they stand upon
Glass; Fortuna levis est, (...) reposcit quae dedit, Senec. Sent.
which by its slipperinesse and brittlenesse may cause them to fail at once;
for as to rise to preferment is craggie. So to fall downwards is icie; for the
least aspersion will cause him slip; Non enim in gradibus quibus ad summum
perventum est, itur: Saepe inter fortunam maximam and ultimam nihil interest.
Sen de Ben.
and between the heighest fortune and the lowest ebb there is no stay.

CHAP. XCVIII.
Of the Sergeant Major General of the Cavalliary.
THis great officer is to walk the same path that the Sergeant Major General
of the Infantry steps in; for he is not only to be the eye and hand, but
also to be the ear and legs of the General and Lieutenant General; for
he must be the Ambassador between the General and the inferior Officers;
he is to attend the General thrice a day at the least, both to bring news of
the Enemies proceedings; and of the defects in the army; as also to receive
such Orders as shall be given him in charge from the General to deliver to the
Colonells and the rest of the Officers. He is likewise to take the watch word;
and secretly to deliver it to the General, and to the Livetenant General of
the Cavalrie, and so to the Quartermaster General, that he may distribute it
to the inferior Officers: He must be ware of doing ill Offices between the
head and inferior Officers.

He is never to report any news from what others do say, Nihil tam leve est
quod non magnam inter^^^m faciat res Momentum. Live. l. 25.
but from his own immediate knowledge, or from some trusty friend that has
informed him* likewise, whatsoever he is truly possessed with, it is necessary
he should truly relate, although it be never so small an accident. V^ p^tit
accid^st, est sou^ventes foys ce commencement des grandmaux. Am. Pleut. Agis.


Likewise he must be very careful, as he officiates his duty in visiting the
Guards, and going about the quarters, that he gives no occasion of alarm to
the soldiers, nor take no alarm unless it be justly, for it may breed much
inconvenience.

When he is to visit the outmost Guards; Nocturni terrores Clearcht exercitum
invaserunt: At ille precepit, si noctis tumultus (...): nemo rectus
consurgeret; hoc preceptum docuit (...) contem nere nocturuam terrorem, Polyoen
Strat* lib. 2.
he is to have a sufficient guard of Horsemen to attend him, for fear of
being surprised by the enemy. Such orders as he shall receive from the
General; he must not betrust his memory with, but commit it presently to
writing, for a small mistake can plead no excuse in the wars, but is highly
to be punished, for by mistakings a world of mischief has insued many times
to the ruining of part, or of the whole Army.

CHAP. XCIX.
Of the Quarter Master General of the Cavallry.
THis Office is of great respect, and importance; he ought to be full of sound
knowledge in Marshall discipline; and well read in diverse of the Liberal
Sciences, but especially in Arithmeticke and Geometry, so that he is to have an
insight in the Art of Surveighing and measuring of grounds, being able upon the
first view, to take the best advantage thereof for any singular purpose;
especially for the Quartering or Incamping his Troops in the best and safest
manner that may be. Tuum and hostium exercitum, lacorum situm; naturam regi^^is
nos^e. Livi. lib. 2^.
He is likewise to be skillful and well experienced in the use of Mappes; that
thereby he may truly know how all the Roades and ways lie: with the Situation
and distances, between Town and Town.

He is to keep a List of the Guards, and is to visit them both day and night,
showing the Alarm place, to all the inferior Quartermasters, when they come
to take the word of him

When the Lord High Marshall takes a view of the ground whereon to Incampe the
Army; he is to Summon all the inferior Quartermasters, belonging to every
Regiment, and those Quartermasters are to call together every Furrier and
Harbenger; and so are to attend the Lord Marshall to the intended Camp; then
the Chief Quartermaster is to stake out the form of the Incampement or
intrenchment, and also the distances for each Regiment, and then every
particular Quartermaster is to allot out the distances for the alodgement of
every private Company.

He is to give his due attendance to the General, and to the Lord High
Marshall to be employed about such things as they shall give him in charge; If
any order for have be given him by word of mouth, himself must go and
deliver it, and not trust it to others; the Inferior Quartermasters are to
assist him in all his affairs.

CHAP. C.
The Office of the Captain of the Cavallry.
THis Officer ought to be qualified with all those Noble parts, Miles be tris
(...) deb^t: Corpus, ut quam validis^^^^m and perniciss^m^m habeat, a^ma ap^a
animum paratum ad Sub^ta imperia. Ceterad^is immortalibus and (...) curae esse.
Livi. l. 44.
which are to be expected in a foot Captain, and rather in a fuller measure,
in regard he is to govern man and beast: He must be a perfect and absolute
Horseman, teaching his Horse by the Motion of his hand, leg, and body, to
understand all things belonging to the Riders pleasure; he must be careful in
making his whole Troop good Horsemen teaching them how to sit a horse in a
comely posture; carrying his body upright, the right hand bearing his Pistol
or Carbine coucht upon his thigh: the left hand with the bridle raines under
the guard of the Pummell of the Saddle; and his legs close and straight by
the horses sides, with his toes turned a little inwards; If any Horse be Iadish
and apt to st^^ke his fellows or strangers that shall come near him: he is to
have a little Bell plast on his Crooper behind; that such as know not his
qualities may be aware of his Iadish tricks.
his horse so well managed that he will stand constantly without rage or
distemper: then he is to be made sensible (by yielding the body, or thrusting
forwards the riders legs) when to put himself forwards into a short or large
trot; then how by the even stroke of both is spu^res to pass into a swift
Carrire; then how to gallop the field either in large ringes; midles or less
rings, either to turn with speed upon the one or the other hand; then to put
him into a gentle gallop right forth in an even line, and suddenly to stop, and
upon the half stop to turn swiftly and roundly.

Then lastly how to retire back, or to make him fly sidewayes, on the one or
the other side according as the advantage of fight shall give him occasion; he
is likewise to see his Soldiers well horst, with complete armor, their
furniture sufficient their bridles well rayned and lyned with a wire chain,
their Pistolls and Carbines strong and fix; and he must strive to make all his
Soldiers, as good Shot or marks men as himself, Temporl aptari decet, Senec.
Med.
or else all his labor will be to little purpose.

He must be wary of over slipping any opportunity, Vl^eriora Mirari, praesentia
sequi, Tac. hist. 4.
which may be taken either in offending the Enemy, or securing himself; for
not to adventure when he should is cowardice and not prudence, Consilium nobis
resque l^cusque dabunt. Ovid.
and to dare when he should not is rashness and not valor; wherefore he must
frame his Counsels and actions, upon the Mould of necessary circumstances,
Consilia nova pro novis rebut, aut ubi priora in prospera. Cip. Ao. lib. 3.
He must further know that the weapons of Victory are formed on the forge of
Discipline; for it both Captain and Soldiers have not this temper; they will
loose the edge of their valors in the trial, and turn the points into their
own Bowels. Pauc^s vi^os fort^s natura procreat bona institutione plures
reddit industria. Veg l. 3.


Further, there is nothing snatcheth victory out of the hand of the Conqueror,
so much as untimely falling to the spoil, upon such disorder fortune always
turns her wheel, and makes victors of them that before were vanquished.

He must diligently observe the orders which shall be given him from his
Superiors, Exercitus predator, and ipsa preda hostium. Salust Iug.
and not fail to be with his Troop, at the time and place required.

Upon all occasions he is to be first mounted on horse back, Eventus preliorum
inter initia contra illes fuit, quibus victoria debebatur veg. l. 3.
and is to have his Company full and complete, and what ill fortune so ever
should seem to befall him, he must not discover any fear, for upon his
courage and countenance the soldiers depend, wherefore he must have a good
resolution attend him.

In a pitched battle he must seldom or never seek to charge the enemy in the
Front, Nam necesse est, ad fugam pa^at^ sint, qui ducem suum sentiant
desperare. Veg. l. 3.
especially if the two armies are near joining, fearing least his horses wrong
his foot troops, by a disorderly retreat than possibly he can offend the
enemy, wherefore the best and safest place to charge the enemy upon, is the
flanks and rear.

When the enemy shall charge you with one of his Troops, do not you rush
forth to meet them, but if your ground be of advantage keep it; if not
advance softly forwards; until the enemy be within 100. paces of you, and then
fall into your Careire, by this means your horse will be in breath and good
order, when as the Enemy will be to seek.

The Captain of the Cuirassiers has the Priority, the next is the Captain of
the Harquinburies, the Captain of the Carbines has the third place, the
Dragones are of the meanest account, although many times they do the best
service.

And for conclusion let all noble Captains, that desire the honor of their
King, and welfare of the Country, not suffer themselves to be gold and deluded
by their Soldiers; which bring them borrowed horses, and furniture not of
their own; and chopping and changing of their men, and not appearances; so
that our Troops are so deficient, that if an enemy should aproach we shall be
to seek of half our Troops, and them not half exercised.

CHAP. CI.
The Office of the Liefetenant of the Cavallry.
THis Officer is to bear the true Image of his Captain, In the Roman coins
the picture of Mars was stamped, with a lavelin in one hand and a scourge in
the other: and the portraiture of a cock by him; intimating his prowess his
command and his vigilance: Godwin: Romans antiqui.
for he is employed upon many services by his Captain, more than any other
inferior Officers are; as guarding some particular passages, riding out upon
parties to scowre the Country, and to gain intelligence (from the Country
people) of the enemies proceedings.

He is many times sent out to command a certain number of horse for the
safeguard of the Forragers and for the intercepting and guarding of some Fords
and passages. Quem m^ tuunt oderunt; quem quisque ^dit, periisse expetit.


He is to exercise and Drill his men wisely and orderly, using his command over
them; that he may be more beloved than feared.

He commands in his Captains absence soly, he is to March in the rear of his
Troop; causing the Soldiers to follow their Captain and Corner in good
order: not suffering any to straggle from the Troop.

When he is to pass upon any duty, he is first to gain the best instructions
for the advantage in managing the service he is employed about.

He is to be always armed during the time of his guard, and is not only to
place out the Sentinels, but also to visit and revisit them: if they be
quartered in any village, in case of an Alarm, the Soldiers are to repair
to the Cornets Lodging.

He is to see every Soldier have his Billet delivered him from the
Quartermaster, unless it be in Garrison, then the Major of the Town performs
that office. He is to see good orders kept by visiting their Huts, and
commanding their fires to be extinguished immediately after the warning piece
is discharged. Multa sunt honesta factu, quae sunt turpia visa.


He is to be very careful of his own demeanurs for example sake.

He must have some Schollership in him in regard he is to keep a List of all
his Soldiers names, Inquibusdam notarum peritia calculandi computandique usus
ex^g^tur Veg. l. 2.
and by reason of orders or letters sent to him from his Superiors, which he is
to keep secret, and not to show to others.

The company being drawn to the guard in any place, and approaching near it;
the Lieftenant is to ride before to take notice of the Corpse duguard, and is
to confer with the Company, who are then to be releeved, what Sentinells are
to be placed out, and what ways are to be scowred, and all other things
requisite.

CHAP. CII.
Of the Cornet belonging to the Cavalry.
THe Cornet of Horse ought to be a man of a haughty courage, and of a singular
behavior, he commands the Company in the absence of the Captain and
Livetenant, his place of March is in the Front, before the first rank; yet
behind the Captain. In fight he is not to regard the breaking of his Standard
in regard it shall be an honor unto him although the enemy should gain a
piece of it, his usual place in time of Skirmish, is to be in the middle of
the Troop, those before him must be the aprovedst Soldiers and best armed.

He is to keep a List of the Company to send so many to the guard as the
Captain or Lieutenant shall appoint.

Once a day at the Lord Generals first passing by the Troop, he is to do
obeisance by inclining his Cornet toward the ground.

And because I intend brevity, I will only name the residue of Officers
belonging to the Cavalry, referring the Reader for his better satisfaction to
Markhams Decads, and to Captain John Crus^e his Millitary Instructions.

The Quartermasters of every particular Regiments duty is to assist the
Quartermaster general in making the Quarters; The office of the Quartermasters
to a Regiment.
they are to distribute the Word and the Billets for the Soldiers lodgings.

The Corporalls to a Troop are usually three or two at the least, The office
of a Corporal.
they are to assist the Leivetenants in placing the Sentinells, and in ordering
of the Troop, they have the command of a Squadron to guide some passages, or
to ride out upon discovery; he is to keep a List of his Squadron.

There ought to be two Trumpers at the least to each Troop of Horse; The
office of the Trumpets.
whose duty is besides their knowledge in distinguishing their sounds and
points of war. But they must be wise in delivering Embasses and Messages, and
very observative how the Enemy demeanes his forces, and how his guards are
kept, one Trumpet is to lodge with the Cornet, to be in a readiness for all
sudden Allarmes.

There is but one Auditor or Fiscall general allowed to the Army, The office
of the Fiscall.
both of Horse and foot.

The Provost Marshall is an Officer under the high Marshall; The Office of the
Provost Marshall.
he is to keep in safe custody all delinquents, every Regiment has an
inferior Marshall belonging to it, they are to see to the Victuallers,
Butchers, and to the Weights and Measures of Bread, Bear, and the like; they
are to inform the Commissary, and Auditor what rates the Sutlers, Butchers,
etc. may afford their provision for that they may set the Tax accordingly.

They are to carry a Trunshon with a Ribbin in it by which they are
distinguished.

They are to attach all straggling soldiers in a March, to prevent him from
pilliging.

And to conclude this discourse, I would have all Officers of such a true
temper of valor; Is demum vir est, cu^us animum nec prospera statu suo
efferant nec adversa infringant Live. l. 45.
and so constant in all their proceedings, that honor and prosperity should
not make them Imperious; nor the worst of fortunes deject them. For that man
that bears his prosperity, neither with moderation nor prudence but is full
blown like a bladder with the wind of pride; he seldom in adversity shows
either constancy or courage, Si nihil possis sperare desperes nihil. Senec.
for one prick of distaster will empty his swollen heart of all hopes; and
will make him prove like an unskilful and dejected Sea man, upon every little
storm to cut his Cables, Humilis and parcus animus prosperitatibus effertur;
adversit autem rebus deprimitur, Epicar.
and Maste, and throw all over boorde; where as a Noble resolution would find
a remedy by slacking of some few Sails to endure the storm, and save all he
has in charge.

CHAP. CIII.
Of the ordering and riding of Horses to make them fit for Service.
IT is a thing of great consequence for soldiers to understand how to order
themselves, The art of Riding horses is most noble, as appears by Virgil in
his Encidor, where he terms King Picus for his excellency and greater praise,
a breaker or rider of horses.
toward their horses, to make them the apter to understand the Riders meaning,
and to be fitted for exercise, for an Officer shall find it a thing impossible
to exercise a troop of horses, unless they be first prepared for that
service; Therefore let me request you to apply your endeavors to such
documents, as the best experienced Riders have observed. Likewise the Poets
feign that Bellerophon. the son of King Glaucus rode upon a Pegasus when he
slew the Monster Chi^era.


And first a soldier may fit and help his horse six manner of ways (viz.)
with his Voice, with his Tongue, with his Rod, with his Bridle, with the
Caulfes of his Legs, with his Sturrop, and with his Spurs, likewise when
your horse has performed his exercise well, you have two ways to cheerish and
coye him, which is by your voice in speaking to him gently, or else by
scratchiug and coying him with your hand, or with the end of your Rod.

And although helps and corrections may seem one, You may take notice that a
horse is a very sensible creature, and apt to learn and conceive of any words,
or active demonstrations, as appears by the French man's horse, that he had
taught to fetch and carry like a Spanell; at his command he would lie down, or
rise up and kick, or st^mpe as many sto^^ps as he pleased to command him with
diverse other things.
yet there is this difference, having a respect to the time, for the one goes
before error, and the other comes after: for you help your Horse to the
intent he should not err; but you correct him because he has already erred.

For the first of the seven helps before specified, which is the Voice, it is
used diverse ways, as in the way of Correction, for his obstinacy or
wrestinesse: a terrible voice is used with some opprobrious terms, but in the
way of helping or cherishing him, you must use mild terms with a cheerful
voice; as in running him, you must say, Hey, hey, or the like; if to retreat,
you must use a low voice, Back, back boy, back, I say.

If you would help him to advance at the stop, you must say cheerfully, Hup,
hup, or Hoyse, hoyse.

Likewise to make him lite behind, you must say Derier, or such terms as you
shall please.

In cherishing your horse, or coying him for doing well, your voice must be
most mild of all, as saying, well boy, well. Use of the voice.


The next thing observeable it the tongue, which is only a clocking it to the
roof of the mouth, and likewise the lips, with a kind of Chirrupping: does
much put a horse forwards in a gentle strain.

The Rod is a very necessary instrument if used aright (viz.) not to correct
your Horse with it out of season, There are five things observeable in the use
of the rod or riding wand; first when the horse is fitted to use a wand;
secondly, how to take it for skaring; thirdly, how to bear it at all times:
fourthly, the use and ends it s^^ves for; lastly, how and when to use it as a
help correction or cheerishing to your horse.
but only at the very instant he erreth: for there is no such way as a good
wand, well labored upon a stubborn horse that is wresty.

The Bridle governes a Horse as the Helm does the Ship, and it is the
principal instrument about him, to bring him in subjection; and to fit him for
service, wherefore diverse things in it are considerable: as the fashion of the
bit, suitable to the tenderness of his mouth, the Musrowle, the Cheeks,
kurbles, ports, treaches and such like bitts according to the discretion of the
Rider. He most likewise know when to ride his Horse with a Bitte, then with
what manner of Bitte, and how to use it at first putting on, and in what part
of his mouth it must rest.

Likewise how to hold the Raynes, when even together; and when one shorter than
another, and what measure he shall keep with his hand, in bearing hard or
loose, When your horse is managed, you must learn how to handle your sword,
Harquebuz or Pistol.
high or low, when to use the false Raynes or Musrowle, and when to leave them;
when and how to correct him with the Bridle, and when to help him.

Many men spoil their Horse at first, by using to sharp a Bitte; wherefore
the safest way is to take a plain Cannon with right cheeks, and that has
been formerly used, The Rod is to be borne in the right hand, with the point
right up to your right shoulder when you trot your horse.
placing it a little above his great teeth, anointing it with a little honey
mixed with salt, which will make him lean to it, and delight in it the better.

The Raynes you must hold in your left hand; so as your little finger, and Ring
finger be betwixt the two Raynes, and your thumb may lie close upon the
Raynes, with the brane thereof turned toward the sadles pummell; being
destitute of a Rod, take the overplusse that hangs down by the midst in
your right hand, holding just by your right thigh.

In bearing your bridle you must observe three several ways: first, by
bearing the Raynes low beneath the pummell of the saddle, even with the
wither^, which is a ready way to correct him.

Secondly, Note the left hand is only to be held up so high to rest your
Harquebuz or Carbine, upon when you discharge, and not otherwise.
bearing your hand heigher toward the midst of the pommell, th^^ maintains
him.

Thirdly, bearing him just above the Pommell, that is used in managing him; to
bear the hand higher is by sundry Authors disallowed; first, in regard it
we^^ieth the arm; secondly, if need require, you have not so much power to
stop your Horse when you would.

Thirdly, being upon Service in the field against your enemy, the bearing of
your hand so high, would be a trouble unto your defense, and a commodity to
your enemy, for thereby he may easily cut your Raynes in sunder.

Lastly, you can have no steady hand upon your horse, for any continnance, by
means whereof he can never rain well, nor port his head steedy, unless you
bear your hand low, remembering when you turn your horse, neither to draw your
arms nor hands more on the one side than the other, but keep it even with the
horses crest, and only to turn your fist a little inward, or outward, to
signify unto him what hand you would have him turn unto: for the help of the
caulfe and heel in riding the Ring, you must consider diverse Circumstances, as
first a single stroke of the contrary leg, Use of the Caulfe.
to the side you intend to turn upon: as for example, if you would have him
turn on the right side, You must not forget to spur behind the gi^ts
toward the flank.
then you must touch him with your left leg, if on the left hand, then with
your right leg.

Secondly, a double stroke, striking him with both your legs together with
an even stroke, and this is to make him thrust forwards.

Thirdly, the closing stroke; as for example, when you would have your horse
close his turn well, as namely to the right hand; then in his turning touch
him with your left leg in the spurring place, Th^se actions of the heels are
performed with out spurs, if the horse will not endure the spur.
and with your right leg immediately after more backwards toward his flank.

Fourthly, to strike with both heels one after the other four or five times,
serves for a correction when your horse transgresses.

The use of the Stir^op avails much in helping a young horse in his
beginning; for if he carries his head or neck a wry, The use of the Stirrup.
or hang on one side, more than another by striking him with the Stirrup under
the shoulder, on the contrary side, will cause him to amend his fault.

The use of the Spur is to help when the horse has been first backed half
a score times; Use of the Spur.
and when you first use them, You may stuff old boots with sand, and put
spurs on them, fastening them in the saddle, the ^orse running about with
them in the pasture, will make him endure the spur.
let it be in a new fallow field which lies upon stetches, and then tro: the
Ring; and when you put spurs to him, forget not to help him with your voice
or lips.

How and when to use the spur, you may observe what is before spoken of the
calfe and heel.

CHAP. CIV.
Further Instructions concerning the ordering and riding of a Horse for
Service, with the use of the Ring.
NOw let us proceed further, Note you are to teach your horse only in the
morning before he has provender, not failing to ride him every day once,
until he be perfect, afterward twice a week will be sufficient.
to the instructing of horses, and fitting them for the employment of war;
wherein the Rider must use great diligence in making him tread loftily to keep
one path, and to trot clean, which is one of the chiefest points; then to go
softly, to run or to gallope. Secondly, you must teach him to be light at
stop: Thirdly, to advance or rise up with his fore legs. Fourthly, to turn
readily upon both hands, with single turn or double turn. Fifthly, to make a
sure and ready manage. Sixthly, to pass a swift carriere; for which purpose
you must take a new fallowed land with deep forrowes to make him lift up his
feet; then trotting him right out about the length of a hundred paces cross
the Ridges; then ride him a good way up one of the furrows, How to ^read out
the Ring.
in such part of the land as will admit space enough; Then begin to turn
on the right hand, making him easily tread out a round circle twice together,
containing twenty five, or thirty paces; and being come about at the second
time to the place you began; then tread out the like circle Ring on the left
hand, after twice going about it; then begin again on the right hand, and so
shift from Ring to Ring, treading each of them, twice about, until you have
gone about the left Ring four times, and the right Ring six times; this being
performed, Note the same Ring you beg^n with all, the same you must end with,
whereby there is two turns difference of that hand you begin on.
trot him right out in the same furrow where he began first, the length of
thirty paces.

And then pulling in your Bridle hand, stop him, and stay a pretty while
together, causing him to stand still, keeping his head and body right in the
furrow; this being performed, then turn him softly on the right hand, and
being come round again in to the same path, trot him back again into the
place from whence first he came; At the first riding of the Ring the horse must
be exercised in it eight days together.
then alight off his back, coying and encouraging him; this you must perform
eight days together; but after that time is expired, you must increase his
Ring turns, by two and by two, until he comes to twenty two (viz.) ten for
the left Ring, The number of 22. Gryson says, makes five large turns and a
half; four goin^ about, makes but one large turn.
and twelve for the right, the proportion of the Ring I have here drawn,
whereby any man may perceive, both the Rings together with the furrows, and
place of stopping and turning.



If you find your horse not fitting but untoward and unable to tread out this
Ring; then let some other horse that is perfect tread it out before him; and
let him follow him; but if you tread it out your self, do not trot your
horse, but tread it out softly, until the way be beaten, that he may the
better see how to demean himself, then afterward to fall on with a gentle
trot.

But if your horse be over metled, you shall not suffer him to trot the Rings
at all, but only to tread them fair and softly, for two or three days
together, until be be stayed and acquainted with them.

If through often treading; Note it is dangerous to shift often your Rings,
except necessity constrain you.
the Rings grow hard, then tread out new ones.

When you come to manage your horse, or to pass a carriere, it is not then
best to use one place always, or one length, lest he be to seek, when he
change places, thinking he should not do it, in any other place; or that he
should not pass his accustomed length, and so stop before you would have him.

After you have ridden your horse a few weeks, you may increase your Ring
turns every day two times, until he come to 46. which makes a leaven large
turns and a half, (viz.) 22. for the left Ring, and 24. for the right.

When soever you gallop your horse in the Ring, remember always to help him
with your Voice, Rod, or Spur, according as the quality of the horse shall
require, and when he does well forget not to cherish him.

When you have trotted or troad your number of Rings, that you shall see meet,
then trot your horse right out in the furrow between the two rings, until you
come to the place of stop, there staying a good pretty while together, keep
his body right in the path: and after he has made his stop, you must cause
him to go back; three or four steps, which will not only stay his mouth,
and make him easy rayned; but also lift his legs, and be apt to advance, or
rise before.

To teach him to go back, you must so soon as he has stopped, pull in your
bridle hand moderately, according as the horses resistance shall require, so
keeping your hand steady, without giving him any liberty, strike him softly
upon the bowing of his neck with your riding rod, saying with a soft voice in
that instant, back, back I say, thus being obsequious unto him a pretty while
together, if he then will not move his legs, Note you may have a fellow stand
at the place of stop, with a stick to Rap him on the knees, which will make
him tread back.
or does make resistance, then spur him in time, first with one spur, then
with the other, but most of that side his hinder part stands out of order, when
these things are performed, and your horse well verst in them, then at the stop
you shall further teach him to advance or rise, with both his fore feet
together three or four times, a foot or half a yard above the ground, this
thing is so necessary that the horse cannot manage well, nor turn readily
without this performance.

If he will not advance by striking him at his stop on the right shoulder
with your rod, How to teach a horse to rise before.
then keep still a steady hand, and correct him twice or thrice together with
the even stroke of your spurs, or else with one spur after another,
cherishing him with your voice, as saying hup, hup, or hoyce, immediately after
trot him out again, the distance of forty or fifty foot, with a swift trot,
and at the stop do as you did before, continuing the same course until he
be perfect, likewise you may teach him the same devices upon his gallop.

In the next place we are to take notice of the narrow and straight turns
(having sufficiently spoken of the former large turns) of the narrow turns
there are three kinds (viz.) half turns, Of the narrow turns there are
three kinds described.
whole turns, and double turns.

The half turn is when the Horse turns on the one side, and sets his
head the way his Tail before stood, the way he goes being but half a Circle,
but if he doubles it and goes the whole circumference of the Circle, his head
will stand as it did at his first setting out, and this is called a whole
turn, and two such whole turns will make a double turn, Diverse
considerations in turns.
in these turns diverse things are to be considered.

First that the horse brings in the contrary leg upon the other, and that he
carries his legs neither too high nor too low, also that he keeps always
one path: and that he neither presses forwards not reeleth backwards in his
turning, also that he keeps his body at one stay, not any ways awry, neither
head, neck, nor any part of his body, but to come in whole and round together,
and to close his turns, in so narrow a room as may be.

When you are come out of your Ring, Remember always to begin your Ring on
your right hand, and likewise on the same hand to end it.
trot your horse right out in the middle furrow, unto the place of stop, and
having stopped; turn your horse fair and softly on the right hand, taking
circumference enough: that being done give him the like turn on the left hand,
and then return him again; (as before) on the right hand.

Note when he is to turn on the right hand, he is to bring his left foot over
the right foot before, which is performed by helping him with your voice, in
saying to him turn here; and by striking him with your rod, moderately upon
the left shoulder.

Likewise when you turn him on the left hand, How your horse should order his
feet at his first turning to either hand.
help him with your voice as before, and with your rod on the right shoulder,
to bring in the right fore foot over the left fore foot.

If your horse be harder to turn on one side than on the other, you must help
him with the contrary leg or spur, or with your rod by beating him on the
contrary shoulder.

And to make him close truly, it shall be needful to help him with your
closing stroke of your heel and Spur. Further if your Horse be so stiff
necked and wresty that he will turn upon one hand and not upon the other, you
shall tread out in new plowed Land another fashioned Ring, as beneath is
figured, which both differs in shape, and in the order of treading from the
former.

Another fashioned Ring to cause a horse to turn perfectly as well upon one
hand as upon another.




For whereas you were wont before in the former figure to go twice about in
the right ring, following still the right hand; and then to go twice about the
left ring, following then the left hand: Now in this last ring you shall go
three times about each of them following still the right hand in both of them,
and whereas before four goings about made a large turn, now six goings
about, shall do no more than make a large turn, In this second figure six
goings about makes but a large turn, the reasons of it are described.
the reason is this, if you should go out of the right ring at the second
turn, for to enter into the left ring and would follow still the right hand
(as you must do) then you shall lack a good deals of closing the second
turn, as you may perceive by this last figure in the right ring; where the
place is marked (that you should go out of, for to enter into the left wing)
with the letter A. and the place of closing your turn with the letter B.
betwixt which two letters is contained the portion of a Circle, which will be
wanting, wherefore of necessity you must go thrice about, to the intent the
second turn may be fully ended, as for any overplusse it makes no matter.

To this last ring, is also added a middle furrow with two places of stoppings
and turnings, The last Ring fully described.
meet to manage a horse, trotting him there in the length of a good Cariere,
and having made him stop and advance, make much of him and stay a good while,
and until he has mended his fault of not turning which way you would have
him; you must with your bridle hand, shorten one Rain of that side he desires
he should turn upon, An observation how to make a horse turn to what hand you
please.
then having a foot man standing against him with a stick in his hand, and as
you move your fist to turn your horse, on that side he is unwilling to turn
upon, at that same instant shall strike him upon the nose, not leaving him
until he turns: Likewise making use of his voice to provoke him; then being
turned and trotted the uppermost ring round, you must return back in the same
furrow again, even hard to the second little ring, and there likewise let a
man stand as before is showed, to strike him upon the stop, and cause him to
turn upon the right hand, which hand a horse must always first turn upon,
but if he be harder to turn on the left hand than on the right, then begin in
first with the left Ring observing the order and directions before expressed.

Likewise with a Cord fastened to the middle eye of the bit, How to make a horse
turn upon what hand you please.
on the side he will not turn upon, and tie the other end unto the Sursingle,
on the same side strayning it pretty hard to make him bow his neck: thus
chasing him round in the Circle, diverse times unloosen the cord and hold it in
that hand which is next the side he will not turn upon in stead of a false
rain, then trot him forth the length of twenty or thirty paces, and there
stop, where one must stand with a rod threatening him; and if need be, beating
him upon the contrary side to cause him to turn; and the rider strayning the
cord a little will make him perform it. Forget not to help him with the sound
of your tongue.


Then trot him back, and cause him to perform the like, using the same means
a fore prescribed.

CHAP. CV.
How to manage a Horse for Service, four kinds of ways.
IN this next progress we are to observe four kinds of managing a Horse to
fit him for service.

First when you make your Horse double his turns.

Secondly when you gallop the field, making him wave in and out, as is used in
single skirmish.

Thirdly when you make him leap a loft, fetching diverse saltes or curveates;
but this is not so proper to teach to a horse for service.

Fourthly when you pace, Three things observabl^ in the word Manage.
trot, and gallop, him too and fro in one path, the length of twenty or thirty
paces, turning him at each end thereof, either with single turn, whole turn,
or double turn, (this is termed manage) and in this word there is three things
observable, as first the manage with half rest, that is to cause your horse at
the end of every managing path, to stop and then to advance twice together, and
at the second bound to turn, whereby you rest one bound.

The manage with the whole r^st, A very strong Horse requires the manage with
the whole rest, and a horse of indifferent strength the half, and the weak
horse the manage without rest.
is when you turn him at the third bound, and so you rest two bounds, the
managing without rest, is when you turn him immediately upon the stop, without
any tarriance at all, which is most in use with us.

Note when your Horse turns upon the right Hand, turn you your left shoulder
toward his left ear, keeping your body upright in the Saddle, so that the
raynes of your back may directly answer the ridg-bone of the horses back,
never the less when you feel him to bend his hinder houghs, then lean you
somewhat backewards, for that will make him close his turn the more roundly
and swiftly, likewise when he turns on the left hand accompany him with your
right shoulder toward his right ear, A great horse must be rid the shortest
Ca^eire, and a midling slight horse the longer although not much.
observing as before.

Your horse being perfect in all points before mentioned you shall ride him
into some plain sandy way, void of all occasions of stumbling, and to
acquaint him with the way, pace him fair and softly the length of a good
Carriere, which must be measured out according to the strength and quality of
the horse.

At the end of the Carriere path, let your Horse stop and advance, and at the
second bound; Three things of note in a Carriere, first that the horse gathers
roundly, secondly that he runs swiftly, thirdly that he stops easily.
turn him fair and softly upon the right hand, and so stay a little while
then suddenly with a lively voice, crying hay, hay, put him forwards with both
Spurs at once, forcing him to run all the path as swift as possibly may be,
just up to the end, to the intent he may stop on his buttockes; this being
performed turn him upon the left hand, and pace him forth fair and softly,
unto the other end of the Carriere path, and there stop him, and turn him
again upon the right hand, as you did before and so leave him.

Note there is no better way to bring a horse to this, than by using him to
tread the ring with a very swift trot, which will make him nimble of his
legs, and so swift and stayed of head, When your Horse can run the Cariere
do not exercise him in it above once in two months at most.
that coming afterward to be run, it shall be easy to him to perform;
this was observed by that famous Rider Cola Pagano, who would never run his
horse until he saw him well stayed of head, and well broken, for although a
horse may be half a year in breaking, yet in eight days he may be taught to
run and stop in a most perfect manner.

Likewise to teach your horse to go side ways, (it being a thing of much
consequence in the wars) you must perform it thus, as namely you desire to
have him go side longs toward the left hand, you must bear your bridle even
and steady: and clap your right leg close to his belly, and hold it there
still, making him feel the spur on the right side; if he moves his body
that way you desire, then suddenly pull away your leg from thence, and make
much of him, that being performed make him do as much with your left leg;
and leaving to molest him on either side until he understands your meaning,
thus with a little exercise, so soon as he shall feel you stay your bridle
hand, and touch him with your leg or spurs, on the contrary side he will
go side ways, so much, or so little as you will have him.

Likewise to make him keep his head always toward the Enemy, An excellent
way to (...) to fit him for a single fight with the en^mie.
being in fight at single duel; you must make him go sidewayes with his hind
part only, and his fore part stand party steady, to perform this you must
turn your bridle hand somewhat on that side you touch him, likewise you must
help him with your rod, by striking him therewith on the contrary flank
behind.

Further take notice the carriage of your Horses head is a matter of no small
consequence; his forehead being the strongest part of his head; his snought or
mussell the weakest and tendrest; The excellent properties of a horse, well
(...), described.
the more he thrusts out his mussell, the more he distendeth his back, and
bears the less force in his actions; and it is impossible he should ever
make good Manage, observe time, keep order, or continue in breath, any space
of time together; whereas by bringing in his mussell and extending his
forehead, he uniteth his force together, and gathers his strength in his
back, whereby he becomes more nimble in his actions.

Secondly, he shall see his way the better, and be in less danger of falling
in running; and if he should chance to fall he is the abler to rise speedily.

Thirdly, in his performances against an enemy, he shall be able to execute,
or suffer more with his forehead, than can be expected from his Mussell, being
the tendrest part of him.

Fourthly he cannot be so apt to be urged right forwards upon a sudden, as
otherwise he might do.

Lastly the Horse that Raynes well, and brings in his head shall always be
better stayed, both of head and neck, and have a better mouth than otherwise.

Wherefore if your horse will not bring in his head at any time when you stop
him with your bridle hand, The means to compel a horse to rain well
described.
then holding your hand still at that stay, correct him sometimes with your
right Spur, and sometime with your left, and sometimes with both your spurs
at once; and at the self same instant thrust him with your right hand upon the
neck toward his ears; to force him to bring in his head, but if he will not
yield with that, then by pulling your bridle toward you, cause him to go
back, some three paces, and then to return fair and softly to his first
place; this being put in action diverse times together; and every time he
thrusts out his nose correct him as before is showed.

Moreover if your horse by wresty, A devise to make a wresty Horse go forwards.
so as he cannot be put forwards; then let one take a Cat tied by the tail to
a long pole, and when he goes backewards thrust the Cat toward his stones,
where she may claw him, and forget not to threaten your horse with a terrible
Noise: or otherwise take a Hedgehog and tie him straight by one of his feet to
the inside of the horses tail, so that he may squeake and prick him.

Likewise if your horse be fearful and shie, How to make a shie horse gentle.
so that he is afraid of every thing he sees, you must take heed that in no
wise you correct him for it, least he should take the thing he beholds and
shunneth, to be the cause of his chastisements, and so become more fearful
than before, but rather stay a while and do not force him forwards, but by
gentle means make him by little and little aproach near the thing he fears,
which if he performs, cherish him with your speech and hand, and you shall set
by standing still sometimes to look on it, and sometimes by going toward the
object he fears, he will be so acquainted therewith as he will not fear it,
and when he comes at it, let him gaze and smell on it a good while, to the
intent he may be more assured thereof.

Further to embolden your horse to make him hardy in the wars, you must use
to encounter upon a soft pace or trot, How to make a horse hardy and bold in
the wars.
with another horse man face to face, in one path, but beware they dos^e not
one the other, but rather let the adverse horse be compelled back a few steps
which will hearty the other, or if you please you may encounter one with the
other, riding in two sundry paths, the one coming cheek by cheek within a
foot of the other, the paths being both of a just length; each of them
containing about ten paces, to the intent in managing your horse too and fro
upon a trot, you coming one toward another, from two contrary ends, may both
meet right in the midst of your course passing one by another, which you
cannot choose but do if you keep true time, as well in their trotting as in
their ^urning, also not forgetting, upon what hand soever the one turns, the
other must do the same, By trotting the Ring you may embolden your Horse.
and in the self same instant. Moreover when you trot the Ring, you may
embolden your horse, by entering both together into the Right Ring, then turning
your horse tail to tail, follow you the right hand, and let him follow the
left in the same Ring, the ring path being so enlarged, that at your meeting in
ryding it about you may not touch one the other.

Having ridden thus about twice, you may enter the left ring, and do as before
was showed.

CHAP. CVI.
How to make a Horse endure Pike, Sword, Gunshot, Drum and the like.
IN this Chapter we are to deal with the difficultest matter of all; and that
is now to make a Horse abide Pike, Gunshot, Sword, Drum, and the clattering
of Armor, or to run upon any hazard, to perform this you must acquaint him
thoroughly with the rod or truntion, so as he may not fear it; sometimes coying
him therewith upon the Neck, and by holding the point right forth by his eye,
or betwixt his ears, so as it may be always in his sight, and being
thoroughly assured of the rod, then appoint a foot man, having a staff in his
hand or pike, to stand in your way as you should pass, and as you aproach, let
the footeman by little and little make signs, seeming to strike your horse
upon the head, then encourage your horse to go on toward the footeman, who at
the same instant must retreat back as if he would flee, in doing this you
shall much imbolden him.

Likewise to make him abide the sword, a footeman must perform it in the same
manner as he did with the Pike, but be ware he strikes him not.

After this, cause half a dozen footmen or more to stand in his way, making a
great shouting and noise, threatening him with their loud voices, against whom
you must encourage him to go forwards; first with a soft pace, secondly with a
trot, thirdly with a gallop; at which time let the footmen retreat, fayning
to run away, also let them threaten them with their staves, Pikes or swords.

To make him dure Gunshot, Drum, or clattering of Armor; or any hideous
noise whatsoever; let your horse go hard by another horse, or rather betwixt
two other horses, that are accustomed to the like noise, and are not afraid,
and as you ride together cause three or four Pistols to be discharged, first a
good distance off, then nearer hand, according as your horse begins to abide
them; during which time forget not to make much of him.

Likewise every morning before he is dressed discharge a Musket or two, and sound
a Trumpet, and beat a charge with your drum, and then when he is patient
feed him and cherish him, the Groom may sometime dress him in bright armor,
he may be used to eat his Oats from off the Drum head, you may ride him
against an armor, placed upon a stake, that he may overthrow it, and trample
it under his feet: Every horseman that does not observe these brief
observations, and fit himself and his horse in all respects before he come to
be trained, they will prove both unfit for service; neither would I wish any
Captain to approve either of man or horse, that in some reasonable manner,
has not attained to this perfection; for an Ox well Managed may in
possibility do better service than an ill ridden wresty horse; neither can any
security or reputation be expected by any service they shall undertake if the
Officers be not diligent to see their Troops well ordered and demeaned.

Thus premising every Horseman is or will be in this nature qualified, we will
proceed to the Exercising of private Troops, and breefely show all their
Postures, and how they ought to be imbattelled; but first it is necessary to
give a touch about the several kind of arming both of Curassiers,
Harquebuzires, Carabines, and Dragoones, as follows.

CHAP. CVII.
How the horse Troops ought to be divided and distinguished by their several
arms, apt and fit for diverse services, and what proportion of Cavalry ought to
be joined with the Infantry.
WE are to understand how our Generals of late ages have divided their horse
Troops into four several kinds, proper for diverse Services, and
accordingly, their armings are suitable to their Offices; as The arming of the
C^irassier. Harquebuzier. Carbine. Dragoone. is chiefly Defensive. Offensive.
Offensive and Defensive.





The light armed which are the Harquebuziers, Carabines and Dragoones are
employed to begin a charge against the Infantry, The Dragoones are the fittest
to give the on set because they do their execution at a further distance.
upon flank and rear at once, (the Front is dangerous if the two armies of
foot be ready to join) then the heavy armed (viz.) the Cuirassiers shall
take the advantage of such disorders as are procured by the light armed; for
their complete arming is efficatious to defend their bodies from the push of
pikes; the better to thrust in amongst them: The light armed are also more apt
and fit to be sent upon services that require expedition, which the heavy
armed are unfit to perform; for the Cuirassier is to be compleately armed,
Capape, with a good Buffe coat, to preserve his body from the pinching of his
pondrous armor; his horse is to be fifteen hand high and upwards; he is also
to have his Bedee Nagge, and a Boy to carry his Arms and Snapsacke, and to get
him forage for his horses; his Saddle and Bitte must be strong and good,
whereunto must be fixed upon each side of it a case of good Firelocke
Pistolles, The Firelocke is ^^rest to give fire, and not so apt to be out of
(...); besides they will endure Sp^nd 24. hours together without ^urting them.
the barrel being full eighteen inches long, and the bore of twenty or twenty
four bullets in the pound, with his Spanner and flaske boxes a good sword and
a scarffe over his arms to distinguish him from the enemy. His service in the
wars is chiefly defensive.

As for the proportion which the horse should bear to the foot, there are
diverse of sundry opinions, but the Prince of Orange used to allow three to
ten, or twelve at most (viz.) 3000. horse to 1000. or 12000. foot, and every
troop consisting of five score horse, which are ordered twenty in rank, and
five deep in file; the which custom they use the rather, because of the
scarsitie of their horse; and again they are opiniated that in regard each
horse man has two Pistolles, they may perfect their fight, as well as a Troop
of Musketeers that are ten deep in ^yle, having but one Musket apeece: but
from this has proceeded many inconveniences, as Captain Beumount has
observed: wherefore his advice was to have the horse Troops consist of six
score; so they may be ranked twenty in breast, and six deep in file, they
being then more apt, and proper to double their ranks; whereby their front may
be extended; or if (being in skirmish with the enemy) any shot should be drawn
out to give fire upon them in the rear; then the two hindmost ranks of a
horse, may peckiere about and put them to retreat* and the four foremost
ranks in the front may be the better able to prosecute their fight; wherefore
my discourse shall be to show you how the Troops consisting of 120. horse
ranked, twenty in breast, and six deep in file shall be exercised and fitted
for the wars, and leave it to the judicious Commander to take his choice.

CHAP. CVIII.
How the Harquebuziers and the Carbines ought to demean themselves.
THese kind of horse men are to be armed with an open Caske, Gorget, back and
breast more than Pistol proof, with good Buffe coat to preserve their bodies
from bruising: Their Harquebuzes are to be two foot and a half in length,
their bores of seventeene bullets to the pound; about their necks a strong
leather Belt, with a Swivell to hang the Ring of their pieces upon a Flaske and
Touch box and Pistolls like to the Cuirassiers: Their horses ought not to be
under the size of fifteen hands in height; when they pass by the General, or
Troop through the streets of a town, they place the but end upon their right
thigh, and their right hand grasping the barrel toward the midst of it, the
lock toward their bodies; otherwise in their march, if the enemy be not
near, they hang down by their sides.

Likewise the Carbine requires a smaller horse, a fair Buffe coat; his
Carabine twenty seven inches long, the bore of twenty four bullets to the
pound; and he is to demean himself upon all points like the Harquebuze having
his sword in a strong belt; Flaske and touch box.

CHAP. CIX.
How the Dragoones ought to arm and demean themselves.
THe Dragoones are no less than a foot company, consisting of Pikes and
Muskets, only for their quicker expedition they are mounted upon horses they
are of great use for the guarding of passages and fordes, in regard of their
swiftness they may prevent the enemies foot, and gain places of advantage to
hinder their passage.

Their Pikes are to have thongs of leather about the middle of them, for the
easier carriage of them.

The Muskets are to have a broad strong belt fastened to the stock of them,
well near from one end to the other, whereby he hangs it upon his back when
he rides, holding his match and bridle in his left hand: any horse if he be
swif^ will perform this service, in regard they alight and do their service a
foot; so that when ten men alight, the eleventh holds their horses; so
that to everytroope of 120. there is 132. men allowed.

CHAP. CX.
How a single Troop of horse ought to be drawn into Rank and File.
NOw it remaynes we should make entrance into the discourse of Exercising a
single Troop; Therefore supposing our Troop to consist of one hundred and
twenty horse, we must first order them into Ranks and Files.

Ranks are a number uncertain, Description of a Rank.
and hapens according to the quantity of soldiers, be they more or less.

A File is a number certain consisting of six persons (viz) a Leader,
Description of a File.
two Middle men, a Bringer up, a Follower between the Leader, and the
Middleman to the Rear; and a Follower between the Middleman to the Front, and
the Bringer up, which is the last man in the File called the Rear.

A File differs from a Rank, because they stand face to back, and never above
six deep.

A Rank differs from a File, in regard they stand even a breast, shoulder to
shoulder, and have no certain extent.

The order of a File you shall see in this description following.

0 Leader. 1 Follower. 0 Middleman to the Rear. 0 Middleman to the Front. 1
Follower. 0 Bringer up.
The description of a Rank you shall understand by this demonstation
following; where you shall suppose twenty in Rank, and six deep in File.

Six in File. Twenty in length.


Rear.



CHAP. CXI.
What Orders and distances a horse Troop should observe in exercise.
NOw let us take notice what Orders or Distances these Files and Ranks are to
observe; in exercising, where note, that in horse Troops, there are but two
sorts of distances or orders, either in Rank or File, (viz.) close order, and
open order.

Close Order in Files is knee to knee.

Open Order in Files is six foot, which is accounted a horses length.

Likewise close Order in Ranks, is to the Horses crooper; so that little or no
distance remains between the head of the Follower and the crooper of the
Leader.

Likewise open order in Ranks is six foot, above which they must never open.

CAAP. CXII.
The motions which the Cavalrie are to observe in their exercise.
THe Motions of the Cavallrie are of four kinds, as namely, first, Facings;
secondly, Doublings; thirdly, Counter-Marches; fourthly, Wheelings.

The use of Facing is to make the company perfect, to be suddenly prepared for
a charge; on either of the Flanks or the Rear.

Doubling of Ranks; or doubling by half Files, or Bringers up, is used upon
occasion of strengthening the Front.

Doubling of Files, or Doubling by half Ranks, serves to strengthen the
Flanks.

Counter-Marches, serve either to reduce the File-leaders, into the place of
the Bringers up; and so to have the best men ready to receive the charge of an
Enemy in the Rear; or to bring one Flank into the place of the other: or
Front, and Reere, or either Flank into the middle of the body.

The use of Wheeling, is to bring the Front, (which) is all ways supposed to
consist of the ablest men to be ready to receive the charge of the Enemy; on
either Flank, or Reere.

CHAP. CXIII.
The Manner how a Commander over 120. Horse, besides Officers, should Troop
with them into the Field to be exercised.
NOw we are to suppose this Troop of 120. horsemen are to be ordered in Rank
and File; fit to draw into the Field for exercise; where note they are five in
Rank, and six deep in File, and every Officer marching in his due place, as
appears by this subsequent demonstration.

Captain.

Trumpet. That the Troop may move orderly, and keep their distances truly;
let the whole Troop move all at an instant, (viz.) when the Front moves, then
the Rear to be ready, so shall they be seldom found to err.


Cornet. In Marching or Trooping through a Town, forget not to have your
Pieces spand, and holding them in your hand, with their mouths upwards, and
the butt end resting upon your thigh.


Eld. Corporal.

Second Corporal.

Youngest Corporal.

Livetenant.

Trumpet.



CHAP. CXIV.
How a Commander should draw this Troop of Horse into a body in manner of
Battalia standing at their open Order or Distance of six foot.
YOur Troop of horse being drawn into the Field, before you can exercise
them; you must draw up the dimissions into an even body, in manner of
Battallia; (viz.) the first devision, led by the Captain, being come to a
convenient place of Exercise, is to stand firm.

Then the Cornet is to lead up the second Division upon the left side of the
former, fronting even, and keeping even destances both in Rank and File.

Thirdly, the Eldest Corporal is to lead up his Devision upon the left side
of the Cornets, fronting them even with the former.

Lastly, the second Corporal brings up his last Division upon the left hand of
the eldest corporal, observing their due orders and proportions both in Ranks
and Files.

And being thus drawn in Battallia there shall be consequently be in the
Front; the Captain whose place is to stand upon the right hand before the
Front of the first Division.

The eldest Trumpet and Cornet before the Front of the second Devisions

The eldest Corporal before the Front of the third Division.

The second Corporal before the Front of the fourth Division.

And in the Rear, the Lieutenant, the youngest Corporal, and youngest
Trumpet.

Trumpet.

Second Corporal. Eldest Corporal. Cornet. Captain.

Front. The Figure of the four Divisions drawn into Battallia.


Rear.

Livetenant. Trumpet. Corporal.



CHAP. CXV.
How Soldiers are to be made to understand their Commanders intention in time
of skirmish.
BEfore we can proceed to the Exercising of this Troop of Horse; we must
take notice how and by what means the soldiers should understand their
Commanders (...), that accordingly they may immediately act and put in
execution, such things as are commanded: And this is to be performed by the
Commander three several ways.

First, by the immediate command of the Captain, either so that every soldier
hears the word of Command distinctly himself, or by Tradition from inferior
Officers, whose office is to echo such commands throughout the Troop, and
this is termed vocal.

Secondly, when the Captain commands the Trumpet to sound such points of war
as are generally known to every particular soldier; this is termed Semivocall.

The first point of war the Trumpet sounds, The distinctions of the sounds of
Trumpet described.
is (Butte Sella) this is the warning to clappe on the Saddles.

The second is (Mount Cavallo) that is the warning for the soldiers to mount
upon horse back.

The third is (Tucquet) that is the warning for a March.

The fourth is (Carga, Carga) that is a command for to charge the Enemy.

The fifth is (Al^ Stand^rdo) that is a command for to retreat to the Colors.

The sixth and last is (Auquet) that is a command for the soldiers to repair
to their Watch or Guards, or for the discharging of the Watch or Guards.

In the third place when the Commander shall make such perfect signs pregnant
to the sight; as by charging with his Trun^ion, or Pistol, or by holding up
the colors; whereby the soldiers take notice by the first to charge on; and
by the second to make a stand; and this is termed Mute; wherefore you may
perceive it is a thing of great consequence to accustom your soldiers to
these things, without which a world of inconveniences, and confusion must of
necessity betide you in times of skirmishing.

Further, in regard the exercising a Troop of Horse is tedious and painful
for a Captain to perform; it shall prove very convenient to take some
extraordinary pains in making every File-Leaders most perfect in their
Postures and Motions, and then every particular File-Leader shall teach and
instruct the residue of his File in the same manner; from whence will arise
such an emulation between each File, who shall be most expert, and make the
best performances, that in a short space they will transcend in their Millitary
discipline. These things being thus performed, and the Troop drawn in
Battallia, as before is deciphered; then the Commander at his ease and pleasure
may exercise them in gross, in this Subsequent form.

CHAP. CXVI.
The Description of the Postures for the Cavalry, which every Officer is to
teach his Soldiers before they can be fit for Service.
FOrmerly I have showed you how to back your Horse, to use his Raines, to ride
him in the best and aprovedst way for Service, now it remains before you
exercise them in their Motions, to show them first their postures: and
premising that a Horseman cannot fit himself for exercise; or to execute any
Service, unless he be first mounted on horseback, compleately armed as
formerly is taught, therefore I will omit those things; and begin with the
first posture according to the Netherlandish rules, the words of command
follow* viz. 1. Vncap your Pistols. This posture is performed by turning down
the Caps of the Pistol cases with your right hand.
2. Draw forth your Pistol. You are to draw your Pistol out of the case, with
your right hand; the left Pistol first, in regard it is most trouble some for
the right hand to draw, and at first there is most time to perform it, being
drawn, mount the Muzzell of it.
3. Order your Pistol. You are to sink your Pistol into your Bridle hand,
and instantly remove your right hand toward the midst of it, and then rest the
But end upon the right thigh.
4. Span your Pistol. This is performed by sinking the Pistol into his Bridle
hand, and taking the Spanner in his right hand, to put it upon the Axeltree,
and winding about the wheel till it stick, and then to return the Spanner to
his place, which most usually'st hanges about their necks in a silken string,
or placed in the case.
5. Prime your Pan. Your Pistol being held in your Bridle hand, not far
above the lock, you are to take your priming box in your right hand, (and
pressing the spring with your fore finger to open the box) to put powder into
the Pan.
6 Shut your Pan. You are to press in your Pan pin, with your right thumb
whereby it will easily close.
7. Cast about your Pistol. You are to assume the Pistol in your bridle hand,
and casting it about against the left side, erecting the mouth of it.
8. Gage your Flaske. You are to take the flaske into your right hand, and with
your fore finger pull back the Spring, and turning the Mouth of the Flaske
downward, you are to let go the Spring.
9. Lade your Pistol. Having gaged your Flaske (as in the former posture) you
are to press down the Spring, which opens the Flaske with your fore finger,
then placing the mouth of it in your Pistol, give it a shogge to cause the
powder to proceed.
10. Draw out your Rammer. You are to draw out your Gunsticke with your right
hand turned, and to shorten the great end of it against your breast, whereby you
may the easier put it to the mouth of your piece for to ram it.
11. Lade with Bullet and Ram home. Holding your Rammer head in your right
hand (as before) you are to take the Bullet out of your mouth with your Thumb
and fore finger; and so put it into the mouth of the Pistol, and immediately
ram it home.
12. Return your Rammer. You are to draw forth your Rammer with your right
hand turned (and shortning it against your breast as before) return it to it is
place.
13. Pull down your Cock. You are to bring back the Pistol with your Bridle
hand, toward your right side; and placing the Butt end, upon your right thigh
you may pull down the Cock.
14. Recover your Pistol. You are to take your Pistol in his due place, with
your right hand bearing up the Muzzell.
15. Present, and give fire. Having your Pistol in your right hand, with your
finger upon the tricker, you are to incline the Muzzell (with a steady eye)
toward the Mark, not suddenly but by degrees, according to the distance you
ride, before a necessity of discharging shall be, you are not to give fire
directly forwards the horses head, but in a diameter line, by his right side,
turning his right hand so as the lock of the Pistol may be upward, and
having a true view of the Mark, draw the tricker and let fly.
16. Return your Pistol. You are to return the Pistol into the Case, and
speedily draw out your other Pistol, (if occasion commands) making the same
performances as before.
17. Bend your Cock. Now in regard our English Pistolls differ from the
firelocke Pistol, I will briefly touch two or three postures that are
Heterogen^all to the former. And as before is taught, the holding of your
Pistol in your bridle hand; now to perform this posture you are to place your
two fore fingers of your right hand upon the vice pin that sk^ues in the stone,
and by it to draw up the Cock.
18. Guard your Cock. With your Right hand you are to pull down the back
lock, and then be careful in securing the Cock, from striking down.
19. Order your Hammer. You are gently to draw down your ste^ele upon the Pan
with your right hand; provided always there be a good flint, and that it be
evenly measured, least it under or over reaches, which may hazard the firing.
20. Free your Cock. You are to thrust back your back lock with your thumb
and fore finger of your right hand, so as the Cock may be let down without
danger of staying it from giving fire.



CHAP. CXVII.
Of the exercising of the Harquebuz and Carabine with the Postures to them
belonging, and diverse brief rules appertaining to the use of them as also to
Cuirassiers.
HAving discourst of the managing of the Pistol, in his several postures; it
will seem convenient here by the way to observe some brief notes, concerning
the use and managing both of Pistols, Harquebuzes, and Carabines; and then
only name the Postures belonging to the Harquebuz, and Carabine, that go with
Snaphanes.

The quickest and most compendious way of charging either the Pistols belonging
to the Cuirassiers; or other Pieces of what kind soever, is by using of
Cazrouches, which are made of white paper after this manner following. First
you are to have a former of wood of the just wideness of your Pistols bore,
about this you are to wind a Paper, The proportion of powder usually required
for a true charge of any piece, is almost half the weight in powder of the
bullet.
which shall contain the true charge of powder and Bullet, the ends must be
tied with a thread and in the midst betwixt the powder and the Bullet, when you
are to use them, you are to bite of the end of the Paper close to the powder
and so put it into the Barrel of your Pistol ramming it down close so as the
powder may take at the Touchhole by this means a Soldier shall be far
readier in his postures, you are also to observe that the arms of the
Cuirassiers are Pistol proof; wherefore that Soldier that incounters against
them must be sure not to shot until he be within three or four paces: Some
will not have a Cuirassiere to give fire until he has placed his Pistol
under his enemies armor.
the Hollanders use to discharge their Pistols at the enemies ear, as a place
most certain to speed them; others at the lower part of the Belly, or his
arm Pits or about the neck or throat; a Cuirassiere usually gives this
charge upon the trot, and very seldom upon the Gallop, if you miss the
speeding of the man, then you are to direct your next charge against the Horse,
You may place the Pum^ell of your Sword upon your right thigh and directing it
with your right hand to the place you intend to hit, viz. the belly or arm
pits or his throat.
where you shall be sure to speed him either upon the head or breast; the sword
is to be managed after you have done your endeavors with the Pistol; and the
principal thing required is to disable your adversary by hacking a two the
Raynes of his bridle, or the Buckles of his Pouldrons, whereby he shall be
disabled from making any resistance.

The Cuirassire, in fight is to strive to gain the right side of his Enemy
being most proper to discharge his Pistols against him.

The Harquebuziers and Carabines, must contrarily strive to get the left side
of of their Enemies, because that in presenting he is to rest his Carabine
upon his Bridle hand, They must be taught to be excellent marks-men, for the
manner of handling them, the directions of the Pistol may serve for
instruction.
placing the Butt end upon the right side of his breast near his shoulder.

Our Modern Generals think it best to order the Cuirassiers in gross
Bodies, by which means they are more powerful and strong, against the shocke
of the enemy, they are for the most part reserved to second the light armed;
so that when they are broken they may have shelter, and time to reu^ite
themselves behind the Cuirassiers.

Note that in a pitched Battle if the enemies Ordnance be planted upon some
hill so advantageous that they may annoy the Horse troops; then the horse are
to be drawn into some place of security, or into the Rear of your Battle of
the Infantery; until such time as their Ordnance be intercepted by certain
disbanded Troops both of Horse and Foot, sent for that purpose; as for the
Postures of the Harquebuz and Carabine, they may receive their instruction from
the Cuirassiers; yet in regard most of our pieces go with English locks,
which differ from firelockes, you shall find here underneath the order of
handling them with the words of Command.

The Postures belonging to the Snaphane Carabine ut sequit.
1. Order your Carabine. 2. Sink your Carabine into your Bridle hand. 3. Bend
your Cock. 4. Guard your Cock. 5. Prime. 6. Shut your Pan. 7. Cast about your
Carabine. 8. Gage your Flaske. 9. Lade your Carabine. 10. Draw your Rammer. 11.
Shorten your Rammer. 12. Lude with Bullet and Ram (...)* 13. Withdraw your
Rammer. 14. Shorten your Rammer. 15. Return your Rammer. 16. Recover your
Carabine. 17. Order your Hammer. 18. Free your Cock. 19. Present. 20. Give
Fire.
CHAP. CXVIII.
Of the Excellent Service which may be performed by the Dragoones here in our
Island of England.
AS for the Dragoones, their Service and use of arms does so nearly corespond
with the Postures of the Infantry, to which postures I altogether refer them.

They were invented for special services, to assist both the Cavalry and
Infantry, for there are many exploits which cannot be effected by the Cavalry
alone.

The Musquetei^es are to exercise themselves to give fire on horseback, in the
same fashion as the Harquebuzirs ought to do.

Being come to Guarde a passage or to do any other the like Service; they are
to alight and demean themselves as infantry, as in diverse places in this
book you may read, only here by the way I will show how necessary it were, to
breed and train up certain companies of them in this our Kingdom, which
being an Island, and the chiefest of our Land forces far remote from the
Maritime places, where an enemy may possibly land, which will be troublesome,
and require much time to March to our Coast side with our foot troops, and
when we are arived; with the strength of our Land thinking to encounter with
them;

The Enemy may easily delude us by the advantage of a dark night or mistie day
which may so favor them, that by rebarking themselves, and setting sail, by
the next night they may be landed on the other side of the Kingdom, which were
a thing impossible to March to them with our Army to oppose them; but these
Dragoones may easily cross the Kingdom, and may suddenly arive in any place
thereof to assist such Forces, as that Coast shall be able to raise.

And although we should admit of that Noble Gentleman's advice, Edmunds
observation upon C^sars Com.
which was to divide the Forces of certain adjacent Counties, into three
divisions; making an entire army of the one half of them: intrenching them
near the place suspected for greatest danger for conveniencie of landing them;
as he exemplifies it by Fulke-stone in Kent, where he would have lodged 6000.
men, then upon the right wing twelve miles distant from this body, being the
point of Nesse, he would have 3000. men lodged, and upon the left wing 12.
miles distant, being the Town of Margate, he would have 3000. more lodged; and
so accordingly to inguirt the whole Island, by this they should mutually give
help one to another: so that if the body of this army being 6000. men, should
be distressed, then the two wings were speedily to repair to their succor; or
if any of the wings then the body of the army were to March speedily to their
aid: Questionless this is a singular project, and no reason can contradict
it, if we have men sufficient to inguirt the Island round; but that cannot be
expected, in regard that his Majesty must of necessity have a standing Army
in the Heart of the Kingdom, composed of the Principal Gentry and Yeomandry,
to be in readiness if the Enemy should give a repulse, and overthrow those
Maritime Forces, or if any Domesticke enemy should trecherously draw a head to
side wit^ them; this standing Army will dishearten them, and be a means to
corroberate our own men which otherwise would be much dejected, and happily
many of them so base (being overwhelmed with the present disasters) that they
would turn to the Enemy and compound their own safeties, as was well seen
at the Landing of William the Conqueror, after he had discomfited the Army of
King Herrald, In those Kingdoms that are fortified with strong Garrison
Towns, there shall need no such arm^, for those towns are ready to perform
the same Office that this Army should do.
which was but a handful of the Forces which might have been afterward
raised to have given the enemy a second Battle, or otherwise have defended
the Land by delaying the Enemy: but fear had so wonderfully surprised the
Natives, that immediately they compounded their own safeties, which had there
been a powerful Army in the heart of the Kingdom, to have kept them in
obedience, that they might have strengthened their dejected conceits, upon their
hope of victory which might possibly have been gained by this Army, the Lords
Spiritual and Temperall would never have yielded themselves with the City of
London to the mercy of the Conqueror, but this is only by the way.

Now these Troops of Dragoones being well exercised and practiced as they
ought, let any sensible man judge if they shall not prove in time of need most
useful in regard of their speedy March.

CHAP. CXIX.
The Order of Exercising a Horse Troop in their Motions being drawn in
Battalia.
TO pretermit all further circumstances; (presupposing that every Soldier is
perfect in his postures) it is now high time to draw out in Battalia; (as
before is demonstrated) that they may the better be exercised in Gross, and the
more commodiously taught their Motions which every Soldier (using silence) is
to perform according as he shall be commanded, as this following figure does
demonstrate; where note there are ^20. horse drawn in Battalia ready to be
exercised and standing at their open order of six foot, being the space of
ground allowed between horse and horse.

Front. The form of their standing in Battalia ready for exercise. To cause
them to face to the right hand is performed by commanding.


H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h

Right Flank.

Rear. To the right hand, This motion is performed by turning (all at once,
and the same time) to the right hand. Thus the Front is where the right Flank
was. To reduce them to their first form the word of command is


As you were.* This is performed by turning to the left hand, from thence to
face them to the left you command,


To the left hand, This is performed by turning toward the left, from hence
they are to be reduced by commanding;


As you were. Which they do by turning to the right. Now to face them to the
Rear, though it be most proper to do it by the right hand, yet for the more
ready way you must command.


Front. H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h
H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h
h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h
h h h h

h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h
h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h
h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h H h h h h h
H

Rear.

To the left hand a-bout. This is performed by turning toward the left hand,
until their faces Front to that place which was before the Rear. To reduce
them to their first form the word of Command is,


To the Right hand about as you were.

h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
H

Ranks to the Right hand double. Every other rank passes into the rank
before them upon the right hand of his leader. To reduce them, the word of
Command is


Ranks as you were. Which is best done by causing those ranks which doubled
to stand, and those which stood to advance.


HhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o

Ranks to the left hand double. This motion differs nothing from the former
only where as before they doubled to the right now they double to the left
hand of their Leaders. To reduce them, the word of Command is


Ranks as you were.

hHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhH o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o

Files to the right hand double. To perform this, the second File passes into
the first, every man behind his sideman, this must be done throughout the
Company at one instant, the o are the places where the Files that removed did
stand. They are reduced by commanding.


Files to the left hand, as you were.

29 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 o H o H o H o H o H o H o H
o H o H o H H o H o H o H o H o H o H o H o H o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o
h o h h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h h o h
o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h h o h o h o
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h h o h o h o h o h
o h o h o h o h

Files to the left hand double. The difference between this and the former
motion is the difference of hands, so that those Files that before moved are
now to stand; view the Figure. They are reduced by commanding:


Files as you were, or Ranks to the right hand double.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 H ^ H ^ H ^ H ^ H ^ H ^ H ^
H ^ H ^ H ^ H o H o H o H o H o H o H o H o H o H o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o
h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o h o

Half Files to the right hand, double your Front. To perform this the
middlemen double the first rank on the right hand; the other two Ranks double
the two following Ranks, as is manifest in the Figure. To reduce them the word
is,


Half Files as you were, But in regard of the combersomnesse of the horse in
turning, to cause them that double, to stand, and the first division to advance.


HhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHh
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o

Half files to the left hand, double your Front. This motion only differs
from the former in the hand. The reducing of them is showed in the former
motion.


hHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhH
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o

Bringers up to the right hand, double your Front. In this motion the last
Rank passes into the first, and so successively, as the Figure demonstrates
it. They are reduced by saying.


Bringers up as you were.

HhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHh
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o

Files to the left hand Countermarch. For the convenient turning of the horse,
it is best to begin with the left hand. This Figure is after the Corean
manner. There are diverse other forms of countermarching which are to be
performed as well by Ranks as by Files, as the Lacedemonian, and Macedonian;
but in regard of brevity they are here omitted.


HhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHhHh h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o

Files close to the right and left to your close Order. All the Files are to
close from the right and left, toward the middle of the body. Note when you
intend to wheel, your Files must first be closed and then the Ranks; and when
you command them to open again, the Ranks are first, and then the Files.


oooooHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHooooo ooooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhooooo
ooooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhooooo ooooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhooooo
ooooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhooooo ooooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhooooo

Ranks close forwards to your close order. To perform this all the Ranks
move forwards, saving the first, which stands, the second rank being
advanced up to its distance stands, so all the rest. When the horses are to
wheel, the Commander must take a reasonable Compass, for they cannot possibly
do it in such exact manner as the foot, for they must be allowed a far
greater space, in regard of the combersomenes of the horse.


H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

To the left hand wheel. To perform this motion, all the body moves to the
left, upon the left file leader as the Center. The wheeling to the left hand is
the readiest way, unless some impediments hinders, wherefore that is first
nominated although it be more proper to begin with the right, the wheeling to
the right is for brevity omitted. To reduce them wheel to the right hand as
you were.


H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h

There is also wheeling to the right or left about, wheeling wings into the
front, they are here omited for brevitie. To reduce them into their first
order; first the Ranks are to be opened, then the files. In opening the
ranks, the best way is to do it by opening forwards.


H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h
h

CHAP. CXX.
The Fashion of Horse Battles discourst of, and first of the Rhombe, the Wedge,
and the Square.
IN regard we shall not have the opportunity to discourse, and demonstrate
every kind of Battle, that at this time is in use when we shall come to
entreat of the embattelling of the Infantry with the Cavalry; therefore I
think it most convenient to discourse of some forms of Embattelling the
Cavalry which are of greatest use.

And the rather because the Cavalry for the most part are employed upon
peculiar services in the absence of the Infantry. Those that have formerly
written of this subject, have not fully expressed their own conceits. Therefore
to make all things clear; I shall endeavor to set down the several figures
of each several kind.

The Thessalians were the first inventers of the Rhombe, It was attributed to
Jason.
and conceived it to be an absolute form; in regard they were ready to turn
their faces every way with speed, and not easily to be surprised, in Flank or
in the Rear; because the best men are placed in the Fanke, and the commanders
in the Angles. (viz.) the Captain in the Front, and in the right, and left
Angles of the Flanks the two ablest Corporalls, and the Livetenant in the
rear Angle.

Of these kind of battles called the Rhombes, there are four sorts severally
distinguished; Four kinds of Rhombes ^ described.
the first kind Files and Ranks. The second form, neither File nor rank;
the third form Files but rank not; the fourth rank, but file not: The first
kind of Rhombe that does both file and rank, is ordered as follows (viz.)
you are to make the greatest rank being the middle most of an uneven number,
as of a 11. or 13. or 15. or 17. to which you are to join other ranks before
and behind, every one containing two less than the former; as if the greatest
rank consisted of 17. the next ranks on either side are to have but 15. the
next on either side of those, but 13 and so every one two less, until at last
you come to one, as you may perceive by the next Figure following; the longest
rank consists of 15. the next of 13, etc. and so the whole Rhombe has 113
horse in Battalia: of these I intend to show you the order of framing them,
although not much used in these late wars: afterward I shall discourse of
sundry forms of Embattelling in a discourse by it self.

The Rhombe of Horse.

The Front. Euelide defines a Rhombe to be a square Figure, that has the
sides equal, but the Angles not right, viz. the foure-sides of the square are
of one and the same length, but the points which make the Angles, are two of
them, stretched out in length and become more sharp; the other two are more
blunt than a Tetragonall square.


Left Flank

Right Flank

The Rear.



CHAP. CXXI.
The manner and form how the second kind of Rhombe is ordered in Battalia.
THe next kind of Rhombe, which neither Files nor Ranks was by the ancient
Generals, thought very proper for service, in regard the turnings and other
motions, were to be performed very easily, having nothing to hinder them
before, behind, or in Flancke.

For the ordering of this form of Battle, you must first place the Leader,
then one a^ his right, and an other at his left hand, and in such a distance,
that their horses heads reach up to his horses shoulders, as in the formal
battle.

The first row you must also make of an uneven number, as 21. the Leader of the
Troop standing in the midst, and 19. other being laid to him backwards on
either side; so that this rank contains two sides of the Rhombe, like to
this A.

Then the Rear Commander is placed directly behind the Leader; and to him are
other joined forwardly on either side, like to this Figure V. and the number of
the following ranks; after the first, there are to be two less than the
former, and therefore nine must be added on either side of the Rear Commander;
so that the number of the second rank has ten; this rank makes two sides
parrallell to the two former sides of the Rhombe, as the Figure shows: the
third must be 17. and so forwards to one, the whole Battle has in it 121.
horse with the Officers; the Figure follows.

Front.

A Rhombe neither filing, nor ranking.


Rear.



CHAP. CXXII.
The Manner and form of imbattelling the third kind of Rhombe consisting of
Files but not of Ranks.
THe third kind of Rhombe, The These alonians used this form of imbattelling
their Troops.
which Files but Ranks not, you are to order your Troop after this manner
following.

First you must make a File of any Number, the Captain of the Troop being
File-leader, and the Rear Commander the last of the File.

To both the Flanks of this File, you are to lay two other Files either of
them one less in number than the first, these you must begin to place even
with the midst of the distances of the first file on both sides; as suppose
11. in the first File, the next file on either side must have 10. a piece, and
the next after them 9. a piece, and still one the less in all the rest after
placed Files, and so it shall prove to file but not rank.

This form is advantageous and profitable for turning of faces, when need
shall require, The terms used by Commanders in former ages as P^li. l. 4. 217.
from one point of the Rhombe to another: turning to the right hand is called
turning to the staff: turning to the le^^ is called turning to the Raynes, but
in these our modern wars we use to command them to face to the right, or to
the left hand, as occasion shall offer, the figure of this discourse follows
the Troop of horse consisting of 121. with the Officers.

The Front.

Rear.



CHAP. CXXIII.
The manner of imbattelling the fourth kind of Rhombe which Ranks and Files
not.
THis last kind of Rhombe whose property is to Rank and not to File, is made
by a contrary way to the former.

The presedent Rhombe which showed to File but not to Rank, began at the Front
point, and Rear point, and proceeded to the Flanks.

This begins at the Flank points and proceedth to the Front and Rear.

First therefore a Rank is to be laid of what number you please to the
distances of this Rank you must lay two Ranks more, one on either side, whose
number must be one less a piece, than the former Rank, thus continue laying
of Ranks toward the Front, and Rear, and in every pair of Ranks diminish
one a piece, until you come to the points, either of which have but one,
namely the Captain and Lieutenant; by this means the Rhombe will rank but
not file, the figure follows.

Front.

A Rhombe ranking but not filing.


Rear.



CHAP. CXXIIII.
The manner of Framing the Battle called the Wedge, or half Rhombe, used by
the Macedonians.
THe form of this Battle called the Wedge, plainly appears in the Rhombe,
which both Ranks and Files, for the half of that Rhombe is a Wedge.

Wherefore first you must begin with a Rank of an uneven number as suppose
15. horse before that Rank, you must place another Rank of 13. having two
less than the former, and so you are to proceed until you end with one,
which is the place of the Captain; this was the Invention of King Philip of
Macedon, who placed his best men before, that by them the weaker might be held
in and enabled to charge.

Elian gives reasons why the Wedge was in those times accounted better than a
Square form, which we now have in use, in regard it is apt and proper,
artificially to break the Enemies Square battles, for he Compares a Square
Battle to an Axe, for although it be sharper than a Wedge, yet having the edge
drawn out in length it cannot possibly, by strength be driven far into the
Wood, but by redoubling of strokes.

The Wedge being once entered, insinuates it self, the point being Narrow, and
it holds what it gets, until at last it divides the Square form in
Sunder, although never so tough. Polybius reports lib 4. 278. that the
Thessalians being Imhatteled in this kind of form, they could not be resisted
by the Gracians and Persian Squares.

Moreover the Wedge is of greater strength than the Rhombes, because it
brings more hands to fight, for the hinder part of the Rhombe is of no use
but to avoyde surprises, for it avayleth nothing in charging, whereas all parts
of the Wedge are effectual, viz. the point to enter, and the sides even to the
flank corners, where the rear ends does dispart and dissever, and utterly
disorder the Enemy, whereby victory is gained.

And questionless this form of a Wedge, were of excellent use in our wars
especially when an enemy is charged in Flank and Rear, or Front and Flank,
then this Battle in form of a Wedge to come full upon the point of the
enemies Battalia, where they shall find an easy place for entrance, in regard
the foot Troops are constrained to make a double resistance, both to Front
and Flank, so that there will be a space open for entrance; and then the sides
of this Wedge battle will give such a Valley upon the point, that of necessity
they cannot be able to withstand it.

The Cornet (in this Wedge form of imbattelling) is to take his place right
before the Lieutenant in the second Rank from the Rear, the figure
follows: this Troop consists of 121. Horse.

Front.

The Leivetenant.



CHAP. CXXV.
The reason why we retain the custom of Ranking five deep in File.
WE have learned from Generals in former ages the framing of Square Battles,
in regard they were oppinionated that form was the easiest to be framed, and
best for Motion, besides the ablest men were placed in Front, and had all the
principal Commanders, to lead them on, to give the Enemy a charge, the
weapons which the Horsemen used were Spears, Leo Chap. 5. Sect. 3. and Cap. 6.
Sect. 39.
of such a wonderful length to to Match their Enemies Pikes, which as Leo
reports Chap. 25. that they were 16. Cubtis in length, that is 24. foot; and
Livy verifies the same that their Pikes were very unwildy in regard of their
bigness and length, and then they for the most part did order their horse
Troops eight deep in File, as Polybius speaks plainly; who was General of
the Horse of the Achaeans; besides Leo in his seventh Chapter writes after
this manner* Leo Cap 7. Sect. 81* Cap. 14. Sect. 70.
If there be many horse (says he) (viz.) above twelve thousand, then let them
be ordered ten deep in File; if but few, then let it be no more than five;
Leo Cap, 14. Sect. 108* 109.
further he says, too much shallowness makes a Battalia weak, and ready to
be broken; by this we may conjecture that the filing of Troops five deep was
not a thing enforced of necessity, until such times as they found the
inconvenience of their overlong Spears; so that the Macedonians caused their
Spears to be but 15. or 16. foot in length, and then five horse in depth was
rather at the most, (then otherwise) to make use of those short weapons to
offend the Enemy in their charge.

They further aimed to order their Battles, so that the Battalias might seem
square, (viz.) as deep in Flank, as broad in Front, so that thereby, the
enemy might be deluded; Plutarch in Li^urgo.
and therefore sometimes they would order eight horse in Front, and but 4. in
Flank, which seemed as a square, by reason a horse takes up twice as much
space in his length as in breadth; whereupon finding the inconveniences of
those kind of squares, they bethought them of a more perfect square, less
than which they durst not venture, and more they could not; for want of horse,
in regard their policy was to discourage the Enemy by making their Troops
show more than indeed they were; wherefore they framed their Troops of 50.
horse, and ordered them ten in Rank, and five in File; which form
represents a square, in regard the five horse take up as much ground in their
length, as the ten do in breadth, and this proportion they held best, for
had there been six, seven, or eight horse in a File, Leo Cap. 12. Sect. 4^.
they could not have done any good in regard of the shortness of their
squares, as Leo after confessed.

But our manner of charging the Enemy differs from theirs; for we are to give
fire upon the Enemy by Ranks, and so fall off into the Rear, so that all the
Ranks shall come up and give fire by degrees upon the Enemy, whereas their
Troops gave a firm close charge, and wheeled off together; this was the use
both of their Archers and Spearemen.

Now our modern Captains, Their horse Troops charged the Enemy in Phalang,
and not by ranks as we do, Leo ibidem, read Bingham upon Ali^ns Tacticks,
page 106.
although they have abandoned the use of their Spears, yet they have detained
their form of ordering their Troops, five deep in file; and because each
horseman has two Pistolls, therefore they suppose that they may charge and
discharge as well as the foot Troops that are ten deep (with one Musket
for their arms) but let the ablest horseman of them all say what he please; he
shall find it another business, especially if both sides stand to their
tackling, until all the Ranks have given fire; for the small distance of
time, and the ordering of their unruly horses, will make them fall short of
their expectations: but indeed our horse Troops, seldom stand so long in
competition for the victory; but that one side either retreates, or do worse;
for if they should, it should be easily seen that that Troop whose Files were
ordered six in deepth, would soon wear through the adverse part, whose
extent is but five.

Wherefore I could wish that all our Troops might be so ordered, in regard it
is a number so proper and apt, either to be divided, or to be doubled, or to be
drawn into any form of Embattelling, wherefore more than six are
unprofitable, and less than six are not so serviceable.

In former ages they were driven to their inconvenience, in regard they were
scanted of horse; and so to make their fronts equal with the Enemies; they in
policy framed their Battalias but of five deep; whereas their Enemies were
compounded of many more, as 6. 8. or 10. many times; but after they had found
out their policy (which) was only to make the fronts of their Battles equal
with theirs, being constrained in regard of their thinness to line them with
shot, and to have stands of Pikes to rescue them to make them abler to resist
their enemies streng Phalange; Caesar against Pompey did the like, and
E^a^mondas against the Lacedaemonians.
they likewise ordered their Troops after the same manner, whereby they
delated their Fronts far witer than before, and so over winged them, whereby
many times they gained victory.

Our Kingdom (blessed be God) shall not need to be driven to that exegint to
make such simple shifts, In regard we have or may have more than sufficient to
oppose the potentest Enemy that shall dare venture, or indeed possibly can
conveigh so many Troops over, but that we shall be, not only his equal, but
exceed him; wherefore I have framed each Troop of 120. horse, and the same to
be divided into four Corporallships (viz.) thirty in each; each Corporallship
to march six in breast and six in depth, and so I leave it to your best
considerations.

CHAP. CXXVI.
How the Chavalry are to order and demean themselves in proportionable
Battles, fit to be joined with the Infantry with their due order of fighting
against the Enemies foot Troops; Likewise how they are to give or receive a
charge of the Enemies Cavalry in gross, as also in single combats and assaults.
AS in ordering of the Infantry; so in disposing of the Cavalry in Battalia,
for the well fighting of a pitched battle against the Enemy, these
Circumstances are to be considered,

First, there are to be drawn out of sundry Troops of Carabines, a certain
number of horse; which are to be joined with a proportionable number of foot:
these are speedily (without keeping any order or distances) to run upon the
Enemies Ordnance; and either to surprise them, or to hold those of the Enemy
that gaurd them in combustion; so that their Ordnance shall be hindered from
annoying your Troops of horse, who are far more subject and liable to
receive harm from the Ordnance (in regard they are mounted high) then the
Infantry can possibly be, wherefore the Cavallry many times have been
constrained to retire themselves into some place of advantage, as a Valley, or
in the Rear of the foot Troops to hide and secure themselves from the great
shot, until such time as the Armies were drawn near together; so as they
could not discharge for indamaging their own Troops.

In the next place, there are certain horse to be commanded out of diverse
Troops of Carabines to assist and guard the forlorn Hopes of the Infantry;
and these are to towle out the Enemy to begin light skirmishes; the better to
animate the maine Battle against they shall be ready to charge; by seeing
their valors; and many times they have been a means of disordering the
Enemies grand Battalias.

The maine battle of the Cavalry is divided into there distinct divisions;
(viz.) the Vanguard, the Battle, and the Rearegaurd; these three make one
entire Front, and are to be ordered at three foot distance, when they are
ready to charge: This principle Battle is to stand in an even front with the
Infantry (viz) either upon the right or left wing, or upon both when there is
no natural strength, as Rivers, Quagmires, Hedges, or the like, to secure one
of the wings, you are to place your Cavalry wide off the Empalement of the
Flanks of the Battle of the Infantry a hundred paces at the least for fear
of anoying your foot Troops: likewise there must be the space of 25* paces of
ground in distance left between every company, and 50. paces betwixt each
Regiment.

The wings of the horse Battle next adjoining to the Flanks of the foot,
are to be of Cuirassiers, in regard they are rather to secure the Flanks of the
Infantry by sustaining a charge, then for to advance forwards to give the
Enemy a charge; unless upon some great occasion, So^e Generals have (...)
range (...) second (...) by a large (...) ^ront (...), but (...) Flank^; (...)
battle to (...) In^an^ry.
the residue of this maine Battle may be compounded Harquebuziers and
Carabines as the General shall think best.

There must likewise be two other grand battles ordered; the first is to be
placed a hundred paces before the Front of the maine battle, but not so
forwards as the forlorn hopes, by little more than half the distance, these
are to consist of Harquebuzires and Carabines, and are to be ordered in
competent Battalias; which shall be neither too great nor too small, but so as
they may charge in sundry bodies, the better to releeve one the other: between
each Battallia, there must be certain Files of Musketeers, drawn up in an
even Front with them, who shall give fire upon the enemies horse to disorder
their Ranks, as they shall approach to charge your Troops; these shotiupon
occasion may retreat, and fall in betwixt the distances of the maine Battle,
which are to advance forward to re scue the former Troops being over charged.

The third battle, which is called the Battle of Sucker, is to be placed a
good distance behind the maine Battle, and these ought to be all (or the
greatest part of them) Cuirassiers, and ordered in great Battalias then the
Harquebuziers, they are to be marshalled, and disposed into diverse Compertments
or Divisions; so that the Battalias of the maine battle may retreat betwixt
them, or being routed they may shelter themselves behind them, and reunite
themselves again, and join with them in a desperate charge; for this is the
last refuge, unless you draw out certain Pikes to relieve them; Not to charge
the enemies foot Troops with your horse, until you have put their horse to a
retreat or routed them, unless a great advantage be offered.
and unless your strength in horse do much exceed the Enemies, it will be to
your disadvantage, to strive to charge the Enemies foot Troops (unless there
should be an unexpected advantage offered) until such time as you have either
routed the Enemies horse, or put them to flight; and then you are to bend your
full strength to assault them upon all quarters with your Harquebuziers and
Carabines first; and then seconded by your Cuirassires; who are to press in
amongst the Enemy, and break their ranks; but in the mean time they must
leave a sleeve of horse upon each flank of the wings of the foot Troops to
defend them from the Enemies charge, who will adventure to do it when they see
them left naked.

If your Cavalry are by some accident to fight only against some certain
foot Troops of the enemies you must make choice of plain fieldings, The
convenient time of advantage for the Cavalry to charge foot Troops.
as a place most advantageous for that purpose.

Likewise you must use all celerity and diligence to charge them before they
can order themselves, in Battle, and upon these advantages you may venture,
although they should be far more potent than your self.

But being drawn into battle, How to charge the Enemies foot, being provided
for your assault.
expecting your assault, and your forces being equal in power; then you must
command out certain Troops of Harquebuziers, or Dragoones, if you have any;
and with these you must charge them upon the Front, Flanks and Reares; these
are to be seconded by certain small Battalias of Cuirassiers who shall take
the opportunity to fall upon such disorders as the Harquebuziers have caused.

If the Enemy have possessed themselves in some place of advantage; Not to charge
the enemy upon disadvantages.
then the Cavalry are not to charge them, although your forces were superior
in strength to them.

If it should so happen that one company of Cuirassirs should be to fight
against another, How to take an advantage of the Enemy in fight several ways.
if the enemy does charge you in full carriere, your safest way is to devide
your Troop by half ranks, opening a large distance to the right and left
hand, so as the Enemy may pass through: then facing your Troop inwards, you
are to charge them upon the Flanks; you are to perform the like if you have a
Battalia made of two Troops; and being charged by the Enemy, they are to
divide themselves as before, but keep each Troop whole and entire; or you may
cause three or four files of each of your wings to advance forward on the
sudden, and to charge the enemy upon the Flanks; and to equal your Enemies
Front, you may cause the half Files of your Body to double your Front to the
right and left hand by divisions.

Note the Harpuebuziers are to give fire by ranks; The manner of the Horse
Troops giving fire, and falling off.
the first rank having given fire, is to wheel off to the left hand (unless
the ground will not permit it, (but that of necessity you must perform it to
the right) making ready and falling into the Rear: the second rank is to give
fire upon the wheeling away of the first, and so the rest successively.

The advantages which the Cavalry may take against the Enemy when he shall
think himself secure in his quarters, The great advantage a few Troops of
horse may have against an Enemy in his quarters upon an onslaught.
in regard of his Potencie, and the undervalluing of his adversaries disability
may be very great, for many times weak forces have achieved great victories.

Wherefore there must first be gained true intelligence how the Enemy has
disposed his Troops; and also certain knowledge of the situation of the
Country, Place, or Village, they are quartered in; and how, and in what places
he has placed his Guards, and set out his Sentinells. An Enemies Quarters for
the most part are ever strongest and best watch kept upon those passages which
leads toward a suspected Enemy.

In this case you are to make use of the night, fetching a compass about by
some by-ways, so that you may charge them in the Rear or Flanks of their
Quarters before they be aware of you, where you shall be most sure to find
them most negligent in those parts.

Every Horsman is to take up behind him a Musquetire, (...) use of Musque^^^^
amongst Horse (...) upon an onsl^ught.
whose service will be excellent either to place behind, upon some passage of
advantage, to rescue your Troops if they should be put to a retreat, or to
assist the horse in their discharge against the Enemy in his Quarters, as I
shall afterward specify.

Now let us presuppose that your Troops are arrived near the Enemies
quarters, Some have put their shirts over their arms; or handkerchief^s in
their head-peeces; or glu^d white paper upon their breasts and backs.
every man having the Watchword given him, and also some distinction, or mark
of white, whereby they my be known from the Enemy in the dark night, and
having laid a sufficient guard of Musquetires to make your retreat safe: the
next thing to be considered of, is how you may best hinder the Enemy from
uniting their Troops into a body, wherefore some few Musquetires or Firelocks
are to be sent some by-way, where secretly they must get betwixt the Guard and
the Sentinells to cut off their retreat; the residue of the Musquetires are to
creep to the Alarm place, and there to place themselves near the passage
where the Enemy is to enter with his Troops; and having the advantage of some
Hedges, Banks, or pales, for to hide and secure them from the Horse, these
shot shall give fire upon the Enemy as they come scattering into the Alarm
place.

In the mean time one of your Troypes of Harquebuziers or Carabines shall
advance secretly and without noise toward the Sentinel, and suddenly surprise
him by the help of the shot that lies behind him: then speedily they are to
fall upon the guard and surprise them, before they shall have time to mount
themselves, from thence this Troop is to march forwards into the chief
streets of the Village with a certain number of Musketeers following them
close at the heels, and there they are to make their stand: the shot shall
then Rank themselves before the Horse; the first rank upon their knees; the
second are somewhat to stoop, the third rank is to stand upright, and so to
give a whole Volley upon the Enemy at once, and then they are to fall off and
march down by the Flanks of the Horse into the Rear of them, and there they
are to order themselves as before in a readiness to give fire upon the enemy
that shall seek to charge them in the Rear; in the mean time the horse are
to advance forwards and charge the enemy.

The rest of your Troops if there be four or five of them, are to be employed
in four or five several places, viz. one Troop is to follow the first Troop
to assist them; where if they they find no resistance they shall possess the
Alarm place, and assist the Musqueteirs that are laid in ambush, likewise
there must be certain Horse appointed to scour the streets continually,
whereby the Enemy shall be hindered from gathering together.

Your third Troop is to come Marching fairly unto the Alarm place.

The fourth Troop is to follow softly after, and where they hear any broils
or stirrings, they are to repair to that place to assault them; or enter into
their houses and cut them off, thus sudden and unexpected aproached, will so
pussell the Enemy, that they will seek to save themselves by flight, through
by-pathes and back sides, wherefore you must cause your first Troop to be
drawn about the Quarters; to intercept those that shall seek to save
themselves by flight.

If at any time any of your Horse Troops should meet, the Enemy in their
March; if they be equal in strength, you must resolve to fight, if not you
must endeavor to save your men by a fair retreat; wherefore to gain true
intelligence of their Forces; besides your Scoutes you must send out a
Corporal with 8. or 10. Soldiers; who must pretend to be of the Enemies
Forces if that place do favor the Enemy, and from them they shall all have
true information; and if you be far from your own Quarters, and near to the
Enemies when you meet with them, then you must be forced to fight, though your
Forces should be inferior to theirs, but if you be near to your own, then
you must fairly retreat, leaving a Lieutenant in the Rear; with some of the
best mounted Soldiers, your retreat must be by the same way you went in the
day time, but in the night you must take some other way, You must cause the
feeting of ^our Horse to be defaced at the place where you left the wa^, if it
be dusty, by drawing of Bows.
though further about to your Garrison or Quarter.

If you intend to lay any Ambuscadoes, to defeat the Enemies Forces first you
must be certain of what number the Enemies Forces are of, if he has fewer
Horse than you, then you may employ all yours, attempting to Toule out all his
and route them, or else you may employ some small number, by which you may at
several times make some good Booty, the Enemy not daring to issue out of his
Quarters; but if the Enemy exceed you in horse, The order of la^ing of
ambuscadoes to surprise the Enemy.
it will be dangerous for you to make ambuscadoes, unless it be with some few
Horse, for with your small number you may easily retreat, but being a Gross
it might be entertained by part of the Enemies Cavalry presently issuing, and
those seconded by more, whereby you should be hardly able to retreat without
disorder and loss.

The Ambuscadoes must not by laid much before break of Day, You must search
all suspected places near your ambush, least the Enemy should have laid one
before you.
because otherwise you cannot discover the aproach of the Enemy, but at hand,
and so the ambuscado shall have no time to come forth and put themselves in
order, whereby they may be taken in their own ambush: the Troops must be
placed a good distance one from another, that they may not hinder one another
in time of fight, the Sentinells are to be placed out on every side, and some
upon trees, but very closely that they may not be discovered, your ambush must
be plast in some covert place upon the side of a Plain or Champion ground.

In making your Ambuscado with many Troops of horse, some number of Infantry
must be laid in ambush, about the midde way to releeve and sustain the
Cavalry, The Soldiers must not know that any of your Troops are to follow
them, least any of them should be taken prisoner, should reveal the design.
in their retreat, if need should be, or otherwise to assist them upon
occasion.

Now you are to dispose of your Cavalry in this manner following, suppose you
have 1200. horse, consisting of 12. Troops, three Troops must be sent before
toward the enemy; giving notice to the Commanders of them, where the ambush
shall be, of these three Troops three must be 50. Cuirassiers, and 50.
Harquebuziers, the Cuirassiers are to be commanded by their Captain and
Leivetenant, but the Harquebuziers are to have their Leivetenant only.

Of these Harquebuziers, 25. shall advance before, with their Corporal
attempting to take some Booty or Prisoners; In view of these Harquebuziers at
the distance of a Cannon shot, there must be 25. Cuirassiers placed, under the
Command of their Leivetenant, to receive those 25. Harquebuziers when they
return;

The Captain with the other 25. Cuirassiers, and 25. Harquebuziers is to stay
behind half a league off; the Harqueburies are to be placed nearest the
Enemy, to succor the 50. horse^ which are charged by the Enemies Guards, and
then they are all to retreat to the Cuirassiers, these four small Troops must
still retreat, keeping a convenient distance one from another* and holding the
Enemy in fight, unless the Enemy so charge them that they are forced to
fly in disorder.

The other 200. horse which are to consist of 150. Cuirassiers, and 50.
Harquebuzeirs, shall enter the ambuscado about half an hour riding off from
the other 50. horse, which when they shall see return and charged, they shall
issue out, the 50. Harquebuziers first giving Charge rank after rank, then
the Cuirassiers, leaving 20. horse in the Rear to make their retreat. The 900
horse are to be in Ambush about an hours March behind the said 200. horse,
and seeing them to return charged shall suffer them to pass, and the Enemy
also, that so they may charge them upon the Rear.

Likewise a certain number of shot (as suppose 150. Musketeers and 100.
Pikes) must be laid in ambush about a League behind the 900. horse, The foot
must take heed they be not discovered until the Enemy be come up to them.
on the way by which the 300. horse shall return Charged: and when the Enemy
is come up to them, they are to fall out and give them a Valley to disorder
them, upon this the 900. shall Sallie out and Charge the Enemy upon the Rear
and Flanks; and then the said 300. horse are to face about and sustain the
Charge, which cannot but be to the Enemies Confusion. In great ambushes you
must make your number seem as small as may be, but in small ones you are to
make show of a greater number than you have; wherefore your number being small
all your horse must not Sally out of the Ambushcado at once, but some 12. or
15. must remain in the wood at the furthest part of it, to favor the retreat
of the rest, and by their noise to cause the Enemy to think there are a
greater number behind in the Wood.

If the Enemy should retreat for his better safety, How to charge an Enemy
retreating.
meeting your Troops upon your march in the day time; you must first send a
Troop of Harquebuziers to charge him on the Rear, (viz.) the Lieutenant
shall first assault them with 25. horse, charging the Enemy upon a full trot or
gallop; him shall the Captain follow with the rest of the Troop: these are to
be seconded by a Company of Cuirassiers, being most proper to sustain the
Enemy if he resist; but if the wa^ be narrow, the said Cuirassiers shall follow
immediately after the first 25. Harquebuziers; your other Troops shall second
these, observing always one hundred paces distance betwixt every Company.

If a single Troop should meet a Troop of the Enemy of equal number; if the
Enemy retreat, send your Leivetenant with 20. horses to charge him in the
Rear, It is dangerous to engage a whole Troop at once because if they be once
disordered there is no help but confusion.
following him with fifty to the same effect, closed as firm as may be, the
residue of your Troop must follow at a good distance under a good Corporal,
who shall not engage himself to fight (though the Enemy turn head) unless
he see his Officers in great danger, but then he must charge them valiantly, so
that his Captain may reunite his men again.

Other circumstances belonging to the Cavalry, you shall find them discourst
of either in the discourse of the Marching of the Infantry, or else in the
discourse of incamping an Army, I will here conclude with a demonstrative
figure, to show how the Shot should line the horse Troops, and how you should
order your Battalias to succor one the other, where note this represents one
wing of the Horse, that is to Flanker the Infantry; Note the Battalias which
are placed be^ind the shot, consist but of 36. horse in each and the shot that
line the horse consist of 60. after this proportion a greater number may be
ordered.
and you must further observe so soon as the Enemy has put the shot to
retreat, those Horse Battalias behind, are to advance up into their places,
the shot are but 36. in a Troop, the Harquebuziers 120. and the Cuirassiers
200. by this proportion you may make as great Battalias as you please, view the
figure only of the maine battle without the Battle of Succor.

The Horse Troops being drawn in Battalia, there must be 25. paces distance
left between every Company, and 50. at the least between every Regiment.



The end of the 12. Section.
A DISCOVRSE OF POLITIQVE STRATAGEMS. SECT. XIII.
CHAP. CXXVII.
A perfect demonstration of such Politic Stratagems as have been plotted,
and practiced, both by Ancient and Modern Commanders.
SEeing that Politic Stratagems have been the immediate means next under the
providence of God, to gain victories enervating and weakening an enemy; I have
thought it most fit to collect out of the best Authors, the most subtillest and
most eminent; as also my own observations which I have gathered in the time I
followed the wars, which may prove of much worth to be taken notice of, in two
respects; first in seeking to evade them, or prevent them; when an enemy shall
make use of them or (finding a convenience; and fit occasion) to make use of
them our selves by putting them in practice against our Enemies: And although
it be not in the power of Man, to read the thoughts and designs of a
polictike Enemy; yet when a Commander knows the nature of all Stratagems, he
may happily guess by an Enemies carriage, demeanor, and actions what he
intends: And first because no General can ^^rry his designs so in the air,
but by some privy intelligence, an Enemy is informed of it, and so being
forewarned is fore-armed, it is wisdom for a General privately, to give out
some speech of a design in hand, which he intends not to execute, and in the
interim to put in action some other project, which may be prevalent in regard
it is novelties to the enemy; by this many Countries, Cities, and Garrison
Towns have been taken, before the enemy could provide for to defend it, as in
the next chapter you shall see.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
How the Prince of Orange took in Grolle in Gelderland, by pretending his Army
should march before the Town of Gelders,
THat wise and Politic General Prince Maurice knowing the strength of Grolle
in regard of the Situation of it, especially if it were well manned, and
victualled; he having lain with his Army once in former times before i^ and
was constrained to raise his Siege; wherefore the second time he practiced by
policy to gain that, which formerly was denied to his strength; wherefore he
countenanced his Design, and fitted his Army, giving it out for another Town
called Gelders, not far in distance from the other; The Enemy for the better
securing of the Town sent what Forces and Ammunition; they could spare out of
other Towns to strengthen it, but most especially from this Town of Grolle,
which they thought secure, whereby it was left destitute of any means for a
long Siege; this opportunity being suddenly taken by the Prince, he drew his
Army before it, and beleaguered it round, so that in a short time it yielded,
which without this advantage would have been impregnable.

CHAP. CXXIX.
A policy to defer time when a Town is beleaguered, that relief may be
gained, or by it to get from an Enemy.
IN a Town besieged, it is policy for the Governor to parley upon some
agreements, in what kind he shall surrender up the same, and so make a Truce
for certain days; in this kind of practice may be two advantages gained, as
namely, first relief if it be expected, which without this plot happily
cannot hold out until it comes; This was practiced in Ost-end, the Governor
understanding by a Prisoner which was taken, that the Enemy did intend to
assault his works generally upon all sides, and in all places the next morn;
he thought it wisdom (considering the weakness of the Town) to spend some
time in a parley, until his Succors were arrived, or at least to set those
men in order, and provide such necessaries for defense as could be got,
whereupon Hostages being sent upon either side, and Articles being discust
upon, but none agreed upon; the relief did arrive in the Town, and they were
fitted for the assault.

Moreover, these kind of Parleys makes an Enemy confident, that mere distress
drives them unto it; this causes an enemy to be negligent in all his
performances, whereby great advantage may be taken, either in building or
repairing works, which otherwise could not be done; by this devise Silla that
famous Commander being in a straight took advantage of the Enemies negligence
in time of the Truce, and suddenly beat through the Enemy and delivered
himself, the like did Asdruball being beleaguered in his running Camp by
Claudius N^ro, escaped him, which otherwise must have yielded upon base
terms, or have perished by the Sword.

CHAP. CXXX.
How Zophirus by a politic Stratagem delivered a whole Army into his Generals
hands.
ZOphirus one of Darius Captains mangled his body, and disfigured his face, by
cutting off his nose and ears, fled to the Babilonians, complaining of the
tyranie of his King, they crediting his words, and knowing his prowess,
committed the charge of the whole Army unto him, as a man to whom such
Barbarous usage had made him irreconciliable, and deeming he would have
studied and used all his best endeavors to have been revenged, but he taking
his best opportunity, delivered his Army into the hands of his Sovereign with
all the Towns, and Forts in his possession.

CH^P. CXXXI.
How Philip Macedon, and diverse others by their policy have gained Kingdoms
by affording their aids to distressea Princes.
FOraigne aid is a surfeit most uncurable; for there is no Kingdom but by such
a politic advantage has been conquered; as appears by the example of Philip
Macedon assisting the Thebanes in Greece against the Phocians; by taking his
advantage brought the Country under his own Command; also the Romans assisting
the Sicilians against the Carthagenians possessed themselves of the Island;
likewise the Britains being aided by the Saxons, were by them thrust out of
all: The same Cup tasted the Irish, they requesting the aid of the English,
were by them dispossessed: wherefore there is no confidence to be put in
foreign assistance; for they will not engage themselves, nor venture their
lives when danger approaches, as by the example of Francis Sforza assisting the
Millanois, he revolted to the Florentines in expectation of higher preferment:
Likewise Gucapo Picinino assisting the King of Naples, left him in his
extremity of Battle; the Switzers did the like to the French. It is a thing
most easy for a foreign aid (if they be more potent) to keep possession in
a Kingdom, and by drawing in more forces to them, to drive out the Natives; or
if they be less in power, to side with the Enemy, and so share the Kingdom
betwixt them, as the Burgundians did ayding the Romans in Galacia against the
Frankes; and joining with them overthrew the Romans: these brittle helps
makes the remedy worse then the disease; so that they are least to be trusted,
and last to be tried.

A politic Nation are ready to assist in three causes: as first when some man
in high authority upon discontent or desire of revenge opens a way for them,
as Count Julian did, drawing the Saracens into Spain to be revenged of Don
Roderigo who had ravished his daughter.

Secondly, when a weaker faction makes way for them to overthrow, or at least
counterpoise a stronger; as the Burgundians oppressed by the faction of the
Orleans, made way for Henry the fifth to pass into France: Likewise our English
Barons, being likely to have been vanquished by King John, sent for Prince
Lewis into England to assist them.

Thirdly, when a Kingdom is over-burthened by a foreign foe, whom he is
neither able to repel nor resist; he is constrained to make use of a foreign
friend; in this ease as one wisely says, plus a medico est, quam a morbo mali.

CHAP. CXXXII.
A policy to preserve Towns from revolting with a covert-way to banish such
men as are held in suspicion.
IT was Maxim of State amonst the Romans not to suffer great men in
authority, whose birth was from great and noble Families, because their revolt
might endanger a Country: or if a General were a Conqueror in a strange Land;
and yet having some few Towns standing in great suspicion of revolt, and
diverse men of note in them not to be trusted, whereby a conquest is unperfect;
it is his best policy to command them to beat down the walls of their
Towns, and banish some of their Citizens whom most doubt is to be made of; and
this must be so carried that no Town so commanded might think that this
charge concerns any other then themselves particularly: in practicing whereof,
the command must be given to all the Towns at one instant, to the intent they
might all immediately obey; and have no respit to consult one with the other;
and as for those that are held in suspicion for revolting, the fairest way is
to give them some commission to negotiate certain affairs a-far off in such a
place that they can work to means of mischief: this will stand in stead of a
covert banishment.

CHAP. CXXXIII.
A politic way to prevent an Enemy from stopping the march of part of an
Army.
IF a General should be constrained to send part of his Forces upon some
special and speedy Service, he ought not to diminish the Huttes, not lessen
the bounds of his Camp; only for his security fortify strongly within the old
works, because those forces left are too weak to maintain the old: the same
fires are likewise to be kept and the same guards throughout the Camp that was
before; by which means an Enemy cannot take notice nor advantage either to
prevent the passage of those troops marched away, or to adventure to assault
the Camp: Claudius Nero put this in practice. Likewise if new forces should
come to assist an Army, the way to prevent an Enemy from knowing it, is,
neither to enlarge the guards nor the works about the Camp; this policy is
to be performed when it is known the Enemy has a purpose to assault your
trenches because of the weakness of your forces. The keeping of designs
secret has always been most prevalent; this made Metellus say (being with
his Army in Hispania) to one which asked him what he would do the next day,
made answer, that if his shirt knew thereof he would burn it.

CHAP. CXXXIV.
A politic way for an Army that is fallen into danger to escape it, by
securing the one half by the hazarding the other.
IF an Army be in distress; either being beleaguered or coopt up in some
place of disadvantage; then the General is of two evils to make choice of the
least: wherefore if his troops be far inferior to the Enemies, his best
policy is to divide his troops, and with one part of them assault the Enemy,
who being busy in making resistance, the other part may escape safe: this is
only to be practiced when no other Project can help, so that iminent ruin is
like to ensue unless such a course be taken; otherwise, it were better to
imitate Haniball, who caused a strange Accident to happen that did dismay and
distract his Enemy; he being disclosed by Fabius Maximus, took the
opportunity of the night season to tie dry Kisks and Bavins between the
horns of many Oxen, which being fired, drove them with such fury that Fabius
being astonished at the strangeness of the same sight, suffered him to pass
without opposition.

CHAP. CXXXV.
A Policy whereby Scanderbeg in a Battle against the great Turk overthrew
his troops of horses.
SCanderbeg in a Battle against the great Turk, being over-matched both with
Horse and Foot; caused those few troops of Horse which he had, to be lined
with certain Foot, who being charged by the Turk, those Foot with a mighty
shout brake out upon the Enemies troops of Horse with such fury, that they not
only rescued their own, but also brake and chased the Enemies Cavallry, and
contrary to all expectation won the Field.

CHAP. CXXXVI.
A Policy which the Duke De Alva used to fortify his Army against the Prince
of Orange his Horse.
THe Duke of Alva, in the late Flemish Wars against the Prince of Orange,
most pollitiquely fortified himself, with his Carts, and Carriages chayned
together, casting up a small Trench of Earth beyond them, did safeguard his
Army being all Foot, against the Prince of Orange, who suddenly invaded him
with a great power of Horse, whereby he was never able to give him Battle; and
in the conclusion, for want of Forage and Victuals he was driven to retire.

CHAP. CXXXVII.
A Policy to prevent rebellion of such in high authority as are discontented,
or of a proud and haughty Spirit.
MAny times Treacheries and deceits are practiced against Generals; and
happily by their own disdainefull proud carriages to their inferiors. For
prevention thereof, it is best to immitate Lewis the eleventh, King of France;
who propounded to himself diverse ways to wind out of such troubles* and to
gain the love and applause of his people; wherefore he studied to carry
himself very loving and affable, ready to hear complaints, and to redress
them without delays: If he feared the fidelity of any one, he would insinuate
into him with mild and fair speeches, free to them in gifts according to
their degrees, always holding them in hopes of preferment and honor, and
freely tendering it, as occasion offered: He was loving to men of mean estate,
especially where any worth was cressant, if by any mistake he had offered any
injury he would in a fair way show himself greeved, and seek to recover the
parties love by large benefits.

CHAP. CXXXVIII.
How a General ought to demean himself politiquely, both in giving of
Battle, and in refusing it.
IF a General understand that his Enemy have new aid and supply of men a
coming unto him, then ought he to seek by all means to give him Battle,
before both his powers join; or if his Victuals or Pay begin to fail, then a
General should never refuse Battle if any opportunity be offered.

Likewise, on the contrary, if a General expects a supply, or if he
understands his Enemies Victuals, or moneys fail, or that sickness increases
amongst them, then it behooves him in policy to stand strongly upon his guard,
and by no means join Battle, so long as he can conveniently avoid it; As the
French did lately at the Isle of Ree, only dogging our English at the heels,
and delaying to fight, until they saw a confusion in the Army by imbarking
their men. The like also in the Flemish Wars 1578, between the Estates and
Do^ John de Austria* who understanding of the coming of Duke Cassimere, with
5000 Horse and 6000 Foot, offered the Army of the States Battle at Rymenant
where they lay encamped and expected Duke Cassimers coming; but Count Bossute
then General of the States Army, being of sufficient strength to have fought
with him would not, but gave command that none of his Troops should salley
forth their Trenches, but only some Squadrons to guard Passages; so that Don
John finding himself and his expectations deceived, and that he could not
train them forth to Battle, was driven to march away; and this temperance in
the Count Bossute, was no less Souldier-like, than the courageous attempt of
Don John to seek Battle, both being done with reason.

CHAP. CXXXIX.
A Politic observation of a General, how he should entreat about a Peace.
WHen an Army of one side is driven to a straight, so that conditions of Peace
are to be entreated of, a General must be curious, and circumspect in making
choice of discreet, wise, able men which understand themselves, and the
weighty service they are employed in, lest they should conclude some
dishonorable Treaty, or put the General in fear of their truth and fidelity.

CHAP. CXL.
A Policy to prevent the Assistance of a Foreign frieud.
LEwis King of France being distasted against the Duke of Normandy and
Britain, draws his Army into the Dukes Territories, the Duke understanding
his proceedings, obtaines assistance from the Duke of Burgundy; the King
presently conceived this policy in his head, to indite a Letter as if it had
come from the Duke of Normandy, and sends it by a Herald to the Duke of
Burgundy, the Contents thereof were, that whereas the King of France had
offered him an Annual sum of money, to the value of 60000 Franks, which he
had accepted, and considering diverse circumstances, and desiring not to hazard
the event, he had according to the Kings propositions surrendered to him the
Dukedom of Normandy, and the assessation of Arms was concluded upon; The
Duke of Burgundy being sensible of this, and of the danger that might accrue to
himself by their falling off, yet he was jealous that those Letters were
counterfeited* until certain other Letters were likewise invented, as sent
from other Friends to certify him the truth, which did confirm the former: by
this devise the King caused the Dukes Army to be disolved; and according to his
wished desires obtained a firm League.

CHAP. CXLI.
How to gain fortunate success to an Army.
THe best means a General can use to bring fortunate success to an Army; is
to get true and frequent Intelligence from the Enemy; which must be obtained
from them, by a trusty and secret Friend there resident, or by some plain wise
Country man that vents victuals to an Army, or by the Drums that are sent
for Prisoners; or by some Prisoners taken: Likewise, some have used to send
Ambassadors; and with them in Servants apparel, most expert men in War; who
having taken occasion to view the strength of the Enemies works; and of his
Forces, have by this means taken a sufficient opportunity to overcome them.

CHAP. CXLII.
A Policy used by Mar^i^^, to try the fidelity of the French, which inhabited
Lombardy.
MArri^s in the Wars managed against the Cimbrie, made use of a policy to
try the fidelity of the French, which inhabited Lombardy; he sent them
certain Letters open, and sealed, and in the open he wrote, that they should
not open the Letters sealed until a certain time prefixed; But before that
time, he demanded of them to see those Letters again, wherehee found them
opened, by this he knew their faith was not to be trusted.

CHAP. CXLIII.
A Policy to compel an Enemy out of a Land without hazarding an Army in
Battle with them.
A Kingdom being invaded by an Enemy, if the Towns thereof be of any
sufficient strength and ability, to withstand the brunt of War, the best way
is not for an Army to go meet them, and give them Battle, but for to enter
the Enemies Dominions, ransacking, pillaging, and spoiling it, whereby he must
be constrained to return for to defend the safety of his own Country; this
project has taken many times good effect, for that those Soldiers beginning
to fill themselves with bootyes and confidence to overcome, shall soon make
the Enemies Soldiers to be afraid, when they supposing themselves Conquerours
shall understand to become losers.

CHAP. CXLIIII.
How a General should use policy in letting an Enemy to pass without fight.
IT is a thing most dangerous to stay an Enemy, if be have an intent to flee,
either by cutting off his passages, or by cooping him up, for every Coward will
fight, when they are bereft of all hopes of safety; as by the example of our
Black Prince in France, who with a handful of Men overthrew a mighty Army;
But a wise General should rather make the Enemy a Bridge of gold to pass
over, then to endeavor to stay him; Themistocles would not suffer the Grecians
to break down the Bridge made over the Hellespont by Xerxes lest the Persians
should have been compelled to fight; Charles the sixth of France lost his Army
by intercepting Henry the fifth of England in his March to Callice.

CHAP. CXLV.
A Policy to make Soldiers fight in a pitch^ Battle, and to prevent their
running away.
CHarles Martill in a wonderful fight with the Sara^e^s, placed in the Rear
of his Army certain troops of his Horse, commanding to kill all such as
offered to fly, hereby to inform his Soldiers that there was no safety, but
what they purchased by valor; Likewise William Duke of Normandy, after the
landing of his men upon our English Confines, caused all his Vessels to be
burned, that no relief might be expected, which bred a resolution in his
Soldiers to gain a Conquest; Aso Caesar did the like at his first approach
against England, that his Soldiers should not expect any safety by flight, but
to purchase their freedoms by the dint of the Sword.

CHAP. CXLVI.
A Policy of a Genoys, used to the Negotiator, of Lodwick Sforza to cause him
to know the nature of oppression.
LOdwick Sforza having trenched too far upon the patience of the people of
Genoa; His Negotiator that collected his Masses of money was by a Genoys
invited to dinner, and walking in his Garden, he showed the Ambassador the
herb Basil, he gently stroking it smelt it very sweet, but squizing it hard
as unsavory a smell; whereon this Genoys inferred; if our Lord duke Lodwick
will gently stroke the hand of his puisance over this City, it will afford him
a sweet savor of obedience, but if he oppress it, it may chance to prove as
unsavory by rebellion.

CHAP. CXLVII.
A Policy to be used by a General to encourage Soldiers to work in time of
necessity.
WHen the Capitol of Rome was last built, the Emperor Vespatian carried the
first Basket of earth to the making of the Walls; after him his Nobility did
the like; this did wonderfully encourage the people to be more forward in that
service, and that made them undergo the task without grumbling.

CHAP. CXLVIII.
A Politic way for a General to gain a difficult passage with his Army.
FErand King of Naples understanding that Charles King of France approached
near his Territories; he to prevent his approaches; and to make his safest
and strongest resistance, drew his Army to a certain straight, not far from
Naples, having Hills, and unpassable places on each side; the French perceiving
their defense was not to be repelled, divided his Army by night, and sent
half of them far about to come by stealth upon the Rear of the Neapolitans,
they holding themselves secure in regard the French had intrencht themselves
before their Camp; and thus holding them in suspense until the other part of
their Army were arrived at the place he desired; they suddenly (taking the
opportunity to assault on both sides) routed the Neapolitans, and in defeating
their Army took their whole Country.

CHAP. CXLIX.
A policy to be used by a General, to further the assault made against a
Town.
THe Prince of Orange drawing his Army before Gertrudenberge, they lay
intrencht upon land, and strong by Shipping upon the water; by chance taking of
a Prisoner belonging to the Enemy, they understood by him that the States and
Governor of the Town once aday went privately up the Steeple to view the
Hollanders Trenches, if that any advantage might be gained by Sallyes or
otherwise; The Prince immediately contrivrs with a Gentleman to run to the
Enemy, under a pretense he had killed a man, and that he fled for the safety
of his life, who by a private sign, playing upon a Pipe, discovered their
being upon the Steeple; The Hollanders Ordnance being ready planted upon a
Battery, they made a shot at the Steeple, and beat it quite down, killing
the Governor with the rest, then presently assaulting the Town, took it.

CHAP. CL.
A politic Stratagem used by the Hollanders to take in the Town of Breda, by
cutting off their Guards,
BReda a strong town in Brabant, was once by the Hollander surprised, by a
Stratagem of a Boat laden with Turffe, in whose Keele was imbarqued very
closely diverse valiant Gentlemen; the Boat being brought before the Town
according to its usual wont, and the Boates-man well known of the Soldiers,
was suffered to come upon the Guard, where he usually made them sport and
bestowed drink upon them, until he had made drunk both Corporal and
Sentinel, and the rest of the Guard; then seeing his fit time, he conveyes
these Gentlemen into the Town, who killed the Sentinels, and cut off the
Guards; and having first obtained the Watchword, they gave a privy sign by
casting up a ball of Wilde-fire, whereby certain forres of the Estates lying
in Ambush not far off, made their speedy approaches, and blowing open the
Ports entered the Town, and took possession of the Ordnance, before any
alarm was given; Likewise by Carts laded with Corn, and Hay, having
Soldiers laid in a hollow place the like projects have been done; For
prevention of these things they are gaged with Iron spits made for that
purpose, before they are suffered to enter the Ports, fearing lest treachery
should be in them.

CHAP. CLI.
A Policy which the City of Cassiline used, to make Haniball raise his Siege.
THe City of Cassiline being besieged by Hamball, after they endured a long
Siege and hard brunt; they took occasion to plow up all their waste grounds
within the walls, and to dig for Corn and roots; Haniball perceiving they
were sowing their seeds, was verily persuaded, they had sustenance sufficient
to last them until their seeds came to maturity, which made him presently
raise his Siege, when indeed they could not have held the Town one week
longer for famishing.

CHAP. CLII.
Caesar's Policy in letting the Dutch men flee that he might vanquish them.
CAEsar having coopt up the Dutchmen, that they could not flee, he thought
better to open them a way to run, than to hazard the fight; by which he
overthrew them in their disorderly flight.

CHAP. CLIII.
How by a Stratagem the Guard of the Skonse at Zutphen was cut off; and the
Skonse taken, and immediately after the Town.
AT Zutphen in Gelderland, the Enemy had raised a strong Skonse by the River
Issell, which they potently managed, in regard it did command the Town;
whereby the States of Holland were not able to besiege the Town, without that
Skonce was first taken: wherefore they procured a dozen English and Flemish
young Feminine faced Gentlemen; who were apparelled in Country Maids clothing,
some having Butter, others Poultry, and the rest Eggs, which they brought by
the Skonce feigning to sell it; the soldiers begun to cheapen their
commodities, at length grew to toy with them, and finding them somewhat
tractable, they pulled them into the Fort; every Soldier being busy in
drinking, and some courting of these supposed Maids, they took opportunity
with a short skeane which hung by the inside of their Coats, every maid to
stab the Soldier that was next her, whereby they cut off the whole guard, then
by a private sign certain troops of the Estates (which lay close by in
ambush to attend the design) came and maintained the work; by which means in
few days they got the Town of Zupthen also.

CHAP. CLIV.
A Policy used by the Romans to relieve such Towns as had rivers running by
or through them.
THe Romans used to relieve their besieged Towns when any River came through
it, or near unto it, by putting Corn and Munition in small Barrels, which
were so evenly balanced that they might only swim, and be kept from sinking;
these were conveyed down the stream in a dark night, so as the Enemy could
not discover them; also dried Nuts they threw down the stream which the
Soldiers (knowing the time of their coming down) fisht out of the water, and
relieved their necessities; when the Enemy has admired how the Garrison should
possibly have been relieved.

CHAP. CLV.
How the Governor of Bergen-up-zone had like to have rowted Spinola's Army at
his first besieging it.
WHen Marquess Spinola drew his Army before Bergen-up-zone, the Governor
invented a Politic Stratagem to have discomfited his Army as they stood in
Battalia, before they had intrencht themselves; first, he caused all his best
Troops to be in a readiness to salley out, likewise all his Horse-troopes
were to assist them. He also provided all the Bedees and Iades, and all kind
of Horses of no Service, that he could possibly get, and having furnished them
with old Furniture and Pistols and Carbines fashioned of Wood; these were to
come softly on the Rear of the Enemy, and the Foot and the other Horse were to
charge them in the Front, to the intent the Enemy seeing such a great and
unexpected strength of Horse, might be dismayed; which thing indeed had taken
effect, had those supposed Harquebusiers come up as they were commanded, but
they fetched so great a compass about, that they came too late, for the Enemy
had beaten back the other Troops to the Ports (before they came in view) and
had spent all their Ammnnition; for no sooner did the Enemy perceive those
false Troops, but they disorderly retreated into those Trenches they had then
made, and had the States soldiers then had powder and shot to have pursued a
Charge in their disorder, they had questionless rowted them.

CHAP. CLVI.
A Policy used by Mennon of Rhodes, to draw his Enemy out of his Trenches to
give him Battle.
MEnnon of Rhodes finding no possible means to draw his Enemy out of his
Trenches (wherein he lay strongly encamped) to give him Battle on the Plains;
sent unto his Enemies Camp one of his Household servants, under the Color of a
Fugitive, who gave them to understand, that the Soldiers of the said Mennon
were in a mutiny, and together by the ears, and for that cause the greatest
part of the Army went away at that instant; and to the intent the greater
credit might be given to his words, there were sent away certain Bands whom
they saw to depart from the Camp, and so understood there was a great tumult,
and being further opportun'd by the said Fugitive to take this advantage, they
might easily in the time of this disorder ruin Mennons Camp; to this the
Enemy condiscended, and straightwayes fallyed out of their strong Trenches, to
assail those, who (by this Project) overthrew them for their too much
credulity.

CHAP. CLVII.
How Marcellus by a Politic Stratagem, cut off Hanibals Forces, which came to
assault the Town of Nola.
ONe Bantius a Commander in the Siege of Cane, being fore wounded by Haniball,
and by him also taken Prisoner, he used him very nobly with gifts and fair
promises, suffering him to pass quietly to the besieged Town of Nola,
thinking to have made use of him in betraying the Town to Haniball; but
Marcellus being General of the Forces in the Town, perceived by the strange
carriage of Bantius, that Haniball had infected him, whereupon Marcellus closed
with him by fair speeches, with great gifts, and mighty protestations of
preferments and honors, whereby he won his love, and discovered unto him,
that Haniball intended to scale the Walls at such a time, which accordingly he
did; but Marcellus having made ready for resistance, had prepared certain
Troops in a readiness to salley out of the Town to take the advantage of the
Enemies disorders, who falling upon them in several places unexpectedly,
vanquished them: Thus by making use of a Traitor, a Victory was obtained.

CHAP. CLVIII.
A Policy which Scipio used, to weaken and dishearten the Army of Asdruball,
before he would give him Battle, whereby he gained the Victory.
SCipio being Encamped in a Plain against Asdruball, daily they drew
themselves into Battle, yet not attempting to charge either the other,
whereupon they firmly concluded, that at what time soever they should fight,
their Battles should be drawn in the same figure, as they before had practiced;
but Scipio being politic, victualled both his Horse and Men in the Night, and
drawing out certain of his men by peep of day, to give an Alarm to Asdrubals
Camp, to cause him to draw his Army out of the Trenches, and to expect a
present fight; Scipio now presently altered his form of imbattelling, and
being drawn out of his Trenches earlier than formerly he was wont, yet he
protracted the execution of Battle, only using light skirmishes, to keep
them from feeding either man or beast, until at length he thought they would
be ready to faint for lack of rest and food; about noone he advanced his Wings
forward a good pace, leaving his maine Battle a good space behind, marching
leisurely after, also he drew out a Division, which wheeled about and charged
Asdrubals Wings in the Flank, and his own Wings being in the Front, whereby
the Enemy was overcharged; yet Asdrubals Battle durst not stir to assist,
fearing Scipio's Battle, and had they marched forwards to have charged
Scipio's Battle, they had been enclosed, and so charged on every side: By
this Stratagem Scipio got the victory.

CHAP. CLIX.
A Politic Stratagem which Titus Didus made use of, to prevent his Enemy
from Encountering with his fresh Supplies, that were coming to assist him.
TItus Didus having diverse Forces marching toward his Camp to strengthen his
Army, whereof his Enemy being informed, prepared to encounter them upon the
way, and to cut them off; whereupon Titus Didus having certain Prisoners of
the Enemy, he gave out in their presence, that every man should be in a
readiness to give Battle the next morning to the Enemy; and withal, took an
occasion to let the Prisoners go to their quarters, who declared that Didus
had given order for a Battle the next morn, whereupon the Enemy was afraid to
diminish their forces, and durst not go to encounter the Soldiers of Titus;
by this policy they arrived at his Camp in safety, which otherwise could not
possibly have been without the loss of most of them.

CHAP. CLX.
A policy of Haniball, to bring the Romans into jealousy of their General
Fabius Maximus, that thereby he might work his own ends.
HAniball having Pillaged and burned all the Fields about Rome, he only caused
to be reserved safe the fields and goods of Fabius Maximus, to cause a
jealousy to arise, that there was some frienship betwixt the Enemy and him, by
this means Fabius was not be trusted. Also, Metellus to having an Army against
Iugurth, all the Ambassadors that Iugurth sent him, were required by Metellus
give unto him their General prisoner, and after to the very same men he wrote
Letters to the same effect, which wrought them such discredit, that in short
time Iugurth had all his Councillors in suspicion, and put them to death. The
like was practiced by the Romans upon Haniball when he fled to Antiochus, their
Orators wrote to him so frequently and familiarly, that Antiochus suspected
him, and would not put confidence in his Counsels.

CHAP. CLXI.
A Politic Stratagem whereby an Army has been disheartened in time of
Battle, which has caused their overthrow.
AT Muscleborough-field there was a policy used, to cause a rumor to be
spread in the Enemies Battle, that their General was slain, and some part of
the Troops defeated and put to flight; at this the Enemy was so amazed in the
midst of their fight, that they gave way, and brake their Ranks. Titus
Quintus did practice the like, but this must be acted in that part of the Army
where the General is not to be seen.

CHAP. CLXII.
A Politic Stratagem used by Labienus in France, whereby he vanquished his
Enemies Army marching over a River.
LAbienus in France, seeing his Enemy desirous to pass a River to present him
Battle, he counterfeited that he feared their pote^^cy, and feigned to March
away, yet leaving secret Ambushes, which gave Labienus intelligence, that a
good part of the Enemies Army was past over the River; he suddenly returned,
and defeated them before the residue could get over to their rescue.

CHAP. CLXIII.
A Policy whereby an Army may pass over a River in safety, when the Enemy
attends the advantage to ruin them.
QVintus Lutatius in his Wars against Cimbry, was close pursued, even to the
side of a River, where either he must pass, or receive Battle, wherefore he
settled his Army down by the Rivers side and intrencht himself, setting up
some Tents, and sending abroad for fortage, as though he meant indeed to stay
by it; The Enemy believing the same, did in like manner incampe his Army, and
sent out his Soldiers likewise for Provision; Lutatius making use of the
Cimbryes negligence, the night ensuing, suddenly passed the River with his Army
before the Enemy could dis^odge, and drew his men in order to give them Battle.

CHAP. CLXIIII.
An excellent Policy for a General to put off a people that he is in league
withal, and desires his assistance.
THe Athenians and Lacedaemonians desired assistance of Gelon the Son of
Dinomenes, he being General over the Siracusians against Xerxes, who had past
the Hellespont with his mighty Army; unto which Gelon consented, and under a
color of his willingness levied thirty thousand Soldiers, and two hundred
Ships to do them service, conditionally that they should make him General
of one of their Armies, either by Sea or Land, which they refused to do; But
afterward upon better consideration they yielded to his proposition, and to
that purpose sent their Ambassadors, to whom he returned this answer, That May
was past, and the Spring withered.

CHAP. CLXV.
The policy of Vigetius to convey Foot-troopes over a River that is passable,
so that the stream shall not offend them.
VIgetius has a rule in passing a River that is wadeable, if the stream be
violent and swift, to cause certain Horsemen to cross the River in two
places, leaving a Lane between them for the Soldiers to pass; the one rank
of Horse are to break the strength of the water, and the other Rank below are
to sustain the Soldiers.

CHAP. CLXVI.
How by a Politic device, the Hollanders obtained a convenient piece of
ground from their Enemy, upon which they built the Skonce called Skinkes, which
could not be gained by force of Arms.
THE Hollanders having sound a certain piece of ground very convenient, to
raise a Fort in it, which might be made impregnable: it being a point of ground
lying between two mighty Rivers, the Wale and the Leck; they knowing not how
to obtain it, in regard diverse of the Enemies strong holds bordered upon it,
which would have beaten them off, had they presumed to have entered it; and
besides, they were loath the Enemy should take notice that the place was so
convenient for that purpose, as they knew it to be, for it cut off all relief
by water, that all the adjacent Towns were accommodated with, wherefore they
plotted with a Country fellow named Skincke, to hire that piece of land to
feed Colts in it* and for to keep them from straying out he was to raise a
Wall with a great Ditch from one River to another, which was about 400 Rod*
this being finished, the Hollanders came sailing up the River by night with
certain Troops, which they landed there, and by the strength of that Ditch
and Rampart, they beat off the Enemy; (for they had no other passage but
thereby) until they had built the Skonce, which is now called by the name
Skinkes Skonce, so samous for the late Siege.

CHAP. CLXVII.
Hanibals politic Observations, in placing his Battles upon advantages.
HAniball against the Romans in the battle of Cannas had gotten the advantage
from the Enemy both of Sun and wind, and had imbattelled his Army upon the
higher ground: these three things are to be principally considered as
coadjutors in a victorious Skirmish: the like did M^^rius against the
Cimbrians; by which he obtained an honorable Conquest.

CHAP. CLXVIII.
A Policy used by Pyrrhus, whereby he deluded the Lacedaemonians, that his
design for the conquest of the Town of Sparta might take effect.
THe mighty general Pyrrhus having secretly levied an Army, and had given out
that his design was against Antigonus; he having conquered almost all the
Country of Macedon by a fortunate Battle not long before; whereupon they
began to suspect their Town of Sparta: But Pirrhus in policy caused them to
understand, that he honored the Town so much for the noble discipline and
good learning, that he intended to send his two Sons thither to be educated,
thus deluding them by this colorable way, he suddenly took his opportunity
to enter with his Army upon Laconia; where he presently demeaned himself an
open Enemy, conquering at his pleasure.

CHAP. CLXIX.
How Demetrius by a politic Stratagem, overthrew the Army of Ptolomy; which
not long before had vanquishd him.
CIlles, Lieutenant General to King Ptolomie, was sent with an Army against
Demetrius Son to Antigonus, who not long before was overthrown in Battle by
Ptolomie: Cilles rather thinking to find Demetrius fleeing, then to hazard
another Battle, marched very indiscreetly and without all order, as not
fearing any to oppose him: Demetrius understanding the order of his Troops,
drew out certain of his light armed men, and marchd a whole night to meet him
in his Camp, where he found his Troops lying confusedly and scattering; not
having any Guards or resistance placed to secure the Army* whereupon he took
his opportunity to fall into his Camp, where he routed and put to flight
Cilles Soldiers; and took him likewise prisoner, and overthrew his whole Army.

CHAP. CLXX.
A politic way to weaken an Enemies Army.
THe ancient Worthies in Policy would oftentimes suffer an Enemy to take
certain of their meanest Towns: to the intent that the Enemy should (by
degrees) more and more weaken his Army, by putting into them strong Garrisons:
when afterward (assaulting the much impaired residue of the Army) have by this
politic way at the length, made means to overcome the adverse Party.

CHAP. CLXXI.
A politic Stratagem used by Fulvius, whereby he cut off the sallyes of the
Cimbrians.
FVlvius used this Policy against the Cimbrians, caused his Horsemen to
assault their Camp diverse times: the Cimbrians sallying out, repeld them;
wherefore he set an ambush behind the Camp of the Cimbrians, and causing their
Camp to be again assaulted by his Horse, they issuing out of their Camp, as
formerly they had done to close them; Fulvius his Soldiers lying in ambush got
between them and home, whereby they entered the Fort and sak'd it.

CHAP. CLXXII.
A Policy whereby Alexander deceived the Illyrians, by counterfeiting the
Enemies Colors, did overthrow them.
IF an Army lies near encamped to the Enemies; it is great policy for the
General to send part of his men with the Enemies Colors a pillaging, and to
burn the Country; whereby the Enemy may think they are men come to aid them,
as Alexander did against the Illyrians; and Le^tenus against the Carthagenians;
Alexanders Soldiers having counterfeited the Illyrians Colors, and burning
his own Country, made them faithfully believe that they were certain of
their own Forces, sent to assist them: whereupon diverse of the Enemies
Soldiers did run to meet them disorderly: Alexanders men taking this
opportunity, fell upon the disordred troops, and overthrew them.

CHAP. CLXXIII.
A Policy used by Tamirus and Tiberius Gracchus, whereby they overthrew their
Enemies whole Army at once, without loss or hazard to themselves.
TAmirus in his wars against Cyrus and Tiberius Gracchus against the
Spaniards, faigning themselves to be afeard of the Enemy, having suddenly
abandoned their Camps, and left them furnished with store of Wines and good
cheer; to the intent their Enemies might take their fills and wallow in their
pleasures: then suddenly they have returned with their Armies, and assaulting
them have found them like sots not fit to make a resistance, whereby they have
been all destroyed: Some have practiced to poison their wines and Beer, with
their victuals, by which their Enemies have dyed like Rats.

CHAP. CLXXIV.
A politic Stratagem used by Eumenes, to cause his Soldiers to follow him
upon a dangerous attempt; and how he stopped Antigonus proceedings, and overcame
him.
EVmenes, perceiving that his Soldiers were much daunted at the sudden news
of Antigonus his approach to assault his Camp; and fearing the fidelity of
his Soldiers, he being but newly chosen their Vindex, thought it more safe to
make use of some politic way to prevent Antigonus his coming; wherefore he
used good and beseeming speeches to his Soldiers, desiring them to prepare
immediately to follow him; for his own part be would undertake to stay
Antigenus in his march: whereupon he hasted with certain of his Friends to
the top of diverse hills making sundry great fires, that were seen into
Antigonus his Camp; who thinking that a very great Army was there in a
readiness, and fearing his design was discovered, caused him to make a pause,
and to bethink himself of his own safety. Eumenes Soldiers seeing this take
good effect, came all flocking unto him, and there strongly fortified
themselves; so that Antigonus could not force him from his works: But Eumenes
having laid an ambush of Horse at the foot of the hill, charged Antigonus his
Forces in the Rear as they came to assault the Camp, and overthrew them.

CHAP. CLXXV.
A Policy to gain a Town whose fidelity is doubtful.
POmpey perceiving the Cattenensians were falling off from him, and tha^ if he
should offer to stir, they would stand upon their own defense; he in policy
sent unto them to desire them they would be content to receive certain sick
men of his, to which they condescended; but Pompey under the habit of sick
persons, sent most able valiant men, who taking a fit opportunity, let Pompeyes
Army into the Town.

CHAP. CLXXVI.
A Policy used by Alexander Magnus to secure Thracia, (which he had newly
conquered) from Rebellion.
ALexander Magnus, desiring to assure himself of the Country of Thracia, in
regard he was to make wars in Asia, he thought it best to take with him all
the principal men of Thrace, and he set over the common people men of mean
birth, and low degree, to govern them until his return; so giving those
Princes (he took with him) places of great command in his Army, with
extraordinary pay, he held them secure and quiet; which had they been left
behind, they would soon have rebelled: The like course did Philip King of
Spain use to be secured of England when he went to Saint Quinti^s.

CHAP. CLXXVII.
A Policy to beguile an Enemy from opposing an Army that would march over a
River.
IF an Army be opposed by the Enemy, from passing over a River (without great
disadvantage unto him) after a few days march by the Rivers side, if the Enemy
follows on the other side to hinder them, then the best way is to draw out of
every Company certain Soldiers, who must secretly be conveyed unto the next
Wood, directing them, that the next day after the Army is departed, they should
come to the River and lay over their Bridges and strongly fortify it; the
Enemy seeing the full number of Troops and Colors will not mistrust any
thing, but will march on to prevent their going over as before they were
accustomed, those in ambush seeing the Coast clear, having finished their
works, the Army has stolen back again, and marched over without danger or
resistance.

CHAP. CLXXVIII.
A Politic Stratagem used by the Duke Bernhard of Saxon-Weymar, whereby he
surprised the strong Town of Manheim in the Pallatinate.
DVke Bernhard of Saxon-Weymar by a Stratagem surprised the Town of Manheim,
being the strongest in all the Pallatinate seated upon the River Rhine, where
the River Nekar flows into it, he marches toward the Town with five hundred
men, ordering his men so, that he might reach the Town the next Morn an hour
or two before day; so soon as he approached, sent word to the Governor, that
he was a Commander of a Town of their side, and named his name accordingly;
and that having been out upon a Partee that night, was by the Enemy beaten in
thither for his refuge, and that the Swedes were ready to fall upon the Rear
of his Troops; he earnestly desired to be let in with all expedition: The
Governor giving ^redence to his feigned tale, opened the Ports, and gave him
free passage into the Town, whereby he took occasion to cut off the Guards,
and slew three hundred of the Garrison, and took Maravelli the Governor, and
his Lieutenant Prisoners, and enjoyed the Town; which by force could not have
been taken without a long Siege.

CHAP. CLXXIX.
A Politic Stratagem used by Alexander, whereby he forced his Enemy from a
Passage, which by strength he could not have ganed.
ALexander in the Wars against Darius was prevented by Bessius, who had
gotten the advantage of a straight Passage over a high Rock, which constrained
Alexander to make use of a Stratagem; he having the opportunity of a mighty
windy day, stackt upon a heap a huge pile or Wood and brush Fagots, and
setting it on fire, the Wind carried the Coals, Flame, and Smoke, so strongly
in the face of the Enemy, that they were glad to quit the place; which
otherwise would have been impossible for his Army to have done, in regard of
the disadvantage of the place.

CHAP. CLXXX.
How Scipio by his Justice and chaste carriage toward a fair Lady which he
had taken Prisoner, won the hearts of his Enemies.
Justice and Chastity winnes the heart of an Enemy, more than any policy else
that may be devised, as by the example of Scipio in Spain; where he rendered a
young Lady very beautiful to her Father and Husband, without offering her any
discourtesie; which made him win more Cities and Towns in Spain, than
formerly he could do with his potent Army. Likewise, Caesar in his Wars in
France, caused the Timber and such necessaries to be paid for, which he used
to make the Lists about his Army, whereby he got such a name of Justice, that
the Conquest of that Province was obtained with ease.

CHAP. CLXXXI.
A Politic answer of Alexander the Great unto certain malicious Enemies, and
his wise devise to gain their love.
ALexander the Great was solicited to take a strict revenge of Arcadian and
Nicanor, who had used evil speeches of Philip of Macedon, father in Law to
Alexander, and that they conceived them for those affronts, to be highly worthy
of death; to whom Alexander most politiquely and wisely answered, that first it
was to be considered, whether the fault lay in them that used the abusive
language, or in King Philip; Secondly, that it lies in the power of every man
to be well spoken of, if he will endeavor it: which indeed proved so, for
after King Philip releeved their necessities, there were none in the Kingdom
did him more honor and truer service than they did, in all the time of his
Wars.

CHAP. CLXXXII.
A politic course used by Tamberlaine in his wars, whereby he gained
speedy Conquests.
TAmberlaine the Great, in all his Wars, used his Enemies to three Banners;
the first day he set up a white Flagge, signifying favor and mercy, if they
yielded immediately; The second day a Red Banner, betokening blood and loss of
lives; The third day a black Banner, in token of the utter subversion of
Cities or Towns, burning them to as^es; by this Policy he made the world
tremble, to withstand his first Summons, for he never granted pardon after the
first refusal, whereby he conquered with small pains, or effu^ion of blood.

CHAP. CLXXXIII.
A Policy used by King Edward the Fourth to suppress his Rebels, which
otherwise had hazarded the ruin of his Kingdom.
THe Earl of Warwick by the instigations of the Duke of Clarence, (who was
Brother to King Edward the Fourth of England) plotted a Rebellion in the North.
The King perceiving the eminent danger that he was like to hazard, thought it
great wisdom to grant his gracious Pardon to be proclaimed unto all such as
would lay down their Arms and come in, whereupon the Rebels considering the
present danger they were in, made the greatest part of them bethink
themselves, that the safest course was, to accept of this gracious offer, and
not to run a double hazard, whereupon they came in, and acknowledged their
heinous offenses, desiring to have his Majesty's favor renewed.

CHAP. CLXXXIIII.
A Politic devise used by William Rufus to get Moneys.
KIng Williaw Rufus had long wars in France, which had much impoverished him,
and being brought into a great strait for lack of Moneys, he devised a
Politic way to help himself by levying twenty thousand Soldiers (being men
of good rank and fashion) to be conducted into Normandy to aid him against
France, who being in their March toward the Coasts side, and ready to be
imbarqued, it was signified unto them from the King, that as well for their
particular safeties, as also for not disfurnishing the Realm of strength,
whosoever would pay ten shillings, toward the levying of Soldiers in
Normandy, he might be excused, and stay at home; the which favor they
generally embraced, and willingly paid every man his stipend, by this devise he
gained 10000 pounds.

CHAP. CLXXXV.
A Politic course to keep a new Conquered people from Innovations and
Rebellions.
Here a Conquest has newly been either in a Kingdom, City, or Town, the
best way to prevent the people from inventing Rebellions and Innovations, is to
impoverish them, so as they shall have no leisure no^ means, to put any
mischief in practice, for busying themselves in getting their livelihood.

CHAP. CLXXXVI.
A politic way to stay Mutines in an Army, and to cut off the chief Author
without running a hazard.
WHen Mutines are a broaching, a General must be wise, and circumspect in
applying himself to appeal them, and first to sever the Confederates, in
dividing them, and breaking their Faction whereby to defeat it; for if the
Authors of it be of any great command, or men of quality; and that the
original proceeds from discontents, and that they have drawn a strong party
to side with them, whereby the Laws of the Field cannot take place without
running a hazard to the whole Army; then the best way is to deal mildly with
them, using fair terms and promises, willingly condescending to such
requests as shall be by them desired, dealing privately with some particular
men* and sometimes with many together; and eft-soone filling them with promises
and hopes, using pensive, yet vehement words, which may induce them to believe,
that they proceed not from any dissembling intents; and so by degrees prevail
to cut off the principal heads, and then the rest of the body will soon fall
off of it self.

CHAP. CLXXXVII.
A Policy used by King William, to Malcolme King of Scotland, who had invaded
this Land, thinking to gain his peace, he would have yielded to any
Conditions.
KIng William the Second, having weakened his Army, by his great Wars in
France, Malcolme King of Scotland perceiving what broils and Contentions this
poor King was hemmed in withal, took his opportunity to make use of it, and
with his Army invades England, (considering the Premises) he thought to bring
King William to what terms of Peace he should desire, and that in regard of
his great losses, he would be very moderate in demanding any Articles from the
King of Scotland; this Project being brought to the upshot, King William showed
himself more resolute then ever before in his prosperity, affirming in high
terms, that he scorned to yield to any difficulties; Whereupon Malcolme
conjecturing that such a high confidence could not be without good grounds; he
consented to any Condition that King William did desire.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII.
Politic Observations in a Confederate War.
THat Army which intends to invade an Enemy, the strength whereof consists of
diverse Confederates* the Service which is to be expected, must be speedily
done, for in a short time such an Army will fall into diverse inconveniences; as
either a dissipation and dissolvement, or else fall into a confusion, in regard
of great difficulties that will arise, and Straites that they must be exposed
unto, especially being far remote from succor and relief, or hardly to be
releeved; whereas the Enemy being in his own Land, at hand may have speedy
supplies, both of Men and Ammunition; as by the example of Robert Duke of
Normandy, eldest Brother to King William, who with diverse other Princes of
Europe had surprised Jerusalem, and diverse other Cities, yet soon ^ell at
odds, and were dissipated.

CHAP. CLXXXIX.
A policy used by the Governor of Croizon to make his cowardly Soldiers fight.
CRoyzon being besieged by General Norrice; the Governor of the Fort seeing
his Soldiers faint in the defense thereof: wherefore (to prevent it) all that
did play the Cowards, or that did speak of yielding; he caused to be chained
to a post set in some breach, with his weapons in his hand to defend himself
and it. By this device the rest of their fellow Soldiers would rather venture
their persons honorably, then to be compelled with a greater danger
dishonourably.

CHAP. CXC.
A Policy used by Generals to beguile hunger in a straight besieged Town.
THe People of Lydia were the first that invented Games, as Dice, Cards,
Chesse, and the like, necessity and hunger forcing them unto it; according to
that of Persius, Artis Magister ingenijque Largitor venture. For being sorely
vexed with famine in the time of Atis one of the Progenitors of Omphale, they
used every second day (by playing at these Games) to beguile their hungry
bellies: thus for 22 years, they continued playing and eating by turns.

CHAP. CXC.
A politic Stratagem practiced by the Governor of Berghen, against the
Prince of Parma's Forces, by which he destroyed diverse of them, and preserved
the Town from surprising.
THe Prince of Parma bringing a mighty Army before Berghen-opzome; the
Governor made choice of two English men, (who in former time had been the
Dukes prisoners) to steal to the Dukes Camp, to let him understand that the
strength of the Town was most English, and that for diverse discontents they
were ready to mutiny; and that (if it pleased him) he could infect some
chief Captains that should command the principal Guards to give way for his
entrance into the Town; and (that the Governor should not mistrust any
treachery) they would only shoot powder at them in their Ordnance and Muskets
without Bullets; and that at such a night he should not fail of his
enterprise; and for the better assurance, one of those Englishmen was to be
left in hostage to be slain if they did not really effect it: whereupon the
Prince gave them large gifts, with great promises of future preferment. The
sign being given that the Duke should come with his Army, the English Hostage
was bound hand and foot, and (for their better security) was carried in the
Front of the Army; that if any treason should be, he might be the first should
suffer: so (finding the Ports open, and the Pieces discharged only with
powder) made them come flocking upon the Bridge; but so soon as the foremost
was entered with the English Gentleman that was their Hostage; the Lord
Willoughby let down the Port-cullisses; and (being ready with the whole
strength of the Town) gave them such a Volley both of great and small Shot,
that they slew and drowned many hundreds. This Project caused Parma to raise
his Siege from before Berghen.

CHAP. CXCII.
A Politic Observation for a General, if he fears the strength of his
Enemies Battle, to march from him by night.
Our famous Generals used this Observation in their Wars: Si pauci necessario
cum multitudine pugnare cogantur, consilium est noctis tempore
Bellifort^^^^tentare.

CHAP. CXCIII.
A Politic Stratagem whereby the King of Naples regained the possession of a
City and Castle formerly lost to the King of France.
FErand King of Naples, having lost his Kingdom to the King of France, he
understood the King of France had fought a great Battle with the Venetians and
Milla^^ys at Fernon; conjectured with himself how by a wile to repossesse
himself of the Castle in the City of Naples, to which end (having got some few
Troops in arms) marched toward the City, and sent a Nuntio to the
Governor, to let him understand, that their King was slain, and the Army
discomfited, and if they would yield up the possession of the Castle, they
should have good quarter, but if they did withstand this fair pro^^er, they
should expect nothing but utter confusion; whereupon they being at a stand, and
hearing of a truth that such a Battle was fought but no certain news of the
event, made them give credit to the King of Naples his report, and fearing the
worst, yielded the City and Castle, which occasioned the loss of the Realm.

CHAP. CXCIV.
A Politic Stratagem used by Nauplius the Father of Palamedes, whereby he
destroyed 200 of the Graecians ships, as they came for the Island of Euboea.
IN the Island of Euboea, Nauplius the Father of Palamedes understanding that
his son was slain by the hands of Paris, wherefore he conceived such
displeasure against the whole Host of the Graecians, that he intended their
general destruction; to this end he caused fires to be made upon the top of
the most dangerous and unaccessible Rocks in this whole Island, and had
removed all the Booyes and Sea-markes into dangerous shelves, the Greeks
taking this (according to the custom of the times) to have been the marks of
some safe Haven made thitherwards, where they were miserably cast away, there
perishing 200 ships, and many thousand men.

CHAP. CXCV.
An excell^nt policy used by Mahomet Bassa to conceal the death of Solimon
one of the Ottoman Emperors from his Soldiers at the Siege of Sigeth in
Hungary fearing lest they should mutiny.
SOlimon one of the Ottoman Emperors, dying at the Siege of Sigeth in Hungary,
which was cunningly concealed by Mahomet Bassa, the space of twenty days,
before the Ianizaries knew of it; who when any did inquire for him, he would
show them diverse times the Emperor ^itting in his Horse-litter, as being
troubled with the Gout, causing his Physicians to go too and fro with their
Physic as if they had him in cure; but after the Soldiers suspected ill
dealing, they began to be mutinous, whereupon he promised they should see him
the next day; wherefore they apparelled the Corpse in royal large Robes, and
placed it in a Chair at the end of a long Gallery, and a little Boy cunningly
placed behind him, to move the Kings hand to his head, as if he should stroke
his Beard, (as his manner it seems was) which sign of life and strength, the
soldiers seeing were contented; and so was his death concealed forty one days
more, until the Siege was ended and a new Emperor established.

CHAP. CXCVI.
A Politic Stratagem used by Simon Son of Miltiades being Captain of the
Athenians, whereby he overthrew the Sea and Landforces of the Persians in one
day.
SImon the Son of Miltiades Captain General of the Athenians, overthrew the
Sea and Landforces of the Persians in one day, he took and sunk no fewer
than forty ships, and three hundred Galleys, in the Sea fight; which ended, he
furnished and manned the Persian ships with his own best soldiers attyred in
the Persians habilaments, and waving the colors of the Persians; upon their
approach the Camp was opened, where every man prepared to welcome their
victorious Contrymen (as they thought.) But the Greeks no sooner entered,
but suddenly put them all to the sword, and took twenty thousand of them
Prisoners.

CHAP. CXCVII.
A Policy of the Duke of Burbon to cause his fleeing Soldiers to stand a
charge.
AT the Battle of Agincourt, Lewis of Burbon having suffered a defeat in his
left wing, weighing the dishonor, gathered some scattered troops of Horse that
stood doubtful of the event; proclaiming the English had the worst, and if
they would show their valors, he warranted them the victory; the French being
then all ready to flee, he procures a Soldier to run through the Army to
crave supply, protesting the English were yiedling, for that King Henry the
fifth had offered to yield his troops, and to flee for refuge. This device did
wonderfully hearten the French to abide the other charge, who would otherwise
before have fled.

CHAP. CXCVIII.
A Policy used by King Henry the fifth, being overcharged with Prisoners, if
fresh Supplies should have assailed him.
AT the same Battle of Agincourt, after the French were fled, a world of
Prisoners being taken in the pursuit; in the interim, certain French fugitives
seized upon the Kings Te^ts, an Alarm being made by the Sutlers and those that
guarded the Baggage; the King fearing fresh supplies presently commands every
Soldier to kill his Prisoner, that they might make the safer resistance, and
not be hindered by them, which in Skirmish might have done them treble damage.

CHAP. CXCIX.
A Stratagem whereby the Town of Fast-castle in Scotland was taken from the
English.
IN Edward the sixths days, our English General having taken in diverse Town
in Scotland, this Town of Fast-castle being one, the Governor thereof
commands the neighboring Hines to bring in their Contribution corn; the Enemy
making use of this opportunity, sends diverse soldiers habited like the
Scottish Peasants, with private Arms about them upon the day appointed, with
sackes of Corn upon horseback; they being arrived at the Ports alighted, and
every man brought his sack in upon his shoulder; no sooner were they entered,
but they fell upon the Guard and cut them off, making them masters of the
Ports, until diverse Troops that waited the opportunity, came and succored
them, and gained the Town.

CHAP. CC.
Anotable Stratagem whereby the Island of Sarke was taken from the French, it
being a place of it self impregnable.
SIR Walter Raleigh in his History of the World, relates an excellent
Stratagem, which a Gentleman of the Netherlands made use of for the regaining
of the Island of Sarke which joins to Gernesey, from the French, it being a
place of it self impregnable, having sufficient to sustain themselves there
growing, and being every way inaccessible; This Gentleman anchored in the Road
with one ship of small burden, pretending the death of his Merchant, he
besought the French to bury him in hallowed ground, offering them for a
gratuity such things as they had aboard; the French condescended to their
requests, upon condition they should come all disarmed; whereupon they brought
their Coffin upon land, filled with all kind of weapons and Ammunition; in the
mean time, part of the French went to the ship to view their penniworths,
where they were detained; the Coffin being brought into the Church, and the
doors shut close, they armed themselves, and fell upon the Guard and slew
them; By this device they obtained the Island, which otherwise had been
impossible to have been entered.

CHAP. CCI.
A Politic device used by Iugurth, to help his Army in case it were
overthrown.
IVgurth being invaded by the Romans, deferred the fight in the day of Battle,
until a good part of the day was spent, knowing that if the Enemy did
prevail, yet the night coming on them, they should not be so able to pursue
the victory, and that they being in their own Country, and acquainted with all
passages and places of strength, being protected by the darkness of the night
might the better escape, and make head again upon the Romans; and
contrariwise, if the invaders should be broken, the night would be a means to
cause their utter confusion, they not knowing how to find any place of refuge,
but must fall into the hands of the Natives. This device stood Jugurth in great
stead.

CHAP. CCII.
A Politic Stratagem used by Count Pietro Navarese to beat his Enemies from
a Breach, whereby he rowted their Camp.
COunt Pietro Navarese being besieged in a Town where the Enemy had made a
Breach in the Walls, for his safety to repel them he caused certain
Counter-trenches, and secret Mines to be made, wherein he laid diverse Firkings
of Powder, and other murdering fire-balles; he upon the assault given retired
himself, suffering the Enemy in great number to enter, only maintaining the
inward works; seeing his opportunity, he gave fire to the Mines, and made a
mighty slaughter of the Enemy, sallying out upon them in their disordered
routes, put them to flight, and rai^ed their Siege. This was practiced also at
Mastriche the last Siege but one.

CHAP. CCIII.
A Policy used by the Prince of Orange to drown the Enemy out of his
Trenches, and then to releeve the Town by Boats.
THe Prince of Orange has taken the opportunity to cut through certain Banks,
letting in the Sea, which has forced the Enemy to break up his Siege, and for
his safety retire to such Hills as were near; and in the mean time he has
releeved the Town by Boats, with Men and Munition, which otherwise must have
yielded to the Enemies mercy.

CHAP. CCIIII.
A Policy used by the Spaniards against the French, to prevent the power of
their Horses against their Foot.
THe Spaniards in a Battle against the French at Lyrignola, finding themselves
too weak in Horsemen, thought it wisdom for them to retire themselves for
their better safety among the Vines, Groves, and such like uneven ground,
whereby they prevented the execution of the Horse, which otherwise would have
freedom; by this for the Foot in plain grounds, where they might have used
their been too hard devise they got the better of the French; Some have made
secret Trenches covering them with Hurdles and green swardy Turfe.

CHAP. CCV.
A Politic Stratagem whereby the Lord Poynings gained a Castle at Samerduboys
in France, there being no access to it with Ordaance.
THe Lord Poynings at Samerduboys in France, having summoned a Castle strongly
Situated upon a Hill environed with marish ground in such sort, that it was
thought impossible for to bring the Cannon to batter it, and therefore the
Captain of the Castle refused to yield until he saw the Cannon, wherefore
the Lord Poynings caused secretly a Cannon to be made of wood artificially and
colored over, placing hurdles on the Marish with diverse Horses to draw the
Carriages, as though with great difficulty they had drawn a Ca^non indeed,
then threatening that if he caused him to shoot (according to the Law of Arms)
they should all be put to the Sword; whereupon the Captain abused by this
policy, delivered up the Castle by Composition, which otherwise could not have
been gained; ever since no Fort is to yield upon Composition, unless the
Cannon discharges twice or thrice.

CHAP. CCVI.
A Policy used by Monsieur Lautreck in the Wars at Naples, to make his
Foreign assistance to fight.
MOnsieur Lautreck in the Wars at Naples, having his Army composed of sundry
Nations, thought it wisdom to order every Nation separately into sundry
Battalions, placing in the Front of the Battle those Foreign aids, and in
the time of fight he caused it to be given out, that such a Nation had the
Victory, whereby the rest inflamed did most valiantly fight, and by this devise
was victorious, which otherwise happily would have left him in the suddes.

CHAP. CCVII.
How Scipio by his policy defeated the Carthaginians of their Design.
SCipio drew his Army to Tunis, being within the prospect of Carthage, the
Carthaginians made out a great Fleet to encounter with Scipio in the Haven;
Scipio took his Ships and Hulkes, and fastened them together with the
tackling belonging to them, causing the Maste^ to serve for Rafters to fasten
them together; whereupon he placed his Soldiers to maintain the Bridge: He
left certain places open* where small (...) might swiftly sail out and in, to
fight at pleasure, by this device their enterprise was impeached.

CHAP. CCVIII.
A Politic Stratagem used by Philopoemen against Nabis, whereby he cut off
diverse of his Soldiers, and after took his Camp, and by a second Stratagem
destroyed all his men.
PHilopoemen General of the Athenian Army, being incountred with a mighty
Army, under the conduct of Nabis, and fearing his own strength, took the
advantage of a Forde, where Nabis Forces were to March over, to make their
approches against his Camp; Philopoemen laid privily an Ambush near the
water; who taking the advantage of their disordered passage, s^ue many of the
Assaylants, and losing no opportunity, he presently caused one of his
Soldiers to run to Nabis Camp (who lay strongly intrencht) as a Fugitive,
and told him that the Athenians had a purpose to get between him and
Lacedemon, whereby they would hinder his Retreite into the City, and also that
he had a sure plot to stir up the Citizens to rebel, whereby they might
regaine their freedom. Nabis believing this marched secretly away in the
dark, only leaving a few Companies behind to show themselves upon the Ramp^^s,
making great lights in their quarters, the better to conceal his March; But
Philopoemen assaulted the Camp, and chased Nabis into the Woods, where he
expected the favor of the night; Philopoemen dreaming they would steal into
Lacedemon in the dark, drew certain of his fresh Soldiers, laying them in
Ambuscado upon two of the principal passages that conducted to the City, and
causing in his own Camp store of great lights to be made, whereby they
thought all at rest they ventured to creep home by small Troops, where most
of them were slain by Philopoemens Soldiers.

CHAP. CCIX.
A politic Stratagem to prevent an Enemy from entering, the Ports being blown
open.
THe Duke of Burgundy coming before Bevis in France, had blown open the
Ports; Yet being discovered, the Soldiers of the Town made a valiant
resistance, the whilst others above upon the Wall, threw down many fiery
Fagots that burnt down the Bridge, whereupon he speedily retreated.

CHAP. CCX.
A politic Stratagem used by Maximilian King of the Romans, whereby he took
in the Town of Arras.
MAximilian King of the Romans, having promised Henry King of England to assist
him in the Wars of France, meeting at Bulloigne, a Peace was concluded with
the French by King Henry, whereby Maximilian lost his journey, yet thinking to
get something for his penny, he came to the speech of a Smith, that had a poor
house built upon the Wall of the Town called Arras, and by gifts and large
promises, made him agree to liquor the Soldiers upon the Guard; and as for the
Governor, he was no afternoone-man, this project was cleanly performed, and in
their drunken security the Town was surprised.

CHAP. CCXI.
A Policy to prevent mischief when two great Princes (...) to discourse.
IF great Princes should capitulate upon any Articles of peace, it might prove
very dangerous to hazard their Persons, unless in wisdom they make choice of
some River between them and their two Armies, where a Bridge is to be made
over with a grated Gate on the midst to keep them a sunder, and yet may
discourse through it: also on either side a certain Company of men to view the
Carriages, that no treason be put in action: as the like was performed between
the King of England and the King of France; the King of Englands men went
through the wicket of the grate to guard the King of France, and the King of
Frances men came to guard the King of England, on either side there were locks
and boults, and but 20. men a piece to guard them. By this means it could not
possible be that any mischief could ensue.

CHAP. CCXII.
A Policy to conduct troops of Horse over Bogges, Mores or deep snowes.
XEnophon in his Ascent of Cyrus, being troubled in his march with wonderful
deep Snowes, Mores and Bogges; he was taught by the Comarch or guide to bind
bags of Straw about their Horses foot-locks, which would preserve them from
danger of sinking: without which necessary and experienced practice, diverse of
them have been proved (with far greater prejudice) to sink even up to the
bellies.

CHAP. CCXIII.
A Policy used by the Citizens of Priennia, by which means they deluded their
Enemy by a color of plenty, which caused him to leave his Siege.
THe City of Priennia (being besieged by Aliattes) made use of this Stratagem:
when their Town could not hold out any longer; their victuals being spent they
turned out of their City diverse fat Cattle, as Horses and Mules into the
Enemies Camp: the Enemy (perceiving this) sends (...) a Spy into the Town to
see whether they were so well provided as they made show of: Bias the Governor
(having intelligence of this Spy) caused diverse heaps of sand to be piled up
together in the Streets and Marketplace; and to be strewed over with Corn;
as Wheat, Rye, Pease and other Grain, which made a wonderful show of plenty;
this Messenger being suffered to have recourse about the City, did take a
particular view of all things, and returned into the Camp with this answer,
that he saw infinite plenty both of Corn and Victuals which made Aliates
presently removed his Siege. Had not this Policy taken effect, the City could
not have subsisted a week longer.

The like Policy Gracchus caused the Citizens of Cassilinum to use, whereby
Haniball was deluded; the Citizens sowing Parsnip-seeds in the fields about the
Town, and defending it from the Enemies spoiling it; made Haniball think that
there was store of plenty; and that it was no policy for him to stay his Siege
until those Roots were grown; wherefore he presently removed.

CHAP. CCXIV.
A politic Stratagem, whereby young Scipio brought Haniball into a mighty
suspicion with Antiochus.
YOung Scipio being sent by the Roman Senate to Antiochus, who had (by the
instigation of Haniball,) prepared an Army against the Romans; which should
have been conducted by that crafty Enemy Haniball; for prevention he thus
practiced: he would often frequent the Company of Haniball, falling into
friendly conference, about the Battles betwixt them fought before in Italy and
Africa, feeding and pleasing the humor of Haniball, lest he should leese his
company and so fail of his intended purposes, which was to bring Antiochus
into a mistrust and jealousy of the fidelity of Haniball; so that the
conduction of the moyetie of this Army might not be granted him; which took
effect, for his secret coming to Scipio^ lodging; yet so, that some of
Antiochus friends might take notice of it: also in the day (having conference
together) if any approch'd near, Scipio would suddenly be silent, and wind
away from his company, which actions of his wrought his desires: for Antiochus
durst not trust him, fearing there was some plotted treachery betwixt them.

CHAP. CCXV.
Politic devises used by Archelaus Mithridates to cause his Soldiers to
fight when they were both unwilling and fearful.
ARchelaus Mithridates Lieutenant at Pir^a, perceiving his Soldiers had small
courage to fight, he so wearied them with continual labor, that they were
glad to desire him to fight that the wars might be ended: the same did Cyrus
King of Persia in the wars against Astyages King the Medes, minding to stir
up the valor of his dejected Soldiers fiercely to give Battle to their
Enemy, he wearied them all one day with hewing down of wood, and on the morrow
after he made a plenteous feast for them, demanding in the feast time which
day liked them best; they allowing of the pastime of that day present: to whom
he replied, this pleasure must be obtained by the other days pains; for
except ye first overcome the Medes, ye can never live at freedom or in
pleasure; by this they took great courage to fight.

After the same manner Epaminondas being ready to give battle to the
Lacedaemonians; he (perceiving his Soldiers hearts to faint) frames a short
Oration to instigate them to fight, telling them how that the Lacedaemonians had
determined if they got the victory to slay all their men, to make all their
wives and children bond-slaues for ever; and to beat down the City of Thebes
flat to the ground, with these words the Thebans were so grieved and moved,
that at the first brunt they overcame their Enemies.

Agesilaus had pitched not far from Orchomeno, a City that was in league with
him; he (perceiving that the chiefest part of his Army had their treasure in
the Camp) commanded the Townes-men to receive nothing into the Town belonging
to the Army; to the intent his Soldiers might fight the more furiously,
knowing they should fight both for their lives and goods.

Also Gelon King of Syracuse, entering war against the Persians, to make his
Soldiers disdain and undervalue the Enemy, causes diverse of the poorest and
most uncomliest weak persons of the Enemy to be stripped stark naked, and led
them before all the divisions of the Army, to persuade them that the Enemy was
but silly poor wretches, and scarce worth the fighting withal. All these
Projects have taken good effect in the ancient wars.

CHAP. CCXIV.
A Politic Stratagem used by Flavius to bring Gracchus into an ambush,
whereby he and his Romans were s^aine.
TItus Gracchus being in the Country of the Lucans, who were then divided,
diverse Towns being rendered up to Haniball, and certain abode under the Romans
jurisdiction, of the which sort the chief Ruler that year was one Flavius a
Lucan, this Flavius on a sudden turned to Haniball, and sending to Mago to
speak with him, he conspired to deliver Gracchus the Roman General unto him,
so as the Lucans might be received into amity; which being condescended unto,
he brought Mago to a great covert of Wood, willing him to hide himself with a
great company of men of Arms, appointing him the time when he would bring the
Roman Captain into his hands: Returning to Gracchus, he gave him to
understand, that he had begun a great enterprise, and that he must be the
instrument to effect it; which was, that he had moved and persuaded all the
Princes of the Lucans that were gone to the amity of Haniball, to return
again to the obedience of Rome; I did further declare to them (says he) the
potencie of the Roman power, how it daily increased, with the imbecility of the
Carthagenians, further not to mistrust the Roman gentleness, whose nature was
ever meek to those that submitted unto them; with these persuasions I found
them all contented to be reconciled, so they may hear you speak and confirm
my words, touching their hands in pledge of your faith, and indeed I have
undertaken you shall do it, and I have appointed them a secret place well out
of the way from our Camp, for fear of espies, yet not far from your own
Camp; few words will dispatch this business, and by this means all the
Lucans will come wholly under your jurisdiction. Gracchus nothing mistrusting
deceit and treason to lie under those sugared words, took a Guard with him (all
unarmed) and rode to the place appointed, Flavius was his guide; being arrived,
Mago with his armed men invaded them suddenly, Flavius the Traitor turns to
the Carthagenians, who furiously darted their weapons at Gracchus, and slew him
and his Romans, not being able to make resistance. This should teach Generals
not to be over-credulous, but to walk upon sure grounds, for had Gracchus sent
Spies to view the Lucans, in what conditions they presented thewselves in, or
had he taken a sufficient guard with him, he might have eschewed this hellish
treachery. Latet sub melle venena.

CHAP. CCXVII.
A Policy whereby Haniball had like to have caused the Romans to have fled.
HAniball coming to the succor of Capua which was beleaguered by two Roman
Consuls, and being not able to releeve the City, he craftily sent diverse of his
men forth, that could speak the Latin tongue, into diverse parts of the Host of
the Romans, which should in the Consuls behalf declare, that the Roman Camps
were taken and spoiled; wherefore he willed every man to save himself by
flight to the next Mountains: Since by longer tarrying the greater would be
their loss, this crafty deceit amazed diverse of them, and had like to have
taken effect, which might have been the ruin of the Roman Army: Let this
teach Soldiers to give no credit to any report in time of Battle; least they
be ruined by it.

CHAP. CCXVIII.
A Politic Stratagem used by Marcius General of the Romans, to make use of
the Carthagenians security, whereby he overcame two Camps, and put them to
the Sword.
MArcius being made General of the Romans, was sensible of the Potency of the
three Carthagenian Armies, two of them lying near Encamped one to the other,
and thinking themselves secure in regard of the precedent overthrow they had
given to the two Scipio's; Marcius makes a politic use of this, and by a
well-delivered Oration, persuades his men to take the opportunity of that night
to invade the Enemies Camps, his reason telling him, it could not but take
good effect; wherefore all things being fitted and prepared, about three a
clock in the morn they set forwards to Asdrubals Camp, the other Camp of
the Carthagenians was seven miles beyond, between which was a hollow-Valley,
and by it a Wood, in this Wood Marcius had placed an ambush of Roman Horses, to
cut off such as fled from the first Camp to escape to the other; in the
interim, he with his Troops went to the first Camp, where finding little or
no Watch or resistance, they entered their Quarters, where suddenly sounding
their Trumpets, and beating their Drums, and making an infinite shout, some
firing the Tents, others slaying all that stood in opposition, others lying in
ambush at the Ports of the Camp, to murder those that fled out; thus with
sudden noise, fire, and slaughter, the other were so amassed, that they fled
to the Ports and were slain; others got over the Works to the second Camp,
and were taken by the Roman ambushment, so that none could possibly escape to
carry news to the next Camp. This being finished, the Romans made all possible
haste to the second Camp, where they arrived by break of day, finding that
more easy to enter than the first; for some were fetching Wood, others
Forage, some walking, others at victuals, and none ready to make a defense,
these they cut off; others arming in the mean time made resistance, but when
they saw the fresh blood besmeared upon their swords and shields; their hearts
fainted, they then knowing the other Camp was taken, and their Friends slain.
Thus in one night, were two Armies overthrown, 37000 slain, and 1800
Prisoners taken.

CHAP. CCXIX.
A Politic Stratagem whereby Asdruball in the Wars of Spain delivered his
Army out of a great Strait from Nero, who was ready to have rowted them.
ASdruball in the Wars of Spain, being in a great Strait so as he could not
stir his Army, but Nero would have taken the advantage to have rowted him;
wherefore he thought it policy to delude Nero by fair promises: Which was,
that if Nero would suffer him and his Army to march forth the Straites, without
Battle, he would leave Spain without delay, and leave it wholly unto the
Romans, this offer was acceptable unto Nero; the next day following was
appointed for conference, about the conditions of redelivering the Castles and
Fortresses in their possessions, and what day should be appointed for the
Carthagenian Garrisons to depart with their Baggage. Nero thinking himself
secure, was remiss in guarding the Straites so strictly as before; Asdruball
taking the advantage, all the night sent away many of his Host with all his
gross and heavy carriage through the Straites, ever foreseeing that not
over-many departed at once, to the intent that the smallness of the number, by
making small noise, might with silence deceive their Enemies; The next day they
held their Communications, and Writings were drawn (trivial things) until
night approacht, agreeing to meet the next morn to finish all matters; the
same night he conveyed away more of his Baggage; the next meeting was also in
vain, the time being spent in devices of communication; in the night he sent
his Footmen and stuff out of danger (diverse days being employed in debating)
so that most of his stuff was conveyed away; Asdrubal began to be more ridged
and stiff in the agreement, insomuch that he dis^ented from diverse Articles,
he de^ming himself partly secured. The morrow following there arose a
wonderful mist, so that both Hills and Valleys were obfuscated, which joyed
Asdruball being for his purpose; he sent to Nero, letting him understand that
it was a high holy day, which he always kept holy, and all the people of the
Carthaginians, so that he durst not negotiate any business on it, desiring
him to defer the further Communication until the morrow. Nero all this time
dreaming of no fraud in this Message condescended unto it; In the mean time
Asdruball issued out of the straights with the residue of his Army very
silently, and was past danger before the day was clear; then too late they
espied the Camp void, and that they were grossly deluded; by this policy
he saved his Army and his honor. What vigilance and circumspection should
this teach a General to eschew the like deceit, for although an Enemies
countenance be never so fair, yet his heart is treacherous: Contrarily, how
should it animate a Commander to set his wits abroch, when he is in straights
to wind out of them with safety and honor.

CHAP. CCXX.
How Haniball by using of a Politic Stratagem in parting of his
Horse-troopes, the one part falling upon the Rear of the Romans, the other
into their Camp, gained a victory from Fulvius.
IN the Wars of Spain, betwixt Haniball and Cn. Fulvius the Proconsull,
whose Army lay before Herdonia; Hanibal having intelligence uses scelerity,
and with his Horsemen, and Light-footmen, had made his approaches near the
Town, before the fame of his coming was known; and to put the Romans in more
fear, he appeared in good array of Battle, most suddenly with his Colors
displayed; Fulvius prepares to oppose him in like manner, and joined Battle
with him; Hanibal setting his policies abroach, commanded his Horsemen that
after a sign or token to them made, whilst the Romans were busy in Battle
against the Footmen of Haniball, and every man's eye was occupied busily, that
that they should secretly coast the Field, and a part of them set upon the
back of his Enemies, the other part of them to invade the Enemies Camp and
Tents, with a great noise and slaughter, proclayming that they did not question
to vanquish this Fulvius, as they had done one of his name not long before: so
soon as the Horsemen assailed the Rear of the Romans (which caused a great
fear and slaughter) Immediately from the Camp was heard a mighty cry and
uprore, which so terrified the Romans, that some fled, and many more were
slain; among which the said Fulvius and twelve Tribunes with 13000 Romans, and
their Camp and stuff taken. This teaches Generals to make use of sceleritie
the wings of Conquests, and likewise it teaches Soldiers not to be daunted by
any Stratagem, nor to take notice of uprores, which will betray their valors,
but rather to stand firm to their tackling, and fight manfully for their
freedom; for so long as a flock of sheep keep intyre, the Wolf fears to
seize on them, but once severed by flight, every bawling curre will destroy
them.

CHAP. CCXXI.
How by the wisdom of Crispinus the Politic Stratagem of Haniball, was
prevented, and a like Stratagem returned upon him, by which the Town of
Salopia was freed, and his own men slain.
MArcellus with diverse of his Soldiers being slain by Hanibals Ambushes, he
finds Marcellus Ring with his Signet; by this he thought to put some exploit
in action; whereupon he causes diverse Letters to be counterfeited in
Marcellus name, and sealed with his Signet; the Contents were, that the night
following Marcellus would privily come to the City of Salopia, wherefore he
commanded the Captains and Soldiers to be in a readiness against his
coming, to know his further pleasure what was to be done; this Letter posted
speedily to the Governor of Salopia. But in the mean time Crispinns
mistrusting this deceit, sent post to all the Towns adjoining, that Marcellus
was slain, and Haniball had his Signet, for otherwise this project had taken
effect; Whereupon those of Salopia made use of the intelligence, returning the
Messenger with a gentle answer; but in the mean time the Salopians provided
for his coming upon the night prefixed, keeping an extraordinary strong Watch,
they made no question but to pay Haniball with his own coin; Not long before
break of day comes Haniball with his Troops close to the Ports, he having
appointed six hundred Romans which were fled to him, and could speak the
Language well, to call to the Porter, and to enter the Gates first. The Watch
opening the Ports, and drawing up the Portcullis, the said Romans entered as
fast as they might, but being entered, the Guard let fall the Port^ullis with a
great noise; The Salopians ^^ue them that were entered with small dificulty; for
they entered without fear, bare their Arms hanging upon their shoulders,
dreaming of no such Banquet; those without the Ports were likewise chased away;
Thus was Haniball taken in his own Trappe. This may inform Commanders in the
first place, when they have a fit opportunity to set a project afoot, to make
use of scelerity; for had Haniball put this immediately in execution before
Crispinus had given them intelligence it had taken effect. Secondly, they must
use all endeavors to prevent intelligence, for had Haniball belayed the
passages, he could not have mist of this Nuntio whereby he might have been
the more confident, that his Design would have taken effect. In the next
place, a Commander must make use of intelligence, and accordingly to regulate
his actions, so that an Enemy may be wounded with his own weapons. This may be
termed a golden Stratagem, to extract from an Enemies policy his utter
confusion.

CHAP. CCXXII.
A Policy whereby Scipio had 300 Romans armed and instructed, without the
charge of the General.
SCipio having obtained an Army to make wars in Africa, many of the young men
of Arms of Sicilia grudged to undertake this journey with him, wherefore to
secure himself he spoke thus; If there be any man here unwilling to venture
his person in these honorable wars, let him now speak, and I will gladly
hear, for I had rather you should now confess your unwillingnesse, then you
should be drawn forth against your wills, and become unprofitable Soldiers
unto me, and to the Commonwealth; Whereunto answer was made by some particular
Soldiers, that if it might be in their choice, they would not venture
themselves in those Wars; Scipio replied, Since you have plainly without
dissimulation declared your minds, I will appoint others in your places, to
whom you shall deliver your Horses; Harness, and other necessary instruments
of war; whom you shall take home with you to your houses, and there instruct,
teach, and exercise them in the feats of war until I send for them; the
young Gallants, were glad and joyful delivering them their Arms. By this
device he trained up 300. willing Soldiers without his charge.

CHAP. CCXXIII.
A politic Stratagem used by the French, whereby they vanquished Lucius
Posthumus and all his Army as they marched through a Wood.
LVcius Post-humus having wars with the French, and they being to march through
the passage of a wide wood called Littana; the French provided against their
coming, cutting all their Timber Trees on both sides of the way; so that being
not moved, they would stand firm, but being moved, they would presently fall
all together. Post-humus had 25000. in his Troops; the Frenchmen had bestowed
their Troops round about the circumference of the wood: and when the Army of
the Romans was well entered the wood, they cast down the furthest part of the
trees growing on the borders of the wood, which being once moved fell one upon
another through the wood, having no stay, throwing down and s^aying the Romans
both Foot and Horses as they passed, so that scarsly ten men escaped; for those
the trees spared were so amazed at the sudden accident that the French
vanquished them imediately, and slew their General Post-humus.

CHAP. CCXXIV.
The Policy of Cyrus how to gain valiant and loyal Commanders in his service.
IT is reported of Cyrus by Xenophon how infinitely he would publicly
confess he loved and honored meritorious Soldiers; Lib. 1. Page ^0.
and when he saw men willingly offer themselves to danger, he preferred them to
places of command and dignity, and honored them besides with other gifts,
whereby it appeared that valiant men were happiest, and cowards accounted as
their slaves. By this devise many thrust themselves into eminent dangers;
especially if they thought or imagined that Cyrus should have notice thereof:
by this means he purchased both loyal and valiant commanders daring to present
their bodies against most eminent perils and most difficult attempts.

CHAP. CCXXV.
A Policy to stir up emulation amongst Soldiers, to make them enter the
greatest difficulties, and gain impregnable things.
VBius, a Captain of the Company of the Pelignes; being commanded upon a
difficult piece of Service by Flavius Flaccus the Roman Consul; his men being
beaten from the Carthaginian trenches by Hanno; he straight took his Banner in
his hand, and with force threw it over the ditch into the Camp of the
Carthaginians, speaking with a loud voice, Evil might I fare and my Company if
my Enemies shall enjoy my Banner: then by great force he lightly went over the
ditch and scaled the walls of the Camp of his Enemy, whom his Company boldly
followed, they being in fight with the Carthagenians; another part cried,
Valerius Flaccus what sluggish cowards are we now grown? shall the Pelignes
win the honor of taking the Camp of our Enemies before us Romans? Whereupon
Titus Pedamius took his Colors from his Ensign, saying, This will I bear
into the Field of my Enemies: follow me brave Soldiers as many as would be
loath of the loss thereof: they presently being stirred with a valiant
emulation, obtained the Camp, slaying six thousand, and taking as many
Prisoners: this Policy to stir up emulation was the only means to obtain
this impregnable Camp, from whence they had been formerly repulsed diverse
times.

CHAP. CCXXVI.
A policy to be used at the entering of an Enemies Town to free the Soldiers
from being anoyed with stones, or Pieces, from the Battlements of houses, as
also to prevent an Enemies fury in pursuing, or retreat in a Fort or Town.
XEnophon in his first book of the ascent of Cyrus, relates how the Droylans
having betaken themselves to their chief Fort, Lib. 5. page 83. and 85.
to defend themselves against his Potent Army, at last through much difficulty
having scaled the Walls, his men were forely wounded from the battlements of
the houses; and likewise there being a Citadell strongly made within the Fort,
they made a fierce salley out upon him that was irresistible; by accident a
house falling on fire upon one side of the way, caused those that threw down
stones, and weapons, from the battlements to vanish away. Xenophon perceiving
this, caused the house upon the other side to be fired, which wrought his
Soldiers much safety. Those from the Citadell charged his men so furiously,
that there was no retreating without a manifest loss and confusion; wherefore
he commanded every Soldier as he was to come up, to present his weapons and
shot against the Enemy, to bring with him a quantity of Seare-wood, and to
place it between the Enemy and themselves, and then to set fire on it: by this
policy he stayed the Enemies pursuit in their Retreite, and busied them in
quenching their fires.

CHAP. CCXXVII.
A politic Stratagem, whereby Fabius the Consul took the Town of Arpos, by
the help of a violent storm of Thunder, wind, and rain.
CLassius Aitinius repairing to young Fabius, about the betraying of Arpos,
Fabius being arrived within a mile of the Town about three a clock in the
morn, he appointed six hundred active Soldiers to bear Scaling-Ladders, and
so first to assay the scaling of the Walls; Which done, then on the inner part
to break open the Gates, and (being Masters of part of the Town) by the sound
of a Horn to give him knowledge; whereby he, with the rest of the Troops,
might approach to their succors; as this was discussing there happened a
wonderful storm, of wind, rain, and thunder, whose vehemency drove the
Sentinells and Watchmen from the Walls into their Guards, where abiding a good
season, not dreaming the Enemy would make his approches in such a stormy
season, they fell asleep; in the mean time the Romans making use of these
storms, had quietly scalled the Walls, and were quietly passing the streets
to the Ports, where they broke them open, whose noise was not heard by the
Watch, so violent was the storm; then blowing their Horns, the Consul made
his approches about break of day, and entered the Town.

CHAP. CCXXVI.
A politic Stratagem of Scipio, in counterfeiting an intrenchment, which
amazed the Carthaginians, and puzzled them to scale them.
SCipio in the Wars of Spain, being set upon with three Armies, as he lay
upon a great Hill, devised how to make some intrenchment to defend his Camp,
which could not be performed, in regard the ground was so stony; neither could
he get Bushes nor wood to make a defense about it, wherefore he made a show
of a defense, laying his packs and packsaddles, and other gross carriages one
upon another round the Camp, whereby he raised the Walls of his Camp of a
good height; the Carthaginians being come, they were astonished at this, and
found it very difficult to enter, only their infinite number gained the
conquest from Scipio: This should put all Commanders in mind, of impaling
their Army, although it be but with a Hedge, or Hurdles, for it is a great
safety; as may be instanced by Captain Swa^^e, who after St^^ley, and York,
had treacherously given up Deventer to the Enemy, his Company having got forth
the Town, was to march over Amers-forth Heath to a Garrison there, and being
set upon by a Troop of Horse of the Enemies, with certain Foot with them, he
betook his Company to a sheepfold made of Hurdles, whereby he protected his
Company, and beat the Horse with their Footmen, causing them to retreit.

CHAP. CCXXIX.
A strange Politic Stratagem, whereby Haniball gained a Town of great
consequence, by the help of Nico and Philomenes, under the pretense of
bringing in a wild Bore.
NIco and Philomenes being great Hunters, and used to go out the City of
Tarrent by night a hunting, they went toward the Army of Haniball, to declare
to him their intents, and being brought before him by the Watch, Haniball being
sensible of the plot, wished them to drive back diverse Cattle, as if they had
gotten them as a prey from the Enemies; this course they often used, so that it
was thought marvel that they so often enterprised such feats, and ever
escaped unslaine; the Porter and Mayor of the City they used very kindly,
giving unto them part of their prey for their courtesy and pains, being so
forward and vigilant to open the Ports for their going out and in; the residue,
they bestowed upon the Governor for his love and leave; the Porter was so
accustomed, that at their first whistle at all times of the night, the Gates
were opened unto them, all things being brought to a good pass for the
accomplishing of their project. Hanibals Army lying within four days journey
from the Town, he feigned himself very sick, and that it was the only
reason he stayed there so long, this was bruited abroad, the night being
appointed Haniball made choice of ten thousand Horse and Foot, of the lightest
armed, and removed from his Camp in the night, making speed until he came
within fifteen miles of the City of Tarrent, where he secretly abode, charging
his men in no wise to break their array and order, but to be ready to perform
what was commanded; wherefore he first set forth to palliate his removing, and
to the intent that none of the Country should descrie his Army, he sent
fourscore Numidian horsemen to go before him, commanding them to overrun the
Country, by which his Army should pass, and those they overtooke to bring
back, and if they met with any they should kill them; to the intent they should
be taken by the Inhabitants, for Robbers and Thieves, and not men of War; the
fame of these Robbers, came to the ears of the Governor of Tarrent, who
smally regarded it, because he thought Haniball was sick, and his Army so far
a distance from the Town. He intended the next morn to send forth some men of
Arms to drive back those Robbers; the same night removed Haniball his Army to
Tarrent, having Philomenes with him for his guide, being arrived near the
Town it was appointed that Philomenes according to his custom should enter
the Town with a number of armed men; he having awaked the Porter, telling him
he had brought a mighty Bore which he had slain; at the first call he
opened the Gates, and two young men of his companions first went in, then
entered he and other his servants, plucking in the great Bore; the Porter being
glaring at his greatness, Philomenes slew him with his Bore-speare, and
incontinent let in thirty other Soldiers armed, who slew the other Watchmen at
the same Port, and without noise let in the rest of the Army, and secretly
brought them into the Marketplace, where they abode without noise; in the
mean time Haniball with a sufficient strength arrived at another Port; and
first having made a great fire afar off, which was the sign betwixt him and
Nico, who abode with other his accomplices ready within the Town looking for
his coming; which so soon as Nico perceived, he answered him with another
fire; notice being taken on both sides, the fire was put out, and Haniball
approacht to the Gates; Nico also within the City came to the Ports guard, and
slew all the Watch, and opened the Ports, so as Haniball with his Army entered,
his Horse were commanded to remain in Batalia without; he being arrived in
the Marketplace with Philomenes, and his other company; then had he two
thousand Frenchmen, which he divided into three parts, and sent them to
diverse parts of the City; the residue he commanded to keep the most accustomed
streets of the Town, and to slay the Roman Soldiers; the Alarm being given,
they saw there was no way but death or yielding; wherefore the greatest number
fled to a Castle in the Town, which was of great strength, and upon all
advantages they might, Sallyed out into the Town; Wherefore Haniball had
another Project at his fingers ends, he caused his Men to raise a Wall to hemme
them in, and dreaming they would issue out of the Castle to hinder the work,
he placed an ambush in a secret and convenient place, which should cut them
off, and disable them from anoying the Town; And accordingly it happened, for
the worke-folkes gave suddenly back at their approach, which heartened them to
go on the further, so as the Ambushment surprised the greatest part of them:
but suddenly there came Ships of War from Metapontus, and entered the Haven,
and relieved the Castle; and kept all provision from the Town, so as the Town
was like to endure want before their Enemies, he presently summoned a
Council, it was found there was no way to hinder those Ships, but by a
greater force of Shipping, and that no shipping could enter the mouth of the
Haven, because they had fortified against them; whereupon he devised to hale
their Ships out of a creek, and by Engines and Wheels to draw them through
the spacious streets, and so convey them into the Haven; which he performed,
and made gimselfe Master both of Town and Castle; I have been the more
tedious in relating this Project, because in it there is nothing but is of
great consequence to be observed by a Soldier.

CHAP. CCXXX.
The Policy of Xenophon in electing of Hostages.
SEuthes having taken diverse Hostages of the Thynes which were old, and
unserviceable men, not respected of them; which caused the Thynes not to regard
their promise nor Hostages, but laid a Camizado to take Seuthes and Xenophon,
and to destroy the Army; the Thynes d^^ming those Hostages would have made
Seuthes Army secure; Wherefore they took opportunity of the night to fall upon
their Guards, and to fire their quarters; but being manfully repulsed, they
besought afterward to be taken into favor again; Says Xenophon, I would
counsel the Seuthes hereafter in taking Hostages, to take of the
principallest, and those that were ablest, to do you most harm, and to leave
the old men at home, lest you be gulled in the like kind.

CHAP. CCXXXI.
A Policy used by Xenophon, whereby he deluded his Enemy with his small Army,
causing them to think his Army to be of a mighty strength, which made them to
leave their Siege, and steal away by night.
THe Arcadians being besieged by the Thracians, Xenophon intending to releeve
them; His Army being very weak, he commanded his Horsemen to disperse
themselves, and to set fire upon all things that were combustible as they went
forwards; that by the multiplying of flames, the Enemy might think their Army
was of great strength. The Foot performed the like upon every Hill that might
be descryed to the Enemies quarters, so that the whole Country seemed on a
light fire, and the Army to be of a wonderful extent and Potencie; these
fires were in the Evening commanded to be put out, this did so amaze the
Thracians, that they verily thought, the lights being out, that Xenophon and
his Army, did march toward them, and would suddenly fall upon their quarters;
this fear made them leave their Siege, and abandon the place, so they stole
away in the night out of their quarters, without the loss of any man to the
Grecians.

CHAP. CCXXXII.
A Policy used by the Prince of Orange to delude an Enemy from succouring a
Town.
THe Prince of Orange, when he intended to invade any Province, or to
beleaguer any town, he would plot his Design so, as the Enemy should take it
in a contrary sense, as once he intended to take in Zutphen in Gelderland, he
drew his men quite contrary before Gertrudenberge, who so soon as the Enemy
was stirring to releeve it, he reimbarqued his men, and suddenly intrencht
himself before Zutphen, where he found them secure, and unprovided for such
an assault, whereby he gained the Town; and indeed such Stratagems may easily
be effected, where an Army may be transported by water; for an Enemy may
expect them in one place over night, and happily he may be forty miles
another way by next morn, at the place which the Enemy never dreamt of.

CHAP. CCXXXIII.
An Imposture used by Sertorius, whereby he confirmed his Soldiers valor.
SErtorius the Roman Chiefetaine used an Imposture to help himself, by means
of a white Hind to stay his Soldiers from revolting; this Hind being made
tame, and used to be fed by Sertorius in a private place; His Soldiers being
weary of the Wars, and ready to compose their peace with their Enemy; He
wished them to be content, until he had drawn the Army in to Battalia, and
every man should pray to their Gods, that they would be propitious to them, and
miraculously send them his pleasure, how they should demean themselves:
Sertorius having written in golden Letters, how the Army should be disposed,
hung it about the Hindes neck, which was secretly conveyed into his Tent, and
being put out she came with the Revelation to Sertorius, which being read,
that they should be Conquerours, etc. confirmed the Soldiers valors, and
caused them to be victorious.

CHAP. CCXXXIV.
How a Scottis^ King by an Imposture caused his Soldiers to be valiant,
whereby he obtained a victory.
HEctor Boethius in his Annals of Scotland, makes mention of a certain Scottish
King, having lost a Battle against the Pictes, found his people so
discouraged, that they were all out of love with the Wars; the King being
much grieved therewith, did suborne certain persons, who being apparelled with
bright shining Scales and Seals skins, and having in their hands Truncheons of
rotten shining wood, which is commonly found in the body of old Ashes, which
will shine very gloriously in the dark, these did appear unto the Princes,
and chief Officers of the Army (being in their dead sleep) and awaking them,
did admonish them to fight afresh against the Pictes, and that they should not
fear to assail them, for they were sent from God to tell them that they
should undoubtedly obtain the Victory. This did so confirm the opinions of
the Chiefetaines, they having seen an Angel from heaven, that God himself
would fight for them, and in this imagination they charged the Pictes with such
magnanimity, as they vanquished them, and drove them forth of their Country.

CHAP. CCXXXV.
A Politic Imposture used by Boniface, whereby he disposest the Pope; and
gained the Papacy himself.
IT is reported that Boniface the Eight did climb up unto the Papacy by an
Imposture, he having intonniled his voice in a long Cane or Trunk in a dark
night, putting it through a hole of the Wall, into the Chamber of Celestine, a
simple holy man that was invested in the Sea; Boniface fained himself that he
was an Angel sent from above, to let him know the pleasure of the Almighty,
which was, that the great God of Heaven had things of Importance to execute
upon Earth, whereof he had made choice of Boniface to be Pope, to put them in
execution; and that Celestine should either presently resign, or else he was
to fetch his soul ere long; this politic Imposture prevailed.

This Imposture has been used in diverse Countries by the Enemies Accomplices,
to turn the mind of a General from his intended purpose: as also to breed
fear amongst chief Officers, foretelling some sad events should ensue to
dishearten an Army, or to make them disloyal.

CHAP. CCXXXVI.
A Politic Imposture whereby wonderful things have been atcheived.
HOmer makes mention in his Hymno Mercurii, that by the crawling of a Tortoice,
with a candles end fixed with Wax unto his back, diverse have been deluded,
thinking it to be the Spirit of some Persons lately buried; this thing having
walked diverse times in the Churchyard, so that many have taken notice of it;
then they were next to agree with a subtle fellow to lie in a Coffin, that
should secretly be placed in a Grave, and having a Pipe from it, reaching to
the top of the earth, so that he might draw breath, and be heard speak through
it: these things being thus performed (If a General have any business of
consequence, to settle upon his Army, or to resolve it of any doubts, or to
establish any laws) then were the chief Officers brought to this place in the
dark with common Soldiers, where the Spirit has spoken to them.

CHAP. CCXXXVII.
A Politic Imposture used by King Minos the Lawmakers of Candy, to bring in
and esta^lish his Laws.
KIng Minos the Lawmakers of Candy, at such times as he had a purpose to bring
in and establish Laws in his Realm, fained that Jupiter did daily speak unto
him face to face, and that he was (as Homer says) his (...), that is his
Familiar, and one with whom he had private special conference; this gained
him such special favor with the people, that his name growing thereupon to
be famous; he gave such a countenance to his Laws with so high authority,
that they were kept and observed longer then were any other amongst the
Greeks. Aristotle writes the same of Licurgus, that he did help himself by
this device, for the establishing of those Laws which he made in his
Commonwealth; Numa Pompilius King of the Romans did likewise feign, that the
Nymph Egeria had familiarity and acquaitance with him, and did inform him of
those Laws, which he prescribed unto the people of Rome, a Nation at that
time very unapt to be instructed, and could very hardly by reason of their
fierceness, and Martial courage be tamed and brought to civility, hadit not
been by the only means and color of Religion.

CHAP. CCXL.
A Politic Imposture used at the interments of Emperors, to make the people
believe they were highly honored of God; so that their laws might be the
better observed after their deaths.
AT the interment of the Roman Emperors, they used this Imposture; the Corpse
of the said Emperors being laid in a Tabernacle framed of wood wherein were
three partitions one above the other, in the lower was the wood laid, in the
next above the Corpse sumptuously apparrelled; and in the uppermost was a live
Eagle placed, the fire being burning, Lib. 4. Histor. Caesarum.
a window was secretly opened out of which this Eagle soared away in the air;
this they reported to be the Soul of the deceased Emperor fled to Heaven (as
Herodian witnesses) And Justin Martyr affirms that there was always one
deputed and ordained by the Successor of the dead Emperor, who should upon his
oath aver, that he had seen the Soul of the Emperor; (which was said to
be deified) to issue out from the pile of fire; and to flee directly up into
heaven: Invita August. sub finem.
the same does Dion write, who says, that Livia the wife of Augustus did give
ten thousand crowns unto Numerus Atticus Praetor, to have an Affidavid made,
that he saw Caesar Augustus mount up into Heaven.

CHAP. CCXLI.
A Politic Imposture able to seduce multitudes by walking upon the water.
CArdan in lib. de varietate rerum, reports how that by subtilty and
artificial skill men have walked upon the top of waters without sinking, by
means of Cork and bladders tied to the soles of their feet: Lib. 2. ver^r
narrat. ubi nihil very contin.
Likewise Lucian writes what strange Terror he was put in by the sight of
those Phillopodes, or corke-footed persons, that walked upon the waves of the
Sea: what could not such an Imposture persuade men unto; or dissuade them from;
the strangeness of the thing would make men believe they were divine.

CHAP. CCXLII.
Illusions, whereby diverse learned judicious men have been deceived, through
the feigned voices of men expert in that quality.
THere have been some men naturally disposed so subtle and ingenious; that
they were able to delude and deceive even the best advised; their voice has
been so subtle and so diverse, that they would imitate the voice of all living
creatures; likewise the organs of their voice and their throats were so fine
and small, that being very near to a man they will call him by his name, or
use other discourse; yet it will seem to the party called to be some strange
Angelical voice; and that it is far remote from him: in the French History
of Peter de Loir, he relates a story of a Merchant of Lions, who was exceeding
rich both in Banque, and in other goods and Possessions; and being noted for a
notable Usurer, he went one day walking into the Country; only accompanied
with his servant; and as they were entered into a great Champion Field, the
Servant began his illusions, speaking unto him, and telling him that he was an
Angel which came unto him purposely from God, to tell him, that he should give
and distribute part of his goods ill gotten unto the poor; and that he should
liberally recompense his Servant that had of a long time served him without any
reward or preferment at all received from him: the Merchant being astonished
and abused at the voice, demanded of his Servant if he heard nothing, repeating
unto him the strange voice himself had heard; the servant (counterfeiting a
kind of wonder and astonishment) denied that he heard any thing; and
immediately (with a voice far more stronger and subtle then the former) he
repeated the same words again, and that with such admiration of the Merchant,
that he was brought into a full belief that it was an Angel from Heaven that
spoke unto him; insomuch, that being arrived in his lodging, he gave unto his
Servant a good and large recompense* after the death of the Merchant, this
Servant discovered the Imposture.

Likewise Monsieur de la Cazedin having invited diverse learned men, (the most
excellent spirits then in Paris) to a Banquet in the mean time a merry fellow
that was his crafts-Master in these kind of Illusions, was caused to be there
present by the said Monsieur for to provoke mirth at this feast in imitation of
that of Xenophon; In Sim^ o^io.
or of the Emperor Julian, In Conviv. C^s.
wherein there was a Silenus that kept company with the Gods, etc. This fellow
called one of the company by name; a man well known for doctrine and
eloquence: this party hearing his name called arose imediately from the Table,
supposing some one without the doors had called him; albeit it was no other
but that same pleasant companion that was set at Table by him. By these few
instances we may learn what good or hurt may be done to an Army, they (being
deluded with these or the like Impostures) may either be animated to observe
any Laws; or undertake any difficult achievements; or by the help of some
trusty Accomplices in an Enemies Army that are their crafts-Masters in this Art,
how they may dishearten the Army, or divert the General from some intended
design, which may be the occasion of their overthrow.

CHAP. CCXLIII.
How Marquess Spinola at the Siege of Breda (by the help of a witty Peasant)
gained intilligence of all the proceedings both in the Prince of Oranges Camp,
and in the Town of Breda, by the discovering of their own Letters.
Marquess Spinola made use of a Country Peasant who was expert of all Places
and passages there about: and being forward to accomplish any thing he was
commanded, for a reward did undertake to carry Butter, Tobacco, and Cheese to
the besieged Town, making show of having narrowly, and with great danger
escaped the Enemies Sentinels and Guards: and being arrived he was to offer
his service to the Governor to carry Letters from him to the Prince of Orange,
he being there arrived was much welcomed to the hungry Soldiers, in regard of
the provision he brought, and the Governor desirous to know particulars,
examined him about Spinola's Camp, about the passage he found into the Town,
and what was the received opinion abroad of the state of their affairs: the
fellow (being subtle) related many true things, and feigned as many of his
own head, which begat a great belief in them of his honesty and trust; at
last being demanded whether he durst carry any Letters by that passage by which
he escaped into the Town; he showed himself at first fearful and doubtful
what to answer; suffered them by promises to work him to that, to which of all
things (under pretense of backwardness) he desired to be persuaded. The
Governor therefore trusted him with his Letters to the Prince of Orange,
promising him great rewards, if he brought him an answer: He promised to do
his best; but in his return he brought the Letter to Spinola to peruse;
Spinola (having perused the Letters) sealed them up again fairly, and
dispatched this subtle fellow away with them to the Prince of Orange,
promising him a double reward if he could bring an answer from the Prince:
The Prince of Orange (believing that he might confidently repose his trust in
this fellow, who had been so careful to bring him the Letters) returned his
answer by this Peasant, giving him a large reward: this crafty fellow brought
the Letters to Spinola, and was liberally rewarded by him also for his pains;
afterward the Prince of Orange dying, and his brother Count Henricke being in
his place, Spinola could gain no news of his proceedings; wherefore he
bethought him of his nimble-witted Peasant, but he being not so well known to
this Prince as he was to his Brother, he contrived his acquaintance by this
device; he having lain secret in Spinola's Camp many days together, he
persuaded his Wife to go to the Prince of Orange, and complain of a sickness
her husband had caught in carrying his Brothers Letters to Breda, through the
waters in the Winter season, and she earnestly besought him to pay the
remainder of the reward promised her husband; the Prince taking hold of this
occasion, being over-joyed in finding out this trusty Messenger, did undertake
to pay him what was owing him, with much more, if he would now once again
adventure to carry one of his Letters to the Town, as he had convayed many of
his Brothers heretofore; the woman knowing her lesson, objected the danger of
the passage, and the disease of her husband, but in conclusion, she suffered
her self to be won to it, and with a feigned unwillingnesse undertook to
persuade her husband, whereupon she departed to fetch her husband to the
Prince, who returned with her counterfeiting a lamenesse, as if his feet had
been frozen by the frost in the Winter, the Prince agreed a price with him,
and rewarded him; delivering his Letters of secret importance to him, to be
conveyed to the Governor of Breda; the fellow came directly to Spinola with
it, whereby he understood all their designs: for this Spinola gave him a
yearly pension for ever.

CHAP. CCXXXIV.
A Stratagem whereby the Prince of Orange had like to have gained Antwerpe
Castle.
THe Prince of Orange lying near Breda, which Spinola had besieged, had a
design to take in Antwerpe Castle, upon an onslaught, to which purpose he kept
the passages of his Camp very close, and also the Garrisons out of which he
was to draw his Soldiers out, that no intelligence might be given to the
Enemy, to frustrate his design; the charge of his Expedition, was given to
Brochem Drossard of Bergen-up-zome, who had 1000 foot, and 200 horse, the
Soldiers themselves knew nothing whether they were to march, but to contrary
places: Command was given that they should take off their Orangetawny Scarffes,
and put on red, which was the King of Spaines colors, and they were to give
out that they were the King of Spaines men, and that they marched to Antwerpe
for provision of Victuals: (for indeed it was reported Spinola's men were at
that time to go to Antwerpe for the same purpose) their Waggo^s were also
covered with Canvasse; and marked with the Burgundian Cross as Spinolaes were,
these things furthered their project* and confirmed the Peasants in their
belief, that they were their own men; so that they arrived under the Walls
of Antwerpe Castle, being protected by the extremity of a dark night, they had
made themselves a passage to the Bridge, and were ready to beat open the
Ports; but by the vigilancie of one Andreas Cea, an old Soldier that stood
Sentinel; they were discovered and put to retreit.

A DESCRIPTION OF ENGINES, AND WARLIKE INSTRVMENTS. SECT. XIIII.
CHAP. CCXLIII.
The description of such Engines, and Warlike Instruments, as are prevalent in
the Wars; with the manner of using them, and how to make them.
IN regard the managing of Warlike affairs cannot be well performed without
the knowledge, and true use of all kind of Instruments that are, or may be
invented, it is therefore very necessary to describe the fashion, and operation
of such as have been formerly, and now are at this present day invented, and
also invent some that have not formerly been known; by these a Commander in
chief may defend his Army, and offend his Enemy; for by the use of such
Stratagemicall Instruments, many times a Victory or Conquest has been easily
obtained: and upon more certainer terms, then to trust only to the Valor and
Potencie of an Army. For the Nature of Policy, and Politic Instruments, are
to accomplish such things, that strength cannot perform; their operation being
in a double respect, as the Commander that makes use of them shall order and
dispose; so accordingly is their operation (viz.) making all difficulties
Easy; and again contrarily making all things easy difficult: And by this
twofold Virtue, the wisdom and Ingenuity of an Enemy is often foiled. I have
formerly spoken of the use of all kind of Artillery, as being the principal
Engine. Here I will only speak of the Nature and Condition of the Petard, The
Petard to blow open Ports and Portcullisses.
by the force of which, all substantial massy bodies are dissolved and
fittered in pieces; this Engine is of the fashion of a Leatherne Bucket,
usually made of Brass, the Verges even, that it may lie patte upon the Port
you intend to blow-open. If the Port be accessible, then it is to be hung up by
a Ring upon a piece of Iron skrewed into the Port with a Forke, to stay it
close, and to keep it from reversing; the manner of charging it, and the use
of it, is more largely discoursed of in the Treatise of Artillery, Page 113.
114. But if the Port be inaccessible, then it must be placed upon an Engine
which will conduct it to the Port, as by the next Figure following you may see
at C, the fashion of the Petard at the Letter A. the Forke at the Letter B.

Note the end of the Carriage of the Petard, is to have a Balance, that it may
lie even upon the wheels, and being put home to the Port, the hindmost end is
to be strongly barricadoed, that it may not reverse.




CHAP. CCXLIIII.
The use of the Grenades how they are made, and charged with powder, and how
they are to be discharged out of a Mortar, or thrown by the hand.
AGrando is one of the necessariest Engines belonging to the Wars, in regard
it anoyes and spoils the Enemy, when no other Weapon nor Engine can; there
are two sorts of them, one to shoot in a Morter-peece; the other sort is to
be cast by the hand amongst the Enemies over their Walls and works. Those
that are to be shot out of Morter-Peeces are to be cast in Brass for the
principal Service, or made of Glass or Earth; and these are to batter down
Walls and Roofes of houses, and to break amongst the Enemies Horse or
Foot-Troopes; there is another sort made of Canvas, and that is used properly
to set fire upon Houses and Towns; of these I will discourse in particular,
and demonstrate them by Figure.

Those of Brass ought to be of a foote-Diameter made somewhat long-wayes; The
knob or Snoute is in stead of a handle, to put the Granado in the Mortar, the
screw-hole is to go next the Powder for the better firing it.
in thickness an inch, one end thereof is to have a Snowt like a Bottle; and
at the other end a Hole, at the which it is to be charged, and the said hole is
to be skrewed; then there is a strong Skrew-Tappe to be made, to fill the
skrew-hole, and that is hollow, wherein is put slow-burning-Powder, made of
Cannon-Powder beaten fine, and moystned with the oil of Peeter mingled with
some Charcole; then it is corded over with Cord half an inch in distance one
from the other every way acrosse to keep it from splitting or breaking in the
discharging it; the manner how to charge them is showed in the Discourse of the
use of Artillery; This Figure following in the mean time will give you some
light for your better understanding.

Note some Grenades are made of Canvasse with diverse Pistoll-barrels charged
with powder and bullets, and covered over.




In this Precedent Figure, you see the parts of the Granado, and how it is to
be charged at A. the Skrew-faucet which is to be filled with a Composition of
slack-burning-Powder is at B. the manner of twilting the Granado is at C. You
must likewise be very circumspect, whether the Priming-powder burns quick or
slow, lest it should fire before it comes at the place assigned; those
Grenades that are made of Glass or Earth, are to be used after the same
manner as the former is, not forgetting to anoint them all over with Tallow for
fear of flawes and crackes.

Now for those Grenades which are to be thrown by the hand, There are of
these kinds made of Earth and Glass.
the substance they are made of is Brass three parts, and Tin one; which
being cast in a Mould are made hollow, and about half an Inch thick; the
Brass must be melted before the Tin be put in; the fashion is of a
Pomgranat: the Concavitie is to be filled half full of fine corne-powder, and
the other half next the vent, is to be filled with Serpentine-Powder, mingled
with Rosin beaten to powder, so that for three parts of Serpentine-powder, you
take one of Rosin; then putting into the Snowt or hole of it a little fine
Powder, which makes it fire the sooner: being held in the Right Hand ready to
cast from you (at the same instant fire being given to it with a Match) it is
tossed over into the Enemies Works, where it breaks in diverse pieces,
destroying all near it; the fashion of them you may behold in the next Figure
following. There is no way to prevent the force of these, but by extinguishing
them with raw Hides, or tumbling them into water to choke the Powder before the
Priming-powder be burnt to the Corne-powder; wherefore diverse Soldiers are to
be appointed with Skoopes, and others with Hides to quench them in the water,
or to choke them for want of vent.

There are some Grenades made without a snowte very round, only a vent-hole
whereby it is filled with Powder, as you see at the Figure B, this being filled
with fine powder, is to be put into an Earthen-pot; so far bigger, that it
may hold it, and a quantity of Powder besides; then diverse threads of Cotton
being folded together, and boiled in Salt-Peeter and Brimstone to make it apt
to hold fire, the said Pot being covered at the mouth with a skin close tied,
then crossing the Pot with a piece of Wire, as you perceive at the figure D,
diverse pieces of this Match is tied about it being well lighted; so that when
the Pot is thrown and breaks with the fall, the Match fires the Powder,
whereby the Granado is also fired; And this is the securest way to throw them:
Note if the Granado be of Glass, then the skrew-tappe that is to go into the
vent-hole to carry the Priming-powder must be of Wood, for the Glass will
break so soon as the fire touches it; View the Figure.



CHAP. CCXLV.
The use of the Fire-ball, to fire Houses, Bridges or Ports, with the manner of
framing them.
THe use of the wildfire Ball; is to be shot out of a Morter-piece or Canon,
to fire Houses, Ports or Bridges; they are framed after this manner. First,
there must be had three or four pieces of Iron of equal length, sharp-pointed
like an Adders tongue; they are to be rivited one into the other just in the
midst, so as the one may cross the other justly; then take Goose-grease or
Swines-grease one part, of Tar half a quarter as much, of Pitch two parts,
of Aqua-vitae half a quarter part, of Lin-seede Oil one part, of Verdigrease
a quarter part, of wax half a quarter part, of Groom a quarter part, of
Salt-peeter meal one part; these being mixed together over a slow fire; and in
the liquid mixture dippe a good quantity of Tow and linen rags; then rub the
same well in bruised Powder, the which being rolled hard about the aforesaid
Irons, and bound about very straight with wire or pack-threed, not forgetting
to bore two holes quite a-crosse the said Composition, which must be filled
with good bruised Powder; they are to be put down into the piece next the
Powder, that the priming holes may take fire; and being shot out, wheresoever
they stick they will fire it suddenly: the like balls may be made without Iron
to throw with the hand against the Enemy; view the Figures following.

CHAP. CCXLVI.
The use of Lanthornes and hollow Plates filled with pibble Stones and Musket
Bullets for the defending of Breaches.
FOr the defending of a Breach and disabling the Enemy from making his forcible
entry, it is necessary to have in store and readiness diverse hollow round
plates, like half Bullets, the one is to shut over the other, like a Box lid,
this is to be filled with pibble Stones or Musket Bullets, or square pieces of
iron, called Dice-shot; this being discharged out of a Murdering piece, will
do much hurt: also, your Lanthornes are made of soft Wood, after the fashion
of our ordinary Lanthornes, these being filled with stones, and shot out of a
Piece, will break in pieces, and the stones will do wonderful execution
against those that shall enter a Breach, a Bridge, or Port; View the Figures
following.



CHAP. CCXLVII.
How to make a certain Stone to burn in the Water, or to kindle fire in the
greatest storm of Rain, being very useful in the Wars.
THere is a certain Stone to be made, which will kindle either by laying water
on it, or by spitting upon it; it is very useful in the Wars, in time of
tempestuous rain, when Soldiers matches are out, or for the firing of any
Houses or Bridges, when other kind of fires will not burn, the Composition is
this. Take unslak'd Lime one part, Tutia Alexandrina unprepared one part,
Salt-peeter well refined one part, all these must be well beaten and fifted,
and bound hard together with a piece of new Linen cloth, then put it into a
couple of earthen Cups, such as Goldsmiths use to melt their metals in; the
mouths of the which must be joined together, and fast bound with iron wyre,
and dawbed over with Siment that it breathes not out, then dried a while in the
Stone, it must be put into a Furnace where Brick is burning, or other earthen
Vessels, there to remain until they be burnt, then taking it out, it will
seem like to a Brick stone, and when any water touches it, it will burn
immediately.

Otherwise, if you please to make a fire-ball to burn in the water, you must
take powder bruised ten parts, Peeter in meal two parts, Peeter Roch one part,
Sulphur meal three parts, Turpentine one part, Linseed oil one part,
Camphire a quarter part, Arsenick a quarter part, Verdi-grease a quarter part,
Bole Armoniacke a quarter part, Corns of Bay salt 1/^^ part, filings of iron
part, Quick silver 1/^^ part, these things being well blended and mingled
together with the hand, in some wooden Vessel. Then taking a piece of
Canvasse, and cut out a round piece as big as you please, which being sowed
together and filled with this Receipt, then strongly bound with pack-thread, and
coted with moulten pitch, making therein but one vent of an inch deep; wherein
must be put fine powder (to prime it) bruised very small, this being fired with
a match, after it has burnt awhile ding it into any water, it will rise and
burn furiously upon the top; this is very proper to set fire upon the Enemies
floates or Galleries that are built upon the water, there shall need no Figure
to demonstrate this.

CHAP. CCXLVIII.
Of certain earthen Bottels filled with a kind of mixture to be fired, which
are thrown amongst the Enemy.
THere are certain Earthen Bottels to be made of a round fashion, being not
half burnt are best for this use; they are invented to disorder the Enemies
Ranks, or to astonish them, being whirld out of the Soldiers hands amongst
the Enemies will soon make them give ground, the device is this; having got as
many of these Bottels as shall be thought requisite, these must be filled
half full of Serpentine powder, or somewhat more, there is to be mixed with it
a quantity of Hogs grease, Oil of Stone, Brimstone, Saltpeeter twice
refined, Aqua vitae, Pitch, these being stirred together over a soft fire in
some earthen vessel; this composition being put into the Bottell, with fine
powder bruised to cause it to fire, suddenly the Bottell is to have a Cord to
throw it by; this has wrought strange effects.

Also there is a kind of Composition which is besmeared about Ropes ends and
Hoopes, which are to be thrown from a Wall upon the Enemy, which will burn
and disorder them wonderfully, especially at the scaling of a Wall. The
Composition is this; take Sulphre in meal six parts, of Rozin in meal three
parts; these being melted in a Pan, over a slow fire, then taking Stone-pitch
one part, hard wax one part, Note, that* Flax or Towe Hurds is best to dip
into the Composition, and to wind about the Hoope or Rope ends.
of Towe half a quarter part, of Aqua vitae half a quarter part, of Camphire
parts, these being also melted together, there must be stirred into it
Saltpeeter-meale two parts, and when it is taken off the fire, there must be
four parts of bruised powder mixed with it; these being oynted upon Hoopes and
Ropes and set on fire, wheresoever they light they cannot be quenched, but will
burn the Enemy to death. View the Figures following.



CHAP. CCXLIX.
How a frame of Muskets are to be made and ord^red for the defense of a
Breach, or for the flanking of a Battalia of Pikes.
THe use of this frame of Muskets is very excellent both in the defense of
Breaches, Bridges, Ports, or to be placed before the Divisions of Pikes, or
flanking the Pikes in Battle, whereby the Enemy will be wonderfully shaken,
and by the help of a few men which are to remove them too and fro, and to give
fire to the trains, strange exploits may be performed: The manner of it is
thus; A Frame is made of Boordes or Planke three Stories high, one story half
a foot above the other, and a foot or more behind one the other, the lowermost
tire is to lie about three foot from the ground, the next half a foot above
that, and so the third: there are certain quilles or small spouts of Brass to
go from one touchhole to the other, so that the train being fired, they
shall one discharge after another, beginning first with the uppermost tire, as
the Enemy enters the Breach, then the second, and the lowermost last; there is
also a broad plate which shall be placed over the Breeches of the Muskets,
that no sparkles may fall down into the Pans of the second, nor the lowermost
tire, each tire is to hold twelve Muskets a breast, one being placed a foot
distance from the other; there are certain Ringles on each side to remove it
by: There is one in Germany that has only twelve Muskets, which may be
discharged eight and forty times, according to the French new invention for
Pistols: This was practiced at Ostend when Duke Albert made his potent assault,
by which he was wonderfully repulsed. View the Figure.

This Frame may be made only with the Barrels of Muskets, without stocks to
them the manner how to order them any ingenuous wit will conceive of.




CHAP. CCL.
An Instrument called a Flaile, used in the defending of a Breach, or scaling
of a Wall, or when the Enemy is at handy blows.
THis instrument is used in the Wars to defend breaches, or when the Enemy is
entered the streets of a Town and are at close fight, then these are the only
weapons for dispatch, there being no defense for it; it is made much after the
fashion of a Flayle, only the Swingill is short and very thick, having diverse
Iron Pikes in it upon all parts of it, that which way soever it falls it
destroys; diverse soldiers are appointed to attend the Enemies assaulting the
Breach, some standing at one end of the Breach, the residue at the other, and
when the Enemy is come up at push of Pike, so close that the Pikemen can make
no use of their Pikes, then these Flayles makes way through their Head-peeces
and Armor. View the Figure.



CHAP. CCLI.
The use of the Turne-pike, and how it is framed, and of the excellent defense
it makes, both against Horse and Foot upon all straights and passages.
THis Instrument is of great use to be cast into straites, The hole must be of
a Mortice wimbles Bo^e.
breaches, passages, or highways; for which way soever it is rolled, there
be sharp pikes toward the Enemy to hinder his approches; the manner of
framing of it is after this manner; First there is a round Beam of light wood,
as Fur or Sallow about twelve Inches in circumference, and ten or twelve foot
long; at every halfe-footes length, or under, there must be holes bored through
every way a-crosse; then there must be Staves fitted for those holes of good
seasoned Ash, about a yard and a half long, somewhat tapering toward each
end; the ends of these Staves must be armed with Iron Pikes cheeked down a
good way, that they may not be hackt off with their Swords, then being droven
into the foresaid holes just half way of the Staff, it will be defensive
which way soever it be turned; the beam is to be so made, that one may be
fastened to the other by hooks at each end, so that if need be half a score
of them may be coupled together, or otherwise as the breach or passage is in
breadth; the Musque^iers may shoot over them, and the Pikes may defend them so,
that the Enemy shall not have the advantage to pull them asunder; and so long
as they lie, neither Horse nor Foot can pass for them; when they are to be
transported by wagon, then the Staves are to be knocked out, that they may lie
in closer room; View the Figure following.



CHAP. CCLII.
The use of the Pallizadoes to prevent both Horse and Foot, from any sudden
assault, and how they are framed.
HIs Excellency the Prince of Orange had always these Instruments carried in
his Army, either by Water, or by Land, for wheresoever he did incampe his Army
for any time, especially if the Enemy were quartered near, he always gave
directions to have these Pallizadoes pitched into the ground round the quarters;
and upon all Passages and Bridges the Turne-Pikes were placed with a sufficient
Guard to defend them; The manner of framing them is after this fashion, they
take Furre-poles about twelve Inches in Circumference, and four foot and and
a half, and some five foot long* and upwards, these are sharp at the nether
end with a piece of Iron, that they may enter the Gravel or Stones, and some
are not; within a handful of the upper end there is two Iron Pikes of five or
six inches long driven in side-wayes one crossing the other, then in the
midst betwixt both is the third Pike placed right-forwards, Some Pallizadoes
have two Pikes right forwards, and two slenting forward on each side.
these being driven into the earth about a foot and a half, and in distance a
foot, or thereabouts asunder, the Pikes will so answer one to the other, that
nothing can pass but must receive hurt, when they intend to raise a Parapet of
earth, then as they finish the work, they pull up the Pallizados; There is
another kind of Palizado made of pieces of Oake-heart sharpt at one end, the
other end is laid into the earth three quarters of a yard deep near the top
of a Breast-worke, either of Skonce or Redout; View the Figure of the former
Palizado.



CHAP. CCLIII.
The use of the Calthrop, and of the Spiked Planke to anoy both Horse and Foot.
THe Calthrop is an Instrument very offensive to the Enemies Horse, and by the
use of them a few Soldiers may make an able resistance, either in the streets
of a Town, or upon any passage, or in a Pitched Battle; the lightness of it
being such, that every Soldier may carry two or three of them at his Girdle,
and as they advance toward the Enemy, throwing them down, they will endanger
any thing that shall tread upon them; They are framed in this wise; first they
take a tough piece of Sallow, and making it round about the bigness of an
Apple, there is Iron pikes driven through, which points every way, so that which
way soever it falls a pike will be upwards to run into the feet, either of
Horse or Man; there is another fashion made of a piece of Board as broad as a
Trencher, which is driven full of nails, and lyned with another thin Board, to
keep the Nails from slipping back; these are very good to be thrown upon
passages in the nightime, when a fear of the Enemies approach is at hand.

Also at the Siege of Ost-End the Archduke invented a device to defend
himself against sudden Sallyes out of the Town, wherefore he cansed to be
laid at the nearest Retrenchments long Plankes driven full of long sharp
spikes, the sharp points lying upwards to run into their feet that should
assail him; this is good to lay cross streets in a Town in the nightime,
when an Enemy has entered the Ports; View the Figures following.



CHAP. CCLIV.
The use of the Bome or Baricado to cross a passage or highway to prevent the
Enemies Horse in their speedy approches.
THis kind of Instrument is used very frequently about all the frontier Towns
in the Netherlands; it is to be placed upon some straight passage in the Road
or highway, a flight-shot from each Port or nearer, to prevent the Enemies
sudden assault with his Horse-troopes: the form and fashion is after this
manner. The Beam which crosses the way is of Oake-hart, and a foot square of
Timber at the least; then upon one side of the way is pitched down a strong
able Post, the top of it being fitted to enter into a hole of the Beam about
the third part of it, from the fore end, then there comes diverse Braces down
from the Beam which are mortic'd into a circular piece of Timber, framed
purposely to wind about the midst of the standing Post, the Post being there
made with a Regal; these Braces stays up the Beam from sinking down at the
fore end; and it also hinders the raising of it up from the standing Post: upon
the other side of the way is another able Post for the end of the Beam to shut
against; the said end of the Beam has a very strong Spring-locke, which at
the first pulling too locks into the Post: there is always a Sentinel to
guard at this Bome, to open and shut it to Passengers; if there be any void
place betwixt the Posts and the hedges, it must be strongly railed: the
Figure follows, which happily may better inform you.



CHAP. CCLV.
Of a second kind of Bome or Baricado to lay over Rivers to prevent the
coming up of Boats, whereby the Enemy may surprise a Town.
THis second kind of Bome was invented by the Netherlanders to prevent the
Enemies designs, who had many times deceived them by rowing up their boats
the Rivers, and unexpectedly have entered their Towns: the manner of framing it
is after this fashion. In the narrowest place of the River or Haven they spile
both the sides next the banks with long able spiles, mortissing the top of
them into an over-way or beam of sound Timber, only in the midst of the
stream they leave a passage for such vessels or boats to pass, as are
requisite: then they take a piece of Timber, or some Mast of a Ship, which
being fitted in due length for the place, the one end of this Bome has a
Staple of strong Iron which is joined by a Ringle to a second Staple that is
droven into the inmost Spile; likewise upon the Spile of the other side is a
strong Staple, whereunto the fore-nd of the Bome is to be fastened either by a
Mortice plated with Iron, or some Chain fastened unto it, and this is strongly
locked: upon the top of this Bome, goes a thick bar of Iron from end to end,
which has large strong pikes rivited into it three or four inches one from
the other.

Lastly, the iron plate or Bar is rivited to the Bome, so that it cannot
possibly be cut in sunder, neither can they have their Boats over it by reason
of the Pikes; this they may open and shut at pleasure; Many times they use iron
chains, but they are more chargeable and not so good, in regard a Boat will
run over it. View the Figure.



CHAP. CCLVI.
Duke Alberts Invention for the staying of the Hollanders Ships at Ostend,
that his Batteries might the easier discharge upon them.
IN the Siege of Ostend, Duke Albertus had planted diverse Block-houses with
Ordnance to impeach the Hollanders shipping which releeved the Town: yet with
a quick tide and fair Wind, they entered in despite of his Ordnance without
any damage; wherefore he bethought him to draw a mighty Cable over the
Channel where the Ships did usually pass safely by the favor of the dark
night: to diverse parts of this Cable, he fastened diverse empty Caske, as Pipes
and Hogsheads to bear it up strait and even; also, there were certain
Anchors to stay the Pipes and Cable from floating away; he having prepared his
Batteries in readiness for the same purpose on either side of the shore, no
sooner were the Ships stayed, but the Ordnance played upon them to their
great detriment, many of them being suncke, and the rest battered.

Some have caused a Massy chain to be conveyed over a Heaven, or Channel,
also long pieces of Timber linck'd together, has been a means to hinder
shipping, for otherwise it is a difficult thing to offend the passage of
shipping, or boats, especially by night, as was probable at the same Siege;
there being as Grimstone records, 70 shot made at one Fleet in that Channel,
yet not one of them suncke, nor damnified. View the Figure.



CHAP. CCLVII.
The manner of making a Battery to floate upon the water, that the Ordnance may
shoot the leveller, invented at Ostend by Duke Albertus.
THis Floate was invented at Ostend, to plant their Ordnance on it, that they
might strike the Vessels between Wind and water, as they came into the Heaven;
the manner of framing it, was on this wise: First, there were diverse strong
large Pipes or Hogsheads made purposely, upon the which diverse Beams or
Rafters were strongly fastened, crossing every way to hold the Pipes together;
then there were diverse Plankes fastened upon the top of the Rafters, after the
fashion of a floor of a house, round the sides were wooll-packes, fixed to
shelter the Enemies shot; this Floate lying thus level with the water, gave
the Ordnance fit opportunity to shoot at a better certainty; upon either side
of the Heaven was one of these Floates planted, not one right against the
other, but a certain distance wide, so that if one mist his shoot, the other
should endeavor to hit. The figure of it follows.



CHAP. CCLVIII.
The manner of framing the Engine called the Saulciffe, which is to be used
against a beleaguered Town to shelter both Horse and Foot.
THis Instrument was invented at Ost-end, for the safeguard both of Horse and
Foot; the manner of framing of it was after this manner; They took diverse
Bords or Plankes of Deale-wood, and framed them in manner of a Hogshead or
Pipe, but so great that a Horseman might ride behind it, and not be
discovered; the Concavitie of it was filled with Dunge and sand, it was hooped
with broad Iron hoopes, it was twenty foot long; there were fifty or sixty
men to rowel it: this did the Archduke wonderful service in preserving his
Soldiers, both from the Cannon and Musket, it being always rolled before
those that went to Entrench themselves, or to releeve such Guards as were
dangerous, and within shot of the Walls of the Town; by this devise they
could go as near to the Enemies works as they listed: the Figure follow^^.



CHAP. CCLIX.
How to stop up the passage of Vessels, and Boats in a Channel, or to mend a
breach in an arm of the Sea.
THe best and presentest way to stop, and damn up a Channel, or a breach, is
to fill the Hulke of old cast Ships, Hoighes, and Boats with earth, and so
conveying them to the fittest place where the water is narrowest and
shallowest, and there to sink them; Likewise by filling old sackes full of
Earth or Sand, and casting them into the water, will damme up a small Haven,
and will hinder the passage of all kind of Vessels from releeving a besieged
Town; and by this the breach of an arm of the Sea may be stopped, but first
it must be well pyled to stay the Vessels and Earth from being washed away;
wherefore they must take the opportunity of a low water to work in, and have
sufficient help to lay the foundation sure, for fear of blowing up; Moreover,
if you fear the water will decay some weak place of the bank, then there
must be a stancke made to shelve off the force of the water; also if there be
any Skonees or other Works that the water beats against the Wall, and decays
it by dashing against it; then for the preventing of it, there must be Mattes
made of Sedge and Bulrushes, which must be staked down before the Earth, and
Hurdles made with Oysiers.

Also for the Landing up of some shallow place, where the water runs but in
Winter time, or in great Storms, the best way is to set it thick of Oysiers,
which will speedily grow, and keep up the Sand and Rubbish from washing away,
so that in a short time it will be landed up; View the Figure following.



CHAP. CCLX.
The manner how to make a Bridge with Cord to convey Soldiers over a Moate or
River, by means whereof they may speedily Scale the Walls of a Town.
THis kind of Bridge is used upon all surprises of Towns and Forts, which are
to be taken in upon the sudden, it being so light, that two or three men may
bring it twelve or fiveteene miles in an evening, and place it over any narrow
water, so that their Soldiers may march over abreast: the manner of framing
it, is after this fashion; First, there are two wooden Rowles, made of strong
light wood, either of them being twelve foot long; one of these Rowles have at
each end a Winch, which may be taken off and on like to a Grindstones; this is
to wind and strayten the Ropes that they may lie tyte, at each end, and in the
midst of the Rowles are to be holes bored through, wherein must be fastened
four strong Ropes, but if there be more Ropes it will be the stronger, at
every footes end there may be one, if the Bridge be twelve or ten foot broad,
then it is but boring so many holes, and drawing so many Ropes through: then you
are to take Cord, and knit it with Mashes, like the Mashes of a Flue, so that a
man's foot cannot slip through; this Cord being knit all the way fast to the
Cords, one end of this Bridge is to be transported, either by one or two that
can swim, or in a Leatherne Boat made for that purpose; the ends of the
Rowles are to be staked down strongly, either with Iron stakes made for that
purpose, or with wooden; Next it is to be straightened out strait with Winches,
and made fast, you are to note that over these Ropes and Mashes, there is
Canvasse stitched down to make the Bridge firm, that they may not faulter
with their feet in passing over; View the Figure following.



CHAP. CCLXI.
How to make a firm Bridge both for Horse and Men to march over and to
transport their Ordnance, over any River, although as broad as the Thames.
Earl Charolois in the wars of France, termed the Holy League, being to
pass over the great River of Seine, he caused diverse Casks to be made of very
strong board or Clampall strongly hooped, and of a great bigness, upon which he
fastened Rafters, and Plancherd it over, placing diverse strong Anchors to stay
the Bridge from the force of the stream: over this Bridge (as Commines
reports) marched a hundred thousand men, with all their provision and Ordnance:
The States of the Netherlands have a kind of an open flat Boat which they
term Punts; these they convey by water to any place they intend to march over;
but if they march to some remote place, so that they cannot pass by water,
then they are transported upon Carriages, and drawn by Horses, which does them
great service to stow in them Powder, Match, Ammunition, Bread and such like;
they are made like to Horse-boatee flat-bottom'd the ends open and rising, so
that when they are joined together, the rising ends meeting it is like an Arch,
through which the water has passage, four men may march a breast over them; and
they are twenty or thirty foot long a piece; they are fastened together with
iron hooks; and their Masts and Tacklings are fixed to the sides of them, to
strengthen them; the rising ends of these Punts have ledges nailed half a foot
distance one from the other, to prevent the feet both of Men and Horse from
sliding; they are stayed with Cables and Anchors from falling down with the
stream. These are the surest and best Bridges that ever yet were invented; and
very easy to be conveyed either by land or by water; besides many things
belonging to the Wars may be carried in them.

The Prince of Orange many times made Bridges with small Vessels, as Hoighs or
the like; they were stayed by Anchors; their beak heads pointing against the
stream, there were Rafters placed from one Vessel to another and plancher'd
over. The Figures of these several Bridgesfollow.

A Bridge laid upon Caske.





The Tressels which the King of Sweden made his Bridge upon to pass over the
Lech into Bavaria, the feet of the Tressels had weights upon their Ledges to
hold them down in the water.



There was likewise another Bridge framed at the Siege of Ostend called
Pompey's Chariot, it was framed of four wheels, and a piece of Timber of a
hundred and fifty foot long lay upon the Wheels, upon which was framed a
slight Bridge, this was to be drawn in a dark night to the Motes side, and so
thrust over by the force of men; the manner of framing of it, you may more
plainly see by the Figure following, only observe the Wheels were fifteen
foot in height.



CHAP. CCLXII.
The use of the Leathren Boat, and how to make it.
THis kind of Boat was invented for the lightness of it, and to be used to
convey Soldiers over Motes and Rivers, whereby some sudden and unexpected
exploit may be done before the Enemy is aware of it: for a Soldier may carry
one of these under his Arm twenty miles, without any great trouble: the manner
of framing them, is after this manner; there must be the two sides or Bellies
of an Ox hide well tanned, beaten out and made concave; this being cut
fashionable to the keele of a Boat, the two sides are to be sown strongly
together, so that no water may soake through, then taking a couple of strong
staves to pend the sides and the ends of the Leather from bending in, when the
Soldiers are in it. The Hollanders carry their Skutes and Boats upon
carriages, and in them they put their Ammunition and other necessaries, being
well covered over with Tilts, or sometimes one Boat covers the other; these
Boats they can speedily take off from the carriages, and upon all occasions
suddenly make use of them. View the Figures of them.



CHAP. CCLXIII.
An easy and quick way to cast water with great Scoopes.
MAny times when Fortifications are a raising, springs will arise and hinder
the Workmen from digging; so that men must continually cast it out, or else
their Works are presently drowned. For the better and easier effecting of it,
the Hollanders have invented a speedy way, the manner of doing it is thus; they
pitch certain Poles a cross; the crosses are to stand in distance asunder,
according to the quantity of persons that are to work between them; upon the
top of these crosses, lies another Pole over-thwart, unto this Pole are diverse
Cords fastened, and to the lower end of the Cord, is the handle of the Scoopes
tied within a foot of the Scoope, this Cord bears the weight both of the
Scoope and of the water, the man is only to guide the Scoope out, pulling it
too and fro, these Scoopes may be very great ones; many times they nail on
Steals unto great Trayes, having a piece of Leather fastened over the end of
the Tray by the Steal, to keep the water from flying backwards; by this
devise a man may cast more water at ease in one hour, than otherwise they can
do in three; besides, they wet not themselves half so much. View the Figure
following.



CHAP. CCLXIV.
How to make a Skrew to wind up water, with the use of it.
THis Engine called the Skrew, was invented by the Hollanders to empty Pondes
and Motes, it being a thing very useful in the Wars, it is framed after this
manner; First, there is a Rafter some twenty foot long, and sixteen inches
about, this is hewn round, only a foot and half at the upper end it is four
square, whereon a Trundle wheel is to be fixed, and to be turned about by a
Cogge wheel, at each end of this Rafter of Wheele-tree is a gudgion of iron as
the Wheele-tree of a Mill has, for the Engine to turn upon; then within three
quarters of a foot of the lower end, there is a Regal to be made in this
Wheele-tree, which must be made half an inch deep, and so carried in manner
of a Skrew, within the foot of a Trundle wheel, at the upper end; next you
must take Deal Boordes of eighteen inches long, the one end of them is to be
fitted cleverly into the Regal, and joined so close that no water may get out,
it will seem to be after the fashion of a winding Stare-case, this is to be
covered over with Deal Boordes, and likewise to be reagold into them, that the
ends of the short Boordes may be fastened into them, and hooped over with flat
iron Hoopes, so that it will seen round like a Pype, or a great long Barrel.
Next there is a Cogge-wheele to be made to turn this Engine round; it is
formed like a Cogge-wheele of a Horse-mill, only the Cogges are to stand
downwards, and it is drawn about with two or three Horses, Plankes being
placed for them to go on; this Engine being placed in the water: the nether
Gudgeon running in a piece of Timber placed for that purpose in the water, the
Engine lying side-wayes; the upper Gudgeon is likewise placed in another piece
of Timber very tryly, so that the Cogge-wheele may turn about the Engine; at
the upper end of the Barrel of this Engine must be placed a Troffe to receive
the water, and convey it away into some ditch; this Engine will screw up water
as fast as it runs out of an Overshot-mill, whereby in a short time an
infinite deal of water may be drawn. View the Figure.



CHAP. CCLXV.
The Description of an Engine whereby water may be drawn out of any place or
depth, or mount any River: water to be conveyed to any place within three or
four miles distance.
SVppose A. B. C D. to be a deep Moate, River, Well, or Pond, and OF to be a
strong piece of Timber fastened overthwart the same a good distance in the
water, in this Planke let there be fastened a piece of Timber, with a strong
Wheel in it as G and H. having strong Iron spikes drove athwart the Wheel
within the crevice, and strongly rivited on each side, let them be three or
four inches distance from each other: Let there be likewise made in the said
Planke two holes, in which set two hollow Posts that may reach the top of the
Wheel, or so much higher, as you desire to mount the water; Let them be made
fast that they stir not; in the bottom of one of these Posts there must be
fastened a barrel^ of Brass, as g. h made very smooth within, and betwixt
these two Posts at the top, let there be fastened unto them both another
piece of strong Timber to hold them fast, lest they start asunder, and in the
midst of that make a Mortice, and in it fasten a strong piece of Timber, with
a wheel like to the former; the pin thereof ought to be made fast to the
Wheel, and have a crooked handle to turn about, that by turning it, you turn
the Wheel also; then provide a strong Iron chain of length sufficient, having
on every third or fourth Link, a piece of horn that will easily pass through
the brass Barrel, and a Leather on each side of it, but somewhat broader then
the horn; put this chain under the lower Wheel in the Well upon both the
lower Posts, draw it over the upper Wheel, and link it fast and strait, then
by turning the handle round, the Chain will also turn, whose Leathers coming
up the Brass Barrells will force up the Waters before them. Or after the same
manner you may take two Plankes eighteen or twenty inches broad a-peece, and
twenty or thirty foot long, or more; at the lower edges of these Plankes there
is a bottom Planke of the same length and thickness closely joined and
fastened; also down the midst is another joined and fixed, these are to be
nine inches broad, and being thus framed, it makes a square Box, as is usually
for Clocke-leads to go down in, the upper side is open like a Troffe; then
there are diverse square pieces of Bordes fitted justly to go up and down the
said Concavities; these Bordes have four flat Irons goes through them, to each
corner goes one, these are keyed together, so as they may play to and fro;
these square pieces being thus chained together, drives up the water through the
hollow of the said Plankes; at the two ends of this Engine is a Wheel as the
former has, only they differ in fashion, for they are made like a Millers
Trundles, the uppermost has a double Sweake, so that eight or ten men may
turn at it; the nether end of this Engine is placed in the water, the upper
end is stayed with Crutchets or other provision; the open side lies upwards,
and in turning the Wheel, those square bordes comes down the open side, and
runs up the Box, and forces the water out.



CHAP. CCLXVI.
The description of an Engine to force water up to a high place very useful to
quench fire amongst buildings in Towns and Garrisons, or Huttes in Camps or
Leaguers.


THis Engine has a brass Barrel marked a. having two suckers in the bottom
of it marked b. also a large Pipe going upon one side of it marked c. with a
Sucker nigh unto the top of it; and above all a hollow round Ball d. with a
Pipe at the top of it made to skrew another Pipe upon it to direct the water to
any place: then fit a Forcer unto the Barrel with a handle fastened unto the
top, at the upper end of this Forcer drive a stong screw; and at the lower end
a Skrew-nut; at the bottom of the Barrel fasten a Screw, and at the Bar
that goes cross the top Barrel let there be another skrew-nut: put them all
in order, and fasten the whole to a good strong frame marked f. that it may
stand steady: when you use it; either you must place it in the water, or in the
Channel of the street; and drive the water up to it with broomes; and by
moving the handle too, and fro, it will cast the water up with mighty force to
any place you shall direct it: Note, there is no Engine for Water-workes of
what sort soever (whether for service or pleasure) can be made without the
help of Suckers, Forcers or Clacks: a Sucker is a Box made of Brass having
no bottom; in the midst of which there is a small bar goes cross the same,
having a hole in the midst of it; this Box has a lid so exactly fitted unto
it, that being put unto it, no Air nor Water can pass between the Crevisses;
this Cover has a little Button on the top, and a seame that goes into the
Box, and so through the hole of the aforesaid cross Bar; and afterward it
has a little Button rivited on it, so that it may with ease clap up and down,
but not be taken, or slip quite out, as this figure in the Margent demonstrates.



A Forcer is a plug of wood exactly turned and leathered about the end that
goes into the Barrel, is Semi-circularly concave, as this second Figure
opposite shows.



A Clacke, is a piece of Leather nailed over any hole of a Pumpe, etc. having a
piece of Lead to make it lie close, so that no Air nor Water may pass
thereby, as the third Figure shows.



CHAP. CCLXVII.
The description of another kind of Engine to cast up water with violence.


THere must be prepared a strong Table of Planke three or four inches thick;
with an Iron Sweep fastened at the one end thereof to lift up and down; unto
the end of the Sweep let there be linked a piece of Iron having two Rods of
length sufficient; let there be made a hole quite through the midst of this
Table, whose diameter let be above five or six inches; then provide two pieces
of Brass in form of Hattes; but let the brim of the uppermost be but one inch
broad; and have diverse little holes through it round about: also in the crown
of this must be placed a large Sucker, and over it a half Globe; from top of
which must proceed a hollow Trunk, about a yard long, and of a good and wide
Bore: then take good liquored Leather two or three times double, and put
between the bordes and the brims of this, and with diverse little Skrewes (put
through the holes of the brim) skrew it fast unto the top of the Table. Note,
the Table must be leathered also underneath the compass of the brim of the
lower brass; also the lower brass must be of equal diameter in hollownesse
unto the other; but it must be more Spirall toward the end or bottom; and
must have either a large Clock or Sucker fastened in it: also the brim of this
must be larger then that of the uppermost, and have two holes made about the
midst on each side one; bore then two holes in the Table on each side of the
brass, one answerable unto the holes of the brim of the lower brass; through
which holes put the two Rods of the Iron hanged to the Sweep, and rivet them
strongly into the holes of the lower brass: place this Engine in water, and by
moving the Sweep up and down, it will with great vigor cast the water on high.

CHAP. CCLXVIII.
How to make water at the foot of a Mountain, to ascend to the top of it, and
so to descend on the other side, for the furnishing of Garrisons.
TO this there must be a Pipe of Lead, which may come from the Fountain A, to
the top of the Mountain B, and so to descend on the other side a little lower
than the fountain as at C, then make a hole in the Pipe at the top of the
Mountain B, and stop the end of the Pipe at A, and C, and fill this Pipe at
B with water, and close it very carefully at B, that no air get in at the hole
B, then unstop the end at A, and at C, then will the water run perpetually up
the Hill, and descend on the otherside; this is of great consequence to furnish
Villages.



CHAP. CCLXIX.
How to make a Scaling Ladder of Cords, which may be carried in a Soldiers
Pocket, by which a Wall, Castle, or Town may be scaled.
THis Engine is of excellent use in the Wars, for the speedy surprising of
Towns; you must first take two pulleyes A and D, unto that of A there must be
fastened a strong Hook or Crampe of iron as B, and at D let there be fastened
a Staff of a foot and a half long as F, then at the pulley A, place a hand of
Iron as E, to which tie a Cord of half an inch thick (either of silk or pure
hemp) then strive to make fast the pulley A, by the help of the Crampe-iron
B, to the place that you intend to scale, and the staff F being fastened at
the pulley D, put it between your legs as if you would sit upon it, then
holding the Cord G in your hand, you may guide your self to the place required.



CHAP. CCLXX.
Of Scaling-Ladders framed of Wood, and how they are to be used in the Wars.
THis Instrument for the scaling of a Wall, is to be made of light Wood, and
about nine or ten foot long, scaled like a Ladder, the upper end of the sides,
have Hooks fastened unto them, to hang somewhat shelving, that the Soldiers
may the easier ascend, if the Wall be higher, then there may be two of these
Ladders hooked together, some are made with joints to open longer or shorter,
as occasion shall be; but for the most part, the Scaling-Ladders are made
according to the height of the Walls that are to be scaled; these are carried
by Wagon or by Water, and are to be hung upon the Walls or Ports very
secretly, for fear of discovery. View the figure.



CHAP. CCLXXI.
The use of Gabions and Baskets, for the defense of the Cannoniers and
Musketeers.
THese kind of Instruments were invented for the security both of the
Cannoniers, Many times some of these Gabions are six foot Diameter.
and also of the Musketeers, the manner of framing them is common to all
Basket-makers; the Gabion or great Basket is some four foot Diameter, and made
of course ro^^es of Osiers or water Sallowes, and four or five foot high: They
are to be first placed where they should be used as a Barricado against the
great Shot, and then they must be filled with good earth well rammed; there is
many times three or four set one before the other to bury the shot of the
Cannon; and likewise one a^^op of another to shelter, both the Men and
Artillery. The same small Baskets are likewise made of rods, These small
Baskets are used to carry up earth to the top of a work upon Soldiers
shoulders.
and two foot, or two foot and a half Diameter, and about the same height;
these are to be filled with good earth, and to be placed upon the Partapets
and ^rest works one close by another for the Musketeers to discharge between
them, and to shelter them from the Enemies Bullets, these are likewise many
times set double; there must be a care no stones be amongst the earth; if
Baskets should be wanting, then there must be Sacks filled, as before is
showed. View the Figures.



CHAP. CCLXXII.
The use of Cru-wagons and small Carts, with the fashion of them.
THese Instruments were invented to convey Earth out of Moats, and to carry it
upon works; those Wheele-barrowes that are to be driven up by the strength of
one man, are made very small and light; they are used chiefly in the foundation
of a work, before it grows too steep for the Horse to clyme up: there are
shelving places left for the Wagons to be drivven up, and Bordes laid to keep
the wheels from sinking into the eath. The Figure follows.



CHAP. CCLXXIII.
The use of the Powder-pots in a pitched Battle, to mischief and break the
Enemies Ranks, with the Description of the form of them.
THese Engines are of use to discomfit an Enemy in a pitched Battle, the manner
of framing them, is according to this following Description: there must be
(...) prepared, either of Earth, or of timed Lattin, the Mouths of them are to
be four inches Diameter, and the height of them six, on either side of these
is a hollow quill formed of Earth or sodred of Lattin, about the bigness of a
Tobacco-pipe; these are to go from the top of these Pottes just to the
bottom to convey the the train of Powder to the Touchhole at the bottom;
Upon the top of this Quill is a round knob to be placed hollow, about the
bigness of the half shell of a Walnut; this is to put the end of a Reed, or
pipe made of Tin, to convey the trains of Powder from one Pot to the other.
Further, a certain number of these Pots, are to have upon all four sides,
Pipes, as before is showed; these are to be placed both at each end of the
Stratagem, and in two or three places in the midst, from these the fire is
immediately to be given, that the fire may more speedily be spread to every
rank of these Pots; and indeed if they were all made after this manner to
convey fire from all four parts, it would be more speedier and better, only
the trains would be a little the more trouble to lay from one to the other.
These Pots are to be set six foot asunder every way square, or further as
occasion shall offer. These Pots being filled half full of Powder, there is a
piece of thin Board to be fitted to the diameter of the Pot, and put down
close to the Powder; upon this Board are Pible-stones to be placed, to fill up
the rest of the Pot, and then to be covered to keep them in. In the next
place there are diverse Wimbles to be made of a just bigness to the Pottes,
these are to bore the holes in the earth to place the Pots in; note the holes
are to be bored somewhat aslent, that the stones may fly side-wayes to
disorder the Ranks; if it be swardy ground, then only the top of the sward is
to be laid to cover the Pots, and the residue of the earth is to be cast quite
away toward your own Troops to avoid suspicion; then there are Regals cut
from pot to pot, to lay the Pipes which are to convey the trains of Powder;
these are also to be covered as the former: there may be also long trains
made, both from the two ends, and also from some other places about the
midst, these trains are to be likewise conveyed in Pipes ten or twenty
rod toward your own Bataliaes, and when the Enemy is marched full upon them,
then those appointed to attend these traynes are to give fire unto them; Note
if the earth should be wet, then the Pots and Pipes that convay the Trains,
must be closed with Pitch or Yallow to prevent the moystning of the Powder.
View the Figure following of all the parts of the Stratagem, which happily may
cause you better to understand it.



CCLXXIV.
How to make Torches and Candles to burn in any weather: being a thing most
necessary in the wars.
THese kind of Torches are invented to keep fire either in windy or raynie
weather; they are made of this composition following: Sulphur, Salt-peeter,
Rosin, Calxvine, quick Peal, Lin-seed Oil, and common Lamp-oyle: Pitch, Tar,
Camfire, Wax, Tutia, Arsnicke, Quicksilver and Aqua-vitae: of this
composition, may be Torches, Candles, or Balls of Wildfire made that will
burn in the water without extinguishing.

CHAP. CCLXXV.
How to arm Pikes with Wildfire and Pistols for to with-stand a Breach, and
defend it against the Enemy.
THis kind of arming of Pikes at the Spears end with Wildfire was invented
for the defense of a Breach, Port or Bridge; and it has been approved that an
Enemy has been more feared with it then with any other kind of weapon: the
manner of framing these Weapons is after this fashion. First, there must be
Powder bruised, eight parts; Peeter in Roch, one part; Peeter in Meal, one
part; Sulphur in Meal, two parts; Rosin-Roch, three parts; Turpentine, one
part; Lin-seed Oil, one part; Verdigrease, half a part; Bole-Armoniack 1/3
part: these ingredients must be put in a Bag made of strong Canvas, which
first must be put upon the Pikes end, and the lower end of it being tied fast
to the Pike, and the Bag filled up with this Composition, the other end
thereof must also be fast tied to the end of the Spear; the whole Bag must
be soundly woulded with a small Cord: this being done, then there must be
(...) in a Pan, Pitch, four parts; Lin-seed Oil, one part; Turpentine, one
part; Tar, 1/3 part; Tallow, one part: these being mixed together must be
daubed all over the Canvas a good thicknes: then being cold, two holes must be
bored into the Bag two inches deep with a sharp square Iron, filling the
same with fine bruised Powder; to this may be made fast diverse Pistoll-Barrels
charged with Bullets: this instrument will perform excellent service in a
throng of people. View the figure.



CHAP. CCLXXVI.
A Device to make a Musket sh^ot with the same quantity of Powder half as
far again, as her usual Shot is.
THis Invention the King of Sweden did make trial of, and it is a thing highly
to be prized in the Wars: for many times it happens, that the wings of Shot
in a pitched Battle are drawn out to skirmish with an Enemy before they be
within the true distance of the Muskets commanding Shot; or being discharged
by the Enemy out of some Fort many times when they are out of distance,
whereby much Powder and shot is spent to no purpose; now to remedy this there
is an approved device which will cause a Musket or Canon to shoot half as
far again with the same quantity of Powder: and this is effected by taking
of white Case-pepper of the soundest Corns, and steep them 24 hours in the
strongest Aqua-vitae; then being taken out and dried in the Sun, so that they
may not danke the Powder; then charging the Piece with the usual charge of
Powder; you must take so many of these pepper Corns as will cover the
circumference of the Bore, and being put down close with the stick to the
Powder; then putting next to the Pepper the Bullet; this being tried at any
mark, it shall be sensibly found to convey the Bullet with such a violence
far beyond the accustomed shooting, and being charged without this
ingredient, the Bullet shall not come little more then half the way.

CHAP. CCLXXVII.
Of the Bow-Pike, and how it is best to be used in the Wars.
THis Invention of joining a Bow to the Pike, may be of excellent use in the
Wars, to impale the Flanks of an Army, for when the Horse shall charge
either in Flank or Rear those Arrows will gaul them: they are very good to
be drawn out to safeguard some small troops of shot, that shall be sent out
to discharge upon the Horse; but for the placing of these in the Front of the
maine Battalia's, I hold it not so good, unless it be only the two first
ranks; for it will be very troublesome when the Troops snall join at push
of Pike; besides, the Pikes heads will soon out their Bow-strings in sunder,
and make them of no validity: and questionless in the time of stormy wet
weather, these Bows would do great service, when the Musket cannot be
discharged for wet; but were it so, that a Pike were made of such an
indifferent bigness toward the But end, that there might be disposed in it
three Petronell Barrels, made of a very light substance, as there is a new
Invention found out in that kind; there is a light lock to be placed a yard
from the But end, this shall at once pulling up, strike fire twice, having a
double pan, and that part of the Pike the Petronell is placed in, is to be
turned round, so that the Touch-holes of these Barrels may turn to the lock
one after another, without removing either of hand or foot; this would work
some effect against the Enemies Pikes, it going with that force, that it would
enter their Corslets; which the force of an Arrow could not perform. View the
Figures.



CHAP. CCLXXVIII.
The Description of an Engine, whereby the diversity of the strength of powder
may be truly known.
TO know which are the strongest sorts of Gunpowder; according as this Figure
demonstrates, you must prepare a Box as A B, being four inches high, and two
inches wide, having a Lid joined unto it; the Box ought to be made of Iron,
Brass, or Copper, and to be fastened to a good thick Planke, and to have a
Touchhole at the Bottom as O, and that end of the Box where the hinge of the
Lid is, there must stand up from the Box, a piece of Iron or Brass, in length
answerable unto the Lid of the Box, this piece of Iron must have a hole quite
through it toward the top, and a Spring as AG, must be skrewed or rivited, so
that the one end may cover the said hole; on the top of all this Iron or Brass
that stands up from the Box, there must be jointed a piece of Iron (made as
you see in the Figure) the hinder-part of which, is bent downward and enters
the hole that the Spring covers; the other part rests upon the Lid of the
Box, open this Box Lid, and put in a quantity of Powder, then shut the Lid
down, and put fire to the Touchhole at the Bottom, the Powder being fired,
will blow the Bo^e Lid up the notches, more or less, according to the strength
of the Powder; thus by firing the same quantity of diverse kinds, at several
times, you may know which is strongest.



CHAP. CCLXXIX.
Of a Bridge made without Boats or Barrels, Cordage or Timber-worke which
transported 4000 men at once, over a great River.
IN the Ascent of Cyrus, the third Book, page the 57. the Army being in great
distress environed on one fide with high Mountains, and deep broad Rivers on
the otherside, a Rhodian presented himself to the General, and did undertake
to transport 4000 at once, over those Rivers, without Boats or Barrels
(whereof indeed they were defective) wherefore he provided all the raw Hides
that he could possibly get, and sowing them up very close, blew them full of
Wind, then he made use of such Cords and Ropes as the Army could afford, and
tied them together, having stones upon them which went down like Anchors,
these being placed upon the waters, he threw Rice upon them, and then earth,
which kept them from tottering, making them lie stable, every Bouget was able
to convey two men; by this means the Army was convayed well.

CHAP. CLXXX.
How Caesar made a Bridge upon the River Rhine and carried his Army over into
Germany.
CAesar holding scorn to transport his Army over the River Rhine by Boats
into Germany, he bethought himself to try what he could do to make an
artificial Bridge, which should stand more for his honor, and the terror of
his Enemies; they conceiving it impossible to frame a Bridge over a water so
deep, broad, and swift, wherefore he caused great store of Timber to be
brought, and at two foot distance, he placed two Trees of a foot and half
square, sharpened at the lower end, and cut answerable to the depth of the
River; these he let down into the water with Engines, and drove them in with
Commanders; not perpendicularly, after the fashion of a Pile, but G^blewise and
bending with the force of the water; opposite unto these, he placed two other
Trees, joined together after the same fashion, being 40 foot distant from the
former by the demension between their lower parts in the bottom of the water,
and reclining against the recourse of the River; these two pair of Couples
thus placed, he joined together with a Beam of two foot-square, equal to the
distance between the said Couples, and fastened them at each end on either side
of the Couples, with Braces and Pins, whereby the strength of the work and the
nature of the Frame was such, that the greater the violence of the stream was,
and the faster it fell upon the Timber, work, the stronger the Bridge was
united together in the couplings and joints; In like manner he proceeded with
Couples and Beams, until the Work was brought unto the other side of the
River, then he laid straight plankes from Beam to Beam, and covered them
with hurdles, and so he made a floor to the Bridge Moreover, on the Lower
side of the Bridge, he drove Supporters, which being fastened to the
Timber-worke, did strengthen the Bridge against the force of the water, and at
the upper side of the Bridge at a reasonable distance, he placed Piles to
hinder the force of Trees or Boats, or what else the Enemy might cast down to
damme up the water, whereby the Bridge might have been borne down by the
violence of the stream; this work was begun and finished in ten days.

CHAP. CCLXXXI.
The Description of an Instrument, invented by King Henry the fifth, at the
Battle of Agincourt, and since used by the King of Sweden, and by him called a
Swines-Pike.
THis Instrument was first invented by King Henry the fifth, at the Battle of
Agincourt, and did infinite service there; and now of late days was used by
that famous General, the King of Sweden: the manner of it is thus; First, the
Instrument is made of a strong piece of Ash, about four foot in length;
biggest in the midst, and shaved Taper-wise toward each end; upon each end
is fastened on an Iron Pike of an indifferent length, with cheeks down a
pretty way the staff to strengthen it; this instrument every Masquetier
carried one of them at his girdle, and when they were upon service, as they
advanced to give fire upon the Enemy, they stuck down one of these somewhat
sloping, to the intent if the Enemies horse should charge them, these
Instruments would prevent them; for they could not possibly shift them, but
they would pierce their Horses Breasts: by this they were able to maintain a
skirmish, against the potency of the Horse. View the Figures of it.



CHAP. CCLXXXIII.
How a Case of Tin is to be made, to carry light Matches in, that the Enemy
may not discover them.
THe Prince of Orange when he intended to assault a Town by night, upon an
On-slaught, he invented an Instrument to carry the light matches in, so that
the sparks of them might not be discovered from the walls by the Enemies
Sentinels, the manner of forming them wa^ thus; the^^ was a piece of Tin or
Lattin, made like an elder pipe about a foot long, the hollownesse of it was of
sufficient bigness to hold the match within it; it had also diverse holes on
either side, like the holes of a Flute, to let in the air to keep the match
from extinguishing; the match being drawn in a good way into the Pipe, it
cannot be discovered, for the wind can have no power to make the sparkles
fly. View the figure.



CHAP. CCLXXXIII.
How the Venetians did order their Powder, after their Arsnall was burnt.
THe Venetians had their Magazine blown up with Gunpowder, two or three
several times, and for a future prevention they sat in counsel a long time,
how they might prevent this danger, which might come either by accident or
treachery, but they could in no wise contrive a way to their liking; a poor
man in Venice hearing of it, had presently a device in his brains how to order
the matter, so that no damage might ensue either by fire to consume it, or by
any other means to decay the strength of the powder; whereupon being brought
before the Estates, he wished them not to compound the three ingredients (that
powder is made of) together, but to lay in one room the Salt-peeter, in
another room the Brimstone, and in the third the Charcoale, and so to compound
it, as they used it, for none of these three being several, could easily be
fired, and if they were, it could do no great harm before it should be
discovered; neither would it waste nor consume in the strength of it; but being
made into powder, it would blow all up of a sudden; he being rewarded for his
advice, they made use of his counsel and do observe it to this present day.

FINIS.
ANIMA'DVERSIONS OF WAR. THE SECOND BOOK.

By ROBERT WARD Gentleman, and Commander.

I D

PRINCEPS SVBDITORVM INCOLVMITATEM PROCVRANS.



LONDON, Printed by John Dawson. 1639.

THE OFFICE OF A GENERAL, With his ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
LIB. II. SECT. XV.
CHAP. I.
The Character of a General, with such excellent properties, both of body and
mind, which he ought to be endued withal, declared; and also the chiefest
circumstances belonging to his high and weighty Office.
A General over an Army, must be ever trusty, faithful, and dutiful to his
Prince; endued with excellent judgment, reason, and resolution; well studied
in the liberal Arts; of a fierce disposition, yet qualified with justice, and
clemency; not rash in undertaking, yet as free from cowardice, as cruelty;
talk little, and brag less, in speech ready, and eloquent, faithful of his
word, constant and strong in the prosecution of his purposes, bountiful and
honoring due deserts; of a good ability of body; in his countenance a stately
terror, yet in private affable and pleasant; naturally disposed to abhor
vice; of a natural strength and hardiness to undergo all extremities, either
in travel, or want; in arms expert and adventurous; his invention subtle,
full of inward bravery and fierceness, in his execution resolute; always
forward, but never dismayed; in counsel sudden and wise, of a piercing insight
to foresee dangers, ingenious, decent, and in performance a man; or as Sr. R.
Dallington specifies in his Aphorisms, to be five things required in a
General; Bona Ducis (...) quinque, s^^entia, virtus, providentia, authoritas,
fortuna. Lip. sol. l. 5.
knowledge, valor, foresight, authority, and fortune; he that is not renowned
for all or most of these virtues, is not to be reputed fit for this charge; nor
can this glory be purchased, but only by practice and proof; for the greatest
Fencer, is not always the best Fighter, nor the fairest Tilter, Tiberius
hortabatur Senatum, ut eligeret Proconsulem in Bello contra Tacfarinatem,
gnarum militiae, corpore validum, and Bello suffecturum. Tac. hist. l. 3.
the ablest Soldier, nor the greatest Favorite in Court, the fittest
Commander in a Camp: that Prince therefore is ill advised that conferres this
charge upon his Minion, either for his Courtship, or what other respects,
neglecting those more requisite and more noble parts.

Wherefore a General ought to be excellently qualified in the real knowledge
of his Office, and every circumstance belonging unto it, before he shall
adventure to take so weighty a charge upon him; Non erunt honores unquam
^ortuiti muneris. Aus. fol. 92.
and far be it from any man to undertake this honorable burden, having the
speculative and practick part of his Office to learn, when occasion calls for
performance; for many Armies has been subdued by this onething; for he that
will be fortunate and desires to atchieve to honor, must consider it has a
dangerous birth, and that in like manner it must be nourished and fed with
great circumspection and care; he must be infinitely chary, lest he be seduced
by the trains of time; and the preservation of his honor must be his chiefest
aim, next the love and fear he owes to God, having an especial care that the
Christian Religion be had in due reverence in his Army, causing such Ministers
of Gods word, as shall follow to instruct the Army, to retain their dignities,
and to be reverenced of his soldiers; by this means an Army shall be kept in
marveilous obedience and order, and the Almighty Lord of Hosts will be ever
assisting to work him honorable victories, causing his divine providence to
attend him, as he did to Gideon, Judges 6. 36.
who had a miraculous sign of a Conquest by the strange effects of the Fleece.

Hezechiah had the like by the Suns retrograding ten degrees. 2 Kings 20. 8.


Also in History we read of Alexander, how he dreamed that he sported with
Satyrs, as he marched to the siedge of Troy; whereupon his diviners perceived
some divine revelation in it, and found the Anagram of it to be Tua Tyrus, and
so it happened.

Likewise Constantine marching toward Maxentius and Licinius, to give them
Battle, being sad and pensive casting up his eyes, perceived a lightsome
pillar in form of a Cross, Socrates Scholast.
wherein he read engraven these words, In hoc vince; the night following our
Savior appeared in a vision unto him, commanding him to wear that Emblem in
his Banner, and he should be victorious; this command he observed, and was
victorious, and turned a faithful Christian; so that questionless, where God
loves and favors, before he will see destruction to incompasse his chosen
Army, his destroying Angel shall devour the enemy: Samuel 10. verse. 9.
and never was General yet chosen to govern an Army, which God did so favor,
but he gave him another heart, as he did to Saul, and fitted him with virtues
fit to execute the place.

CHAP. II.
The things which a General is to give order for, unto his Sub-officers, to be
in a readiness against he Marches; with all manner of circumstances belonging
to this Office; as namely rules and precepts, whereby the ablest Generals in
former ages have steered their warlike course.
THE things necessary to be thought upon by a General after his Army is
leavied, is provision necessary for the same; as (formerly has been showed)
namely Victuals, Moneys, Powder, Shot, Artillery, Engines, Arms, Spades,
Mattocks, etc. with the safest transporting of these either by land or water,
and how in time of want to be speedily relieved with these materials, which war
consists of; the Army being composed of a competency both of horse and foot, as
the consequence of the design shall be thought to require, for the managing of
this war, there must be a convenient Navy if the service requires, either to
conduct or assist, or both. His care is to provide, and declare, good and
wholesome laws, that soldiers may be governed by, endeavoring to win
favor, using justice with clemency, and courtesy toward all; taking away all
occasions, that may provoke his Officers, or soldiers to transgress before
punishment be inflicted; he must be very vigilant and careful, how and where
he lands his men, strongly fortifying near the shore, that recourse may be
had too and fro from their ships: he is seldom or never to re-imbarke his
Army in the same place he landed them, especial if the enemy be at hand, where
he will have infinite advantage upon the disorderly re-imbarking, if some
fortification be not raised to defend them from the enemies assault.

He must be frugall of the blood and slaughter of his soldiers; only in
dangers not to be eschewed, or upon absolute advantages, in such a case he is
both to adventure his honor and his soldiers lives, to the hazard of the
merciless sword; always remembering that upon unadvisednesse, and yielding
unto dishonorable terms, though at first (...) fares like a green sore, yet
afterward he shall find pain enough; for dishonor frecs to the bone.

Also there is great knowledge, by reading, and practice, required in him,
whereby he may give advice for the sundry sorts of Imbattelling, Encamping,
Fortifying, and to use or prevent all kind of stratagems; for by the reading of
History a man may learn, and conceive more in a year then he possibly can see
practiced in his life time; by reason whereof the worthies of ancient times,
were portraited with a Book in one hand, and a Sword in the other.

And because there is no General, but is limited by his Prince in his
Commission, he is therefore to observe literally every tittle of it, and not to
exceed the limits of it, although a victory might be attained; in the like
kind, all inferior Officers are bound to obey their General in all things he
shall please to command; which obedience and observancy made King Philip of
Spain protest, that the true observing of his Commission by his General the
Count de Medina in 88. was far more pleasing to him, than the loss of his
Invincible Navy caused grief.

Generals must be very circumspect in making choice of their Officers, not
electing them for their outward show, but for their virtuous conditions and
approved experience; for favor may be prejudicial in these affairs, and
greatness of birth is not to be expected as the sole thing to qualify a man,
and to beget in him the habit of a soldier.

Also a General is not to be unmindfull to honor and reward the virtuous and
valiant, as well as to be severe in punishing the vicious and imbellick
persons; for he that corrects the offender, and rewards not the well
deserver, will soon be disesteemed of. Hythlodaeus in his Vtopia bitterly
invayeth against such kind of proceedings; he holds it very unfitting for
Commanders to make the sentence of death the guerdon for theft and mischief,
and does not rather first carefully provide to prevent the occasions; Cum multo
potius providendum fuerit, uti aliquis esset proventus vitae; ne cuipiam sit
tamen dira fur andi primum, deinde pereundi necessitas. Also deserts of right
ought to be gratified with gifts and advancements; for it is the surest tie to
knit a man to his superior, which being not performed, breeds impatience,
discontents, and heart-burnings, and for the most part apt to break forth into
dangerous attemps, Milites ditate, reliquos omnes spernite.

A General ought to be very circumspect in Marching his Army in difficult
ways, especially if the enemy be at hand; for an enemy will wait his
occasion, and take the best opportunity to fall on; for prevention whereof the
horse-troopes are to March before; which will discover the enemy and hold them
play, until all the foot divisions are drawn into Battalia; also in Marching
over Plains or Heathes, at every stand the Companies must draw up into
several divisions, which are as so many limbs ready to frame the body of the
Army upon a sudden.

The danger of being pestered and troubled with carriages and luggage, is very
great, and to be avoided; for it has been the confusion of dive^s Armies; as
first of Malchome King of Scots; likewise Sebastian King of Portugal in his
wars against Abde^^elec King of Morocco.

Likewise a General is upon all occasions, to call to counsel his chief
Officers to debate of all affairs and designs, taking every man's opinion at
large, only reserving his resolution to himself in all secrefie, that none or
very few should be made partakers before the execution.

A General ought to know the situation of every country by his insight in the
use of Maps, and take a true survey of all such parts as his Army is to march
through, whether they be plains or champions, or woody and full of waters;
whether or not furnished with strong Towns and Forts; so that accordingly he
may proportion his Horse and Foot; for in Champion Countries Horses are of
greatest use; if situated upon Straights and strong Forts, the Army must
consist most of Footmen.

He is also to gain perfect intelligence, how his enemy is appointed; how, and
in what kind his Army is demeaned; for it is no policy to follow a
light-footed enemy with an heavy Army.

Also a General must take notice if any matter of fear or muttering be in the
Army, upon the rumor of giving Battle: Exercitum terrore plenum Dux ad pugnam
non ducat; also a further principle in war must be observed. Si Duces
necessa^^ cum multitudine pugnare cogantur, Consilium ect noctis tempore Belli
fortunam tentare.

A General ought also, not only to have expert Enginers and men of exquisite
knowledge in the art of fortification, both of Forts, Camps, conducting of
Mines, planting of Batteries, and disposing of all kind of Trenches; but also
to have therein himself absolute judgment and knowledge; otherwise he may be
wondrous misled, frustrating his designs, which will redound to his great
dishonor.

He is also to have a special consideration of the place he means to incampe
and continue his Army in; first respecting the healthfulnesse of the air, then
the dryness of the ground, the convenience of wood and water; and that the
enemy may have no advantage to intercept the relief and provision that is to
be conveyed to the Camp, either by water or land; that no hills be near to
annoy the Camp, and that no waters be cut out to drown it.

A General must cause his soldiers to take good rest and competent food,
before he presumes to give Battle; for it is a principle in war, In pugna
milites validius resistunt, si cibo potuque referti fuerint; Nam fames
intrinsecus mag^^ pugnat qu^^ ferrum exteri^^: Soldiers do better stand to it
in fight, if they have their bellyes full of meat and drink; for hunger within
fights more eagerly, than steel without. Also he is to stir up their
drooping spirits with some brave Heroic Oration, that shall inflame their
spirits, that like lightning they may consume where they go.

A General is to command his Officers daily to exercise their Companies, which
will enable their bodies, and preserve their healths; and although the enemy
should be far remote, yet duly to observe watches, guards, and setting forth
their Sentinells as carefully, as if the enemy were near at hand; this will
breed an habit and custom to their bodies, so that it will not seem grievous
to them, when as they shall perform those duties in earnest.

A General must be very circumspect in giving an express command to his
Officers, that no abusive drinking be used amongst his Officers, nor Soldiers;
par vinonolentiam crudelitas sequitur; for it is commonly seen that quarrels,
mutines, and horrible abuses arise by drunkenness, besides the neglect of
their duties, whereby an enemy takes his advantage to destroy a whole Camp.

A General is to have special care, that there be no quarrels or
heart-burnings between his Officers, but speedily to reconcile them, before
they go upon any service, lest a greater mischief ensue, as did upon the like
difference betwixt Hanno and Bomilcar, two famous Captains of Carthage, who
being in fight against Agathocles, and furiously charged by his troops,
Bomilcar withdrew his divisions, suffering Haenno and his soldiers to be hewn
to pieces.

If a Captain or soldier transgresses twice by his cowardlinesse, or through
negligence, Not that famous Hannibal that poisoned himself.
a General ought not to forgive; as Hannibal a Commander in the first Punick
wars lost his head, for being through his cowardice vanquished twice; Non est
bis in Bello peccare.

A General must avoid mutinies, disorders, and abuses in his Army, by
commanding every Regiment to be drawn in parrado, and before the head of the
troops; some Officer to read such laws and edicts as are provided for the
Army to be governed by, whereby may not plead ignorance, and if any dares offend
wilfully against any of the Articles, immediately to have the punishment
inflicted without respect of persons.

He is to command diverse false allarmes to be made, whereby he shall see in
what a readiness his Army will be in if necessity required, and if any base
cowardlinesse should be found in any soldier, that should not dare to answer
the allarm with speed, he should be brought before the head of the troops, and
his arms broken, and banished the Army.

If a General perceives that the enemy stops his relief of Victuals and
Ammunition, that without hazard they cannot arrive; then he must take notice
what Towns, or Forts intercept the passage of relief, and give order for the
taking of them in, or strong Convoyes prepared to conduct the carriages; for it
is very dangerous to have an enemy in the Rear of an Army to hold any strong
Towns or Forts; for thereby they have advantage to stay and surprise all
relief, that should sustain the Camp.

He must be truly informed by Intelligencers, and Guides (whose informations he
must compare with the Map of that Country, to see that no false wood be used)
how far the enemies Towns lie from his Army; he must not be ignorant of the
Hills, Vallyes, Ways, Straights, Passages, Lakes, Rivers, and Bridges; their
number; quality, distance, with every particular circumstance; whereby he may
know how the enemy may annoy him, and the better he may know how to place his
Fortifications, and Guards, for to prevent him. The Prince of Orange was well
seen in these affairs; he knowing the situation of the seventeene Provinces
in the Netherlands so exactly, that he was able at one time to give directions,
how sundry parts and passages, should be guarded, what Straights fortifyed,
what Levells drowned, either by sea or fresh water, whereby he avoided present
and eminent dangers.

Before a General intends to march with his Army, the ways are to be skowred
by certain horsemen, for fear the enemy should lay any Ambuskadoes; and also
to give notice of the convenience of the ways for the Soldiers and Artillery
to pass; and also he is to have provided able sufficient Guides to conduct
them, the best and safest way.

A General is to see every Regiment as they march, take their places according
to their antiquities in the Field; but when Companies are in Garrison, that
Company which first enters the Town has the priority during the time they
stay; also in a March the eldest Regiment is not continually to have the
Vaward, but the Regiment that marched the first day in the Van, the next day
must march in the Rear; and so proportionably every Regiment must take his
turn if the march continues; and in the morning before they dislodge, a piece
of Ordnance is to be discharged first, whereby the Army takes notice they are
to march; at the second report of the Ordnance, every Company is in arms ready
to march; and at the third report of the Cannon, the first Regiment marches.

If diverse Nations should be in an Army, every particular Nation is to be
quartered in a division by themselves, and not to mix Companies to avoid
quarrels: moreover if the number be great of the Mercenary Nations, it is best
to divide them, both in marching and imbattelling, lest they should be
treacherous, or cowardly; for there is no confidence nor trust can be reposed
in them, unless they be conveniently placed in the Battle, so as they may be
yoaked in and tied to perform their best endeavors. If an enemy should keep
a Straight to hinder the marching of the Army; a General must draw out both
Horse and Foot to charge them in either Flancke, and then the residue to fight
out their way in the Front of them.

Also a General must be very expert in distinguishing the several seats of
the Drum, which is his voice in the time of war; the soldiers are also to be
taught the understanding of the same, that they may accordingly demean
themselves as the beat of the Drum commands.

A General is to give to the Serjeant-Major-Generall of the Army the
watchword, which is privately to be kept and returned to all inferior
Officers; by which word, they may pass the whole Army through; this watchword
is to be altered every night.

A General is to cause lots or billets to be made, with the names of every
particular guarde written in them, those are to be rolled up, and put into a
hat by the Major, and so every inferior officer draws his guard; by this
means disputes are prevented, and the enemy cannot corrupt an officer to give
over a guard, because it is uncertain who shall have that watch; also to give
order to the inferior Officers, for the due and orderly releeving of the
watch, morning and evening.

A General is to draw his whole Army into Battallia and to see them exercised
in gross, changing them into diverse forms of Battle; the footmen are to be
ordered in diverse small Battallions, whereof are framed the right Wing, the
Battle, and the left Wing; the Battle is to consist of as many more men as
either of the Wings does; the Horsemen are to be divided into diverse
Battallia's, so as they may one releeve the other; the one half of the horse,
are to be placed on the right Wing of the Army, the other on the left, unless
one of the Wings, and the rear of the battle may be secured by Rivers,
Bogges, or Rockie ground, so that the enemy may not take advantage with his
horse; then they are to be ranged only upon one Wing, they are to be placed a
sufficient distance from the foot, lest by their disorderly retreat they
annoy their own foot-troopes; diverse foot and horse are to be ranged a good
distance before the Army, which are termed the forlorn hopes, in regard they
are first to charge the enemy; these troops being thus ordered are to be
taught how to advance and retreat, performing all actions, as ample as if the
enemy were encountering with them. This kind of exercise will make them ready,
and orderly in their performances, otherwise it may prove dangerous to bring
them to the encounter.

A General is to animate his soldiers in time of need to take pains; as the
valiant Emperor Vespasian who was the first man that carried a Basket of earth
to the Fortification, that his soldiers might not think scorn to imitate
him; it is the sober obedient mind, and the hard painful body, that makes
the noble soldier.

A General must take away all hope of refuge from his soldiers in time of
Battle, as William the Conqueror and Julius Caesar did send away their
shipping that there soldiers should hope for nothing but either victory, or a
grave; and in many Battles troops of horses have been placed in the rear of
the Army, to put to the sword all such as turn head to look for refuge.

It is not sufficient for a General to get a victory, but also to know how to
use it, for many times security and negligence, after a conquest has bred
utter ruin, as appeared by the history of Bayan Chinsan, who was General to
the Tartarian Emperor, after he had vanquished his enemy at Cinguinguy, by
their carelessness, disorders, and drunkenness, were set upon in the night by
the remnant remaining, who put them all to the sword.

It is very dangerous for a General to present battle to an enemy in such a
difficult place, Sc^^^erberg practiced this against the Turk and overcame him.
that he is devoyd of all refuge, or possibility to escape, whereby urgent
necessity may make an enemy desperate. If a General sees his horse-troopes too
weak to encounter with the Enemies, then he must give order for diverse shot to
march up in file with the horse; then seeing their advantage, to break out
from them, and gall the enemy; these shot would be often exercised with the
horse to make them apt to give an assault, and also upon occasion to reunite
themselves into a body to make a defense.

If a General draws out any Wings of shot, (to charge and skirmish with the
enemy) any far distance before the body of the Army; then they ought to be
backed with a guard of Pikes, which are to rescue them from the charge of
horse, as also to aid them if they should join pell mell with the enemies
forlorn hope; but this is to be performed long before the bodies of either
Armies can meet, which kind of skirmishes are for diverse good ends; as first,
to discover, and win some ground of advantage, or to give the soldiers
courage, by seeing how those loose bands do valiantly foil those of the
enemy, in which skirmishes some politic stratageme is to be used, to skare
and affright the enemy; for any unexpected accident, will seem strange to an
Army, although it be never so small, and will be ready to disorder them; he
that commands these troops must be very wise and circumspect, left he falls
into the enemies stratagems, which may discourage the Army.

Also a General is not to trust to a seeming victory; for many times good
success at the first, in a battle, occasioneth the overthrow of many great
actions, as we have the example of Theoderick, General of the Germans; his
army being very potent, had gotten the best of William Earl of Flanders at the
first encounter, which made the Germans confident, and the rather secure, in
regard their strength exceeded the Flemmings; but the Flemmings being rather
desperate than resolute; and by the valor of the Earl they had so reunited
their broken troops, and with a furious charge did so shake and disorder the
Germans, that many of them were slain, and the rest put to flight.

If a General or some other great Commander, or if any part of the Army should
be cut off by the enemy, it is best to keep it from the knowledge of the rest
of the Army, lest it dishearten them.

If an Army be to march in the dark; to avoid confusion, command must be
given that every soldier shall carry the end of his Leaders pike or weapons
from making any noise: and by that means they shall keep right in their ranks.

A General in time of battle must be very wise and discreet, to give order
when the skirmishers of the loose-banded Maniples shall make their recreat, and
to what place; also when the Horse shall charge, and what part of the enemies
divisions they shall assault; and to give order what footmen shall be drawn
out to succor them if occasion be; also what Battalia's shall advance
forwards, and when to retreat; likewise when the whole body of the Army shall
charge, and what divisions shall pursue the victory; always remembering to keep
the maine Battle steadfast, and not to move in pursuit after the vanquished
enemy; also to have Officers in the time of fight, to gather together such
straggling soldiers as shall be disrank't and in disorder, and so make a body
of them in the rear of the Army.

There are sundry opinions about the place of a General in the time of giving
battle: but questionless, the best and securest place is before the battle
of succor; but at the first he may stand in the front of the maine battle,
until such time as the forlorn hopes are beaten in: he is to ride upon a
small Palfrey, having a guard of able gentlemen in like sort attending him, the
which he may send to and fro upon all occasions to give Officers intelligence
of his pleasure.

If a General shall perceive fresh aids are approaching, then let him use his
best endeavors to give the enemy battle before they arrive; and also to draw
out a convenient force to meet those aids, and give them battle in some place
of greatest advantage.

If a Generals victuals, ammunition or pay begins to fail, then let him
endeavor to give his enemy battle, if he suspect Supplies: but if he knows
his enemy is in want either of victuals, ammunition, etc. or that sickness,
mutinies or the like are in his Army, so that any hope be that his Army may of
it self dissolve, then a General must stand strongly upon his guard, and by
all means avoid joining battle, as was practiced by the Prince of Orange
about fourteen years since, when Grave Hendrick Vandenberg marched over the
river Ysell in a great frost, by the Town of Duesburgh into the Vello, with
ten thousand men; where his Excellency and the States of Holland might have
given him battle with a great deal of convenience, but he rather suffered him
to pillage the Dorpes and burn where he pleased, because he knew he could
not stay long, nor march far from the river, lest the frost should have broke,
and he disappointed of his return.

If a General has had victory triumphed on his side, a little persuasion will
serve to cause the Soldiers to encounter a second time; for as the proverb
says, victoria victoriam parat, animumque victoribus anget, and adversariis
anfert: for questionless one victory begets another, and puts great courage
into those that have already had the better; and it beats the edge of courage
and spirit from those that have been beaten: wherefore a General must be very
wise and careful how he brings on his men to fight after an overthrow once
received, unless it be upon great advantages and firm hopes of a Conquest.

When a General intends to make a retreat from his enemy, he must be very
circumspect and careful in his carriage, and demeaning of his actions for his
better safety and strengthening, for fear his soldiers perceive any cause of
fear should constrain him, in regard of the nearness or potency of the
enemies army; but he is to let his soldiers understand that his retreat is to
draw the enemy after him to be surprised in some ambushkado; or rather, if it
may be with convenience, for his better advantage to give the enemy battle:
for there are diverse inconveniences attend a retrait, if the enemy be in view:
for although a General may aim at some place of better advantage, yet
unhappily there may be diverse ill passages and streights to hinder their quick
passage: besides, these kind of retraits breed a jealousy both in soldiers
and their Officers; for they know that he that forsakes the field fears some
danger: so that the safest way is either to recreat before an enemy be at hand,
or being near at hand, secretly in the night; for it is a Maxim to be
observed, Rather to retreat in the dark than be beaten in the light: Si
certamen quandoque dubium videatur, tacitam miles arripiat fugam; fuga enim
aliquando lauda^da (says a learned General). But indeed of all motions in the
war, a safe retrait is the most difficult, but that danger will ever attend,
as Monluc high Marshall of France once said, Je ne trove point null fait des
arms chooses si difficille qu ^ne retraite: A General must have a jealous eye
over an enemy that is revolted from his King, and beware what confidence he
reposeth in him; for diverse respects; as namely, first, they are not to be used
in any great enterprises, neither are they to be trusted in any frontier Town
or Fort of any consequence; for they may redeem their reputations, liberties
and estates lost, by surrendering up those Forts: The French had experience of
this when Don Pedro de Navarro (being banished Spain) was trusted with
Fonterable, and to gain his former freedom, he surrendered up this Town, anno
1523. A General may make use of a Treason, but let him never trust the Traitor.

A General must take this for a Maxim; If a Commander of any high authority
has wilfully transgrest, Machiavill taxes this for a great Solecisme in S^ate
either not to strike at all, or else to strike home; for he shall be sure
afterward to be rewarded to purpose. A delinquent regaining liberty, may
endanger the estate of an army and the life of a General: for high spirits
will seek revenge, as by our late woeful experience of that treacherous
Felton, who spightfully murdered our noble General, the Duke of Buckingham:
therefore there is but three ways for a General to deal with such wilful
transgressors, whose spirits cannot be subjected: namely, first to put them to
present execution; although it be a solemn thing, yet it must be allowed where
it cannot be helped; but where with safety it may be helped it is to be
disallowed. The second is to keep a delinquent close prisoner, or confine him
to the custody of some man in trust, and in this there is a great caution to be
used; for our Histories report of Morton Bishop of Ely, who was committed to
the custody of Buckingham by King Richard the third; he by his policy not
only gained his own freedom, but wrought the Duke to his own faction. The
third and last is the more noble and gentile, and in most cases surest; and
that is a free and gracious pardon both of life and for liberty; which,
although of it self, it may seem partly unsafe, yet if the delinquent be of a
noble disposition, and have any spark of worth in him, there is no better way
to endeare him to his Superior, than by promising him promotions and honors,
or advancing him to some place of gain or trust: This was practiced by Oth^,
who not only pardoned Marius Celsus, the chief man of Galba's faction, but
put him in a place of great command and honor in the Wars against Vtelius: He
yielding this reason for it, Ne hostis metum reconciliationis adhiberet: a
pardoned enemy is jealous of the breach making up.

The chiefest means whereby a soldier will be drawn to love and honor his
General, is by receiving courteous carriage, and careful provision for those
that are wounded and maimed in the Wars, and by a strict command that the
Officers do not wrongfully abuse them: if any soldier should be taken
prisoner, order is presently to be taken for his ransom. This will encourage
soldiers to venture themselves upon all perilous dangers.

A General ought to be very careful to prevent discontents, and to appease
mutinies, which for the most part grow from the neglect of the due and well
paying of the soldiers their weekly pay, which draws infinite dangers after
it: for usually they take the advantage to rebel, when the most present and
urgent occasion of service is to be performed; as appeared at the siege of
Ostend, where Duke Albertus his forces would not be entreated to go upon the
service intended, without they had first their present pay, which he, not being
able to perform, nor having the art to insinuate into their affection to gain
their patience and loves, but rather trusting to his power to reduce them to
his service by force of arms, caused two thousand of his army to revolt to the
enemy, which might have been the ruin of his design. In such a desperate
case, there is no better way to prevent them, than by making loving
protestations and large promises, and to satisfy so far as ability will
extend. They that are the chiefest in the faction, in a fit time and season are
to be privately apprehended and punished, whereby the whole faction will be
enervated and weakened by degrees, and the inferiors seeing the chiefest in the
rebellion to be surprised, will yield quietly of themselves, so that they
shall be brought under obedience without any hazzarding of the Generals person.

A General must conceive, that advice may be given and taken to a man's own
destruction: for it may as well be the wise man's fall, as the fools
advancement; and is oftnest most dangerous in wounding, when it strokes with a
silken hand: for a base Politician is indeed a devouring fury in the shape of
friendship, to advantage his deceit the more.

That General that is not truly wise and valiant, soon loses his Command,
and grows contemptible, and by his own folly or fears, infects his troops
with cowardice. It is reported of Caesar, (by Cicero) That in all his command
in War, there was not found an It^, but a Veni; taking it as a great dishonor
to himself to be any thing but the forwardest Leader in all his designs.

If any discontents and quarrels should arise in a Generals Camp, between
Officers of great Authority and Command, it is not safe for a General to take
part of any side, but rather to mediate peace between them; for the contrary
side that sees he is despised or neglected, will study a revenge; as by the
example of the Earl of Warwick and the Duke of Somerset, who falling out in
Henry the fourth his Court, Somersets part was chiefly taken; whereupon Warwick
rebelled, and deadly Wars continued twenty nine years, until there was a
general confusion of both Houses: so that the safest way, if peace cannot be
mediated, is to confine them both, until they be glad to desire friendship of
themselves.

A General ought in some kinds to participate in the wants and distresses of
his Soldiers, which makes them the more willing to undergo it; as Alexander
did, who marching with his Army through a dry barren Country, where the Army
was almost famisht, a Soldier brought him an helmet of water, who courteously
rewarded him, and told him he durst not drink it unless there were
sufficient for all his Soldiers, and so cast it upon the ground; testifying,
that he desired to fate no better than his Soldiers.

Also a General ought to take notice, that his Honor and all his Actions are
much subject to be dimmed and disgraced; especially, if he seeks not to be
beloved and honored of his Army: besides, it is the policy of a subtle enemy
to study and labor how to undervalue and disgrace Commanders, so, that their
Soldiers may have a base and poor opinion of their worths, whereby all
enterprises or designs, taking no effect, shall be censured and ambiguously
construed. Nihil est quod male narrando non possit depravari.

A General is to consider, that in all treaties of peace and friendship, these
circumstances are first to be considered,: In the first place, either between
the victor and the vanquished: secondly, between those, that having warred
together, are upon equal terms of advantage: thirdly, between those that
have lived always in good agreement without any quarrel. Unto the Victor the
vanquished must yield, and patiently endure the imposition of some strict
Covenants, which otherwise might seem unreasonable. Where War is made, and
no advantage gotten, there it is usual to demand and make restitution of
things and places claimed, gotten or lost, according as both parties can best
agree: But between such Nations as never fell out, there ought no conditions
of establishing friendship to be propounded, since it seems reasonable, that
each party should hold their own, and neither carry themselves as Superiors
unto other in prescribing ought that may be troublesome.

Thus do I conclude this discourse with diverse Aphorisms (very proper and fit
to be annexed to this subject) which I have collected out of S. R. Dallington,
and fitted them for this purpose: and moreover I would not that any man should
think that I go about to teach any Officer his duty, much less this high
Officer, whose perfections ought to be beyond my capacity to conceive of; but
these collections I have taken pains to gather from the best Authors, as
things of consequence to be taken notice of by a General.

Aphorism I.
EXample is of greater validity then precept; Princeps optimus saciendo docet,
cumque, sit imperio maximus, exemp^o major est. Valet. l. 2.
therefore a General must principally be an absolute Soldier, and likewise a
good Director; that by his presence and personal performance his Soldiers may
strive to imitate, I^lus in Duce repones quam in Exercitu. Prob. d^^^per.
and be encouraged to undergo any pains, or meet with any danger: for upon
his noble performance depends the success of the Service; Vnus hom^ pluris
quam ^niversa Civitas. Tac. de Mor. Ge^.
according to the Greek Proverb, That an Army of Sheep led by a Lion was
better than an Army of Lions led by a Sheep.

Aphorism II.
THe keenest Rasor will turn edge at a more solid substance, Fortuna vitrca
est, cum splendet f^angitur.
but the tough and dull Axe is able to encounter the hard and sturdie Oak, and
overpower him: So experience teaches, that hot and fiery spirits are apter
to get a purchase, Vincere scis, Hannibal, uti victoria nescis. Prob. de Han.
than to keep it. He therefore that has the fortune to get the victory, but
not the judgment to make use thereof, stands upon slipperie ye, and is
subject to fall on either band.

Aphorism III.
A General is to command and advise, In Milite uniu^ sors est, in Imperatore
universorum periculum. Egesip.
but Soldiers are to execute with their swords what is commanded; in this, but
one man's life is in danger; Dubus praeliorum exemp^us, summam rerum and imperu
scipsum reservat. Tac^. lib. 11.
but in that, the hazard of all. Wherefore a Commander in chief ought to be
covered with the sevenfold shield of Ajax, and never expose his person to
apparent peril, S^etit sub Ajacis clipco septemplice t^ctus. Hom. Odys. 9.
but in case of a general overthrow and manifest defeat.

Aphorism IV.
Virtue is a Gemme of such excellency, Exomni vita simulatio dissimulatioque,
tollenda. Cic. l. 2.
that even her shadow, if it be in a great Commander, Sanctitas, sictas,
sides, privata bona sunt. Sen. Thyest.
does much good to particular Officers by imitation, Nescit imperare qui nescit
dissimulare. Sigism. Imper.
and to the public Army by participation. Wherefore, though simulation of
what is good, and dissimulation of what is evil, Malum sub lingua, non in
lingua habens. Greg.
are accounted vices in a private man; yet in a public person, they are
necessary evils; Simplicitas ac liberalitas, ni adsit mod^s. in exitum
ver^untur. ^acit. Hist. 3.
for if he be overt in expressing his nature, or prodigal in venting his
purposes, it breeds dangerous consequences; for it harms himself, and arms
his enemy with prevention.

Aphorism V.
HIde not from those of thy best and most private Council the true state of
thy cause, Medicus in desperatione, ^ubern^^^^ in tempestate cognoscitur; Horum
omnium famam praecedentia pericula extollunt. Sid. App. 8.
and discover not to thy Army or Enemy thy wants or fears: for it
encourages the one, and quite dismayeth the other: Fair bonne mine, en mavai^
jeu. Pro. Gal.
But if confusion were at hand so eminent, as if heaven and earth had conspired
thy overthrow, yet comfort thy self and Soldiers with hopeful words of
assurance of some plottes and advantages thou have against them (though thy
heart apprehends truly the danger as it is) whereby thou may make thy
resistance the stronger, Q^o timoris minus est, eo minus ferme periculiest.
Live. l. 2^.
or procure thy peace upon better terms. ^onus animus in re mala dimidium est
ma^^. Plaut. Pseud.


Aphorism VI.
A Will to do hurt is more dangerous in the close, Flexu^sum and occultum
hominis ingenium* cujus vis proprie in art solertiaque, est posita, aptior
tamen ad cavendos quam metuendos ^ostes. Eront* praef.
than a prosessed enemy, because he that suspecteth least, is soonest and
easiest overthrown: like the unskilful Fencer, who, while he wardeth the head,
is hit at the heart, Nemo celerius opprimitur, quam qui nihil timet. Vel. l. 2.
which lay out of guard.

Aphorism VII.
IN the School of Art, Is qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni. Gram. vulg.
doubt begets knowledge; so in the School of Policy, Si nihil velis timere,
metu^s omnia. Senec. Sent.
she is the mother of good success: for he that fears the worst, Quod nimis
miseri volunt, hoc faci'e credunt. Seneca.
preventeth it soonest. Man naturally interprets things according as he would
have them, Omnia audens contemnit^r, nil temere agens metuitur. Live. lib. 24.
and so doubts less than he should; but he that doubts most treads the safest
path.

Aphorism VIII.
A Business well begun is half ended: Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet.
Hor. lib. 1. ep. 2.
wherefore it much imports to the happy or disastrous issue of any affairs,
Bonum principium dimidium totius Pro. lat.
what manner of entrance and beginning he makes, especially in that of War; for
good success in the first encounter greatly advances the maine of his
business, Fama in novis coeptis validissima est. Tac. An. 13.
and takes away both courage and reputation, Primis eventibus, metus aut
fiducia gig^itur. Idem An. 12.
yea, and resolution from the losing side: herein therefore consists the maine
care of a General.

Aphorism IX.
WOrth is valued by the quality, Nun quam bonos fortesque mis^tes habebis,
nisi haec duo ve^^t instrumenta ad^ibeas, delectum and disciplinam Lip. Pol. l.
5.
not the greatness of a thing; as the goodness of a Fortress consists
rather in the conformity of the parts, and the answerable distances, than in
the unproportionable greatness: Multitud^^^ vi^es habet, sed pondus. Sen^ c.
so the strength of an Army stands more in the valor and good order of the
Combatants, than in the number; against which number, are these two principal
advantages, great Ordnance, and good Ordnanc^.

Aphorism X.
It is unwarrantable to run an extreme hazard, De vita and regno velut ad
casum alcae pericl^tari, stu^titi^ est and vanitas. Stobaeus.
saveonely when extreme necessity commands: therefore a wise General ought
never to venture his fortunes upon one days trial, Fortunam inter dubia,
virtutem inter certa numerare. Tac. de Ger.
or doubtful chance of Battle, when he foresees by military inductions that
he may obtain his purposes without blows.

Aphorism XI.
WHo undertakes a long Voyage by Sea, Verum si incipias, neque terficias
gnaviter, nihilo plus agas, quam si des operam, ut cum ratione insania^ (quod
ille de amoreidem de bello). Terent. Eun.
and at a great charge, must resolve to hold on his course against all
accidents that may offer to oppose him: So a General being engaged in a great
Action, must wrestle with all difficulties rather than quit the Enterprise;
Mars communis, and victum saepe erigit, and affligit victorem. Live. Lib. 28.
better it were to foresee the dangers at first and prevent them, or desist:
but if once set forwards, he must take up this resolution, To go on with the
Sword, or fall on the Sword: for in this he puts his fortunes upon trial, Et
fractis rebus, violentior ultima virtus. Sil. Lib. 1.
but in retrograding he purchases shame and loss.

Aphorism XII.
AS the Orator places his strongest arguments in the entrance of his plea,
Instandum famae, nam prout prima cesserint, succedunt universa. Tacit. lib. 12.
to persuade and confirm the Auditorie: So should a General bend all his best
forces upon the first piece he attempteth, to animate and encourage his
Soldiers, Non mim^s fama quam vi, stant res principum. Tac. An. 3.
and to give reputation to the action he intends; for first actions make
deepest impressions either of fear or courage. La bonne reputation d'un
Chief, est caused un grand bien pur son Armec. Plut. Phoc.
He is therefore so much to tender his reputation at the first onset, as to
leave nothing behind him unbroken but that which bends.

Aphorism XIII.
Mischief enters at the open gate of security. Inter scopulos quibus illidi
ac frangi Reipub. Navis solet. prima (...) fiducia^ occurri^. Lip. Pol. lib. 3.
As the Indian Rat shuts himself into the belly of the Crocodile that sleeps
gaping, and gnawes his guts asunder: So selfe-conceited confidence in our own
strength, Credulitas pariter ac diffidentia perdiderunt homines. Hesiod. Lib 1.
and overweening credulity of an enemies insufficiency, begets this supine
negligence; but a watchful Providence prevents an eminent danger.

Aphorism XIV.
WE perceive it easier to oppose (in the Schools of Art) than answer;
Tutissimum est inserre cum timeas gradum.
So by proof we find the same in the art of War: Quand on void venir le
danger, ^^faut gaignerle devant; and ne (...) mal sei f^it, po^ry donner order.
A^. P^ud.
For it is safer to obviat and meet danger in the way, than to tarry till it
comes home to our doors. Provocando, tuis auges confidentiam, and adversariis
min^^^; quia fortiores videntur qui provoc^re non dubitant. Live.
For there is ever more courage in the assailer, and commonly better success.

Aphorism XV.
IN the active part of military service, Ars vi^cendi and bellandi est
prudentia, ut medicina valetudinis, Ci^de fin.
the Generals greatest virtue is to apprehend a present occasion of advantage,
Men's u^a sapiens plurium vincit manus: qui fallere non v^^^, falls non potest.
Lip. Pol. l. 3.
and to take it. So on the passive side, Mache giona ((...)) c^e del perig^o
(...), omai fosse presago il c^ore, ^^irresolute in ritron^r rimedio: Lamia
tenera eta rendesse ^'timore.
the evasion from a sudden and imminent danger is much more noble than a
forethought of prevention: for in this is only matter of judgment, but in
that is the life of action and execution.

Aphorism XVI.
TO speak that which a man thinks not, Nulla sunt ^^liora consil^a quam quae
ignocaverit ^osta antequam fiunt. Veg. lib. 3.
is reproveable, being taken in strict moral sense; but necessity gives a
larger latitude to the managing of greater affairs. For nothing is more
expedient to a General, than that the enemy knows nothing of his deliberations
till they be put in action, Nec ostenderunt Bellum prius quam i^t^lerunt. Live.
de Sab.
nor of his preparations till they be on foot. It is therefore an useful
policy to pretend one Service, and intend another.

Aphorism XVII.
Pliny reports of a Getulian Captive that escaped the danger of devouring by
many Lions through her humble gesture and fair language; Captivam Getuliae
reducem a^divi, multoru^ Leonum impetu^ a se mitigatum; alioqui ausam se dicere
faemina prosuga^, infirmam, supplice animalis omnia dignissimi, caterisque
imperantis, indigna^ ejus glori^ pradam. Pl. not. hist.
he being the noblest beast of the forest never commits violence but where he
finds resistance: Debellare hosts fortune est, refocillare victos vere regium.
Pa^. lua a quo clementia abest, crudele est. Pom. Lec. 1.
So is the true Soldier the most honorable of all professions, who holds it
as great glory to releeve the oppressed captive, as to conquer the enemy.

Aphorism XVIII.
IN the honor of great achievements, Fortunam citius reperias quam retine^^.
Publi.
inferior Officers and Soldiers partake with the General, according to the
measure of their place and merit: Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta
tutri. Ovid.
but the well or ill ordering of things achieved, redounds wholly to his own
proper glory, or shame: it behooves him therefore to have a special care to
the safety of his Army, Ilest be^^coup plus fait de garder un estat de ne
tomber en ruin, que del' agrandir, and enrich^^ Am. in Piut.
that every thing may be regulated according to rule and order; for it is
greater honor to come off with judgment, than to go on with courage; to use
victory wisely, than to get it happily; and more glory to retain that which is
won victoriously, than to obtain it.

Aphorism XIX.
NOthing is more necessary in a General than the perfect exploration of the
courses his enemy takes, Ille diffici^^ vincitur qui de suis and adversarii
copiis vere potest judicare. Veget. lib. 3.
and a true estimate of the forces he ^ingeth; for by the ignorance of the
first, and the misprision of this other, Tuum est, hostium exe citum, locorum
situm, naturam regionis (...) Live. lib. 22.
he makes his preparations, and builds his actions upon supposals and slippery
grounds, bereaving himself of many fair advantages.

Aphorism XX.
Despair takes Arms when all hope of escape is absent, Necessitas etiam
timidos sorts ^acit. Iu^^. lib. 3.
for necessity makes the most imbellick cowards valiant; wherefore it is
wisdom to leave thy enemy a port open to fly, Hosts s^gientes nolite
trucida* re, ne potius ducant manner quam fugere. Lycurg. in Pol.
and rather build him a bridge of gold to pass over, than coup him in a place,
that either he must fight, or perish.

Aphorism XXI.
NO Actions of men are more subject to sudden and unexpected events than those
of War; Exercitus praed^tor, and ipse praeda hostium. Salust. l^g.
and in War, nothing so soon snatcheth victory out of our hands, Fventus
prae^iorum inter initia ^^^raillos fuit, quibus victo^ia debebatur. V^get. lib.
3.
as untimely falling to the spoil: upon such disorder Fortune always turns
her wheel, and makes victors of them which before were vanquished.

Aphorism XXII.
AS in nature, (...) causd, tollitur effectus. Arist^t.
so in War; where the cause fails, there the effect also dies; for where
men are courageous, not out of a true resolution, Teme* itas, ubi primum
impetum effudit, sicut quaedam anima^^, amissoa^ule^, ^orpet. Curt. lib 4.
but out of some conceit of the enemies weakness or wants; when they find
things contrary to those former impressions, then they lose their spirits and
animosity.

Aphorism XXIII.
THere is nothing so glorious or sweet in the fruition, Quie nuce nucleum esse
vult, frangat nucem. Plut.
that is not difficult and painful in the acquisition; nor can we taste the
kernel of pleasure, Q^^squis enim duros ca^sus virtutis amore
unless we crack the hard shell of danger: such are the craggie and untrodden
paths to honor, Vi^erit, ille sibilaude^que, decusque pa^bit. Vir. Opus^.
where though the first entrance be hard and many times disastrous, yet
overcome by true resolution and perseverance, it after turns to a man's great
glory.

Aphorism XXIV.
FRom the collection of circumstances every action takes his warrant, Magna
sant momenta t^mpo^^^ and mul^um interest, idem (...) utr mante, an post
decernat^r, (...) scipiatur, agatur. Caelar. Com. lib. 5.
and amongst these, that of time is of greatest moment. For a Soldier not to
adventure when he should, is cowardice, not prudence; and to dare when he
should not, is rashness, not valor. A wise General therefore must form his
counsels, Temporiapta^i decet. Sene^. Med.
and frame his actions upon the mould of necessary circumstances.

Aphorism XXV.
ABove all other actions, Multum cum in omnibus rebus, tum in re militari
potest fortuna. Caesar's Com. lib. 6.
fortune is said to have the greatest stroke in War; yet the f^ult cannot be
so transferred upon her, but the greatest blame will rest upon the General;
for her two only advocates (Blindness and Ignorance) which plead her
innocence, Qui qu^ necessaria sunt non providet, non prorsus videt: (...) non
sa^ere, est p^ane desipere. Lip. Pol. lib. 3.
will be your chiefest accusers, and prove you guilty of your own ruin. It
behooves therefore every Commander to open the one eye of his providence upon
the danger, and fix the other of his knowledge upon the remedy.

Aphorism XXVI.
THe law of Arms tolerates a professed enemy to attempt that by stratagem,
Cum istud Bellum suscipitur, ut aperte pugnet quis, autex insidiis, nihil ad
justiciam attine^* August.
fraud or suborned treachery, which cannot be achieved by force, without
long endeavoring, uttermost danger and excessive charge. qui adiouste ^oy
audire d'un mcschant, ^^en repent and ^^en voit l'onstrage puis apres. Ami.
Plut.
But it is dangerous for a General to treat in such a practice, and be of
the party, if he be to engage his person and trust his life in the hands of
the suborned traitors; lest whilst he seeks to buy other men's lives for money,
he sells his own for naught.

Aphorism XXVII.
THese which by our means, Nemo fere credit nisi ei quem fidelem putat;
perd^^^ssimi est igitur hominis fallere eum qui lesus non esset nisi
credidisset. Cic. pro Ros.
and for our cause are brought in case not to help themselves, by us ought
carefully to be tendered. It is therefore a shameful thing in a General to
give Hostages for keeping of Articles capitulated, and after by wilful
breaking of them, to leave the lives of those pledges at the enemies mercy. --
Rebus succurrite laesis, Et date nau^^agio littora tuta meo. Ovid. Inst.


Aphorism XXVIII.
Blood flesh and bones are the least strengthening to the arm, Quemadmodum
homines sine nervis ambulare nequeunt; ita nec Bellum usquam progredi sine
pecunia. Lip Pol. lib. 5.
unless there be sinews to stretch out and pull in for the defense of the
body: So an Army consisting of many valiant men, and furnished with all other
warlike habilements, Antequam inchoetur Bellum, de copiis expensisque
sollicitus debet esse tractatus. Veg. l. 3.
is but lame and useless, and unable to move it self without money the
sinews of War.

Aphorism XXIX.
IN unresistable tempests, Gubernator, ubi naufragium timet, jactura quicquid
sanari potest, redimit. Lamp. Alex.
where shipwreck is threatened, they disburden the Ship, lest themselves and all
should perish: so it must fare with a wise General in the tempestuous storms
of War; he must adapt his consultations and actions to the necessity of the
times, and not expose the main to a manifest loss, Parva sunt ^oris arma, nisi
sit consilium domi. Cicero.
by seeking to save the bye: Wisdom therefore is more requisite in a Chief
than Valor.

Aphorism XXX.
IN humane actions, Bellum ex momentis parvarum saepe rerum dependet, Live. lib.
32.
small actions work great effects, Un petit accident est ^^^^tessois, le
commencement des grands maux. Am. Plut.
and especially in those of War; for one word of command mis-understood, many
times overthrowes both the action and the Actors. Noctur^i terrores Cl^^rchi
exercitum i^vaserunt; at ille praecepit, si noctu tumultus oriretur, nemo
rectus consurgeret: hoc pr^^ceptum do^^t mutes contemnere nocturnum terr^rem.
Pol. Strat. lib. 2.
Wherefore a wise General should accustom his soldiers to the perfection of
discipline, never to take all arm, or apprehension of sudden danger from what
others do, or say; but from his own immediate Officers, or them in place about
him.

Aphorism XXXI
THe greatest glory of a Commander is to drive out the nail of his enemies
practice with a stronger of his own, Illa belli furta pulcherrimam laudem
habent, per quae hosts ma^ime decipiuntur, and amici plurimum juvantur. Thuc.
l. 5.
and to blow him up in his own mine. Policy against force deserves much, and
prevails often: but by stratagem to prevail against policy is most excellent.

Aphorism XXXII.
THe chiefest weapon to gain victory, Miles haec tria curare debet, corpus ut
quam validissimum and pernicissimum habeat, arma apta, animumque, paratum ad
subita imperia: ^aeteradiis immortalibus and Imperatori commendet. Live. lib. 4.
is good discipline; for if Soldiers have not this true temper, they lose
their edge in their trial, and turn the point into their own bowels that use
them. Wherefore nothing is more necessary in a Martial government than
obedience, both for the general good of their affairs, and safety of the
Soldiers.

Aphorism XXXIII.
IN the government of a prudent Commander rests the safety of the Army; Nullum
numen abest si sit prudentia. luven. Sat. 10.
and the greatest weakening thereof is by disorder and want of discipline.
Perdifficile est ad carentem auribus ventrem verba facere; ven^er quippe cibi
avidus, praecepta non audit. Plut. in Cat^.
From want of pay springs up disorder: money comforts more than aqua vitae; but
want is such an aqua fortis as will eat up the steel coat of discipline: for
hunger and penury will rout a well composed Army sooner than an over-potent
enemy.

Aphorism XXXIV.
TWo things are most requisite for a General to possess, Du^ sunt quae
principatus comparent, augeant, servent, milites and pecunia. Dion. l. 42.
and that is a sufficient treasure to discharge his Troops, and an high
reputation, which begets a majesty in him, and an awful obedience in his
Soldiers toward him: Vebementer pertinet ad Bella administranda, quid hosts,
magis vero quid subditi de suis Imperatoribus existiment. Cic.
by these he shall preserve in health and safety the body of his Army. If
reputation be lost, neither his maturity of judgment to undertake, nor his
alacrity of spirit to execute, will avail in the perfecting of his intended
enterprise: for where there is no powerful majesty to command, there is no
awful readiness in Officers nor Soldiers to act what is commanded.

Aphorism XXXV.
THe two famous Soldiers of Rome and Greece which shot like two thunderbolts
into the West and East, Tam celer in agendo and cons^^tus in exequendo, ut
(...). Suet. de Caes.
filling the whole world with the fame of their victories, were renouwned for
nothing more than their celeritie in doing, Veni, vidi, vici. Caes. apud Plut.
and preventing the very report of their coming. For there is nothing so
excellent in a Chief as prevention; it blesses the action with success,
Saepenumero in Bello ca quae geridebent, (...) quam vt (...). Xenoph. lib. 6.
and crowns the Actor with glory. He therefore that will arrive at the ports
of Victory, and by her gates enter the town of Fame, must steer his course this
way.

Aphorism XXXVI.
IT is hard for a General so warily to walk in any condition of charge or
service as that he dash not his foot against the stone of offense: Dissicile
est in omni vitae (...) sic te gerere ut non (...). Lip. an. lib. 3.
he being chief in command, must use his authority sparingly, Potentiacautis
quam acri^ribus consi^^is (...). (...). an. 11.
if he intends to keep it long. Wherefore that General which binds not
himself within the limits of his Commission, nor uses the advice of his
Council of War, shall never want secret enemies amongst those be has
neglected, to urge his transgression, and work his confusion.

Aphorism XXXVII.
SHafts being bound together are not easily bowed, Ibi semper est victoria ubi
concordia. Senec. Sent.
but taken one by one, may easily be broken; so fares it with the forces of
an Army, whose safety chiefly depends upon the unity and mutual conjunction
of the inferiors with the superiors, Nobilium factiones tra^unt ad se, and in
parts, universum populum. Arist. Pol. l. 5.
and of these one with another. Wherefore nothing is more dangerous in the
service of War than discord and faction amongst the chief Officers of the
Army.

Aphorism XXXVIII.
AS Seconds in single fight be very circumspect that there be no ods in the
Combatants weapons, Ad victoriam plurimum resert ut lectissimos de peditibus
and equitibus, been armato^, and post aciem in subsid^um praepa atos habeas.
Veg. lib. 3.
but see them meet upon indifferent terms; the like care should every General
all have that the Arms and Armor of his Soldiers should be every way
sufficient: for many times this prevails both against number and valor of the
enemy: Ensis habet vires, and gens quae. cunque virorum est,
for in a Battle where the fight is in a firm station, Bella gerit gladiis,
sed Medos praelia prima
and a greater desire is had of offending and killing others than of defending
and saving themselves, Exarmant, vacuaeque jubentr^meare pharetrae. Luc^^. l. 8.
ods of the weapon is most advantageous.

Aphorism XXXIX.
IN the prosecution of War, Summum jus, summa injuria. Ad^g. Poly.
there are often advantages met with-all by accident, which reason and
judgment could not possibly fore-think of, Resdant consilia hominibus, (...)
homines rebus: itaque aptare te iis rebus debes, praese, tim in Bello. Lip.
Pol. l. 5.
much less direct; for things give better counsel to men, than men to the
things: therefore the rigor of punishment due for transgressing a Commandment
in War is not so strictly to be forced, if good success approves it.
Turpissima est jacturaquae fit ^er negligentiam. Senec. Epist.
But he that has once transgressed the limits of his Commission, and thereby
has fair occasion offered to make an honorable amends, and in ample sort to
justify his first transgression, and wipe out the forfeit, that man makes a
double fault not to take it.

Aphorism XL.
THe Crocodile is slain by the Dolphins policy striking him in his soft and
tender belly being unarmed with scales. In ventre mollis tenuisque cutis
Crocodili, ideo se ut territimergunt Delphini subcuntesque alvum illam secant
spina, Plin. not. lib. 8 cap. 25.
Experience should teach men more than nature can the creature; Laprudence doit
conduire and manier la force. Am. Plu. Parendo potius quam imperia ducum
sciscitando, res militaris continetur. Tac. an. lib. 1. Divisa inter Duces
Militesque munia, his arma and manus sint, illis consiliu^ and virtutis suae
specimen relinquant. Tac. an. l. 1.
for a General must strike the enemy where he may be most hurt; and such
things as reason deems impossible are not to be attempted, for prudence is of
force where force cannot prevail. Therefore direction is left to the
Commander, execution to the Soldier, who is not to question why, but to
perform what is given him in charge.

Aphorism XLI.
IN morality it is a greater vice to commit a wickedness, Custodiendi milites
intra limits, aliter solvitur militia tua, immo perit.
than to omit the doing of a virtuous act: so in Martial government it is
worse for the Soldier to do what he is forbidden in his own Camp, than not to
do what he is commanded upon the enemy; for this only bereaves him of some
fair advantage, Periculum subire instructo ordine. Xeno. inst.
but that lays himself open to all ambush and defeit.

Aphorism XLII.
THose dangers are least avoided which are unknown or unexpected, Citius venit
periculum cum contemnitur; nopinata magis premunt mala. Senec.
and those counsels are best carried which the enemies sees in execution before
he hears them by relation. Metellus aliquid militiae interrogatus, Si inquit
tunicam meam arcani mihi consciam scirem, exutam in ignem abjicerem. Plu. de
Grac.
None in the Army must know to what Service Scipio leads his Troops, but only
C. Laelius; nor is it fit things determined in Council should be communicated
but to those without whom they cannot be effected: for as expedition is the
life of action; so is secrecy of deliberation.

Aphorism XLIII.
THe furious Cursour breaks his wind in the midst of his carrer, Dum festino
omnia teleriter percurrere, tardeor sum. Plat. Rep. 7.
whereas the Snail comes to the top of the hill in her due time as well as the
Eagle; Scito militibus cupidinem pugnandi convenire; duces prudendentia,
consulta^do, c^nctatione saejius quam temeritate prod^sse. Tac. hist. lib. 3.
Wherefore he that will do a thing well, must have patience to tarry till it
may be well done: for it hurts as much to anticipate the occasion as to
foreslow it being offered. Men of hot spirits err in the first, for scarce do
they perceive the shadow of her, but they run to catch at it, and thinking to
take hold on the solid substance, embrace nothing but the empty air; Fabius
novam de Hannibal* victoriam, commentus est, non pugnare; ut qui frangi virtute
non poterat, mora comminueretur; hinc illi cognomen novum and reip. salutare
(cunctator.) Florus lib. 2.
whereas the wary and well advised Commander, holds it safer to weary and wear
out the enemy by cunctation and delay, than to put all to hazard by have; in
this is danger, in that is a Fabian virtue.

Aphorism XLIV.
A General is not to stay his provision for war, Ostendite modo Bellum,
pacem habebitis* videant vos paratos, ad vim jus ipsi remittent. Man. apud Plut.
although he be constrained to seek for peace; because otherwise he seeks to
beg or buy his peace, and cannot purchase it but at a dear rate; wherefore
peace is never to be treated with our enemy, Pacem optatis magis quam
defenditis, pacem sub clipeo paerare. Salust. hist. 1.
our Armor being of, or Sword sheathed; neither can it be easily concluded but
under a Buckler.

Aphorism XLV.
OF all bad ingredients into the heart of man, Veterae odere, nova expetunt,
odio suarum rerum mutari omnia student. Salust.
there is none poisons it so much with the venom of treasonable thoughts as
that of disdain. Digitu^ praescindi oportet, ne ob eam rem gangrena ad
brachium perveniat. Varro. Frag.
That General that sees this mischievous seed planted and grown amongst his
Captains in time of their employments, and seeks not to root it up with a
quick and sharp hand, is in the high road to his own ruin.

Aphorism XLVI.
IT is a hinderance to the Generals service, Providendum, ne cui, qui insigni
aliqua injuria affectus est, demandetur provincia administrandi rem aliquam
magni momenti. Mac. dia. lib. 2.
and a furtherance to the Generals destruction, to give any of his chief
Officers any manifest cause of discontent, and yet after employ him in any
place of great charge; for neither can he be assured of his fidelity when he is
used, Tam est periculosum, malitiosa p^tentiam, quam furioso gladium dare.
Aeschin.
nor he of his Generals favor being accused.

Aphorism XLVII.
Upon certain notice of some treasonable plot or practice in an Army,
Securitati consulas ante quam vindictae. Tacit. an. lib. 11.
the General must first assure the place, and then more fully search into the
treason, and punish the traitors, either all for the offense, or the
ringleaders for example. Principibus seditionis securi percussis. Mac. lib. 3.
ca. 26.
Severity in this case is but justice, lenity puts all in hazard; wherefore
against such intestine ambush, we must first take up the Buckler of safety, and
then produce the Sword of Justice.

Aphorism XLVIII.
IF a General be forced to abandon any hold or place of strength; Arces
extruuntur duplici de causa, ad hosts arcendos, ad subditos compescendos, and
in officio continendos; ad priorem usum non necessariae, ad posteriorem
inutiles and noxiae. Mac. lib. 2. dis. 24.
if he ever hopes to return when times are more propitious, let him raze all
such Works and Forts before his departure as may hinder his reaching, whereby
he shall find his return and restitution more easy.

Aphorism XLIX.
SOme advantages in Battle are personal, In omni prae^io non tam muttitudo
and virtus indocta, quam ars and exercitium soleut praestare victoriam. Veg.
lib. 1.
as better men, and horse, or more number of both; some are real, as more
money, or better arms; some are formal, as better discipline in governing,
and better order in fight; and some are accidental, as the Sun, the Wind,
and the place. Amplius potest locus saepe quam virtus. Veg. Lib. 3.
Now amongst all these the two last (of better order in fight, and better
ground to fight on) are not the least means of obtaining the victory. Vi
Militum inferior, locorum fraud prior. Tac. an. 12. Erectum and fidentem animi
te ipsum ostende. Tac. an. lib. 4.


Aphorism. L.
Adversity may bend, but never break a noble and undaunted courage: Al faut
pl^yer plus tossed que rompre: and se reserver a meilleur temps. Am. plu. Cic.
he abandons not himself though all his forces seems to forsake him, but hopes
when fortune is come to the height or Brumall Solstice of her frowning,
Majestas non fracta malis. Lucan. 4.
she will be retrograde and shine again upon him with the beams of better
success: a General therefore plunged into the lowest deep of disasters, Decet
virum vere generosum; far tum bona, tum mala, si lapsus fuerit. Menand.
must beware he sink not to the nethermost hell of despair, from whence is no
redemption; but let him reserve himself for better fortunes.

Thus have I collected and joined together the principal and worthiest
observations, which the best and famousest Generals both ancient and modern
have left behind them for, the guides to posterity; whereby they may learn how
to steer their course in a short time by the help of speculative knowledge,
which has confirmed many thousand years, and destroyed millions of people to
purchase the experience, which here is offered to your view; and I question not
the grateful acceptance, unless it be some vain glorious fellow, whose
feather is greater than his wit: or experience may cast some silly aspersion
upon this discourse; but let such an imbellick fellow know, that his depraving
it does not touch me or my reputation; but it must be transferred upon those
noble Commanders, whose experience purchased these observations. In the next
place I am to discourse about the marching of an Army, and quartering it for
one night, wherein I shall be as brief as may be.

RVLES TO BE OBSERVED BY A GENERAL IN MARCHING HIS ARMY. SECT. XVI.
CHAP. III.
Diverse Rules and observations to be used both in marching and retreating from
the enenemy, whereby confusion may be avoided.
BEfore we can come to treat of the nature of Battles, we must first call
into our best considerations the absolutest form and surest way which possibly
may be devised for an Army to march in. For without due observations, and
judicious care, an Army may be overthrown before they can come to order
themselves in Battalia: for prevention thereof, I have collected diverse Rules
out of sundry of our best Authors, worthy the taking notice of.

Wherefore in the first place, before we adventure to march, we must be given
to understand, whether the way we intend to pass, be narrow and straight
lanes, or broad plain heaths or commons.

Secondly, whether the enemy be quartered near or afar off, and accordingly we
are to order our Troops.

In a March, if the enemies quarters are before us, then the Troops of Horse
are to march before the Foot, A party of Musketires or Fire locks are best to
discover wades, rocks, hills and the like, in regard the heavy armed cannot
possibly effect it.
and before them certain Spies to discover, for fear of the enemies Ambushes.

If marching from an enemy, the Horse-Troops are to follow in the Rear of the
Army, to charge the enemy if he offers to pursue.

An Army marching through straight lanes, must order their men into so many
Files as may well march a Breast.

An Army being to march over Heaths or Plains, then they must march by
divisions, as namely, three or four Companies a Breast, that they may the
readier and more suddenly be drawn into Battalia.

An Army is commonly divided into three divisions, viz. the Vant-guard,
Battle, and Rear-guard; every Colonel ought to march according to his
antiquity, one before another; after like manner, every Captain of every
Colonels Regiment is to do the same.

That Regiment which marches in the Vant-guard the first day, Note, these
divisions of the Army are not to be quartered too far asunder for fear of
danger.
ought to come to their quarters very timely, then the Battle must march
forwards, and be quartered beyond them; then the Rear-ward is to march up
beyond the Battle, and there to be quartered: so that the next morn it may
be ready at the discharging of the warning piece to march. Note, that Regiment
which marches the first day in the Van, the day following is to march in the
Rear; and they are daily thus to take their turns, if the March continues long.

We are further to observe, whether we are to march in the day time or in the
night, and accordingly we are to demean our selves.

If by day, The manner now in use is to send out before the Army (by a
sufficient trusty Guide, which knows well the passages of the Country) certain
Firelocks, Dragones and Musketires to discover the enemy; and the Horse are to
repress the enemies incursions: these are likewise to surprise straight ways,
Bridges and Foords*

Next after these are the Pioners to march, with a good guard to mend the
ways, and to cut through passages, so as the Ordnance may be drawn safe, and
the Army march the best and nearest way.

The Foot of the Vant-guard or right Wing, is in the next place to follow,
every Battalia thereof in their due order; the one half of the Horse of the
Army before them, and all their baggage or carriage behind them in the Rear.

The Battalions of the Battle are in the next place to follow in the same
equipage the former did; viz. with all their baggage and carriage in the Rear.

Lastly, the Battalions of the Rearward, or left Wing are to follow in March,
with all their baggage and carriage behind them also; and every one of these
Battalions are to have their shot before and behind, and the residue of the
Horse are to bring up the Rear.

The Ordnance are to be distributed as the Carriage is, viz. both behind the
Vantguard, the Battle, and the Rear-ward, the better to secure against all
attempts. But this kind of ordering the Horse, the Ordnance, and the Baggage,
is most commonly used when the enemy is not at hand.

As for the marching of an Army by night, all the baggage and carriages are to
be sent before the Army with a sufficient guard; next after them your
Pike-men, then the Musketires, and all the Horse in the Rear: so that by break
of day they may come all together to their Rendevou. This way an Army in the
night is best and easilyest kept together, and is soonest espied if it
faulters: but this is also to be used when the enemy is not near.

We are to observe, that in a March, both Colonels, Captains and other
inferior Officers are called from the leading of their own Regiments and
Companies to command in another Regiment or Company., which many times happens
in regard the General will have the eldest Colonels by him, to discourse and
advise of things Material about the Wars. So that a Lieutenant Colonel
commands a Regiment, and the eldest Captain the Colonels Company; also a
Lieutenant to command a private Company: and these are thus ordered and
disposed as it shall please the Serjeant-Major to give commandment.

An Army being thus orderly marched to the place of their inquartering, the
General his field-Martiall and Serjeant-Major general are to be very wise and
circumspect in placing the Horse-guards outermost of all, upon special
passages where they must set out their Horse-sentinels a good distance from the
guard, that they may the better discover and give warning of the enemies
approaches, by making an Alarm by the discharge of their Pistols, so that the
whole Army may presently be in arms. The Foot-sentinels are to stand upon
some passages nearer to the Quarters than the Horse are.

Upon Alarm given, The Serjeant-Major is to acquaint every Officer where the
place of imbattelling is, and the ways made plain and ready for every Company
to troop to it.
all the Companies of the Army are speedily to march into some convenient place
appointed by the General over night, where every Company is to be drawn into
Battalia fit to charge the enemy.

And as before I have said how the Foot should march in divisions over a Heath
or Plain; after the same proportion the Horse-troops also are to march in
divisions, viz. two, four or six Cornets in a division; neither divisions of
Horse nor Foot are to march in far distance one from the other, but so as the
whole Army suddenly may join in Battle, if the enemy should approach.

At every stand the Army makes upon a Heath or Plain, every single division is
to march up and front with the next division before it, upon the left hand of
the same; and if the stay be long, and the place dangerous, then successively
all the divisions are to be drawn into a complete Battle.

After this very manner the Army must be demeaned in marching off from a Heath
or Plain; if the enemy chaseth them in the Rear, thinking to take an
advantage when the Army shall be drawn out by Companies to march through some
narrow passages, lanes, or highways; the Horse are to be drawn in Battalia
in the Rear of these Troops, to receive the charge of the enemy, until such
time as all the Foot Troops are marched through those straights; where having
convenient ground, they are to re-imbattell themselves, to entertain the
enemies charge, if he dares adventure to follow.

But the safest way is (if an Army cannot eschew, This caution would have a^ed
a great deal of blood at the (...) or Rec.
but must break his array) to march from an enemy through a straight, he being
ready to take his advantage to charge them; then to give them Battle, if your
Army be equivalent in strength, is the safest way; if not, then to entrench the
Army securely, waiting an opportunity, and making use of some policy to get
safely from them.

If an Army be weaker in Horse than the enemies Army is, it is very dangerous
to march over the Plains, but rather take some hilly rockie way whereby the
enemies horse shall be unprofitable.

The enemy being near at hand, the best way is to have the Artillery and
Baggage to march on the contrary side from the enemy in all straights, and in
Champions to be placed in the midst of the Army.

In extremity of hot weather, the Sutlers belonging to every Company may march
with their Wagons between the Companies, whereby they may the sooner be
relieved with meat and drink, which otherwise they cannot come unto but once a
day: but this must be when there is no fear of the enemy.

It is requisite to have good Guides for direction of the best and safest way:
Likewise those Horsemen that are commanded to be Vant-currers for the
discovering of the enemy, their duty is also to view the passages, and to take
notice of the breadth of every straight way; the Quarter Masters are to do the
same, and to give intelligence, that the Army may march accordingly. As for
example, suppose the way be eighteen foot broad; the Army must be
commanded to march six men in Rank or Breast; because every Footman will have
three foot in breadth between File and File, and six foot at the least between
Rank and Rank: so that twenty four foot in breadth, and four Miles in
length, will but contain an Army marching of three or four and twenty
thousand.

When an Army is constrained to march thus in length, the straight passages
hindering from marching in divisions may prove very dangerous, if extraordinary
intelligence be not hourly had of the enemies proceedings; for should an
enemy watch his opportunity to fall on the Front, Flank, or Rear of the Army,
there could be very little help expected; for the Front were not able to
succor the Rear, no more than the Rear could the Front; and being charged
upon the Flank, there could be but a poor resistance made. But the best and
safest way in such an unexpected danger, is either to draw as many Companies as
may possibly be gotten, into such closes of ground as shall be strongly
fenced, and there order them in Battalia; where they shall be able to make a
good resistance until the residue of the Army provides for its safety.

Or otherwise, if the enemy charge upon any of the sides, then it is best to
file all the Musketires upon that Flank the enemy strives to charge; so that
every Soldier shall give fire over the hedge as he marches, and so pass
along.

But if an enemy should chance to break into the highway with their Horses,
be it in the Front or Rear of the Army, there is no way but to barricado up
the way with Wagons, or fell trees cross the way, or by fyring a great
quantity of feare-wood to hinder the enemies execution until the Army be
drawn out of the way into the fields, where they may so order themselves that
the enemy cannot possibly rout them: if a few Troops should be assaulted by
the enemies Horse in their March, the dimond Battle or the cross Battle is
of greatest strength: otherwise, if an Army opposes another Army upon the
plains, then a Battle so framed that most hands may be brought to fight, and
succors to releeve them, is best, always having the advantage of Wind and
Sun, with Woods, Rocks, Rivers, Ponds or great Ditches, either on Flanck, or
Rear, or both.

It is a thing unsufferable for soldiers to ramble from their Colors, to laze
or pillage, but to march orderly in their rancks; for the Provost-Marshall by
his Commission and authority ought to hang up such fellows the next bough they
come at, for the whole Army to see, and be warned by as they shall pass by
them in their March; for the inconveniences are many and dangerous to an Army.
The enemy by taking them gains intelligence of the state of the Army, besides
the mischief which such fellows do commit in robbing, and pilfering, whereby
a friend-people will be incenst, and ready to be treache rous to an Army,
seeing themselves abused and bereft of their goods.

It is policy, if an Army marches in an enemies country, to ruin, destroy,
and burn whatsoever may be advantageous to the enemies livelihood; providing
always sufficiently for your own Army.

If there should be any suspicion that the enemy strives to gain some places
of advantage to hinder the march, it is convenientest to send speedily certain
Horse-Troopes; likewise Shot and Pikes upon Bedees in manner of Dragons, or
ten or twelve men in a wagon; hurry them speedily to prevent the enemy from
fortifying themselves in such places of advantage.

The Lord Montpezat in his march from Fossar was put to a dangerous plunge, he
being constrained to take his way through the Valley Pratgella, the entrance
into which was most difficult, in regard the Hills and Mountains were held
and possessed with the enemy, whereby he lost diverse of his men; wherefore he
sent certain Forces under the conduct of Monsieur Dambres, to get the higher
ground, and force his enemy to a retreat, which they did excellently perform;
by which policy he marched safe without the loss of a man.

The wedge-Battell is the absolutest form to enter a straight, for the Shot
comes so fluent and peircing, that the enemy cannot possibly resist unless the
passage be Barricadoed up.

If any Enemy be far stronger both in Foot and Horse then thy Army is;
provide that he assaults thee not on every side, but be sure of some place of
safeguard, as Woods, Bogges, or Rivers; for if the enemy be not three times as
strong as thy Army is, he shall show himself of very poor judgment to divide
his Army, and weaken it, for to assault thee in diverse places; which may
purchase his own overthrow.

Machiavill in his Art of War, advises Generals to accustom their
soldiers to march, and in marching to join in Battalia ready for fight, and
so draw out into a march again; then to face about into the Rear, and draw up
into Battalia again, the like also to perform on either Flanck; so that upon
all occasions suddenly they might understand to order themselves, and range
themselves into any form of Battle; but where there is no place of safeguard
or advantage, the quadrate form of imbatttelling is safest; for he durst not
devide his forces to charge that kind of form upon all sides.

It were very commendable, and very advantageous to the strengthening of our
kingdom, if every Lord Lieutenant might draw all the forces of the shire
together, unto some convenient place in the midst of it; taking a convenient
time of the year, that neither Hay-time nor Harvest may hinder, wheresuch
troops may be drawn into all forms of Battle, and learn to understand all
advantages in march.

If an Army marches through the enemies land, or far from the water, so that
provision may not be conveyed by shipping; the best way is to drive after the
Army herdes of Beeves and Sheep, which being alive cannot much cumber the
Army; all other provision is to be conveyed by Wagon.

A General must be very vigilant and circumspect in his march to discover all
Ambushes, by which he may two ways incur danger, (viz.) either by marching
into them, or through the enemies policy trained into them unawares.

For the avoiding of the first peril, as before is said, it is necessary to
send before the Army certain Troops to discover, which may be of strength to
resist if occasion be; and in this they must be very inquisitive of the country
people; whether they have seen any of the enemies troops lately, and how and
which way they ordered their march: Likewise the more woody and hilly the
country is, the willinger the enemy will lay his ambushes, which being
discovered, they cannot be hurtful; but if not foreseen, whereby the Army
falls suddenly amongst them, ten to one but they ruin them.

It is easy to perceive where an enemy marches by the dust they raise, and by
the wondering of fowls and birds which will fly about and not light, which is
a great sign that an ambush lies there.

Concerning the second case of the enemies trayning an Army into danger, there
must be great wisdom, not suddenly to believe such things as in man's sense
seem not reasonable to be indeed as they show for; for under the bait lies the
hook; as for example, if many of the enemies troops be put to flight by a few
of thy own men, or if a few of the enemies troops assail a number of thine,
or by making a sudden flight without a charge; in these cases there can nothing
but deceit be expected; for we are to note, that to march through an enemies
country is more dangerous then to fight a pitched Battle; wherefore in these
cases a General must have a secret inward cautelousnesse and fear of
surprising; which his soldiers must not take notice of, lest they should be
discouraged. Likewise in the same predicament a General must use lofty
scornful words, in way of undervaluing his enemy, which will animate his
Soldiers to fall on; therefore for the better and safer conduct of an Army, it
is most necessary to have an exact Map of the country you intend to march
through, in which may be discovered all places of difficulty and danger, that
so they may be the easilyer prevented; also those Guides which are chosen for
the conducting of the Army, ought severally to be questioned withal, whether
there knowledge be good; and compare their relation with the Mappes, whereby
the errors may be discovered; and above all things secrefie is to be commended.

If in your march you light upon deep and unpassible rivers, and having no
means to make Bridges to waft over the Army, you are to march further to the
heads of the rivers, where you may pass at ease; if the current be over big so
that the Army cannot wade over, you must cut out the same river in diverse
places, and turn it into the land, whereby you may the easier pass over.

Every Officer must cause his soldiers to march according to the beat of the
drum; for if one part of the Army should march too fast, and the other part
too slow, it may breed confusion.

We are further to observe, Observations about retreating from the enemy in a
March.
if it should happen in a march that the enemy opposes, and seek to give you
Battle, and you finding your self too weak for to join in Battle; a
principle point then is, how to get safely off from the enemy without blows;
of all the points of war this is most dangerous to be practiced, by reason it
has a show of undervaluing your own potency; and your enemy is puffed up with a
self conceit of transcendent worth, and thereby is animated to stretch his
valor to the uttermost period; whereas the courages of your own men fall away
being surprised with fear, which will make them tumble into confusion.
Therefore as formerly has been said, a General must set a fair gloss,
causing his soldiers to believe that such retreates are for other advantages,
and to accomplish some other design of further consequence, and not that you
retreat to avoid the combat; wherefore some reasons that favor of likelihood
must be used to the Soldiers. Sir Walter Rawlyes advice was to dislodge in
the dead of the night, in such a quiet still manner that the enemy should not
perceive it. Marquess Spinola made use of this when he broke up his Leaguer
before Bergenup-zone, when his Excellencies Army lay at Rossandell ready to
have assaulted his trenches.

But the safest way of all is to retreat before the enemy be too near; for if
the enemy be in view, although you should march forwards to gain some place of
more security, yet unhappily there may be some ill passages and straights to
hinder your quick passage whereby the enemy may take his advantage to rout
you; for it is far greater honor to retreat in the dark than to be beaten
in the light. A far greater honor to retreat in the dark then to be beaten
in the light.
And as Monsieur Bellay advises such as retreat by day, must place there
horsemen upon two sides like unto hedges leaving a way betwixt them, through
the which the footme^ are to retreat, by which means the enemy shall not
perceive them, they being shaddowed by the Horse; and as every particular
Battalia is passed the principal place of danger, then they are immediately to
entrench themselves, or otherwise one Battalia is to stay for another, they
being past danger and the enemies sight, until they are all stolen away in
safety; but this must be understood that it must be performed in some plains
or covert places, where the enemy has not the advantage of a Hill to discover
them: but those that intend to retreat in the night, first send strong Guards
to defend the passages, fearing the enemy should prevent them, and then leaving
sufficient fires in the quarters, hanging out light matches, and stuffing old
clothes with straw, and setting them in the place of the Sentinells, leaving
Dogs howling, Beasts lowing, Horses neying, Cocks crowing in the Quarters,
so that the enemy may not suspect your departure; if your Ordnance cannot
conveniently be drawn away, it is best to dismount it from the Carriages, and
bury them secretly in the earth; further (says he) when an Army is reduced to
this exigent of extremity, it is much better for to be careful in saving the
men (albeit that the Ordnance, Baggage, and other movables should be lost)
than to hazard men for a thing that may so easily afterward be regained.

If an Army be pollitickly stolen out from their Quarters, This is to be done,
when the enemy knows not of their departure.
they are to make no stay, but to continue the march, resting as little as may
be; but if it be so that of necessity they are constrained to stay upon the
way, then let them make choice of some place that is naturally fortified,
always remembering to have certain fleet horses to stay behind the Army to
discover a far of from some Hills whether the enemy pursues; which if he
does, the surest way for prevention is to barricado up the passages with trees.

It is likewise safe to quarter your Army in some wood, felling the trees one
over another round about it, which will be an excellent safeguard both from the
enemies horse and foot.

Likewise a General may lay ambushes upon places convenient, which must be
such soldiers as are best horst, or those that are nimblest of foot, so that
they may the safer retire upon all occasions; moreover they must not stay over
long behind the Army, but so as they may soon recover it; for otherwise they
will be cut off by the enemy.

If a retreat be wisely carried, An enemy may receive more damage, then they
that retreat.
the enemy that shall follow may receive more damage then they that retreat.

But on the contrary side if you perceive the enemy does provide to steal from
you, it is wisdom to anticipate such passages as they must pass through,
sending secretly certain troops to fortify at the entrance of them; What is
to be done, if you fear the enemy will steal from you.
likewise to barricado up the way with trees, and to have your Army always in
a readiness to set out after them, following them at the heels; but in this
case the Army must keep a very strict order in their Battallia's, and march up
close together, commanding your horse to charge the enemy in the Rear, which
will be a means to stay the hindermost part of the Army; and then the
Vantguard of your enemies Army being come to the passages that are blockt up,
it will so discourage the enemy, that your Army marching up to them in Battle
array, they will be easily overthrown, as there has been diverse examples to
verify this. The lightest Ordnance are the best to pursue the enemy withal;
for which purpose Grave Maurice the Prince Van Nasaw had fifty or sixty small
field pieces cast, which he used to place between his Battallions, which were
of great service in the time of fight; for two or three men could weild one of
them as they pleased, both in advancing it forwards and drawing back as
occasion served; and it were very fit and of excellent use to have such small
pieces cast here in England for his Majesty's service, which may be employed
many ways; I have observed the Hollanders how they made use of these small
Ordnances, to place them in little vessels which they provided to safeguard
their great rivers, as the river Issel, and the Rhine; one of these had thirty
or forty soldiers to man her, and eight or ten of these pieces, whereby they
prevented the enemy from marching over the said rivers; likewise they were
safeguards to the Army, when they were convayed by Boats up those rivers, or
when they lay intrencht near any great river, they safeguarded the Rear of
the qnarters from treachery; also they safe conducted such Boats as brought
Victuals and Ammunition to the Army. The use of small vessels.
If occasion should be in our land (which God forbid it should be) they could
not do us less service than by experience they have done them; besides such
small vessels being made for service, were of more worth to offend an enemy
that should dare sail up in any of our great rivers, than the greatest Ship of
burden; for it were impossible for our great Ships to make a fight in the river
Thames, but they will be more ready to hurt themselves than the enemy, whereas
these small vessels will lie under the shot, and glide up and down by the
great vessels sides and gall them.

In the next place it remains how an Army should March near an enemies
Battery to secure themselves from the shot; in this you must observe the
situation of their Batteries, how they are flancked, by which you may come to
perceive in what direct li^e e^ch piece of Ordnance shall make her true shot;
and so accordingly either to open the files and ranckes for the passage of the
shot, or else to fetch a circumference in your March, so as the shot shall not
touch the files, but only a rank; but the securest way is to March secretly by
the most obscurest places, so as the Ordnance may not discover you. Lastly for
conclusion, if the enemy should assault your troops in in some narrow passages
or high ways, you are to demean your self as follows: First, you are to
fill the passage or high way with your pikes; if the breadth of your troops be
not sufficient to perform it, then double your rancks, whereby the Wings will
extend themselves to the filling up of the passage; these then charging your
enemies hand or foot, your Musketeers being in the Rear; the Battle being
thus ordered, let the first rank of Musketeers (which are those next the pikes
face to the right hand and march forth file-wise) close up by the right flank
of the pikes, until he that is leader of the said file be even with the Front
of the Pikes; then he is to face to the right hand and lead them quite cross
the Front of the Pikes, until he has attained the further part of the Front
to the left hand; which being performed, they are to make a stand, and couch
under the Pikes, and give fire upon their knees so as the Pikes may not be
hindered to charge; then are they to march down by the left flancke, and place
themselves in the Rear of the shot; and the next files in order are to advance
into the Front after the same manner, and perform the same service; by this
means continual fire shall be given upon the enemy whilst this skirmish is in
action. Let there be drawn out certain Pikes and Musketeers, into the best
enclosed fields either on one or both sides of the way, where they may secure
themselves from the enemies horse, and there charge the enemy on the flancks,
or at least keep them from charging your own troops that are in skirmish to
maintain the passage; view the figure following in the next page.

The figure of the Battle.

Front

Left flancke

Right flank

Rear



In this figure the Character p shows how the Pikes are placed, Note the
Rank of the ciphers, o demo^strats the place where the Rank of shot stood,
that is advanced forward.
their Fronts being doubled; the other represents the Musketeers, as you may
perceive them marching up the right flancke, and so placed under the Pikes in
the Front ready to give fire upon the enemy; you may likewise perceive certain
shot drawn out into two closes upon each side of the high way, whose duty is
to give fire upon the enemies flancks as they are charching the Front of the
Battle; or if the enemy should draw out any forces to charge your Flancks;
Note after the shot have given fire, they are to match down the left flancke,
and place themselves in the Rear of the shot, and the next rank is to supply
their places; by which means they may continually give fire.
then these shot having Pikes to join with them, shall be able to encounter
with them and prevent them. Thus I hope, I have collected sufficient
instructions which may give any reasonable man satisfaction concerning the
ordering of their March; only if you please I will refer you to diverse Modern^

Authors which have write of this subject; viz. Ierosme Cattamo page 133.
Machiavill page 67. Bellay page 151. Barrit page 132. Edmonds page 39. Garrits
Art of War. page 245. In the next place we are to discourse of the incamping
of an Army, and how to order the Guards and the Intrenchments. Thus ends the
sixteenth Section.

RVLES TO BE OBSERVED IN QVARTERING OR INCAMPING AN ARMY. SECT. XVII.
CHAP. IIII.
How a General is to quarter his Army, with the election of places of greatest
security; what Redoubts are to be raised upon the passages, and how the
out-Guardes are to be placed, with diverse other observations thereunto
belonging.
HAving formerly discourst of such rules, and observations, as are most
requisite, and pertinent, for the Marching of an Army; In this Chapter I find
it convenient that we should show such rules, and observations as are most
useful for the secure incamping of an Army, wherein there is great wisdom
and circumspection to be used, in the well managing of the same; wherefore
first there are two things offered to our consideration, (viz.) whether an Army
is to be quartered but for a night; or for to be encamped for a long season?
and from these two questions there is a third produced, (viz.) whether the Army
of your enemy be at hand, or far remote? now in regard in the former
discourse of marching; I have touched briefly the manner of quartering an Army,
for a night or two upon a March; where most usually no enemy is near, it being
then a matter of no such consequence, as it is when an Army must pitch down
his quarters or entrenchments for a long season, and perchance in the face of
the enemy; therefore I will be sparing in the first, and also be as brief as
the subject will permit in the second; (viz.) the incamping an Army for some
long time, wherein also, there are two things considerable; (viz.) the strength
of the enemies Forces, and the neerenesse of his Camp; for we must observe
that slight intrenchments, are of sufficiency to safeguard an Army, where the
enemy is weak, and his Camp far remote.

In the next place we are to have a due respect to the situation, and
commodiousnesse of water, wood, forage for the horses, and a safe and
convenient recourse for to convay victuals and necessaries to the Camp, which
must be either by land, or water: these things being duly considered, the
Army being drawn to the place of incampment, standing in Battalia; the
Quartermaster General being directed by the Lord General of the Army, is to
lot out the Stations of ground for every regiment to be quartered in; then the
Quartermaster of each particular Regiment, is to line out every particular
Companies Station in the Regiment, beginning with the eldest Regiments, and in
every Regiment the eldest Company, which are to be placed at the right hand,
and so successively, every Company according to his antiquity, and every
Regiment according to theirs.

In the mean time the Earl Marshall, the Sergeant Majors, Scout-Masters are
to take notice what passages and places of access are, whereby the enemy may
approach to this Camp, and in the convenientest places of them they are to
command double guards, both of horse and foot, to be placed for the securing
of the Army whilst the intrenchments are making. Before the principal works
of the Camp are to be raised, there must be Redouts speedily made upon all
such passages, to lodge those outguards in, and for the same purpose the
Pioners and Soldiers are to make what speed possibly may be: These Redouts
are to be made in greatness, as the place requires number of Soldiers to
defend it: viz. upon a small passage, where the enemy is not to be expected,
there a triangular Redout, sufficient to contain thirty or forty men, is
requisite; if the passage be more dangerous, then a foure-square Redout, which
may hold eighty or an hundred men; but upon the chiefest passage of all, either
a Sconce is to be built, or otherwise two Redouts, which may be either
foure-square or triangular, one being raised upon one side of the way, the
other somewhat wide upon the other side of the way, with the point or corner of
the work toward the enemies approaches, by reason more hands may be brought
to give fire upon them, from the two sides which make the angle or point. In
the mean time, whilst this is in agitation, the front of the Army is to be
pallizado'd with such stakes as is described in the discourse of warlike
instruments, which are to be driven one within a foot of another; these shall
keep off both the horse and the foot, if they should break through the
guards: Then as soon as conveniently may be, the works are to be raised of the
Quarters, and as they finish, the pallizadoes are to be pulled up again, as
hereafter in this discourse we shall speak more plainly of. The Prince of
Orange used also many times to place Redouts more inward within Musket Shot one
of another, to secure the Camp: the horse guards are within the outmost
Redouts, but their horse-Sentinels are set out perdue beyond the furthest
works, and also beyond the foot-Sentinels, which are always placed a good
distance from the works upon the passages, that they may give the alarm upon
all occasions, and so to retreat into the work.

No Soldier, during the time of his watch, in any of these Redouts, is to have
his Bandilires off from about him, nor any Pike-man his Gorget from about his
neck; their Pieces must be likewise loaded with powder and shot in a
continual readiness, and a Sentinel standing duly upon the brest-worke to
discover the enemies approaches; at which time, the Officer which commands the
work is to place betwixt each two Musketires a Pike-man to make the better
defense.

Those Officers that guard in such Redouts, seldom or never carry their
Colors with them, but leave them in their Quarters with a guard passing upon
them. Both the Captain and the Ensign are to march with their Company with
each of them a Pike.

These Redouts are to be releeved every night before Sunne-set with fresh
Companies from the main Camp; where no Soldier is to pull off his Armor, or
set down his Pike or Musket until they be all entered the work, and the
Sentinels set out in their due places.

Every several Redout has a particular name to distinguish one from the
other, How the Redouts may be pallizado'd.
and the Officers must draw Billets who shall have the guard in them, so that
no Officer shall aforehand know his guard, to avoid treachery. These Redouts
may be pallizado'd to make the defense more strong against the enemy, which is
performed after this manner: when the work is raised near the top, then lay
in some sharp stakes of hard wood a yard into the ground, and as much out of
the ground, three quarters of a foot asunder; but these kind of works are
seldom pallizado'd, unless they be very great, and set in dangerous places
for assaulting.

Now we are to show how the maine Quarters are to be fortified, How the maine
Quarters are to be situated and intrencht.
wherein we are to dispose the form of it according as the situation shall
direct us: but by the way, we must make sure, that no hilly ground be near
the Quarters, fearing left the enemy take it for his advantage, and so annoy
the Camp with his Ordnance; if such a place should be, either it must be
levelled, or else a work raised upon it to defend it.

If an Army may have such an advantage to be quartered near some great River,
that may be of defense sufficient to protect the Rear of the said Quarters,
then the intrenchment will be soon finished, and much the stronger, in regard
the whole power of the Army is but to make resistance one way. But if an Army
should happen to be encamped upon a Plain, so as the enemy may approach upon
any side of it, the form of it must be far otherwise, and the strength of it
the greater.

When an enemy can gain no advantage, but to come upon the face of the
Quarters only, then a small ditch of eight or nine foot broad, and six or
seven foot deep, the Rampire or Breast-worke accordingly, will serve; for
there shall need no better defense but to keep off their Horse and to damp
their Bullets: your forces being more than sufficient to defend the works from
scaling, the highest part of ground in the Camp is most fit to plant the
Ordnance upon, to scour the Plains before the Trenches. Diverse have fortified
their Camp by lodging their Army in a Wood near some great River, and in stead
of intrenching of it, they have cut down the timber trees, and made a
Barricado both against Horse and Foot, being a very speedy and cheap way,
and wonderful secure.

But in regard all places cannot possibly be found to have such advantages of
natural strength, we must learn to secure our Quarters by art, as the
ancient Romans used: for they regarded not so much the strength of the place by
nature, so as they could conveniently fortify it by art; and for the most part
they used one kind of intrenchment: but in these modern times we use any
form, as the situation of the place will permit; viz, sometimes crooked, as
his Excellency did betwixt Cleave and Skinken-Sco^ce; other times triangular,
as he did by Rays; sometimes round, and sometimes square: but these kind of
intrenchments are not so good, especially, when we are constrained to regulate
our selves according to the situation or extent of the place; for we shall
fail in the uniformity that is requisite to be observed in the Quarters,
whereby the Camp will be ordered so absurdly and grossly, that almost nothing
will have his due proportion: for as a Fortress serves to defend men against
the assaults of their enemies; so the well-ordering of a Camp within, serves
to distribute and place them, so that every particular Company may know what
place is proper and particular for them to defend, without which order there
had need be Bulwarks and large intrenchments about a Camp: for indeed, it
were better to want this fortification than the proper defense that the
soldiers may make within it, who being duly ordered as they ought to be, may
for a need secure themselves with little or no defense, their Quarters being
always so situated, and placed in such an orderly ready way to resist all
assaults.

But this is not the only care that is to be taken about the well disposing
of a Camp; but it is very requisite we should proceed further, taking a
survey how we may have supplies of ammunition, victuals, soldiers, and the
like, to have a safe recourse to this Camp, that they may not be hindered or
damnified by the enemy; and (as in the beginning of this discourse) it must be
either by water or land, and so, as the enemy may not possibly cut off the
passage, either for provision coming, or the Army retraiting: for if such an
oversight should happen, an Army should be just brought into a trap or
stratagem for its own confusion. Wherefore the enemy must not be suffered to
have any Forts or Garrisons behind you, to hinder you by land, nor any Castle
or Block-houses, to spoil you by water, but of necessity they must be taken in
first; and although the place should be never so commodious to transport
(either by water or land) necessaries to the Camp, yet if the place you intend
to encampe in be not very fruitful, The Christians being encamped about the
River Nile, Ann^ 1221. were drowned out of their Trenches.
to accommodate you with wood, victuals, forage for the present necessity both
of man and beast, or if the air be not healthful, or if the situation of your
Camp be so low that it be subject to drowning (if the enemy should cut out any
waters) you would find your self but in an ill taking; for you shall be sure
to suffer before you can redress these things.

Further, a special care is to be had how to preserve the Soldiers in health,
which we may learn from that famous soldier Mounsieur Bellay, who says that
sickness may be avoided by taking good heed unto the excess the Soldiers
use; and for their better healths, there must be provision made that they may
have warm and dry Hutes, well thatched with straw, reed, or sedge; shady trees
to defend the heat of Summer, or storms in Winter, their victuals sweet and
good, well boiled and salted.

Further, if in the heat of Summer any of the Troops belonging to the Army
should be forced to travel, they must take the early and cool morn, so as
they may be returned to their Quarters by the chief heat of the day.

Likewise in Winter the Soldiers ought not to march through waters, or over
ice and snow, unless the place they go unto will afford store of firing to
relieve and dry them. Neither must they be suffered to drink ill waters, or to
be ill clad, for these are the originals of great sicknesses; this care being
had, ties and unites the hearts of poor Soldiers to their superior Officers
more than any other way: for should not this care be had, a double loss of men
would ensue; as namely, to be vanquished by sickness, and slain by the enemy:
now since exercise is a principal thing to keep the Army in health, therefore
duly thrice a week they ought to be exercised in their complete Arms; this will
be a means to keep them from vicious courses, as gaming, drinking, and the
like, which of it self is able to surfeit and destroy an Army.

The General is always to have one months provision in his Camp, A General
may tax the Towns about his Camp to bring in a certain quantity of corn and
victuals, and he is to set the rates according to his pleasure.
especially of Bread, Cheese, Bacon, Fish, etc. with all kind of Provender for
the Horse. Also there must be good and wholesome Laws established and
proclaimed, and seen to be put in execution; for if Justice do not govern in
an Army, all things go to ruin in the Camp.

For in the first place, the unrulinesse of the Soldiers will cause
Victuallers, and the country people to refrain the Camp, whereby a famine will
soon ensue. Secondly, if the Soldiers be suffered to pilfer and pillage the
people abroad in the Country near adjoining, those people will plot a revenge
with the enemy, and seek to betray you: besides the quarrels that will arise
amongst themselves, whereby a confusion amongst themselves will be wrought, if
Justice should not prevent.

But now I shall come to that which all this while you have expected, and that
is to show the best manner of incamping, the which I shall endeavor to do by
two several demonstrations: The first shall be (as before is spoken of) when
the Rear of the Camp is secured by some great River or Arm of the Sea. The
second a square incampment upon the Champion, where no natural strength can
afford us help.

For the first of these two; when the place affords such natural strength,
that the Rear of the Army may be secured by some River or Arm of the Sea,
(provided always that the enemy cannot come with shipping to annoy you) the
Front of this Camp must be toward the enemy, where a certain Brest-work must
be raised four or five foot high, upon the most eminent ground, and about the
same breadth; the ditch about six foot broad, and four foot deep; this must
run, if the ground will give leave, with some nooks and angles, the better to
flanker some part of this intrenchment, as by the following figure you may
perceive, marked A.

From this Brest-work inwards into the Camp must be a space left sixty or
eighty Paces broad, if the convenience of the ground will give way, for the
Soldiers to draw into Battalia, or to Parado in, marked O.

In the next place, marked B. every Captain and Colonel are to have their
Hutes, or Tents stand in an even Line; viz. every Colonel before the head of
his own Company being quartered upon the right hand of his Regiment, and each
Captain successively, according to their antiquities.

In the next place there is a space eight paces broad, marked with the letter
C. this is for the chief street, and runs in an even line, from one side of the
Quarter to the other.

From this chief street downwards toward the Rear of the Quarters, are the
inferior Officers and Soldiers to be quartered, as at the letter D. and in
this are diverse things to be considered; as first, the street which goes down
between the Hutes, ought to be ten foot broad, and four hundred foot deep, in
regard each Hute is to be eight foot square, The Lieutenants Cabin is to be
12. foot long, and 8. foot broad.
and in every Hute two Soldiers are to be lodged: so that upon each side of
the way there is to be fifty Hutes built, which are to hold an hundred
Soldiers upon a side. At the top of the street upon the right hand, is the
Lieutenants Cabin, who is to be allowed twelve foot; and upon the left hand
is the Ensigns Cabin, The Sergeants are there placed to keep the Company in
good order.
of the same bigness, the Sergeants are to have upon each side their Cabbins
in the Rear of the Quarters: thus a Company of two hundred are conveniently
quartered.

In the Rear of these Hutes is another street or space of ground, which
runs from one side of the Quarters to the other, marked E. being six paces
wide, upon the foremost side of which are the Sutlers, Butchers and
Shopkeepers; behind these is a wast place next the water, for the off all,
filth and draffe to be conveyed away, as you may perceive at G.

The space or distance of ground which is betwixt Regiment and Regiment, ought
to be twenty or thirty foot broad, as you may see at H.

The General ought to have his Tents in the midst of all the Quarters, and the
Colonells, according to their dignity, upon each hand of his Pavilions.

The Passages into the Campare to be placed in the most convenient places; and
strong Ports made to open and shut at pleasure, as you may perceive at I. Also
if need requires, there may be posterne passages made in diverse places of the
Brest-work, for single persons to go in and out, with a turne-pike to secure
it as at K.

The Ordnance is to be placed in a half Moon made next the waterside, in the
most convenient place of the Camp; the residue may be placed either upon the
Brest-work, or else before the halfe-Moon, as at L. View the figure following:
and at M. is the Bridge for the Army to pass over the River.



The other manner of fortifying a Camp is now to be discourst of. A second way
of fortifying a Camp described.
The Lord high Marshall having made choice of a place convenient, being
attended by the Quartermaster General, and the inferior Quarter Masters:
about the midst of the ground where you intend to incamp, set up the Generals
Standard, and about the same stake out a square place of ground for the
Generals Pavilion, forty paces square* directly from this toward the North,
runs one main street forty paces broad, which divides the Horse-Camp from
the Foot-Camp; and on either side of the Generals Tents, runs two other
cross ways, thirty paces in breadth, which divide the armed Soldiers from
the Pioners and Wagons: these two ways embrace two long squares of ground
forty paces broad, and five hundred and fifty paces long apeece; these may
either of them be divided into five Lodgings, of an hundred paces in length,
and forty in breadth, leaving between them certain passages of ten paces in
breadth, so that the Soldiers upon every sudden alarm, may the more readily
repair to the place of Assembly. One of the Lodgings next the Generals Tent,
is appointed for the high Marshall and his retinue, and the other on the other
side, for the Treasurer; the rest may be assigned at the Marshals discretion,
to the other Officers of the field, and for such Noblemen and Gentlemen
Voluntires as follow the Wars at their own charge.

In the North-east Quarter of the Camp are the Horsemen lodged, in the
Northwest the Footmen: either of these Camps are divided into three parts, by
streets running East and West; these streets are twenty paces in breadth, and
five hundred and eighty paces long: in every of these three spaces of the
Foot-Camp are lodged a Regiment of 10000. men; and in the Hors-Camp, the
middlemost of them shall serve for 1500. Lances, or Curassiers with their
Beedets, the North space for the Harquebuziers; on the other side of this
street are the Lodgings assigned for the Colonels of every Regiment and their
Officers; every space being thirty paces broad, and one hundred and seaventy
long. By these Characters following you may understand the description of this
Camp the better, as in the figure following: A. stands for the Captains of the
Harquebuziers, B. for the Captain of the Lances or Curassiers, and C. for the
residue of the Carbines and Dragones: Likewise, D E F. is the place for the
Leaders of three principal Regiments of Footmen, the which are to be
distingu^ished by their antiquities, or by the usual name of Vantguard,
Battle and Rear-ward; the Vantguard lies next to the Generals Tent, and
answers to the Harquebuziers, the Battle answers to the Curassiers, and the
Rear-ward to the residue of the Carbines and Dragones. Every of these
principal Regiments, you may (if you please) divide again into five smaller
Regiments, by streets of ten paces broad, running North and South: So have you
fifteen less Regiments in the Foot-Camp, and five apeece in every of the
Horse-Camps, and every of these Regiments are one hundred paces broad, and one
hundred and seventy paces in length; and shall contain every of them in
Footmen 2000. of Curassiers 300. of Harquebuziers 400. the residue of the
Carbines and Dragones 500. with their Colonels and their Officers.

The Colonels and Captains of the Cavalliary may be quartered at the head of
their Regiments, as you may behold in the figure of the Camp. Those marked G.
are for the Colonels of the Foot; H. for the Captains of the light-Horse-men or
Harquebuziers; I. for the Captain of the Curassiers or Lances; K. for the
Captain of the residue of the Carbines and Dragones: So there remains
Regiments of an hundred paces broad, and one hundred and fifty paces long for
the Soldiers to be quartered in; which may, by small streets of five paces
broad, be divided into as many spaces as there are several Bonds in every
Regiment.

These last divisions of Bonds are omitted in the figure, because in so small a
plot it would breed confusion. This must be observed, that the shot be lodged
toward the outside of the Camp, that they may be in readiness to answer the
alarm; the which may be done, by dividing the utmost seven Regiments into
half, as you may see in the figure by the pricked lines, leaving the seven
spaces marked with L. for 7000. Shot, and the other with M. for 7000. Pikes:
all the other Regiments marked with N. are likewise for Pikes and Muskets, to
the number of 16000. Thus you see in the North moytie of this Camp, is
quartered all the Foot and Horse; the other half of this Camp must serve for
the quartering of the unarmed, as Pioners, Carters, Carpenters, Smiths,
Sutlers, Butchers, and all sorts of Mechanical Artificers, together with a
large place of assembly for the Soldiers to retire unto, to put themselves in
order upon any alarm; as also to exercise themselves in sundry sorts of
activity. You shall therefore from the South side of the General Pavilion, six
hundred paces Southward, extend out your first main street of forty paces
broad, and cross it again with another street, running East and West, three
hundred and sixty paces distant from the South side of the Generals Pavilion;
this street needs be but thirty paces in breadth.



Again, extend the second narrow street that runs parallel to the first main
street until you come to this cross street last made; so have you O. your
place of Assembly three hundred and thirty paces broad, and five hundred and
forty paces long. P. shall be appointed for the Munition and Officers
attending upon the Artilery. Q. is the Marke-place, and round about this
Marketplace may be lodged the Butchers, Bakers, Cooks and Victuallers of all
sorts.

About the place of the Assembly may be the Tents of all such as furnish the
Camp with things needful for the Soldiers, as Armourers, Tailors, Shoo-makers
and the like.

There still remains two long squares of earth, either of them 540. paces long,
and 190. paces broad: here the Carts and Wagons, with the horse and oxen; for
the Carriages themselves must always impale that part of the Camp that is not
fortified either by nature or art: the Pioners likewise may be quartered in
this Camp.

Lastly, you shall line out 60. paces distant from all these Regiments and
Quarters already set down, and there raise the circumference of the
intrenchment of the Camp, making a good Trench eight or ten foot wide, and
raise a good Parapet or Brest-work of five or six foot thick, and as high, with
a foot-bank to make the Soldiers of height sufficient to give fire over it:
your Ordnance is to be placed on the same.

But if the enemy be near, and of greater force than your self, then you must
make your Trenches very large and deep, with a Rampart and Brest-work of a
great height and thickness, with a Bulwark at each corner, and in the midst of
the Curtain. View the figure following; where the line the Ordnance is planted
upon, demonstrates the slight Trench and Brest-work which is to be made, the
enemy being a far distance from you. The outmost line with the Bulwarks, is the
figure of the strongest Intrenchment for security when the enemy is at hand.
For the Guards and manner of watching, I have discoursed of in the beginning of
this Discourse, and more fully in the latter end of the Discourse of
Fortification. I intend in the next Chapter to show you the manner of the
Swedes Incampings, which I rather affect than this.

CHAP. V.
How the King of Sweden, in the late Imperial Wars, used to incamp his Army,
with Figures to explain the same.
THe Swedes in their late German Wars have been very curious in their
Incampings, in regard of the potency of their enemies, and the multiplicity of
their Armies; and were able by their excellent order, and good discipline, to
perform as great achievements with their Army of 16000. Soldiers, as their
enemy could with 20000. For that famous General never filed his men above six
deep, and never above 126. in a Company (besides the Officers), and in a
Regiment but eight Companies; which he might the better do, in regard his
Soldiers were no novices, but admirable apt and pregnant in their exercisings
and performances: this was one reason of this his only and peculiar way of
imbattelling and incamping.

Likewise, the fewness of men in his Companies made the more Divisions and
Cohorts; and the more Officers, which he found by experience, stood him in
great stead, and less charge to maintain them.

His incampments were different both from the ancient Romans, and our modern
Hollanders, as you may see by this description following, how he used to
enquarter his Regiments of Foot; as by the sequent figure you may perceive in
the head of the Quarters nine large Square at the upper end of the figure
marked with the letter A. all which are the due places for the Colonel and
Captains to pitch their Tents upon, where you see the word Colonel written,
and the Captains according to their degrees in seniority and dignity of Office,
as you may perceive by their Hutes or Tents marked each on the head of his own
Company. The number over the Colonells Hutes or Tents show it to be 48. foot
broad, viz. twice as broad as any of the Captains Cabbins, which are marked
with 24. at each end of these rows of Squares you see the number 30. marked,
which shows how many foot long each of these great Hutes are.

Now, whereas the King of Swedens discipline was usually to have but eight
Companies to a Regiment, so many Hutes you see on the top of the Quarter, four
on each side the Colonels.

And the reason why this famous Warrior had so few in a Regiment as 1008. and
consequently so few in a private Company as 126. those 1008. being divided
amongst eight Captains, was that he might have the more places of preferment,
and the more Officers to command these few men. This is a greater advantage
than our Ancestors were aware of: and it were happy if our English Companies
were reduced into 126. men in a Company, and not to be suffered some to be 200.
and some 300. and some 150. which if it must needs be so, and may not be
altered, then I could wish all Companies to be only of the extent of 200. and
80. of them to be Pikemen, and 120. Musketires.

The rows of less squares marked on each side of the figure with the letter
B. are the Hutes for the Soldiers to lie in, between the Front of which and
the Colonels ground, you see a large void space or distance, which is twenty
foot wide marked at each end; the use of it is for the drawing up of the
Companies or for the Officers to walk in, and for the Soldiers to speak with
them there: this space is marked in the figure with C.

Right under the Colonels Hute, you see another void space as wide as the
Colonels Hute is, and as long as all the Quarter of the common Soldiers,
marked with D. the use of it is for the Officers of the Regiment, commonly
called the Officers of the Staff, as the Provost-Marshall, the Quarter Masters
of the Regiment, and the like.

Of the Quarters of the common Soldiers on either side of this long void
space, these be the proportions. All the little squares be Hutes or Cabbins
in the longer rows marked with the letter M. on the first Hutes are the
Musketires lodged; and in the other rows marked with P. are the Pikemen
lodged: one row of Musketires and one row of Pikes makes up one complete Bond
or Company of 126. men.

In the Musketires row are twenty four Hutes, and in the Pikemens but eighteen;
the reason is, because the King by his orders commands that every complete
Company should have three Corporalships of Musketires; four Files or Rots (as
the Swedes term them) make a Corporalship of Musketires; but of Pikemen three
Files or Rots make a Corporalship: so that twelve Files of Musketires, and nine
Files of Pikes, viz. twenty one Files, firemen in depth in each File, is a
complete Band of 126. men, besides the Officers and Sergeants.

When his Companies were weak, then he would have but two Corporalships of
Musketires, and the remainder to be Pikes.

Each of these Hutes are nine foorsquare, viz. three yards every way; and
whereas one row of Musketires and one row of Pikes belongs to one Company;
these therefore nearer set together than the row of Pikes belonging to several
Companies are for the Pikes and Musketires of the same Company, are parted with
a street but six foot wide, whereas betwixt the Pikes of several Companies is
a street of eighteen foot wide, and betwixt the Musketires of several
Companies, a street of twelve foot wide, and so you see the several
proportions marked.

The length of the row of Pikes is but 162. foot, as you see it marked betwixt
the two first rows of their Hutes. The length of the Musketires row is 216.
foot, as is marked in the margent: the distance of breadth being observed, they
amount to 360. foot, or 72. paces; so broad is the whole Quarter for one entire
Regiment.

Below all this, in the Rear or lower end of the Quarter, you have a void
space, 14. foot of ground running all the breadth of the Quarter, serving for
the freedom of Air; this is marked with E.

Last of all, you may behold another lowance of ground marked with the letter
F. which is for the Sutlers, Chap-men, Butchers, etc. of the Regiment. Add now
the distances of length together, and they come to 300. foot, which is the
length of the whole Quarter for one entire Regiment.

Now rests the chief point of discipline in the number and order of the placing
of the Hutes, and the men in them. Concerning the number, there be three men to
be lodged in one Hute, as well Pikes as Musketires; so that in 24. Hutes of
Musketires of one Company there be 72. men; and in the 18. Hutes of Pike-men
of one Company there be but 54. men, which number added together, amounts to
126. which is a complete Band. These 72. Musketires are again divided into
three Corporalships, and the 54. Pike-men also into three Corporalships. Four
Files or Rots of Musketires go to one Corporalship, and of Pike-men but three
Files or Rots to a Corporalship. So that 24. Musketires go to one
Corporalship, and of Pikes 18. according to the number of either of their
Cabbins.

Furthermore, their order being to march six deep in File, therefore in every
two Hutes there is one Rot or File lodged, which presently know how to put
themselves in order.

Thus has every Corporal of Musketires eight Hutes to look unto, and every
Corporal of Pikes six Hutes under him. This certainty and disposing of the
numbers serves much for private government: this order of quartering, they are
opinionated, is prevalent for the ready resisting of the enemy.

Whereas you see two rows of Pikes, and two rows of Musketires still together,
with their Cabin doors inward one to another; this is the use of it. Suppose
the enemy in the night falls upon the Quarters, the Alarm being taken and
given by those of the outmost Guards, out slips the two rows of Pikes into the
street or alley betwixt them, and presently marching out betwixt the Captains
Hutes, they are instantly in a fair order of Battle.

The Pikes being gone, then the two next rows of Musketires joining together,
march also out upon both sides of the Pikes, where they are ready instantly to
flank them. Thus one Squadron or halfe-Regiment issuing out upon one side of
their Colonels Tent, and the other half on the other, presently they draw
themselves in complete Battalia, and find their Colonels and Captains in the
head of the Quarter, ready to conduct them to the Brest-work; thus so soon as
the Alarm is given in from the outer Guards, the Soldiers will be ready to
entertain their assault, every man before his own Quarter, upon which the enemy
falls before he can possibly (march he never so fast) come near to do any
execution.

If you desire to hear how in that huddle of darkness they can possibly find
their weapons, know that by the order of their standing, every man can at first
coming most readily clap his hands upon his own. To instance in the Pikes for
example; The place where they all stand together is upon a thing made after the
fashion of a pair of Gallows at the head of the Quarter; the upper overthwart
beam is for the Pikes to stay against; then there is another beam lower, for to
hang the Corslets upon, and to lean the Muskets against; this is to have a
defense over it to defend the wet. Now when any service or exercise is done
abroad, he that lies in the Rear of the Quarter, by coming in first, sets
down his Arms inmost, and he that comes in last leaves his outmost, which
when he again goes first out, he finds his foremost, and when the last man
comes, he finds his own left, every man keeping still the same order that
was at first appointed; so that the foreman, the right hand man, or the
bringer up is the fame ever, and his weapons ever in the same place. Thus they
lie in Battalia being at bed; in Battle array when they rise up, their Arms
are as ready as themselves: so that upon all Alarmes, they are ready in a
moment to entertain their enemy to their costs. The figure of this discourse
you shall find in the next page: then afterward we shall describe the figure
of the whole Camp, with all the Fortifications thereunto belonging.

A figure showing how the Swedes inquarter a Regiment of Foot.



A figure of perfect strong Encampment of a whole Army, used by the King of
Sweden in his late Wars.



Let me request you to observe, how the former figure of inquartering a
particular Regiment is explained; that you may the better understand this
figure, which has the same ground and order as formerly is described, what the
Spaces, and the Fortification about the whole Camp means, I shall now explain
unto you by the letters following. A. Signifies the Parradoing place, where the
Soldiers are daily excercised in the use of their Arms. B. The chief Quarter
for the General. C. The place of the Artillery, and the General of it. D. The
common Marketplace for the whole Army. E. The high Marshals Quarter. G. The
place by him for his guards and servants. H. The Major General of the Army
his Quarter. K. The place for his men and guards. L. The several Regiments to
be divided, as in the former figure. M. Half Regiments. N. The Streets
betwixt the several Quarters, each fifty foot wide. O. The space between the
Front of the Quarters and the Trench of the Camp, being forty paces wide,
serving for the drawing up of the Soldiers, and for the Alarm place. P. The
space between the two innermost lines of the Fortification, decyphereth the
Parapet or Breast-work five or six foot high, and six paces thick or broad. Q.
The wet Mote or Graffe beyond the Parapet, as you may perceive by the pricks.
R. The half Moons or half Redouts. S. The cuttains. T. The passages into the
Redouts or half-Moons. V. The Ravelins, with their Graffes about them: they are
placed betwixt the half-Moons, somewhat further out: each of these are to be
sixty paces one from another, and the extent of the side of these is fifty
paces long, and is so situated, that a right line on either side or face, be
drawn to fall upon the point where the half Redouts and Curtains meet, as you
may perceive by the lines pricked from the extreme of the Curtain to the end of
the Ravelin. The use of these is to guard the passages out of the Camp: the
passages are marked with W. Also as before is showed, there are out-guards upon
all foords and passages according to the nature of the place, round about this
Camp. If there should be any Convoyes sent out, or any design to be
performed against the enemy, the passages of the Camp must be safely guarded,
so that no man may pass out to inform the enemy until such time as the
danger be past. And this shall suffice for the describing how an Army should be
encamped.

CHAP. VI.
The Oath of all Underofficers both of Horse and Foot, to be given at the
proclaiming of these Articles following.
I R. W. do here promise and swear, that unto the high and mighty King C. etc.
as also to the Crown of England, I will be a true and faithful servant and
Soldier, every manner of way performing my best endeavors for his Majesty's
service, and the profit of his Kingdom. To my power also shall I hinder all
actions prejudicial unto his Crown: and if I have tidings of any thing likely
to be prejudicial, I shall give his Majesty or his General present notice
thereof, or some one or other of his Council. Moreover, I will do my best
endeavor to obseve all these his Majesty's Articles of War. Also I shall
behave my self manfully in Battle, Skirmishes, and entries of Breaches, as
well by water as by land, in all times and places, when and where I shall be
commanded. I shall also keep watch and ward, and do all other duties
willingly, unto the best profit of his Majesty and his Kingdom, wheresoever I
shall be commanded by sea or land. Also I shall bear my self obediently
toward my superior Officers in all that they command me for his Majesty's
Service. In like manner, as I shall answer it before God and every honest man,
I shall not fly from my Colors that I am commanded to follow, so long as I am
able to go after them: and I shall be willing to do this at all times, and by
no means absent my self from them at any time. I shall lay down my life and
goods for the advancing of his Majesty's service; and endure all miseries that
can possibly fall out in the Wars, fighting manfully to the very last, so
far forth as I am able, or that any valiant true Soldier ought to do.
Furthermore, if hereafter I be put into any place of charge by his Majesty or
his General, I shall do my best endeavor fairly to discharge my duty
therein, so as I ought to do according to my place. This Oath shall I well and
truly keep as the Lord of Hosts shall help my soul at the last judgment.

ARTICLES AND MILITARY LAWS TO BE OBSERVED IN THE VVARRES. SECT. XVIII.
CHAP. VII.
Diverse Articles and Martial Laws, whereby an Army is to be regulated and
governed, both in Camp and Garrison.
INprimis, By these Laws the King of Sweden governed his Army.
No Commander, nor private Soldier whatsoever, shall use any kind of Idolatry,
Witchcraft, or Enchanting of Arms, whereby God is dishonored, upon pain of
death.

2. If any shall blaspheme the name of God, either drunk or sober, the thing
being proved by two or three witnesses, he shall suffer death without mercy.

3. If any shall seem to deride or scorn Gods Word or Sacraments, and be
taken in the fact, he shall forthwith be convented before the Commissioners
Ecclesiastical, to be examined, and being found guilty, he shall be condemned
by the Court of War to lose his head: but if they were spoken through haste
or unadvisedly, for the first offense he shall be in yrons fourteen days,
and for the second, be shot to death.

4. If any shall swear in his anger by the name of God, being convicted, shall
pay half a months pay unto the poor: Or if any be found drinking, or at any
other evil exercise, he shall forfeit half a months pay, and at the next
assembly of prayer or preaching, he shall be brought upon his knees before the
whole assembly, and there crave pardon of Almighty God.

5. To the end that Gods Word be by no means neglected, Our will is, that
public prayers be said every morning and evening throughout the whole Camp,
at one time, in every several Regiment, they being called thereunto by the
sound of the Generals or Marshals Trumpets, and the Drums of every private
Company and Regiment.

6. Whatsoever Minister shall neglect his time of prayer, except a lawful
occasion hinders him, he shall for every time being absent, pay half a months
pay.

7. Whatsoever Soldier shall neglect the time of prayer, and is thereof
advised by his Captain, he shall lie in prison 24. hours, except a lawful
occasion hindered.

8. If any Minister be found drunk or drinking at such time as he should
preach, or read prayer, for the first offense he shall be gravely admonisht by
the Commissioners Ecclesiastical, and for the second fault be banished the
Leaguer.

9. Every Holy Day and every Sabbath Day at least, shall be kept solemn with
preaching, in a place convenient, before and after noon; this also to be done
twice every week, if the time will permit: if there be any holy days to come
in the following week, the Minister shall after such Sermons or Prayers
publicly bid them: who so shall neglect the time appointed (unless he have
some lawful let or occasion) shall be punished as aforesaid.

10. All Merchants and sellers of commodities whatsoever, so soon as they hear
the Token or call to be given, shall immediately shut up their doors, and so
keep them during the said time of Prayer and Sermon; they that presume in that
season to sell any thing, shall make forfeit of all things so sold, whereof the
one half to go to the General, and the other half to the next Hospital;
over and above which, the offender shall for one whole day be put in prison.

11. All drinkings and feastings shall in the time of Prayer be given over,
upon pain of punishment, as is before mentioned in the seventh Article; if any
Soldier herein offends, he shall forfeit half his weeks pay to the poor; and
if he be an Officer, he shall forfeit what shall be awarded.

12. For the explaining of this Article formerly expressed: If there be none to
complain of these abuses, then shall the Minister himself give notice thereof
unto the Colonel or Captain, and if he shall suffer such abuses to go
unpunished, then shall he give the General notice thereof, who shall do him
right.

13. All Priests and Ministers that are to be in our Camp or Leaguer, shall be
appointed by the Bishop of the same Diocese or Land from whence the Soldiers
come whom he is to be among: no Colonel nor Captain shall take what Minister
he shall think good, but shall be content with whom the Bishop shall appoint
him.

14. To the intent that all Church business, as well in the field as
otherwhere, may have an orderly proceeding; We ordain, That there be one
Ecclesiastical Consistory or Commission in our Leaguer, the President or
chief person whereof shall be Our own Minister, when We our selves are
personally present in the field. In Our absence shall the chief Minister to
the General be the man; his fellow-Commissioners or ordinary Assessors shall
be the chief Ministers to every Regiment of Horse and Foot; unto whom We give
full power and authority to be Judges in all Church affairs, according to the
Law of God and holy Church; what shall be by them decreed, shall be of as great
force and strength, as if it were determined in any other Consistory
whatsoever.

15. No Captain shall have liberty to take any Minister without the consent of
his Colonel, and of the Consistory. Neither again shall he discharge any, but
by permission of the Consistory, he having there first showed, that Minister
not to be worthy of his Charge.

16. If any Minister be found ill inclined to drunkenness or otherwise; then
may his Colonel or Captain of Horse or Foot complain of him in the Consistory;
and if his fellow-Ministers find him guilty, then may they discharge him of his
place. In such complaints, shall the whole Consistory and the President,
severely also reprehend him, that others of the same calling may take example
thereby, and be warned of such gross errors, and give good example unto others.

17. For that no government can stand firmly, unless it be first rightly
grounded; and that the Laws be rightly observed: We the King of, etc. do
hereby make known unto all our Soldiers and Subjects, as well Nobles as
others; that in our presence they presume not to do any unseemely thing: but
that every one give us our due honor, as we ought to receive; who presumes to
do the contrary, shall be punished at our pleasure.

18. Next shall our Officers and Soldiers be obedient unto our General and
Field-Marshal, with other our Officers ne^t under them; in whatsoever they
shall command belonging unto our service, upon pain of punishment as follows.

19. Whosoever behaves not himself obediently unto our great General, or our
Ambassador coming in our absence, as well as if we our selves were there in
person present, shall be kept in irons or in prison, until such time as he
shall be brought to his answer, before a Council of War; where being found
guilty, whether it were wilfully done or not, he shall stand to the order of
the Court, to lay what punishment upon him they shall think convenient,
according as the person and fact is.

20. And if any shall offer to discredit these great Officers by word of mouth
or otherwise, and not be able by proof to make it good, he shall be put to
death without mercy.

21. Whosoever offers to lift up any manner of Arms against them, whether he
does them hurt or not, shall be punished by death.

22. If any offers to strike them with his hand, whether he hit or miss, he
shall lose his right hand.

23. If it falls out that our great General in any feast, drinking, or
otherwise, does offer injury to any Knight, Gentleman or other, which stands
not with their honor to put up; then may they complain to the Commissioners
for the Council of War, where he shall answer them, and be censured by
them according to the quality and importance of the fact.

24. As it is here spoken of our General; so also it is of all other our great
Officers, as Field-Martiall, General of the Ordnance, General of the Horse,
Serjeant-Major General, Quartermaster General, and Muster-Master; all which,
if they commit any such offense through envy or other by-respect, they shall
answer it before the Court of War, as is before mentioned.

25. As every Officer and soldier ought to be obedient unto our General and
other great Officers; so shall they in the under Regiments, be unto their
Colonel, Lieftenant-Colonell, Serjeant-Major, and Quartermaster, upon pain
of the same punishment before mentioned.

26. If any Soldier or Officer serving either on horseback or foot, shall
offer any wrong or abuse unto his superior Officer either by word or deed, or
shall refuse any duty commanded him, tending unto our service, he shall be
punished according to the importance of the fact.

27. If any Colonel, Lieftenant-Colonell, Serjeant-Major, or Quartermaster,
shall command any thing not belonging unto our service, he shall answer to the
complaint before the Court.

28. In like manner if any inferior Officer, either of horse or foot does
challenge any common soldier to be guilty of any dishonest action; the
soldier finding himself guiltless, may lawfully call the said Officer to
make proof of his words before the Court as his equal.

29. If any soldier either of horse or foot shall offer to strike his officer
that shall command him any duty for our service, he shall first lose his hand,
and be then turned out of the Quarter. And if it be done in any Fort or place
beleagured after the watch is set, he shall lose his life for it.

30. And if he does hurt to any of them, whether it be in the field or not, he
shall be shot to death.

31. If any such thing falls out within the compass of the Leaguer or the
place of Garrison, in any of the soldiers lodgings where many of them meet
together, the matter shall be inquired into, by the Officers of the Regiment,
that the beginner of the fray may be punished according to desert.

32. He who in the presence of our General shall draw his sword, with purpose
to do mischief with it, shall lose his hand for it.

33. He who shall in anger draw his sword while his Colors are flying, either
in Battle or upon the March, shall be shot to death; if it be done in any
strength or fortifyed place, he shall lose his hand, and be turned out of the
Quarter.

34. He who shall presume to draw his sword upon the place where any Court of
Justice is holden, while it is holden, shall lose his life for it.

35. He that draws his sword in any strength or Fort to do mischief
therewith, after the watch is set, shall lose his life for it.

36. No man shall hinder the Provost Marshall General, his Lieftenant or
servants, when they are to execute any thing that is for our service; who does
the contrary, shall lose his life.

37. Leave is given unto the Provost Marshall General to apprehend all
whatsoever that offends against these our Articles of War. All other
offenders he may likewise apprehend by his own authority.

38. If the Provost Marshall General shall apprehend any man by his own
authority; he may keep him either in prison or in irons, but by no means do
execution upon him after the Court of War is ended, without first giving the
General notice thereof.

39. The Provost Marshals of every Regiment, have also the same privilege
under their own Regiment and Company, that the Provost Marshall General has
in the Leaguer.

40. Every Sergeant Major commanding in the whole Leaguer what appertains to
his Office, shall be obeyed by every man with his best endeavor.

41. Whatsoever is to be published or generally made known shall be proclaimed
by sound of Drum and Trumpet, that no man may pretend ignorance in it; they
who after that shall be found disobedient, shall be punished according to the
quality of the fact.

42. No soldier shall think himself to good to work upon any piece of
Fortification, or other place, where they shall be commanded for our service,
upon pain of punishment.

43. Whosoever shall do his Majesty's business slightly or lazily, shall first
ride the wooden horse, and lie in prison after that with bread and water,
according as the fact shall be adjudged more or less heinous.

44. All Officers shall diligently see that the soldiers plye their work,
when they are commanded so to do; he that neglects his duty therein, shall be
punished according to the discretion of the Court.

45. All soldiers ought diligently to honor and obey their Officers, and
especially being by them commanded upon service; but if at any time they can on
the contrary discover, that they are commanded upon a service which is to our
prejudice any manner of way; then shall that soldier not obey him what charge
soever he receives from him, but is presently to give notice of it.

46. No Colonel nor Captain shall command his soldiers to do any unlawful
thing; which who so does, shall be punished according to the discretion of the
Judges. Also if any Colonel or Captain or other Officer whatsoever, shall by
rigor take any thing away from any common soldier, he shall answer for it
before the Court.

47. No man shall go any other way in any Leaguer wheresoever, but the same
common way laid out for every man, upon pain of punishment.

48. No man shall presume to make any Alarm in the quarter, or to shoot of his
Musket in the night time, upon pain of death.

49. He that when warning is given for the setting of the watch by sound of
Drum, Fife, or Trumpet, shall wilfully absent himself without some lawful
excuse; shall be punished with the wooden horse, and be put to bread and water,
or other penance, as the matter is of importance.

50. He that is taken a sleep upon the watch, either in any strength, trench,
or the like, shall be shot to death.

51. He that comes of his watch where he is commanded to keep his Guard, or
drinks himself drunk upon his watch or place of Sentinel, shall be shot to
death.

52. He that at the sound of Drum or Trumpet repaires not to his Colors,
shall be clapped in irons.

53. When any march is to be made, every man that is sworn shall follow his
Colors; who ever presumes without leave to stay behind shall be punished.

54. And if it be upon mutiny that they do it, be they many or be they few,
they shall die for it.

55. Who ever runs from his Colors, be he Native or Forreiner, and does not
defend them to the uttermost of his power so long as they be in danger, shall
suffer death for it.

56. He that runs from his Colors in the field shall dye for it; and if any
of his Comrades kill him in the mean time he shall be free.

57. Every man is to keep his own rank and file upon the march, and not to put
others from their orders; nor shall any man cast himself behind, or set
himself upon any wagon, or horseback; the offenders to be punished according
to the time and place.

58. Whatever Regiment shall first charge the enemy and retire afterward from
them before they come to dint of sword with them, shall answer it before our
highest Marshals Court.

59. And if the thing be occasioned by any Officer, he shall be publicly
disgraced for it, and then turned out of the Leaguer.

60. But if both Officers and Soldiers be found faulty alike, then shall the
Officers be punished as aforesaid. If it be in the Soldiers alone, then shall
every tenth man be hanged; the rest shall be condemned to carry all the filth
out of the Leaguer, until such time as they perform some exploit that is
worthy to procure their pardon, after which time they shall be clear of their
former disgrace. But if at the first any man can by the testimony of ten men
prove himself not guilty of the cowardice, he shall go free.

61. When any occasion of service is, he that first runs away, if any man kill
him, he shall be free; and if at that time he escape, and be apprehended
afterward, he shall be proclaimed Traitor, and then put out of the Quarter;
after which, whosoever kills him, shall never be called to account for it.

62. If any occasion be to enter any Castle, Town or Sconce by assault or
breach, he who retires from the place before he has been at handy blows with
the enemy, and has used his sword, so far as it is possible for him to do
service with it, and before he be by main strength beaten from it by the
enemy, shall be so punished as the Court shall censure him.

63. Whatsoever Ensigne-bearer shall fly out of any place of Battery, Sconce
or Redout, before he has endured three assaults, and receive no relief,
shall be punished as before.

64. Whatsoever Regiment, Troop or Company refuses to advance forwards to
charge the enemy, but out of fear and cowardice stays behind their fellows,
shall be punished as before.

65. Whatsoever Regiment, Troop or Company is the beginner of any mutiny, shall
be punished as is before mentioned; the first author to die for it, and the
next consenter to be punished according to the discretion of the Court.

66. If any Regiment, Troop or Company shall fly out of the Field or Battle,
then shall they three several times (six weeks being betwixt every time)
answer for it before the Court, and if there it can be proved that they have
done ill, and have broken their Oath, they shall be proclaimed Traitors, and
all their goods shall be confiscated, whether they be present to answer it
before the Court or not: if they be absent, they shall be allotted so many
days as we shall appoint them for liberty to come in to answer it before the
Court, where if they clear themselves, well and good; if not, they shall have
so many days to retire themselves, after which if they be apprehended, then
shall they be punished according as the Court shall doom them.

67. Whatsoever Regiment, Troop or Company shall treat with the enemy, or enter
into any conditions with them whatsoever (without our leave, or our Generals,
or chief Commander in his absence) whatsoever Officer shall do the same, shall
be put to death for it, and all his goods shall be confiscated; of the
soldiers every tenth man shall be hanged, and the rest punished, as aforesaid.

68. Whosoever presuming to do the same, and shall be taken therewith, shall
be proceeded withal like those that fly out of the field; their goods also
shall be confiscate.

69. If any that then were in company with such, can free themselves from being
partakers in the crime, and can prove that they did their best to resist it,
then shall they be rewarded by us according as the matter is of importance.

70. Whoever upon any strength holds discourse with the enemy, more or less,
without our leave, our Generals, or the Governor of the place; shall die for
it.

71. If it be proved that they have given the enemy any private intelligence
by letter or otherwise, without our leave as aforesaid; shall die for it.

72. They that give over any strength unto the enemy, unless it be for
extremity of hunger or want of Ammunition; the Governor, with all the Officers
shall die for it; all the soldiers shall be lodged without the quarters
without any Colors, they shall be made to carry out all the filth of the
Leaguer; thus to continue until some noble exploit of them be performed, which
shall promerit pardon for their former cowardice.

73. Whatsoever soldiers shall compel any Governor to give up any Strength,
shall lose their life for it: those, either Officers or Soldiers, that consent
unto it, to be thus punished; the Officers to die all, and the Soldiers every
tenth man to be hanged: but herein their estate shall be considered, if they
already have suffered famine and want of necessaries for their life, and be
withal out of hope to be relieved, and are so pressed by the enemy, that of
necessity they must within a short time give up the Piece, endangering their
lives thereby, without all hope of relief: herein shall our General with his
Council of War either clear them, or condemn them according to their merit.

74. If any number of Soldiers shall without leave of their Captain assemble
together for the making of any convention, or taking of any council amongst
themselves; so many inferior Officers as be in company with them shall suffer
death for it; and the soldiers be so punished as they that give up any
Strength. Also at no time shall they have liberty to hold any meeting amongst
themselves, neither shall any Captain permit it unto them; he that presumes to
suffer them shall answer it before our highest Court.

75. If any being brought in question amongst others, shall call for help of
his own Nation or of others, with intention rather to be revenged than to
defend himself; he shall suffer death for it, and they that come in to help him
shall be punished like Mutiners.

76. Whosoever gives advice unto the enemy any manner of way, shall die for it.

77. And so shall they that give any token sign or Item unto the enemy.

78. Every man shall be contented with that Quarter that shall be given him
either in the Town or Leaguer; the contrary doer to be accounted a Mutiner.

79. Whoever flings away his Arms, either in field or otherwhere, shall be
scourged through the Quarter, and then be lodged without it, be enforced to
make the streets clean until they redeem themselves by some worthy exploit
doing.

80. He that felleth or pawneth his Arms or any kind of Ammunition whatsoever,
or any Hatchets, Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, or other the like necessary
instruments used in the field, shall be for the first and second time beaten
through the Quarters, and for the third time punished as for other theft: he
also that buieth or takes them upon pawn, be he soldier or be he victualler,
he shall first lose his money, and then be punished like him that sold them.

81. He that wilfully breaks any of his Arms or Implements aforesaid, shall
again pay for the mending of them, and after that be punished with bread and
water, or otherwise according to the discretion of the Court.

82. He that after warning to the contrary, shall either buy or sell, shall
first lose all the things so sold or bought, and then be punished for his
disobedience, as is aforesaid.

83. No man that once has been proclaimed Traitor either at home or in the
field, or that has been under the hangmans hands, shall ever be endured again
in any Company.

84. No Duel or Combat shall be permitted to be fought either in the Leaguer
or place of Strength: if any offers to wrong others, it shall be decided by
the Officers of the Regiment; he that challenges the field of another shall
answer it before the Marshals Court. If any Captain, Lieutenant, Ancient, or
other inferior Officer shall either give leave or permission unto any under
their command, to enter combat, and does not rather hinder them, shall be
presently casheired from their charges, and serve afterward as a Reformado or
common soldier; but if any harm be done, he shall answer it as deeply as he
that did it.

85. He that forces any woman to abuse her, and the matter be proved, he
shall die for it.

86. No Whore shall be suffered in the Leaguer; but if any will have his own
wife with him, he may; if any unmarried woman be found, he that keeps her may
have leave lawfully to marry her, or else be forced to put her away.

87. No man shall presume to set fire on any Town or Village in our Land: if
any do, he shall be punished according to the importancy of the matter, so as
the Judges shall sentence him.

88. No Soldier shall set fire upon any Town or Village in the enemies Land,
without he be commanded by his Captain: neither shall any Captain give any such
command, unless he has first received it from us or our General: who so
does the contrary, he shall answer it in the Generals Council of War
according to the importance of the matter; and if it be proved to be
prejudicial unto us, and advantageous for the enemy, he shall suffer death for
it.

89. No Soldier shall pillage any thing from our subjects upon any March,
Strength, Leaguer or otherwise howsoever, upon pain of death.

90. He that beats his Host or his household servants, the first and second time
he shall be put in yrons, and made to fast with bread and water, according as
the wrong is that he has done, if the harm be great, he shall be punished
thereafter, according to the discretion of the Court.

91. None shall presume to do wrong to any that brings necessaries to our
Leaguer, Castle or Strength whatsoever, or to cast their goods down off their
Horses, and take away their Horses perforce: which whosoever does shall die for it.

92. They that pillage or steal either in our Land or in the enemies, or from
any of them that come to furnish our Leaguer or Strength, without leave, shall
be punished as for other theft.

93. If it so please God that we beat the enemy, either in the field or in his
Leaguer, then shall every man that is appointed follow the chase of the enemy,
and no man give himself to fall upon pillage, so long as it is possible to
follow the enemy, and until such time as he be assuredly beaten; which done,
then may their quarters be fallen upon, every man taking what he finds in his
own quarters; neither shall any man fall to plunder one in another quarters,
but rest himself contented with that which is assigned him.

94. If any man give himself to fall upon the pillage before leave be given
him so to do, then may any of his Officers kill him. Moreover, if any
misfortune ensue upon their greediness after the spoil, then shall all of
them suffer death for it; and notwithstanding there comes no damage thereupon,
yet shall they lie in Irons for one month, living all that while upon bread
and water, giving all the pillage so gotten unto the next Hospital. He that
plunders another quarter, shall also have the same punishment.

95. When any Fort or place of Strength is taken in, no man shall fall upon the
spoil, before that all the places in which the enemy is lodged be also taken
in, and that the Soldiers and Burgers have laid down their Arms, and that
the quarters be dealt out and assigned to every body; who so does the contrary
shall be punished as before.

96. No man shall presume to ^illage any Church or Hospital, although the
Strength be taken by assault; except he be first commanded, or that the
Soldiers and Burgers be fled thereinto and do harm from thence; who dares
the contrary shall be punished as aforesaid.

97. No man shall set fire upon any Hospital, Church, School, or Mill, or
spoil them any way, except he be commanded; neither shall any tyrannize over
any Churchman, or aged people, men or women, maids or children, unless they
first take arms against them, under pain of punishment at the discretion of
the Judges.

98. No soldiers shall abuse any Churches, Colleges, Schools, or Hospitalls;
or offer any kind of violence to Ecclesiastical persons, nor any way be
troublesome with pitching or inquartering upon them, or with exacting of
contribution from them: no soldier shall give disturbance or offense to any
person, exercising his sacred function or Ministry upon pain of death.

99. Let the billet and lodgings in every City be assigned to the Soldiers, by
the Burge-masters or chief Head-borroughes; and let no Commander presume to
meddle with that office; no Commander or common soldier, shall either exact or
receive of the Townsmen or Citizens any thing, besides what the King or his
General in his absence has appointed to be received.

100. No Citizen nor Country man shall be bound to allow unto either Soldier
or Officer, any thing but what is contained in the Kings Orders, for
contributions and enquarterings; (viz.) nothing besides house-roome, firewood,
candle, vinegar, and salt, which is yet to be undestood that the inferior
Officers, as Sergeants and Corparalls and those under them, as also all common
Soldiers shall make shift with the common fire and candle of the house where
they lie, and do their business by them.

101. If so be that Colonels and other Commanders have any servants or
attendants, they shall not be maintained by the Citizens or Yeomandry, but by
their own Masters.

102 No Commander shall take any house or lodging in his protection, or at his
own pleasure give a ticket of freedom, when such tickets are not expressly
desired of him, nor shall he receive any bride or present to mend his own
commons withal under any color or pretext whatsoever. If any man desire a
personal safeguard, let him be contented with that which is appointed in the
Kings Orders.

103. To Commanders and Soldiers present, let the usual allowance be offered
by the Citizens, but let no care be taken for such as are away.

104. New-levied Soldiers are to have no allowance before they be entertained
at the Muster.

105. Nothing is to be allowed the Soldiers in any house but in the same where
he is billited; if they take any thing otherwhere by force, they are to make it
good.

106. If either Officer, Soldier, or Sutler be to travel through any Country,
the people are not to furnish them with Wagons, Post-horse, or victuals but
for their ready money, unless they bring a Warrant either from the King or the
General.

107. No Soldier is to forsake his Colors, and to put himself under the
entertainment of any other Colonel or Garrison, or to ramble about the
Country without he has his Colonels Pass, or his that is in his stead: who
so does, it shall be lawful for any man to apprehend him, and to send him
prisoner to the next Carrison of the Kings, where he shall be examined, and
punished accordingly.

108. Whosoever have any lawful Passes, ought by no means to abuse the benefit
of them, or practice any cheats under the pretense of them. If any be found
with any pilfery, or to have taken any man's cattle or goods; it shall be
lawful for the Countrey-people to lay hands upon them, and to bring them to
the next Garrison; special care being had, that if the prisoner has any
letters of moment about him, they be speedily and safely delivered.

109. Our Carriers or Posts, though they have lawful Passes to travel
withal, yet shall they not ride their Posthorses which they hire, beyond the
next Stage. And if they shall take away any horse from one or other, to tire
out with hard riding, and beyond reason; they shall be bound to return the
horse again, or to make satisfaction for him. The same order shall take place
too, when any Regiment or Troops of ours shall remove from one Quarter to
another; namely, when they shall hire Postillions or baggage-Waggons for the
carriage of their Valises, Arms or Ammunition.

110. The houses of the Princes or Nobility which have no need to borrow our
Guard to defend them from our enemy, shall not be pressed with soldiers.

111. Moreover, under a great penalty, it is provided, that neither Officers
nor Soldiers shall make stay of, or arrest the Princes Commissaries or
Officers, or any Gentlemen, Counselors of State, Senators or Burgers of any
Cities, or other countrey-people; nor by any fact of violence shall offend them.

112. Travelers, or other passengers going about their business into any
Garrisons or places of Muster, shall by no means be stayed, injured, or have
contribution laid upon them.

113. Our Commanders shall defend the countrey-people and Plough-men that
follow their husbandry, and shall suffer none to hinder them in it.

114. No Commander or common soldier whatsoever, either in Town of Garrison,
or place of Muster, shall exact any thing upon Passengers, nor shall lay any
Custom or Toll upon any Merchandise imported or exported; nor shall any be a
hindrance to the Lord of the place, in receiving his due Customs or
Toll-gathering; but to further them.

115. If any of our Officers having power of Command, shall give the Word for
any Remove or March to some other Quarter; those soldiers either of Horse or
Foot that privily lurk behind their fellows, shall have no power to exact part
of the contributions formerly allotted for their maintenance in that place; but
shall severally be punished rather for their lingering behind the Army.

116. Whatsoever is not contained in these Articles, and is repugnant to
Military Discipline, or whereby the miserable and innocent country may against
all right and reason be burdened withal, whatsoever offense finally shall be
committed against these Orders, that shall the several Commanders make good,
or see severally punished, unless themselves will stand bound to give further
satisfaction for it.

117. According to these Articles, let every man govern his business and
actions, and learn by them to take heed in coming into lurch or danger.

118. If any Soldier happens to get free-booty in any Castle, City, Town,
Fort, Strength, or Leaguer; and moreover, whatsoever Ordnance, Munition for
War, and victuals is found there, shall be left for our use, the rest shall
be the Soldiers, only the tenth part thereof shall they give to the sick and
maimed Soldiers in the Hospitalls. All prisoners shall first be presented to
us, amongst which if there be any man of note, whom we desire to have unto our
selves, we promise in lieu thereof honestly to recompense the taker of him,
according to the quality of the person; other prisoners of inferior rank may
the takers keep unto themselves, whom by our leave or our Generals they may
put to their ransom and take it to themselves, but without leave they may not
ransom them upon pain of death.

119. If any be found drunken in the enemies Leaguer, Castle, or Town, before
the enemy has yielded himself wholly up to our mercy, and laid down his
Arms; whosoever shall kill the said drunken Soldier, shall be free for it;
always provided that good proof be brought that he was drunken; and if that
Soldier escape for that time with his life, and that it can appear that some
damage or hinderance has come unto our service by his drunkenness, then
wheresoever he be apprehended, he shall die for it; but if no hurt ensued
thereof, yet shall he be put in irons for the space of one month, living upon
his pittance of Bread and Water.

120. All our Soldiers shall duly repair unto the general musters upon the
day and hour appointed; nor shall any Colonel or Captain either of Horse or
Foot, keep back his Soldiers from being mustered at the time when our
Muster-masters shall desire to view them; if any refuse, he shall be taken for
a Mutiner.

121. No Colonel nor Captain shall lend any of their Soldiers one to another
upon the Muster-dayes for the making up of their numbers complete; he that thus
makes a false Muster, shall answer it at the Marshalls Court, where being found
guilty, he shall be proclaimed Traitor; after which being put out of the
Quarter, his Colors shall fly no more.

122. If any Soldier hires out himself for money to run the Running the
Gate-lope or Purgatory, is, when he that has done the fault, is to run between
the Regiment, standing half on one side, and half on the other, with whips or
bastinadoes in their hands, to lash and cudgel the offender, which punishment
many a shameless soldier will be hired to undergo for drink or money.
Gate-lope three several times, he shall be beheaded; and if any Captain
shall so permit or counsel his Soldier to do the same, he shall be actually
cashierd.

123. If any Horseman borrowes either Horse, Armor, Pistols, Saddle, Sword,
or Harness to pass Muster withal; so much as is borrowed shall be escheated,
and himself after that turned out of the Leaguer, as likewise he shall that
lent it him; the one half of the Arms forfeited shall go to the Captain,
and the other half unto the Parforce.

124. If it can be proved that any Horseman has wilfully spoiled his Horse;
he shall be made Traitor, lose his Horse, and be turned out of the Quarter.

125. All Soldiers both of Horse and Foot, shall be taken on at a free Muster,
but not by any private Captain; neither shall their pay go on before they be
mustred by our Muster-masters.

126. No Soldier either of Horse or Foot, shall be cashiered by his Colonel,
Captain, or other inferior Officer; nor shall they who being taken on at a
free Muster, have their men sworn to serve (if it please God) until the next
Muster, except it be upon a free Muster, at which time the Muster-masters, and
his Colonel may freely give him his Pass.

127. If any foreign Soldier shall desire his pass in any Town of Garrison
after the enemy be retired, he may have it; but by no means whilst there is
any service to be done against the enemy.

128. If any Soldier or Native subject, desires to be discharged from the
wars, he shall give notice thereof unto the Muster-masters; who if they find
him to be sick, or maimed, or that he served twenty years in our wars, or
has been ten several times before the enemy, and can bring good witness
thereof, he shall be discharged.

129. If any Colonel or Captain either of Horse or Foot does give any Pass,
otherwise than is before mentioned, he shall be punished as for other
Fellonies; and he who has obtained the same Pass, shall lose three months
pay, and be put in prison for one month, upon bread and water.

130. No Colonel or Captain either of Horse or Foot shall give leave to his
Soldiers to go home out of the Field, without leave of our General, or
chief Commander; whosoever does the contrary, shall lose three months pay,
and be put in prison for one month, upon Bread and Water.

131. No Captain either of Horse or Foot shall presume to go out of any
Leaguer or place of Strength to demand his pay, without leave of the General
or Governor; who so does* shall be cashired from his place, and put out of the
quarters.

132. No Captain either of Horse or Foot shall hold back any of his soldiers
means from him; of which if any complain, the Captain shall answer it before
the Court, where being found guilty, he shall be punished as for other Felony;
also if any mischance ensue thereupon, as that the Soldiers mutine, be sick,
or endure hunger, or give up any Strength; then shall he answer for all those
inconveniences, that hereupon can or may ensue.

133. If any Captain lends money unto his soldiers, which he desires should
be paid again; that must be done in the presence of the Muster-masters, that
our service be no way hindered or neglected.

134. If upon necessity the case sometimes so falls out in the Leaguer, that
pay be not always made at the due time, mentioned in the Commissions, yet
shall every man in the mean time, be willing to further our service, seeing
they have victuals sufficient for the present, and that they shall so soon as
may be receive the rest of their means, as is mentioned in their Commission.

135. Very requisite it is, that good justice be holden amongst our Soldiers,
as well as amongst other our Subjects.

136. For the same reason was a King ordained by God to be the Sovereign Judge
in the field as well as at home.

137. Now therefore in respect of many occasions which may fall out, his single
judgment alone may be too weak to discern every particular circumstance;
therefore it is requisite that in the Leaguer, as well as otherwhere, there be
some Court of Justice erected for the deciding of all controversies; and to be
careful in like manner, that our Articles of war be of all persons observed
and obeyed so far forth as is possible.

138. We ordain therefore that there be two Courts in our Leaguer; a high
Court, and a lower Court.

139. The lower Court shall be amongst the Regiments both of Horse and Foot,
whereof every Regiment shall have one among themselves.

140. In the Horse-Regiments the Colonel shall be President, and in his
absence the Captain of our own Life-guards; with them are three Captains to
be joined, three Lieutenants, three Cornets, and three Quarter Masters, that so
together with the President they may be to the number of thirteen at the least.

141. In a Regiment of Foot the Colonel also shall be President, and his
Lieutenant Colonel in his absence; with them are two Captains to be joined,
two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, four Sergeants, and two Quarter Masters; that
together with the President they may be thirteen in number also.

142. In our highest Marshall Court, shall our General be President; in his
absence our Field-Marshall, when our General is present, his asseciats shall
be our Field-Marshall first, next him our General of the Ordnance,
Serjeant-Major-Generall, General of the Horse, Quarter-Master-Generall; next
to them shall sit our Muster-Masters and all our Colonells, and in their
absence their Lieutenant-Colonells, and these shall sit together when there is
any matter of great importance in controversy.

143. Whenever this highest Court is to be holden, they shall observe this
order; our great General as President, shall sit alone at the head of the
Table, on his right hand our Field-Marshall, on his left hand the General of
the Ordnance, on the right hand next our Serjeant-Major-Generall, on the left
hand again the General of the Horse, and then the Quarter-Master-Generall on
one hand, and the Muster-Master-Generall on the other; after them shall every
Colonel sit according to his place, as here follows; first, the Colonel of
our Life-Regiment, or of the Guards of our own person; then every Colonel
according to their places of antiquity. If there happen to be any great men in
the Army of our subjects, that be of good understanding, they shall cause them
to sit next these Officers; after these shall sit all the Colonells of strange
Nations, every one according to his antiquity of service.

144. All these Judges both of higher and lower Courts, shall under the blue
Skies thus swear before Almighty God, that they will inviolably keep this
following oath unto us: I. R. W. do here promise before God upon his holy
Gospel, that I both will and shall Judge uprightly in all things according to
the Laws of God, of our Nation, and these Articles of War, so far forth as
it pleases Almighty God to give me understand^ng; neither will I for favor
nor for hatred, for good will, fear, ill will, anger, or any gift or bribe
whatsoever, judge wrongfully; but judge him free that ought to be free, and
doom him guilty, that I find guilty; as the Lord of Heaven and Earth shall
help my soul and body at the last day, I shall hold this oath truly.

145. The Judges of our highest Court shall take this their oath in the first
Leaguer, where our Camp shall be pitched; our General, and the rest appointed
to set with him shall repair to the place where we shall appoint, before his
Tent, or other where; where an Officer appointed by us, shall first take his
oath, and then the others oaths also.

146. When the President of our lower Courts shall hear this foresaid oath
read before them, then shall they hold up their hands, and swear to keep it;
in like manner, so often as any Court is to be holden in any Regiment, the
aforesaid oath shall be read before all them that sit in judgment with him,
who shall also hold up their hands and promise to keep the oath aforesaid.

147. In our highest Court, there shall be one sworn Secretary appointed, who
shall make a diligent record of all the proceedings that shall fall out, either
in any pitched Battle, Skirmish, Leaguer, or any other piece of service
whatsoever; he shall take the note, both of the day, place, and hour, with all
other circumstances that shall happen; he shall also set his hand unto all
sentences signed by our General; he shall have also two Clerks or Notaries
under him, who shall ingrosse all these passages, and keep a true Register of
all enterprises, that our General with his Counsel of War shall give order
to have done; and likewise of what letters be either written or received.

148. In our highest Court there shall be one Vice President, who shall command
the Sergeant at Arms, whose office is to warn in all the Judges of the Court,
that they may there appear at the time and place appointed, and also to give
the same notice both unto the Plaintiff and Defendant.

149. In all lower Courts also, there shall be one sworn Clerk or Secretary
who shall likewise hold the same order that is mentioned in our highest Court.

150. Our highest Court shall be careful also to hear and judge all criminal
actions, and especially cases of conspiracy or treason practiced or plotted
against us, or our General either in word or deed; secondly, if any gives out
dishonorable speeches against our Majesty; thirdly, or consulteth with the
enemy to betray our Leaguer, Castle, Town, Soldiers, or Fleet any way
whatsoever; fourthly, if any there be partakers of such treason or treachery,
and reveal it not; fifthly, or any that has held correspondency and
intelligence with the enemy; sixthly, if any has a spite or malice against us
or our Country; seventhly, if any speak disgracefully, either of our own or
our Generals person or endeavors; eighthly, or that intends treachery
against our General or his Underofficers; or that speaks disgracefully of
them.

151. All questions in like manner happening betwixt Officers and their
Soldiers, if they suspect our lower Court to be partial any way, then may
they appeal unto our highest Court, who shall decide the matter.

152. If a Gentleman or any Officer be summoned to appear before the lower
Court, for any matter of importance, that may touch his life, or honor* then
shall the same be decided by our higher Court.

153. All civil questions that be in controversy in our lower Court, if the
debt or fine extends unto five hundred Dollars, or seventy five pounds or
above; if the party complains of injustice, they may thence appeal unto the
higher Court, if so be they can first prove the injustice.

154. All other occasions that may fall out, be they civil, or be they
criminal; shall first come before the lower Court where they shall be heard:
and what is there by good evidence proved, shall be recorded.

155. Any criminal action, that is adjudged in our lower Court, we command,
that the sentence be presented, unto our General; we will not have it
presently put in execution, until he gives command for it in our absence. But
our selves being in person there present, will first take notice of it, and
dispose afterward of it, as we shall think expedient.

156. In our higher Court, the General Parforce, or his Lieutenant, shall be
the Plaintiff, who shall be bound to follow the complaint diligently, to the
end he may the better inform our Counselors who are to do Justice: if it be
a matter against our selves, then shall our own Advocate defend our action,
before our Court.

157. The same power the Parforce of every Regiment shall have in our lower
Court, which Parforce shall be bound, also to give notice of every breach of
those Articles of war, that the infringer may be punished.

158. Whatsoever fine is by the aforesaid Judges determined according to our
Articles of war, and escheated thereupon, shall be divided into three parts.
Our own part of the fine we freely bestow upon the several Captains either of
Horse or Foot, which is forfeited by their Officers and Soldiers; and the
forfeiture of every Captain, we bestow upon their Colonel; and the forfeiture
of every Colonel we give unto our General. The other two parts, belonging
either to the party to whom it is adjudged, or to the Court, those leave we
undisposed, the point of Treason only excepted: and this gift of ours unto our
Officers, is to be understood to endure so long as the Army be in the field,
upon any strength or work, and till they come home again, after which time,
they shall come under the law of the land like the other inhabitants.

159. Whenever our highest Court is to sit, i^ shall be two hours before
proclaimed through the Leaguer, that there is such an action criminal to be
there tried, which is to be decided under the blue skies; but if it be an
action civil, then may the Court be holden within some tent, or otherwhere;
then shall the soldiers come together, about the place where the Court is to
be holden, no man presuming to come too near the table where the Judges are to
sit; then shall our General come foremost of all, and the other his associats,
two and two together, in which order, they all coming out of the Generals
tent, shall set themselves down in the Court, in the order before appointed;
the Secretaries place shall be at the lower end of the table, where he shall
take diligent notice in writing of all things declared before the Court; the^
shall the General Parforce begin to open his complaint before them, and the
contrary party shall have liberty to answer for himself, until the Judges be
thoroughly informed of the truth of all things.

160. If the Court be to be holden in any house or Tent, they shall observe the
same order in following the General in their degrees, where they shall also
sit as is before mentioned.

161. The matter being thoroughly opened and considered upon, according to the
importance of it, and our whole Court agreeing in one opinion; they shall
command their sentence concerning the same action, to be publicly there read
in the hearing of all men, always reserving his Majesty's further will and
pleasure.

162. In our lower Court they shall also hold the same order; saving that the
particular Court of every Regiment, shall be holden in their own quarters.

163. In this lower Court, they shall always observe this order; namely, that
the President sits at the bords end alone, the Captains, Lieutenants, and
Ensigns on either side; so many inferior Officers also upon each side, that
so they may the better reason upon the matter amongst themselves; Last of all,
shall the Clerk or Secretary sit at the lower end of the Table; the one party
standing upon one hand, and the other upon the other.

164. So soon as the sentence is given, the President shall rise up, and all
that sit with him; but doom being given by our General, that one of the
parties must lose his head, hand, or the like; then shall they command the
Parforce to take him away to Prison, which done, the Parforce shall send unto
the Minister, to desire him to visit the Party, and to give him the Communion;
but if the doom be passed in any lower Court, it shall be signified up unto the
General in our absence, who shall either pardon the fact, or execute the
sentence.

165. No superior Officer, Colonel or Captain, either of Horse or Foot, shall
solicit for any man that is lawfully convicted by the Court, either for any
crime, or for not observing of these Articles of War; unless it be for his
very near kinsman, for whom nature compells him to intercede; otherwise the
solliciter shall be held as odious as the delinquent, and cashierd from his
charge.

166. Whosoever is minded to serve us in these Wars, shall be obliged to the
keepin of these Articles. If any out of presumption, upon any Strength, in any
Leaguer, in the field, or upon any work shall do the contrary, be he Native
or be he Stranger, Gentleman or other, Process shall be made out against him
for every time, so long as he serves us in these wars in the quality of a
Soldier.

167. These Articles of war we have made and ordained for the welfare of our
Native Country, and do command that they be read every month publicly
before every Regiment, to the end that no man shall pretend ignorance. We
further will and command all, whatsoever Officers higher or lower, and all our
common soldiers, and all others that come into our Leaguer amongst the
soldiers, that none presume to do the contrary hereof upon pain of
rebellion, and the incurring of our highest displeasure; For the firmer
confirmation whereof, we have hereunto set our hand and seal.

Signed in the Leaguer Royal.
RULES AND OBSERVATIONS TO BE USED BEFORE BATTLE. SECT. XIX.
CHAP. VIII.
Diverse promotions and observations for a General to take notice of, before
the pitching of a Battle.
IN framing and ordering of Battles, there are diverse circumstances of great
importance to be had in consideration, whereby such warlike actions may be
crowned with Victory, which being neglected, shall give an advantage to the
enemy to rout and ruin your Army; wherefore I will endeavor to draw the
particular circumstances to certain heads; and there being diverse things of
great moment to be handled, I must crave your patience to be somewhat the
larger in it, and the rather because I intend to insert the best instructions
that our ablest Generals both ancient and modern have left us examples for
future ages.

Our ancient and best experienced Commanders found by their practical
experience, that an Army consisting of fifty thousand men, was of potency
sufficient for any enterprise or design, and that thirty thousand men was the
least Army they durst adventure to enter the enemies country withal.

I shall give you the forms of diverse and several Battles, and of sundry
proportions of numbers both of Horse and Foot as hereafter you shall see.

The things observable before the ranging of a Battle are these; A small Army
of old soldiers, are able to encounter with a great Army of novices.
first, the strength of your own, and of your enemies Army, both in Foot and
Horse; with the conditions of soldiers, whether they be old and expert, or
young novices.

Secondly, the situation of the ground, the advantages of strength in it, as
Hills, Dales, For the securing of the Rear or Flanck of the Army, and to hide
ambitions to dis^omfit the enemy.
Rivers, Hedges, Woods, Rocks, Mores, or the like.

Thirdly, the extent of the place, so that there may be convenient distances,
and proportionable for the imbattelling of your Army.

Fourthly, according to the advantages, situation, smallness or vastness of
the place; accordingly you are to proportion and order your form of
imbattelling.

Fifthly, according as your enemies Army shall consist most, either in Horse or
Foot; the choice of your ground shall be thereafter taken for advantage; viz.
if your own forces consist more of Foot, and less in Horse, and your enemies
strength is chiefly in his Cavallary, and weak in his Foot-forces, then you
must make choice of Fields enclosed, or the advantage of hills, ditches, rivers,
woods, moorish grounds, and the like, whereby the enemies Horse will be barred
from executing their service: otherwise, if the Army consists chiefly in
Horse, the plains and large fields are most convenient and proper to further
their execution.

Sixthly, the Sun and Wind are chiefly to be gained of our sides; wherefore the
Battalia's must be ranged at some rising with their backs toward it, and give
Battle before the Sun declines to be in their faces: or if the enemy should
have the advantage of the Sun in the morning, This was observed by M^r^us
against the ^imbres, and King Pl^^^o August^^ against the F^emings.
then to defer battle until noon, whereby you gain the advantage of it in the
afternoon. But of the two, the Wind is principally to be had on your side; for
there is nothing that can trouble the enemy more than the dust and smoke of
Ordnance and Muskets, which blinds and choaks them so as they know not what
they do, nor can perceive how their adversary orders himself against them:
wherefore if you have but a side-wind, be sure you plant most Ordnance upon
that side, Epaminondas gained a victory by caus^^ng his Horse to stir the the
dust into his enemies face.
and make what smokie fires of Straw and Muck mingled with Brimstone and Pitch
as possibly you can, so that the Wind may convey the smoke full into the
enemies teeth. Finally, if it cannot be eschewed, but that the Wind must be
against you, then place your own Ordnance wide of the Flanks of your Army, so
that the smoke of them may not blind the Front of your Battle.

Seventhly, get some convenient hills* either Natural or Artificial, for the
planting of Ordnance, to flanker the Army and annoy the enemy; the which must
be strongly guarded, and intrencht if it possibly may be, for it is the first
thing the enemy will seek to surprise, if he possibly may.

Eighthly, the orderly disposing of the Carts, Wagons, and Carriages, and all
the impediments of the Army in the Rear, so that the Battle may be strengthened
and impaled with them; or if there be any natural strength, as rivers, woods,
hedges, ditches, and the like for to defend the Rear, then to order and place
those carriages and impediments on the Flanks, whereby they shall be impaled
and strengthened: but if no commodious place may be found to safeguard your
Army, then raise intrenchments upon the Flanks and Rear, and man them with Piks
and Muskets, or at least impale them with Pikes and Muskets.

Ninthly, by dividing the Army into diverse sundry Battalions or Divisions, and
so ordering them, that one Division or Battalia may releeve the other, being
overcharged with the enemy; for there is no greater danger can possibly betide
an Army than to range it so as one Division cannot retire between the other
Divisions for safety and strength. Many have used to frame their Battles but of
one entire Front, so that being repulst, The first figure of imbattelling has
three several Battles, viz. the main Battle, the Battle of, succor, and the
Rear-Battell.
they have no refuge, but to be routed and vanquished; but this is to be
accounted madness: for it is great wisdom and policy to range three several
Battles to retreat into, but never to order less than two: for if there be
Battles of succor for the main Battle to retrait into, then the Files may be
the thinner, as we have formerly instanced the King of Sweden, who used to
range his Battalia's but six men in depth; so that with ten thousand
well-exercised men he could extend the Front of his Army as broad as the enemy
could with fourteen thousand, and make his party good with them in regard of
his sundry Retreats, which brings fresh hands to fight and weary out the enemy:
as also he would not miss of places of advantage, environed with water or
marish grounds, etc. so that his Army should not be assaulted upon all sides.
Sebastian King of Portugal, when he aided Mulehamet in the Wars of Barbary
against Abdimelec King of Morocco, This Battle was fought the 4. of August.
1578
ranged the Rear of his Battle against the River Maraga, which was as a wall
to defend them.

Moreover, a General must take this for a Rule, viz. to enlarge or strengthen
the Front of his Battle according to the number of his Soldiers, as also
according to the force of his enemies Troops; if the place where you are to
imbattell in be narrow, then of necessity you must straighten your Ranks; and
if the place be wide and open, you must be very careful not to extend the
Front of your Battle too wide, except your Army be of greater potencie than
the enemies; then by extending out the Wings of your Battle, you may gain
advantage by over-winging them, whereby you may charge them both in Flank and
Front at once. But he that shall adventure to charge an Army upon all sides,
either must have four times more men than the enemy, or else he must be sure to
perish for want of discretion.

Also there is great discretion to be used in ordering of Battles, that they
may not be placed in low grounds near any hill or high banks, or upon the side
of a hill, because the lower grounds are subject to the enemies Ordnance: if
the enemy should have this advantage, the best way to prevent it, is to march
out of distance from such places of advantage, to cause them to come down to
you. But some fondly have maintained the lower ground to be of greatest
advantage, in regard the Muskets will do more service in shooting upwards than
downwards. To this I answer, it is but a simple opinion; for it is double
advantage to have the higher ground, in regard both Horse and Foot will soon
find to their costs that it is a double pains; besides they come upon them with
a great deal more power down hill, than they can up hill, and a bullet shot
from a side-hill may shoot through two or three Ranks, when as that which is
shot upwards, cannot shoot past through one; as for their bullets rolling out,
they are simple men that charge them the mean time. But this by the way.

Tenthly, your Battle must be so ordered and disposed, that the enemy may be
brought into some stratagem, or made to disorder his Troops; which may be done
many ways, as by causing your Army orderly to retrait, so that the enemy may
disorder his Ranks in the pursuit, and then to take the occasion to fall on
again orderly, and rout them. The ancient Generals were very politic in this,
for when they knew that their enemies placed their greatest strength in any one
Point or Wing of the Army, then contrarily they would frame that Point or Wing
weakest which was to encounter with them: their ablest forces they commanded to
stand firm, and not seek to repulse the enemy, but to resist them; and the
weakest Battalia's they caused to assault the enemy, Two great disorders the
enemy may be brought into in the time of Fight.
and then to retrait to their Battalia's behind them; by this means they
brought the enemy into two great disorders: the first was, the enemy had his
best Soldiers enclosed betwixt their adversaries Battalia's: the second was,
when the enemy thought they had gotten the victory: their Bands would disorder
themselves by pillaging: as the like happened at the Battle of Dreux in France,
where the Lord of Guise stood fast with his Battalia, all the rest being fled
from him but the valiant Switzers, who opposed themselves against all the fury
of the enemy. In the mean time the Prince of Codee's Troops being confident of
the victory, some of them following the slaughter, and others fell to
pillaging, La Now page 381*
thus being scattered abroad, the Lord Guise finding his opportunity, with
those men he had he marched up to them with a bold countenance, and overthrew
them before they could order themselves in any form to receive their charge.
Likewise Scipio placed his weakest Forces against Asdrubal's best soldiers
which he had placed in the midst of the Battle; and upon each Flank Scipio
had placed his ablest men. So soon as Asdrubal charged Scipio's Battle, they
retraited, only the two Flanks of his strongest soldiers stood firm:
Asdrubal's soldiers pursuing the retrait, before they were aware, were gotten
between the two Divisions of the Flanks of Scipio, as if they had been in an
Half Moon; they there being charged upon both sides by them, his weakest men
being there, were soon vanquished, and the rather, because his chiefest Forces,
being placed in the midst of his Battle, could not come to fight.

Eleventhly, You must know how and when to make use of such instruments as may
hinder the enemies Horse, and disorder and annoy his Foot-troops: and for this
purpose the King of Sweden made use of an instrument which he termed a Swines
Spike, formerly used by one of our Kings, whereby he gained a Conquest in
France: it was a piece of Ash four foot long, at each end a speared pike of
iron; his Musketires stook this at their girdles, and as they advanced forwards
to give fire upon their enemy, every man stook down his instrument aslope into
the ground; this hindered the Horse from charging them. Also many have made use
of the Caltrop, it being a small piece of round wood with pikes sticking up
every way; The use of these instruments you may read in the discourse of
Engines.
each soldier having one or two of these about him, may cast them before the
Front and Flanks of the Army: these will much annoy the enemies Horse.

Also your Powder-pots being placed in the earth, and fire given unto them just
as the enemy shall be approaching over them, these will infinitely disorder and
kill them.

Moreover it behooves a General to be of a very quick apprehension, In the
discourse of Stratagems you shall find variety for all conditions and places.
and to forecast with himself what stratagems will best suit with the condition
of the enemy, and the situation of the place, and how and when to put them in
execution, that they may work their best effect.

In the framing of your Battle you must be mindful to order the Battalia's
so as there may be a space left of two paces for the Musketires to march down
by the sides of the Pikes after they have given fire upon the enemy; for if the
distance should be less, as diverse would have it, the motion of the
Battalia's would presently close them up.

Also the distances between the Battles of the forlorn hopes and the front of
the main Battle ought to be sixty paces, or according as the place will admit.

Likewise, the distances between the main Battle and the Battle of succor
ought to be fifteen or twenty paces. The like distance is to be observed
between the Battle of succor and the Rear-Battell.

That part of the Battle that cannot be secured by Rivers, Moors, Woods, or
the like, must be impaled either by Intrenchments well manned, or double or
treble Pallizado'd, and well manned with Pikes and Muskets; four Ranks of Pikes,
and three Ranks of Muskets will be sufficient to make the impalement: one Rank
of Musketires may be drawn under the Pikes to give fire upon their knees; the
other two Ranks standing behind the Pikes, may give fire over their heads, as
they stoop to charge to the Horse. These ought not to give fire at random, but
just when the Troops are come almost within push of Pike, and then but every
second Musketire is to give fire, so that they may without intermission
maintain their volley of Shot. These new invented Bow-Pikes are the properest
to impale the Battle withal; and it cannot be amiss to have a Rank or two of
them in the Front of the Battalia's, where they may do good service. There must
be a convenient space between the Wings of the Battle and the Impalements, if
in case the foremost Battalia's should retrait into the Battle of succor, etc.

There are diverse small field-Peeces which are to be placed before the
Divisions of the Front, (...) the Att^le^^ should be placed in the
s^aces^etaeen the Divisions, the spaces must be left very wide, and then very
dangerous; if left the usual distance, then in stirring, these spaces will
close so soon, that the Ordnance can have no place to play.
which after once or twice discharging are to be drawn within the Divisions of
the main Battle, and are to be placed before the Battle of succor: so that
if the foremost Battle is driven to retrait into the spaces of the Battle of
succor, then are they ready to give fire upon the enemy at his next
approaches; these field-Peeces being there placed, may be drawn upon the
Flanks, ready to give fire upon the enemy when he shall charge the Flanks
either with Horse or Foot.

The forlorn Hopes, when they are wearied and beaten back by the enemy are to
retrait through the spaces left betwixt the Battalions, and there they are to
order themselves in a readiness to issue out at the Flanks, and assault the
enemy when they are at push of Pike, upon one of their Flanks. There would be
diverse appointed with Granado's and fire-Pots to cast them amongst the enemy.
This must be done when the enemy is 100. yards from your Battle.
There may be diverse Morter-Peeces so placed that they may shoot Granado's and
Fireballs from the space between the main Battle and the Battle of succor,
and convey them over the heads of your foremost Battle, amongst the enemies
that are approaching to charge you.

In regard nothing can hinder the enemies Ordnance from annoying your
Battalia's, but either they must be out of distance, or a strong wall betwixt
you: it being an evil not to be eschewed, you are to make choice of the best
and safest means of prevention; the first is by ordering of your Files thin:
the second is to send with all speed a certain convenient number of Shot, The
(...) punish with death those that are afraid of the Ordnance, or show any
(...).
accompanied with Horse, to seize upon the Ordnance; with all celerity they are
to perform this Service, by which the enemy will be hindered from shooting more
than once; for they being in combustion for the gaining and defending their
Ordnance, will hinder their execution.

Those field-Peeces, which I have formerly spoken of that they should be placed
before the Battalia's, may do as good service being placed behind those
Battalia's, if you cause those Troops before them to open a distance for the
Shot, and speedily to fall into their order again.

No Army is to be ordered so that those Battalia's behind, or in the Rear of
the Battle cannot succor and assist those that fight before, for then the
greatest part of the Army will be unprofitable, and if the enemy be potent, it
cannot possibly but suffer an overthrow.

The Front of the Battle ought to be entire, only those spaces before spoken
of, for they are only to withstand the first brunt of the enemies Charge: and
there ought in this to be more care taken not to be stricken by the enemy, than
it imports to strike them.

The second Battle, called the Battle of succor, is to receive the Divisions
of the foremost Battle upon occasion, and ought therefore to be ordered with
convenient spaces or distances for that purpose, and ought always to be of
less Number than the first Battle; for there can be no danger betide them, in
regard the enemy cannot come to fight with them, unless the foremost Battle be
joined with them, and then the enemy will find the middle Battle far stronger
than the foremost.

The Battle in the Rear ought to have the widest spaces or distances of all,
There ^r-Battell is to consist or far less men than the Battle of succor.
because if the enemy should be too powerful for the main Battle and the
Battle of succor, then these distances receive them, and then with one power
they assail the enemy with all the whole strength of the Army; and now they
must stand close and strongly to their tackling to gain victory: and take this
for an observation, that soldiers will enlarge their Ranks, and Files when
fear makes them think of flight; and close then when valor and resolution
makes them stand firm to resist.

If the enemy forces the main Battle to retrait into the Battle of succor,
those that impale the Flanks ought to keep their ground, if possibly they may,
for thereby they shall have advantage to charge the enemy upon the Flanks as
they follow the retrait of your main Battle; but if they be compelled to
retrait, they may do it safely, falling back and doubling their own Ranks from
the midst downwards to the Rear* and indeed it were very fitting an Army should
be exercised in order of Battle, to make them perfect. And again no General
ought to use one form of imbattelling always, for fear his enemy should prove
too subtle for him, and foil him in his own play.

The best way to save an Army from smal-shot, that will much annoy you, is to
come speedily to the encounter. The Officers of every Band being drawn into
Battalia, are to appoint trusty careful men to fill the soldiers Bandilires,
and to deliver Bullets and March unto them, that there may be no stay nor want,
nor any Powder miscarry.

If your Army be compounded of diverse Nations, Hannibal used this policy: he
placed his aids next the enemy, and behind them his Carthaginians: so as they
could not fly, but either vanquish or weary the Romans.
so that some of them are not to be trusted; those whose loyalties are not to
be trusted, must always be placed foremost next the enemy, and the faithfullest
ablest men behind them, next unto them; so that having the enemy before, and a
strong Battalia behind them, they must of necessity fight or perish. The Romans
used to place their assistants or strangers upon the out-Wings of the Battle.
But if your Army consists of diverse Nations that you were confident of their
valor and fidelity, the best way were to order them all in one Front; so that
the jealousy of one another forwardness and valor might breed such an
emulation in them, that they would do their best to exceed one the other in
prowess. The King of Sweden made use of this policy many times, and it stood
him in gread stead; the same did Monsieur de Lautrec against the Emperors Army
in the Kingdom of Naples, his Army consisting of diverse Nations, as Italians,
Switzers, Frenchmen, Gaescoins, Almaignes; because none of them should be
disparaged, he placed them all in on Front; for he knew of their great
emulation, that one Nation desired to be thought more valiant than the other.

Now it remains to speak of the Cavialry, how they ought to be placed; and in
this a great care and circumspection is to be had: first in ordering them into
convenient Battalia's, The Horse are equally to be divided, and placed on each
Wing of the Battle, unless one Wing may be secured by (...) ground or hedg^s.
or proportionable Divisions, that they be neither too big nor too small;
these are to be ranged upon each Wing of the Foot-troops, fifty or sixty paces
distant from the Flanks of the Army, lest by their unrulinesse and disorderly
retraiting, they press upon your own Troops, and dis-rank them.

Many times the Horse-troops are divided into six Battalia's, viz. three placed
upon one Wing, and three upon the other; the foremost Battalia's are to consist
of as many more as the second, and the third is to be least of all. As, suppose
the number of 4000. Horse; the two foremost Battles upon each Wing are to
consist of 1100. the two second Battles of 500. apeece, and the two third and
last Battles of 400. in each: there ought to be a good distance betwixt each of
these Battalia's.

If your Horse-Troops should be too weak for the enemy, you must line their
Files with Shot, and also have in a readiness certain extraordinary Pikes to
assist the Horse and Shot, if they should be overcharged. This is to be done
when the ground is plain, that the Ordnance may not (...).
The Horse are to shelter themselves in the Rear of the Foot-Battalia's until
such time as the enemies Ordnance are surprised; for the Horse are subject to
more danger of the enemies Ordnance than the Foot possibly can be, in regard
they are lower, and a ^annon-shot is subject to mount.

The Harquebuziers and Carbines many times are employed to assault the enemy
not having so much respect in keeping of their Ranks.

The Curassires are to be ordered next the Flank of the Battle for the most
part, and the Harquebuziers and Carbines outmost of all; for the Curassiers
ought to stir as little as possibly may be from the Wings of the
Foot-Battalia's; for most properly they are to resist and seldom to assail.

The best and safest way both for Horse and Foot, By this means they will be
both in better order and breath. Bellary would not have them put forwards
until the enemy were within 30. paces.
is to keep their ground until the enemy be drawn very near unto your Battle,
and then to receive their charge.

The Cavalry being ordered (as before) into three several Battles, viz. the
main Battle, which is to consist of Carbines; the Battle of succor is to
consist of Harquebuziers, and the Rear-Battell of Curassiers; and many times
the Troops of the Carbines and Harquebuziers are next in the foremost Battle,
and are to do the first execution upon the enemies troops, and the Curassiers
are to finish what they have begun to ruin and disorder.

The Battle of succor is to be in distance behind the main Battle forty or
fifty paces, Vide Live lib. 8. and Lips. de milit. Rom l l4.
and is to have spaces as the Foot has, for the Divisions to retrait into: the
like must the Rear-Battell have; and it is to be ordered in distance twice as
far behind the Battle of succor, as the Battle of succor is from the main
Battle, viz. 80. or 100. foot, or more or less according to the situation of
the ground. If the enemy should charge your Horses in the Rear, in the time of
the conflict, then the General must send the Light-armed Horse to resist them;
and there must be always in a readiness certain Maniples both of Pikes and
Shot placed in the Rear of the Battle, to draw out to assist either the Horse
or Foot upon all occasions.

Lastly, It remains to speak of the ways and means to encourage the soldiers,
and to breed Spirit in them, making them undervalue their enemies, and to
charge them with a boldness: and this is to be done by some pithy Oration and
persuasive Speech, which ancient Generals have found by experience to be of
great efficacy to induce them to wonderful performances. The Speech may be
according as the General shall please, or as if he should in the head of his
Troops pronounce these words.

Right valiant Captains and fellow soldiers, I have here ordered you in form
of Battle ready to charge our enemies, and do require of you in the Name of
the Lord of Hosts, two things especially; namely, the utmost of your Valors,
and the truth of your Loves in obedience. For what man soever does not use his
best endeavors to subdue his enemies, is not only a murderer of himself but
of his dear friends; and by disobedience may be the means of the Armies
overthrow; for which there can be no plea before Gods Tribunal, but his just
sentence of condemnation, besides the in supportable shame and intolerable
servitude we bring our selves that shall survive, with our dear friends, into,
which though it may seem as a green wound, only to smart at first, yet at last
the reproach and disgrace will gnaw and fret to the bone. Wherefore, brave
Soldiers, let your golden Spirits shine, and your steely mettalls hew out a
Conquest for the glory of our great God, and the honor of our gracious King
and beloved Country. God would have the Israelites fight valiantly as well as
Moses to hold up his hands and pray or else no Conquest could be expected:
wherefore let us perform both that the great God of Hosts may be propitious
unto us, according as he has promised to them that seek him. Wherefore let us
be confident of Victory and not seek our ruins by unbelief. Let us call to
mind our Ancestors, what noble achievements their magnanimous Spirits by Gods
assistance, effected, whereby our Nation has been not only the Mirror, but
the ^errour to the world. How did they in France at the Battle of Poyteirs,
with an handful of men confound the mighty Army that would have swallowed them
up? The like at Again court, etc. And how gracious was God to us in 88. to
dissipate and destroy our invincible enemy, by his prospering our poor
endeavors? Wherefore now let us not despair of his help, but with one joint
consent let us furiously assault our proud enemies, that we may enjoy their
riches, and eternize our memories to Posterity. For my own part, I am
confident, that if we resist but three of their charges, that they shall not
dare to adventure the fourth, but to their utter ruin. Wherefore if there be
any man timorous or faint-hearted, let him depart weth his brand of infamy, to
be rewarded by his King and Country according to his demerits. But let all
Heroic Spirits ejaculate their petitions to heaven, and say with me, Let God
arise, and his enemies shall be scattered.

RULES AND OBSERVATIONS TO BE USED IN TIME OF FIGHT. SECT. XX.
CHAP. IX.
Diverse Observations which both General and Officers must make use of in the
time of fight or skirmish.
HAving collected the best Observations that my poor indevours could attain
unto, for the fitting of all thing requisite before the time of fight; now it
remains to discourse of such necessary principles as are convenient to be used
in the time of fight, so that there may be nothing omitted which may be an
inducement or furtherance to a victory. Wherefore, presupposing that the
Battle Standards are pitched, and the Army ranged accordingly as before is
showed; the first thing that is to be done, is to draw out a certain company of
Horse and Foot to surprise the enemies Ordnance, in which they are not bound to
keep any array or order, but to run disbanded, and fall pell mell upon the
enemy, whereby his Ordnance will be disabled from shooting above once.

In the mean time the Forlorn Hopes, and such disbanded Shot are to skirmish
with the enemy, partly to see if they can disorder any of their Divisions, or
gain some prisoners, whereby the General may learn how they are imbattelled,
and what Stratagems they intend to use, with the true number both of their
Horse and Foot, so as he may the better fit himself for them; as also by their
first onset to breed courage in his own men, and to make them disdain their
enemy.

The Forlorn Hope is duly to be supplied with men and munition, either from
the Wings of the main-Battel, or else some Maniples appropriated for that
purpose; according as they prevail against the enemy, so they are to be
strengthened: if the enemy be too potent for them, then they are to retrait
behind the main-Battell, and when the two Battles join, these are to sally out,
and charge the enemies Flanks.

Some Stratagem or other ought to be put in practice at the first encounter;
for a small matter, if it comes unexpectedly, will discourage an enemy.

If there be any Ambuscado's secretly laid for to charge the enemies in the
Flanks or Rear, let them execute their charge when the two Battles join in
fight, whereby they may be disheartened.

If in case the enemy take the charge, and make a retrait, those Officers that
lead up the Forlorn Hopes to skirmish, must not pursue the retrait, nor suffer
the soldiers to follow the enemy no further, since that this skirmishing is to
no other end than to breed a certain impression and good opinion in the minds
of your own soldiers.

The absolutest way to disorder the enemies Troops, is to charge their
Battalia's either with your Horse or Foot, Flank and Rear.
both in Flank and Front *; and then having certain Troops of Horse ready
formed in manner of a wedge-Battell, that shall endeavor to enter the point of
the Battle, and so disorder their Ranks.

The General is to cause it to be given out, in the time of fight, that he
has a new supply of men coming unto him; and may make a show of some matters
like a truth that may signify his Succors to be near at hand. This may take
effect to discourage them, so that with little difficulty they may be
vanquished. Sulpitius put all the servants and laborers belonging to the Army
upon beasts unfit for fight, causing them to be ranged in such sort, that they
seemed afar off to be a great number of Horsemen, whom he sent up upon a
mountain some what near unto his enemies Army, commanding them to keep
themselves close until the Battle was begun, and that then they should show
themselves in many Troops like Horsemen faining to march down to charge the
Rear of the enemies Army: this put the enemy to flight.

But if the Country be plain, so that no Ambush can be laid, then there must
be Trenches dug, and men laid privily in them, and covered over with green
boughs. Also such kind of Ditches may be dug, and covered over slightly with
boughs, and earth laid slightly over, and certain firm places be left betwixt
the Trenches, with good marks for to find them, at which places they may retire
that are sent to charge the enemy, faining to be afraid in their speedy
retrait, to cause the enemy to follow them the faster, and so to fall into the
snare.

Note, Note.
that upon the disordering of the enemy, the main-Battell is not to follow the
pursuit, but certain Troops of each Wings, both of the Horse and Foot are to
pursue the victory.

If any accident should happen unto the General during the Combat, which might
dismay his soldiers, it is a point of great wisdom for to cover it, and to
make the best of it presently; as Hostilius, who seeing that his assistants,
which should have entered Battle with him, went their ways without striking
stroke; he knowing their departure would have greatly dismayed his soldiers,
caused it to be given out through all the Army, that they went away through his
commandment: this did not only appease the people, but did moreover encourage
them, that they were victorious. Sylla having part of his Troop slain, fearing
lest his Army should be discouraged, he said, he sent them of purpose to be
slain, in regard they conspired against him.

In the Battle of Flanders, when the enemy had cut off the whole Regiment of
Scots, that were sent to guard a passage, one only man brings the news of it;
his Excellency caused him to be slain, lest he should have frighted the Army by
the report of so sudden an accident.

A Generals care must ever be to avoid confusion of fight, which is to begin
before your time; which causes such inconveniences, as are cause oftentimes of
loss. Therefore in the beginning of your fight, take great heed you invade
not, nor fight confusedly, whereas every part of the Army has his ordinary time
to fight; neither suffer any part of your Army to fight with your enemy in any
other fashion than you appointed them.

At your first onset in charging the enemy, (...), in the (...) of Cyrus, shows
(...) Grecians (...) a kind of (...) which (...) the Pean.
the Army must give a mighty terrible shout, to dishearten the enemy: and then
afterward keep great silence, that the sounds of the Drums and Trumpets may be
heard, and distinguished, as also such commands as Officers shall give.

If your Horsemen be oppressed with your enemies Horsemen, send for succor a
supply of Musketires, who may scattering and out of order, as occasion shall
serve, shoot at the oppressors, and upon occasion retire, and return very
often: to these you may send a guard of Pikes for rescue, the better to bring
them off safe. But if you invade your enemy with Musketires, with your guard of
Pikes send some Horse, so that both may defend them from invasion of the
enemies Horsemen. Likewise, to give the enemy his hands full, follow him with
a Battalion resolutely, to put all, or one of his Battalions to rout; and
having discomfited any one of his Battles, send only a small or convenient
company to pursue the chase, and with the rest invade quickly some part of his
Army fighting with any one of your Battles; this must of necessity be done;
for sundry Victories have been lost upon this occasion, that when one Battle
has overthrown his first encountered enemies Battle, it has immediately
followed the chase, and not helped his own fellows in danger.

Likewise, in your first joining of Battle, if your Fore-ward gain the
Victory, join other Battles immediately whilst comfort is on your side, and
your enemies disheartened. This got Bucoy the victory at Prague.

If your Footmen be vehemently oppressed with your enemies Footmen; send your
Horsemen to invade the Flanks of your enemies, and with them some Shot to hold
them play: but if you can plant a Piece of Ordnance against their Flanks; it
will gall them shrewdly.

If your enemies main Battle do urge very valiantly your Fore-ward, and his
other Battles be not ready to help or rescue; cause both your other Battles,
one on the one side, and the other on the other side, freshly to invade your
enemies main Battle; and herein you shall do wisely, imitating our brave
English at Poytirs.

When the General perceives he has a greater Army than his enemy, minding to
compass him about before he be aware, let the Front of the Battle be ranged
equal to the Front of the enemies, and so soon as the fight is begun, let him
make the Front by little and little to retire, and the Wings to advance a
little forwards, and then charge the enemy upon the Flanks. By this many Armies
have been vanquished.

It has been a thing of great importance, whilst the fight continues, to give
out the word, that the General, or some chief Commander of the enemies is
slain, or that one Wing or other of their Army is vanquished. Also the Chivalry
of the enemies is to be feared with some strange fights, or by some fireworks,
by which they may be made unserviceable.

Now if the enemy have any Pieces of Ordnance in the Rear of their Army, if
their Battalia's suddenly divide themselves, you are to do the like, for be
sure, they intend to discharge upon you.

If the enemy should endanger the taking of your Baggage; by no means suffer
any of your Troops, either Horse or Foot, confusedly to run to relieve the
same; but advisedly send a sufficient Strength to perform that Service when the
enemy shall be most busy in ransacking the Wagons, whereby they may be
easily vanquished.

Where the enemy comes most potently and furiously upon any part of your Army,
be sure there to discharge your Ordnance at the thickest of them, and being
thereby dispersed, let your Horse charge them, taking the advantage of their
disorder.

If the enemies Horse charge any of your Battalia's in the midst of it, be
ready to give way to them, by making a passage for them; and as they pass
through, charge them upon either Flank, by which means they will have the worst
of it.

Lastly, to end with Machiavils Rules of War which he has set down for
Maxims to be observed by all Commanders, as follows.

1 The same that helps the enemy, hurts thee; and the same that helps
thee, hurts the enemy.

2 He that shall be in the War most vigilant to observe the devises of the
enemy, and shall take most pains to exercise his Army, shall incur least
perils, and may hope most of the victory.

3 Never conduct thy men to fight the field, if first thou have not confirmed
their minds and know them to be without fear, and to be in good order; for
thou oughtst never to enterprise any thing of danger with thy soldiers, but
when thou see they hope to overcome.

4 It is better to conquer the enemy with famine than with iron: in the victory
of which, fortune may do much more than valor.

5 No purpose is better than that which is hid from the enemy until thou have
executed it.

6 To know in the War how to understand occasion, and to take it; helps
more than any other thing.

7 Nature breeds very few strong men; but industry and exercise makes many.

8 Discipline may do more in War than fury.

9 When any depart from the enemies side for to come to serve thee, when they
be faithful they shall be unto thee always great gains, for that the power of
the adversaries are more diminished with the loss of them that run away, than
of those that are slain, although that the name of a Fugitive be to new friends
suspected, and to old odious.

10 Better it is, in pitching the field, to reserve behind the first Front aid
enough, than to make the Front bigger to disperse the Soldiers.

11 He is difficulty overcome which can know his own power; and the same of
the enemy.

12 The valiantness of the soldiers avails more than the multitude.

13 Sometimes the situation helps more than the valiantness.

14 New and sudden things make Armies afraid; slow and accustomed things be
little regarded of them. Therefore make thy Army to practice, and to know with
small fights a new enemy, before thou come to fight the Field with him.

15 He that with disorder follows the enemy after that his Battalia's be
broken, will do no other than to become of a Conqueror a Loser.

16 He that prepares not necessary victuals to live upon, is overcome without
iron.

17 He that trusts more in Hors-men than in Footmen, or more in Footmen
than in Horsemen, must accommodate himself with the situation.

18 When thou shall understand there is a Spy from the enemy come into the
Camp, cause every man to go to his lodging.

19 Change purpose when thou perceivest that the enemy has foreseen it.

20 Consult with many of those things which thou ought to do; the same that
thou will after do, confer with few.

21 Soldiers, when they abide at home, are maintained with fear and
punishment; after, when they are led to the Wars, with hope and reward.

22 Good Captains come never to fight the Field, except necessity constrains
them, and occasion calls them.

23 Cause, that the enemy know not how thou will order thy Army to fight, and
in whatsoever manner thou ordainest it, make that the first Battle may be
received of the second, and the second of the third.

24 In the fight, never make use of the Battle to any other thing than to the
same for which thou have appointed it, if thou will make no disorder.

25 The sudden accidents with difficulty are removed, or remedied; those that
are thought upon, with facility.

26 Men, iron, money, and bread be the strength of the War; but of these
four, the first two be most necessary: because men and iron find money and
bread, but bread and money find not men and iron.

27 The unarmed rich man is a booty to the poor soldier.

28 Accustom thy soldiers to despise delicate living, and lascivious
apparel.

Thus much I thought good to collect concerning this subject, which I hope will
give any discreet Soldier content.

RULES AND OBSERVATIONS TO BE USED AFTER FIGHT. SECT. XXI.
CHAP. X.
Diverse Rules and Observations to be used after a Battle is either won or
lost.
HAving in the precedent Chapter discourst of such things as are requisite to
be done in the time of Skirmish; in this Chapter I shall demonstrate what is to
be done after a Conquest either gained or lost. Wherefore the first thing to
be considered, is, how a General shall demean himself, so that the Forces which
are left may not be quite destroyed, and so the overthrow to redound to his
utter confusion. Wherefore a General must order his affairs so, that his
enemies should not follow his men to overtake them in their flight from the
Battle: and for this purpose he must use some policy to hinder them, as
Sertorius practiced: Metellus having vanquished his Army, and knowing it was to
no purpose for him to fly, commanded his Officers to retire unto diverse
places, as scatteringly and dispersed as possibly they could, (knowing that the
enemy would not make pursuit after such disbanded persons, It is policy for a
General not to divide his Army to follow the pursuit, but rather let such
small Troops depart quietly. Neither is it good to let the soldiers know the
place of meeting beforehand, but only the chief Officers.
but rather such as went by Troops) and having first advertised them where
every man should come to his Rendevous and meet again; this was the means of
saving most of his men: but if they should be pursued, then every man must cast
such treasure as he has in the way as they fly, that the enemy may stay to
get it up. King Mithridates made use of this policy to escape from Lucullus.
Likewise Frotho King of the Danes being landed in England* deceived the Natives
that pursued him; they being laded with the Danish goods and jewels, and
scattered about here and there to gather them up, were set upon again by the
Danes with some of their forces they had rallyed together, and vanquished the
English at their pleasure.

Many that have been overthrown in Battle, by reason of Woods and other secure
places, have saved themselves, and being come together, have secretly returned
in the night, and charged the enemy who has thought himself secure, and have
taken them so disorderly, that they have routed them.

If the Conqueror have taken many prisoners, and the vanquished should rally
his forces again, thinking to have an advantage to assault the Conqueror;
then there is no way, but every soldier must kill his prisoner, lest they
should take an opportunity to resist. If a Battle should be fought, and
neither side be utterly vanquished, but the darkness of the night cause them to
give over, the best way for him that has lost most men in the fight, to cause
some of his Soldiers to steal away the bodies of their own slain men, and
privately bury them; so that the enemy shall conceive that he had the worst of
the fight, in regard he sees most of his men slain; this will make him loath to
encounter again.

The victour after he has discomfited his enemies army, and scattered them
about, ought to send a sufficient number of Horse and Foot, to lie upon some
passages, secretly in the nightime, which leads to some Town or Fort of
theirs of greatest strength, and nearest at hand, where they shall be sure to
entrap all such as shall seek by flight to save themselves.

Likewise when a General sees there is no way but to be routed, let him send
speedily certain Troops of Horse and Foot to the next straight passage, which
may so provide for themselves, that they may defend the passage, so as diverse
of their own soldiers may safely escape; for an enemy will not divide his Army
to weaken it, to follow the chase of the subdued enemy, much less to seek to
gain a passage which is fortified, to hinder their escapes: for he that with
disorder follows the enemy after he is broken, will do no other, than to
become of a Conqueror a Loser.

Many things more you may expect should have been here inserted; but I have
been plentiful in setting down diverse observations most proper to these
Discourses, in the Office of a General, and in the Discourse of Marching and
Retraiting from an enemy. In the next place I shall endeavor to portray to
your view sundry forms of Imbattellings, which have been, and now are in use,
and some newly invented; with a demonstration of the manner of framing them and
the true use of them.

THE MANNER OF FRAMING OF BATTLES. SECT. XXII.
CHAP. XI.
An excellent strong form of imbattelling an Army, consisting of twenty six
thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse.
THE following Figure has before the Front of the Battle four Divisions,
marked A. which are termed Forlorn Hopes: viz. one Division before the Front of
the right Wing, and the other before the Front of the left Wing of the main
Battle. In each of these Divisions of Forlorn Hopes are four hundred and
fifty Soldiers, Pikes and Musketires. There are also two other Divisions of
Forlorn Hopes placed in the midst before the Front of the main Battle,
containing likewise four hundred and fifty in each of them: these Forlorn Hopes
are advanced before the main Battle an hundred paces, or as much more as the
General pleases. These are first to make loose skirmishes with the enemy, to
draw them within distance of the Ordnance; they are gently and orderly to
retrait: the two Divisions of Forlorn Hopes next each Flank are to fall back
and join with the same. The two Forlorn Hopes in the midst are to fall back
into the space in the midst of the main Battle.

But first the Ordnance, after they have performed their duties, are to be
drawn back through this broad distance or space, and are to be placed before
the Front of the Battle of succor.

The Forlorn Hopes are to have certain Troops of Carbines to be flankered
twenty two paces or more, side-waies from them, viz. on either Wing two hundred
and fifty, marked B. these are to make light skirmishes with the enemies
Horse, and likewise to view what advantages may be taken by the ill ordering of
the enemies Array.

Before the Front of the main Battle are planted diverse Field-Peeces, marked
C. there are two others on each side of the Forlorn Hopes, marked D. these are
to scowre the distances betwixt the Divisions. A A.

Likewise, These Ordnance are on each Flank to be guarded with 300. Foot and
100 Horse.
wide upon each Flank are planted diverse Ordnance marked E. these are to have a
sufficient Guard both of Horse and Foot; and are to command and scowre the
Plains within distance of their Shot. These are likewise to be drawn back upon
the enemies approaching, and to be placed at the point of the Flank of each
Wing of the main Battle, ten or twelve paces wide.

The main Battle consists often Maniples or Battalia's, marked F. viz. five
toward the right Flank, and five toward the left.

In the midst is a broad space or distance of ground containing forty two
paces, for the Artilery to be drawn to and fro, as also for the two middle
Divisions of the Forlorn Hopes to retrait through for their safety, behind the
main Battle.

Likewise through this distance or space diverse loose Shot may sally out and
give fire upon the enemies Battalia of Pikes. Also diverse Soldiers with
fireworks and Granado's, are to go and come, to cast them against the enemies
Troops, which will be a great annoyance unto them.

Furthermore, under the Front of the Pikes are diverse Firelocks or Musketires
to be placed, Short Swords and Targets are excellent to line the Front of
Pikes, to cut off the enemies Pikes heads.
that shall play upon the enemies Pikes, when the enemy shall be approacht
within twenty of forty paces of your main Battle; viz. five hundred Shot.

The Ordnance that before were drawn down from before the main Battle, unto the
Front of the Battle of succor, are (when the enemy is within twenty paces of
your foremost Battles) to be levelled right up this broad space or distance,
and having given fire in a right line upon the enemy, those of the Forlorn Hope
that retraited into that space, being ordered and ranged 37. in Rank, and ten
deep in File, and placed behind the Battalia, upon the right side, marked P.
and 38. in Rank placed behind the middle Battalia, on the left side, at Q. viz.
three hundred and seventy even behind the Maniple or Battalion of the right
side of the said space, and three hundred and eighty soldiers behind the
Battalia of the left side: so soon as the Shot is past, the three hundred and
seventy soldiers are to face to the left hand, and the three hundred and
eighty to the right; and so advancing forwards into the midst of the space or
division to their even distance; they are again to face toward the Front of
the main Battle, and are speedily to march up and join with them, whereby the
whole body will be strong and firm to receive the enemies charge.

Likewise the several distances betwixt every Maniple or Battalia of this main
Battle, Note, each Battalia of this main Battle contains 1000* soldiers.
is If the partition should be less than 2. paces, they would close up in the
motion of the Army.
two paces; and this is for the Shot, after they have given fire, to march down
into the Rear.

Behind this main Battle is the Battle of succor, consisting of six Divisions
or Battalia's marked H. these are ranged, in distance from the Rear of the main
Battle, twenty or thirty paces.

The space or distance of these Battalia's betwixt Flank and Flank, from one to
the other, is one hundred twenty six paces: and these are thus placed, because
if it happens the main Battle to be overcharged, the Battalions thereof may
Note, into each space 2. Battalions are to retreat, and on each Flank 1.
Battalia; and the middle-most Battalia is to fall into the space in the midst.
By this means 6000. men more are brought to fight, and the middle Battle made
so much stronger than the first: and again, retraiting into the ^ear. Battle,
makes them strongest of all.
retrait between these spaces, and so be reinforced with fresh men. Note, each
Battalia contains seven hundred men.

In the rear-Battell are four several Battalia's, twenty or thirty paces
distant. Behind the Battle of succor marked I. the space or distance of
ground between these Maniples or Battalia's are three hundred thirty six
paces: the reason is, because if the enemy should still over-charge the former
principal Battles, then they are to make their last retrait betwixt these
divisions or spaces; viz. whereas before there retraited into the Battle of
succor four Maniples or Battalia's, and the first Battalia unto the Flank of
the right Wing, as also the other four Battalia's retraited into the spaces
upon the left side of the Battle of succor, and the fifth Battalia upon the
outside of the Flank of the left Wing of the same: so now there must retrait
six Battalia's into the spaces between the Battalia's of the rear-Battell, and
two Battalia's upon the outside of the Battalia of the right Wing; and also
the other six Battalia's retraiteth into the spaces upon the left side, and two
Battalia's upon the outside of the Battalia of the left Wing. Likewise the
middlemost Battalia is to retrait into the space in the midst, so that by this
means there shall be brought two thousand four hundred fresh soldiers more to
join with the rest to fight.

By this means the enemy will be wearied, The rear-Battel consists of 2000.
soldiers, viz. 500. in each Battalia.
and also over-winged, by reason this Battle at the last retraiting is as
broad again as it was at first. Thus it will come to pass that the enemy
shallbe charged both in Front and Flank, whereby he shall surely be routed.

The Flanks of this Battle are to be impaled on either side with four hundred
eighty five Pikes, and two hundred ninety one Musketires; because the distance
from the Front of the first Battle to the Rear of the last, is fifty eight
paces, that is ninety seven soldiers in a Rank, Five Ranks of Pikes is the
most that can do any service against the enemy at once; if there be more
Ranks, they are out of distance to annoy the enemy with their Pikes. The
Impalement is marked with the letter G.
and five deep in File: the Musketires are but three deep in File, and equal
to the Pikes in Rank or Breast; they are to stand behind the Pikes; the Pikes
charging at the Horse, the foremost Rank is to give fire over the heads of the
Pikes as they stoop, and then falling back, the ne^t Rank is to give fire in
their place. These new fashioned Pikes with Bows annexed to them are the best
for Impalement: also they may do much good to be placed in the first and
second Ranks of the main-Battell, in the Front thereof, to gall the enemies
Horse. This Impalement is to be set a pretty distance from the Flanks, that
the Battalia's upon their retrait may have room to fall in betwixt the Flanks
and the Impalement. The Impalement in the Rear, is to be made of the Carts and
Carriages, or some Intrenchments, if occasion be. The Rear of this Battle
extends it self seven hundred paces wide from the Flank of the right Wing to
the left, and without Intrenchments, or Carriages, Carts and Wagons fastened
with chains together; it would take up a quarter of the Army to impale it so
strongly as the Flanks are.

Wherefore it were very convenient that the Pioners, Pioners having ^ow^ for
their weapons, may do excellent service in wet wether when Pieces will not fire.
being they are troubled with nothing but their Spade and Mattock, and that but
seldom, they being most usually carried by Water or by Wagon; these Pioners
should have Bows and Arrows for their Arms, which would be but little
burden to them, and these would help to defend the Carriages in the Rear, with
the help of a small quantity of Pikes and Muskets: so that if there be two
Pikes and three Musketires to guard the Rear, The whole Imp^lement, Flanks and
Rea^, amounts to 7382. Soldiers.
it being 700. paces broad, they would amount to 5830. Soldiers; so the
Flanks and the Rear would take up 7382.

Note that when the maine Battle retreats into the Battle of succor, the
impalements of the Flanks are to stand firm if they can possibly, and are to
charge the enemy on the Flanks: but if the two first Battles retreat into the
Rear Battle, they must of necessity then fall back, and half of them
strengthen the Rear, because the Front of the Battle then will extend it
self so wide that the impalements of the Flanks must give way to the
Battalia's that shall retreat, and so they will be disjoined from the
impalement in the Rear, which places bein not fortified by these Soldiers,
there will be an advantage for the enemy to break in upon the Rear of the
Battle with his Horse.

The residue of the Horse troops are to be imbattelled in several Battalia's
down by the Flanks of the wings of the Army, and wide in distance from them
sixty paces or more: the Carbines or Harquebuziers are to maintain skirmish
with the enemies Troops, and if it chance they make any breach into any of the
Foot-Battalia's, by charging them in Front and Flank, then the Curassiers are
to second them, and to break into their Ranks.

We are to have certain divisions of Pikes upon either Flank of two hundred
and fifty a piece, These may be lined with Muskets.
to aid and rescue the Horse upon all occasions; these may be placed in a
square form before the points of the Wings of the maine Battle, as well to
secure them from danger of having their Rancks broken, as also upon occasion to
rescue the Horse marked K.

There is also eight hundred Musketeers to join with the Harquebuziers; Viz.
400 upon each Flank; these are to join with 150. Horse.
these are to stand ready by the Flanks to take the opportunity to fall upon
the enemies Ordnance, and are either to gain them or hinder them from
discharging; these are marked with W.

The residue of the Soldiers unplac'd are to guard the Carriages from the
enemies assauls, which are placed upon the Rear of the Army, and to agitate
such other services as the General shall see fit; also those loose Shot or
part of them with the Pikes of the Forlorn Hope, after they are retreated, may
fall into the Rear and join with the 3665. Soldiers to guard the Rear, if
need be.

The rest of the Horse are to be ranged upon the Wings of the Army in three
several Battalia's some eighty paces wide of the Flanks, for fear they should
commit any disorder by their unruly retreatings; in the foremost Battalia is to
be eight hundred Harquebuziers, and these must stand fifty or sixty paces
before the Front of the Battle, but wide as is said before. Next to them is
another Battle of four hundred and fifty Carbines, standing even with the
Front of the main-Battell, but wide. Next is the third Battle to be placed
fifty or sixty paces behind the former, which shall contain three hundred
Curassiers, these are marked with the letter L, as you may see them placed upon
either side or Wing of the Battle.

The residue of the Horse are thus to be disposed of, first to guard the
Ordnance there is one hundred on either Flank: there is two hundred and fifty
Horse to Flank the Forlorn Hopes on either side.

Lastly, there is a hundred Horse to join with the Shot that is placed on
either Wing to intercept the Ordnance from the enemy; the figure of this
discourse follows.



CHAP. XII.
This second figure shows a very strong form of Imbattelling, and very apt
for the drawing an enemy into a stratageme.
IN this second figure following you may perceive a very strange form of
Imbattelling, very apt for the drawing an enemy into a stratageme, whereby of
necessity they must be disordered and routed.

First, the Forlorn Hopes consisting of 1500. Pikes and Musketeers in either
grand division marked A, and are advanced 200. paces before the first Battle,
which is placed for their succor; these are first to skirmish with the enemy,
and then orderly to retreat even with the said Battle of succor, when the
enemies troops are at push of Pike with them, and eagerly pursuing them until
they are come within the distance of the first stratageme; then fire is to be
given to the trains, and upon the disorder they are to advance forwards, and
furiously to charge the enemy in the Front, and the Horse on either Flank.

But if the enemies discomfiture be not so great but that they take heart of
grace, and stand so firmly to their tackling that they are too prevalent for
you, then the Forlorn Hopes and the Battle of succor are to retreat between
the divisions of the maine Battle, the enemy then pressing forwards within the
distance of the second stratageme; then fire being given to the trains, the
whole strength of the Army will be in a readiness to take the advantage to
charge the enemy in his disorders, as before is specified; and also then the
Field-peeces shall have freedom immediately to play upon the enemies Troops.

If the maine Battle should retreat (except upon a wonderful occasion of
necessity) it will be most dangerous; for if any of the divisions of the two
Wings or of the Body of the Battle be overcharged, the divisions of the
Reare-Battell are to advance forwards and join with the maine Battle; and
then manfully to encounter with the enemy; or otherwise those Battalia's in the
Rear are to be disposed of according as the wise General shall see occasion
either of assistance, or to charge the enemy upon any place of advantage.

But let me request you to observe how either of the Forlorn Hopes consists of
a thousand men marked A, the first Battle of succor being four Battallia's
marked B, have in each of them 600. men.

The maine Battle marked C consists of eight Battles, and each of them
contains 1000. men.

The Reare-Battell consists of seven Battalia's marked D, and in every one of
them there is 500. men.

The Flanks are impaled with four rancks of Pikes, and three rancks of
Muskets, on either side is 490. (viz) on both sides is 980. (...) marked E.

The Impalement of the Rear is with the Carriages, and there is two rancks of
Pikes and two rancks of Muskets to defend them will amount to 4620. men, in
regard the Rear is 3450. Foot broad, or 690. paces with the distances betwixt
the Battallia's.

There is also placed on either Wing 550 Pikes and Shot to aid the Horse, and
to join with them upon all occasions if the enemy should be to strong for
them, so that upon both Wings there are 1100. men.

There are also 600. Shot which are to join with three hundred Carbines; these
are to surprise the enemines Ordnance as you may see marked at F and G, (viz.)
300. Shot on each Wing with 150. Horse; these are to use all celerity and
diligence to surprise, or at least to hinder the enemy from shooting with his
Ordnance against your Troops.

There is also 600. men to guard your own Ordnance, least the enemy surprise
them, and two hundred horse to assist them; (viz.) on either wing are 300. Foot
and a hundred Horse as you see marked H.

The powder pots that are to be placed in the earth are marked I

Thus you see a Battle consisting of 22000. Foot and 3000. Horse ordered ready
to encounter the enemy; the figure of this discourse follows.



Note the Horses are ordered as follows; first upon either Wing are a
thousand divided into three Battles; in the first Battle there is 500. in the
second Battle there is 300. and in the last Battle there are 200. upon both
the Flanks are 2000.

There are 200. Horse to guard the Ordnance (viz.) on each Flank 100.

There is also 500. Horse to Flanker the Forlorn Hopes, (viz.) 250 in each.

There is 300. Horse to surprise the enemies Ordnance, (viz.) 150. on either
Wing before the Forlorn Hopes; thus the 3000. Horse are ordered.

CHAP. XIIII.
A very strong form of Imbattelling ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse,
very proper to be used in the Champion, where there is no refuge either
natural or artificial, the enemy exceeding in strength both in Horse and Foot.
THE figure of the Battle following is invented for the safe retire of the
Shot, being over-powred and repulsed by the Horsemen of the enemy; or
otherwise, who may at eight several places retire into these Squadrons which
stand in the proportion of a Fortress.

There are thirty seven Maniples of Shot orderly placed, the distance betwixt
each are three paces; in every Maniple are contained 130. Shot, which amounts
to in gross 4810. the residue being 190. are equally placed to attend the
Ordnance being 23. at each Platform; so there is only six remains to be
employed upon messages, or to guard the Powder.

These Maniples or Battalia's of Shot, are Impaled with the Pikes, which are
thus ordered; each Flank has 850. also the Front and Rear takes up 800. each
corner takes up 425. these amount to 5000. Pikes, being ordered ten deep in
file.

In either corner of this Battle are two spaces for the Shot to sally out upon
the enemy, and to retreat in again for their safety.

The Ordnance being discharged upon the enemies Troops are to be drawn in at
these spaces, and placed within the Rear of the Pikes; so that when the enemy
charge, the Pikes may close themselves into one maine Square by causing the
Flanks to March up to the corners of the Squares, which as occasion shall
offer, may disclose again, and let out the Shot to skirmish with the enemy.

The Squares of Pikes at each corner, does much strengthen the Battle,
especially if the enemy charge it on Front and Flank at once; it is all in
all to strengthen the corners of any Battle whatsoever, for in the corners
lies all the weakness.

Moreover if the enemy charge upon two sides at once, yet those passages
furthest from them may have Shot sally out and give fire upon them, and safely
retrait in again. There is no wise General will adventure to charge such a
Battle as this is upon all four sides at once, except his Army were four
times stronger in men and horse.

If need be, Shot may be drawn continually round under the Pikes, which may
give fire upon the enemy and so fall in again, and be continually releeved.

The Horse are to be ranged upon each Flank or Wing in indifferent small
Battalia's, and are to be lined with Musketeers; these may do great execution
when the Ordnance have disranked the enemy; these Horse-Troopes upon all
occasions may secure themselves either upon one side or other of this Battle.
View the figure of the third Battle.

CHAP. XV.
A fourth figure of Imbattelling an Army consisting of twenty thousand Foot,
and two thousand Horse.
IN Marshalling this Battle, this course is to be observed; the Pikes
consisting of 4000. must be ranged into eight Battalia's; each Battalia has
460. Pikes, (viz.) 46 in rank, and 10. deep in file, which amounts to in the
whole sum 3680. so there remains 320. Pikes of the 4000. which are thus
disposed of; upon the right Sleeve in the Front is 120 Pikes, which are either
to guard the Ordnance, or to assist the Horse, as occasion shall serve;
likewise there is as many on the left Sleeve to be employed as the former; in
the Rear are 80. more placed for the guarding of the Ordnance, as you may see
at each Platform 40.

In the next place the four thousand Shot are thus to be Marshalled; each
Flank of the Pikes has six hundred twenty four Shot ranged eight in depth,
and seventy eight in Rank or Breast; that is one thousand two hundred forty
eight upon both Sleeves; for from the Front of the Pikes to the Rear is fifty
two paces, and the spaces or distances betwixt each Battalia is five paces, and
the three Battalia's occupies forty two paces of ground, (viz.) in each
Battalia fourteen paces, so that every soldier occupies seven foot of ground
betwixt Rank and Rank, which makes fifty two paces.



In the next place there is thirty six Squadrons of Shot, each Squadron
containing seventy men; in the Front there are twenty one Squadrons, and in the
Rear fifteen; the whole number amounts unto two thousand five hundred and
twenty Shot, so their remains still three hundred and twenty Shot, of which
are placed on each Sleeve or Wing, above in the Front by the Pikes one hundred
and twenty; these are to join with those Squadrons of Pikes that attend the
Ordnance, and upon all occasions they may be drawn out to assist the Horse, if
the enemy should over-powre them; also in the Rear each Platform of Ordnance
has forty Shot to aid the Pikes for the securing of the same.

The two hundred Horse are placed upon each Flank in three several
Battalia's; the first Battle consists of three hundred, the second being
Curassiers has four hundred, the third being Carbines has as the first had
three hundred, so that in all there is two thousand; the Horse are to charge
the enemies Horse, and being put to retreat by them, those loose Shot and Pikes
are to be in a readiness to give fire upon them, which being disordered by
them the Horse are immediately to recharge them; if the enemy be still to
strong, then let the four hundred Curassiers being fortified on each Flank
with the Harquebuziers and Carbines, charge them all on breast, these Horses
being sufficiently lined with shot; and in the mean time the Squadrons of Shot
must disband themselves and give fire upon the enemy, and if need be, those
Squadrons in the Rear may easily releeve them in the Front through those
passages of the Pikes.

If all resistance be to no purpose but the Shot must retreat into those
spaces, and so to order themselves in the void space in the midst of the
Battalions of the Pikes; then after their retreat the Battalia's must close
themselves, making a firm Front every way; and the Impalement or Wings of Shot
must be drawn round under the Pikes, which being so drawn will make just
four ranks; they must discharge upon their knees and so safeguard themselves.

The Horse must secure themselves on the Flanks or in the Rear.

So soon as the enemy is driven to retreat, then the Pikes are to open their
divisions and let out the Shot to assail them, in the same manner as before.

This form of Imbattelling has been used in former times, and questionless
it may be very prevalent in two necessities; as in the night, when a General
knows not in what kind or manner the enemy will assail him; or if his Army
should be weak in Horse, and his Army should be suddenly set upon by them upon
some spacious ground, which should be advantageous for the enemies Horse to
surprise them, then this form of Imbattelling may be very defensive.

From this form of Imbattelling, as also from all other, if the General sees
reason, he may alter it into what order he pleases; this very subject deserves
a discourse by it self, the which if I should here treat of, it would be too
tedious; but any ingenious Soldier at the first view, will conceive how to
transmute any Battle decyphered into any other form the condition of the
Battle will best admit; and thus much for this.

CHAP. XVI.
A fifth way of Imbattelling an Army consisting of twelve thousand Foot, and
four thousand Horse, the Ordnance being placed covertly in the midst, and also
upon the Wings.
IN this first figure following you may perceive at the letter A, four hundred
Shot upon either Flank before the maine Battle; these are to surprise the
enemies Ordnance which is to be supposed are planted upon a Hill; further you
may observe sixteen Battalia's, the Ordnance being planted in the maine
Battle between the divisions thereof, having four hundred Musketeers ordered
before them, and by them obscured; and as soon as the enemy is approacht
within distance, those Musketeers are to divide themselves on either hand, so
that the Shot may have free passage to disorder the enemies Troops, upon which
advantage the other Battalia's are to advance forwards, and furiously to charge
the enemy in his disorders.

The Horse are oblique-wise placed upon either Flanck. Note before the Horse
gives their charge, the Musketeers at A are to sally forth to surprise the
Ordnance.

Likewise the Shot before every Battalia are to make their passage through the
Intervalls down the sides of the Battalia's into the Rear of all, and from
thence to charge upon the enemies Flanks, if occasion offers; otherwise aid
their own men in the skirmish; all the Shot before the Battali'as are in
number twelve hundred.

If according to the King of Swedes Discipline, these Battalia's were ordered
but six deep in file, then there would be sufficient men spare to Impale this
Battle, whereby it would be of a far greater strength; besides there would
be a quantity spare to line the Horse-Troopes, which is a thing of great
consequence, and very prevalent, as is formerly showed; and by this following
figure you may see.



CHAP. XVII.
The sixth way of Imbattelling an Army consisting of twelve thousand Foot, and
four thousand Horse, with the Ordnance planted on the Hills before the
Battle, as also on the Rear and Flanks, being fit for all attempts.
IN this subsequent Battle which we are now to describe, you may perceive
fifteen Battalions of Foot ordered in Marshall array; in the right Wing or
Vantguard are three Battalions containing 500 in each of them Flankt with
Musketeers; before every one of which are also ranged ten files of Musketeers,
three in the right Angle, three in the left, and four in the midst just before
them, every File containing ten men in depth; these Shot are to make their way
through the spaces of the Battalions in the Rear of all, and so from thence to
charge upon the enemies Flanks: in the maine Battle are three Battalions
containing three thousand men, (viz.) in each a thousand, these are Flankt with
Musketeers, and have also Musketeers before them in the same form with the
rest: in the Reare-ward or left Wing of the Battle, are likewise three
Battalions containing 500. men a piece, Imbattelled as the rest with Musketeers
before them; also behind these Battalia's are four other Battalia's placed,
and have also in each of them 500. a piece, with Musketeers advanced before
them; these are for seconds, as you may perceive them Martialled just against
the Intervalles or Spaces of their opposite Battallions; these Spaces are 200.
foot distance in breadth, so that the said four Battalions may pass through
them; these likewise have Shot before them in the same manner the former had.

These with the rest may March forth to skirmish with the enemy, or stand firm
to second them upon their retreat; or remaining in the Rear, they may sally
out and charge the enemy upon the Flanks, or if occasion be, they may assist
the Horse if they be too weak for the enemy.

The rest of the Battalions are but twelve foot distance one from the other,
and at three foot order.

The divisions of Musketeers are allowed six foot that they may the better fall
through having given fire.

In the Rear of all are two Battallions, of a thousand in either of them,
standing just behind the three Battalia's of the maine Battle.

About a Furlong wide of the Flanck of these are 800. Horse marked B, (viz.)
400. in each placed oblique-wise, the better to start forth and inviron the
enemy; in like manner are the Horse Marshalled in the outmost Flanks of
therest, but in greater numbers, as by this following figure you may see.



By the Wings of these two Battalia's are two field-Peeces placed, ready turned
and bent to the Rear; these are to discharge upon the enemy, if he should with
Horse or Foot give upon that part: if not, then may these Pieces with ease b^e
brought to some other place which may be more apt to annoy the enemy. The rest
of the Ordnance are planted upon two hills opposite against the enemies Flanks:
these are to break their order, and distress them; and for their better
security, there are seven hundred Musketires to guard them: and if need be,
there must be a greater Force. There should be a slight Trench raised before
them, or pallizado'd about, the better to defend them from the enemies Horse
and Foot. These forms of imbattelling I found in the Prospective-glasse of
War, and have here inserted them for the benefit of the ingenious Soldier.

CHAP. XVIII.
A seventh form of Imbattelling an Army consisting of fifteen thousand Foot
and five thousand Horse, impaled with Redouts, and a Ditch of combustible
stuff to prevent the Horse from assaulting either the Flanks or Rear.
THis figure following represents to your view an excellent form of
imbattelling, very strong and secure: the principal Strength of the Army are
brought to fight at the first encounter.

Wherefore first observe the main-Battell to consist of five Battalia's; in
each of them are one thousand six hundred Pikes and Muskets: the Muskets are
orderly ranged before the Pikes; each Battalia has one hundred and sixty
Files, and ten deep, which amounts unto, in all the five Battalia's, eight
thousand men.

After the main-Battell is a second Battle placed, which is termed the Battle
of succor; and that consists of four lesser Battalia's, and has in each of
them seven hundred Pikes and Shot. Betwixt the said Battalia's there is a
convenient space or distance of ninety six paces, for the main Battalia's to
retrait into, when they shall be overcharged with the enemy.

The manner of retraiting is thus; all the first five Battalia's are evenly and
easily to retrait, with their face toward the enemy, holding them play with
their Shot; upon the right and left Flank of the second Battle, are the two
outter most Battalia's of the first Battle to retrait on; also the other three
Battalia's are to enter into the spaces betwixt the four Battalia's of the
second Battle, and there to stand even with them in Front, whereby there will
be nine Battles to re-charge the enemy afresh; for these two thousand eight
hundred fresh men will be a great heartning and strengthening of the rest which
were wearied and discomfited in the first encounter.

But if it should so happen that the enemy should over-wing your Battle at the
first encounter, then this second Battle of succor must advance up between
the distances in the main Battle, whereby the Front of it will be extended so
much the wider. But by the way, you must not make your Front wider than the
impalement of the Redouts and the Trenches of fire will permit; for those that
shall retrait beyond those Redouts and Trenches, are but as lost men, unless
if occasion were, they should join with the Horse-Troops, to assist them.

Note, if the main Battle be advanced toward the enemy beyond the limits of
the Redouts, and if the Wings should stretch out wider than the impalement,
then if it be driven to retrait, those out-parts of the Wings must first fall
back, and order themselves in the second Battle, as they were before; or
otherwise some of them may be placed to secure the Flanks or the Rear, or
otherwise, as the General shall think fit.

In the next place is the Battle in the Rear to be considered, which consists
only of three Battalia's, and in each of them are four hundred men; they have
also sufficient large spaces to receive the two former Battles, and this is the
last hopes the Army can expect. Wherefore the Redouts must manfully bestir
them, to give continual volleys of shot upon the enemies Flanks, which will
lie naked unto them.

The Ordnance, after they have done their service, must be withdrawn, and
placed before the Battalia's of succor, where they may give fire once again
upon the enemy after the main Battle shall be retraited into the second
Battle; and then they are to be withdrawn again into the Rear, or else to be
placed upon the Flanks between the Redouts. In each of the Redouts are two
hundred men; they are to secure the Flanks and the Rear of the Battle: beyond
these Redouts you may perceive two Ditches made, the earth thrown up in way of
a Brest-work toward the Flanks of our own Troops; the breadth of them may be
five or six foot: these are to be filled with Searwood, Straw, and other
combustible stuff: the outmost next the enemy is first to be set on fire. The
next Ditch is to be made more near to the Flanks of the Battle by eight or
ten paces; in all things like the first it is to be ordered: this last is to
be fired a good while after the first, so that they may endure burning the
time of the fight. But a principal respect is to be had to the Wind, lest it
should drive the smoke and fire upon your own Troops: in a calm day it can do
no hurt to your selves, but is very prevalent against the enemies Horse, and
will much strengthen the Redouts: besides, it will be as a Pound to keep your
own men from running away.

The Horse are ordered in five Battalia's, upon either Wing along beyond the
fiery Trenches, being in each Battle five hundred Horse. The first Battle
being Harquebuziers, are to charge the enemies Horse, and the second are to
releeve them or rescue them, and so are the rest; only the last Battle, being
Curassiers, are to charge the enemies Flanks whilst their Horse are in action;
or if the enemies Horse fly, then they are all of them to charge the Foot of
the enemy, and also to secure their own Foot-Troops from being charged.

In the Rear of these Horse-Troops are placed on either Wing five hundred Pikes
and Muskets; these are to aid the Horse, and to line them with the Shot, if
need be, or to be employed in charging the enemies Flanks. View the following
Figure.



This kind of impaling with Redouts and fiery Trenches is to be only practiced
when the enemy is far stronger than your self; so that your men cannot be
spared to impale your Battle, neither is there any place of refuge to secure
any part of the Battle; for if there be, then be sure to impale one of your
Wings after this manner, so that the Wind may convey the smoke and sparks into
the enemies teeth, to their great annoyance.

CHAP. XIX.
The eighth form of imbattelling an Army, the Flanks being impaled with
Horse-Pallizado's and the Rear secured by a River: it consists of five thousand
Foot and one thousand Horse.
THis eighth form of imbattelling is fittest and most proper, if the enemy
assails in such a place that the distance of ground is scant, and the Rear of
the Army fortifyed with some Moors, Ponds, Rivers, or the like places of
natural strength.

The Flanks are Pallizado'd with Horse-Pallizado's, or fortified with the
Carriages, or with some Hedges or Ditches, so that a few men may be able to
secure them from the enemies Horse or Foot from taking any advantage.

You may perceive the Battell-Flags pitched according as every Battalia is to
be ranged.

The two Forlorn Hopes are either of them consisting of 250 men, and are
advanced before the main Battle above an hundred paces; they are flanked with
100 Horse.

Likewise the main Battle consists of 2880 Foot, videlicet, in each Battalia
180 men and sixteen Battalia's.

The Battle of succor is placed twenty paces behind the main Battle; it
consists of 1040 men, there being eight several Battalia's, and each Battalia
contains 130. The space or distance betwixt each of these Battalia's, from
Flank to Flank, is twenty two paces, being large enough for two of the
Battalia's of the main Battle to retrait into. View the Figure.



There is also allowed for the impalement of the Flanks, to guard the
Pallizado's, 432 men; it being 32 paces from the Front to the Rear; and two
Pikes and two Muskets in depth, comes to no less to be placed upon both the
Flanks.

There is also allowed 120 Shot to join with the Horse, to aid them upon all
occasions, viz. on each Wing 60.

To help Gunners, and to defend the Ordnance which is placed upon such a place
of advantage, that the enemy cannot but with difficulty come at them, there is
14 men at each Plat-forme; or there may as many as you please, be taken from
the Battle of succor to guard the Ordnance, and also a quantity of Horse to
aid and assist them.

The thousand of Horse are thus disposed of; first, to Flanker the Forlorn
Hopes there are 100. Next beyond the impalements upon either Flank are three
Battles ranged: the first has 200. the second, 150. and the third, 100.

Before the main Battle there are seven field-Peeces placed, which are to
scowre the distance betwixt the two Forlorn Hopes; after they have wrought
their effect, they are to be drawn through the divisions of the main Battle,
and then placed before the Battle of succor; and when the main Battle is
retraited into the Battle of succor, then they are to give fire again, and
immediately to be drawn in the Rear of all, and there to be placed upon some
hill, so that the Battle stooping, they may shoot over their heads, to
disorder the enemy; or else the Battalia's must open suddenly, whereby the
Ordnance shall have freedom to shoot.

The Rear of this Army is defended by a large River, as by the foregoing Figure
appears.

CHAP. XX.
A description of the ninth Figure, how to frame a Battle for Stratagem,
environed with a Ditch, being very prevalent in the Plains, when the enemy
predominates in Horse.
IN this following Figure you may first observe the Ditch marked A to be six
foot broad, and three foot deep; it has on all four sides an entrance or way
to sally in or out, of twenty paces broad, marked B, and are so placed to
allure the enemy to enter them.

You may likewise observe at every Passage five Battalia's, of three hundred
men in each Battalia; there is a Piece of Ordnance placed behind every middle
Battle; when the enemy is ready to enter any of these passages, then the
middle Battle must open in the midst, dividing either half on each side of
the passage, so as the Ordnance may play full in the face of the enemy: then
the 400 Horse are to issue out upon the enemy, and to charge them in their
disorders; for the same purpose they are placed in the midst, remote from the
Foot, being divided into four Squadrons, in form of a Cross, standing ready
faced toward the entrance of the passages, being 400 in each Battalia.

The Foot are in all the Army only six thousand, each Battalia has
particularly 300 men apeece. If you have no Horse in the midst, then divide
them only into eight Troops, placing them for Wings in an even Front, or on the
Angles: in so doing, the form of the Battle will be hollow, and the Battalia's
that guard each passage will be but three apeece. The Figure of this discourse
follows in the next Page.

The ninth Figure of the Battle for Stranagems.



This may be a form of imbatteling very prevalent to secure a weak Army, that
is compelled to fight, and has no place of advantage to help them, but the
open field and their own valors to trust unto.

CHAP. XXI.
A tenth form of imbattelling an Army, used by Henry the fourth of France
against Duke Albertus of Austria, at his approach to raise the siege of Amiens.
This Army consists of 12000 Foot and 4000 Horse.
THis following Figure demonstrates unto your view nine Battalions, after this
form marshalled: first, three of these Battalions were for the right Wing;
three other for the main Battle; the other three for the left Wing.

The first three Battalions of the right Wing are each of them flanked with
Musketires containing a thousand Foot in each: before every of the said
Battalions is placed nine Files of Musketires; three in the right Angle, three
in the left, and three in the midst, before them; every File contains ten men
in depth.

The three Battalions for the main Battle are also flanked with Musketires,
having nine Files placed before them, as the former had, only these Battalions
contain as many more men as the former did, viz. two thousand in each.

The three Battalions for the left Wing are likewise imbattelled (as the former
Battles of the right Wing are) with Musketires before them; each Battalia
contains a thousand men. There are also twelve field-Peeces; upon each Wing
there are planted six; viz. three fore-right, and three Flank-wise, to annoy
the enemy both in Front and Flank.

The Horse are ranged without these, upon either Wing, somewhat oblique-wise,
to incompasse the enemy, being in number four thousand; and they are divided
into three Battalia's; the first contains five hundred, the second three
hundred, and the last two hundred.

In the Rear of the Army was the Kings Trenches strongly fortified, and guarded
with three thousand Foot to defend him from the sallies of the Town, in which
respect he needed no Seconds. View the Figure.



CHAP. XXII.
The eleventh form of imbattelling an Army, consisting of 30000 Foot, and
6000 Horse, being a most excellent strong form.
THis subsequent Figure represents unto your view a Battle formed with two
Fronts or Faces: the foremost Battle is divided into eight principal
Battalions, each Battalia containing nine hundred men (Pikes and Muskets) which
make ninety Files, and ten deep in each. In these eight foremost Battalions are
contained seven thousand and two hundred soldiers: the spaces or distances
betwixt each Battalia in the Front, is four paces.

The second Front is divided into four great Battalia's containing one thousand
and eight hundred Pikes and Muskets in each, Note, there are four od Files
placed in the two middle Battles in the Front, the^e being five od men in each
Battle, which makes these four od Files.
viz. one hundred and eighty Files, and ten deep: so that these four last
Battalia's contain seven thousand and two hundred soldiers, as the foremost
Battle did: the distance or spaces betwixt these four last Battalia's is
twenty five paces.

Likewise, the space or distance from the Front of the first Battle, unto the
Front of the Battle in the Rear, is sixty paces. In the time of fight the
General is to take his place before the Front of the middle Battle in the
Rear; it being the place of greatest safety, and most commodious for him to
view the defects, and to send his Commands about.

These Battalions are impaled upon both the Flanks with one thousand five
hundred and forty Pikes, viz. on each Flank seven hundred and seventy, they
standing one hundred and ten in Breast or Rank, and seven deep.

The Rear of the Battalia's has four thousand seven hundred and sixteen Pikes
for its impalement, they being placed but six deep in File.

Upon the outside of the Impalement you may observe placed upon either Flank or
Wing twenty four Troops of Shot in little squares; each Troop contains a
hundred men: so that in both the Wings, being forty eight Troops of Shot, and a
hundred in each Troop, amounts unto 4800.

In the Front of all is placed eighteen Troops of Shot more in way of a Forlorn
Hope; each Troop also consists of an hundred Shot, which amounts unto one
thousand and eight hundred men; these are to disband themselves, and maintain
skirmish with the enemy.

There are four hundred Shot and five hundred Pikes to guard the Ordnance.

There are also one thousand Pikes placed in each Wing, five hundred in a
Troop; these are to aid the Horse or safeguard the Shot, either in the Wings
or in the Forlorn Hope, as occasion shall be offered. Likewise there is allowed
two hundred Shot and three hundred Pikes to guard the Carriages placed in the
Rear.

Lastly, there remains two hundred forty four Pikes to be employed as
occasion shall offer, and necessity require.

Now we are to observe, that when the great Ordnance upon either side have
discharged, and that the enemy is approacht near your Troops of Shot of the
Forlorn Hope, then those Maniples of Shot which stand before the Ordnance,
placed before the Battalia's in the Front, are to divide themselves into the
void spaces upon either hand, so that the Ordnance may have free passage to
play upon the enemies Troop, and then the Shot may join together again.

The Forlorn Hope is continually to be supplied with fresh Troops of Shot from
the Flanks or Wings, and those Troops of the Forlorn Hope that have given fire,
are to retrait betwixt the Wings of the Battle, and the Troops of Horse that
are placed along by the Wings. So maintaining always the Flanks furnished, by
this means they may maintain skirmish continually with fresh men, and the
Battle never the less impaled.

But after the enemies Battle begins to approach near your own forces, then
the Forlorn Hope must withdraw themselves, and the foremost Battle must bear
the brunt.

The six field-Peeces placed amongst the Shot, after they have done their
service, are to be drawn back into the space betwixt the two Battalia's or may
be drawn into the Wings, and there may be guarded with those Troops of Shot,
where they may perform excellent Service.

But if the first main Battle should miscarry in the first encounter, so that
their Battalia's be broken by the enemy, yet there are ample spaces betwixt the
Battalia's of the second Battle to retrait into, and there to make head, and
freshly to re-charge the enemy again: betwixt each Battalia in the Rear there
must retrait two Battalia's of the Front, and upon each Flank one.

The Troops of Horse are thus disposed; upon each side there are an hundred
Horse to guard the Ordnance, which with the assistance of the Pikes and Shot,
they are to secure themselves.

Now there remains five thousand and eight hundred Horse, which are to be
divided into several Battalia's: upon each Wing are to be placed two thousand
and nine hundred, and they are again to be divided into three Battalia's at the
least. View the Figure following, being the eleventh Figure.



CHAP. XXIII.
The twelfth form of imbattelling an Army consisting of 12000 Foot and 3000
Horse, partly imitating Monsieur Bellay in his military Discipline Page 75.
THis form of imbattelling which follows in this Discourse, was chiefly
invented to deceive the enemy: for whereas it seems of narrow Front at the
first view, yet the foremost Battle being retraited within the second Battle,
and the Impalements upon each Flank, with the Forlorn Hopes being doubled one
Rank into another, makes the Front of a far larger extent: so that the enemy
having framed his Battle answerable, as he may suppose to encounter with this
form, he shall find it otherwise: for this Battle will over-Wing his, and
the Forlorn Hope being strengthened with Shot, and fortified with a competencie
of Pikes, will soon hemm in the enemies Battalia's on the Flanks, before they
be aware of it; which by the help of those Troops of Curassiers, and seconded
by the Carbines, will endanger to rout them.

The order observed in Marshalling this Battle, is in this manner; first,
there is on each Wing, before the Front of the main Battle, two Battalia's of
Horse; each consisting of 252, which makes forty two Files, being ranged six
deep; so that in the four Battles are contained 1008 Horse.

The next is the main Battle of Foot, consisting of five Divisions; which has
in each five hundred and ten Pikes and Shot; in all the five Battalia's are
contained 2550 men.

The distance betwixt each Battalia or Division is 5 paces in breadth, and they
have 51 in Rank or Breast, and 10 deep in File; the breadth of the whole Front
from side to side of either impalement (the distances being added betwixt each
Division) is 1560 paces broad.

Next are three Battalia's placed 25 paces behind the first main Battle; these
have contained in each of them 510, as the former had: so that the three
Battalia's have 1530 soldiers in them.

You may delude the enemy in making him believe your Forces are more than they
are, by causing your second Battalia's to open their Files to their open order;
and then they will seem as many men in the second Battle as is in the first.

The Rear-Battel is likewise ordered 25 paces behind the second Battle, and
that consists only of 2 Battalia's, and are placed upon the Flank, as by the
Figure you may see, having a broad space to receive the two former Battles, if
they should be constrained to retrait: these two last consist of 1020, viz, 510
soldiers in each; these two Rear-Battels may open their Files to their double
distance, to make them seem far more than they are: but when they are ready
to charge the enemy, they must fall into their order of three foot.

The Impalements of each Flank of the Battle marked with the figures of 1 and
2, consist of 5 in Breast, and 153 in depth, so that each Wing of Impalement
has 665 Pikes.

Likewise by the outside of the Pikes are the same quantity of Muskets ordered
5 in Breast, and 153 in depth, which amounts likewise to 665 Shot; it is marked
with the figure 2. This Division of Shot is to be placed 5 paces from the
Pikes: they must likewise open their Files very wide, that they may seem to
equal the Front of the Battle; these must double one within another, as the
main Battle shall retrait.

Next this impalement the Forlorn Hope is placed, along by the side of it,
marked with the figures 3 and 4; and these are to consist of Shot and Pikes as
the figures 1 and 2 did: and first, the Shot has 8 in Rank, and 153 in depth,
so that each Wing takes up 1224 Shot; the Pikes you are to suppose, are ranked
next the Shot the outside 5 paces from the Shot; they are 5 in Front or Breast,
and 153 in depth, which amounts to in each, 665: these are to dilate their
Files as the former.

Beyond the Forlorn Hope are placed 700 Curassiers, ten paces from the former,
as you may see at the figure 5. These are to order themselves in convenient
Troops down by the ^lanks of the former.

And 5 paces beyond these Curassiers are 300 Carbines, which must orderly range
themselves in convenient Troops, as at the figure 6.

In the Rear are four strong Redouts, well Pallizado'd, with field-Peeces in
them; in each several Redout there are one hundred and fifty soldiers.

The Shot belonging to the main Battle are placed before the Pikes to shelter
them, and to hide the Ordnance amongst them. When the enemy are within
distance, then those Files of Shot which stand before the Ordnance are to
divide themselves upon either hand, so that the Ordnance may suddenly give a
volley upon the enemies Troops; and when they have done their best, they are to
be drawn into the Rear of the Battle. View the Figure following.



CHAP. XXIIII.
A form of imbattelling containing 15000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, with twenty
field-Peeces, the Pikes girdled with two Ranks of Musketires round about; the
residue of the Shot are ordered in 188 Maniples.
IN this form of imbattelling you may perceive the Pikes to be drawn into
twenty four Divisions, each Division or Battalia containing three hundred
soldiers, with convenient distances betwixt them. They are first impaled, or
girdled round under the Pikes with one hundred and eighty Shot, which makes two
Ranks: these are to give fire upon their knees, if the enemies Horse should
offer to charge the Battle of Pikes: at a convenient distance beyond this
girdling, all the residue of the Shot are ranged in small Maniples, of thirty
in each. Before the Front of Pikes you see twenty two Maniples of Shot, which
are to disband themselves, and give fire upon the enemy, and are to be supplied
from those Maniples placed in the Wings.

These Maniples of Shot are thus ordered, for two reasons: For in the first
place, the enemy cannot possibly assault the body of Pikes, but these Maniples
of Shot are ready to give fire upon them: and the Pikes are so sheltered and
shadowed from the enemy, that they cannot receive any damage: for indeed, so
long as the Pikes stand firm, although the Shot should be routed, yet it
cannot be said the Field is won; for the whole strength of an Army consists in
the Pikes.

Secondly, these Maniples may very easily be drawn on a sudden into greater
Divisions, and as occasion shall be offered, may be joined with the Pikes;
and the Pikes suddenly drawn into any form the General shall conceive best
of; they being ordered in apt Divisions, with convenient distances betwixt each
Battalia for that purpose. And if so be this Battle be pitched in such an
advantageous ground that the enemies Horse may not have too much freedom to
wrong the Shot, this form, questionless, is very prevalent. Wherefore these
Shot ought to have each man his Swines-Pike at his girdle, to stick down
against the Horse: upon each corner of the Impalement is placed a Maniple of
fifty Musketires. The Horse upon the out-Wings of the Shot are ranged in three
grand Battalia's, one a good distance before the other: in the foremost is three
hundred Harquebuziers; in the second, five hundred Carbines; and in the last,
two hundred Curassiers: these upon occasion may march up together, and make one
entire Front.

The Ordnance are guarded upon each Wing with three hundred and fifty Shot,
and one hundred and fifty Pikes: These Ordnance are placed upon places of
advantage, to scowre the enemy in what manner soever he shall make his
approaches.

It would be too tedious to discourse of the sundry forms this or any other
form of Battle may be translated into: but the ingenious soldier, like that
famous General Pyrrhus, must by his ingenuity frame in his imagination all
kind of forms which may suit with the place they are to be fought in, and may
be most prevalent against the enemy he has to deal withal. But this you
must take for a Maxim, as Sr. Francis Bacon well observed (in his advancement
of Learning) that no massy body can possibly be moved without a kind of
trepidation; and it holds good in this: for it is very dangerous to move or
alter a form of Battle, not only to avoid fear, but confusion. Yet I confess
diverse Generals have done it, as Caesar cast his form of imbattelling into a
halfe-Moon: but extremity drove him unto it. The Figure hereof follows upon
the next Page.



For otherwise, if a General orders his men in one kind of form to delude
his enemy, and to cause him to order his Battle thereafter, yet he must be
sure to Metamorphise it into that form he intends, before the enemy draws to
near, least confusion follow.

To avoid tediousness, these forms before demonstrated shall suffice. In the
next Chapter following I shall further discourse of the nature of small
divisions of Shot, and of diverse circumstances belonging to them, and
afterward I shall further discourse of the nature of Battles.

CHAP. XXV.
The use of small Maniples of Shot, with a general discourse of the
light-armed.
IN the precedent descriptions of Imbattelling, (...) may perceive two or three
several forms of Battles where the S^^^t are ordered in small Troops by
themselves; wherefore although it be not ordinary, yet I shall show the good
use of them, by paralelling them with the light-armed used in former ages, what
strange conquests have been gained by them, as Historians have observed;
wherefore we must first compare the body of an Army to the body of a Man that
is compact of several parts, of which some parts are of more use than other;
some parts being able to perform their function without the help of the other
parts, and again some, except the other parts help, can do nothing to
purpose of themselves.

The armed are the strength of the Battle, and are the refuge for the rest in
extremity; wherefore our Generals in this latter age join the Shot on each
Wing of the Pikes for their safety, Aelian page 65 cap. 17. Xenoph. Cyro^. lib.
7. cap. 188.
and in this kind they may work great effects, as Elian in his Tacticks
learnedly discusses; and Xenophon says, let there be never so many
light-armed, yet dare they not stand and abide the assault of a few armed; in
which respect a place fit has been sought for their service, to secure them
from the access of the Horse, or of the enemy armed; wherefore Generals in
former ages placed them sometimes behind their Phalange of Pikes, or else in
the Wings betwixt the Horse and the armed Pikes, as these figures by me
described shows; or if they skirmished loose before the Front, and chanced to
be oppressed with the enemy, then they were to retreat into the Intervalls and
so convayed themselves behind the Phalange in safety: and as Leo reports, Leo
c. 14. sect. 105.
the securing of the light-armed in some place of strength either natural or
artificial, will be most prevalent and advantageous; as namely some strong
inclosiers being well, Hedged and Ditched, Rocks or steepie Hills, or the banks
of Rivers or the like.

How did the Prince of Wales, being to fight with the whole power of France at
Poytiers, fortify his light-armed, and safeguarded them with Hedges and
Ditches, and other Strengths; so that the French Horse finding no access to
disorder them, were overwhelmed with their storms of Shot, which those
Maniples so placed, showred upon them?

At the Battle of Agencourt there were two thousand English Shot placed in a
Meadow fenced with a deep Ditch, Henry the fifth at the Battle of Agencourt.
from whence they so galled the French, which occasioned the Victory. The
residue of the Shot had Stakes armed with iron pikes, which preserved them from
the fury of the Chivalrie, by which means they gained that famous Victory. By
this you may see, that light-armed soldiers, although they be divided from the
body of Pikes, may be very efficacious to gain a Victory.

Further, there is no enticing or training an enemy from his place of
advantage, but by small Troops of Shot, which are to make a bravado, to toule
them into some place of advantage: as Alexander did practice against the
Tryballs, who had hid themselves in Woods; He sent his light-armed from the
body of his Pikes, and trained out the Barbarians; they being shrewdly wounded
with their Shot in the Woods, threw themselves out to fall upon the Archers:
Alexander immediately commands Philotus with the Horse of upper Macedonia to
charge the enemies right Wing, upon which part they cast themselves out
farthest; and Heraclides and Sopolis with the Horse of Baeotia, and Amphipolis
the left; he having roughly charged them, put the Tryballs to flight, and
vanquished them.

Moreover, Leo cap. 14. sect. 104.
it is Leo his own advice; if the Army has light-armed men enough, (namely
Shot) let them (says he) before the Army joins, send their Shot furiously at
the enemy; How the Shot ought to be used in the time of giving Battle.
but after the fight of the armed is begun, then pay their Flanks with your
missive weapons; that at once both their Flanks may be assaulted. And indeed,
in all ages, the Shot were the first that did begin the Battle, and for the
most part, the chiefest means to gain victory at last.

Further, the nature of Shot is to wound afar off. Wherefore a General, if he
desires not to come near to join Battle, he may annoy his enemy afar off,
without endangering his own forces; Live. decad. 4. lib. 8. 1^^
as Livie makes mention of Cn. Manlius Volso, he warring against the
Gallo-Grecians that fled into the mountains, attending the Romans coming, and
there defending themselves by the advantage of the place; he prepared great
plenty of Darters, Archers, and Slingers, and leaving his Legionary soldiers
behind, led his light-armed against the enemy, that possessed certain Straights
by which his Army must of necessity pass; after a small skirmish, the
Gallo-Grecians being not sufficiently armed to defend the fury of their Shot,
the light-armed of the Romans forced the Passage, and followed them to their
Camp; the Legionary soldiers being marched unto them for their aid, they won
the Camp also.

Of how much more efficacy are our Muskets at this day to perform greater
achievements, if they be skilfully marshalled? wherefore upon many occasions,
our Shot may be dis-joyned from the armed Pikes, and placed according to the
wisdom of the General. For, as formerly I have said, so long as the body of
Pikes stands in array, and remains steadfast in good order, no victory can be
gotten against it: but if the Pikes should be dis-banded or dis-joynted from
their proper place, there is naught else but an overthrow to be expected.

Wherefore it cannot choose but be very good to place Shot before the
Battalia's of Pikes, to shelter them; as you may see the like in some of those
Battles which I have described: where the pricks stand for Musketires, and
certain field-Peeces placed amongst them to annoy the enemy. But this is best
to be done when the enemy is a good distance from you; otherwise it may be
hurtful: for when the enemy is ready to come to handy blows, then the
Battalia's of Pikes must stand and endure the showring Shot of the light-armed,
and the Shot must shelter themselves amongst the Pikes.

You may further observe the strange Conquests which have been achieved by
certain Maniples of Shot which have been employed against the body of the
Pikes, as appears by the example of the Egyptians in Crassus his Battle; who
after the defait of part of his Army, Xenoph. Cyro ^^. 7. 178.
yet he would not yield to King Cyrus, although in all likelihood he had got
the victory: wherefore Cyrus was first constrained to charge the Rear of their
Battalia's of Pikes with his Horse, and being not able to break them, he had no
way to perfect his Conquest, but by drawing his light-armed or Shot, to direct
their Volleys at them; the Egyptians being wounded, and many soldiers lost,
they were constrained to yield themselves to the mercy of the enemy. By this
you see that Maniples of Shot are very prevalent.

But it may be objected, that light-armed (as the Shot) of themselves are not
able to repulse the Horse, but are subject to their fury, unless they be
strengthened with Pikes, or have some convenient place of retrait, for their
refuge and safety; as by the example of Crassus in Parthia, Plutarch in Crasso.
how the light-armed were beaten in by the Parthian Horse, and through their
discomfiture the Battalias of Pikes were likewise disheartened. And likewise
Antonies retrait out of Persia; his light-armed were constrained to shroud
themselves from the Persian Horse within the Phalange of the armed.

This Objection is true and undeniable; for the Shot of themselves are too weak
for to resist the Horse, unless the wisdom of the General place them in such
places of advantage in which they might secure themselves; or as in former
times they did use to line their Horse-Troops with Shot, and then they wrought
wonders: for it is impossible the enemies Horse being so charged, Hir^ius de
Be^^ Afr^^.
should resist both: as an Historian reports of Caesar, that he having but a
small number of Horse, and his Foot-Troops as few, was set upon by his enemy,
who had lined his Horse-Troops with light-armed Numidians: when the soldiers
of Caesar advanced forwards to charge them, the enemies Horse galloped away,
and the Foot that lined them stood fast, and gave their Volleyes at them,
until their Horse, with a full Career, returned to their rescue: this kind of
fight did much perplex Caesar, and would have confounded him, had he not
retraited to the next hills from the fury of the enemies Horse.

Certainly there is no absolute way to secure the body of Pikes, but by
impaling them with a quantity of Shot: for whereas in former ages they used
Lances, and then the Pikes could make their parties good with them. But in
these our days, Pistols, Carbines, and Harquebuzes being in use, the
Horse-Troops may advance up to the Pikes, and discharge upon them, and so fall
off again in safety, were it not for the placing of Musketires about them.

It may be further objected, that the light-armed are not able to grapple with
the armed Pikes, but that they will soon come within their Shot, and so
confound them having spent their breath and powder.

To this I answer, There is no fear of any damage the Pikes can do to the
Shot of themselves, without the aid of Horse; because the light-armed are
nimble and quick, and seeking always advantage by changing of ground, whereby
they cannot possibly be forced by the armed Foot, they being wearied and laden
with their heavy Corslets and Pikes: neither can they make any great speed to
come up to handie-blowes with the Shot, but they must run themselves into ruin
by disorder. Wherefore the Shot need fear nothing but the Horse to trouble
them. And by the way, it is to be supposed, the Horse are to be employed
against their adversaries Troops, and shall not be at all turns at freedom to
attend the excursions and dis-bandings of the Shot, but that the Shot will find
time and fitting opportunity to work their effects, either against the Foot or
Horse of their enemies, unless their own Troops serve them as Pompies did at
the Battle of Pharsalia, Lucans Pharsalia.
who fled before they received a charge from Caesar's Troops.

I may well compare a pitched Battle to a game at Irish; each Gamester must
have a special eye, not only of his own, but of the adverse Tables, how he
disposes his men, what hits may be given, and how to bring home your own men
in safety; and if a fore game cannot possibly be attained, then the wise
Gamesters seek by policy to disband their men so that they may be hit, which
in the winding up many times turns the wheel of Fortune, so that he that had
lost, in all likelihood, has now gained an after-game beyond relief: for as
in this game there are two principal things which attend the winner, viz.
Cunning in handling his Dice, and Judgment in placing his men: so it is in a
well fought Battle to atchieve the victory. For I must compare Shot to the
Dice, which by their cunning and quick discharge, and the multiplicitie of
volleys that one side gives more than the other, is for the most part a
principal cause of victory. Wherefore, where most Shot are, or may be brought
to fight, there is the most likelihood of success.

What wonderful effects has Shot wrought by discovering of suspected places,
and by laying of Ambushcadoes? there being two kinds of Ambushments; as first,
those that are cunningly laid to endammage the enemies Battle in time of
fight, which are to be compounded both of Pikes and Shot, and many times Horse
are joined with them. These have fallen upon the Flanks or Rear of the enemies
Troops, and have much dismayed them: Or such Ambushes as are laid in Woods,
Mountains, Forests, Rocks, Banks of Rivers, Caves, hollow Pits, Hills, deep
Ways, and the like; these are usually either Muskets or Firelocks, and are
fittest for that service; because their quickness and expedition gives them
advantage to assail their enemies, although the ground be never so unequal.

And lastly, for the stopping guarding, or securing any Passage which the enemy
may take for his advantage, if it be of any far distance from the Army, there
are none so fit as the light-armed (unless you have some Troops of Dragones)
for they may soon travel a long way riding behind the Horsemen, which most
usually are sent with them for their succor: these may with far more speed and
ease be conveyed than the Pikes, in regard their Arms are more cumbersome, and
cannot but make great noise by their clattering, whereby the design may be
discovered.

Wherefore let us conclude, that Shot are the principal members (as the arms
are to the body) of an Army, if they be wisely and advantagiously placed and
made use of.

And to conclude this Chapter with the advice of Monsieur la Noue: those
Battles (says he) that dare stand the third charge of the enemy, La No^e Page
380.
they shall never need to fear the rest; for he that first flies is surest to
perish; for then every cowardly Curre will run after, and worrye a whole flock
of Sheep, which so long as they face him, and keep their standings, dares do
naught but bark at them. And as formerly I have said, that at the famous
Battle of Dreux a Battalia of valiant Switzers, which stood to their tackling,
after all the rest of their Army was routed, taking their opportunity, charged
their enemy, and gained the victory. And thus much concerning this subject, of
the use and commodity of Maniples of Shot: the next Chapter shall more largely
treat of all kinds of Battles, with such observations as the famous Generals in
former ages observed as most advantageous.

CHAP. XXVI.
Diverse and several Observations of the ancient Grecians in framing of
Battles, with several uses and circumstances belonging to them: as also the
order and rules, by going paces to know any seat or piece of ground, how to
imbattell either Horse or Foot thereon according to the proportion thereof.
I Having formerly treated of diverse things considerable, both before and after
Battle, and having described both by Word and Figure, several Forms: In this
Chapter I intend to discourse more fully of the Nature of framing of Battles,
with several uses and circumstances belonging unto them. And by the way, I
shall touch such kind of Battles as the Ancients did frame for advantage to
oppose one the other. And although (in this later age) experience has found
out stranger weapons than former ages were acquainted with, as the Musket and
great Ordnance, and we have rejected the ancient Bows and Bills, whose form
to imbattell them, was far different from ours; yet we must retain their
policy in distinguishing which form of Battle is most prevalent to oppose any
kind of Figure that shall be by the enemy marshalled against us.

Wherefore, first, take special observation, that there is no kind of
imbattelling, but upon some special occasion, may be suddenly reduced and
framed, into another form; and so happily from one form into diverse. Now the
learned General is not to seek his principal skill when he should make use
of it: and (as before I have said) if I should discourse of these several
ways of reducing one form into another, it would deserve a Treatise by it
self. Wherefore let us be content to be as brief as the subject shall permit,
in discoursing of the advantages one kind of form of Imbattelling may have of
another.

Now both reason and experience tells us, that if a Battle be so framed that it
may over-Front the enemies, Page 149. cap. 50.
there is great advantage in it, as Aelian in his Tacticks does plainly show:
The over-Fronting Battle is termed by the Grecians, Hyperphalanges.
and this may be performed two ways especially: as first, if the breadth of
the foremost or main Battle extends its Wings wider than the enemies; then it
is easy either for the body of the main Battle to retrait orderly, and the
two Wings to stand firm, whereby the enemy may be intrapt unawares: or
otherwise, the Wings advancing forward; and this likewise may be two ways
performed: either by having the outmost Maniples of the Wings double, the depth
in File to the Body, which being advanced forwards toward the Flanks of the
enemy, there will be ten Ranks before the Body, which may charge the enemy
upon the Flanks: or else being of an even depth with the Body, the File-leader
of the outmost File of each Wing is to advance a distance before the
File-leader of the second File, and so the second before third, and the like of
the rest of the Files inwards, toward the Body of the Battle, which causes
them to stand in apt form to charge the enemies Flanks. So that reason shows,
the charging an enemy in Front and Flank is ods, two to one.

A second ods the Grecians found out, The over-Winging Battle is termed of the
Grecians, Hyperkerasis.
by framing their Battle called Hyperkerasis, and this only differs from the
former, in that they advance forwards only but one Wing, which charge the
enemy upon the Flank; and this is thus performed in a double respect, either
because there is a want of men to extend the Front of the Battle in such
breadth, as that they may over-Front them on both the Wings; or happily the
situation will not permit them. But this, questionless, is a great advantage,
and ought not to be neglected, if it possibly may be put in execution. These
two are the only forms for advantage against a Battle merely of one Front.

A third ods the Grecians found out; The Battle called (...)
wherefore they invented a Battle accordingly, and termed it the Cyrte, it
being a unequal Battle: the intent of it was to delude the enemy: for it made a
semblance of small Forces, by reason of the convexitie of the Figure, it being
a Maxim in Philosophy, that all round things seem far less than they are in
compass; but being extended in length, they prove as much more as they seemed
to be; because the rotunditie of the forepart obscureth the exterior from the
eye. And indeed it is the perfection of skill in a General, to have so much
art in imbattelling, that he shall make show but of few Forces, but bring as
many more hands to fight.

A fourth ods the Grecians found out, The Battle termed Epicampios.
which was a form of imbattelling they termed Epicampios; and this was to
oppose the former deluding form, it being a figure most apt to oppose the
same: for as the former was a unequal Battle, this was a concave; and no less
deception to the eye, in regard the circumduction of the Front is like an
embowing; for this Figure opening it self, will easily receive the orball form
of the other into its concavitie; or otherwise dilating it self on either
Wing, the Front of it will equallize the former Battle in all respects. And
this latter they made use of to entrap the Battle called the Horsemans Rhombe;
for soon they would wrap them into their void space of their Front, as they
charged them, and so galling them upon all sides, soon vanquish them.

A fifth advantage they found out, The Battle called Amphistomus.
to oppose their enemy that charged them in the Front and Rear at once.
Wherefore they framed their Battle sixteen deep in File: so that the half
Files to the Rear did but face about, and they were ready to entertain the
enemy both ways at their first approach; and this they termed the Phalange
Amphistomus, having respect to the two Fronts: this kind of form was
principally to entertain the charge of Horse.

A sixth form of imbattelling they invented, which they termed Antistomus, and
this did not much differ from the former; The Battle called Antistomus.
only this receives the charge upon either Flank, and the former upon the Front
and Rear.

A seventh form of imbattelling they invented, The Battle termed Diphalange
Antistomus.
very advantageous to be opposed against the Horse-Battell, called the Wedge,
and this they termed Diphalange Antistomus. The manner of the Battle called
the Horsemans Wedge, was to charge the Foot in the Front with such fury, that
they would pierce and enter the most strong resistance: for the prevention
thereof, they placed the ablest men in their middlemost Files; so that when the
Horse charged them, each Flank divided it self by the middlemost File, faceing
each toward other, and so made a lane for those Horses to pass betwixt them
without any damage to themselves; yet they galled the Horse on both sides in
their violent passage; the Foot standing on either side like two walls faceing
inwards, gave them a fruitless passage: for otherwise a square Battle of
Pikes were not able to resist the fury of this wedge-Battell.

The eighth form of imbattelling which they invented, The Battle termed
Diaphalange Peristomus.
was of great advantage to be opposed against the square Battle; and this they
termed Diaphalange peristomus: the manner of it was thus. The two Wings opened
themselves like a pair of Compasses, or otherwise dividing themselves into
such a sufficient distance, as they might entrap and enclose the square Battle
betwixt them. The square form of Battle fearing to be enclosed betwixt them,
transform themselves into two marching Phalanges; and being thus divided, they
direct one against the right, the other against the left Wing of the enemy.

Likewise, if they did expect a charge upon both their Flanks, then they wisely
provided for it; for they divided their Troops into two Phalanges, one
sequenting the other; the first had all the Leaders in a right hand deduction,
and the following Phalange in a left hand deduction: one having their
Commanders in the right Flank, and the other in the left Flank: this form of
imbattelling they termed Heterostomos: The Battle called Heterostomos, used
upon a March.
that is when the Phalange proceeds in a Wing, not by File but by Rank. These
kind of Phalanges may march in a double, treble, or quadruple side, according
to the place and part suspected, where the enemy should fall on. These
deductions or Paragogies, if they begin the fight in Flank, do make their
Front or length double to their depth: this last they invented to teach their
soldiers to receive heedfully the charge on all parts; and it was used most
upon a March: for accordingly they demeaned themselves as they understood the
enemies manner of approaching: for if the enemy marched his Army in a right
deduction, viz. when the March extends it self out into a Wing, having the
depth much exceeding the length; Then they invented another form of Battle
which was advantageous to be opposed against the former; The Battle called
Coelembolos, or hollow Wedge.
and they termed it Coelembolos or hollow wedge-Battell; and their framing of
it was after this manner: viz. when the Antistomos Diphalange or double
Phalange dis-joyneth and divides the Wings in the Front; the Rear being still
closed in manner of the letter V, the advantage is this; when the enemy
approaches with his right induction and charge at the midst of the aforesaid
Battle, it suddenly opens its Front in the midst as before is demonstrated,
and frustrates the charge of the enemies Front, clasping them in, and
circumventing the flanks of the enemies right induction.

Then to prevent this great advantage; The Battle termed Triphalange.
they devised another form of Imbattelling which should over-march this; and
they termed it a Triphalange, or treble Phalange. The manner of framing it was
thus; they divided their forces into three Phalanges; two of them marching up
in an even Front: But having both in their Front and Rear as large a division
betwixt them as the Front of the Battle Coelembolos or hollow wedge-Battell;
these two Phalanges charge the two Wings of the Coelembolos, and the third
Phalange stands with its Front even at the Rear of the two former Phalanges,
ready to advance up in the space betwixt them; this last waits only for a
time of advantage to give an onset, and they termed it the forbearing Phalange;
this questionless, has much advantage of the former.

Lastly they invented a form of imbattelling called Phalagiophalange, The
Battle called of the Greeks Phalagiophalange.
which they made use of to oppose the Horse-Battell termed Hetromekes, or the
Hearse, of Horse; this Herse-Battell had the depth double to the length or
breadth, and was profitable in many respects: for seeming to carry so few in so
small a breadth, it deceives the enemy; and it did easily break the force of
the Foot, with the thickness and strength of the imbattelling; and it might be
led through straight passages without perceiving.

The Foot-Battell before named which was to encounter with this Horse-Battell,
did extend its Front very wide, and was very slender in depth; So that when the
Horse did charge them, they could do no great damage if they brake through
the midst of them: for there could nothing be lost but a little of the depth;
the fury of the Horse could not be resisted by the multitude of Foot; but
running through the midst of them, they spoiled some few men, and immediately
were carried through them into the open field: and for this cause was the
length much exceeding the depth. And now of latter days our modern Commanders
have thought square forms of Battalia's to be fittest, and most proper and
easy to be reduced into any other form.

These examples of the Grecian Generals shall suffice to give a taste and light
to the ingenious soldier how he may best contrive any form of imbattelling
into what other form he pleases that may seem advantageous to entrap an
enemy: and indeed, this ought to be the study of all Generals and
Commanders, to have at their fingers ends a form of imbattelling that shall
not only oppose, but be peculiar for advantage against any form of Battle
the enemy shall be able to marshall. In the next Chapter I shall speak of such
Orders and Rules which are to be used in pacing of ground, whereby may be known
how to imbattell an Army thereupon, be they either Horse or Foot.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Order and Rules which are to be observed by going paces to know any state
or piece of ground how to imbattell either Horse or Foot thereon, according to
the proportion thereof.
NOW for conclusion of this tedious Work which I have taken in hand to finish;
There now only remains to speak of the Orders and Rules which are to be used
by a Commander in pacing of ground, whereby may be known how to imbattell his
men thereupon, whether they be Horse or Foot, according to the proportion of
the same, which by Arithmeticall Rules are to be written.

Wherefore it is necessary that the skillful Commander do acquaint himself
with pacing the measure called the Geometrical pace; it contains five foot of
length, and every foot is divided into twelve inches: this being often
practiced by ordinary going paces, whereby may be known how many steps make
this pace after five foot to it: This being observed, it will prove very easy
to know how many men may be imbattelled upon such a quantity of ground, or
what quantity of Horse, or both, it being presupposed, they are not ignorant
what due proportions and order is to be allowed to the said Men and Horse.
Wherefore it being usual to allow to every Pike-man standing in form of
Battle, three foot of ground in breadth, and seven foot of ground in depth;
that is to say, three foot before him, three foot for behind him, and one foot
of ground for his own station.

Likewise for every Horse there is to be allowed five foot for breadth, ten
foot for depth.

Wherefore for examples sake, let us further suppose that we are constrained
to make choice of a piece of ground to imbattell our Army upon, containing in
breadth four hundred and eight going paces, which after the rate of two going
paces to one Geometrical pace (containing five foot) do make two hundred and
four paces Geometrical.

Likewise this piece of ground contains in depth one hundred seventy eight
going paces, which makes eighty nine Geometrical paces, as by this subsequent
Figure plainly appears.



Now to know how many Battalia's may be placed a breast or breadth in the
foremost main Battle, and how many in the Battle of succor, and how many in
the Rear-Battell.

Next we are to consider the distances or spaces which are to be left betwixt
each Battalia as they stand in Breast, and also the distances or spaces of
ground betwixt the Rear of the main Battle and the Front of the Battle of
succor, and also betwixt the Rear of the Battle of succor, and the Front of
the Rear-Battell.

Then next is to be considered what quantity of men is sufficient to impale
this piece of ground for the defense of the Foot from the enemies Horse.

Lastly, there is to be considered what quantity of Horse may conveniently be
ranged upon the Flanks or Wings of this Battle. Wherefore observe, the
distance betwixt the Battalia's is ten foot; the ground each soldier occupies
in Breast is three foot, and in depth seven foot: The distance betwixt the Rear
of the main Battle and the Front of the second Battle is at least twenty
paces. The distance betwixt the Flanks of the Foot-Battell and the Horse is
twenty paces at the least.

The ground each Horse occupies in Rank or Breast is five foot, and in depth ten
foot.

Now having past the ground as aforesaid, and as this precedent Figure
demonstrates; you are in the next place to bring those paces into feet: which
you may do by multiplying the said paces by 5, and the product is 1020; then
this 1020 feet being divided by 3 (which is the just distance each soldier
takes for his station in Rank or Breast) the product is 340 men in Rank, for the
Front of the main Battle.

The ground being likewise eighty nine paces deep, there may be ranged three
Battles one behind another, viz. the main Battle, and twenty paces behind that
the Battle of succor is to be placed; and twenty paces behind the Battle of
succor the Rear-Battell is to be placed: and lastly there is seven paces
allowed for the Carriages to be placed in.

The Battles are ranged but ten men in depth: Wherefore observe that you are to
multiply 10 by 7 (for so many feet is allowed to each soldier to occupy his
Arms in) the product is 70 feet: this 70 being again divided by 5 (for so many
feet go to a Geometrical pace) the quotient will be 14 paces; and so many
paces ten men occupy in depth or File.

Next you must observe the Battle of succor is ranged twenty paces behind the
former, and is likewise ten deep in File, which takes up as much ground as the
former did: the Rear-Battell likewise is twenty paces behind the second
Battle, and takes up as much ground as the former did in depth. And lastly,
the seven paces of ground for the placing of the Carriages, being added to the
former distances, make just eighty nine paces, which is the depth of the field.

Now for the Impaling of this Battle both in Flanks and Rear, we are first to
consider the quantity of paces the Flanks are in depth, which we find to be
eighty nine; this being multiplied by 5, the product will be 445 feet; this
being divided by 3, the quotient will be 148 and a little odd; this will
impale one Rank down the side of the Flank of this Battle.

And if you would have the impalement to consist of seven Ranks, then multiply
the 148 by 7, and the product will be 1036: so many men must be employed to
impale one of the Flanks seven deep: then again multiply 1036 by 2, and there
will arise 2072 men, the just number to impale both the Flanks with seven Ranks
of Pikes and Shot.

The Rear of this Battle is 143 paces in breadth from the inmost Flanks of
each impalement of the Wings: this 143 must be brought into feet by multiplying
it by 5, which amounts to 715 feet; this 715 being likewise divided by the
quantity of ground each soldier takes in Breast or Rank, being 3 foot, the
quotient is 238 and one odd; this being multiplied again by 7 (for so many
Ranks they must be in depth) the quotient will be (adding the 7 odd men)
1673: For so many men the Rear will take up to impale it with seven Ranks.

Now in regard it is at the Generals pleasure to order his form of
imbattelling after what manner he sees best: therefore to show you a more plain
example of this former discourse, let us suppose our strength of Foot to be
8000 Pikes and Shot, and 300 Horse, and that the space of ground before
specified, is the field wherein I must order this Battle. And seeing it is the
Generals pleasure to divide the main Battle (in regard of the straightness of
the ground) into three grand Battalia's, distinguished by the name of the right
Wing, the Battle, and the left Wing: or Van, Battle, and Rear-ward.

These grand Battalia's are to be divided into lesser Battalia's or Squadrons;
as namely, the right Wing into two Squadrons, the Battle into four, and the
left Wing into two; for the straightness of ground will not admit of more.

The distances betwixt these Battalia's or Squadrons must be understood; as
namely, betwixt the two Squadrons of either Wing is two paces distance, for the
Shot to fall off into the Rear.

The distance likewise betwixt the two Wings, and the Battle must be wider
than the former, to distinguish betwixt them, which you may suppose to be three
paces. The distance likewise betwixt the four Squadrons that the Battle is
composed of, has the same distance of two paces betwixt each, for the Shot to
fall off into the Rear, as the Wings had.

Betwixt the outmost File of each Wing, and the Impalement is likewise two
paces; in both, four. Also the ground which the Impalement occupies being seven
Ranks, is nine paces and odd feet; so that the ground which both the
Impalements on each side takes up, comes to nineteen paces, adding thereto the
odd feet.

Betwixt the Impalement and the Horse upon the right Wing, is ten paces: also
the distance betwixt the left Wing and the Horse, is likewise ten paces.

The Space of ground the Horse takes up for their station, they being ranged
but ten in Rank or Breast, is ten paces, allowing five foot for every Horse:
upon both Flanks they take up twenty paces; and the space for their falling
off, when they have discharged, must be one pace at least, on both the Wings
two paces.

Now these distances being accounted and summed up together, we may presently
see how many soldiers may be placed in Rank or Breast in the foremost main
Battle; the ground being but 204 paces broad. You having taken a survey of the
distances betwixt each Squadron or Battalia, with the ground the Impalement of
Shot and Pikes takes up, and the space between the Impalement and the Horse,
with the ground the Horse takes up for their stations; you shall find it to be
81 paces, (being the nearest distances that possibly can be allowed, in regard
of the narrowness of the ground). Now if you deduct 81 paces from 204, (which
is the breadth of the ground) there will remain 123 paces, for to place their
foremost main Battle in.

These 123 paces being brought into feet by multiplying them by 5; the product
will be 615. This again being divided by 3, (being the space each soldier
takes to use his Arms in) the quotient shows that 205 men may stand in Rank
or Breast in the foremost main Battle. This 205 being also multiplied by 10 (for
so many men each File must have in depth) the product shows that the main
Battle must consist of 2050 soldiers. These 2050 soldiers being divided by
8, (being the number of Battalia's in the main Battle) the quotient does show
there is 256 in each Battalia; only two odd men are to be joined with 30
Soldiers more, and to be distributed amongst the 8 Battalia's, viz. four men
in each Battalia, to make the Files even, so that then there will be in each
Battalia 260 soldiers, as the Figure demonstrates.

Now it is to be supposed that there is depth enough in this piece of ground to
imbattell two such Battles more, one in the Rear of another, and may be
allowed 20 paces in distance betwixt each Battle; and 7 paces in depth
besides, for the Carriages to be placed in, as I shall show you.

Wherefore observe, the foremost Battle has ten men deep in File: this 10 must
be multiplied by 7 (the space of ground each soldier occupyeth with his
weapons before and behind him) and the product amounts to 70 foot; the two next
Battles being of the same depth in file, takes up 210 foot of ground. To bring
this into paces, you must divide the 210 by 5, (for so many foot goes to a
pace) and the quotient will show you it to be 42 paces, these three Battles
take up in depth: then to this 42 paces you must add the distance of 40 paces,
which the two Battles toward the Rear are allowed them between the Rear of one
Battle and the Front of the other, and 7 paces for the Carriage to be placed
in, and you shall find the 89 paces in depth of ground just taken up.

In the next place you may observe, that the second Battle (which is called
the Battle of succor, and is placed 20 paces behind the foremost or main
Battle) is divided into three grand Battalia's having in each Battalia 340
men, viz. in all three 1020: and are so placed with convenient distances for
the foremost Battalia's to retrait between them; it being supposed that many of
them will be slain before they be driven to make a retrait, whereby those
distances will easily contain them.

In the Rear Battle there is only 800 which are divided into two grand
Battalia's of 400 in each, with a large space for the former Battles to retrait
into.

The Impalements, as before is showed, has in the Rear 1633, and upon each
Flank 1036; viz. in both Flanks 2072. All these being summed up together, you
shall find 7605 men placed in all the Battalia's with the Impalement.

Lastly, there remains 400 wanting five men, which may be employed to line the
Horse, or to surprise the enemies Ordnance, or for what other purposes the
General shall think fit. Thus you see 8000 men marshalled in Battalia upon
this piece of ground.

The Horse are 300, divided into six Troops; viz. upon each Flank three Troops,
and in each Troop 50 Horse; as before is showed.

If you desire to know how many Horse may be ranged a Breast in Battalia upon
this piece of ground; by the precedent Rule, you cannot err. And for
explaining what has been discoursed of, I hold it not amiss to exemplify it
by Figure, as follows.



A Table, demonstrating the quantity of paces of Ground which any number of
Soldiers, be they Foot or Horse, shall occupy for their stations, in Rank or
Breast; whereby may be known how many men or Horse may be placed in single Rank
or length, in the foremost Battle. And being in File 10 deep, the just number
of them is likewise described; or the Horse 6 deep in File, the true number of
them is to be known as follows.
Paces Geometrical. The Soldiers standing in Breast or Rank. 10 deep in File.
The number of Soldiers so placed. The Horse standing in Breast or Rank. Horse 6
deep in File. The number of Horse so placed. The use of this Table is described
in the latter end of it.
3 5 10 50 3 6 18 6 10 10 100 6 6 36 9 15 10 150 9 6 54 12 20 10 200 12 6 72 15
25 10 250 15 6 90 18 30 10 300 18 6 108 21 35 10 350 21 6 126 24 40 10 400 24 6
144 27 45 10 450 27 6 162 30 50 10 500 30 6 180 33 55 10 550 33 6 198 36 60 10
600 36 6 216 39 65 10 650 39 6 234 42 70 10 700 42 6 252 45 75 10 750 45 6 270
48 80 10 800 48 6 288 51 85 10 850 51 6 306 54 90 10 900 54 6 324 57 95 10 950
57 6 342 60 100 10 1000 60 6 360 63 105 10 1050 63 6 378 66 110 10 1100 66 6
396 69 115 10 1150 69 6 414 72 120 10 1200 72 6 432 75 125 10 1250 75 6 450 78
130 10 1300 78 6 468 81 135 10 1350 81 6 486 84 140 10 1400 84 6 504 87 145 10
1450 87 6 522 90 150 10 1500 90 6 540 93 155 10 1550 93 6 558 96 160 10 1600 96
6 576 99 165 10 1650 99 6 594 102 170 10 1700 102 6 612 105 175 10 1750 105 6
630 108 180 10 1800 108 6 648 111 185 10 1850 111 6 666 114 190 10 1900 114 6
684 117 195 10 1950 117 6 702 120 200 10 20^0 120 6 720 123 205 10 205^ 123 6
738 126 210 10 2100 126 6 756 129 215 10 215^ 129 6 774 132 220 10 2200 13^ 6
792 135 225 10 2250 135 6 810 138 230 10 2300 138 6 828 141 235 10 2350 141 6
846 144 240 10 2400 144 6 864 147 245 10 2450 147 6 882 150 250 10 2500 150 6
900 153 255 10 2550 153 6 918 156 260 10 2600 156 6 936 159 265 10 2650 159 6
954 162 270 10 2700 162 6 972 165 275 10 2750 165 6 99^ 168 280 10 2800 168 6
1008 171 285 10 285^ 171 6 1024 174 290 10 2900 174 6 1042 177 295 10 2950 177
6 1060 180 300 10 3000 180 6 1078 183 305 10 3050 183 6 1096 186 310 10 3100
186 6 1114 189 315 10 3150 189 6 1132 192 320 10 32^0 192 6 1150 195 325 10
3^50 195 6 1168 198 330 10 3300 198 6 1186 201 335 10 3350 201 6 1204 204 340
10 3400 204 6 1222 ^^^ 345 10 3450 207 6 1242 21^ 350 10 3500 210 6 1260 21^
355 10 355^ 213 6 1278 216 360 10 3^^0 216 6 1296 219 365 10 3650 219 6 1314
222 370 10 3700 222 6 1332 225 375 10 3750 225 6 1350 228 380 10 3800 228 6
1368 231 385 10 3850 231 6 1386 2^4 390 10 3900 234 6 ^404 237 395 10 3950 237
6 1422 240 400 10 4000 240 6 1440 243 405 10 4050 243 6 1458 246 410 10 4100
246 6 1476 249 415 10 4150 249 6 1494 252 420 10 4200 252 6 1512 255 425 10
4250 255 6 1530 258 430 10 4300 258 6 1548 261 435 10 4350 261 6 1566 264 440
10 4400 264 6 1584 267 445 10 4450 267 6 1602 270 450 10 4500 270 6 1620 273
455 10 4550 273 6 16^8 276 460 10 4600 276 6 1656 279 465 10 4650 279 6 1674
282 470 10 4700 282 6 1692 285 475 10 4750 285 6 1710 288 480 10 4800 288 6
1728 291 485 10 4850 291 6 1746 294 490 10 4900 294 6 1764 297 495 10 4950 297
6 1782 300 500 10 5000 300 6 1800 303 505 10 5050 303 6 1818 306 510 10 5100
306 6 1830 309 515 10 5150 309 6 1854 312 520 10 5200 312 6 1872 315 525 10
5250 315 6 1890 318 530 10 5300 318 6 1908 321 535 10 5350 321 6 1926 324 540
10 5400 324 6 1944 327 545 10 5450 327 6 1962 330 550 10 5500 330 6 1980 333
555 10 5550 333 6 1998 336 560 10 5600 336 6 2016 339 565 10 5650 339 6 2034
342 570 10 5700 342 6 2052 345 575 10 5750 345 6 2070 348 580 10 5800 348 6
2088 351 585 10 5850 351 6 2106 354 590 10 59^0 354 6 212^ 357 595 10 5950 357
6 2142 360 600 10 6000 360 6 2160 363 605 10 6050 363 6 2178 366 610 10 6100
366 6 2196 369 615 10 6150 369 6 221^ 372 620 10 6200 372 6 2232 375 625 10
6250 375 6 2250 378 630 10 6300 378 6 2268 381 635 10 6350 381 6 2286 384 640
10 6400 384 6 2304 387 645 10 6450 387 6 2322 390 650 10 6500 390 6 2340 393
655 10 6550 393 6 2358 396 660 10 6600 396 6 2376 399 665 10 6650 399 6 2394
402 670 10 6700 402 6 2412 405 675 10 6750 405 6 2430 408 680 10 6800 408 6
2448 411 685 10 6850 411 6 2466 414 690 10 6900 414 6 2484 417 695 10 6950 417
6 2502 420 700 10 7000 420 6 2520 423 705 10 7050 423 6 2538 426 710 10 7100
426 6 2556 429 715 10 7150 429 6 2574 432 720 10 7200 432 6 2592 435 725 10
7250 435 6 2610 438 730 10 7300 438 6 2628 441 735 10 7350 441 6 2646 444 740
10 7400 444 6 2664 447 745 10 7450 447 6 2682 450 750 10 7500 450 6 2700 453
755 10 7550 453 6 2718 456 760 10 7600 456 6 2736 459 765 10 7650 459 6 2754
462 770 10 7700 462 6 2772 465 775 10 7750 465 6 2790 468 780 10 7800 468 6
2808 471 785 10 7850 471 6 2826 474 790 10 7900 474 6 2844 477 795 10 7950 477
6 2862 480 800 10 8000 480 6 2880 483 805 10 8050 483 6 2898 486 810 10 8100
486 6 2916 489 815 10 8150 489 6 2934 492 820 10 8200 492 6 2952 495 825 10
8250 495 6 2970 498 830 10 8300 498 6 2988 501 835 10 8350 501 6 3006 504 840
10 8400 504 6 3024 507 845 10 8450 507 6 3042 510 850 10 8500 510 6 3060 513
855 10 8550 513 6 3078 516 860 10 8600 516 6 3096 519 865 10 8650 519 6 3114
522 870 10 8700 522 6 3132 525 875 10 8750 525 6 3150 528 880 10 9800 528 6
5168 531 885 10 9850 531 6 3186 534 890 10 8900 534 6 3204 537 895 10 8950 537
6 3222 540 900 10 9000 540 6 3240 543 905 10 9050 543 6 3258 546 910 10 9100
546 6 3276 549 915 10 9150 549 6 3294 552 920 10 9200 552 6 3312 555 925 10
9250 555 6 3330 558 930 10 9300 558 6 3348 561 935 10 9350 561 6 3366 564 940
10 9400 564 6 3384 567 945 10 9450 567 6 3402 570 950 10 9500 570 6 3420 573
955 10 9550 573 6 3438 576 960 10 9600 576 6 3456 579 965 10 9650 579 6 3474
582 970 10 9700 582 6 3492 585 975 10 9750 585 6 3510 588 980 10 9800 588 6
3528 591 985 10 9850 591 6 3546 594 990 10 9900 594 6 3564 597 995 10 9950 597
6 3582 600 1000 10 10000 600 6 3600 603 1005 10 10050 603 6 3618 606 1010 10
10100 606 6 3636 609 1015 10 10150 609 6 3654 612 1020 10 10200 612 6 3672 615
1025 10 10250 615 6 3690 618 1030 10 10300 618 6 3708 621 1035 10 10350 621 6
3726 624 1040 10 10400 624 6 3744 627 1045 10 10450 627 6 3762 630 1050 10
10500 630 6 3780 633 1055 10 10550 633 6 3798 636 1060 10 10600 636 6 3816 639
1065 10 10650 639 6 3834 642 1070 10 10700 642 6 3852 645 1075 10 10750 645 6
3870 648 1080 10 10800 648 6 3888 651 1085 10 10850 651 6 3906 654 1090 10
10900 654 6 392^ 657 1095 10 10950 657 6 3942 660 1100 10 11000 660 6 3960 663
1105 10 11050 663 6 3978 666 1110 10 11100 666 6 3996 669 1115 10 11150 669 6
4014 672 1120 10 11200 672 6 40^^ 675 1125 10 11250 675 6 4050 678 1130 10
11300 678 6 4068 681 1135 10 11350 681 6 4086 684 1140 10 11400 684 6 4104 687
1145 10 11450 687 6 4122 690 1150 10 11500 690 6 4140 693 1155 10 11550 693 6
4158 696 1160 10 11600 696 6 4176 699 1165 10 11650 699 6 4194 702 1170 10
11700 702 6 4212 705 1175 10 11750 705 6 4230 708 1180 10 11800 708 6 4248 711
1185 10 11850 711 6 4266 714 1190 10 11900 714 6 4284 717 1195 10 11950 717 6
4302 720 1200 10 12000 720 6 4320 723 1205 10 12050 723 6 4338 726 1210 10
12100 726 6 4356 729 1215 10 12150 729 6 4374 732 1220 10 12200 732 6 4392 735
1225 10 12250 735 6 4410 738 1230 10 12300 738 6 4428 741 1235 10 12350 741 6
4446 744 1240 10 12400 744 6 4464 747 1245 10 12450 747 6 4482 750 1250 10
12500 750 6 4500 753 1255 10 12550 753 6 4518 756 1260 10 12600 756 6 4536 759
1265 10 12650 759 6 4554 762 1270 10 12700 762 6 4572 765 1275 10 12750 765 6
4590 768 1280 10 12800 768 6 4608 771 1285 10 12850 771 6 4626 774 1290 10
12900 774 6 4644 777 1295 10 12950 777 6 4662 780 1300 10 13000 780 6 4680 783
1305 10 13050 783 6 4698 786 1310 10 13100 786 6 4716 789 1315 10 13150 789 6
4734 79^ 1320 10 13200 792 6 4752 795 1325 10 13250 795 6 4770 798 1330 10
13300 798 6 4788 801 1335 10 13350 801 6 4806 804 1340 10 13400 804 6 4824 807
1345 10 13450 807 6 484^ 810 1350 10 13500 810 6 4860 813 1355 10 13550 813 6
4878 816 1360 10 13600 816 6 4896 819 1365 10 13650 819 6 4914 822 1370 10
13700 822 6 4932 825 1375 10 13750 825 6 4950 828 1380 10 13800 828 6 4968 831
1385 10 13850 831 6 4986 834 1390 10 13900 834 6 5004 837 1395 10 13950 837 6
5022 840 1400 10 14000 840 6 5040 843 1405 10 14050 843 6 5058 846 1410 10
14100 846 6 5076 849 1415 10 14150 849 6 5094 852 1420 10 14200 852 6 5112 855
1425 10 14250 855 6 5130 858 1430 10 14300 858 6 5148 861 1435 10 14350 861 6
5166 864 1440 10 14400 864 6 5184 867 1445 10 14450 867 6 5202 870 1450 10
14500 870 6 5220 873 1455 10 14550 873 6 5238 876 1460 10 14600 876 6 5256 879
1465 10 14650 879 6 5274 882 1470 10 14700 882 6 5292 885 1475 10 14750 885 6
5310 888 1480 10 14800 888 6 5328 891 1485 10 14850 891 6 5346 894 1490 10
149^0 894 6 5364 897 1495 10 14950 897 6 5382 900 1500 10 15000 900 6 5400 903
1505 10 15050 903 6 5418 906 1510 10 15100 906 6 5436 909 1515 10 15150 909 6
5454 612 1520 10 15200 912 6 5472 915 1525 10 15250 915 6 5490 918 1530 10
15300 918 6 5508 921 1535 10 15350 921 6 5526 924 1540 10 15400 924 6 5544 927
1545 10 15450 927 6 5562 930 1550 10 15500 930 6 5580 933 1555 10 15550 933 6
5598 936 1560 10 15600 936 6 5616 939 1565 10 15650 939 6 5634 942 1570 10
15700 942 6 5652 945 1575 10 15750 945 6 5670 948 1580 10 15800 948 6 5688 951
1585 10 15850 951 6 5706 954 1590 10 15900 954 6 5724 957 1595 10 15950 957 6
5742 960 1600 10 16000 960 6 5760 963 1605 10 16050 963 6 5778 96^ 1610 10
16100 966 6 5796 9^9 1615 10 16150 969 6 5814 972 1620 10 16200 972 6 5832 975
1625 10 16250 975 6 5850 978 1630 10 16300 978 6 5868 981 1635 10 16350 981 6
5886 984 1640 10 16400 984 6 5904 987 1645 10 16450 987 6 5922 990 1650 10
16500 990 6 5940 99^ 1655 10 16550 993 6 5958 996 1660 10 16600 996 6 5976 999
1665 10 16650 999 6 5994 1002 1670 10 16700 1002 6 6012 1005 1675 10 16750 1005
6 6030 1008 1680 10 16800 1008 6 6048 1011 1685 10 16850 1011 6 6066 1014 1690
10 16900 1014 6 6084 1017 1695 10 16950 1017 6 6102 1020 1700 10 17000 1020 6
6120 1023 1705 10 17050 1023 6 6138 1026 1710 10 17100 1026 6 6156 1029 1715 10
17150 1029 6 6174 1032 1720 10 17200 1032 6 6192 1035 1725 10 17250 1035 6 6210
1038 1730 10 17300 1038 6 6228 1041 1735 10 17350 1041 6 6246 1044 1740 10
17400 1044 6 6264 1047 1745 10 17450 1047 6 6282 1050 1750 10 17500 1050 6 6300
1053 1755 10 17550 1053 6 6318 1056 1760 10 17600 1056 6 6336 1059 1765 10
17650 1059 6 6354 1062 1770 10 17700 1062 6 6372 1065 1775 10 17750 1065 6 6390
1068 1780 10 17800 1068 6 6408 1071 1785 10 17850 1071 6 6426 1074 1790 10
17900 1074 6 6444 1077 1795 10 17950 1077 6 6462 1080 1800 10 18000 1080 6 6480
1083 1805 10 18050 1083 6 6498 1086 1810 10 18100 1086 6 6516 1089 1815 10
18150 1089 6 6534 1092 1820 10 18200 1092 6 6552 1095 1825 10 18250 1095 6 6570
1098 1830 10 18300 1098 6 6588 1101 1835 10 18350 1101 6 6606 1104 184^ 10
18400 1104 6 6624 1107 1845 10 18450 1107 6 6642 1110 1850 10 18500 1110 6 6660
1113 1855 10 18550 1113 6 6678 1116 1860 10 18600 1116 6 6696 1119 1865 10
18650 1119 6 6714 1122 1870 10 18700 1122 6 6732 1125 1875 10 18750 1125 6 6750
1128 1880 10 18800 1128 6 6768 1131 1885 10 18850 1131 6 6786 1134 1890 10
18900 1134 6 6804 1137 1895 10 18950 1137 6 6822 1140 1900 10 19000 1140 6 6840
1143 1905 10 19050 1143 6 6858 1146 1910 10 19100 1146 6 6876 1149 1915 10
19150 1149 6 6894 1152 1920 10 19200 ^152 6 69^2 1155 1925 10 19250 1155 6 ^^30
1158 1930 1^ 1930^ 1158 6 6948 1161 1935 10 19350 1161 6 69^6 1164 1940 10
19400 1164 6 6984 1167 1945 10 19450 1167 6 7002 1170 1950 10 19500 1170 6 7020
1173 1955 10 1955^ ^173 6 7038 1176 1960 10 19^^^ 1176 6 7056 1179 1905 10
1905^ 1179 6 7074 1182 1970 10 19700 1^82 6 7092 1185 1975 10 19750 1185 6 7110
1188 1980 10 19800 ^188 6 ^^28 1191 1985 10 19850 1191 6 71^6 1194 1990 10
19900 1194 6 ^^64 1197 1995 10 19950 1^^7 6 7182 1200 2000 10 20000 120^ 6 7200
2400 4000 10 40000 2400 6 14400 3000 5000 10 50000 ^^00 6 18000 4000 6667 10
66670 4^^0 6 24000 5000 8333 10 83330 5000 6 30000

The use of the precedent Table described.
THis precedent Table is divided into seven Columes, each Colume having its
proper use set above it.

In the first Colume toward the left hand, you shall find the number of paces
Geometrical (viz^ foot to each pace) placed.

In the second Colume you shall find the just number of men which those paces
may contain in Breast or Rank, ^^cording as the first Colume shall point to you,
viz. each man taking up three foot for his particular station.

In the third Colume you shall find our ordinary way of placing our men 10 deep
in File, fit for skirmish.

The fourth Colume points to you the whole number of men being ordered 10 deep
in File.

The fifth Colume shows how many Horses may be placed upon so many paces of
ground, as the Colume of paces demonstrates; viz. each Horse takes up five foot
for his station in Rank.

The sixth Colume shows the manner of placing of them six deep in File.

The seventh Colume shows the just number of Horse being ordered six deep in
File. As for example; You have paced out 1002 Geometrical paces, which is 2004
of your ordinary going paces (taking but two foot and an half to each step.)
Now if you would know how many men these forenamed paces may contain in Rank,
you must first enter the Table, and in the first Colume of the last Table-Page,
right under the superscription of Paces Geometrical, you shall find 1002, and
just against it, in the second Colume toward your right hand, you shall find
that 1670 men may be placed in Rank or Breast; and in the next Colume, being the
third, you shall find they are placed 10 deep in File; then casting but your
eye into the fourth Colume, you shall find the whole number of them to be 16700
men.

Likewise if you would know how many Horses may be placed in Breast or Rank upon
the forenamed quantity of paces, by casting your eye into the fifth Colume
you shall find 1002 Horses; and if they be ordered six deep in File, then look
into the seventh Colume, and you shall find the whole number to be 6012
Horses: after the same manner you may find out any other number.

If you intend to order your Horse but five deep in File, then to know how many
be of the whole number, you must multiply the number in the fifth Colume by 5,
and the product is the whole number.

After the same manner, if you intend to impale the Flanks or Rear of your
Battle, after you know the number of paces, as for example, Suppose it to be
801 paces; enter the Colume of paces, and you shall find that 801 paces must
have 1335 men to make one Rank for the Impalement; now if you would have seven
Ranks, then you must multiply 1335 by 7, and the product will be 9345, the just
whole number that the Impalement will take up, being it consists of seven Ranks.

The reason why I have set down the paces Geometrical in the first Colume,
after a progressionall way, one number exceeding another by three, is because
it fits even with the quantity of feet each Footman and Horseman occupyeth
for his proper station in Rank or Breast: otherwise there would be odd feet, as
in 2 paces (which consists of 10 feet) there can be but 3 Footmen placed, who
must take up but 9 feet; so that there is an odd foot remaining, which would
put all out of order. But in 3 paces there is 15 feet contained, wherein may be
5 men placed. Also in 3 pa^es there must be even 3 Horses placed, for a Horse
takes up in Breast or Rank an (...) pace, containing 5 feet. Vale.

FINIS.

