AN APPEAL to Truth, Jn the Controversy between ART, and USE; About the best
and most expedient Course in LANGVAGES.

To be read Fasting; For the greater benefit of the deluded innocence of our
own, and other Nations.

Drawn, and Exhibited, by IOS. WEB, Dr. of Ph.

Non fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare lucem
Cogitat: vt speciosa dehinc miracula promat. Hor.
LONDON, Printed by H. L. for George Latham: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Brazen Serpent, 1622.

Great LADY, and sole GOVERNESSE of my best Endeavors:
Having a purpose to divulge an unattempted Course whereby desired Languages
may in their native purity, and unaccustomed perfection be archieued: and
finding Opinion (taken on Trust, rather then grounded on due examination) to be
the maine impediment in my proceedings; I thought it useful partly by reason,
partly by experience, but especially by ancient, weighty and unstained
Authority, to reclaim it; And by this Appeal to refer all unto the censure
of thy most just, and vncorrupt vprightnes.

Thou know (O Truth) that Grammar (an Art whereby Languages are now commonly
held to be sufficiently taught in every Nation) was not in use amongst the
ancient Romans; Tranquillut. Th. zuing. l. 1.
much less in any reputation. And when it had access unto their children, it
was at the first full of humility; and took upon it no more than the name
Grammatica (translated Quint. de Inst. Or. l. 2. cap. 7.
literatura or Mr. Gill Logon. cap. 1.
literatoria) could well warrant: which was (not to teach the language; for
that was their own already, but) to Lud. Viu. de cause. corr. Ar. lib. 2. and
Com. l. 1. c. 2. and. c. 5.
teach the letters, syllables and words (thereof) and how to pronounce, write,
and place them rightly (not according to any man's new found precepts, but)
after ancient received Custom; lest with Philost. in Soph. et vol. 18. vrb.
com. Zuin. l. 1. Th.
Pausanias they might confound the letters, and make of long short, and of
short long syllables: Or fall upon an evil pronunciation (which S^ob. ser. 2.
de imprudentia.
Theocritus so prettily reprehended in a Grammarian.) Or transpose words (which
was so hateful to Pomponius Marcellus; that Tranquillus. Zuing. Th. l. 1.
in the height of his pleading, he (like a wise Grammarian) left and lost his
Cause, to fall upon his adversaries transposition.) Or lest words might be
used which were not Latin (for which Id. ib.
Tiberius Caesar was accused by the same Pomponius.) Or lest words, and
languages might be abused by a rude, and externe ignorance: as Annalium l. 1.
Auentinus reports of that Bauarian who baptized a boy, In nomine Patria,
filia, et Spiritus sancta. And in this nature, such as teach to read and write
by the A. B. C. Primers, horn books, and the like, may be truly said to teach
the Grammar: Quint. Inst. l. 2. c. 1.
for these were the uttermost limits of the first Grammarians.

Which Plato's Socrates makes manifest as follows. In Philebo.
After Voice was thought (says he) to be infinite, some God, or divine Man (as
that Thenth was reported to have been amongst the Egyptians) considered this
in that infinite generality, the first letters were vocal; and that they were
of more than one sort. And, further, that there were other which did not
partake of the voice, but of the sound: And he also reduced them into a
certain number. Then, he distinguished a third sort of letters now called
Mutes. Last of all, he distributed those that were without sound, and Mutes,
even to certain particulars. So did he with those that were vocal, and half
vocal; till he had found out their number, as well in part, as in whole, and
called them Elements. And when he had well weighed, that none of us could ever
gather any thing of these in particular, unless we knew them all, and had
considered that all made but one kind of knot, and was but a reduction of
dispersed things together, and that in these he had found out there was an Art;
he called it Grammar.

But, this little creeping fountain, Quint. ib.
having in time, through continual, and universal imploiment, gotten credit,
wealth, and patronage, grew ambitious; and under the first title of entire
simplicity, has at length engrossed rivers, streams, Lud. Viu. de causis
corr. Art. l. 2.
and branches, out of Orators, Poets, and Historians, yea and almost all the
greatest arts, and sciences; and is become a full-swolne, and ouer-flowing
Sea, which by a strong hand arrogates unto it self (and has well near
gotten) the whole traffic in learning, but especially for languages.

And though it be herein judged by Quintilian, l. 2. c. 1.
and other ancient Authors, to have usurped the function and the right of
others: yet imboldned by partial favor, and a trick of it own invention,
called Synecdoche, it dares without blushing term it self by that former
poor, and silly name, Grammatica.

This Art (or Science, De Causis Ling. Lat. l. 1. c. 1.
as Iul. Scaliger would have it) in it own circuit and first humility, is to
be reverenced for the antiquity, and for the place and precedence thereof
amongst the liberal Arts, or Sciences: Com. l. 2
(though neither it, nor any of the rest can teach the languages.) But, as it
is ambitious, and assumeth to it self the right of others, promising that
which it performs not; so is it warily to be looked into: least (as hitherto)
it trifle away our time, consume our exhibitions, frustrate our labors,
disinable our selves, and wrong the ends of our intentions. For, neither has
the name proportion with the thing, nor the thing with what it promises.

Which being at the last iudiciously considered by a diligent and able
Grammarian, appointed (doubtless) to be the first who should begin to
arbitrate between the lawful owner, and this bold intruder; he has
ominously dispossessed old and toothlesse Grammatica, Cap. 18.
and conferred the art of writing and of speaking rightly, upon a more
deserving heir, Logonomia. Which, as it comprehends the whole speech of a
Nation, so the Author means it shall include al things necessary to their
language; as, Grammar, Etymology, Syntax, Prosodie, Logic, Rhetoric,
Oratorie, and what else soever. Otherwise, this name should not embrace what
the speech of a Nation comprehends; nor should the Inuenter have so full and
reverent an opinion thereof as it behooves.

But (to go a little further than the name) had this understanding Master
(when he dispossessed the one, and invested the other) altered the crazy tenure
by which Grammatica formerly held the principality of writing and of speaking
rightly (making that which was usurped by the tenure of Art, rule, and precept,
to be more surely houlden under use, custom, and authority) all nations had
been happy in his just arbitrament. Yet howsoever, I shall die contented, to
have but seen this only name thus altered. For, in this case had Truth com
rushing all at once amidst her enemies and ill-willers, it might have imported
danger to her person: but as it is, I may live in hope, that by that time this
new name be well digested, the oulde tenure will be somewhat altered.

For, if we open the right eye, the eye of Equity; and wink with the left of
Partiality, and aim only at the public good of our Nation and posterity,
and speak what we apprehend ingenuously; we shall be forced, by that which
follows, to confess, that this Art never was or can be perfected; and that
of such as pretend pure languages it ought in no case to be followed.

The truth whereof shall appear as well by the dissension of her chiefest
vphoulders and the best Grammarians; as by their accusation produced from
authentic Orators, Historians, Poets, and Philosophers.

For, In Ep. ad Rest. and alibi.
Cominius tells us, that the best Grammarians have from Age to Age successively
quoted the defects and errors of each other. Grammarians dissenting.
Donatus, Seruius, and Priscianus, accused their predecessors; and were
afterward themselves taxed by Beroaldus, Politianus, Philelphus, and
Laurentius Valla: and these, by Baptista Pius, Georgius and Petrus Valla, Aldus
Romanus, Perottus Sipuntinus, etc: and these, by Pylades Brixianus; and he,
and the former by Quintianus Stoa: and Stoa, by Phineus, Domitius and others:
and to come to our own times, Martinus Crusius was inuay'd against by
Frischlinus; and our English Lilie by the Spanish Aluarus; Mr. Ralph Gittins.
and, as I hear, by a gentleman of our own Nation, who brings him on the
stage for many errors.

Some of these call the rest Grammatistae, Stoa in art versif. Suetonius.
Zuing. l. 1. Th.
seu literatores; Grammaticuli; Grammatociphones; and by other names of
ignorance; as, incuriosi, and Scioli: yea, and some of them tell their
companions, that their works, and precepts are tedious; and that they are not
able to utter their own name in good latin; as Valla tells Priscianus. (...)
c. 1. Com. in Ep.
And this Valla tells others, that they vnteach the latin tongue. But, Pius
Bononiensis honestly reprehends his own judgment formerly delivered upon
Plautus, and Sidonius Apolinaris; making (with others) the world a witness of
his retractations. So that I may, according to the Proverb, conclude with
Horace, "Grammatici certant, In art poetica.
et adhuc sub Iudice lis est. Now, if these men may be credited, the Art of
Grammar is imperfect: if we should not credit them, we are but fools in my
conceit to follow them. For, to learn what is imperfect, breeds but imperfect
knowledge: and I despair of better; in that I am not able to conceive how
those defects which could not in a thousand eight hundred years past (from the
time of Ennius, till this day) be corrected, can at any time hereafter by
the same course that others have hitherto followed, be amended; V.S. Alb.
Organo mag. Aph. 6.
It being a folly and against all sense to conceive that those things which
were never heretofore brought-to-passe, can be effected by other means then
such as no man yet attempted.

But leaving this unattempted means to languages till a fitter opportunity;
let us, Grammarians censured.
while these Grammarians are at variance, give ear to what the Standers-by and
men of credit will say of them.

Crassus was of opinion, Cic. in. Or. l. 3
that they took a course to dull young wits, and make them shameless, In
learning that which among me^ of sort was thought ridiculous.

Pliny tells us, Com. in Ep.
they corrupt the books of ancient writers, and make them more obscure, by
their vain and overthwart corrections; and that their curiosities are Hist.
not. l. 35. c. 3.
perverse subtilties: and that for telling these truths he always In Prolog.
Hist. Not.
expected something from Grammarians, in opposition of those books which he
had written de Grammatica.

Quintilian calls their diligence mischievous, l. 1. c. 10.
or malicious; auouching, that he holds it l. 1. c. 14
fitting, that amongst their other virtues, they should insert some kind of
ignorance. He also holds they are unlearned: And Epig. l. 14
Martial knew it as well as he; and therefore said, Quamuis me Ligulam dicant
equitesque patresque:
Dicor ab indoctis Lingula Grammaticis.
Though I be Ligula to the wise and Noble man:
Thou call'st me Lingula, vnlearn'd Grammarian.


Moreover, Iab. 1. cap. 10.
the same Quintilian tells them plainly, that they may well be able to teach
their Scholars to write and speak like Grammarians, but they shall never be
able to do either of them like the Latins: Ibid.
for they are of sundry conditions; Aliud est Grammatice, aliud Latin loqui.

And further he says, lib. 1. cap. 14.
that all their Commentaries are full of impediments, and such as are for the
most part unknown unto themselves the Commentators.

And this made Laur: Valla say, there is nothing more arrogant then their eye;
or more insolent in the correction, or rather corruption of Authors.

Whereupon Hermolaus Barbarus reports, In calce castigationum suarum.
that some are now adays grown so audacious, as to hold every thing faulty,
and to be corrected, that falls not within the reach of their capacity: which
kind of haste (says he) or rather rashness, is the most pestilent evil that
can happen in the latin language.

And (knowing that Crassus in the time of his Censorship had by edict put such
as these to silence) he wishes, Cic. in Ordib. 3.
that (now also) there were a law made, whereby such bold and indiscreet
attempts might hereafter wholly be forbidden: Affirming that the unlearned may
sometimes fall into this error; but the learned more often, and with greater
danger: for, as others are wont to rely much upon their judgment, so are they
still able to produce new false allurements to persuade them.

And Master Tho. Haine (one of the most sufficient Schoolmasters about this
city of London) in Fol. 1 b.
a latin Discourse of his, written to the effect of this Appeal, Too too
diligent. Lud. Viu. lib. 2. de cause. cor. Art. Say more then they ought, and
and yet not all they should.
holds some Grammarians to have been nimium diligentes; and that they fall
within the compass of Quintilian's complaint against such as Plura quam par
sit dicunt, non tamen omnia: And that they have enriched themselves, with the
spoils of Lexicons, and other arts; and adorned their plumes with filched
feathers: and that when they have done what they can, they do but break young
Scholars backs with the burden of unnecessary precepts; Repetitions of the
self same things with other words.
and that setting their tender wits upon the rack they pull and tear them
with Tautologies.

Other some; though (says he) they be succinct, and methodicall in their
precepts: yet bring they with them disadvantage. For no man can run speedily to
the mark of languages, that is shackled and ingiu'd with grammar precepts. And
hence it proceeds, that such as only depend on the rules of Grammar, wrote
barbarously, as appears ex libris Tenebrionumseu Dunsarum, et ex epistolis
obscurorum virorum. And such as attribute much to precepts, and something to
authority, must needs be fearful, and irresolute. For, following
authority, they many times run against rules; and obeying rules, they disturb
authority: without whose hand and feale, the best of rules is but irregulare.

And Cominius concludes, that they teach, Rest. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and command children, and such as would learn the tongue, to follow things of
a contrary nature. For, first they would have them learn by Grammar, and then
they send them to read Authors: which things are contrary.

And Despauterius runs with him against himself: for he is constrained to say,

Construit Orator proprie, In Syntax.
quae destruit ipse
Grammaticus; quibus est ferme contrarius Ordo.
What the Orator builds decently's destroyed
By the Grammarian, other ways employed.
And in an other place.

Si been discutias doctorum scripta virorum,
Multa secus cernes quam lex vult Grammaticorum.
If thou with care discuss what wise men wrote,
Thou'l't often find other things then Gra^mars note.
Whereunto Cicero alluding, Or. l. 1
says, I omit to speak of Mathematicians, Grammarians, and Musicians; with
whose arts, this of Oratorie has not so much as the least coherence.

Howbeit we are not ignorant (says Cominius) that Grammarians endeavoring to
uphold their errors (either to please the people, Rest. 1.5.
or (rather) because they had no better way to get, or teach by) have wrested
all the sentences and authorities of the Ancients, to the approbation of their
Art of Grammar. For whereas Varro, Quintilian, and others disputing about
Grammar, are enforced to allege the arguments that may be brought on both
sides; the Grammarians catch those that make for themselves, and produce them
as the judgment, and established opinions of the same Authors on their behalf:
but such arguments as made against them, as also the conclusions, and absolute
determinations of those Authors in the shutting up of their disputations, they
ouerslip without remembrance. And therefore, says he, (though somewhat
roughly) they have hitherto deceived us, and are themselves full often deceived.
Neither does he exclude our new writers from this censure: Ep. Rest.
for he houlds that they have nothing, but what they have taken from others.
And he wrote since Lilies Grammar was composed.

But, says he, Rest. l. 1.15
let these and many other Authors speak their pleasures, Grammarians will not be
reformed. True it is, that finding their collections taxed of being vain,
tedious, disordered and superfluous; they affect brevity and better method:
but, as they grow shorter, so are they more insufficient, and less
intelligible; ever intricated in the self same Labyrinth, commending their
reproved precepts, and persuading all the world to follow them.

Thus far our Authors have declared themselves concerning Grammarians: Grammar
censured.
now let us patiently hear them about their Art.

It is very likely (says our alleged Author) that those which in speech
proceed by Art, l. 1.10. Rest.
rules and reason, ought to speak better, then those that follow the people,
and such as are unlearned. So is there a likely hood in music, that the
distances of a third, a fifth, a sixth, and an eight, should by reason of these
numbers, make a concord, or consonant harmony: but (says he) this depends
merely upon the judgment of the ear, because God and nature would have it
so: And they were not found out by numbers, but by experience; for this
observation of numbers therein came afterward. We may also by likelihood say,
the Suns rising is a cause of the Cocks crowing; and the setting thereof of the
Owls better seeing: But presumption upon likelihood is often a wronger of
blameless truth, and an overthrow of greatest knowledges: and in many things
there are seeming reasons at the first encounter thought to be irrefragable,
which experience at length assures us to be vain, and frivolous. And this
appears in Grammar, in that there is a likelyhoode, that all Nounes, and
Verbes should follow by Analogy the grammatical Declensions, and
Conjugations: Prisc. lib. 7. cap. de dat. and abl. plur. sec. dec.
yet looking into Custom, and Authority we find daily some irregularities,
which we cannot excuse, or make good, but by newfound exceptions, and enlarging
the doctrine of the Heteroclites. And all our actions that proceed from nature
are sooner and better learned by use and exercise, then by Art, Inst. Or.
or Precept. For Quintilian says, there are many things that cannot be
deliuerd by Art; as, sucking, eating, drinking, standing, running: to which we
may add the actions of our outward senses and the like; which are not only
given to men, but children, and unreasonable creatures. And as in these, so in
speech (which is the sixth external sense according to Raymundus) we begin
not by Art, but by Art. Mag. Plato in Cratylo.
Nature; and proceed by use, custom, authority, and exercise, governed by the
ear; which is in this kind pleased, or displeased by an inbred, secret, and
vnpenetrable harmony in nature. And let us be content to know thus much de
facto: for, of the first causes we never yet had solider doctrine, the^ those
likelihoods. Neither will Nature be compeld to dance within our circle; or have
a coat, or a cocks-comb put upon her, by her own Apes; Though I must
confessethat all these may be helped by Art, and also adorned: But this is not
to be understood in childhood; but in men of judgment, and of good discretion,
that are capable of Art, and the reasons thereof. And that made Quintilian say,
they would do it better, conducted by nature, then by Art; lib. 9. cap. 4.
yet nature (says he) has in it Art.

But though there be an Art of helping and adorning speech, yet is it not
Grammar; Com. lib. 1.10.
except we take it in the first simplicity. For, our fore-alledged Author
Cominius would have us know, lib. 1. cap. 9.
that Grammar hinders the elegancie of speech: because Grammatical
construction, and precepts, command that words be otherwise placed then
ancient Authors placed them. And this, says he, is a great error amongst us,
that we are now afraid to produce the same sentences, and periods which were
used by them, in the same words that they did, and in their manner of position:
but by Art of Grammar we invent new words, and put them in an other order,
then the best Writers placed them; Though Quintilian say, that if any man
dissolve a clause, lib. 9.4.
sentence or period that is in it self sweet, full, and well spoken; he will
drive away all the force, pleasure and orname^t thereof; and altogether foil
the composition. And he takes his authority from Cicero; In Or.
who, dissoluing periods of his own, makes them harsh, and ill-sounding: and
by correcting the hard, and crabbed compositions of Gracchus, makes them sweet,
and pleasing; the better to demonstrate that, which otherwise might have been
thought but mere imaginary.

Wherefore, it appears, that in following Grammar, we abandon elegancie, and
the pleasure of the ear; and speak and write Grammar-latine, Englishlatin,
Dutch-latine, French-latine: and, in a word, every nation, by this Art, writes
it own peculiar latin; and not the latin of the Latins, nor any foraine
language as it should be. For, in every tongue there are many things, which if
we should utter by any other order then as they are vulgarly spoken, they
would not run well, and we should be thought to speak improperly; as every
man may judge by the clauses, sentences, and especially Proverbs, of his own
language: which, transposed, or made-vp with other words than common, would for
the most part lose their pleasing grace, delightful sound, and (many times)
their sense, and meaning. Or. l. 3
Whereupon Cicero concludes, that these men separate words from sentences, in
the same manner that the Soul is separated from the body; which is not to be
done (says he) without their manifest destructions. l. 1 of the bringing up
of youth.


By mine advice, says * Ascham (who read to Queen Elizabeth) a Scholar shall
not use the common order in common schools, for making of Latins: whereby the
child commonly learneth first an evil choice of words (and right choice of
words, Cic. de clar. Or.
says Caesar, is the foundation of eloquence;) then, a wrong placing of words;
and lastly, an evil framing of the sentence; with a perverse judgment both of
words and sentences. These faults, taking once root in youth, be never, or
hardly pluckt-away in age.

Moreover, there is (says he) no one thing that has either dulled the wits,
or taken away the wills of children more from learning, then the care they have
to satisfy their Masters in making Latins. For, the Scholar is commonly beaten
for the making, when the Master were more worthy to be beaten for the mending,
or rather marring of the same; the Master many times being as ignorant as the
child, what to say properly, and fitly to the matter And he produces two
Schoolemasters, Horman and Whittington.
which have set forth in print, either of them, a book of such kind of
Latins, that (if we believe him) a child shall learn of the better of them
that which an other day (if he be wise and com to judgment) he must be feign
to unlearn again.

Further: our Cominius says, Rest. l. 1.9
This Grammar hinders us in writing rightly, in respect of the diuersirie of
Grammatical opinions about dipthonges, aspirations, hissings, accents, and
infinite other particularities, about which they are ever in controversy; as
appears by Priscianus, Tortellius, Lancilotus, Nicholaus Ferettus, Georgius
Valla, Aldus Romanus, Nestor, Stoa, Frishlinus, and a thousand others; in whom
you shall find almost nothing but contentions about letters, syllables,
accents, quantities of syllables, and corrections of Authors, every man after
his own humor and invention: so that in so great a diversity, you are not
able to determine how you should proceed either in speaking, or in writing
rightly.

Whereupon he further inferres, Ib.
that Grammar hinders men from the understanding of Poets, and ancient
Authors, and makes them more obscure, and difficult. So that, such as are
otherwise (for the language sake) desirous to read them, draw back, and are
discomfited. And things are brought to that pass, that the very name of Latin
is hateful almost to every man; excepting such, as (hunting after gain, and
commodity by some science, or profession) are constrained to fall upon the
very froth, and dregs thereof: and these for the most part despise elegancie,
and scorn such as endeavor to attain unto it; in that themselves are
brought-vp under the discipline of Grammar; which neither respects the names
of things, nor the custom of ancient Authors, nor the judgment of the sense of
hearing, wherein elegancy has her maine foundation.

Besides: Ib.
he holds it an occasion of the loss of much time, and (consequently) of
many of the best and chiefest Arts, and knowledges. For, if any man would be
exquisite therein, and speak rightly according to the rules thereof, it is
necessary he should turn over the most part of Grammatical Commentaries,
that he may the better make election which of them were fittest to be
sollowed; though he confesses, Ibid.
that it would be a perpetual and an unprofitable labor, to gather all rules,
to examine all places of Authors, and out of all these to put all occurrent
exceptions unto rules; in that there is no man but had rather speak after the
example of Cicero, Liuius, Salustius, Virgilius, Ouidius, Plautus and
Terentius, than use the precepts of Grammarians; Inst. Or.
Fabius houlding it a more excusable error, to fall in following of these
great men, than in following of these great men's Followers. But (to turn to
our election) our Grammarians will questionless reject Priscianus, as
condemned by Valla; and Valla, as found tripping by Perottus. So (to be short)
by further inquisition he will neglect our common Grammar, Mr Gittins.
as taxed by him that has collected centum errores Lilij: And, as well it, as
all other Grammars now in use; De cause. linguae latinae.
as branded by Julius Caesar Scaliger, in above seven hundred and fifty noted
errors.

Thus having found all the former Grammars faulty; he cannot warrant the last,
infallible: yet must he be constrained to follow it, or make a new one of his
own; which will be liable with the rest to all taxation. For, by reading
ancient Authors, he shall still discover something that falls not under the
collections of other Grammarians; and heerevpon will make an exception to some
former rule; or make a new rule, and call the former Collecters, block-heads.
Thus did our Fathers to our Grandfathers: thus will our children deal with us.

But stay: If, before we can justly tax our Predecessors of ignorance, we must
necessarily take pains in reading them; and to read both new and old
Grammarians, were work enough for a Methushelah; what shall we be able to
elect or judge of, that have but a span of life; and in it, before our tops
be ripe, our roots be rotten? Certainly we may commence the suit: but we shall
never live to hear the Sentence. For, besides the infinite number of them, the
very thought of one only Quint. l. 1.14 Arist. Rhet. 3. Zuing. l. 1. Th.
Didymus, which wrote but three thousand and five hundred volumes, makes me
despair of doing well amongst Grammarians; In moriae encomio.
Insomuch that Erasmus concludes well, that only Grammar is enough to make a
man spend the circuit of his whole life in tortures.

And, Rest. l. 1.9
says Haloinus, we have this experience, that many of the Master-grammarians
(which lost no time, either in writing of Grammar, or in teaching it) have been
so far from perfection in their own profession, that they were neither able to
speak Latin rightly, nor to write it with elegancy.

Further: we may note a number of their scholars which have taken infinite
pains til twenty years of age, sometimes till thirty, and yet are not able to
write or speak any thing worth the reading: nor have they any knowledge in
other arts or professions; though they have suffered many stripes, and are
almost deaf with cries and exclamations.

Half our age, Essaies, l. 1. c. 25
says Montaigne, is confumed that way: we are kept four or five years in
learning to understand bare words, and to join them into clauses; then, as long
in proportioning a great body extended into four or five parts; and five
years more at least, ere we can succinctly know how to mingle, join, and
interlace them handsomely into a subtle fashion, and into one coherent orb.

I remember, says Ascham, when I was young, l. 2.
in the North they went to the Grammar-schoole little children, they came from
thence great lubbers; always learning, but little profiting; learning without
book every thing, understanding within book very little: their whole
knowledge, by learning without book, was tied only to their tongue and lips,
and never ascended up to the brains or head; and therefore was soon spet out
again. They were as men always going, but ever out of the way: and why? for,
their whole labor (or rather great toil without order) was even vain
idleness without profit. Indeed, they took great pains about learning; but
employed small labor in learning.

Now, if Grammar should be the best Course to languages, and Kings may have
their choice of best Courses; I wonder what choice of Grammars was made by
Mithridates. And that, that makes me wonder more: we, that have no business
but a language, spend all our life, and are not perfect in one; and he, that
had a Kingdoms affairs to look unto, had two and twenty complete languages.
Val. Max. l. 8. c. 7


I wonder also how the Romans came all to be expert in Oratory, Husbandry,
Astrology, Geometry, Arithmetic, Music, and many other sciences, before they
were admitted to martial discipline, or other employment: as by Livius,
Valerius, Plutarch, Suetonius, Frontinus, Vegetius, and many others, is
recorded. Assuredly, they knew no Grammar: or, knowing it, they did neglect it.

And no marvel: for, Alexander, Amigonus, Achilles, Themistocles, Epaminondas,
Hanibal, Scipio, and a thousand others, were instructed by Aristotle,
Calisthenes, Leonides, Perseus, Phoenix, Phreareus, Lysias, Socilaus, Terentius,
and the like. And all these former Potentates were known learned, almost in
all sciences, through the assistance of these and other Masters. Of whom, some
were Orators; some, Poets; some, Philosophers, and of other professions: but,
none of them were found to be Grammarians.

Yet now adays, lib. 1.9.
says Cominius, they are so frequent, that if a man would pen an eloquent
Oration after the manner of the Ancients, were it never so pleasing and
sufficient; if he observe not, every where, the Grammar-rules, he dares not
utter it, for fear of being thought to speak incongruously. And of this I was
lately my self a witness; where a Gentleman, making a Verse to his own purpose,
and imitating in all points Martial, was by one, that thought himself a great
Proficient, reprehended for false Latin: But, the Gentleman producing his
Author, the Critic was half disparaged.

Haloinus, l. (...) 1. Rest.
coming yet a little nearer the quick, tells us (and it stands with reason) that
no Grammar can be made perfect, unless it were as often renewed as new words
are coined, or old ones newly received. Neither can it, says he, be perfect,
unless it teach us the Dialects of Nations, or the diversities of language and
pronounciation in sundry Regions, Provinces, and distant places; with the
changes and alterations in the manner of speaking, as well in Latin as in other
languages.

And our experience gives us to understand, that not only those of Flanders,
Brabant, Holland, Zeland, and others in the lower- Germany; and those of
Navar, Aragon, Catalonia, Galicia and Portugal, in Spain; and our own
Eastern, Western, Northern, Southern, and middle parts of England, do much
vary one and the self-same language: but every twenty-miles-distance from any
place, yields a manifest difference in the tongues of all, or any of these
parts or Provinces; as also every twenty years alters every one of the said
differences. Insomuch that few of us, if we consider the ancient Records and
Authors of our Nation, can believe, that a Grammar made in the time of
Chaucer, Robert of Gloucester, or of Aelsrick, can be useful now in ours; though
doubtless these men wrote in the choicest Dialect the time afforded. And,
certainly, all other Dialects are and will be changed in the same proportion.

Now, if Grammars be composed according to the purity of speech especially;
and the purity of speech in any nation is thought to be at the height, at that
very instant that the Grammar was or is composed; and that every time and
place, according to the alteration and inconstancy of that instant, is likewise
altered and inconstant: I cannot see how any Grammars of any languages, that
are not daily (according to these alterations) altered, can be of any certainty
or perfection; in that, as a Grammar is made to be universal, so should it,
according to the Authors intention, be perpetual: which, for the reasons
alleged, is in both impossible.

For, l. 1.2
says my Author, if words be changed, it is necessary that Conjugations,
Declensions, Numbers, Tenses, Moods, and all other Grammatical observations
(in what tongue soever) be also changed: which since it is impossible, the
perfection also is impossible.

And Ludovicus Vives says, Be corr. art. l. 2
that after Grammarforms or precepts were invented out of a proportionable
correspondencie of Art; some have attempted to draw the immeasurable stream of
use through them, as through fitting trenches or channels: whereas Grammar, with
Logic and Rhetoric, were observed and derived from use; and not use, from
them. Therefore they have not only weakened and broken speech, by reducing it
unto the poor and penurious prescript of Grammarrules; but have also corrupted
it with many errors, in that they have spoken otherwise than they ought to do:
well, in respect of rules; but ill, in respect of custom, which is the Lady
and Mistress of speaking. You may see full many most exact Masters of the Art
in this manner pollute their speech with foul enormities, whilst they follow
Art, which is not capable of use; because use is various or changeable: neither
does it follow Grammar or Analogy; and therefore all things could not be
rightly gathered.

This being sufficiently known unto the Ancients; though this Art, as
suetonius reports, de claris Gram.
began at the first to draw many (as is usual) through the nouelty thereof,
and by a likelihood of reason, and vain hopes that depended thereon: yet
Cominius, In Ep. Rest.
subscribing to the fore-alledged opinion of Martial, says, If any man read
with diligence, and examine ancient Authors, he shall find, that the Roman
Nobility, the men of authority, the Gentry, and the learnedest Citizens, never
followed that Art, or ever approved it: neither was it at any time praised or
received by Poets, Orators, Historians, or any other of perfection: but, true
it is, says he, they discommended, scorned and rejected, as well Grammar, as
Grammarians.

Neither did Quintilian think, l. 1. c. 10
that this Art was sent from heaven when men were first formed, to give laws
of speaking; but that it was found out after they spoke, and had taken notice
how every thing did sound in utterance: for many, says Cominius, whose
labors for the most part perished in the combustion of the Goths, as Actius,
Pacuvius, Plautus, Navius, Livius, Andronicus, Laberius, Lucretius, and many
others, wrote Latin before this Art of Grammar was invented; and are cited by
Nonius Marcellus, Aulus Gellius, Macrobius, Priscianus, and other Writers. And
no man doubts, but the Inuenters of Grammar had the language before they had
the Art; and must therefore conclude, that it may be learned without Art.

And the same Quintilian, lib. 1. Inst.
considering how much this Art had (by the best sort of people) been reproved,
ingenuously confesses, that he, in what he wrote of Grammar, did not
undertake to compose an Art thereof: but, it coming in the way of his
discourse, he would not omit to speak of it, lest exceptions might be taken,
that he should slight and undervalue it.

Cicero, Or. l. 1.
alluding heerunto, says, I understand the power and force of all precepts to
be thus; not that Orators had the name of being eloquent by following them; but
that some observed and did those things, which of their own accord had made
men eloquent: so that eloquence is not bred of Art; but Art, of eloquence. Yet
I reject it not, says he: for, though it be not so necessary to teach a man
to speak well, yet the knowledge thereof is not illiberall. And in the same
manner may we say, that speech was not bred of Grammar; but it, of speech: and,
if the precepts of Orators are not so necessary in well-speaking, what shall we
gather of the precepts of Grammarians?

Let us leave them to those whose profession they are, Essaies, 1.25.
says Montaigne; and let us that seek, not to frame a Grammarian, but a
complete Gentleman, give them leave to mis-spe^d their time in precepts: we
have elsewhere to do, and somewhat else of more importance. There are that
know neither Ablative, Conjunctive, Substantive, nor Grammar; no more does
their Lackey, nor any Oyster-wife about the streets: and yet (if you have a
mind thereto) they will entertain you your fill, and peradventure stumble as
little and as seldom against the rules of their Tongue, as the best Master of
arts in France. And, says he, Essaies, l. 1. c. 24.
I hate such as can brag of their rules of Grammar, and can neither write nor
speak a language; and so do others: nay, says he, I find the choicest men
were they that most condemned them.

Thus it appears, says Cominius, l a. c. 10. Rest.
that this Grammar, which gives rules and laws of speaking, that now every
where is taught, is a deceitful, vain and unprofitable Art; drawing men on,
only by likelihoods. And it may well be said, to be a Labyrinth: for, such as
are brought up, and are Proficients in it, can find no way to wind them out
again. Some of them perceive they are entangled, and intimate as much to all
men in their works, though but obscurely: yet for gains sake they commend it,
teach it, and profess it. Wherefore, says he, l. 1. c. 15.
I cannot but grieve and lament, that in so cloudy and so false an Art, so many
men, and of so exquisite an understanding, should thus long be deceived and
stupefied. And that which makes me grieve the more, is, that by it all ancient
elegancy, the Art of Oratorie, Rhetoric, and many other Arts and knowledges,
have perished, been stifled, and abandoned.

And Scaliger did often wonder at the presumption and stubbornness of such as
were vpholders of other men's errors: De cause. linguae latinae. l. 3. c. 67
whereas if they which had committed them were now alive again, they would
recant them. Neither is it so great an offense to err: for, it is the
beginning of wisdom; if not to him that was deceived; yet to others, that they
may not deceive. But to foster errors, is either extremity of madness and folly;
or like the choice of those, who being once or twice foiled, had rather be
stain then reconciled.

I cannot think, USE APPROVED
these ancient Authors would in this manner slight either Grammar or
Grammarians; had they thought the Tongues of Nations might have been
sufficiently learned by their grammatical rules or precepts: for, none made
more account of speech then they did; or were more dilligent in adorning it; or
more desired to make themselves and posterity, Orators and eloquent: but they
knew full well, that there were other courses to come sooner, and with greater
ease in all perfection, unto languages: whereof though something have been said
already; yet, because we have had the judgments of grave men to dissuade from
Art and precepts, let us also use them to direct us to that way of greater
benefit.

If we ask Quintilian what this way is; Inst. Or. l. 1. c. 10
he will tell us plainly, that Custom is the best approved School-mistress
for languages; and that all the Latins were taught by use and custom, from
the mouths of nurses and other women which had the keeping of them, from their
cradle; and not by Grammar or Grammarians, as was erroneously thought by
Leonardus Aretinus, and his Followers. And he boldly affirms, that speech
depends not on reason, but example: neither will he hear of any other law
therein, but observation; or that the Art it self had any ground or foundation,
but in custom.

Experience also confirms, that if we speak not according to custom, few or
none will give us hearing: and, amongst those that will, the most part of them
will deride us, because they cannot understand our meaning. Whereupon, 1 Cor.
14.11
the Apostle says, If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him
that speaks a Barbarian; and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me.

Yet was this custom limited by the judgment of hearing: and therefore
Cominius says, Custom, Rest. l. 1. c. 11
concurring with the pleasure of hearing, is the surest rule and foundation of
the latin language.

By Custom, ancient Authors understand the common form of speaking used by
the people; and especially, as Quintilian says, Inst. Or. l. 1. c. 12
by consent of that part of them that are learned. But, says Cominius, Rest.
l. 1. c. 11
these learned must be such as are least tainted with grammatical
instructions, or corrupted with extern custom: for, says he, Quintilian
understood not the consent of Grammarians; but of men, that by much knowledge
and experience came by learning and understanding; as being exercised by
frequent custom of speaking, both in private and in public places; and of
such as resorted daily to Princes Palaces; as, Cicero, Caesar, Livius,
Salustius, and the like, who as well in war as peace were Courtiers; and
joined to their own learning much other study and diligence in reading, and
experience of all other matters that might enrich their Tongue in speaking.

And if any man read Cicero's works de perfecto Oratore, and de claris
Oratoribus, he shall also find many sentences of the judgment, pleasure,
measure, and sweetness of the ear: whereunto he concludes, all Tongues and every
speech of man is tied, and must be subject; as well in prose, as in verse or
poesy: Ord. 3
for heerunto, says he, and not unto Art, the Tongue and custom of the
ancient Latins was submitted.

In a verse, we look, says he, as well to the beginning and middle, as the
end thereof; and we spoil all, if we fail in any part: but in prose, few
mark the beginnings, but most me^ mark the ending Cadences; which because they
appear and are taken notice of, they are to be varied, lest they be rejected by
the judicious, and through satiety grow odious.

But, says he, lest any man should admire, how the very weakest sort of those
that are unlearned should take notice of these sounds and endings, which the
wisest and most understanding hearers do distinguish; let him know, that
nature has, as well in every other thing as in this, a kind of stroke more
then ordinary. For, every man by a secret feeling discerns those things
without Art, which are right or wrong in Art and reason; which, since they do
in pictures, statua's, and in other workmanship, to whose understanding their
instrument so well serves them not; they show, they are much better able to
judge of words, of numbers, and of voices. For, these are things that run with
common sense: neither would Nature have any man to be wholly without the
knowledge of them. For, seeing art is produced out of nature; except she move
nature and delight her, she seems not indeed to have done any thing. For,
there is nothing that has so near an alliance with our souls, as numbers and
voices: for, by them we are provoked, inflamed, appeased, and grow timorous,
and are brought to mirth and melancholy.

But, says our Author, as in verse the Vulgar find what is amiss: so in our
prose, if there be any haulting, they perceive it. And they pardon not the
Poet, though they wink at us: yet inwardly they know, that what we also said
was neither apt nor perfect. Whereby, Cicero gives us to understand, that all
speech, whether prose or verse, depends upon the judgment of our hearing;
and that it must by Orators, as well as Poets, be regarded, that every man in
hearing may be pleased.

And this is not only commanded by our ancient Authors, but acknowledged and
prescribed by Grammarians: for, Diomedes is by Despauterius cited, saying thus;
We must always be careful of Good sound, or pleasant utterance of words. l.
12. aut. 13. Noct. Attic. c. 19
Euphonia: for, Euphonia in words is sometimes of more worth in speech, then is
Analogy or Grammar-precepts.

And Aulus Gellius (or, as late Critics call him, Agellius) says, Amongst the
elegantest Writers, there was more account made of the sweet sound of words and
voices, called Euphonia by the Grecians; than of the rule or discipline which
was observed by the Grammarians.

But let Gellius, Macrobius, or others, say what they please; they almost all
proceed by Art, and not by hearing, Rest. 1.12
says Cominius. And whatsoever they acknowledge in this kind, they still
return to Grammar, Ib. 13
and leave the use and custom of speech, that has been so much celebrated by
our Ancestors.

Had Cominius read the Preface to our English Grammar, he would doubtless have
acknowledged, that our better sort of Schoolmasters have an honest desire to
follow the best, easiest, and most ready way to languages: for, says he that
wrote that Preface, It is not amiss if one, seeing by trial an easier and
readier way than the common sort of Teachers do, would say what he has
proved, and for the commodity allowed; that other, not knowing the same, might
by experience prove the like, and then by proof reasonable judge the like: not
heerby excluding the better way when it is found; but in the mean season
forbidding the worse. Yet I must needs with Cominius confess, They still
reflect upon some Grammar: for, all this speech has relation to our common
Grammar; and that, because they know not how to bring that way of custom into
practice.

For, though some will grant, that in the vulgar languages of Nations, Use and
Custom may do much: yet for such Tongues as have their maine foundation in
the works of ancient Writers, and are now in use only amongst Scholars, they
cannot think of any course, but only Grammar.

And yet I make no doubt, but these men will grant, that the best and most
imitable part of Custom, whether in languages extinct or flourishing, consists
in Authors; and that (as well in Greek and Latin, as any other usual Tongues)
there is no want of worthy Authors. Now, we that desire not to follow the
dross of Custom, but the purity; what should keep us from learning languages
also by written Use and Custom? which is common, not alone to those that are
in daily use; but also such as are extinguished.

They 'l say, In such as are extinct we cannot hear or imitate the custom of
their native Tone, their accent and delivery.

It Is true: but, finding none alive that may be made our lawful Judges heerin,
let every man hold that to be the best that is judged best by his own Nation.

They 'l tell me, that the same in every School is at this Present put in
practice.

I acknowledge, it is done as well as their Grammar-bounds will suffer it: but,
this is but Grammatice. I would have it, as the Authors themselves would have
it, to be done Latin, and without the Grammar.

But, this reducement of Custom to practice, impossible, because it neither is
nor has been found out, nor heard of; ridiculous, in that, being to be done
without the rules of Grammar, it would be done without all reason, and such as
learn should learn like Parrats.

The objection of impossibility makes me smile,

About the being ridiculous, Cicero said so; than to say, Priscianus says that
Cicero said so.

Some, that are thus far convinced and brought forward, fall upon this block of
opinion, that they are bound (as, of this, or that University) to defend
Grammar: which is like that old and rotten position, We are bound rather to
err with the multitude, than to follow truth with two or three.

But these are such as do not perceive, that in Grammatica there is a thing
required besides the name and shadow thereof. The thing is that, that they are
tied unto; which is, the Art of writing and of speaking rightly (which, though
it may be understood of Grammar in the first simplicity; yet let us now take
it as they do): this thing if it be not to be found in ordinary Grammars, they
are bound to seek it elsewhere; and where they really do find it, there to
honor and observe it; whether under name or title of Grammatica, Logonomia, or
what else soever, so the thing be there: for, though it should have the
properest name in opinion that might be; if the thing be absent, all is but
deceit and vanity. And, for mine own part, I have as long sucked the milk of
Universities, and acknowledge as much respect and obedience unto them, as many
others; and therefore have some reason to know their motherly love to be such,
that, what we receive, they had rather should turn to wholesome and effectual
nourishment, than a seeming and diseasing fullness. But, let deeds dispute the
rest, and let us return to Custom: in which, I had rather satisfy the world
with other men's authority, than mine own opinion.

And to this purpose Cominius says, Rest. 1.13.
If we would follow the example of ancient Authors, Orators, Historians, and
Poets, either in Latin, or in Greek; and should be exercised in their custom
of speaking, which we find within their writings; Ib. 1.11.
there is no doubt but we may arrive unto their very height of elegancy.

But, there are four especial reasons, alleged by mine Author, why few, or
none perceive the custom of the Auntients.

First, they put whatsoever they would speak, word for word, into an other
language, in the same order wherein they speak it in their own. Now, though
this may in some fall out well; yet there are many speeches, sentences,
proverbs, sayings and authorities, of two words only, or of more; which,
translated into three or four languages, are to be set down in every one
after a diverse order, and other words are to be received. For, every tongue
has proper and peculiar words, which are neither agreeable to other tongues,
or liable to translation; by which the eleganter sayings, the grauer sentences,
and the more usual proverbs are especially composed. Wherefore they are
deceived, which speak according to the order of other languages: which is
known to be much used, and most amongst the more unlearned.

Secondly: though such as follow Grammar, and are a middle sort of Scholars, do
not always tranflate verbally; yet they speak not by the order, and custom of
the Auntients; but, place their words after a grammatical order, and
construction; rather obeying the rules, and precepts of Grammarians, than the
custom of the Auntients, and the judgment of hearing: which is contrary to
the precepts of Cicero.

Thirdly: though the learned sort, and such as would be called Poets, and
Orators, translate not always word for word; nor do every where observe a
grammatical construction: yet they come not near the Latin elegancie; as
having been brought up from their childhood by the Art of Grammar, and
Analogy. They take a pride to frame new words, without regard unto the
judgment of the ear: which though they be sometimes placed according to the
order of the Auntients, yet are they harsh, and without elegancie; because they
are not moderated, and measured by the ear, as their Ancestors would have
them.

Fourthly: the greater part of men, and especially of the learneder sort, are
ashamed forsooth, to speak in the same words, and in the same order placed,
that the Auntients spoke them; lest it might be cast in their teeth, that they
knew not how to speak of themselves, without using the ways, and words of
others.

From these fore-alledged reasons, there arise (says he) innumerable
Soloecism's, and Barbarisms, not only in the Latin, but all other languages:
of which, says he, Grammarians dream many things; but I dare say, that few of
them know what either a Soloecism, or a Barbarism means; because they make
all to have relation to their Grammar. And I so much the rather believe him, in
that Our Thomasius Dictionary translates the word Soloecismus, Incongruitie;
even to the eleventh Edition. And, says he, By how much the more they
endeavor to flee these Solaecisms, so much the more and oftener by their rules
and precepts do they fall into them. For, Inst. Or. l. 1. c. 9
Quintilian says, Soloecismus non est in sensu, sed in complexu; is not in the
sense, but in the disposition of the words, or foulding of them one with
another: Ib.
which in * another place he makes more manifest; saying, A Soloecisme is an
inconvenient placing of last and first together in a speech of one sentence;
meaning, by inconvenient, that which is not in use among the ancient Writers.
For, whatsoever is in use, is neither inconvenient, nor a Soloecism.

Now, let Grammarians consider the deceit of their Art: for, I will prove,
says he, that they introduce many Soloecismus and Barbarisms in the latin
language; and I will admit of no other testimonies heerin, then such as are of
their own profession. For Servius, which is called the Prince of Grammarians,
writes, that the Art of Grammar commands many precepts to be followed,
against custom, and the use of ancient Authors. So says Nonius Marcellus
also: which being true, it necessarily follows, that they command and teach
men many Soloecisms. And that made Servius say, The authority of the Ancients
confounds Art; and Quintilian, that there are some things that cannot be
delivered by Art: l. 9. c. 4.
for, if the case we began withal be harsh, it is to be changed: wherein
he shows, that all grammatical proceedings should be altered, if the ear be
not well pleased. And that made Cicero say, In Or.
We ought rather to offend in Art, than in the sweetness of the ear. Which,
Nonius Marcellus ratifieth; showing, that cases, genders, tenses, conjugations,
declensions, and all other grammatical precepts, are often changed by ancient
Authors, against the rules and precepts of Grammarians; as well in prose, by
Cicero, Livius, l. 1.14. Rest.
Salustius, and the like; as in verse, by Catullus, Virgilius, Ovidius,
Lucanus, and other of the best and worthiest Poets. And thus they wound
themselves, says he, with their own weapons.

Ascham, citing the words of Salustius, l. 2. f. 66.
Multis sibi quisque imperium petentibus, says; I believe, the best Grammarian
in England can scarce give a good rule, why quisque, the nominative case
without any Verb, is so thrust up amongst so many oblique cases. I must
confess, he condemns him for it: but, by Mr. Aschams leave, if I could not
better out of better Authors express my self, I had rather trust Salust in the
Latin, than Mr. Ascham.

It follows therefore, that they labor in vain, that hope to write or speak
eloquent Latin, or other languages; and would make their way thereunto by
learning or following Grammar. For (as it is said) if the last did justly and
deservedly reprehend the former, then could not the former teach us to write or
speak rightly: but, if the last did undeservedly reprehend the rest, it is
impossible that he should teach us. Now, if nor first nor last can teach us,
then may we justly conclude with our alleged Authors, that of Gra^marians
there is none ca^ teach us. Rest. l. 1.15.
Wherefore, Cominius above an hundred years since said, It was necessary that
we should expect others: but, if any man would further know why or to what end
we should expect them, he is lately most learnedly answered; Vic. S. Alb. Org.
mag. vel Rest. Mag.
Vt res de integro tentetur melioribus praesidijs.

And those that are expected to new-mould the way to languages, must draw their
course by Use and Custom, till Babel be reformed by Zorobabel.

For, l. 1.15. R.
says Cominius, if we exercise our selves in Use and Custom, we shall
sooner, easier, and more securely attain unto the elegancy of the latin
language; than by art, or all the rules thereof: for, by exercise of reading,
writing, and speaking after ancient Custom, we shall conceive three things
which are of greatest moment in any languages: first, the true and certain
declining and conjugating of words, and all things belonging to Grammar, will
without labor, and whether we will or no, thrust themselves upon us.

Secondly, we shall taste of the manner of speaking used by the Ancients,
together with the elegancy, grace, pleasure, and delightfulness of the Latin.

Thirdly, we shall get the judgment of the ear, and retain the same for
ever: which, Grammar cannot help us to; in that it is imperfect, and beguileth
us.

Linacer, Camden, and some others, have made them styles of some perfection:
yet they will tell you in your ear, that they have gotten it rather by reading,
and a memory or taste of the custom of Authors, after reading, and practice
upon that taste; than by Art, rule or precept. For, if it be well examined, we
shall find few scholars arrived to a laudable style of writing, but have
forgot the most part of their Grammar-precepts. And indeed, the sooner they
leave them, and fall to reading, and after it to writing; the sooner do they
come to their perfection.

We find, that such as are brought up by Use, and exercise, in any other
sciences, are for the most part in short time great Proficients: nay, if we
look into the ordinary Tongues of Nations, there are none so harsh or
difficult, either in speaking or in writing, wherein a boy that shall be
exercised, will not within the compass of two or three years without any Art,
but merely by use, example, observation and ear, grow very perfect. Which,
our Travelers might with my self observe in the lower and higher Germany,
Bohemia, Italy, Spain, France, and other Countries, in children of our own
and other Nations: As also that among the Polonians, and in many other regio^s,
there are every where servants, boys and wenches, found to speak both good and
congruous Latin; and that without all Art, but ear and exercise.

Which, Montaign veresies in his own person; Essaies, l. 1. c. 25
telling us this following History. I must needs, says he acknowledge that the
Greek and Latin tongues are great ornaments in a Gentleman; but, they are
purchased at an ouer-high rate. Use it, who list: I will tell you how they may
be gotten better cheap, and much sooner than is ordinaryly used; which was
tried in mine own education.

My late father (having, by all possible means and industry, sought amongst
the wisest and men of best understanding, to find a most exquisite and ready
way of teaching) being advised of the inconveniences then in use, was given to
understand that the lingering while, and best part of our youth that we employ
in learning the tongues (which cost the Greeks, and Latins nothing) is the
only cause that we can never attain to their absolute perfection of skill,
and knowledge. I do not believe that, to be the only cause. But, so it is,
that the expedient my father found out was this, that being yet at nurse, and
before the first loosing of my tongue, I was delivered to a Germane (who dyed,
since, a most excellent Physicia^ in France) he being altogether ignorant of
the French tongue, but exquisitely ready and skil-full in the Latin. This
man, whom my father had sent for of purpose, and to whom he gave very great
entertainment, had me continually in his arms, and was mine only Ouerseer.
There were also joined unto him two of his countrie-men, but not so learned,
whose charge was to attend, and now and then to play with me; and all these
together did never entertain me with other than the Latin tongue. As for
others of his howsehould, it was an inviolable rule, that neither himself, nor
my mother, nor man nor maide-seruaunt were suffered to speak one word in my
company; except such Latine-wordes, as every one had learned to chatt and
prattle with me. It were strange to tell, how every one in the house profited
therein. My father and my mother learned so much Latin, that for a need they
could understand it, when they heard it spoken: so did all the howshold
servants; namely, such as were nearest, and most about me. To be short: we
were all so Latinized, that the towns round about us had their share of it; In
so much, as even at this day, many Latin names both of workmen, and their
tools, are yet in use amongst them. And as for my self, I was about six
years oulde, and could understand no more French, or Perigordine, then
Arabic; and that without Art, without books, rules, or Grammar, without
whipping, or whyning, I had gotten as pure a Latin tongue as my Master could
speak; the rather because I could neither mingle or confound the same, with
other tongues. If for an essaye they would give me a Theme; whereas the
fashion in Colleges is to give it in French, I had it in bad Latin, to reduce
the same into good. And Nicholas Grucchi, who has written de comitijs
Romanorum; William Guerenti, who has commented Aristotle; George Buchanan,
that famous Scottish Poet; and Mark Authony Muret, whom (whilst he lived) both
France, and Ralie to this day acknowledge, to have been the best Orator; all
these have been my familiar Tutors, and have often told me, that in mine
infancy I had the Latin Tongue so ready and so perfect, that themselves feared
to take me in hand. And Buchanan (whom afterward I saw attending on the
Marshall of Brissack) told me, he was about to write a Treatise of the
institution of children, and that he took the model and pattern thereof from
mine.

And this Form of teaching and learning of languages was of that authority with
Ludovicus Vives, De corr. Art. l. 2
that he confesses, he had rather be thus employed for one year, than to
bestow ten years to this purpose under the best and most reputed
Schoolmasters.

The practice also of written Use and Custom, which I showed to a most grave,
wise, and powerful Nobleman of this Kingdom, did so content him, that he
spared not to tell me, he had rather give ten pounds a month to have his
child have this instruction, than to give five pounds a year for other
ordinary education.

Ascham in like manner affirms, l. 2.
that Queen ELIZABETH, who never took yet Greek or Latin Grammar in her hand
(after the first declining of a Noun and a Verb) did in a year or two attain
to such a perfect understanding in both Tongues, and to such a ready utterance
of the Latin, and that with such judgment; as they were few in number in both
Universities, or elsewhere in England, that were in both Tongues comparable
with her Majesty.

Scaliger also, without any Grammar at all, Mr. Th. Hain.
did come to an admired perfection in the Greek Tongue. And other here in
England, more worthy remembrance, are comne without any rules at all to many
languages. Thus did Tib. and Ca. Gracchi: Romans Ciceronianus. f. 10
thus did Laelia, the Mutiae and Luciniae: thus did Hortensia, thus Curio,
learn their eloquence: And thus, among the Crassi, the Scipiones, the Mutij,
and many other Roman Oraters before Julius Caesar, the name and honor of
well-speaking flourished entire and incorrupted: not by reason, art or science;
but only by good Use, Custom and conversation. And thus, and no otherwise,
for above three thousand years, were all languages learned; and so are still,
though in some places the Art of Grammar, with greater toil and lesser profit,
be embraced.

And that made Schorus say, We are persuaded, In specim. etc.
that children may by imitation, example and Custom (not only come to speak,
but) be made better Grammarians, Orators and Philosophers, than by precepts.

Now, if Custom, says Varro, be to be followed, l. 1. de Analogia.
there is no need of precepts: for, if we follow Custom, precepts will follow
us. And he spares not to confess, that he cannot command the Custom of the
people; but their Custom will command his: for, says he, whatsoever confused
Custom has received, must and will pass without contradiction.

And that made Marcellus tell Tiberius Caesar, Tranquillus cis. a Zuing. Theat.
l. 1.
that he could not make words, though he could make men, free of the City: and
he gave Capito the lie about it, l. 1.13.
in Caesar's presence. And this Custom, and the change thereof, Quintilian
acknowledges, not only in speech, but in Orthographie.

The fruitless endeauours also of many in our own language, namely of Smith
and Mulcaster (cited by Mr. Praef. Logon.
Alex. Gill) make them acknowledge, that, after the loss of much time and
paper, all must be remitted to the sway of Custom. And yet have men of note,
and the more noted for knowing thus much, once more endeavored against their
own knowledge: which, I wonder at.

Moreover: Or. l. 1.
Cicero tells us, that it is intolerable, in discourse to forsake the ordinary
form of speech, and the usual or common sense of Custom: for, Use of all
other is the best Lord and Master; which, ruling it self by the judgment of
the ear all speech must be likewise ruled by it. And, says he, experience
teaches us, that such, whether in prose or poesy, are especially to be
commended, as, by the position or counterpoize of their words, bring pleasure
to their Auditory, and by their sentences do teach them something; yet so,
that the peoples ordinary Use and Custom be observed: for, Use and Custom are
of that authority, that they transform ancient languages, degrade words
present, coin new ones, and recall old ones at their pleasure. And this made
Horace say, Art. poet.
Vt syluaefolijs pronos mutantur in annos,
Prima cadunt: ita verborum vetus interitaetas,
Et invenum ritu florent, modo nata vigentque.
As woods are changed in leaves by winters fall:
So words do change their age that is past recall,
And newborn youth-like flourish and top all.
And then, Ib.
-- mortalia facta peribunt:
Nedum sermonum stet honos and gratia vivax.
Multa renascentur quae iam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet vsus:
Quem penes arbitrium est, and ius, and norma loquendi.
-- all mortal facts give place:


Much less should speech keep it first praise and grace.

Custom brings words vnus'd, to Use; and such,

As are most usual, to displease as much.

The worth of speech is judged by Customs touch.

And this made Aulus Gellius likewise affirm, that the latin Tongue proceeded
not by Art, but by Use and Custom.

Thus we may gather, that Art and Use are almost opposite: which, In
Virgilianis expositionibus.
Servius the Prince of Grammarians plainly ratifies; telling us often, that
Authority (which is nothing but the written Use or Custom of ancient Authors)
does confound Art. Whereof, Nonius Marcellus gives us this Instance: All that
have followed Art, deny that we ought to add a Preposition unto Verbs: but the
authority of the Ancients bids us place it before them. And Servius gives us
another; saying, Art requires, that we should not put a Preposition with the
names of Cities, but with the rest we should: yet Authors, says he, for the
most part, use the contrary; and he cites Cicero and Virgil comprehending
verse as well as prose; lest Grammarians in Poets should excuse it with
poetical license. And for this cause, Quintilian said, Inst. l. 9. c. 4
The case is to be altered, if that which we began withal run harshly. As
if Quintilian should say with Nonius Marcellus, The case, gender, tenses,
conjugations, declensions, and all grammatical collections, are to be altered
if speech sound ill in pronunciation.: for, authority and experience tell us,
that we can neither in the Latin, nor in any other Tongue, be obedient unto
other rules or reasons, than Custom and our sense of hearing.

And Badius affirms, In Comment. super Virg. in 1. Aeneidos.
that construction is to be sometimes taken from the custom of speaking: for,
if it be taken according to the rules of Grammarians, it is altogether
displeasing; in that it depriueth words of their dignity, and sentences of
their weight and gravity: l. 1. de Analogia vid. Iul. C. Scal. de cause. ling.
lat. l. 9. a. 161
and Varro concludes (what Julius Scaliger confirms) There are many in this
kind, in which we rather follow Custom, than the reason of words.

Whereupon, Hermannus Buschius was not afraid to tell us plainly, that it is a
very childish and ridiculous thing, especially in one of man's estate, to allow
of nothing but of boyish rules; and to be so besotted in them, that he houlds
it a great offense to step a nails breadth from the bounds that they have
limited; and to be altogether ignorant in the authority of the grauest Writers,
or despise it; and to accost rather trifling precepts, than the approved
Authors of so many ages, on whom the latin Tongue depends, and lies as at
anchor: for, we must not speak only as we are commanded by Grammar-rules;
but rather altogether as most excellent Authors have written. Make thou any
doubt of following that which Cicero, Varro, Livius, Florus, Valerius, and both
the Plinij, and others of the purest Authors have spoken? Do thou as yet
imagine, that he that uses Cicero's and Virgil's words, does speak improperly?
Such as are inthrald to Alexanders Grammar, read in Virgil, Pars and certare
parati. Pars ingenti subiere feretro. Pars ingentem formidine turpi scandunt
rursus equum. O vir fortis atque amicus clama^t: and those that Quintilian
produces; which seem, says he, and are not faulty; because it is the custom
of speaking amongst Authors, as Tragaedia Thyestes, Ludi floralia and
Megalesia, and the like. But, say they, we must not imitate this form of
speaking or writing; as if we were necessarily tied like children to atte^d
rather the regular proceeding of some one word, than unto the matter it self.
Donatus, on the Prologue of Adelphos in Terence, wrote, In Adelphis Terentiana:
but, if I shall say so, you will reprove me, and make me write, In Adelphis
Terentianis. But I Will esteem you but as a freshman, or an elementary scholar.
If therefore you shall think Maxima pars homines morem hunc habent, not to be
rightly said, because the Grammar-rule has, Two Substantives in one and the
same case cannot be joined without a Copula. [or, Two Substantives cannot come
together, betokening diverse things, unless the later be put in the genitive
case] you are deceived: In Orat. pro C. Rab.
for, Cicero says, Quid vociferabere, december millia talenta Gabinio esse
promissa; and not, december millia talentorum. And Livius says, Et Philippei
nummi aurei december quatuor millia, vigintiquatuor; and not, aureorum nummorum
millia quatuordecim, etc. Wherefore, says he, I bouldly affirm, that the
latin Tongue is not to be sought-for out of rules or Gammars, but out of
Authors.

Thus it appears (says Cominius) that Hermannus Buschius allows of all that
I have written of this subject, and confirms it.

For first he perceived, and proved, that ancient Authors spoke neither by Art,
nor by the rules of Grammar. Next, that he that will follow Grammar or her
rules, must of necessity despise Orators, Poets, and other ancient Authors:
whereby he concludes, that the precepts of this Art, and the use of the
Ancients are contrary: and that we should not speak according to the rules of
Art, but according to the custom of Ancients. Then, that it is a foolish thing
to be afraid to follow the speech of the Ancients. And that Grammarians command
things contrary. For they judge Terence, Virgil, Cicero, and the like to be
the elegantest Writers: and yet they prohibit our imitatio^ of them in many
things; l. 7. c. de dat. and abl. plur. prima decl.
as Priscianus himself, where (he says) the ancient Authors are found to have
written many things against rule, vitiously, both in these and in other cases,
l. 7. c. de dat. and abl. pl. 2 a. decl.
wherein they are not to be imitated. And in another place, he intimates the
contrary: as, that we ought to know the reason of Analogy; but rather to
follow the custom of Authors. And a little before, he says; There are some
Nounes whose cases are not all in use: which though we may by Analogy
produce; yet because we find them not in Authors, I hold they ought to be
refused. No man can deny but these are diverse and contrary. And then, this
Buschius teaches that the ancient Authors very often bring many things against
the rules of Grammarians; wherefore it is most certain, that these neither
wrote, nor spoke by this Art. Which Nonius Marcellus shows, and proves by
innumerable examples. And it follows, that the first and later Grammarians are
deceived. For they drew their Art out of ancient Authors, and went about to
prove it out of their authority. Again: it follows that others were yet more
deceived, that excuse the custom of Authors, by figures, poetical license, and
other Grammatical inventions; whereas they find that these ancient Authors
neither knew them, nor observed them.

And in conclusion, he affirms the Latin Language is not to be sought by Art,
but out of Authors. And it manifestly appears that there are two kinds of
Latin; one natural, the other adulterate. The natural is that which the men
of authority amongst the Romans, the Nobility, and that which almost all men
spoke, and wherein the ancient Authors Cicero and the rest did write; in which
are the pleasures of the language, true eloquence, all delight and perfect
elegancy; who composed their works by no Art of Grammar, but after the Use and
Custom of speaking, and especially the judgment of hearing. In perf. Or.
And therefore Cicero said, Our Ancesters thought good, that we should obey
Custom, linked with the judgment of hearing: for, Custom has given leave,
that it shall be lawful to offend for sweetness sake. Yet Custom permits,
that we should produce something which the common people speak not; but not
unless it be for sweetness sake, the pleasure of the ear, and to utter those
things which have better sound than others; and in pronouncing, fall better,
without offense to Use and Custom. And this is that license which the
Gra^marians call poetical License: which they think to be given only unto
Poets, to help the measure of their Verses; and do not understand, that it is
as well given unto Orators, Historians, Philosophers, and all other whatsoever,
according to their inclination or election. And of this license, only Grammar
does defraud us; nay, it does confound and drown it. And this begets that other
latin Tongue which is adulterate, and daily depraved with new rules and
precepts; and so involued and intricate, that how thou should either read,
write or speak, says he, thou know not. And this almost every man
perceiues, that has betaken himself to reading of ancient Authors, and begins
but to taste their elegancie: And this, should every man of wisdom look unto.
For, there is no diligence or subtilty, says he, that can bring us to the
latin elega^cie, unless we absolutely so renounce Grammar, that we do not
regard so much as the least rule thereof; but only rely upon the judgment and
pleasure of the ear, and speak after Custom, so far as it is limited by
ancient Authors. And thus without any toil we shall be eloquent. For, Grammar
is so far from being the foundation of the latin Tongue (or any other); that
it is rather the greatest hinderance therein, and cause of all the errors and
contentions that daily rise among Grammarians: As it is also in my judgment,
says he, the main root, fountain and beginning of all barbarism. Nor find I
other out of Varro, Cicero, Pliny, Quintilian., or other ancient Orators or
Poets. And whosoever shall be led by it, will be deceived, and never come to
elegancy, either in this or any other languages.

But, notwithstanding all these reasons, all these experiments, all these grave
and weighty testimonies; I doubt not, but I shall hear of some Demetrius, who
with his Associats, to keep up the trade, will still be crying, Magna Diana
Ephesiorum.

Wherefore, I appeal to thee, my Defendress, and to thy Tribunal; most humbly
imploring no other redress of injurious oppressions, but that the presence of
thy self, O Truth, may be so much respected, that blinde-fould Opinion,
Patroness of Grammar and Grammarians, may cease to govern and to keep the
people (as her self is) hood-winkt: And that, upon thy straight and imperial
Command, she may leave all men indifferent, and in the posture of an equal
balance, ready to turn, where reason, sense and demonstration are most
ponderous.

And the waking part of Students shall not only acknowledge thy divine and
powerful hand in the cure of their deplored lethargy: but my self, thy
deuote suppliant, in lieu thereof shall be obliged in my next endeavors, to
discover in what manner this use, Custom, and Authority should be sought and
ordered, for the speedy, cheap, easy, and infallible furnishing of this, and
every other Nation, with all sorts of purest Languages.

FINIS.
Faults escaped, in some Copies.
Page Line 2. 28. Thenth, read Theuth. 2. 30. this in that read that in this.
23. 26. Liuius, Andronicus, read Liuius Andronicus. 32. ^. been found read
been hitherto found.


