THE KATOPATHA OR PASSIONATE Centurie of Love, Divided into two parts: whereof,
the first expresses the Authors sufferance in Love: the latter, his long
farewell to Love and all his tyranny.

Composed by Thomas Watson Gentleman; and published at the request of certain
Gentlemen his very friends.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf for Gabriell Cawood, dwellinge in Paul's
Churchyard at the Sign of the Holy Ghost.

To the Right Honorable my very good Lord Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxenford,
Vicount Bulbecke, Lord of Escales, and Badlesmere, and Lord High Chamberlain
of England, all happiness.
ALexander the Great, passing on a time by the workeshop of Apelles, curiously
surueyed some of his doings: whose long stay in viewing them, brought all the
people into so great a good liking of the painters workmanship, that
immediately after, they bought up all his pictures, what price soever he set
them at.

And the like good hap, ( Right Honorable,) befell unto me lately,
concerning these my Love Passions, which then chanced to Apelles, for his
Portraites. For since the world has understood, (I know not how) that your
Honor had willingly voutchsafed the acceptance of this work, and at
convenient leisures favorably perused it, being as yet but in written hand,
many have oftentimes and earnestly called upon me, to put it to the press,
that for their money they might but see, what your Lordship with some liking had
already perused. And therewithal some of them said (either to yield your
Honor his due praise, for soundnes of judgment; or to please me, of whom
long since they had conceived well) that Alexander would like of no lines, but
such as were drawn by the cunning hand, and with the curious pensill of
Apelles. Which I set not down here to that end, that I would confer my
Poemes with Apelles Portraites, for worthiness; albeit I fitly compare your
Honors person with Alexanders, for excellency. But how bold soever I have
been, in turning out this my petty poor flock upon the open Common of the
wide world, where every man may behold their nakedness, I humbly make
request, that if any storm fall unlooked for (by the fault of malicious high
foreheads, or the poison of evil edged tongues) these my little ones may
shrowde themselves under the broad leafed Platane of your Honors patronage.
And thus at this present, I humbly take my leave; but first wishing the
continual increase of your Lordships honor, with abundance of true Friends,
reconciliation of all Foes, and what good soever tends unto perfect happiness.

Your Lordships humbly at command Thomas Watson.

To the friendly Reader.
COurteous Reader, if any thing herein either please or profitte thee, afforde
me thy good word in recompense of my pains: if ought offend or hurt thee, I
desire that thou forget the one, and forgive the other. This toye being liked,
the next may prove better; being discouraged, will cut of the likeliehood of my
travail to come* But by that means all will be well, and both parties
pleased. For neither shall I repent my labor in the like, nor thou be any
more troubled with my faults or follies.

Yet for this once I hope thou will in respect of my travail in penning these
louepassions, or for pity of my pains in suffering them (although but
supposed) so survey the faults herein escaped, as either to wink at them, as
ouersightes of a blind Lover; or to excuse them, as idle toys proceedinge
from a youngling frenzy; or lastly, to defend them, by saying, it is nothing
Praeter decorum for a maiemed man to halt in his pase, where his wound
enforces him, or for a Poet to falter in his Poem, when his matter requires
it. Homer in me^tioning the swiftnes of the wind, makes his verse to run in
posthaste all upon Dactilus: and Virgill in expressing the striking down of an
ox, lets the end of his hexameter fall withal, Procumbit humibos.

Therefore if I roughhewed my verse, where my sense was unsettled, whether
through the nature of the passion, which I felt, or by rule of art, which I had
learned, it may seem a happy fault; or if it were so framed by counsel, thou
may think it well done; if by chance, happily.

Yet write I not this to excuse my self of such errors, as are escaped either
by dotage, or ignorance: but those I refer to thy gentle curtisie and
favorable construction, or lay many of them upon the Printers neck, whom I
would blame by his own press, if he would suffer me.

As for any Aristarchus, Momus, or Zoilus, if they pinch me more then is
reasonable, thou courteous Reader, which art of a better disposition, shall
rebuke them in my behalf; saying to the first, that my birds are al of mine
own hatching, and that my only overmuch have made Sol angry in their
Birthday; to the second, that although Venus be in my verse, yet her slipper is
left out; to the last and worst, that I rather take upon me to write better
then Chaerilus, then once suppose to imitate Homer.

I am over long, as well for the fear I had to be bitten by such as are
captious, as for the desire I have to please thee that art friendly. But since
I now well remember me, that nothing is more easlie let flowne, nothing sooner
dispersed, nothing later recalled back again, then the bitter blast of an
evil spoaken man, and that he, whom it shall hurt, has no recure but by
patience; I will set it behind my heel, as a hurt remediless, or else, when
it comes, salve it up with patience.

In the mean space (courteous Reader) I once again crave thy favorable
judgment: and so, for brevity sake, abruptly make an end; committing the to
God, and my work to thy favor.

Thine, as thou art his, Thomas Watson.

John Lyly to the Author his friend.
MY good friend, I have read your new passions, and they have renewed mine old
pleasures, the which brought to me no less delight, the^ they have done to
your self commendations. And certes had not one of mine eyes about serious
affairs been watchful, both by being too too busy had been wanton: such is
the nature of persuading pleasure, that it melts the marrowe before it scorch
the skin, and burns before it warmeth: Not unlike unto the oil of Ieat,
which rotteth the bone and never ranckleth the flesh, or the Scarab flies,
which enter into the root and never touch the rind.

And whereas you desire to have my opinion, you may imagine that my stomach is
rather cloyed, then quesie, and therefore mine appetite of less force the^ mine
affection, fearing rather a surfeit of sweetenes, then desiring a satisfying.
The repeating of Love, wrought in me a remembrance of liking, but serching the
very veins of my heart, I could find nothing but a broad scarre, where I
left a deep wound: and loose stringes, where I tied hard knots: and a table
of steel, where I framed a plot of wax.

Whereby I noted that young swannes are gray, and the old white, young trees
tender, and the old tough, young me^ amorous, and growing in years, either
wiser or warier. The Coral in the water is a soft weed, on the land a hard
stone: a sword frieth in the fire like a black ele, but laid in earth like
white snow: the heart in love is altogether passionate, but free from desire,
altogether careless.

But it is not my intent to inueigh against love, which women account but a
bare word, and that me^ reverence as the best God: only this I would add
without offense to Gentlewomen, that were not men more supersticious in their
praises, the^ women are constant in their passions: Love would either shortly
be worn out of use, or men out of love, or women out of lightness. I ca^
condemn none but by conjecture, nor commend any but by lying, yet suspicion is
as free as thought, and as far as I see as necessary, as credulity.

Touching your Mistres I must needs think well, seeing you have written so
well, but as false glasses show the fairest faces, so fine gloses amend the
baddest fancies. Apelies painted the Phoenix by hearesay not by sight, and
Lysippus engraued Vulcan with a straight leg, whom nature framed with a
poult foot, which proves men to be of greater affection then judgment. But
in that so aptly you have varied upon women, I will not vary from you, for
confess I must, and if I should not, yet might I be compelled, that to ^oue
were the sweetest thing in the earth: If women were the faithfullest, and that
women would be more constant if men were more wise. And seeing you have used
me so friendly, as to make me acquainted with your passions, I will shortly
make you pryuie to mine, which I would be loath the printer should see, for
that my fancies being never so crooked he would put the^ in straight lines,
unfit for my humor^, necessary for his art, who sets down, blind, in as
many letters as seeing.

Farewell.
Authoris ad Libellum suum Protrepticon.
VAde, precor, timidus patrium mittende per orbe^,
Nec nugas iacta parue libelle tuas.
Si quis Aristarchus mordaci laeserit ore,
Culparum causas ingeniosus habe.
Si rogat, vnde venis, dic tu de paupere Vena,
Non ambire tuas laurea serta comas.
Sique rogat, verbis quis adauxit metra solutis,
Ex amimo nomen dic cecidisse tibi.
Forsitan intrabis nostrae sacraria Diuae,
Quam colit in medijs multa Diana rosis,
Quae Cybele caeli nostri; quae gloria regni
Vnica; quaeque sui sola Sybilla soli;
Quae vatum lima est; quae doctis doctior ipsa;
Juno opibus, Pallas moribus, ore Venus;
Quae superat Reges, quantum querceta myricas;
Quam recinat Famae buccina nulla satis,
Illa tuos sancto si spectet lumine rithmos,
O quantum gemino Sole beatus eris?
Tu sed stratus humi, supplex amplectere plantas,
Cuius erit vili pondere laesamanus.
Hic tamen, hic moneo, nesperes tanta futura;
Attica non auris murmura vana probat.
Hic quoque seu subeas Sydnaei, sieve Dyeri
Scrinia, qua Musis area bina patet;
Dic te Xeniolum non diuitis esse clientis,
Confectum Dryadis art, rudique manu;
Et tamen exhibitum Vero, qui magna meretur
Virtute et vera nobilitate sua.
Inde serenato vultu te mitis vterque
Perleget, et naeuos condet vterque tuos.
Dum ^amulus Verum comitaris in aurea tecta,
Officij semper sit tibi cura tui.
Tum fortasse pijs Nymphis dabit ille legendum,
Cum de Cyprigeno verba iocosa serent.
Si qua tui nimium Domini miseretur amantis,
Sic crepita folijs, vt ge^^uisse putet.
Tetrica si qua tamen blandos damnauerit ignes,
Dic tu, mentito me tepuisse foco;
Tumque refer talos, et fixum calce sigillum,
Qua Venerem temnis, filiolumque suum.
Taliter efficies, vt amet te candida turba,
Forsan and Autoris palma futura tui.
Viue libelle, precor, Domino faelicior ipso,
Quem sine demerito sors inopina premit:
Denique, (si visum fuerit) dic montis in alto
Pierij vacuum tempora dura pati.
A Quatorzain, in the commendation of Master Thomas Watson, and of his Mistres,
for whom he wrote this Book of Passionat Sonnetes.
THe starr's, which did at Petrarch's byrthday reign,
Were fixed again at thy nativity,
Destening thee the Thuscan's poesy,
Who skald the skies in lofty Quatorzain,
The Muses gave to thee thy fatal vain,
The very same, that Petrarch had, whereby
Madonna Laures same is grown so by,
And that whereby his glory he did gain.
Thou have a Laure, whom well tho^ do commend,
And to her praise thy passion songs do tend;
Ye both such praise deserve, as naught can smother;
In brief with Petrarch and his Laure in grace
Thou and thy Dame be equal, save percase
Thou pass the one, and ^heexcell's the other.
G. Bucke.

To the Author.
THy book beginning sweet and ending sour,
Dear friend, bewrayes thy false success in love,
Where smiling first, thy Mistres falls to lowre,
When thou did hope her courtesy to prove;
And finding thy expected luck to fail,
Thou false from praise, and do begin to rail.
To use great terms in praise of thy devise,
I think were vain: therefore I leave them out;
Content thee, that the Censure of the wise
Has put that needeles question out of doubt:
Yet how I weigh the work that thou have wrought,
My judgment I refer unto thy thought.
T. Acheley.

An Ode, written to the Muses Concerning this Author.
YOu sacred Nymphs, Apolloes sisters fair,
Daughters of Jove, parents of rare devise,
Why take you no delight in change of air?
Is Helicon your only paradise?
Has Britan soil no hill, no heath, no well,
No wood, no wit, wherein you list to dwell?
Ladies voutsafe with patience once to view
Our lively springs, high hills, and pleasant shades,
And as you like the seat and countries hew,
Pitche down your tents, and use your sporting trades:
Hard hap it is, if nothing here you find
That you can deem delightful to your mind.
Lo Watson pressed to enterteine your power
In pleasante springs of flowing wit, and skill:
If you esteem the pleasures of his bower,
Let Britan bear your spring, your grove and hill,
That it hence forth may of your favor boast,
And him, whom first you here voutsafe for host.
C. Downhalus.

Eiusdem aliud de Authore.
GRaecia permultos peperit foecunda pottas,
Quorum lapsa diu saecula, famamanet.
Ausonia Argolicae tellus post aemula laudis
Transtulit in Latios doctum Helicona sinus.
Acceptam Latium tenuit fouitque poesin,
Inque dies Laurus auget, Apollo, tuas.
Gallica^ Parnasio coepit ditescere lingua,
Ronsard^^pro operis Luxuriare nouis.
Sola quia interca nullum paris Anglia vatem!
Versifices multi, nemo p^eta tibi est.
Scilicet ingenium maius fuit hactenus art:
Forsan and hic merces defit vtrique sua.
Ingenio tandem praestans Watsonus, and art,
Pieridas docuit verba Britanna loqui.
Et faciles alijs aditus patefecit ad artem,
Quam multi cupiunt fingere, nemo refert.
Iste tuus labor est, lucrum est Watsone, tuorum;
Et tua ne desint praemia, Laurus erit.
ITs seldom seen that Merit has his due,
Or else Dezerte to find his just desire:
For now Reproof with his defacing crewe
Treades underfoot that rightly should aspyre:
Malde Industry discouraged hides his face,
And shuns the light, in fear to meet Disgrace.
Seld seen said I (yet always seen with some)
That Merit gains good will, a golden hyre,
With whom Reproof is cast aside for scumme;
" That grows apace that virtue helps t'aspire;
And Industry well chearish't to his face
In sunshine walks, in spite of sour Disgrace.
This favor has put life into the pen,
That here presents his first fruit in this kind:
He hopes acceptance, friendly grant it then;
Perchance some better work does stay behind.
My censure is, which reading you shall see,
A Pythy, sweet, and cunning poesye.
M. Roydon.

To the Author.
IF grauer headdes shall count it ouerlight,
To treat of Love: say thou to them: A stain
Is incident unto the finest die.
And yet no stain at all it is for thee,
These lays of Love, as mirth to melancholy,
To fellow fast thy sad Antigone,
Which may bear out a broader work then this,
Compyl'd with judgment, order, and with art.
And shrowde thee under shadow of his wings,
Whose gentle heart, and head with learning freight
Shall yield thee gracious favor and defense.
G. Peele.

A Quatorzain of the Author unto this his book of Louepassions.
MY little book go hye thee hence away,
Whose price (God know's) will countervaile no part
Of pains I took, to make thee what thou art:
And yet I joy thy birth. But hence I say,
Thy brothers are half hurt by thy delay;
For thou thy self art like the deadly dart,
Which bred thy birth from out my wounded heart.
But still observe this rule where ere thou stay,
In all thou mai'st tender thy fathers fame,
" Bad is the Bird, that fileth his own nest.
If thou be much mislik't, They are to blame,
Say thou, that deeds well done to evil wrest:
Or else confess, A Toye to be thy name;
" This trifling world A Toye beseems best.
I
The Author in this Passion takes but occasion to open his estate in love; the
miserable accidents whereof are sufficiently described hereafter in the
copious variety of his devises: and whereas in this Sonnet he seems one
while to despair, and yet by and by after to have some hope of good success,
the contrariety ought not to offend, if the nature and true quality of a love
passion be well considered. And where he mentions that once he scorned
love, he alludeth to a piece of work, which he wrote long since, De Remedio
Amoris, which he has lately perfected, to the good likinge of many that have
seen and perused it, though not fully to his own fancy, which causes him as
yet to keep it back from the printe.

WEll fare the life sometimes I led ere this,
When yet no downy hear yclad my face:
my heart deuoyde of cares did bath in bliss,
my thoughts were free in every time and place:
But now (alas) all is foul, which then was fair.
My wonted joys are turning to despair.
Where then I lived without control or check,
An other now is mistress of my mind,
Cupid has clapped a yoke upon my neck,
Under whose waighte I hue in servile kind:
I now cry creake, that ere I scorned love,
Whose might is more then other Gods above.
I have assaide by labor to eschew
What fancy buildes upon a love conceit,
But nearthelesse my thought reuiues anew,
Where in fond love is wrapped, and works deceit:
Some comfort yet I have to live her thrall,
In whom as yet I find no fault at all.
II
In this passion the Author describes in how pitious a case the heart of a
lover is, being (as he fayneth here) separated from his own body, and removed
into a darksome and solitary wilderness of woes. The co^ueyance of his
invention is plain and pleasant enough of it self, and therefore needs the
less annotation before it.

MY heart is set him down twixt hope and fears
Upon the stony bank of high desire,
To view his own made flud of blubberig tears
Whose waves are bitter salt, and hot as fire:
There blows no blast of wind but ghostly groans
Nor waves make other noise then pitious moanes
As life were spent he waits Charons boat,
And thinks he dwells on side of Stigian lake:
But black despair some times with open throat,
Or spightfull Jealousy does cause him quake,
With howlinge shrikes on him they call and cry
That he as yet shall nether live nor die:
Thus void of help he sittes in heavy case,
And wants voice to make his just complaint.
No flowr but Hiacynth in all the place,
No sun comes there, nor any heavenly saint,
But only she, which in him self remains,
And joys her ease though he abound in pains.
III
This passion is all framed in manner of a dialogue, wherein the Author talks
with his own heart, being now through the commandment and force of love
separated from his body miraculouslie, and against nature, to follow his
mistres, in hope, by long attendance upon her, to purchase in the end her love
and favor, and by that means to make him self all one with her own heart.

Speak gentle heart, where is thy dwelling place?
With her, whose birth the heavens themselves have blessed.
What do thou there? Sometimes behold her face,
And lodge sometimes within her cristall breast:
She cold, thou hot, how can you then agree?
Not nature now, but love does govern me.
With her will thou remain, and let me die?
If I return, we both shall die for grief:
If still thou stay, what good shall grow thereby?
I Will move her heart to purchase thy relief:
What if her heart be hard, and stop his ears?
I Will sigh aloud, and make him soft with tears:
If that prevail, will thou return from thence?
Not I alone, her heart shall come with me:
Then will you both live under my defense?
So long as life will let us both agree:
Why then despair, go pack thee hence away,
I live in hope to have a golden day.
IIII
The chief ground and matter of this Sonnet stands upon the rehearsal of
such things as by report of the Poets, are dedicated unto Venus, whereof the
Author sometime wrote these three Latin verses. Mons Erycinus, Acidalins
sons, alba columba,
Hesperus, ora Pathos, Rosa, Myrtus, and insula Cyprus,
Idaluimque nemus; Veneri haec sunt omnia sacra.
And Forcatulus the French Poet wrote upon the same particulars, but more at
large, he begins thus, Est arbor Veneri Myrtus gratis^ima, flores
Tam Rosa, quam volucres alba columba praeit.
Igniferum coeli prae cunctis diligit astris.
Hesperon, Idalium sape adit vna memus. etc.


Sweet Venus if as now thou stand my friend,
As once thou did unto King. (...)
Pria^s son,
My joyful muse shall never make an end
Of praising thee, and all that thou have done:
Nor t^o my peane shall ever cease to write
Of ought, wherein sweet Venus takes delight.
My temples hedged in with Myrtle bows
Shall set aside Apolloes Laurel tree,
As did (...)
Anchises son, when both his brows
With Myrtle he beset, to honor thee:
Then will I say, the Rose of flowers is best.
And silver Dooues for birds excel the rest.
I Will praise no star but Hesperus alone,
Nor any hill but Erycinus meunte,
Nor any woodde but I daly alone,
Nor any spring but Acidalian founte,
Nor any land but only Cyprus shore,
Nor Gods but Love, and what would Venus more?
V
All this Passion (two verses only excepted) is wholly translated out of
Petrarch, where he writes, Samor non e, che dunque e quel ch'i sento? Part
pr^^a Sonet 103.

Ma s'egh e amor, per Dio che cosa, e quale?
Se buona, ond'e l'effetto aspro e mortale?
Seria, ond'e sidolce ogni tormento?
Herein certain contrarieties, which are incident to him that loves
extreemelye, are lively expressed by a Metaphore. And it may be noted, that the
Author in his first half verse of this translation varieth from that sense,
which Chawcer uses in translating the self same: which he does upon no other
warrant then his own simple private opinion, which yet he will not greatly
stand upon.

If It be not love I feel, what is it then?
If love it be, what kind a thing is love?
If good, how chance he hurtes so many men?
If badd, how happ's that none his hurtes disprove?
If willingly I burn, how chance I wail?
If against my will, what sorrow will avail?
O liuesome death, Osweete and pleasant ill,
Against my mind how can thy might prevail?
If I bend back, and but refrain my will,
If I consent, I do not well to wail;
And touching him, Add^nt^r Tuscano hij duo ve^sus.
whom will has made a slave,
The Proverb says of old, Self do, self have,
Thus being tossed with winds of sundry sort
Through daung'rous Seas but in a slender Boat,
With error stu^t, and driu'n beside the port,
Where void of wisdoms freight it lies afloate,
I wave in doubt what help I shall require,
In Summer freeze, in winter burn like fire.
VI
This passion is a translation into latin of the self same sonnet of Petrarch
which you red lastly alleged, and comes somewhat nearer unto the Italian
phrase the^ the English does. The Author when he translated it, was not then
minded ever to have imboldned him self so far, as to thrust in foot amongst
our english Poets. But being busied in translating Petrarch his sonnets into
latin new clothed this amongst many others, which one day may perchance come to
light: And because it befitteth this place, he is content you survey it here as
a probable sign of his daily sufferance in love:

HOc si non sit amor, quod persentisco, quid ergo est?
Si sit amor, tum quid sit amor qualisque rogandum:
Si bonus est, vnde effectus producit acerbos?
Sin malus, vnde eius tormentum dulce putatur?
Sique volens vror, quae tanti causa doloris?
Sin inuitus amo, quid me lament a iuuabunt?
O laethum viuax, o delectabile damnum,
Qui sic me superes, tibi si concedere nolim?
^t me si patior vinci, cur lugeo victus?
Aduersis rapior ventis, nulloque magistr^,
Per maris effusi fluctus, in puppe caduca,
Quae vacua ingenio, tantoque errore grauata est,
Ipsus vt ignorem de me quid dicere possim:
Erigeo, dum media est aestas; dum brumae, calesco.
VII
This passion of love is lively expressed by the Author, in that he lauishlie
praises the person and beautiful ornaments of his love, one after an other
as they lie in order. He partly imitateth here in Aeneas Siluius, who sets
down the like in describing Lucretia the love of Euryalus; and partly he
follows Ariosto cant. 7. where he describes Alci^a: and partly borrows
from some others where they describe the famous Helen of Greece: you may
therefore, if you please aptly call this sonnet as a Scholar of good
judgment has already Christened it (...).

Hark you that list to hear what saint I serve:
Her yellowe locks exceed the beaten goulde;
Her sparkeling eyes in heaven a place deserve;
Her forehead high and fair of comely moulde;
Her words are music all of silver sound;
Her wit so sharp as like can searse be found:
Each eybrowe hanges like Iris in the skies; Nasus Aquil^^ ex Pe^saru^ opinione
maiestatem personae arguit.

^Her Eagles nose is straight of stately frame;
On either cheek a Rose and Lilly lies;
Her breath is sweet perfume, or hollie flame;
Her lips more red then any Coral stone;
Her neck more white, then aged Quale (...) rec^nit funere cumen Olo^.
Strozza. and vide P^^n de cantu Ol^rino lib (...) not hist. cap 2^.
Swans y^ moan;
Her breast transparent is, like Crystal rock;
Her singers long, fit for Apolloes Lute;
Her slipper such as Vide (...) 1. Cent. 5 adag. ^4. (...) ex Philostrati ad
vxorem epistola mutuatu:
Momus dare not mock;
Her virtues all so great as make me mute:
What other parts she has I need not say,
Whose face alone is cause of my decay.
VIII
A laeon for espying Diana as she bathed her naked, was transformed into a
Heart, and sone after torn in pieces by his own hounds, as Ovid describes at
large lib. 3. Metamorph. And Silius Italicus libr. 12. de bello Punic^
glaunceth at it in this manner. Fama est, cum laceris Actaeon flebile membris
Supplicium lueret spectatae in font Dianae,
Attonitum nouitate malae fugisse parentem
Per fr^ta Aristaeum. etc.
The Author alluding in all this Passion unto the fault of Actaeon, and to the
hurt, which he sustained, sets down his own amorous infelicitie; as Ovid
did after his banishmente, when in an other sense he applied this fiction unto
himself, being exiled (as it should seem) for having at unawares taken Caesar
in some great fault: for thus he writes. Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina
f^ci? etc.
Inscius Actaeon vidit sine vest Dianam.
Praeda fuit canibus nec minus ille suis.


A Ctaeon lost in middle of his sport
Both shape and life, for looking but a wry,
Diana was afraid he would report
What secrets he had seen in passing by:
To tell but truth, the self same hurt have I
By viewing her, for whom I daily die;
I leese my woonted shape, in that my mind
Does suffer wrack upon the stony rock
Of her disdain, who contrary to kind
Does bear a breast more hard then any stock;
And former form of limbs is changed quite
By cares in love, and want of due delight.
I leese my life in that each secret thought,
Which I conceive through wanton fond regard,
Does make me say, that life avails naught
Where service cannot have a due reward:
I dare not name the Nymph that works my smart,
Though love has grau'n her name within my heart.
IX
Clytia (as Perottus witnesses) was a glorious Nymph, and thereof had her
name: for (...) in greek signifies glory: and therefore she aspired to be the
love of Sol him self, who praeferring Leucothoe before her, she was in short
space ouergonne with such extremity of care, that by compassion of the Gods
she was transformed into a Marigolde; which is significantlie called
Heliotropium, because even now after change of form she still observes the
rising and going down of her beloved the sun, as Ovid mentions, Illa suum,
quamuis radice tenetur,
Vertitur aed Solemn, Metam. lib. 4.
mutataque seruat amorem.
And by this it may easily be ghessed, why in this passion the Author
compares him self with the Marigold, and his love unto the Sun.

THe Marigold so likes the lovely Sun,
That when he settes the other hides her face,
And when he ginnes his morning course to ^u^ne,
She spreades abroad, and shows her greatest grace;
so shuts or spreuts my joy, as does this flow're,
when my ^heesune does either laugh or lowre.
When she departes my sight, I die for pame,
In closing up my heart with cloudie care;
And yet when once I view her face again,
I straight revive, and joy my wonted fare:
Therewith my heart often says, when all is done,
That heaven and earth have not a brighter sun,
A jealous thought yet puttes my mind in fear,
Lest Jove him self descending from his throne
Should take by stealth and place her in his sphere,
Or in some higher globe to rule alone:
Which if he should, the heavens might boast their pray
But I (alas) might curse y^ dismal day.
X
The Author has made two or three other passions upon this matter that is
here contained, alluding to the loss of his sight and life since the time he
first beheald her face, whose love has thus bewitched him. But here he
mentions, the blindness of Tyresias to proceed of an other cause, then he
does in those his other Sonnettes, And herein he leans not to the opinion of
the greater sort of Poets, but unto some few, after whom Polytian has
written also, as follows; Baculum dat deinde petentem
Tyresiaemagni, qui quondam Pallaeda nudam
viaeit, and hoc raptam p^nsauit munere lucem.
Suctus in offensos baculo duce tendere gressus
Nec deest ipse sibi, quin sacro instincta furore
Ora mo^et, tantique parat solaetiae damni.


Mine Quod natatale esse, ait Phnius lib. 11. nature. hist. c. 36.
eyes dye first, which last enjoyed life,
Not hurt by bleared eyes, but hurt with light
Of such a blazing star as kindeleth strife
Within my breast as well by day as night:
And yet no poysned Cockatrice lurk't there,
Her virtuous beams dissuade such foolish fear.
Besides, I live as yet; though blinded now
Like him, that saw Mineruaes naked side,
And lost his sight (poor soul) not knowing how;
Or like to him, whom evil chance betide,
In straying far to light upon that place,
Where midst a fount he found Dianaes grace.
But he alone, who Polyphemus hight,
True pattern was of me and all my woe,
Of all the rest that ever lost their sight:
For being blind, yet love possessed him so,
That he each how'r on every dale and hill
S^ng songs of love to Galataea was a water Nymph and daughter to old Nereus.
Galataea still.
XI
In this sonnet is covertly set forth, how pleasant a passion the Author one
day enjoyed, when by chance he ouerharde his mistress, whilst she was singinge
privately by her self: And sone after into how sorrowful a dumpe, or sounden
ecstasy he fell, when upon the first sight of him she abruptly finished her
song and melody.

O Goulden bird and Phoenix of our age,
whose sweet records and more the^ earthly voice
By wondrous force did then my grief assuage
When nothing else could make my heart retoyce,
Thy teunes (no doubt) had made a later end,
If thou had known how much they stood my fre^d.
When silence dround the latter warbling neat,
A sudden grief eclypst my former joy,
My life it self in calling Carons boat
Did sigh, and say, that pleasure brought anoy;
And blamed mine ear for listening to the sound
Of such a song, as had increast my wound.
My heaute heart remembering what was past
Did sorrow more then any tongue can tell;
As did the damned souls that stood aghast,
when Orpheus with his wife returned from hell:
Yet who would think, that Music which is sweet,
In curing pains could cause delites te fleet?
XII
The subject of this passion is all one with that, which is next before it: but
that the Author somewhat more highly here extolleth his ladies excellency,
both for the singularity of her voice, and her wonderful art in use and
moderation of the same. But moreover, in this so^net, the Author relates how
after the hearing of his mistress sing, his affection toward her by that
means was more vehemently kindled, then it had bin at any time before.

I Marvel I, why poets heretofore
Extold Sic methymnaeo gauisus Ar^o^e Delphin, Martial. lib. 8.
Arions harp, or Mercuries,
Although the one did bring a fish to shore,
And the other as a Consurgente sieto cedit Lyra Cyllenaea Ruff. Fest.
sign adorned the skies.
If they with me had heard an Angels voice,
They would unsay the^ selves, and praise my choice.
Not Philomela now deserves the price,
Though sweetly she recount her cause of moan:
Nor Phoebus art in musical devise,
Although his lute and voice accord in one;
Music her self, and all the Muses nine,
For skill or voice their titles may resign.
O bitter sweet, or hunny mixed with gall,
My heart is hurt with overmuch delight,
Mine ears well pleased with tunes, yet deaf with all:
Through musicks help love has increast his might;
I stop mine ears as wise Ulysses bad,
But all to late, now love has made me mad.
XIII
The Author descanteth on forward upon the late effect, which the song of his
Mistres has wrought in him, by augmenting the heat of his former love. And in
this passion after he has set down some miraculous good effects of Music,
he falls into question with him self, what should be the cause, why the
sweet melody of his Mistres should so much hurt him, contrary to the kind
and nature of musical harmony.

ESclepiad did cure with trumpets sound
Such men as first had lost their hearing quite:
And many such as in their drink lay drowned
Damon reui^'d with tunes of grave delight:
And Theophrast when ought his mind oppressed,
Usd musickes help (...) dring him self to rest:
With sound of harp Thales did make recure
Of such as lay with pestilence forlorn:
With Organ pipes Xenocrates made pure
Their wits, whose minds long Lunacy had worn:
How comes it then, that music in my mind
Enforces cause of hurt against her kind?
For since I heard a secret heavenly song,
Love has so wrought by virtue of conceit,
That I shall pine upon supposed wrong
Unless she yield, that did me such deceit:
O ears now deaf, O wits al drowned in cares,
O heart surprys'd with plagues at unawares.
XIIII
The Author still pursuing his invention upon the song of his Mistres, in the
last staff of this sonnet he falls into this fiction: that whilst he
greedelie laid open his ears to the hearing of his Ladies voice, as one more
then half in a doubt, that Apollo him self had been at hand, Love espiyng a
time of advantage, transformed him self into the substance of aier, and so
deceitfullie entered into him with his own great goodwill and desire, and now
by main force still holds his possession.

SOme that report great Alexanders life,
They say, that harmony so moved his mind,
That often he roase from meat to warlike strife
At sound of Trumpe, or noise of battle kind,
And then, that musickes force of softer vain
Caused him return from strokes to meat again.
And as for me, I think it nothing strange,
That music having birth from heavens above,
By diverse tunes can make the mind to change:
For I my self in hearing my sweet Love,
By virtue of her song both tasted grief,
And such delight, as yielded some relief.
When first I began to give attentive ear,
Thinking Apolloes voice did haunte the place,
I little thought my Lady had been there:
But whilst mine ears lay open in this case,
Transformed to air Love entered with my will,
And now perforce does keep possession still.
XV
Still he follows on with further devise upon the late Melody of his
Mistres: and in this sonnet does namely prefer her before Music her self,
and all the three Graces; affirming, if either he, or else Apollo be ordained a
judge to give sentence of their deserts on either side, that then his Lady
can not fail to bear both prick and prize away.

Now Music hide thy face or blush for shame,
Since thou have heard her skill and warbling voice,
Who far before thy self deseru's thy name,
And for a Science should be had in choice:
Or if thou still thy title wilt retame,
Equal her song with help of all thy train.
But as I deem, it better were to yield
Thy place to her, to whom the price belonges,
Then after strife to leese both fame and field.
For though rude Satyrs like of Marsias songs,
And Choridon esteem his oaten quill:
Compare them with her voice, and both are ill.
Nay, which is more, bring forth the Graces three,
And each of them let sing her song apart,
And who does best twill soon appear by me,
When she shall make reply which rules my heart:
Or if you needs will make Apollo judge,
So sure I am to win I need not grudge.
XVI
In this passion the Author upon the late sweet song of his Mistres, makes
her his bird; and therwithall partly describes her worthiness, and partly
his own estate. The one part he shows, by the color of her feathers, by
her stately mind, and by that souereintie which she has over him: the other,
by description of his delight in her company, and her strangenes, and drawing
back from a dew acceptance of his service.

MY gentle bird, which sung so sweet of late,
Is not like those, that fly about by kind,
Her feathers are of gold, she wantes a mate,
And knowing well her worth, is proud of mind:
And whereas s^m do keep their birds in cage,
My bird keeps me, and rules me as her page.
She seeds mine ear with tunes of rare delight,
Mine eye with loving looks, my heart with joy,
Wherhence I think my servitude but light,
Although in deed I suffer great annoye:
And (sure) it is but reason, I suppose,
He feel the prick, that seeks to pluck the Rose.
And who so mad, as would not with his will
Leese liberty and life to hear her sing,
Whose voice excels those harmonies that fill
Elisian fields, where grows eternal spring?
If mighty Jove should hear what I have hard,
She (sure) were his, and all my market marde.
XVII
The Author not yet having forgotten the song of his mistres, makes her in
this passion a second Phoenix, though not of Arabia, and yet no less
acceptable to Apollo, then is that bird of Arabia. And the chief causes why
Sol should favor her, he accounts to be these two, her excellent beawtie,
and her skill in music, of which two qualities Sol is well known to be an
especial chief patron, and sometimes the only author or giver of the same.

IF Poets have done well in times long past,
To gloss on trifling toys of little price:
Why should not I presume to fame as fast,
Espying forth a ground of good devise?
A Sacred Nymph is ground whereon i will write,
The fairest Nymph that ever yet saw light.
And since her song has filled mine ears with joy,
Her virtues pleased my mind, her face mine eye,
I dare affirm what some will think a toy,
She Phoenix is, though not of Arabie;
And yet the plumes about her neck are bright, Vide Plinium nature. hist. lib.
10. cap. 2.

And Sol him self in her has chief^ delight.
You that will know why Sol afoordes her love,
Seek but the cawse why Peakocks draw the place,
Where Juno sitts; why Venus likes the Dove;
Or why the Owl befitts Mineruaes grace;
Then if you grudge, that she to Sol belong,
Mark but her face, and hear her skill in song.
XVIII
This sonnet is perfectly patheticall, and consists in two principal
points: whereof the first co^teyneth an accusation of Love for his hurtful
effects and usual tyranny; the second part is a sudden recantation or excuse
of the Authors evil words, by castinge the same upon the neck of his beloved,
as being the only cause of his late frenzy and blaspheamous rage so lauishly
powered forth in foul speeches.

Love is a sour delight; a sugared grief;
A living death; an euerdying life;
A breach of Reasons law; a secret thief;
A sea of tears; an everlasting strife;
A bayte for fools; a scourge of noble wits;
A Deadly wound; a shot which ever hitts.
Love is a blinded God; an angry boy;
A Labyrinth of dowbts; an idle lust;
A slave to Beawties will; a witles toy;
A ravening bird; a tyrant most unjust;
A burning heat; A cold; a flattringe foe;
A private hell; a very world of woe.
Yet mighty Love regard not what I say,
Which lie in trance berest of all my wits,
But blame the light that leads me thus astraye,
And makes my tongue blaspheme by frantike fitts:
Yet hurt her not, lest I sustain the smart,
which am content to lodge her in my heart.
XIX
The Author in this passion reproves the usual description of love, which
old Poets have so long time embraced: and proves by probabilities, that he
neither is a child (as they say) nor blind, nor winged like a bird, nor
armed archer like with bow and arrows, neither frantike, nor wise, nor yet
unclothed, nor (to conclude) any God at all. And yet when he has said al he
can to this end, he cries out upon the secret nature and quality of Love, as
being that, whereunto he can by no means attain, although he have spent a
long and tedious course of time in his service.

IF Cupid were a child, as Poets feign,
How comes it then that Mars does fear his might?
If blind; how chance so many to their pain,
Whom he has hitte, can witness of his sight?
If he have wings to fly where thinks him best,
How happes he lurketh still within my breast?
If bow and shaftes should be his chiefest tools,
Why does he set so many hearts on fire?
If he were mad, how could he further fools
To whet their wits, as place and time require?
If wise, how could so many leeze their wits,
Or doat through love, and dye in frantike sittes?
If naked still he wander too and froe,
How does not Sun or frost offend his skin?
If that a God he be, how falls it so,
That all wants end, which he does once begin?
O wondrous thing, that I, whom Love has spent,
Can scarcely know him self, or his intent.
XX
In this passion the Author being joyful for a kiss, which he had received
of his Love, compares the same unto that kiss, which sometime Venus bestowed
upon Aesculapius, for having taken a Bramble out of her foot, which pricked
her through the hidden spiteful deceyte of Diana, by whom it was laid in her
way, as Strozza writes. And he enlarges his invention upon the french
prouerbiall speech, which imports thus much in effect, that three things
proceed from the mouth, which are to be had in high account, Breath, Speech,
and Kissing; the first argues a man's life; the second, his thought; the third
and last, his love.

IN time long past, when in Dianaes chase
A bramble bush pricked Venus in the foot,
Old Aesculapius healpt her heavy case
Before the hurt had taken any root:
Wherehence although his beard were crisping hard
She yielded him a kiss for his reward.
My luck was like to his this other day,
When she, whom I on earth do worship most,
In kissing me vouchsafed thus to say,
Take this for once, and make thereof no bost:
Siquide^ opinati sunt aliqui, in osculo fieri animaturn co^binatione^.
Forthwith my heart gave sign of joy by skippes,
As though our souls had joined by joining lips.
And since that time I thought it not amiss
To judge which were the best of all these three;
Her breath, her speech, or that her dainty kiss,
And (sure) of all the kiss best liked me:
For that was it, which did revive my heart
Oppressed and almost dead with daily smart.
XXI
In the first staff of this passion the Author imitateth Petrarch, Sonetto
211. Chi vuol veder quantunque puo Natura
El ciel tranoi, venga a mirar costei, etc.
And the very like sense has Seraphine in one of his Strambotti, where he
begins thus, Chi vuol ^eder gran cose altiere and nuoue,
Venga a mirar costei, laquale adoro:
Dove gratia dal ciel continuo pioue. etc.


WHo list to vewe dame Natures cunning skill,
And see what heaven has added to the same,
Let him prepare with me to gaze his fill
On her apas^, whose gifts exceed y^ tru^p offa^e:
But let him come a pase before she fly
From hence, to fix her seat above the sky.
But Iunoes gift she bears a stately grace,
Pallas has placed skill amdd'st her breast;
Venus her self does dwell within her face;
Alas I faint to think of all the rest;
And shall I tell wherewith I most have wars?
with those her eyes, which are two heavenly stars
Their beams draw forth by great attractiue power
My moistened heart, whose force is yet so small,
That shine they bright, or list they but to lowre,
It scarcely dare behold such lights at all,
Vide Pli^. not. hist. lib. 10. cap. 3. et lib 28 cap 6. qui de hacre mutuatur
ex Aristotelis historia. Potro vide Seraphinum sonet. 1. vbi de aquila suisque
pullis per co^patationem legantissime canit.
But sobbes, and sighs, and says I am undone;
No bird but Jove's can look against the sun.
XXII
The substance of this passion is taken out of Seraphine sonetto 127. which
begins thus. Quando nascesti amor? quando la terra
Se rinueste di verde e bell color;
Di che fusticreato? d'vn ardore,
Che cio laesciuo in se rinchiude e serra etc.
But the Author has in this translation inuerted the order of some verses of
Seraphine, and added the two last of himself to make the rest to seem the
more patheticall.

WHen werte thou borne sweet Love? who was thy sire?
When Flora first adornd Dame Tellus lap,
Then sprung I forth from Wanton hot desire:
Who was thy nurse to feed thee first with pap?
Youth first with tender hand bound up my head,
Then said, with Looks alone I should be fed;
What maids had she attendant on her side,
To play, to singe, to rock thee fast a sleep?
Vain Niceness, Beauty Fair, and Pompous Pride;
By stealth when further age on thee did creep;
Where did thou make thy chief abiding place?
In Willing Hearts, which were of gentle race;
What is it where with thou wagest wars with me?
Fear cold as Ise, and Hope as hot as fire;
And can not age or death make end of thee?
No, no, my dying life still makes retire;
Why then sweet Love take pity on my pain,
Which often dye, and often revive again.
XXIII
The Author in this passion wishes he were in like estate and condition with
the Loooking Glass of his mistres; by that means the oftener to be made happy
with her favorable and fair aspect. And in the last staff he alludeth
somewhat to the inue^tion of Seraphine, where he uses these words, in writing
upon the Glass of his beloved. Che ho visto ogni qual vetro render foco
Quando e dal Sol percosso in qualche part,
E^ Sol che in gliocchi toi dando in quel loco
Douria per reflection tutta infiammarte etc.


THou Glass, whetein that Sun delights to see
Her own aspect, whose beams have dride my heart,
Would God I might possess like state with thee,
And joy some ease to quail my bitter smart:
Thou gazest on her face, and she on thine;
I see not hers, nor she will look on mine.
Once having looked her fill, she turns thee froe,
And leaves thee, though amazed, yet well content;
But careless of my cares, will I or not,
Still dwells within my breast with tears besprent;
And yet my heart to her is such a thrall,
That she dr^^'n out, my life departs withal.
But thou deceitful Glass (I fear) with guyle
Have wrought my woes to shield thy self from ill,
Shot forth her beams which were in thee erewhile,
And burnt my tender breast against my will:
For Crystal from it self reflectes the Sun,
And fyres his coat, which knows not how it is done.
XXIIII
Seraphine in his Strambotti has many pretty inventions concerning the
Lookingglasse of his Mistres: wherhence many particulars of this passion are
cunningly borrowed, part being out of one place, and part out of an other. And
in the latter end is placed this fiction by the Author, that Cupid shooting
his arrowe from out the fair eyes of his Mistres, did so wound him with love
and desire, that now he is past all recure by any physic, and therefore is
feign to use the old verse, Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.

THou glass, wherein my Dame has such delight,
As when she braues, then most on thee to gaze,
I marvel how her beams that are so bright
Do never cause thy brittle sides to craze:
Thou should by reason mealt or easly break
To feel such force, thy substance being weak.
For when she first with seeming stately grace
Bestowd on me a loving sweet regard,
The beams, which then proceeded from her face
Were such, as for the same I found no ward,
But needs persorce I must become content
To mealt in mind till all my wits were spent.
And therewithal Cupido played his part,
He shot a shaft throughout her crystal eyes.
Wherewith he clest in twain my yielding heart:
And this is cause my panting heart still cries,
I break, I mealt, help heavens in my behoue,
No herb does grow whose virtue cures love.
XXV
It is to be considered in reading this Passion, how in some answers, the
accent or poynting of the words is altered, and therewithal how the Author
walking in the woods, and bewayling his inward passion of Love, is contraried
by the replies of Echo: whose meaning yet is not so much to gainsay him, as to
express her own miserable estate in daily co^suming away for the love of her
beloved Narcissus; whose unkindness Ovid describes at large, Lib. 3. Metamorph.
together with the extreme love of Echo.

Author. IN all this world I think none lou's but I.

Echo. None lou's but I.

Auth. Thou foolish tattling ghest,
In this thou telst a lie.

Echo. thou telst a lie.

Author. Why? Love him self he lodges in my breast.

Echo. He lodges in my breast.

Auth. I pine for grief;
And yet I want relief.

Echo. I want relief.

Author. No star more fair then she whom I adore.

Echo. Then S. Liquescens immutat sensu^^.
he, whom I adore.

Auth. Herehence I burn
Still more and more.

Echo. I burn still more and more.

Author. Love, let my heart return.

Echo. my heart, return.

Auth. Is then the Saint, for whom thou make moan,
And whom I love, but one?

Echo. I love but one.

Author. O heavens, is there in love no end of ills?

Echo. In love no end of ills.

Auth. Thou prattling voice,
Dwelst thou in the air, or but in hollow hills?

Echo. In hollow hills.

Auth. Cease of to vaunt thy choice.

Echo. Cease of to vaunt thy choice.

Auth. I would reply.
But here for love I die.

Echo. for love I die.

XXVI
Here the Author as a man overtaken with some deep melancholy, compares him
self unto the Nightingale, and conferreth his unhappy estate (for that by no
means his Mistress will pity him) with her nightly complaints: to whose
harmony all those that give attentive ear, they conceive more delight in the
musical variety of her noates, then they take just compassion upon her
distressed heaviness.

WHen May is in his prime, and youthful spring
Does cloth the tree with leaves, and ground with flowers,
And time of year reuiueth every thing;
And lovely Nature smiles, and nothing lowres:
Then Philomela most does strain her breast
With night-complaints, and sits in little rest.
This Birds estate I may compare with mine,
To whom fond love does work such wrongs by day,
That in the night my heart must needs repine,
And storm with lighes to ease me as I may;
Whilst others are becalmd, or lie them still,
Or sail secure with tide and wind at will.
And as all those, which hear this Bird complain,
Conceive in all her tunes a sweet delight,
Without remorse, or pitying her pain:
So she, for whom I wayle both day and night,
Does sport her self in hearing my complaint;
A just reward for serving such a Saint.
XXVII
In the first six verses of this Passion, the Author has imitated perfectly
six verses in an Ode of Ronsard, which begins thus: Celui qui n'ayme est
malheureux, Ep son 2. liute du Bocage.

Et malheureux est l'amoureux,
Mais la misere, etc?
And in the last staff of this Passion also he comes very near to the
sense, which Ronsard uses in an other place, where he writes to his Mistress
in this manner: En veus tu baiser Pluton
La bas, En ses mesianges.
apres che Caron
T'aura mise en sanacelle?


V Hii tres vers^^ a Ronsardo describ^^^teor ex Anacre^^ Graeco.
Nhappy is the wight, that's void of Love,
And yet unhappy he, whom Love torments,
But greatest grief that man is forced to prove,
Whose haughty Love not for his love relents,
But hoysing up her sail of proud disdain,
For service done makes no return of gain.
By this all you, which know my tickle state,
May give deserved blame to whom I serve,
And say, that Love has misery to mate,
Since labor breeds but loss, and letts me sterue:
For I am he which lives a lasting thrall
To her, whose heart affords no grace at all.
She hopes (perchance) to live and flourish still,
Or else, when Charons boat has felt her peaze,
By loving looks to conquer Plutoes will;
But all in vain: it is not Proserpin's ease:
She never will permit, that any one
Shall joy his Love, but the her self alone.
XXVIII
In this Passion the Author does very busily imitate and angment a certain
Ode of Ronsard, which he writes unto his Mistres; he begins, as follows,
Plusicurs de leurs cors denues
Se sont veuz en diverse terre
Miraculeusement nines, (...) liver des (...) meslanges.

L'vn en Serpent, and l'autre en Pierre,
L'vn en Fleur, l'autre en Arbriffeau,
L'vn en Loup etc?


MAny have lived in countries far and ny,
Whose hearts by Love once quite consumed away,
Strangely their shapes were changed by and by,
One to a Flower, an other to a Bay,
One to a Stream, whose course yet makes moan,
One to a Dove, an other to a Stone.
But hark my Dear; if wishing could prevail,
I would become a Crystal Mirror I,
Wherein thou might behold what thing I aile:
Or else I would be changed into a Fly,
To taste thy cup, and being daily ghest
At board and bed, to kiss thee midst thy rest;
Or I would be Perfume for thee to burn,
That with my loss I might but please thy sinell;
Or be some sacred Spring, to serve thy turn,
By bathing that, wherein my heart does dwell;
But woe is me, my wishing is but vain,
Since fate bidds Love to work my endless pain.
XXIX
The Author in this Sonnet in a large manner sets forth the surpassinge
worthiness of his Lady, reporting her beawtie and form to be so singular, that
neither Appelles can perfectly draw her portraicte; nor Praxiteles trewly
frame her image and likeness in any kind of metal. And the like unableness he
awardeth unto Virgill and Homer the two Paragons of Poetrye, if they should but
once endeavor to praise her. And the like insufficiency he says would be
found in Tullie him self, if he should endeavor to commend her. And the^
finally he excuses his own bold hardines showed in praising her, upon the
forcible extremity, which he abides in Love, and the earnest desire, which he
has to please.

SUch is the Saint, whom I on earth adore,
As never age shall know when this is past,
Nor ever yet has like been seen before:
Apelles if he lived would stand aghast
Here he ^^^^deth unto the pourtraict of Venus which Apelles drew: as Ovid does
lib. 3. de art. aman. St Venerem Cous nunqua^ p^^xislet Apelles.
With colors to set down her comely face,
Who far excells though Venus were in place.
Praxiteles might likewise stand in doubt
In metal to express her form arighte,
Whose praise for shape is blown the world throughout;
Nor Virgill could so good a verse indite
As only would suffice to tell her name;
Nor Homer with his Muse express her fame;
Tully, whose speech was boulde in every cause,
If he were here to praise the Saint I serve,
The number of her gifts would make him pause,
And fear to speak how well she does deserve.
Why then am I thus bold that have no skill?
Enforst by Love I show my zealous will.
XXX
In the first part of this Passion the Author proves, that he abides more
unrest and hurt for his beloved, then ever did Laeander for his Hero: of which
two paramours the mutual feruency in Love is most excellently set forth by
Musaeus the Greek Poet. In the second part he compares himself with Pyramus,
and Haemon king Creons Son of Thebes, which were both so true hearted lovers,
that through Love they suffered untimely death, as Ovid. metam. lib. 4. writes
at large of the one, And the Greek Tragedian Sophocles in Antig. of the other.
In the last, in making comparison of his pains in Love to the pains of
Orpheus descendinge to hell for his Eurydice, he alludeth to those two verses
in Strozza, Tartara, Cymba, Charon, Pluto, rota, Cerberus, angues.
Cocytes, Phlegeton, Stix, laepis, vrna, sitis.


WHat though Leander swamme in darksome night,
Through troubled Heles pont for Heroes sake;
And lost his life by loss of Sestus light?
The like or more my self do undertake,
When every hour along the lingering year.
My joy is drownde, and hope blown out with fear.
And what though Pyram spent his vital breath
For Thiebes sake? or Haemon choase to die
To follow his Antigone by death?
In harder case and worser plight am I,
Which love as they, but live in dying still,
And feign would die, but can not have my will.
We read that Orpheus with his Harp of gold,
For his Euridice went down to hell:
The toil is more, by that time all be told,
Which I endure for her, whose heart is fell;
The Stigian Curre, the Wheel, the Stone, the Fire,
And Furies all are placed in my desire.
XXXI
There needs no annotation at all before this Passion, it is of it self so
plain, and easilye conuayed. Yet the unlearned may have this help given them
by the way to know what Galaxia is, or Pactolus, which perchance they have not
read off often in our vulgar Rimes. Galaxia (to omit both the Etimologie and
what the Philosophers do write thereof) is a white way or milky Circle in the
heavens, Metamorph. lib. 1.
which Ovid mentions in this manner. Est via sublimis coelo manifesta sereno,
Lactea nomen habet, candore not abilis ipso.
And Cicero thus in somnio Scipionis; Erat autem is splendidissimo candore
inter flammas circulus elucens, quem vos (vt a Graijs accepistis) orbem lacteum
nuncupatis. Pactolus is a river in Lidia, which has golden sands under it, as
Tibullus witnesses in this verse, Nec me regna inuant, Tibal. lib. ^.
nec Lydius aurifer amnis.


WHo can recount the virtues of my dear,
Or say how far her fame has taken flight,
That can not tell how many stars appear
In part of heaven, which Galaxia hight,
Or number all the moates in Phoebus rays,
Or golden sands, whereon Pactolus plays?
And yet my hurts enforce me to confess,
In crystal breast she shrowdes a bloody heart,
Which heart in time will make her merits less,
Unless betimes she cure my deadly smart:
For now my life is double dying still,
And she defam'de by suffrance of such ill;
And till the time she helps me as she may,
Let no man undertake to tell my toil,
But only such, as can distinctly say,
What Monsters Nilus breeds, or Affricke soil:
For if he do, his labor is but lost,
Whilst I both fry and freeze twixt flame and frost.
XXXII
Here the Author by fayning a troublesome dream, expresses a full Passion of
Love. And how soever some will conster of this kind of Invention, it is
evident, that the like has bin usual amongst those that have excelled in the
sweetest vain of Poetry. And (to let the rest go,) it may please him that is
curious to find some president hereof, to visit but the works of Hercules
Strozza, Eroticon. lib. 2.
who in his Somnium has written so exquisitely, that the Dream will quite his
trauaile^ that shall peruse it with due attention.

IN Thetis lap, while Titan took his rest,
I slumbring lay within my restless bed,
Till Morpheus used a falsed soary jest,
Presenting her, by whom I still am led:
For then I thought she came to end my woe,
But when I wakt (alas) it was nothing so.
Embracing air in steed of my delight,
I blamed Love as author of the guile,
Who with a second sleep clozd up my sight,
And said (me thought) that I must bide a while
Ixions pains, whose arms did often embrace
False darkened clouds, in steed of Iunoes grace.
When I had lain and slumbred thus a while,
Rewing the doleful doom that Love assigned,
A woman Saint, which bare an Angels face,
^ad me awake and ease my troubled mind:
With that I wakt, forgetting what was past,
And saw it was Hope, which helped thus at last.
XXXIII
In this Sonnet the Author is of opinion, that his Mistres (by the fatal
appoyntement of destiny) was from the beginning reserved to live in these
times, and to be the only gouernesse and subject of his thoughts: whereas:
if either she had been borne, when Paris was to give sentence upon Ida for
bestowing the Golden Apple; she had (as he supposes) been preferred before
Juno, Pallas and Venus, and moreover supplied that place in the love of king
Priams son, which Helen of Greece obtained: or if she had then lived when
Bacchus took Ariadne to wife, she had been conuayed in her steed, unto that
place in heaven, where now the Crown of Ariadne called Cuius ot^u^ and
occasu^ me morat Plimus not. hist. lib ^^. c. 28. etc. 31.
Corond Gnosia does shine continually, being beautified with great variety
of lightsome stars.

WHen Priams son in midst of Ida plain
Gave one the price, and other two the foil,
If she for whom I still abide in pain
Had lived then within the Troyan soil,
No doubt but hers had been the golden ball,
Helen had escaped rape, and Iroy his fall.
Or if my Dame had then enjoyed life
When Bacchus sought for Ariadnaes love,
No doubt but she had only been his wife,
And flowne from hence to sit with Gods above:
For she exceedes his choice of Create so far
As Phoebus does excel a twinckeling star,
But from the first all fates have thus assigned,
That she should live in these our latter days,
I think to bear a sway within my mind
And feed my thoughts with friendly sweet delays;
If so it be, Assai ben basi^ a chi Formasuona.
let me attend my chance,
And fortune pipe when I begin to dance.
XXXIIII
The Author in this Sonnet very highly commends the most rare excellencies of
his mistres, auouching her to have no equal. And he imitateth the second
Sonnet, Nelle rhyme di messer Agnolo Fiorenzuola the Florentine, whose beginning
is all one with that here; and this it is: Deh le mie belle done et amorose,
Ditemi il ver per vostra cortesia,
Non e chiara tra voi la donna mia,
Come e'l Sol chiar tratutte l'altre cose?


YE stately Dames, whose beauties far excel,
Of courtesy confess at my request,
Does not my Love amongst you bear the bell,
As Phoebus goulden rays obscures the rest
Of Planet Stars, and dimmeth every light
That shines in heaven or earth by day or night?
Take wistly heed in vewing her sweet face,
Where nature has expressed what cre she could
Eather for bewties blaze or comely grace:
Since when to prize her work she brake the moulde,
So that who seeks to find her Equal out,
Intends a thing will nere be brought about.
Therefore sweet Ladies all voutchsafe with me
To follow her desert, and my desire,
By praising her unto the ninth degree,
" For honor by due right is virtues hire,
And Enuies mouth must say when all is done,
No Bird but one is sacred to the sun.
XXXV
In this Passion the Author, as being blinded with Love, first compares
himself with Tiresias the old Soothsayer of Thebes, whom Juno deprived of
sight; but love rewarded him with the spirit of prophecy. Then he alludeth unto
Actaon: And lastly he shows why he is in worse case, then those, which by
vewing Medusaes head were turned into stoanes, leesing both life and light at
once; and so concludes, that old accursed Oedipus of all other best befitteth
him for a companion.

WHen first mine eyes were blinded with Desire,
They had new seen a Second Sun whose face
Though clear as beaten snow, yet kindled fire
Within my breast, and moulte my heart apase:
Thus learned I by proof, what others write,
That Sun, and fire, and snow offend the sight.
O ten times happy blinded Theban wight,
Whose loss of sight did make him half diume,
Where I (alas) have lost both life and light,
Like him, whose horns did plague his heedles eyes;
And yet was he in better case then I,
Which neither live, nor can obtain to dye.
All Perseus foes that saw Medusaes head,
By leesing shape and sense were quitte from thrall;
But I feel pains, though blind and double dead,
And was my self efficient cause of all:
Wherefore, of all that ere did cease to see
Vide Sophocl. aut Senecam in tragedijs suis de Oedipi miserijs.
Old Oedipus were meetest mate for me.
XXXVI
Here the Author misliketh of his wearisome estate in love, for that he neither
obtains any favor at the hands of his Mistres for his good thought or
speech, nor by his louinge looks, or presents, nor by his humility in
writing, or long sufferance in servitude. And herehence he blames her
ouerhardnes of heart, and the froward constellation of his own nativity: and
therewithal abandoning all further desire of life, has in request untimely
death, as the only end of his infelicitie.

EAch thought I think is friend to her I Love;
I still in speech use course of gentle works;
My loving looks are such as ought to move;
My gifts as great as mine estate affordes;
My letters tell in what a case I stand,
Though full of blots through fault of trembling hand;
I dewly dance attendance as I may,
With hope to please, and fear to make offense;
All sou'ramdie to her I grant for aye;
And where she hurtes yet make I no defense;
Sobbes are the song, wherein I take delight;
And shew'rs of tears do daily dim my sight.
And yet all this does make but small avail,
Her heart is hard, and never will relent,
No time, no place, no prayer can prevail,
The heavens them selves disfavor mine intent:
Why should I then desire a longer life,
To weaue therein a web of endless strife?
The Author in this passion does by manner of secret comparison prefer his
beloved before all other women whatsoever: and persuadeth upon the examples of
all sorts of Gods (whom love has overtaken at one time or other) that the
worthiness of his Mistres being well considered, his own fondnes in love must
of force be in it self excusable.

IF love himself be subject unto Love
And cange the woods to find a mortal pray:
If Neptune from the seas himself remove,
And seek on sands with earthly wightes to play:
Then may I love my peerless choice by right,
Who far excels each other mortal wight.
If Pluto could by love be drawn from hell,
To yield him self a silly Virgins thrall:
If Phoebus could voutsafe on earth to dwell,
To win a rustike maid unto his call:
Then, how much more should I adore the sight
Of her, in whom the heavens themselves delight?
If cuntrie Pan might follow Nymphe's in chase,
And yet through love remain deuoyd of blame:
If Satirs were excused for seeking grace
To joy the fruits of any mortal Dame:
Then, why should I once doubt to love her still,
On whom ne Goods nor men can gaze their fill?
XXXVIII
In the first staff of this Passion the Author expresses how fondly his
friends over trouble him, by questioninge with him touching his love, or
accidents thereof. In the two last verses of the second staff he imitateth
those verses of Sophocles: (...)
(...).
(...).
which may be thus Englished, In Trachinijs.
That man, which champion like will strive with Love
And combat hand to hand, has little wit:
For as he list he rules the Gods above.
And in the last, he sets down his mind fully bent to persist constantly in
the love and service of his Lady: like to that, which Stephanus Forcatulus (an
excellent Ciuilian, and one of the best Poets of France for these many
years) wrote unto his beloved Clytia: Quin noctu pluuiu^^ citius mirabimur
arcum,
Solque domo Hesperidum mane propinquus erit,
Quam capia^ lepide me foeda obliui^ nymphae, etc?


SOme ask me, when, and how my love begun;
Some, where it lies, and what effects it has;
Some, who she is, by whom I am undone;
Some, what I mean to tread so lewd a path;
I answer all alike, by answ'ring naught,
But, ble'st is he, whom Cupid never caught^*
And yet I could, if sorrow would permit,
Tell when and how I fixed my fancy first,
And for whose sake I lost both will and wit,
And choase the path, wherein I live accursed:
But such like deeds would breed a double fear,
" For love gainesaide grows madder then before.
But note herewith, that so my thoughts are bound
To her in whom my liberty lies thrall,
That if she would veutchsafe to salve my wound,
Yet force of this my love should never fall,
Till Phoebus use to rise from out the West,
And toward night seek lodging in the East.
XXXIX
The second part of this Passion is borrowed from out the fifte Sonnet in
Petrarch part. 1. whose words are those, Piu volte gia per dir le labbra
apersi:
Poirimase la voce in mez z'lpetto:
Ma qual suon poria may salir tant'alto?
Piu volte incominciai di scriuer versi.
Ma la penna, e la mano, e lo'ntelletto
Rimaser vinto nel primier assalto.


WHen first these eyes behold with great delight
The Phoenix of this world, or second Sun,
Her beams or plumes bewitched all my sight,
And love encreast the hurt that was begun:
Since when my grief is grow'ne so much the more,
Because I find no way to cure the soar.
I have attempted often to make complainte,
And with some doleful words to tell my grief,
But through my fearful heart my voice does fainte,
And makes me mute where I should crave releife:
An other while I think to write my pain,
But straight my hand lays down the pen again,
Sometimes my mind with heaps of doubtefull cares
Conioyn'd with fawning hoapes is sore oppressed,
And sometime suddeine joy at unawares
Does move to much, and so does hurt my breast;
What man does live in more extreemes then these,
Where death does seem a life, and pains do please?
XL
The sense contained in this Sonnet will seem strange to such as never have
acquainted themselves with Love and his Laws, because of the contrarieties
mentioned therein. But to such, as Love at any time has had under his banner,
all and every part of it will appear to be a familier truth. It is almost
word for word taken out of Petrarch, (where he begins, Part prima Sonet.
105.
Pace non truouo, e non ho da far guerra;
E temo, e spero etc?)
All, except three verses, which this Author has necessarily added, for
perfecting the number, which he has determined to use in every one of these
his Passions.

I Joy net peace, where yet no war is found;
I fear, and hope; I burn, yet freeze withal;
I mount to heaven, yet lie but on the ground;
I compass naught, and yet I compass all;
I live her bond, which neither is my so,
Nor friend; nor holds me fast, nor lets me go;
Love will not that I live, nor lets me die;
Nor locks me fast, nor suffers me to escape;
I want both eyes and tongue, yet see and cry;
I wish for death, yet after help I gape;
I hate my self, but love an other wight;
And feed on grief, in lieu of sweet delight;
At self same time I both lament and joy;
I still am pleased, and yet displeased still;
Love sometimes seems a God, sometimes a Boy;
Sometimes I sincke, sometimes I swim at will;
Twixt death and life, small difference I make;
All this dear Dame befalls me for thy sake.
XLI
This Passion is framed upon a somewhat tedious or too much affected
continuation of that figure in Rhethorique, which of the Greeks is called
(...) or (...), of the Latins Reduplicatio: whereof Susenbrotus (if I well
remember me) alleges this example out of Virgill, Sequitur pulcherrimus
Austur, AEncid. 10.

Austur equo fidens.


O Happy men that find no lack in Love;
I Love, and lack what most I do desire;
My deep desire no reason can remove;
All reason shunnes my breast, that is set one fire;
And so the fire mainetaines both force and flame,
That force avails not against the same;
One only help, can slake this burning heat,
Which burning heat proceeds from her face,
Whose face by looks bewitched my conceit,
Through which conceit I live in woeful case;
O woeful case, which has no end of woe,
Till woes have end by favor of my foe;
And yet my foe maintetaineth such a War,
As all her War is nothing else but Peace;
But such a Peace, as breeds secreat Jar,
Which Jar no wit, no force, no time can cease;
Yet cease despair: for time by wit, or force,
May force my friendly foe to take remorse.
XLII
In this Passion the Author under color of telling his dream does very
cunningly and lively praise his Mistres, so far forth, as not only to prefer
her before Helen of Greece for excellency of beauty, but also before how
many soever are now living in this our age. The dream of it self is so
plainly and effectually set down (albeit in few words) that it need no
further annotation to explain it.

THis latter night amidst my troubled rest
A Dismal Dream my fearful heart appald,
Whereof the sum was this: Love made a Feast,
To which all Neighbor, Saints and Gods were calde:
The cheer was more then mortal men can think,
And mirth grew on, by taking in their drink.
Then Jove amidst his cups for service done
Can thus to jest with Gaymede his boy;
I fame would find for thee my preaty Son
A fayrer Wife, then Paris brought to Troy:
Why, sir, quoth he, if Phoebus stand my friend,
Who know's the world, this geere will soon have end,
Then Jove replide that Phoebus should not choose
But do his best to find the fairest face;
And she once found should neither will nor choose
But yield her self, and change her dwelling place;
Alas, how much was then my heart affright,
Which bade me wake and watch my fair delight?
XLIII
The sense or matter of this Passion is taken out of Seraphine in his
Strambotti, who writes thus, Se Salamandra in fiamma viue, e in fuoco,
Non me stupisce quel che fa natura,
Macostei che e di giaccio, and io di fuoco,
E in mezo del mio cuor viue sicura;
Chi la defend in cosi ardente fuoco,
Che douendo sguagliar aiuenta dura?
Solo Amor di Natura aspro aduersario,
Che a suo dispetto vnisce ogni contrario.


THe Salamander lives in fire and flame,
And yet but wonder small in Natures work:
By stranger force love winnes away her fame,
As causing cold in midst of heat to lurk.
Who list of these my pains to take the view,
Will soon confess that what I say, is true.
For one as cold as hardest frozen yse,
Is fixed fast, and lodges in my breast;
Whom reason can remove by no devise,
Nor any force can cause to let me rest:
And yet I still so swim in hoate desire,
That more I burn then either flame or fire.
How strange is this? can contraries so gree,
That Ise in flame will neither waste nor melt,
But still increase, and harder grow to be,
Then erst before? all this my self have felt.
For Love Dame Natures foe, without remorse,
Thus coopleth contraries in me by force.
XLIIII
In this Passion the Author misliketh one while his estate, and by and by
after likes of the same again, upon hoape and likelyhoode of amendment, and
throughout the whole Sonnet he fayneth his Mistres to be a Second Sun: and
by expressinge his private infelicitie, in either always meltinge away with
Love, or growinge stiff through Death approachinge near him by reason of
daily cares; he makes allusion unto the diverse effects of the Sun, which
makes the clay much harder, and the wax softer, then it was before.

THat Second Sun, whose beams have dund my sight,
So scorched has my heart and senses all,
That cloggd with cares, and void of all delight,
I only seek, and sue to be her thrall;
Yet so this heat increases day by day,
That more and more it have neth my decay.
Sometimes I melt, as if my limbs were wex.
Sometimes grow stiff, as if they were of clay;
Thrice happy he whom Love does never vex,
Nor any Second Sun does mealt away:
Nay cursed I blaspheme the fairest Light
That ever yet was seen by day or night.
Perchance her parching heates will once repair
My heart again, and make me all anew:
The Phoenix so reuiues amids the air
By virtue of that Sun which all men view:
The virtue of my Sun exceedes the sky,
By her I shall revive, though first I die.
XLV
The Author uses in this Passion the like sense to that which he had in the
last before it, calling his Mistres a Second Sun upon earth, wherewith Heaven
it self is become in Love: But when he compiled this Sonnet, he thought not to
have placed it amongst these his English toys.

FOelices alij iuuenes, quos blandula Cypris
Aptos fecit amoribus,
Exoptare solent tenebrosa crepuscula noctis,
Aurorae maledicere:
At multo est mihi chara magis pulcherrima coniux
Tythoni gelidi senis,
Dum venit in prima surgentis part diei,
Et Soles geminos mihi
Apperit, and moesto foelices reddit ocellos,
Quod Soles videam duos,
Qui simili forma, simili sic luce coruscant,
Et mittunt radios pares,
Vt Polus ipse nouo Terrae laqueatus amore
F^^ nmis inuideat meis,
Solis and ignoto se torreat igne secundi,
Oblitus decoris sui,
Haud secus atque olim, Cum veris prima venustas
Multo flore superbijt,
Et nitidos primum strophijs ornare capillos
Pulchri Naiadum chori.
XLVI
Here the Author bewaileth the extremity of his estate growinge daily to be
more troublesome then before, and all through the hard heart of his beloved:
whom he therefore aptly compares unto a stony rock, which nothing can move
or waste away but long continuance of time. And hereuppon, after having long
striued with himself and his passions, he is quyetly resolved to have
patience, and so long to persevere in the still hoping mind of a true lover,
till by long continuance of time Love be induced to stand his friend.

ALl ye that love compare your pains with mine,
Which void of hoape continue still her thrall,
Whose heart is hard, and never will assign
A ransom day, nor once will bowat all,
Much like the stony rock, whose hardened side
Will scarsely wear with course of time or tide.
And yet, since time can wear each thing away,
I will enforce my self to live content,
Till so my thoughts have fed upon delay,
That Reason rule the roast and love relent;
O vain attempt in striving with Despair,
I build naught else but castles in the air.
For why: the Qunne may sooner shine by night,
And twinkling stars give glimsinge sparks by day:
Then I can earn to serve my Sweet delight,
Whom neither force nor time can drive away:
Therefore in hoape that love will stand my friend
I thus conclude, Each thing but love has end.
XLVII
This Passion contains a relation through out from line to line; as, from
every line of the first staff as it stands in order, unto every line of the
second staff: and from the second staff unto the third. The oftener it is
read of him that is no great clarke, the more pleasure he shall have in it. And
this posie a scholar set down over this Sonnet, when he had well considered of
it: Tam casu, quam art and industria. The two first lines are an imitation of
Seraphine, Sonnetto 103. Col tempo el Villanello al giogo mena
El T or si fiero, e si crudo animale,
Col tempo el Falcon s'vsa a menar l'ale
Eritornare a te chiamando a pena.


IN time the Bull is brought to wear the yoke;
In time all haggred Hawks will stoop the Lures;
In time small wedge will cleave the sturdiest Oak;
In time the Marble wears with weakest shewres:
More fierce is my sweet love, more hard withal,
Then Beast, or Bird, then Tree, or Stony wall.
No yoke preuailes, she will not yield to might;
No Lure will cause her stoop, she bears full gorge;
No wedge of woes make printe, she reakes no right;
No shewre of tears can move, she thinks I forge:
Help therefore Heavenly Boy, come perce her breast
With that same shaft, which rabbes me of my rest.
So let her feel thy force, that the relent;
So keep her low, that she vouchsafe a pray;
So frame her will to right, that pride be spent;
So forge, that I may speed without delay;
Which if thou do, I Will swear, and singe with joy,
That Love no longer is a blinded Boy.
XLVIII
This Passion contains two principal points. In the first are placed two
similitudes; in both which the Author expresses his own wilfulnes in love. In
the second, he compares the beautiful eyes of his Mistress unto the eyes of
the Basilique, which kills a man with his only sight being a far of:
whereof Lucan lib. 9. says thus, Sibilaque effundens cunctas terrentia pestes,
Ante venena nocens, late sibi submouet omne
Vulgus, and in vacua regnat Basiliscus arena.
And Mantuan in like manner, Natus in ardenti Libyae Basiliscus arena,
Vulnerat aspectu, luminibusque necat.


LIke as the silly Bird amids the night,
When Birders beat the bush, and shake his nest,
He fluttring forth straight flies unto the light,
As if it were the day new sprung from East,
Where so his wilful wings consume away,
That needs he must become the Birders pray:
Or, as the Fly, when candles are alight
Still plays about the flame until he burn:
Even so my heart has seen a heavenly sight,
Wherehence again it hardly can return:
The beams thereof couteine such wondrous flame,
That Jove him self would burn to see the same.
I mean a Virgins face, whose beauty rare,
Much like the Basilique in Lybia soil,
With only sight is cause of all my care,
And loads my yielding heart with endless toil;
Yet needs I must confess she has more grace,
Then all the Nymphs that haunt Dianaes chase.
XLIX
The Author in this Song bewrays his daily Passions in love to be so
troublesome, that to avoid the flames thereof, he gladly and feign would
yield himself to die, were it not that he fears a further inconvenience
would then arise. For he doubts least those flames, wherein his soul
continuallye burns, shall make Charon afraid to grant him passage over the
Lake of Stix, by reason, his old withered boat is apt to take fire.

SO great a Light has set my mind on fire,
That flesh and boane consume with secreat-flame,
Each vain dries up, wit yeeldes to deep desire:
I scarce (alas) dare say, for very shame,
How fame my soul an interchaunge would make
Twixt this her present State and Limbo lake;
And yet she dread's, least when she paites from hence,
Her Heates be such, that Charon will retire,
And let her pass for prayer, nor for Naulum intelligit, de quo Iuuenal:
Miserian est post omnia perdere naulum.
pence,
For fear his withered boat be set on fire;
So daung'rous are the flames of Mighty Love
In Stix it self, in earth, or heaven above.
Wherefore dear Dame voutchsafe to rue my case,
And salve the soar which thou thy self have made:
My Heates first grew by gazing on thy face,
Whose lights were such, that I could find no shade:
And thou my weary Soul bend all thy force,
By Plaintes and Tears to move her to remorse.
L
In this Passion is effectually set down, in how strange a case he lives
that is in love, and in how contrary an estate to all other men, which are at
defiaunce with the like follye. And this the Author expresses here in his
own person: therewithal calling upon Love, to stand his friend; or, if he
fail, upon death, to cut of his wearysome life.

WHile others feed, my fancy makes me fast;
While others live secure, I fear mischaunce;
I dread no force, where other stand aghast;
I follow suit where Fortune leads the Dance,
Who like a mumming mate so throws the Dice,
That Reason leesing all, Love winnes the price;
Which Love by force so warketh in my breast,
That needs perforce I must incline my will
To die in dreams, whiles others live in rest,
And live in woes while others feel none ill.
O gentle Death let here my days have end,
Or mighty Love, so use me as thy friend.
Mine eyes are worn with tears, my wits with woe,
My color dride with cares, my heart with pains,
My will bewitched, my limbs consumed so,
That scarsely blood, or vital breath remaynes:
While others joy, or sleep, I wayle and wake:
All this ( Dear Dame,) I suffer for thy sake.
LI
Tityus was the son of Jupiter, and for attempting to dishonest Latona, was
slain by Apollo. Since which time the Poets feign that for punishment he
lies in hell, miserably tormented with a ravening Vulture, which feeds upon
his bowels continually: and they as they are consumed, still miraculously
grow up again, to breed his endless misery, as the Poet witnesses, Claud.
in Gigantomachia.
Quid dieam Tityum, cuius sub vulnere saeuo
Viscera nascuntur grauibus certanitia poenis?
The Author compares his passions with the pains of this Tityus, and
imitateth Seneca writing to the like effect, Vultur relicto transuolet Tityo
ferus,
Meumque poenae semper accrescat iccur.


IF Tityus wretched wight beheld my pains,
He would confess his wounds to be but small,
A Vultur worse then his tears all my veins,
Yet never lets me die, nor live at all:
Would Gods a while I might possess his place,
To judge of both, which were in better case.
The Hell is dark, wherein he suffers smarte,
And wants not some Compartners of his grief:
I live in Light, and see what hurtes my heart,
But want some mourning mates for my relief;
His Pain is just reward, his crimes were such:
My greatest fault is this, I love too much.
Why then, since too much love can breed offense,
Thou daung'rous Bird, the root of my desire,
Go perch elsewhere, remove thy self from hence;
I freeze like I Will, and burn like flaming fire:
Yet stay good Bird: for if thou scare away,
Twixt Frost and Flame my days will soon decay.
LII
Here the Author after some dolorous discourse of his unhappiness, and
rehearsal of some particular hurtes which he susteineth in the pursuit of his
love: first questioneth with his Lady of his deserte; and then, as having made
a sufficient proof of his innocence, persuades her to pity him, whom she
herself has hurt. Moreover it is to be noted, that the first letters of all
the verses in this Passion being joined together as they stand, do contain
this posie agreeable to his meaning, Amor me pungit and vrit.

A AW^^ld of woes does reign within my breast,
m My pensive thoughts are cou'red all with care,
o Of all that sing the Swanne does please me best,
r Restraint of joys exiles my woonted fare,
M Mad mooded Love usurping Reasons place
e Extremity does over rule the case.
P Pain dries up my veins and vital blood,
u Unless the Saint I serve give help in time:
n None else, but she alone, can do me good.
g Grant then ye Gods, that first she may not clime
i Immortal heavens, to live with Saints above,
t Then she vouchsafe to yield me love for love,
E Examine well the time of my distress
t Thou dainty Dame, for whom I pine away,
V Unguyltie though, as needs thou ^nust confess,
r Remembering but the cause of my decay:
i In vewing thy sweet face arose my grief,
t. Therefore in time vouchsafe me some relief.
LIII
The two first parts of this Sonnet, are an imitation of certain Greek
verses of Theocritus; which verses as they are translated by many good Poets of
later days, so most aptlye and plainly by C. Vrcinus Velius in his
Epigrammes; he begins thus, Nuper apis furem pupugit violenter Amorem
Ipsum ex alueolis clam mella fauosque legentem,
Cui summos manuum digitos confixit, at ille
Indoluit, laesae tumuerunt vulnere palmae:
Flanxit humum, and saltu trepidans pulsauit, and ipsi
Ostendens Veneri, casum narrauit acerbum, etc.


WHere tender Love had laid han down to sleep,
A little Be so stong his fingers end,
That burning ache enforced him to weep
And call for AEsculapius.
Phoebus Son to stand his friend,
To whom he cride, I muse so small a thing
Can prick thus deep with such a little Sting.
Why so, sweet Boy, quoth Venus sitting by?
Thy self is young, thy arrows are but small
And yet thy shot makes hardest hearts to cry:
To Phoebus Sun she turned there withal,
And prayde him show his skill to cure the sore,
Whose like her Boy had never felt before.
Then he with Herbs recured soon the wound,
Which being done, he threw the Herbs away,
Whose force, through touching Love, in self same ground,
By hapless hap did breed my hearts decay:
For there they fell, where long my heart had li'ne
To wait for Love, and what he should assign.
LIIII
In this Passion the Author boasts, how sound a pleasure he lately enjoyed
in the company of his Beloved, by pleasing effectually all his five senses
exterior, and that through the only benefit of her friendly presence, and
extraordinary favor toward him. And in many choice particulars of this
Sonnet, he imitateth here and there a verse of Ronsardes, in a certain Elegy
to Ianet peintre du Roy: which begins thus, Pein moi, Ianet, pein moiie te
supply
Dans ce tableau les beautes de m'amie
De la facon, etc.


WHat happy hour was that I lately past
With her, in whom I fed my senses all?
With one sure sealed kiss I pleased my taste;
Mine ears with words, which seemed Musical;
My smelling with her breath, like Ciuet sweet;
My touch in place where modesty thought meet.
But shall I say, what obiectes held mine eye?
Her curled Locks of Gold, like Tagus sands;
Her Forehead smooth and white as Iuory,
Where Glory, State, and Bashfullnes held hands;
Her Eyes, one making Peace, the other Wars;
By Venus one, the other ruled by Mars;
Her Egles Nose; her Scarlate Cheeks half white;
Her Teeth of Orient Pearl; her gracious smile;
Her dimpled Chinne; her Breast as clear as light;
Her Hand like hers, (...).
who Tithon did beguile.
For worldly joys who might compare with me,
While thus I fed each sense in his degree?
LV
The whole invention of all this Passion is deducted out of Seraphine, Sonnet
63. whose verses if you read, you will judge this Authors imitatio^ the more
praise worthy; these they are Come alma assai bramosa and poco accorta
Che may visto hauea amor se non depinto,
Disposi un di cercar suo Laberinto,
Vedere el monstro, and tanta gente morta,
Ma quel fill deragion che chi per scorta
Del qual fu tutto el ceco loco cinto
Subito, ahime, fu da lui rotto and vinto,
Talche may piu trouar seppi la porta.


MY heedelesse heart which Love yet never knew,
But as he was described with Painters hand,
One day amongst the rest would needs go view
The Labyrinth of Love, with all his hand,
To see the Minotaure his ougly face,
And such as there lay slain within the place.
But soon my guiding third by Reason spunne,
Wherewith I past a long his darkesome cave,
Was broake (alas) by him, and ouerrunne,
And I perforce became his captive slave:
Since when as yet I never found the way
To leave that maze, wherein so many stray.
Yet thou on whom, mine eyes have gazed so long
May, if thou will, play Ariadnaes part,
And by a second Third revenge the wrong,
Which through deceit has hurt my guiltless heart;
Uouchsafe in time to save and set me free,
Which seek and serve none other Saint but thee.
LVI
The first Staff of this Passion is much like unto that invention of Seraphu^e
in his Strambotti, where he says, Morte! che vuoi? te bramo: Eccomi appresso;
Prendemi: a che? che manchi el mio dolor;
Non posso: ohime, non puoi? non per adesso;
Perch? pero che in te non regnail core. etc.
The second Staff somewhat imitateth an other of his Strambotti in the same
leaf; it begins thus, Amor, amor: chi e quel che chiama tanto?
Un tuo seruo fidel; non ti conosco; etc.
The Author in the last Staff, returns to entreat Death a new, to end
his days, as being half persuaded that Love would restore unto him his heart
again.

COme gentle Death; who calls? one that's oppressed:
What is thy will? that thou abridge my woe,
By cutting of my life; cease thy request,
I cannot kill thee yet: alas, why so?
Thou want thy Heart. Who stoale the same away?
Love, whom thou seru'st, entreat him if thou may.
Come, come, come Love: who calls me so often?
Thy Uassall true, whom thou should know by right.
What makes thy cry so faint? my voice is soft,
And almost spent by wayling day and night.
Why then, what is thy request? that thou restore
To me my Heart, and steal the same no more.
And thou, O Death, when I possess my Heart,
Dispatch me then at once: why so?
By promise thou art bound to end my smart.
Why, if thy Heart return, then what is thy woe?
That brought from cold, It never will desire
To rest with me, which any more hot then fire.
LVII
Here the Author cheerfully comforting himself, rebukes all those his
friends, or others whatsoever, which pity his estate in Love: and groundeth
his invention, for the most part, upon the old Latin Proverb, Consuetudo est
altera natura. Which Proverb he confirms by two examples; the one, of him,
that being borne far North seldom ketcheth cold; the other of the Negro,
which being borne under a hot climate, is never smoothered with overmuch
heat.

ALl ye, that grieve to think my death so near,
Take pity on your selves, whose thought is blind;
Can there be Day, unless some Light appear?
Can fire be cold, which yields heat by kind?
If Love were past, my life would soon decay,
Love bids me hoape, and hoape is all my stay.
And you, that see in what estate I stand,
Now hot, now cold, and yet am living still,
Persuade your selves, Love has a mighty hand,
And custom frames, what pleases best her will
A lingering use of Love has taught my breast
To harbor strife, and yet to live in rest.
The man that dwelles far North, has seldom harm
With blast of winters wind or nipping frost:
The Negro seldom feels himself too warm
For both experience teaches and Philosophical reason approoueth, that an
Ethyopian may easily in Spain be (...) thered with the heat of the country
through Spain be more temperate then Ethyopia is.
If he abide within his nature coast;
So, Love in me a Second Nature is,
And custom makes me think my Woes are Bliss.
LVIII
Aetna, called in times past Inesia, as Volaterranus witnesses, is a hollow
hill in Sicilia, whose top burns continually, the fire being maintained
with a vain of brimstone, and other such like Mineralles, which are within the
said Mountain. Which notwithstanding, the bottom of the hill is very
pleasant, as well for the abundance of sweet fruits and flowers, as for the
number of fresh springes and fountains. The Poets feign, that when Iuppiter
had with his thunderboltes beaten down the Gyantes of the earth, which
rebelled against heaven, he did forthwith cover and oppress them all with the
weight of this hill Aetna. These things being well considered, together with
the verse of Horace; (Deus immortalis haberi Dearte Pocuc^.

Dum cupit Empedocles, ardeutem frigidus Aetnam Insiluit)
It may easily appear, why the Author in this passion compares his heart unto
the hill.

THere is a monstrous hill in Sicill soil,
Where works that limping God, which Vulcan hight,
And rebel Gyantes lurk, whom Jove did foil,
When against the heavens they durst presume to fight;
The top thereof breathes cut a burning flame,
And Flora sittes at bottom of the same,
My swelling heart is such an other hill,
Wherein a blinded God bears all the swaye.
And rebel thoughts resisting reasons skill
Are bound by will from starting thence away;
The top thereof does smoke with scalding smart,
And seldom joys obtain the lowest part.
Yet learn herewith the difference of the twain:
Empedocles consumed with Aetnaes fire
When godheade there he sought, but all in vain:
But this my heart, all flauming with desire,
Embraces in it self an Angels face,
Which bears rule as Goddess of the place.
LIX
The Author in this passion accuses his own eyes, as the principal or only
cause of his amorous infeli^itie: wl er in his heart is so oppressed
continually with evils, which are contrary in them selves, that reason can
bear no swaye in the cause. Therefore in the end, he instantly entreatet^
his Lady of her speedy favor and goodwill, alleaginge what hurt may grow
through her longer delay.

THat thing, wherein mine eyes have most delight,
Is greatest cause my heart does suffer pain:
Such is the hurt that comes by wanton sight;
Which reason strives to vanquish all in vain;
This only sense, more quick then all the rest,
Has kindled holy fire within my breast.
And so my mourning heart is parching dry
With sending sighs abroad, and keeping care,
That needs it must consume if long if lie
In place, where such a flame does make repare:
This flame is Love, whom none may well entreat,
But only she, for wheme I suffer heat.
Then peerless Dame, the ground of all my grief,
Uoull^fe to cure the cause of my complainte:
No fauou^e else but thine can yield relief.
But help in time, be ore I further fainte,
" For Danger grows by lingringe till the last,
" And physic has no help, when life is past.
LX
The Author groundeth this Passion upon three points. In the first, he
shows how he witting and wilfully follows his own hurt, with such like
words as Medea sometime used, Ovid. Metam lib. 7.
Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor, etc.
In the second, he excuses his fault upon the maine force and tyranny of
Love, being the only governor of his will. And lastly, he humbly entreats
his Lady for the restitution of his wonted liberty: desiring her not to exact
more of him, then his ability of body or mind can well sustain, according to
the old verse, Pelle magis rabida nihil est de Vulpe pettendum.


WAs ever man, whose Love was like to mine?
I follow still the cause of my distress,
My Heart foreseeing hurt, does yet incline
To seek the same, and thinks the harm the less.
In doing thus, you ask me what I ayle:
Against maine force what reason can prevail?
Love is the Lord and Signor of my will,
How shall I then dispose of any deed?
By forced Bond, he holds my freedom still,
He duls each sense, and makes my heart to bleed.
Thou Sacred Nymph, whose virtue wants stain,
Agree with Love, and set me free again.
Of this my weary Life no day shall fall,
Wherein my pen shall once thy praise forget:
No Night with sleep shall close mine eyes at all,
Before I make recount of such a debt;
Then force me not to more then well I may,
Besides his Skin, the For has naught to pay.
LXI
The invention of this Passion is borrowed, for the most part from Seraphine
Son. 125. Which begins, Selgran tormento i fire fulmini accesi
Perduti hauessi, e li suoi strali Amore,
I n'ho tanti traffitti in meggio el core,
Che sol da me li potriano esser resi;
Ese de gli ampli mari in terra stesi
Fusse priuo Neptuno, io spando fore
Lagryme tante, che con piuliquore
Potrebbe nuoui mari hauer ripresi; etc.


IF Love had lost his shaftes, and Jove down threw
His thundering boltes, and spent his forked fire,
They only might recou'red be anew
From out my Heart croswounded with desire;
Or if Debate by Mars were lost a space,
It might be found within the self same place;
If Neptunes waves were all dride up and gone,
My weeping eyes so many tears distill,
That greater Seas might grow by them alone;
Or if no flame were yet remaining still
In Vulcans forge, he might from out my breast
Make choice of such as should befit him best,
If Aeole were deprived of all his charge,
Yet soon could I restore his winds again,
By sobbing sighs, which sorth I blow at large,
To move her mind that pleasures in my pain;
What man, but I, could thus incline his will
To live in Love, which has no end of ill?
LXII
That the vulgar sort may the better understand this Passion, I will briefly
touch those, whom the Author names herein, being al camned souls (as the
Poets feign) and destinate unto sundry punishments. Tantalus having his
lips still at the brinke of the river Eridanus, yet dies for thirst. Ixion
is tied unto a wheel; which turns incessantly. A vulture fee^eth upon the
bowels of Tityus, which grow up again ever as they are devoured. Sisyphus
rowleth a great round stoane up a steep hill, which being once at the top
presently falls down amain. Belides are fifty sisters, whose continual
task is, to fill a bottomless tub full of water, by lading in their pitchers
full at once.

IN that I thirst for such a Goddess grace
As wantes remorse, like Tantalus I die;
My state is equal to Ixions case,
Whose rented limm's ar turned eternally,
In that my tossing toils can have no end,
Nor time, nor place, nor chance will stand my friend.
In that my heart consuming never dies,
I feel with Tityus an equal pain,
On whom an ever feeding Uultur lies;
In that I rise through hope, and fall again
By fear, like Sisyphus I labor still
To turle a rolling stoane against the hill;
In that I make my vows to her alone,
Whose ears are deaf, and will retain no sound,
With Belides my state is all but one,
Which sill a tub, whose bottom is not sound.
A wondrous thing, y^ Love should make the wound,
Wherein a second Hell may thus be found.
LXIII
Love has two arrows, as Co^radus Celtis witnesses in these two verses: Per
matris astrum, and per fera spicula,
Quae bina fert saeuus Cupido, etc. Odarum. lib. 1.

The one is made of lead, the other of gold, and either of them different in
quality from the other. The Author therefore faineth in this Passion, that when
Cupid had stroke^ him with that of lead, soon after pitying his painful
estate, he thought good to strike his beloved with the other. But her breast was
so hard, that the shaft rebounding back again, wounded Lone him self at
unawares. Wherehence fell out these three inconveniences; first, that Love
himself became her thrall, whom he should have conquered; then, that she
became proud, where she should have been frie^dly. and lastly, that the Author
by this means despaireth to have any recure of his unquiet life, and therefore
desires a spee die death, as alluding to those se^te^tious verses of Sophocles
Electra.
, (...)
(...).
which may be thus Englished paraphrastically. What can it him avail to live a
while,
Whom, of all others, euilles are betyde?


Love has two shaftes, the one of beaten gold,
By stroke whereof a sweet effect is wrought:
The other is of lumpishe leaden mould,
And works none effect, but what is naught;
Within my breast the latter of the twain
Breades fear, fear thought, and thought a lasting pain,
One day amongst the rest sweet Love began
To pity mine estate, and thought it best
To perce my Dear with gold, that she might scanne
My case aright, and turn my toils to rest:
But from her breast more hard then hardest flint
His shafte flewe back, and in him self made printe.
And this is cause that Love does stoup her lure,
Whose heart he thought to conquer for my sake;
That she is proud; and I without recure:
Which triple hurt does cause my hope to quake:
Hoape lost breeds grief, grief pain, and pain disease,
Disease bringes death, which death will only please.
LXIIII
This Passion is of like frame and fashion with that, which was before under
the number of XLI. whetherto I refer the Reader. But touching the sense or
substance of this Passion, it is evident, that herein the Author, by layinge
open the long continued grieuesomnes of his misery in Love, seeks to move his
Mistres to some compassion.

MY humble suit has set my mind on pride,
Which pride is cause thou have me in disdain,
By which disdain my wounds are made so wide,
That wideness of my wounds augmentes my pain,
Which Pain is cause, by force of secreate iarres,
That I sustain a brunt of private Wars.
But cease dear Dame to kindle further strife,
Let Strifes have end, and Peace enjoy their place;
If Peace take place, Pity may save my life,
For Pity should be show'ne to such as trace
Most daung'rous ways, and tread their stepp's awry,
Or live in woes: and such a one am I.
Therefore My Dear Delight regard my Love,
Whom Love does force to follow Fond Desire,
Which Fond Desire no counsel can remove;
For what can counsel do, to quench the fire
That fires my heart through fancies wanton will?
" Fancy by kind with Reason strives still.
LXV
In the first and second part of this passion, the Author proves by examples,
or rather by manner of argument, A maiori ad minus, that he may with good
reason yield him self to the imperie of Love, whom the gods them selves obey;
as Iuppiter in heaven, Neptune in the seas, and Pluto in hell. In the last
staff he imitateth certain Italian verses of M.

Girolamo Parabosco; which are, as follows.
Occhi tuoi, anzi stelle alme, and fatali,
O^e ha prescritto il ciel mio mal, mio been:
Mie lagrime, e sospir, mio riso, e canto; Selua Seconda.

Mia spene, mio timor; mio foco and giaccio;
Mia noia, mio piacer; mia vita and morte.
WHo knows not, how often Venus son
Has forced Iuppiter to leave his seat?
Or else, how often Neptune he has wunne
From seaes to sands, to play some wanton feate?
Or, how he has constraind the Lord of Stix
To come on earth, to practice loving tricks?
If heaven, if seaes, if hell must needs obey,
And all therein be subject unto Love;
What shall it then avail, if I gainsay,
And to my double hurt his power do prove?
No, no, I yield my self, as is but meet:
For hitherto with sow'r he yeeldes me sweet.
From out my Mistres eyes, two lightsome stars,
He destinates estate of double kind,
My tears, my smyling cheer; my peace, my wars;
My sighs, my songs; my fear, my hoping mind;
My fire, my frost; my joy, my sorrows gall;
My curse, my praise; my death, but life with all.
LXVI
This Latin passion is borrowed from Petrarch Sonett^ 133. which begins.

Hor, ch'l ciel, e la terra e'l vento tace,
E le fere, e gli augelli il sonno affrena,
Notte'l carro stellato in giro mena,
E nel suo letto il mar senz' onda giace; etc.
Wherein he imitated Virgill, speaking of Dido, thus.
Nox erat, et tacitum carpebant fessa soporem
Corpora etc.
And this Author presumes, upon the pains he has taken, in faithfully
translating it, to place it amongst these his own passions, for a sign of his
great sufferance in love.

DVm coelum, dum terra tacet, ventusque silescit,
Dumque feras, volucresque quies complectitur alta,
Noxque agit in gyrum stellantes sydere currus,
Inque suo lecto recubat sine flumine Pontus,
Multa ego contemplor; studeo; conflagro; gemisco
Et, mea quae dulcis paena est, mihi semper oberr^^*
In me bella gero plenusque doloris and irae,
Paxque mihi modica est Laurae solius in vmbra,
Oritur ex vno claro mihi font and acerbum,
Et quod dulce sapit; quorum depascor vtrque
Vnica meque manus ladit, laesoque medetur,
Martyriumque meum nullo quia limite clausum est,
Mill neces pacior, vitas totidemque resumo
Quoque die; superestque mihi spes nulla salutis.
LXVII
A man singular for his learning, and magistrate of no small accoumpt, upon
slight survey of this book of passions, either for the liking he had to the
Author, or for his own private pleasure, or for some good he conceived of the
work, voutchsafed with his own hand to set down certain posies concerning the
same: Amongst which, this was one, Love has no leaden heels. Whereat the
Author glaunceth throughout all this Sonnet; which he purposely compyled at the
press, in remembrance of his worshipful friend, and in honor of his golden
posie.

WHen Cupid is content to keep the skies,
He never takes delight in standing still,
But too and froe, and every where he flies,
And every God subdueth at his will,
As if his boaw were like to Fortunes wheel,
Him self like her, having no leaden heel.
When other whiles he passes Lemnos I Will,
Unhappy boy he gybes the Volcan^.
Clubfoote Smith,
Who threatens him, and bids him stay a while,
But laughing out he leaves him he forthwith,
And makes him self companion with the Wind^
To show, his heels are of no leaden kind.
But in my self I have too true a proof:
For when he first espyde my raunging Heart,
He Falcon like came sowsing from aloof.
His swiftly falling stroke encreast my smart:
As yet my Heart the violence it feels,
Which makes me say, Love has no leaden heels.
LXVIII
The Author has wrought this passion out of certain verses of Stephanus
Forcatulus, which are these,

Cor mihi punxit amor, sed punxit praepete telo;
figitur hoc tum plus, cum magis exeutio. etc.
Carpere dictamum Cretoea nil iuuet Ida,
quo vellunt cerui spicula fixa leaves,
Telephus haec eadem fatalia vulnera sensit,
sanare vt tantum, quifacit illa, queat.
And whereas the Author in the end of this passion, alludeth to the wounds of
Telephus, he is to be understood of that Telephus, the Son of Hercules, of
whose wound, being made and healed by Achilles only, Ovid writes thus.

Vulnus Achillaeo quod quondam fecerat hosti, De remed. lib. 1

Vulneris auxilium Pelias hasta tulit
And propertius in like manner lib. 2.
Mysus et Haemonia iuuenis qui cuspide vulnus
Senserat, hac ipsa cuspide sensit opem.
Suidas mentions an other Telephus, an excellent Gra^marian of Pergamus.

IN secret seat and center of my heart,
Unwares to me, not once suspecting ill,
Blind Cupides-hand has fixed a deadly dart,
Whereat how ere I pluck, it sticks still,
And works effect like those of Arab soil,
Whose heads are dipped in poison steed of oil.
If It were like those, wherewith in Ida plain
The Craetan hunter wounds the chased dear,
I could with Dictame draw it out again,
And cure me so, that skarre should scarce appear:
He alludeth to the wound of P^^locte^es.
Or if Alcides shaft did make me bleed,
Machaons art would stand me in some steed.
But being, as it is, I must compare
With fatal wounds of Telephus alone,
And say, that he, whose hand has wrought my care,
Must either cure my fatal wound, or none:
Help therefore gentle Love to ease my heart,
Whose pains increase, till thou withdraw thy dart.
LXIX
In the first staff of this Passion, The Author as one more then half
drowping with despair, sorowfully recounteth some particular causes of his
unhappiness in Love. In the residue, he entreats a better aspecte of the
Planets, to the end, that either his life may be inclined to a more happy
course, or his death be hastened, to end all his misery at once.

MY joys are done, my comfort quite dismayed,
My weary wits bewitch't with wanton will,
My will by Fancies headeles fault betrayed,
Whose eyes on Beauties face are fixed still,
And whose conceyte Folly has clouded so,
That Love concludes, my heart must live in woe.
But change aspect ye angry stars above,
And powrs divine restore my liberty,
Or grant that soon I may enjoy my Love,
Before my life incur more misery:
For now so hot is each assault I feel
As would dissolve a heart more hard then steel.
Or if you needs must work my deadly smart,
Perform your charge by hasting on my death
In sight of her, whose eyes enthrall my heart:
Both life and death to her I do bequeath,
In hope at last, she will voutsafe to say,
I rewe his death, whose life I made away,
LXX
In this passion the Author some what a far off imitateth an Ode in
Gervasius Sepinus written to Cupid, where he begins thus:

Quid tenelle puer, Pharetra vbinam est?
Vbi arcus referens acuta Lunae Erotopaegnicon. lib. 1.

Bina cornua? vbi flagrans Amoris
fax? vbi igneus ille arcus, in quo
De ipsis Coelicolis, virisque victis
Vinctisque ante iugum aureus triumphas?
Haud possent tua summa numina vnam,
Vnam vincere Virginem tenellam?
Qui fortes animos pudicae Elisae
Fortioribus irrigans venenis
Vicisti: etc.
Cupid, where is thy golden quiver now?
Where is thy sturdy Bow? and where the fire,
Which made ere this the Gods themselves to bow?
Shall she alone, which forces my Desire,
Report or think thy Godhead is so small,
That she through pride can escape from being thrall?
Whilom thou ouercam'st the stately mind
Of chaste Elisa queen of Carthage land,
And did constrain Pasiphae against her kind,
And broughtest Europa fair to Creta sand,
Quite through the swelling Seas, to pleasure Jove,
Whose heavenly heart was touched with mortal love.
Thus were thou wunt to show thy force and slight,
By conquering those that were of highest race,
Where now it seems thou changest thy delight,
Permitting still, to thy no small disgrace,
A virgin to despise thy self, and me,
Whose heart is hers, where ere my body be.
LXXI
The Author writes this Sonnet unto his very friend, in excuse of his late
change of study, manners, and delights, all happening through the default of
Love. And here by examples he proves unto him, (calling him by the name of
Titus, as if him self were Gysippus) that Love not only works alteration in
the minds of men, but also in the very Gods them selves; and that so far
forth, as first to draw them from their Celestial seats and functions, and
then to ensnare them with the unseemly desire of mortal creatures, a Passion
ill befitting the majesty of their Godheads.

ALas dear Titus mine, my ancient friend,
What makes thee muse at this my present plight,
To see my woonted joys enjoy their end
And how my Muse has lost her old delight?
" This is the least effect of Cupids dart,
" To change the mind by wounding of the heart.
Alcides fell in love as I have done,
And laid aside both club and Lions skin:
Achilles too when he fair Bryses wunne,
To fall from wars to wooing did begin.
Nay, if thou list, survey the heavens above,
And see how Gods them selves are changed by Love*
Jove steals from skies to lie by Laedaes side;
Arcas descendes for fair Aglaurus sake,
And Sol, so soon as Daphne is espied,
To follow her his Chariot does forsake:
No marvel then although I change my mind,
Which am in love with one of heavenly kind.
LXXII
In this Sonnet The Author seems to specify, that his Beloved makes her
aboade in this our beautiful and fair City of London, situate upon the side
of the Themse, called in latin Thamesis. And therefore, whilst he faineth,
that Thamesis is honorably to be conveyed hence by all the Gods, toward the
Palace of old Nereus, he seems to grow into some iealosie of his mistres,
whose beauty if it were as well known to the^, as it is to him, it would (as
he says) both deserve more to be honored by the^, and please Tryton much
better, then Thamesis, although she be the fairest daughter of old Oceanus.

OCeanus not long ago decreed
To wedd his dearest daughter Thamesis
To Tryton Neptunes son, and that with speed:
When Neptune saw the match was not amiss,
He prayde the Gods from highest to the least,
With him to celebrate the Nuptial feast.
Jove did descend with all his heavenly train,
And came for Thamesis to London side,
In whose conduct each one imployd his pain
To reverence the state of such a Bride:
But whilst I saw her led to Nereus Hall,
My jealous heart begann to throbb withal.
I doubted I, lest any of that crewe,
In fetching Thamesis, shoud see my Love,
Whose tising face is of more lively hew,
Then any Saints in earth, or heaven above:
Besides, I feared, that Tryton would desire
My Love, and let his Thamesis retire.
LXXIII
Here the Author, by faining a quarrel betwixt Love and his Heart, under a
shadow expresses the tyranny of the one, and the misery of the other: to
stir up a just hatred of the ones injustice, and cause due compassion of the
others unhappiness. But as he accuses Love for his readiness to hurt, where he
may; so he not excuses his Heart, for desiring a fair imprisonment, when he
neded not: thereby specifying in Love a wilful malice, in his Heart a
heedlesse folly.

I Rue to think upon the dismal day
When Cupid first proclaimed open war
Against my Heart; which fled without delay,
But when he thought from Love to be most far,
The winged boy prevented him by flight,
And led him captiuelyke from all delight.
The time of triumph being ouerpast,
He scarcely knew where to bestow the spoil,
Till through my heedlesse Hearts desire, at last,
He locked him up in Tower of endless toil,
Within her breast, whose hardened will does vex
Her silly ghest softer then liquid wex.
This prison at the first did please him well,
And seemed to be some earthly Paradise,
Where now (alas) Experience does tell,
That Beawties bates can make the simple wise,
And biddes him blame the bird, that willingly
Cheaseth a golden cage for liberty.
LXXIIII
The Author in this passion, upon a reason secret unto him self, extolleth his
Mistres under the name of a Spring. First he prefers the same before the
sacred fount of Diana, which (as Ovid witnesses 3. Metam:) was in the valley
Gargaphie, adjoining to Thaebes: then, before Tagus the famous river in Spain,
whose sands are intermixed with stoare of gold, as may be gathered by those two
verses in Martial lib. 8.

Non illi satis est turbato sordidus auro
Hermus, and Hesperio qui sonat orb Tagus.
And lastly, before Hippocrene, a fountain of Boeotia, now called the well of
the Muses, and fained by the Poets, to have had his source or beginning from
the heel of Pegasus the winged horse.

ALthough the drops, which chaung'd Actaeons shape,
Were half divine, and from a sacred fount;
Though after Tagus sands the world do gape;
And Hippocrene stand in high account:
Yet there is a Spring, whose virtue does excel
Dianaes fount, Tagus, and Pegase well.
That happy how'r, wherein I found it furst,
And sat me down adjoining to the brinke,
My sow it self, suppris'd with vnknow'n thurst,
Did wish it lawful were thereof to drink;
But all in vain: for Love did will me stay
And wait a while in hope of such a pray.
This is that Spring quoth he, where Nectar flows,
Whose liquor is of price in heaun's above;
This is the Spring, wherein sweet Venus shows,
By secret bait how Beauty forces Love.
Why then, quoth I, dear Love how shall I mend,
Or quench my thurst, unless thou stand my friend?
LXXV
In this passion the Author boroweth from certain Latin verses of his own,
made long ago upon the love abuses of Iuppiter in a certain piece of work
written in the commendation of women kind; which he has not yet wholly
perfected to the print. Some of the verses may be thus cited to the explaining
of this passion, although but lamelie.

Accipe vt ignaram candentis imagine Tauri
Luserit Europam ficta etc.
Qua^ nimio Semelen fuerit complexus amore. etc.
Quali^ and Asterien aequilinis presserit alis:
Quoque dolo laedam ficto sub olore fefellit.
Add quod Antiopam Satyri sub imagine etc.
Et fuit Amphytrio, cum te T^rynthia etc.
Aegmaeque duos ignis sub imagine natos etc.
Parrhasiam fictae pharetra Vultuque Dianae,
Mnemosynen pastor; serpens Deoida lusit. etc.
Ovid writes somewhat in like manner Metam. lib. 6.
NOt she, whom Jove transported into Crete;
Nor Semele, to whom he vowed in have;
Nor she, whose flanckes he filled with feigned heat;
Nor whom with Aegles wings he often embrast;
Nor Danae, beguyl'd by golden rape;
Nor she, sor whom he took Dianaes shape;
Nor fai e Antiopa, whose fruitful love
He gained Satyr like; nor she, whose Son
To wanton Hebe was conioyn'd above;
Nor sweet Mnemosyne, whose love he wunne
In shepheardes weed; no such are like the Saint,
whose eyes enforce my feeble heart to faint.
And Jove him self may storm, if so he please,
To hear me thus compare my Love with his:
No forked fire, nor thunder can disease
This heart of mine, where stronger torment is:
But O how this surpasses all the rest,
That she, which hurtes me most, I love her best.
LXXVI
In this Sonnet the Author being, as it were, in half a madding mood, falls
at variance with Love himself, and blasphemeth his godheade, as one that can
make a greater wound, then afterward he him self can recure. And the chief
cause that he sets down, why he is no longer to hope for help at Loves
hand, is this, because he him self could not remedy the hurt which he
sustained by the love of fair Psyches. Vide Apul.


THou foolish God the Author of my grief,
If Psyches beams could set thy heart on fire,
How can I hope, of thee to have relief,
Whose mind with mine does suffer like desire?
Henceforth my heart shall sacrifice elsewhere
To such a Saint as higher port does bear.
And such a Saint is she, whom I adore,
As foyles thy force, and makes thee stand aloof;
None else, but she, can salve my festred soar;
And she alone will serve in my behoof:
Then blinded boy, go pack thee hence away,
And thou Sweet Soul, give ear to what I say.
And yet what shall I say? strange is my case,
In midst of froast to burn, and freze in flame:
Would Gods I never had beheld thy face,
Or else, that once I might possess the same:
Or else that chance would make me free again,
Whose hand helped Love to bring me to this pain.
LXXVII
The chief contents of this Passion are taken out of Seraphine Sonnet, 132.

Col tempo passa gli anni, imesi, e l' hoar,
Col tempo le richeze, imperio, e regno,
Col tempo fama, honor, fortezza, e ingegno,
Col tem ogiouentu con belta more etc,
But this Author inuerteth the order, which Seraphine uses, some times for
his rimes sake, but for the most part, up on some other more allowable
consideration.

TIme wastes years, and month's, and howr's:
Time does consume fame, honor, wit, and strength:
Time kills the greenest Herbs and sweetest flowr's:
Time wears out youth and beauties looks at length:
Time does convey to ground both foe and friend,
And each thing else but Love, which has no end.
Time makes every tree to die and rott:
Time turns often our pleasures into pain:
Time causes wars and wrongs to be forgott:
Time cleares the sky, which first hung full of rain:
Time makes an end of all humane desire,
But only this, which settes my heart on fire.
Time turns into naught each Princely state:
Time brings a fludd from new resolved snow:
Time calmes the Sea where tempest was of late:
Time eats what ere the Moon can see below:
And yet no time preuailes in my behoue,
Nor any time can make me cease to love.
LXXVIII
This Passion concerns the lowering of his Mistres and herein for the most
part the Author imitateth Agnola firenzuola; who upon the like subject,
writes as follows,

O belle done, prendam pietade
Dimepur hor' in talpa trasformato
D'huom, che pur dianza ardiua mirar fis^
Come Aquila il sol chiar in paradiso.
Cosi va'l mondo, e cosi spesso accade
A chisi fida in amoroso stato, etc.
What scowling clouds have ouercast the sky,
That these mine eyes can not, as woonte they were,
Behold their second Sun intentiuely?
Some strange Eclipse is happened as I fear,
Whereby my Sun is either baid of light,
Or I my self have lost my seeing quite.
Most likely so since Love him self is blind.
And Venus too (perhaps) will have it so,
That Lovers wanting sight shall follow kind.
O then fair Danies bewail my present woe,
Which thus am made a moale, and blindefolde run
Where Aegle like I late beheld the Sun.
But out alas, such guerdon is assignde
To all that love and follow Cupids carre:
He tyres their limines and does bewitch their mind,
And makes within them selves a lasting war.
Reason with much ado does teach me this,
Though yet I cannot mend what is a miss.
LXXIX
The Auhour in this Passion seems upon mislike of his wearisome estate in
love to enter into a deep discourse with him self touching the particular
miseries which befall him that loves. And for his sense in this place, he is
very like unto him self, where in a Theme diducted out of the bowelles of
Antigone in Sophocles (which he lately translated into Latin, and published in
print) he writes in very like manner as follows.

Mali quando Cupidimis
Venas aestus edax occupat intimas,
Arts ingenium labitur in malas;
Iactatur vary, nec Cereris subit
Nec Bacchi studium; peruigiles trahit
Noctes; eura animum sollicita atterit, etc.
And it may appear by the tenor of this Passion that the Author prepares
him self to fall from Love and all his laws as will well appear by the
sequel of his other Passions that follow, which are all made upon this Posie,
My Love is past.

" Where heat of love does once possess the heart,
" There cares oppress the mind with wondrous ill,
" Wit runns awrye not fearing future smarte,
" And fond desire does euermaster will:
" The belly neither cares for meat nor drink,
" Nor over watched eyes desire to wink:
" Footsteps are false, and waur'ing too and froe;
" The brightsome flower of beauty fades away:
" Reason retyres, and pleasure brings in woe:
" And wisdom yeldeth place to black decay:
" Counsel, and fame, and friendship are contem'nd:
" And bashful shame, and Gods them selves condem'nd.
" Watchful suspect is linked with despair:
" Inconstant hope is often drowned in fears:
" What folly hurtes not fortune can repair;
" And misery does swim in Seas of tears:
" Long use of life is but a lingering ioe,
" And gentle death is only end of woe.
LXXX MY LOVE IS PAST.
ALL such as are but of indifferent capacity, and have some skill in
Arithmetike, by viewing this Sonnet following compiled by rule and number, into
the form of a pillar, may soon judge, how much art and study the Author has
bestowed in the same. Where in as there are placed many preaty observations, so
these which I will set down, may be marked for the principal, if any man have
such idle leisure to look it over, as the Author had, when he framed it.
First therefore it is to be noted, that the whole pillar (except Antitheticall
or Antisillabicall. Secondly, how this posie ( Amare est insanire) runs
twyse through out ye Column, if ye gather but the first letter of every whole
verse orderly (excepting the two last) and then in like manner take but the
last letter of every one of the Orchematicall, ye is to say, founded by
transilition or over skipping of number by rule and order, as from 1 to 3, 5,
7, and 9: the secret virtue whereof may be learned in Polygrap^^ae ^uae lib. 5.
T^ithemius, as namely by tables of transilition to decypher any thing that is
written by secret transposition of letters, be it never so cunningly
conueighed. And lastly, this observation is not to be neglected, that Per modum
expansionis.

LXXXI A Pasquine Pillar erected in the despite of Love.
A 1 At
2 last, though
3 late, farewell
4 old well a da: A
m 5 Mirth or mischance strike
a 6 up a new alarM, And m
7 Cypria la nemica
r 8 miA Retire to Cyprus I Will, a
e 9 and cease thy War, Else must thou prove how r
E 10 Reason can by Charm Enforce to flight thy e
s 11 blindsolde bratte and thee. So frames it with me now, E
t 12 that I confesS, The life I led in Love deuoyde ^
I 12 of resT, It was a Hell, where none felt more then I, ^^^
n 11 Nor any with like miseries forlorN. Since n
s 10 therefore now my woes are wexed lesS, And s
a 9 Reason bidds me leave old welladA, a
n 8 No longer shall the world laughe me
i 7 to scorN; I Will choose a path that n
r 6 shall not lead awrie. Rest i
5 then with me from your
4 blind Cupids carR r
e. 3 Each one of
2 you, that
1 serve,
3 and would be
5 srcE. H'is dooble thrall e. Huius Col^^ nae Basis pre^sillab^^^ ^ mero and
li^^ rum propo^ one est Or^^ matica.

7 that liu's as Love thinks best, whose
9 hand still Tyrant like to hurt is priest.
LXXXII Expansio Columnae praecedentis.
A At last, though late, farewell old wellada; A
m Mirth for mischaunce strike up a new alarm; m
a And Ciprya la nemica mia a
r Retire to Cyprus I Will and cease thy war, r
e Else must thou prove how Reason can by charm e
E Enforce to flight thy blyndfold bratte and thee. E
s So frames it with me now, that I confess s
t The life I led in Love deuoyd of ^est t
I It was a Hell, where none felt more then I, I
n Nor any with like miseries forlorn. n
s Since therefore now my wors are wexed less, s
a And Reason bids me leave old wel^^da, a
n No longer shall the world laugh me to scorn: n
i I Will choose a path that shall not lead awri. i
r Rest then with me from your blind Cupids carr r
e. Each one of you, that serve and would be free. ^
" ^H'is double thrall that liu's as Love thinks best
" Whose hand still Tyrant like to hurt is pressed. (...). Sophoc. in Aia.
flagell.

LXXXIII
In this Sonnet the Author has imittaed one of Rionsardes (...)
Odes; which begins thus.

Les Muses lierent un iour
De chaisnes de roses Amor,
Et pour le garder, le donnerent
Aus Graces and a la Beauty:
Qui voyans sa desloyaute,
Sus Parnas^l' emprisonnerent. etc.
THe Muses not long since intrapping Love
In chai^es of roases linked all array,
Gave Beawrie charge to watch in there behoue
With Graces three, lest he should wend away:
Who fearing yet he would escape at last,
On high Parnaslus top they clapped him fast.
When Venus understood her Son was thrall,
She made post haste to have God Vulcans aid, vt Marti^ reuocetur a (...)
Tonantes; A te lu^o petie C^sto^ et ipsa Venus. Mut^ai^s.

Sold him her Gemmes, and Ceston therewithal,
To ransom home her Son that was betraide;
But all in ^ame. the Muses made no stoare
Of gold, but bound him faster then before.
Therefore all you, whom Love did ere abuse,
Come clappe your hands with me, to see him thrall,
Whose former deeds no reason can ercuse,
For killing those which hurt him not at all:
My self by him was lately led awrye,
Though now at last I force my love to dye.
LXXXIIII
The Author in this Sonnet expresses his malice toward Venus and her Son
Cupid, by currying favor with Diana, and by suing to have the self same
office in her walks and forest, which sometimes her chaste and best beloved
Hippokins enjoyed. Which Hippolitus (as Seruius witnesses) dyed by the false
deceit of his Stepmother Phaedra, for not yielding over himself unto her
incestuous love: whereupon Sen^ca writes thus, Iuuenisque castus crimine
incestae iacet,
Pudicus, insons.


DIana, since Hippolytus is dead,
Let me enjoy thy favor, and his place:
My might through will shall stand thee in some stead,
To drive blind Love and Venus from thy chase:
For where they lately wrought me miekle woe,
I vow me now to be their mortal foe.
And do thou not mistrust my chastetie,
When I shall raunge amidst thy virgin train:
My raynes are chastned so through misery,
That Love with me can nere prevail again:
" The child, whose finger once has felt the fire,
" To play therewith will have but sinale desire.
Besides, I vow to hear a watchful eye,
Discou'ring such, as pass along thy grove;
If Iuppiter him self come loytring by,
I Will call thy crew, and bid them fly from Jove;
For if they stay, he will obtain at last,
What now I loathe, because my love is past.
LXXXV
The chiefest substance of this Sonnet is borrowed out of certain Latin verses
of Strozza a noble man of Italy, and one of the best Poets in all his age: who
in describing Metaphorically to his friend Antonius the true form of his
amorous estate, writes thus: Vnda hic sunt Lachrima, Venti suspiria, Remi
Vota, Error velum, Men's malesana Ratis;
Spes Temo, Curae Comites, Constantia Amoris
Est malus, Dolor est Anchora, Nauita Amor, etc.


THe soldier worn with wars, delights in peace;
The pilgrim in his ease, when toils are past;
The ship to gain the port, when storms do cease;
And I rejoice, from Love discharg^d at last;
Whom while I served, peace, rest, and land I lost,
With grieusome wars, with toils, with storm's betost.
Sweet liberty now gives me leave to sing,
What world it was, where Love the rule did bear;
How ^oolish Chance by lottes ruled every thing;
" How Error was maine sail; each wave a Tear;
" The master, Love him self; deep sighs were wind;
" Cares rowd with vows the ship vumery mind.
" False hope as healme often turned the boat about;
" Inconstant faith stood up for middle m^aste
" Despair the cable twisted all with Doubt
" Held Griping Grief the pyked Anchor fast;
" Beauty was all the rocks. But I at last,
" Am now twice free, and all my love is past.
LXXXVI
The sense of this Sonnet is for the most part taken out of a letter, which
Aeneas Syluius wrote unto his friend, to persuade him, that albeit he lately
had published the wanton love of Lucretia and Euryalus, yet he liked nothing
less then such fond Love; and that he now repented him of his own labor
over idly bestowed in describing the same.

Sweet liberty restores my woonted joy,
And bids me tell, how painters set to view
The form of Love They painte him but a Boy,
As working most in minds of youthful crewe:
They set him naked all, as wanting shame
To keep his secret parts or to hide the same.
They paint him blind in that he cannot spy
What diffrence is twixt virtue and default
With Boe in hand, as one that does defy,
And cumber heedelesse hearts with fierce assault:
His other hand both hold a brand of fire,
In sign of heat he makes through hot desire.
They give him wings to fly from place to place,
To note that all are wau'ring like the wind,
Whose liberty fond Love does ounce deface.
This form to Love old paynters have assignd:
Whose fond effects if any list to prove,
Where I make end, let them begin to Love.
LXXXVII
The Author in the first staff of this Sonnet, expresses how Love first
went beyond him, by persuading him that all was gold which glistered. In the
second, he tells, how time brought him to truth, and Truth to Reason: by
whose good counsel he found the way from worse to better, and did ouergoe the
malice of blind Fortune. In the third staff, he craves pardon at every man
for the offenses of his youth; and to Love, the only cause of his long error,
he gives his vltimum ^ale.

YOuth made a fault through lightness of Belief,
Which fond Belief Love placed in my breast:
But now I find, that Reason giues^ (...);
And time shows Truth, and Wit, that's bought, it best;
Muse not therefore although I change my vain,
He runs too far which never turns again.
Henceforth my mind shall have a watchful eye,
I Will scorn Fond Love, and practice or the same:
The wisdom of my heart shall soon desc^ie
Each thing that's good, from what deserves blame:
My song shall be; Fortune has sp^tte her spite,
And Love can hurt no more withal his might.
Therefore all you, to whom my cour^e is known,
Think better comes, and pardon what is past:
I find that all my wildest Oats are sown,
And Joy to see, what now I see at last;
And since that Love was cause I trod a wry,
I here take off his Bells, and let him fly.
LXXXVIII
This whole Sonnet is nothing else but a brief and pithy moral, and made after
the self same vain with that, which is last before it. The two first staffes,
(excepting only the two first verses of all) express the Authors alteration
of mind and life, and his change from his late vain estate and follies in
love, by a metaphore of the shipma^, which by shipwrakes chance is happily
restoared on a sodeine unto that land, which he a long time had most wished for.

I Long maintained war against Reasons rule,
I wandered pilgrim like in Errors maze,
I sat in Follies ship, and playde the fool,
Till on Repentance rock her sides did craze:
Herewith I learn by hurtes already past,
" That each extreme will change it self at last.
This shipwrackes chance has set me on a shelfe,
Where neither Love can hurt me any more,
Nor Fortunes hand, though she enforce her self;
Discretion graunts to set me safe on shore,
Where guile is fettred fast and wisdom rules,
To punish heedeles hearts and wilful fools.
And since the heavens have better lot assigned,
I fear to burn, as having felt the fire;
And proof of harms so changed has my mind,
That wit and will to Reason do retire:
Not Venus now, nor Love with all his snares
Can draw my wits to woes at unawares.
LXXXIX
The two first staffes of this Sonnet are altogether sententiall, and every
one verse of them is grownded upon a diverse reason and authority from the
rest. I have thought good for brevity sake, only to set down here the
authorities, with figures, whereby to apply every one of them to his due line
in order as they stand. 1. Hieronimus: In delicijs difficile est seruare
castitatem. 2 Ausonius: dispulit inconsultus amor etc. 3. Seneca: Amor est
ociosae causa sollicitudinis. 4. Propertius: Errat, qui finem vesani quaerit
amoris. 5. Horatius: Semper ardentes acue^s sagittas. 6. Xenophon scribit
amorem esse igne, and flamma flagrantiorem, quod ignis vrat tangentes, et
proxima tantu^ cremet, amor ex longinquo spectante torreat. 7. Calenti: Plurima
Zelotipo sunt in amore mala. 8. Ouidius: Inferet arma tibi saeua rebellis amor.
9. Pontanus: Si vacuum sineret perfidiosus amor. 10. Marullus: Quid tantum
lachrimis meis proterue Insultas puer? 11. Tibullus: At lasciuus amor rixae
mala verba ministrat. 12. Virgilius: Bellum saepe petit ferus exitiale Cupido.

" Love has delight in sweet delicious fare; 1. Hierom. 2. Ausou. 3. Seneca.
4. Proper 5. Horat. 6. Xenoph. 7. Calent. 8. Ovid. 9. Pont. 10. Marull. 11.
Tibull. 12 Virgil. do Vino et Venere.

" Love never takes good Counsel for his friend;
" Love author is, and cause of idle care;
" Love is distraught of wit, and has no end;
" Love shoteth shaftes of burning hot desire;
" Love burns more then either flame or fire;
" Love does much harm through Iealosies assault;
" Love once embrast will hardly part again;
" Love thinks in breach of faith there is no fault;
" Love makes a sport of others deadly pain;
" Love is a wanton Child, and loves to brall;
" Love with his war bringes many souls to thrall.
These are the smallest faults that lurk in Love,
These are the hurtes which I have cause to curse to curse,
These are those truethes which no man can disprove,
These are such harms as none can suffer worse.
All this I write, that others may beware,
Though now my self twice free from all such care.
XC
In this Latin passion, the Author translateth, as it were, paraphrastically
the Sonnet of Petrarch, which begins thus.

Tennemi Amor anni vent' vno ardendo, Sonnet. 313.

Lieto nel foco, e^nel duol pien dispeme. etc.
But to make it serve his own turn, he varieth from Petrarches words, where
he declares, how many years he lived in love, as well before, as since the
death of his beloved Lawra. Under which name also the Author, in this Sonnet,
specifieth her, whom he lately loved.

ME sibi ter binos annos vnum* subegit
Diuus Amor; latusque fui, licet ignibus arsi;
Spemque habui certam, curis licet ictus acerbis.
Iamque duos alios exutus amore peregi,
Ac si sydereos mea Laura volarit in orbs,
Duxerit et secum veteris penetralia cordis.
Pertaesum tandem vitae me panitet actae,
Et pudet erroris pe^e absumpsisse sub vmbra
Semina virtutum. Sed qua pars vltima restat,
Supplice mente tibi tandem, Deus alte, repono,
Et male transactae deploro temporae vitae,
Cuius agendus erat meliori tramite cursus,
Litis in arcendae studijs, et pace colenda.
Ergo sum Deus, per quem sum clausus in isto
Carcere, ab aeterno saluum fac esse periclo.
XCI
In the latter part of this Sonnet the Author imitateth those verses of
Horace. Me tabula saeer

Votiua paries indicat vuida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo. Ad Py^^ham ode. 5.

Whom also that renowned Florentine M. Agnolo Firenz^ola did imitate long ago,
both in like manner and matter, as follows.

O miseri coloro,
Che non prouar di donna feed may:
Il pericol, ch'io corsi
Nel tempestoso mar, nella procella
Del lor cradel Amore,
Mostrar lo puo lataeuoletta posta,
E^le vesti ancor molli
Sospese al tempio del horrendo Dio
Di questo mar crudele.
YE captive souls of blindefold Cyprians boat,
Mark with advise in what estate ye stand,
Your Boteman never whistles mearie noate,
And Folly keeping stern, still puttes from land,
And makes a sport to toss you to and froe
Twixt sighing winds, and surging waves of woe.
On Beawties rock she runs you at her will,
And holds you in suspense twixt hope and fear,
Where dying often, yet are you living still,
But such a life, as death much better were;
Be therefore circumspect, and follow me,
When Chance, or change of manners sets you free.
Beware how you return to seas again:
Hang up your votiue tables in the quyre
Of Cupids Church, in witness of the pain
You suffer now by forced fond desire:
Thou, hang your through wett garments on the wall,
And sing with me, That Love is mixed with gall.
XCII
Here the Author by comparing the tyrannous delights and deeds of blind
Cupid with the honest delights and deeds or other his fellow Goddestes and
Gods, does blesle the time and hour that ever he forsook to follow him; whom
he confesses to have been great and forcible in his doings, though but little
of stature, and in appearance weakelie. Of all the names here mentioned, Hebe is
seldomest read, wherefore know they which know it not already, that Hebe (as
Seruius writes) is Iunoes daughter, having no father, and now wife to
Hercules, and Goddess of youth, and youthlie sporting: and was cupbearer to
Jove, till she fell in the presence of all the Gods, so vnhappelie, that they
saw her priuities, whereupon Jove being angry, substituted Ganimedes into her
office and place.

Phoebus delights to view his Laurel Tree;
The Popplar pleases Hercules alone;
Melisla mother is, and fautrix to the Be;
Pallas will wear the Olive branche or none;
Of shepheardes and their flock Pales is Queen;
And Cores rypes the corn, was lately green;
To Chloris every flower belonges of right;
The Dryade Nimphs of woods make chief accoumpt;
Oreades in hills have their delight;
Diana does protect each bubblinge Fount;
To Hebe lovely kissing is asign'd;
To Zephire every gentle breathing wind.
But what is Loves delight? to hurt each where:
He cares not whom, with daites of deep desire,
With watchful iealosie, with hope, with fear,
With nipping cold, and secret flames of fire.
O happy hour wherein I did forgo
This little God, so great a cause of woe.
XCIII
In the first and sixth line of this Passion the Author alludeth to two
sentencious verses in Sophocles; whereof the first is,

(...),
O fool, in evils fretting naught auailes. In Oedipo Colonaeo.

The second, In Trachinii^.


(...)
(...).
For who can make undone what once is done?
In the other two staffes following, the Author pursues on his matter,
beginning and ending every line with the self same syllable he used in the
first: wherein he imitateth some Italian Poets, who more to try their wits,
hen for any other conceit, have written after the like manner.

MY love is past, woe worth the day and how'r
When to such folly first I did incline,
Whereof the very thought is bitter sow'r,
And still would hurt, were not my soul divine,
Or did not Reason teach, that care is vain
For ill once past, which cannot turn again.
My Love is past, blessed the day and how'r.
When from so fond estate I did decline,
Wherein was little sweet with mickle sow'r.
And loss of mind, whose substance is divine,
Or at the lest, expense of time in vain,
For which expense no Love returns gain.
My Love is past, wherein was no good how'r:
When others joyed, to cares I did incline,
Whereon I fed, although the taste were sow'r,
And still beleu'd Love was some power divine,
Or some instinct, which could not work in vain,
Forgetting, Time well spent was double gain.
XCIIII
In this Passion tho Author has but augmented the invention of Seraphine,
where he writes in this manner.

Biastemo quando may le labbra apersi
Per dar nome a costei, che accio me induce.
Biastemo il tempo, and quanti giorni ho persi
A seguitar si tenebrosa luce:
Biastemo charta, inchiostro, e versi,
Et quanto Amor per me fama gliaduce;
Biastemo quando may la vidi anchora,
El mese, l'anno, and giorno* el punto, and ^hora.
I Curse the time, wherein these lips of mine
Did pray or praise the Danie that was unkind:
I curse both leaf, and y^ke, and every line
My hand has writ, in hope to move her mind:
I curse her hollow heart and slattring eyes,
Whose sly deceyte did cause my mourning cries:
I curse the sugared speech end Sirens song,
Wherewith so often she has bewitched mine ear:
I curse my foolish will, that stayed so long,
And took delight to bide twixte hoape and fear:
I curse the hour, wherein I first began
By loving looks to prove a witless man:
I curse those days which I have spent in vain,
By serving such an one as reaches no right:
I curse each cause of all my secret pain,
Though Love to hear the same have small delight:
And since the heavens my freedom now restore,
Hence forth I Will live at ease, and love no more.
XCV
A Labyrinth is a place made full of turnings and creekes, wherehence, he that
is once gotten in, can hardly get out again. Of this sort Lib 36. ca 13
Pliny mentions four in the world, which were most noble. One in Crete made
by Daedalus, at the commandment of king Minos, to shut up the Minotaure in:
to which monster the Atheniens by league were bound, every year to send seven
of their children, to be devoured; which was performed, till at the last, by
the help of Ariadne, Theseus slew the monster. An other he mentions to have
been in Aegipt, which also Pomponius Mela describes in his first book. The
third in Lemnos, wherein were erected a hundredth and fifty pillars of singular
workma^ship. The fourth in Italy, builded by Porsenna king of He^ruria, to
serve for his sepulcher. But in this Passion the Author alludeth unto that of
Crete only.

THough somewhat late, at last I found the way
To leave the doubtful Labyrinth of Love,
Wherein (alas) each minute seemd a day:
Him self was Minotaure; whose force to prove
I was enforst, till Reason taught my mind
To slay the beast, and leave him there behind.
But being escaped thus from out his maze,
And past the dangerous Den so full of doubt,
False Theseus like, my credit shall I craze,
Forsaking her, whose hand did help me out?
With Ariadne Reason shall not say,
I saved his life, and yet he runs away.
No, no, before I leave the golden rule,
Or laws of her, that stood so much my friend,
Or once again will play the loving fool,
The sky shall fall, and all shall have an end:
I wish as much to you that lovers be,
Whose pains will pass, if you beware by me.
XCVI
In this Passion, the Author in skoffing bitterly at Venus, and her son
Cupid, alludeth unto certain verses in Ovid, but inuerteth them to an other
sense, then Ovid used, who wrote them upon the death of Tibullus. These are the
verses, which he imitateth,

Ecce puer Veneris fert euersamque phraretram,
Et fractos arcus, and sine luce facem.
Aspice demissis vt eat miserabilis alis,
Pectoraque infesta tondat aperta manu. etc.
Net minus est confusa Venus. etc, Elegiar. lib. 8

Quam iuuenis rupit cum ferus inguen aper,
WHat ails poor Venus now to sit alone
In funeral attire, her woonted hew
Nuite changed, her smile to tears, her mirth to mean:
As though Adonis wounds now bled anew,
Or she wish young Iulus late returned
From seeing her Aeneas carkas burned.
Alack for woe, what ails her little Boy,
To have his tender cheeks besprent with tears,
And sit and sighe, where he was wont to toy?
How happes, no longer he his quiver wears,
But breaks his Boe, throwing the shiuers by,
And pluckes his wings, and lettes his fyrebrand dye?
No, Dame and Darling too, ye come to late,
To win me now, as you have done tofore;
I live secure, and quiet in estate,
Fully resolved from loving any more:
Go pack for shame from hence to Cyprus I Will,
And there go play your prankes an other while.
XCVII
The Author in this passion alludeth to the fable of Phineus, which is set
down at large in the Argonauticks of Apollonius, and Valerius Flaccus. He
compares him self unto Phineus; his Mistres unto the Harpyes; and his
thoughts unto Zethes, and his desires unto Calais, the two twins of Boreas;
and the voice of Ne plus vltra spoaken from Heaven to Calais and Zethes, unto
the Divine grace, which willed him to follow no further the miseries of a
Lovers estate, but to profess unfeignedly, that his Love is past. And, last of
all, the Author concludes against the sower sauce of Love with the French
proverb: Pour un plaisir mill douleurs.

THe Harpye birds, that did in such despite
Greiue and ann^y old Phineus so sore,
Were chased away by Calais in fight
And by his brother Zeth for evermore;
Who followed them, until they hard on hye
A voice, that said, Ye Twins No further fly.
Phineus I am, that so tormented was;
My Laura here I may an Harpye name;
My thoughts and lusts be Sons to Boreas,
Which never cea'st in following my Dame,
Till heavenly Grace said unto me at last,
Leave fond Delights, and say thy love is past.
My love is past I say, and sing full glad;
My time, alas, misspent in Love I rewe,
Wherein few joys, or none at all I had,
But stoare of woes: I found the prouer be true,
For every pleasure that in Love is found,
A thousand woes and more therein abound.
XCVIII
The Author is this passion, telling what Love is, eases his heart, as it
were, by railing out right, where he can work no other manner of revenge. The
invention hereof, for the most part of the particulars contained, is taken out
of certain Latin verses, which this Author composed upon Quid Amor. Which
because they may well importe a passion on of the writer, and aptly befitte the
present title of his ouerpas^ed Love, he sets them down in this next page
following, but not as accomptable for one of the hundredth passions of this
book.

Hark wanton youths, whom Beawtie makes blind,
And learn of me, what kind a thing is Love;
Love is a Brainesicke Boy, and fierce by kind;
A Wilful Thought, which Reason can not move;
A Flattring Sycophant; a Murdering Thief;
A Poysned choking Bayte; a Tysing Grief;
A Tyrant in his Laws; in speech untrue;
A Blindfold Guide; a Feather in the wind;
A right Vide Plin. natura Hist. lib. 28. cap. 8.
Chameleon for change of hew;
A Lamelimme Lust; a Tempest of the mind;
A Breach of Chastity; all virtues Foe;
A Private war; a Toilsome web of woe;
A Fearful Iealosie; a Vain Desire;
A Labyrinth; a Pleasing Misery;
A Shipwreck of man's life; a Smoaklesse fire;
A Sea of tears; a lasting Lunacie;
A Heavy servitude; a Dropsy Thurst;
A Hellish Gaile, whose captives are accursed.
Quid Amor?
QVid sitamor, qualisque, cupis me scire magistro?
Est Venens proles; caelo metuendus, et Orco;
Et leuior ventis; et fulminis ocyor alis;
Peruigil excubitor; fallax comes; inuidus hospes;
Armatus puer; insanus iuuenis; nouitatis
Quesitor; belli fautor; virtuti inimicus;
Splendidus ore; nocens promisso; lege tyrannus;
Dux caecus; gurges viciorum; noctis alumnus;
Fur clandestinus; mors viuida; mortua vita;
Dulcis inexpertis; expertis durus* Eremus
Stultitiae; ^acula ignescens; vesana libido;
Zelotypum frigus; mala men's; corrupta voluntas;
Pluma leuis; morbus iecoris; dementia prudens;
Infamis leno; Bacchi, Cererisque minister;
Prodiga liber^as animae; pruritus inanis;
Prauorum c^rcer; corrupti sanguinis ardor;
Irrationalis motus; sycophanta bilinguis;
Struma pudicitiae; fumi expets flamma; patronus
Periurae linguae; prostrato saeuus; amicus
Immeritis; ani^^ tempestas; luxuriosus
Praeceptor; sine sine malum; sine pace duellum;
Naufragium humanae vitae; laethale venenum;
Flebile cordollum; grave calcar; acuta sagitta;
Sontica pernicies, nodosae causa podagrae,
Natus ad insidias vulpes; pontus lachrymarum;
Virgineae Zonae ruptura; dolosa voluptas;
Multicolor serpens; vrens affectus; inermis
Bellator; senijque caput, seniumque iuuentae?
Ante diem funus; portantis vipera; maestus
Pollinctor; siren fallax; mors praeuia morti;
Infector nemorum; erroris Labyrinthus; amara
Dulcedo; inuentor falsi; via perditionis;
Formarum egregius spectator; paena perennis;
Suspirans ventus; singultu plena querela;
Triste magisterium; multae iactura diei;
Martyrium innocui; temerarius aduena; pondus
Sisyphium; radix curarum; desidis esca;
Febris anbela; sitis morosa; bidropicus ardor;
Vis vno dicam verbo? incarnata Gehenna est.
XCIX
This passion is an imitation of the first Sonnet in Seraphine, and grownded
upon that which Aristotle writes Lib. 9. Hist. animal.
of the Aegle, for the proof she makes of her birds, by setting them to
behold the Son. After whom Pliny has written, as follows:

Aquila implumes etiamnum pullos suos percutiens, Subinde cogit aduersos
intueri Solis radios: et si conniuentem humectantemque animaduertit, Not Hist
lib. to cap. 1.
praecipitat e nido, velut adul^erinum atque degenerem: illum, cuiu^ acies
firma contra steterit, e^ucat.

THe haughty Aegle Bird, of Birds the best,
Before the ^eathers, of her younglinges grow,
She liftes them one by one from out their nest,
To vewe the Sun, thereby her own to know;
Those that behold it not with open eye,
She lettes them fall, not able yet to fly.
Such was my case, when Love possessed my mind;
Each thought of mine, which could not bide the light
Of her my Sun, whose beams had made me blind,
I made my Will suppress it with Despite:
But such a thought, as could abide her best,
I harbred still within my careful breast.
But those fond days are past, and half forgotte;
I practice now the quite clean contrary:
What thoughts can like of her, I like them not,
But choke them straight, for fear of ieopardy;
For though that Love to some do seem a Toy,
I know by proof, that Love is long annoy.
C
The Author faineth here, that Love, essaying with his brand, to fire the
heart of some such Lady, on whom it would not work, immediately, to try
whether the old virtue of it were extinguished or no, applied it unto his own
breast, and thereby foolishlie consumed him self. His invention has some
relation unto the Epitaph of Love, written by M. Girolimo Parabosco;

In cenere giace qui sepolto Amore,
Colpa di quella, che morir mi face, etc.
Resolved to dust entombed here lies Love,
Through fault of her, who here her self should lie;
He struck her i^rest, but all in vain did prove
To fire the yse: and doubting by and by
His brand (...) lost his force, he began to try
Upon him self; which trial made him dye.
In sooth no force; let those lament that lust,
I Will sing a carroll song for obsequy;
For, toward me his dealings were unjust,
And cause of all my passed misery:
The Fates, I think, seeing what I had past,
In my beha^^ wrought this revenge at last.
But somewhat more to pacyfie my mind,
By illing him, through whom I lived a slave,
I Will cast his ashes to the open wind,
Or write this Epitaph upon his grave;
Here lies Love, of Mars the bastard Son,
Whose foolish fault to death him self has done.
This is an Epilogue to the whole work, and more like a prayer then a Passion:
and is faithfully translated out of Petrarch, Sonnet. 314. 2. part, where he
begins,

I vo piangendo i miei passati tempi,
I quai posi in amar cosa mortale,
Senza leuarmi a volo, hauena' io l'ale,
Per dar forse d^me non bassi essempi. etc.
LVgeo iam querulus vitae tot lustra peracta,
Quae male consumpsi, mortalia vana secutus,
Cum tamen alatus potui volitasse per altum,
Exemplarque fuisse alijs, nec inutile forsan.
T^^ mea qui peccata vides, culpasque nefandas,
Coeli sum parens, magnum, and venerabile numen,
Collapsae succurre anima; mentisque caduca
Candida defectum tua gratia suppleat omnem.
Vt, qui sustinui bellum, durasque procellas,
In pace, and portu moriar; minimeque probanda
Si mea vita fuit, tamen vt claudatur honest.
Tautello vitae spacio, quod forte supersit,
Funeribusque meis praesentem porrige dextram;
Ipse vides, inte quam spes mea tota reposta est.
FINIS.
The Labor is light, where Love is the Paiemistres.

