A PANEGYRICKE To the most honorable and renowned Lord, THE LORD HAYS Vicount
of Doncaster, HIS MAJESTY'S OF GREAT-BRITTAINE Ambassador in Germany.

Sung by THE RHINE, Interpreted by George Rodolfe Weckherlin Secr. to his High.
of Wirtemberg.

SONNET TO THE MOST NOBLE AND WORTHILY HONORED LORD, THE LORD HAYS, VICOVNT OF
DONCASTER etc.
Brave Lord in whom Naturs hand does display
Such daintiness, as ever she can frame;
Whose virtuous deeds by still bright-shining Fame
Engraven stand in heavens book foray:
Do not dislike, that my Muse dare array
Her poverty with your honored name.
A humble heart with courage to inflame
Belongs to men of vvorth and noble sway.
The shining Sun casting on a small hill
Of fertile earth her svveet nourishing rays,
In time with seed, flovvrs and fruits does it fill.
One beam allone of your meek grace can raise
My lovvlie style, which as yet wants skill,
(Though foreign) to acquire both skill and praise.
G. RODOLFE WECKHERLIN.

A PANEGYRICKE.
MOst noble Lord te see you I did long,
And now I long to sing your vvorthie praise;
For never worse can be my simple song,
Then my silence of your renowned bays,
Whose luster shall receive (I trust) no vvrong
By those small flours, my humble hand does raise.
Naught do I crave, nor hope I any thing,
And naught but truth wills me your laud to sing.
My greedy ears did often gladly hear
The worthiness of your beloved Name,
When Thamesis, to whom you are still dear,
When the Sea-gods and Sirens sung the same,
Rounding the world with accents svveet and clear,
Of your perfect yet still increasing Fame:
Thus right to know did vvish my gotten heart
If greater were their grace or your desert.
Now do I see, in you now do I find
That your deserts do any praise excel;
I find that Fame (else commonly too kind)
Is but to you to scant, to hard and fell:
Which though too great it seemed in my mind,
Yet did my thoughts of you suppose full well:
But now I read, that Fame could not record,
Nor I invent, what you your self afford.
Let Phoebus tell if ever he did see
In this vast world an other living vvight,
Who justly can with you compared be,
Whom Naturs hand to frame took such delight,
Granting to him such an ascendent Fee,
Where else vvithall a thousand could be dight:
In whom allone with love so fair as svveet
All gifts of mind, body and fortune meet.
A vvorthie tvvig of a most ancient brood,
(Of Scotlands crown a noble ornament)
Have you been borne, where some of that high blood
Were to their foes their last astonishment;
Some others did with counsel wise and good
The Kingdoms ease and their own fame augment.
But you to laud, it is needles to declare
What they have been, but only what you are.
The splendour of the stock giu's but small pleasure,
That often Chance mak's to base minds best known;
And such a fame is but a borrowed treasure,
A lightning show of a vvorthlesse renown:
But Virtues hand, with her excessive measure
Spreading your laud, adorn's you with a crown,
Which, like the Sun, still excellently bright,
Does take of none but giu's to many light.
Not Fortunes blind frank and abusiue hand,
The which to deal her wealth confusedly
Does no deserts see, weigh, nor understand,
But heavens Love did courteously apply
Such goods to you (your vvorth not to vvithstand)
Whereby do still your merits multiply.
For your great heart, that no gold can recover,
Is of all gold a master never a Lover.
The chiefest care, richesse in you can breed,
Is well to do the chiefest instrument.
Gold does some men, while they on gold do feed,
With staruing pain and greediness torment:
But in your heart, the ground of Virtues seed,
Yeeld's it tribut to your encouragement;
And that, whereby some commonly grovve vain,
Most vain to you, mak's you true glory gain.
The godly shape, which heaven did enchace
With supreme skill within your bodies frame,
Does well appear in your most vvorthie face,
Like through a cloud the heavens purest flame:
And as th'outside of a vvell-builded place.
Mak's us believe, the inside be without blame;
Thus seeing you my thoughts do by mine eyes,
I know not what, more then your self advise.
That monster fierce, that all good does envy,
Whose spightfull tongue of no good can speak well,
May your whole life with sharpest look's well spy,
Yet must it but against his liking tell,
The noblest heart of valor, courtesy,
And gallantnesse within your breast do dvvell;
And that your soul enjoys (most content)
All goods that Art and Nature can present.
When courtly sport to any enterprise
Bids you a foot or on horseback to fight,
Or when you please with other exercise
That vvisest Kings (your Dreads) most worthiest sight,
You may still get (if so you will) the prize:
But when your tongue with her svveet-flovving might
Assaileth hearts, then do you plainly prove,
You can subdue all by force or by love.
Once I was told (when you went into France)
How vvanton Love did fair Thetis deceive,
How, while your ship the Tritons made to dance,
He meaned her of her heart to bereave;
How her green eyes your grace and virtues glaunce
Did greedily into her breast receive:
Your presence brave brought her her Son to mind,
Whose image she could no where truer find.
Thus now my Nymfs, nay all the peoples stout
Of Germany, which your presence does grace,
Joyfully run and sing you round about
(Glad with their arms and hearts you to embrace)
With minds and mouths all with me crying out:
Ay-during be the happy health and grace!
Still flourishing may be the praise and bays
(As the deserts be great) of My lord HAYS!
More would I say, but that your glories light,
Dimming mine eyes, does quite my mind oppress:
And though I say much, yet is it but slight,
Since that much more my silence does suppress.
It may be too, that to your hearts brave hight
This lovvlie song does cause but loathsomeness:
Or (as I think) you are to hear more sorry,
Then prompt and glad to deserve praise and glory.
SPES MEA CHRISTVS IOHANN WEYRICH ROSSLIN printer's device of Johann Weyrich
Rosslin, official printer of the Wurttemberg court

Printet at Stutgart by John-Wyrich Rosslin. ANNO M.DC.XIX.


