SIGILVM REGIS MAGNAE BRITANIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE
PRO CONSILIO SVO VIRGINIAE
royal seal

A DECLARATION OF THE STATE OF THE Colony and Affairs in VIRGINIA.

WITH A RELATION OF THE BARBArous Massacre in the time of peace and League,
treacherously executed by the Native Infidels upon the English, the 22 of March
last.

Together with the names of those that were then massacred; that their lawful
heirs, by this notice given, may take order for the inheriting of their lands
and estates in VIRGINIA.

AND A TREATISE ANNEXED, Written by that learned Mathematician Mr. Henry
Briggs, of the Northwest passage to the South Sea through the Continent of
Virginia, and by Fretum Hudson.

Also a Commemoration of such worthy Benefactors as have contributed their
Christian Charity toward the advancement of the Colony.

And a Note of the charges of necessary provisions fit for every man that
intends to go to VIRGINIA.

Published by Authority.

Imprinted at London by G. Eld,,for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South door of Paul's. 1622.

TO THE HONrable COMPANY OF VIRGINIA.
Right Honorable and Worthy:
THE fame of our late unhappy accident in Virginia, has spread it self, I
doubt not, into all parts abroad, and as it is talked of of all men, so no
question of many, and of most, it cannot but be misreported, some carried away
with ouer-weak lightness to believe all they hear, how untrue soever; others
out of their disaffection possibly to the Plantation, are desirous to make
that, which is ill, worse; and so the truth of the Action, which is only one,
is varied and misreported. I have thought it therefore a part of some
acceptable service in me toward you, whose favors have preferred me to be a
member of your Company, to present you with these my poor labors, the
Collection of the truth hereof, drawn from the relation of some of those that
were beholders of that Tragedy, and who hardly escaped from tasting of the
same cup, as also from the Letters sent you by the Governor and other
Gentlemen of quality, and of the Council in that Colonie, read openly here in
your Courts: That so the world may see that it was not the strength of a
professed enemy that brought this slaughter on them, but contrived by the
perfidious treachery of a false-hearted people, that know not God nor faith. No
generous Spirit will forbear to go on for this accident that has happened to
the Plantation, but proceed rather cheerfully in this honorable Enterprise,
since the discovery of their brutish falsehood will prove (as shall appear by
this Treatise following) many ways aduantageable to us, and make this
forewarning a forearming for ever to prevent a greater mischief.

Accept it from me, I most humbly beseech you, as the first fruits of my poor
service. Time may happily make me able to yield you some other work whose
subject may be Joy, as this is a Theme of Sadness: Mean time, I commit You
and the Noble Colony to Gods good blessing, as he that shall always be

A true Votarie for your happiness, and servant to your commands, EDWARD
WATERHOVSE.

Faults in printing are thus to be amended.
Page. Lane. Faults. Amend. 10 10. French Vignerous French Vignerous. 24 17.
Mastiues to tear them Mastiues to seize them. ibid. ibid. which take this
naked which take these naked 26 12. non s'inga muu non s'inganna. 29 4. with
his brothers with his brother. ibid. 10. ambitious quarrels ambitious quarrels.
40 4. Shinhow Swinhow. ibid. 10. Weynoack. Weyanock. 45 5. by Fretum Hudson.
and by Fretum Hudson.

THE INCONVENIENCES THAT HAVE HAPPENED TO SOME PERSONS WHICH HAVE TRANSPORTED
THEMSELVES from England to Virginia; without provisions necessary to sustain
themselves, has greatly hindered the Progress of that noble Plantation: For
prevention of the like disorders hereafter, that no man suffer, either through
ignorance or misinformation; it is thought requisite to publish this short
declaration: wherein is contained a particular of such necessaries, as either
private families or single persons shall have cause to furnish themselves with,
for their better support at their first landing in Virginia; whereby also
greater numbers may receive in part, directions how to provide themselves.
Apparel for one man, and so after the rate for more. Apparel.
li. s. d. One Monmouth Cap 00 01 10 Three falling bands 01 03 Three shirts 07
06 One waste-coate 02 02 One suite of Canuase 07 06 One suite of Frize 10 00
One suite of Cloth 15 00 Three pair of Irish stockins 04 Four pair of shoes
08 08 One pair of garters 00 10 One doozen of points 00 03 One pair of
Canuase sheets. 08 00 Seven else of Canuase, to make a bed and boulster, to be
filled in Virginia 8. s. 08 00 One Rug for a bed 8. s. which with the bed
serving for two men, half is Five else coorse Canuase, to make a bed at Sea
for two men, to be filled with straw, iiij. s. 05 00 One coorse Rug at Sea for
two men, will cost vj. s. is for one 04 00 00

For a whole year for one man, and so for more after the rate. Victual.
Eight bushels of Meal 02 00 00 Two bushels of pease at 3. s. 06 00 Two
bushels of Oatemeale 4. s. 6. d. 09 00 One gallon of Aquauitae 02 06 One gallon
of Oil 03 06 Two gallons of Vinegar 1. s. 02 00 03 03 00

For one man, but if half of your men have armor it is sufficient so that all
have Pieces and swords. Arms.
One Armor complete, light 17 00 One long Piece, five foot or five and a
half, near Musket bore 01 02 One sword 05 One belt 01 One bandaleere 01 06
Twenty pound of powder 18 00 Sixty pound of shot or lead, Pistol and Goose
shot 05 00 03 09 06

For a family of 6. persons and so after the rate for more.

Tools.
li. s. d. Five broad howes at 2. s. a piece 10 Five narrow howes at 16. d. a
piece 06 08 Two broad Axes at 3. s. 8. d. a piece 07 04 Five felling Axes at
18. d. a piece 07 06 Two steel hand sawes at 16. d. a piece 02 08 Two
two-hand-sawes at 5. s. a piece 10 One whip-saw, set and filed with box, file,
and wrest 10 Two hammers 12. d. a piece 02 00 Three shouels 18. d. a piece 04
06 Two spades at 18. d. a piece 03 Two augers 6. d. a piece 01 00 Six chissels
6. d. a piece 03 00 Two percers stocked 4. d. a piece 00 08 Three gimlets 2. d.
a piece 00 06 Two hatchets 21. d a piece 03 06 Two froues to cleave pale 18. d.
03 00 Two hand-bills 20. a piece 03 04 One grindlestone 4. s. 04 00 Nails of
all sorts to the value of 02 00 Two Pickaxes 03 06 02 08

For a family of 6. persons, and so for more or less after the rate.

Household Implements.
One Iron Pot 00 07 One kettle 06 One large drying pan 02 06 One gridiron 01 06
Two skillets 05 One spit 02 Platters, dishes, spoones of wood 04 01 08 00 For
Sugar, Spice, and fruit, and at Sea for 6. men. 00 12 06 So the full charge of
Apparel, Victual, Arms, Tools, and household stuff, and after this rate
for each person, will amount unto about the sum of 12 10 The passage of each
man is 06 00 The freight of these provisions for a man, will be about half a
Tun, which is 01 10 So the whole charge will amount to about 20 00 00

Nets, books, lines, and a tent must be added, if the number of people be
greater, as also some kine.

And this is the usual proportion that the Virginia Company do bestow upon
their Tenants which they send.

Whosoever transports himself or any other at his own charge unto Virginia,
shall for each person so transported before Midsummer 1625. have to him and his
heirs for ever fifty Acres of Land upon a first, and fifty Acres upon a second
division.

Imprinted at London by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1622.

A DECLARATION of the state of the Colonie and Affairs in VIRGINIA.
With a Relation of the barbarous Massacre in the time of peace and League,
treacherously executed upon the English by the native Infidels, 22 March last.
ALthough there have been many and sundry Treatises writ of Virginia, and the
Commodities thereof; whereat malicious men may take occasion to cavil, but
godly men will find good cause to praise the Almighty, whose wonders are seen
in the deep, through the which we have sailed to the discovery of this good
Land: Yet I have not thought it amiss (since I am to express some late
Accidents) beforehand to sum up the benefits of that Country; partly
because they daily increase by new Discoueries made, to the glory of our most
gracious King, and ever renowned to all posterity, for the founding and
supporting of this most Royal and blessed work of Plantation, to the great
honor, wealth and happiness of his most famous Kingdoms; and partly, because
such is the customary daintiness of Readers, that they seldom take the pains
to gather together all that has been written of any subject, that so they
might take the whole business into their consideration, (which is the only
way to make a true judgment,) but usually content themselves with one or two
Books set out occasionally, and with reference to some former Treatises,
whereby they gain but a lame and parcell-knowledge, and so oftentimes both
prejudice themselves and the truth.

THE Country called VIRGINIA (so named by the late Virgin-Queene Elizabeth of
blessed memory) being the rightful inheritance of his Majesty, as being first
discovered at the costs and charges of that most prudent Prince of famous
memory, King Henry the Seventh, his Majesty's great Grandfather; The Patent
whereof still extant to be seen, was granted to John Cabot and diverse other of
his subjects, who went thither with six Sail of Ships, and discovered as
far as from Cape Florida to New Foundland, all along the Coast, and took
possession thereof to the Kings use, about that time when Ferdinando and
Isabella discovered the Western Indies: (by which title of first discovery the
King of Portugal and Spain hold and enjoy their ample and rich Kingdoms in
their Indies East and West:) A coast where King Edward the Sixth after planted
his fishing to the New Foundland by public Act in Parliament, and of which
Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlow took again possession to the use of the late
Qu^ene Elizabeth: and after them, Sir Richard Greenfield, Sir Ralph Lane, and
Sir Walter Rawleigh; at what time several Colonies were there placed. And
since his Majesty's most happy coming to the Crown, being an absolute King of
three of the most populous Kingdoms (which Charles the Fifth was wont to term
Officina gentium, the shop or forge of men,) finding his Subjects to multiply
by the blessed peace they enjoy under his happy government, did out of his high
wisdom and Princely care of the good of his Subjects, grant a most gracious
Patent to diverse Honorable persons, and others of his loving Subjects,
authorizing them thereby to go on in the Plantation of this his lawful and
rightful Kingdom of VIRGINIA, which by the blessing of Almighty God is grown
to good perfection.

THis spacious and fruitful Country of VIRGINIA, is (as is generally known to
all) naturally rich, and exceedingly well watered, very temperate, and
healthful to the Inhabitants, abounding with as many natural blessings, and
replenished with as goodly Woods, and those full of Dear and sundry other
beasts for man's sustenance; and the Seas and Rivers thereof (many therein being
exceeding fair and nauigable) as full of excellent fish of diverse sorts, and
both water and land yielding as great variety of foul, as any Country in the
world is known to afford. The situation whereof being near the midst of the
world, between the extremities of heat and cold, seems to partake of the
benefits of both, and thereby becomes capable of the richest commodities of
most parts of the Earth. From whence arises an assurance that (by the
assistance and skill of industry) those rich Furs, Cordage, and other
Commodities, which with difficulty and danger are now drawn from Russia, will
be had in VIRGINIA and the parts adjoining, with ease and safety. And the
Masts, Plancks, and Boards, the Pitch and Tar, the Potashes and Sope-ashes,
the Hemp and Flax, which now are fetched from Norway, Denmark, Poland, and
Germany, will there be had in abundance. The Iron, which has so wasted our
English Woods, (that it self in short time must decay together with them) is
to be had in VIRGINIA (where wasting of Woods is an ease and benefit to the
Planter) for all good conditions answerable to the best Iron of the world,
whereof proof has been made. The Wines, Fruits, and Salt of France and
Spain: the Silks of Persia and Italy, will be had also in VIRGINIA, in no
kind of worth inferior, where are whole Woods of many miles together of
Mulberry trees of the best kinds, the proper food of the Silke-worme, and a
multitude of other natural commodities. Of Woods, Roots and Berries, for
excellent Dies; of Plants and other Drugs for Physical service; of sweet
Woods, Oils and Gummes, for pleasure and other use; of Cotton-wooll,
Silke-grasse and Sugar Canes, will there be had in abundance, with many other
kinds. And for Corn, Cattle, and Fish, (which are the substance of the food
of man) in no place better: the Grain also of our own Country prospering
there very well; but their Maize (being the natural Grain of VIRGINIA) does
far exceed in pleasantness, strength, fertility, and generality of use,
the Wheat of England.

The Cattle which were transported thither (being now grown near to fifteen
hundred) do become much bigger of body then the breed from whence they came.
The Horses also (through the benefit of the Climate, and nature of their
feeding) more beautiful and fuller of courage. And such is the extraordinary
fertility of that soil, that the Does of their Dear (a kind differing from
ours in England, yet no way inferior) yield two Fawnes at a fall or birth, and
sometimes three. And the Fishings along our Coasts are in plenty of Fish equal
to those of New Foundland, and in greatness and goodness much superior, and
twice in the year to be taken, in their going and return, which is not
elsewhere found in such plenty and variety; So as there went this year from
diverse parts of this Kingdom, near thirty Sail thither, who are well
returned and richly fished.

To conclude (but out of certain aduertisements so often reiterated from
thence, as well as by the constant relations of many hundreds now yearly
coming and going) they auow, that it is a Country which nothing but ignorance
can think ill of, and which no man but of a corrupt mind and ill purpose can
defame, which as it paralelleth the most opulent and rich Kingdoms of the
world, by lying in the same Latitude with them, so does it promise richer Mines
of the best and most desired metals with them, when the Colonie shall be of
sufficient strength to open and defend them. And for the Passage thither, and
Trade there, it is free from all restraint by foreign Princes, whereunto most of
our other accustomed trades are subject: there is neither danger in the way,
through the encountering of the Enemy or Pyrate, nor meeting with Rocks or
Sholes (by reason of the fair and safe passage through the maine Ocean) nor
tediousnes of journey, which by reason of better knowledge then in former
years (the fruit of time and observation) is oftener made and in fewer weeks,
then formerly it was wont to be in months; which (with the blessing of God)
produced in the last Summer this effect, that in the Fleet of nine Sail of
ships, transporting above seven hundred Passengers out of England and Ireland,
for the Plantation, but one person (in whose room another at Sea was borne)
miscarryed by the way. And for them after ariuall, there are convenient
lodgings now in building, and careful attendance in Guests-houses providing,
till those that ariue can provide for themselves.

3570 People sent to Virginia in the three last years. 42 Sail of ships, 1200
Mariners employed.
In the three last years of 1619. 1620. and 1621. there has been provided and
sent for VIRGINIA forty two Sail of ships, three thousand five hundred and
seauenty men and women for Plantation, with requisite provisions, besides store
of Cattle, and in those ships have been above twelve hundred Mariners
employed: 1500 To the Summer Islands. 9 ships, and 240 Mariners employed.
There has also been sent in those years nine ships to the Summer Islands
with about nine hundred people to inhabit there, in which ships two hundred
and forty Mariners were employed. In which space have been granted fifty
Patents to particular persons, for Plantation in VIRGINIA, who with their
Associates have undertaken therein to transport great multitudes of people and
cattle thither, which for the most part is since performed, and the residue
now in preparing, as by the several Declarations of each year in their
particulars, (manifested and approved in our general and public
Quarter-Courts) and for the fuller satisfaction of all desirous to understand
the particularities of such proceedings, has been by printing commended to
the understanding of all.

The Letters written from the Governor and Treasurer in VIRGINIA in the
beginning of March last, (which came hither in April,) gave assurance of
ouercomming and bringing to perfection in this year, the Iron-works,
Glasse-works, Salt-works, the plentiful sowing of all sorts of English grain
with the Plough, having now cleared good quantity of ground; setting of store
of Indian Corn or Maize, sufficient for our selves, and for trucke with the
Natives; restraint of the quantity of Tobacco, and amendment of it in the
quality, learned by time and experience; The planting of Vines and
Mulberry-trees near to their houses, Figg-trees, Pomgranats, Potatoes, and
Cottonwooll seeds, Pocoon, Indico, Sugarcanes, Madder, Woade, Hemp, Flax,
and Silke-grasse; and for the erecting of a fair Inn in Iames-Citie for the
better entertainment of new comers, whereto and to other public works, every
old planter there offered freely and liberally to contribute. I write the words
of their Letters. And how in a late Discovery made, a few months before by
some of them to the Southward, they had past through great Forests of Pines,
fifteen or sixteen miles broad, and above threescore miles long, very fit for
Mastes for shipping, and for Pitch and Tar, and of other sorts of woods fit
for Potashes and Sope-ashes, and came unto a most fruitful Country, blessed
with abundance of Corn, reaped twice a year (within the limits of VIRGINIA)
where also they understand of a Copper-myne, an essay whereof was sent, and
upon trial here found to be very rich; and met with a great deal of
Silk-grasse there growing, which monthly may be cut, of which kinds, and
Cotton-wooll, all the Cambaya and Bengala stuffes are made in the East Indies:
and of which kinds of Silke-grasse was heretofore made a piece of Grogeram
given to Queen Elizabeth. Mr. Hariot in his book of Virginia, 1585.
And how that in December last they had planted and cultiuated in VIRGINIA
Vines of all sorts, (as well those naturally growing, as those other Plants
sent them from these parts of Europe) Orange and Lemon-trees, Figge-trees,
Sugarcanes, Cotton-wooll, Cassaui Roots, (that make very good bread)
Plantanes, Potatoes, and sundry other Indian fruits and plants not formerly
seen in VIRGINIA, which at the time of their said Letters began to prosper
very well: as also their Indico-seedes, for the true cure whereof there is
lately caused a Treatise to be written.

Furthermore, they write that in a Voyage made by Lieutenant Marmaduke
Parkinson, and other English Gentlemen, up the River of Patomack they saw a
China Box at one of the Kings houses where they were: Being demanded where he
had it, made answer, That it was sent him from a King that dwelt in the West,
over the great Hills, some ten days journey, whose Country is near a great
Sea, he having that Box, from a people as he said, that came thither in
ships, that wear clothes, crooked swords, and somewhat like our men, dwelt in
houses, and were called Acanack-China: and he offered our people, that he would
send his Brother along with them to that King, which offer the Governor
purposed not to refuse; and the rather, by reason of the continual constant
relations of all those Savages in VIRGINIA, of a Sea, and the way to it West,
they affirming that the heads of all those seven goodly Rivers, (the least
whereof is greater then the River of Thames, and nauigable above an hundred and
fifty miles, and not above six or eight miles one from another) which fall all
into one great Bay, have their rising out of a ridge of hills, that runs all
along South and North: whereby they doubt not but to find a safe, easy, and
good passage to the South Sea, part by water, and part by land, esteeming it
not above an hundred and fifty miles from the head of the Falls, where we are
now planted; the Discovery whereof will bring forth a most rich trade to
Cathay, China, Iapan, and those other of the East Indies, to the inestimable
benefit of this Kingdom.

But for the further proof hereof, and of the North-west passage thither by
Sea, I refer the Reader to the Treaty annexed at the end of this Book,
written by that learned and famous Mathematician, Mr. Henry Briggs, which I
having happily attained unto, have published for the common good.

Moreover, the Letters of Mr. John Berkley, sometimes of Beuerstone Castle in
the County of Gloucester, (a Gentleman of an honorable Family) likewise
certify, that a more fit place for Iron-workes (whereof he was made Master and
ouer-seer) then in VIRGINIA, both for wood, water, mines, and stone, was not to
be found: And that by Whitsontide then next (now past) the Company might rely
upon good quantities of Iron made by him: which also by Letters from Mr. George
Sandis the third of March last, was confirmed, with this farther description of
the place (called The falling Creek) to be so fitting for that purpose, as if
Nature had applied her self to the wish and direction of the Workman; where
also were great stones hardly seen elsewhere in VIRGINIA, lying on the place,
as though they had been brought thither to advance the erection of those
Works.

The Letters of the French Vignerous or Vine-men, procured out of France and
sent over into VIRGINIA, did likewise assertaine, that no Country in the world
was more proper for Vines, Silk, Rice, Olives, and other Fruits, then VIRGINIA
is: and that it far excelled their own Country of Languedocke; the Vines of
diverse sorts being in abundance naturally over all the Country: and they
having planted some cuttings of Vines at Michaelmas last, in their Letters
affirm that these bare Grapes already this Spring, to their great wonder, as
being a thing they suppose not heard of in any other Country. A taste of Wine
made of the wild grape, they last year sent, with hope to send a good
quantity this next Vintage; and that the Mulberry-trees where they abode were
in wonderful abundance, and much excelling both in goodness and greatness
those of their own Country of Languedocke: and that those Silke-wormes they
have, prosper exceeding well, and some Silk they hope to send this year,
there wanting nothing to set up that rich Commodity but store of hands
wherewith England does abound. Of the fruit of which Mulberry-trees (as of a
Plum there plentifully growing) they would make wholesome drinks for the Colony
and people there.

The Letters of Mr. Porey (verified also from the Governor and Council)
advertised of a late Discovery by him and others made into the great Bay
Northward, (reserving the sounding of the bottom thereof for a second Voyage,)
where he left settled very happily near an hundred English, with hope of a
good trade for Furs there to be had. From thence was brought by Lieutenant
Perkinson, in his voyage, some of that kind of Earth which is called Terra
Lemnia (there to be had in great abundance) as good as that of Turkey.

BY this (though it be but in part) the Reader may understand the great riches
and blessings of this excellent Country, which even ordinary diligence and
care must needs strangely improve. But that all men may see the impartial
ingenuity of this Discourse, we freely confess, that the Country is not so
good, as the Natives are bad, whose barbarous Savageness needs more
cultiuation then the ground it self, being more ouerspread with inciuilitie
and treachery, then that with Briars. For the land being tilled and used well
by us, deceived not our expectation, but rather exceeded it far, being so
thankful as to return an hundred for one. But the Savages though never Nation
used so kindly upon so small desert, have in stead of that Harvest which our
pains merited, returned nothing but Briars and thorns, pricking even to death
many of their Benefactors: yet doubt we not, but that as all wickedness is
crafty to undo it self, so these also, through our sides, have more wounded
themselves then us, God Almighty making way for severity there, where a fair
gentleness would not take place. The occasion whereof thus I relate from
thence.

THE last May there came Letters from Sir Francis Wiat Governor in VIRGINIA,
which did advertise that when in November last he arrived in VIRGINIA, and
entered upon his Government, he found the Country settled in a peace (as all men
there thought) sure and unviolable, not only because it was solemnly ratified
and sworn, and at the request of the Native King stamped in Brass, and fixed
to one of his Oaks of note, but as being aduantagious to both parts; to the
Savages as the weaker, under which they were safely sheltred and defended; to
us, as being the easiest way then thought to pursue and advance our proiects of
buildings, plantings, and effecting their conversion by peaceable and fair
means. And such was the conceit of firm peace and amity, as that there was
seldom or never a sword worn, and a Piece seldomer, except for a Dear or
Foul. By which assurance of security, the Plantations of particular
Adventurers and Planters were placed scatteringly and straglingly as a choice
vein of rich ground invited them, and the further from neighbors held the
better. The houses generally set open to the Savages, who were always friendly
entertained at the tables of the English, and commonly lodged in their
bed-chambers. The old planters (as they thought now come to reap the benefit
of their long travels) placed with wonderful content upon their private
diuidents, and the planting of particular Hundreds and Colonies pursued with an
hopeful alacrity, all our proiects (says he) in a fair way, and their
familarity with the Natives, seeming to open a fair gate for their conversion
to Christianity.

The Country being in this estate, an occasion was ministered of sending to
Opachankano the King of these Savages, about the middle of March last, what
time the Messenger returned back with these words from him, That he held the
peace concluded so firm, as the Sky should sooner fall then it dissolve: yea,
such was the treacherous dissimulation of that people who then had contrived
our destruction, that even two days before the Massacre, some of our men were
guided through the woods by them in safety: and one Brown, who then to learn
the language lived among the Warrascoyacks (a Province of that King) was in
friendly manner sent back by them to Captain Hamor his Master, and many the
like passages, rather increasing our former confidence, then any wise in the
world ministering the least suspicion of the breach of the peace, or of what
instantly ensued; yea, they borrowed our own Boats to convey themselves
cross the River (on the banks of both sides whereof all our Plantations were)
to consult of the devilish murder that ensued, and of our utter extirpation,
which God of his mercy (by the means of some of themselves converted to
Christianity) prevented: and as well on the Friday morning (the fatal day) the
22 of March, as also in the evening, as in other days before, they came
unarmed into our houses, without Bows or arrows, or other weapons, with
Dear, Turkies, Fish, Furs, and other provisions, to sell, and trucke with
us, for glass, beads, and other trifles: yea in some places, sat down at
Breakfast with our people at their tables, whom immediately with their own
tools and weapons, either laid down, or standing in their houses, they basely
and barbarously murdered, not sparing either age or sex, man, woman or
child; so sudden in their cruel execution, that few or none discerned the
weapon or blow that brought them to destruction. In which manner they also slew
many of our people then at their several works and husbandries in the fields,
and without their houses, some in planting Corn and Tobacco, some in
gardening, some in making Brick, building, sawing, and other kinds of
husbandry, they well knowing in what places and quarters each of our men were,
in regard of their daily familiarity, and resort to us for trading and other
negotiations, which the more willingly was by us continued and cherished for
the desire we had of effecting that great masterpiece of works, their
conversion. And by this means that fatal Friday morning, there fell under the
bloody and barbarous hands of that perfidious and inhumane people, contrary to
all laws of God and men, of Nature and Nations, three hundred forty seven men,
women, and children, most by their own weapons; and not being content with
taking away life alone, they fell after again upon the dead, making as well as
they could, a fresh murder, defacing, dragging, and mangling the dead carcasses
into many pieces, and carrying some parts away in derision, with base and
brutish triumph.

Neither yet did these beasts spare those amongst the rest well known unto
them, from whom they had daily received many benefits and favors, but
spitefully also massacred them, without remorse or pity, being in this more
fell then Lions and Dragons, which (as Histories record) have been so far
from hurting, as they have both acknowledged, and gratefully requited their
Benefactors; such is the force of good deeds, though done to cruel beasts, as
to make them put off the very nature of beasts, and to put on humanity upon
them. But these miscreants, contrariwise in this kind, put not off only all
humanity, but put on a worse and more then unnatural bruitishnesse. One
instance of it, amongst too many, shall serve for all.

That worthy religious Gentleman, Master George Thorpe Esquire, Deputy of the
College lands, sometimes one of his Majesty's Pentioners, and in one of the
principal places of command in VIRGINIA, did so truly and earnestly affect
their conversion, and was so tender over them, that whosoever under his
authority had given them but the least displeasure or discontent, he punished
them severely. He thought nothing too dear for them, and as being desirous to
bind them unto him by his many courtesies, he never denied them any thing
that they asked him, insomuch that when these Savages complained unto him of
the fierceness of our Mastiues, most implacable and terrible unto them,
(knowing them by instinct it seems, to be but treacherous and false-hearted
friends to us, better then our selves) he to gratify them in all things, for
the winning of them by degrees, caused some of them to be killed in their
presence, to the great displeasure of the owners, and would have had all the
rest guelt (had he not been hindered) to make them the gentler and the milder
to them. He was not only too kind and beneficial to the common sort, but
also to their King, to whom he often resorted, and gave many presents which he
knew to be highly pleasing to him. And whereas this king before dwelt only in
a cottage, or rather a den or hog-stye, made with a few poles and sticks,
and covered with mats after their wyld manner, to ciuilize him, he first, built
him a fair house according to the English fashion, in which he took such
joy, especially in his lock and key, which he so admired, as locking and
vnlocking his door an hundred times aday, he thought no device in all the
world was comparable to it.

Thus insinuating himself to this King for his religious purposes, he
conferred after with him often, and intimated to him matters of our Religion; and
thus far the Pagan confessed, moved by natural Principles, that our God was a
good God, and better much then theirs, in that he had with so many good things
above them endowed us. He told him, if he would serve our God, he should be
partaker of all those good things we had, and of far greater then sense or
reason ever could imagine. He won upon him, as he thought in many things,
so as he gave him fair hearing and good answer, and seemed to be much pleased
with his discourse and in his company. And both he and his people for the
daily courtesies this good Gentleman did to one or other of them, did profess
such outward love and respect unto him, as nothing could seem more: but all
was little regarded after by this Viperous brood, as the sequel showed: for
they not only wilfully murdered him, but cruelly and felly, out of deuillish
malice, did so many barbarous despights and foul scorns after to his dead
corpse, as are unbefitting to be heard by any civil ear. One thing I cannot
omit, that when this good Gentleman upon his fatal hour, was warned by his
man (who perceived some treachery intended to them by these hell hounds) to
look to himself, and withal ran away for fear of the mischief he
strongly apprehended, and so saved his own life; yet his Master, out of the
conscience of his own good meaning, and fair deserts ever toward them, was
so void of all suspicion, and so full of confidence, that they had sooner
killed him, then he could or would believe they meant any ill against him.
Thus the sins of these wicked Infidels, have made them unworthy of enjoying
him, and the eternal good that he most zealously always intended to them.

And thus these miserable wretches, not he, has lost by it, who to the
comfort of us all, has gained a Crown of endless bliss, and is assuredly
become a glorious Martyr, in which thrice-happy and blessed state we leave him.
But these miscreants, who have thus despised Gods great mercies so freely
offered to them, must needs in time therefore be corrected by his justice: So
as those who by the way of mercies would not be drawn unto him, shall some of
them at length (no doubt) be brought unto him by his way of judgments: to
which leaving them, I will knit again together now the thread of my Discourse,
and proceed to tell you, That at the time of this Massacre there were three or
four of our ships in Iames-Riuer, and one in the next River, and daily more to
come in, as three did within fourteen days after; one of which they endeavored
to have surprised, but in vain, as had also been their whole attempt, had any
the least foreknowledge been in those places where the Massacre was
committed: yet were the hearts of the English ever stupid, and auerted from
believing any thing that might weaken their hopes of speedy winning the Savages
to Civility and Religion, by kind usage and fair conuersing amongst them.
He, and the whole Council write further, That Almighty God (they doubt not)
has his great work to do in this Tragedy, and will thereout draw honor and
glory to his great Name; safety, and a more flourishing estate to themselves,
and the whole Plantation there; and the more speedy conversion of the Children
of those Savages to himself, since he so miraculously preserved so many of
the English (there being, God be praised, about eleven parts of twelve still
remaining) whose desire to draw those people to Religion by the careless
neglect of their own safeties, seems to have been the greatest cause of
their own ensuing destruction. Yet it pleased God to use some of them as
instruments to save many of their lives, whose souls they had formerly saved,
as at Iames-Citie, and other places, and the Pinnace trading in Pamounkey
River, all whose lives were saved by a converted Indian, disclosing the plot in
the instant (whereof though our sins (say they) made us unworthy to be
instruments of so glorious a conversion in general, yet his infinite wisdom
can nevertheless bring it to pass with some more of them, and with other
Provinces there in his good time, and by such means as we think most
unlikely. For even in the delivery of us that now survive, no man's particular
carfulness saved any one person, but the mere goodness of himself, freely
and miraculously preserved whom it pleased him.

The Letters of Mr. George Sandis a worthy Gentleman and Treasurer there,
likewise have advertised (as many others from many particular persons of note
and worth) besides the Relations of many returned in the Sea-flower (the ship
that brought us this unwelcome news) have been heard at large in the public
Courts, that whilst all their affairs were full of success, and such
intercourse of familiarity, as if the Indians and themselves had been of one
Nation, those treacherous Natives, after five years peace, by a general
combination in one day plotted to subvert their whole Colony, and at one
instant of time, though our several Plantations were an hundred and forty
miles up one River on both sides.

But before I go any further, for the better understanding of all things, you
shall know that these wyld naked Natives live not in great numbers together,
but dispersed, and in small companies; and where most together, not above two
hundred, and that very rare, in other places fifty or forty, or thereabouts,
and many miles distant from one another, in such places among the Woods where
they either found, or might easiliest make some cleared plots of ground, which
they employ wholly in setting of Corn, whereby to sustain their lives. These
small and scattered Companies (as I have said) had warning given from one
another in all their habitations to meet at the day and hour appointed for
our destruction, at all our several Towns and places seated upon the River;
some were directed to go to one place, some to another, all to be done at the
same day and time, which they did accordingly: some entering their Houses under
color of trucking, and so taking advantage, others drawing our men abroad upon
fair pretenses, and the rest suddenly falling upon those that were at their
labors.

They certify further, that besides Master George Thorpe, before mentioned,
Master John Berkeley, Captain Nathanael Powel, and his wife, (daughter of
Master William Tracy, and great with child) and Captain Maycock, all
Gentlemen of birth, virtue, and industry, and of the Council there, suffered
under this their cruelty and treason.

That the slaughter had been universal, if God had not put it into the heart
of an Indian belonging to one Perry, to disclose it, who living in the house of
one Pace, was urged by another Indian his Brother (who came the night before
and lay with him) to kill Pace, (so commanded by their King as he declared) as
he would kill Perry: telling further that by such an hour in the morning a
number would come from diverse places to finish the Execution, who failed not at
the time: Perries Indian rose out of his bed and reueales it to Pace, that used
him as a Son: And thus the rest of the Colony that had warning given them, by
this means was saved. Such was (God be thanked for it) the good fruit of an
Infidel converted to Christianity; for though three hundred and more of ours
died by many of these Pagan Infidels, yet thousands of ours were saved by the
means of one of them alone which was made a Christian; Blessed be God for ever,
whose mercy endures for ever; Blessed be God whose mercy is above his
justice, and far above all his works: who wrought this deliverance whereby
their souls escaped even as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler.

Pace upon this discovery, securing his house, before day rowed over the River
to Iames-City (in that place near three miles in breadth) and gave notice
thereof to the Governor, by which means they were prevented there, and at such
other Plantations as was possible for a timely intelligence to be given; for
where they saw us standing upon our Guard, at the sight of a Piece they all
ran away. In other places that could have no notice, some Pieces with
munition (the use whereof they know not) were there carried away, and some few
Cartell also were destroyed by them. And as Fame diuulgeth (not without
probable grounds) their King has since caused the most part of the Gunpowder
by him surprised, to be sown, to draw therefrom the like increase, as of his
Maize or Corn, in Harvest next. And that it is since discovered, that the last
Summer Opachankano practiced with a King of the Eastern shore (no well-willer
of his) to furnish him with store of poison (naturally growing in his country)
for our destruction, which he absolutely refused, though he sent him great
store of Beads, and other presents to win him thereunto: which he, with five
or six of his great men, offered to be ready to (...) against him. That the
true cause of this surprise was most by the instigation of the Devil, (enemy
to their salvation) and the daily fear that possessed them, that in time we by
our growing continually upon them, would dispossess them of this Country, as
they had been formerly of the West Indies by the Spaniard; produced this
bloody act. That never grief and shame possessed any people more then
themselves, to be thus butchered by so naked and cowardly a people, who dare
not stand the presentment of a staff in manner of a Piece, nor an vncharged
Piece in the hands of a woman, from which they fly as so many Hares; much
faster then from their tormenting Devil, whom they worship for fear, though
they acknowledge they love him not.

THus have you seen the particulars of this massacre, out of Letters from
thence written, wherein treachery and cruelty have done their worst to us, or
rather to themselves; for whose understanding is so shallow, as not to perceive
that this must needs be for the good of the Plantation after, and the loss of
this blood to make the body more healthful, as by these reasons may be
manifest.

First, Because betraying of innocence never rests unpunished: And therefore
Agesilaus, when his enemies (upon whose oath of being faithful he rested) had
deceived him, he sent them thanks, for that by their perjury, they had made
God his friend, and their enemy.

Secondly, Because our hands which before were tied with gentleness and fair
usage, are now set at liberty by the treacherous violence of the Savages, not
untying the Knot, but cutting it: So that we, who hitherto have had possession
of no more ground then their waste, and our purchase at a valuable
consideration to their own contentment, gained; may now by right of War, and
law of Nations, invade the Country, and destroy them who sought to destroy us:
whereby we shall enjoy their cultiuated places, turning the laborious Mattocke
into the victorious Sword (wherein there is more both ease, benefit, and glory)
and possessing the fruits of others labors. Now their cleared grounds in all
their villages (which are situate in the fruitfullest places of the land) shall
be inhabited by us, whereas heretofore the grubbing of woods was the greatest
labor.

Thirdly, Because those commodities which the Indians enjoyed as much or rather
more then we, shall now also be entirely possessed by us. The Dear and other
beasts will be in safety, and infinitely increase, which heretofore not only in
the general huntings of the King (whereat four or five hundred Dear were
usually slain) but by each particular Indian were destroyed at all times of
the year, without any difference of Male, Damme, or Young. The like may be
said of our own Swine and Goats, whereof they have used to kill eight in ten
more then the English have done. There will be also a great increase of wild
Turkies, and other weighty Foul, for the Indians never put difference of
destroying the Hen, but kill them whether in season or not, whether in breeding
time, or sitting on their eggs, or having new hatched, it is all one to them:
whereby, as also by the orderly using of their fishing Wears, no known
Country in the world will so plentifully abound in victual.

Fourthly, Because the way of conquering them is much more easy then of
ciuilizing them by fair means, for they are a rude, barbarous, and naked
people, scattered in small companies, which are helps to Victory, but
hindrances to Civility: Besides that, a conquest may be of many, and at once;
but ciuility is in particular, and slow, the effect of long time, and great
industry. Moreover, victory of them may be gained many ways; by force, by
surprise, by famine in burning their Corn, by destroying and burning their
Boats, Canoes, and Houses, by breaking their fishing Wears, by assailing them
in their huntings, whereby they get the greatest part of their sustenance in
Winter, by pursuing and chasing them with our horses, and Bloodhounds to draw
after them, and Mastiues to tear them, which take this naked, tanned, deformed
Savages, for no other then wild beasts, and are so fierce and fell upon them,
that they fear them worse then their old Devil which they worship, supposing
them to be a new and worse kind of Devils then their own. By these and sundry
other ways, as by driving them (when they fly) upon their enemies, who are
round about them, and by animating and abetting their enemies against them, may
their ruin or subjection be soon effected.

So the Spaniard made great use for his own turn of the quarrels and enmities
that were amongst the Indians, as thoroughly understanding and following that
Maxim of the Politician, Divide and impera, Make divisions and take Kingdoms:
For thus he got two of the greatest Kingdoms of the West Indies, Peru and
Mexico, by the Princes divisions, and the peoples differences. After the death
of Guainacapa king of Peru, his sons Attabalippa and Gascar falling to war
about the kingdom, and each of the^ striving to make the Spaniard to his
friend, Francis Pizzarro managing those their divisions only to his own ends,
easily stripped them both of that rich Kingdom, and became Master of Peru. And
so likewise Ferdinando Cortez vanquished King Motezuma, and gained the Kingdom
of Mexico from him by the aid and furtherance of the neighboring people of the
Province of Tascala, being deadly enemies to the Mexicans; for which service
they of Tascala are freed by the Spaniards from all Tributes to this time. In
VIRGINIA the many diverse Princes and people there are at this day opposite in
infinite factions one unto another, and many of them bear a mortal hatred to
these our barbarous Savages, that have been likely as false and perfidious
heretofore to them, as unto us of late. So as the quarrels, and the causes of
them, and the different humors of these people being well understood, it will
be an easy matter to overthrow those that now are, or may be our enemies
hereafter, by ayding and setting on their enemies against them. And by these
factions and differences of petty Princes, the Romans took their greatest
advantage to overcome this Island of Great Britayne, of which Tacitus fayes, Ita
dum singuli pugnant vniuersi vincuntur. And Justin has the like saying of the
cause of vanquishing the Grecian Cities.

Fifthly, Because the Indians, who before were used as friends, may now most
justly be compelled to servitude and drudgery, and supply the room of men that
labor, whereby even the meanest of the Plantation may employ themselves more
entirely in their Arts and Occupations, which are more generous, whilst
Savages perform their inferior works of digging in mines, and the like, of
whom also some may be sent for the service of the Summer Islands.

Sixthly, This will for ever hereafter make us more cautelous and circumspect,
as never to be deceived more by any other treacheries, but will serve for a
great instruction to all posterity there, to teach them that Trust is the
mother of Deceit, and to learn them that of the Italian, Chi non fida, non
s'inga muu, He that trusts not is not deceived: and make them know that
kindnesses are misspent upon rude natures, so long as they continue rude; as
also, that Savages and Pagans are above all other for matter of Justice ever to
be suspected. Thus upon this Anvile shall we now beat out to our selves an
armor of proof, which shall for ever after defend us from barbarous
Incursions, and from greater dangers that otherwise might happen. And so we may
truly say according to the French Proverb, Aquelque chose malheur est bon, Ill
luck is good for something.

Lastly, We have this benefit more to our comfort, because all good men do now
take much more care of us then before, since the fault is on their sides, not
on ours, who have used so fair a carriage, even to our own destruction.
Especially his Majesty's most gracious, tender and paternall care is manifest
herein, who by his Royal bounty and goodness, has continued his many favors
unto us, with a new, large, and Princely supply of Munition and Arms, out of
his Majesty's own store in the Tower, being graciously bestowed for the safety
and advancement of the Plantation. As also his Royal favor is amply extended
in a large supply of men and other necessaries throughout the whole Kingdom,
which are very shortly to be sent to VIRGINIA.

Neither must we omit the Honorable City of London, who to show their zeal
at this time (as they have always done upon all Honorable occasions to their
endless praise) are now setting forth one hundred persons, at their own
charges, for the advancement of the Plantations. In the furtherance of which
action, as the whole grave Senate of Aldermen have showed much piety and
wisdom, so in particular, the Right Honorable Sir Edward Barkham Knight, the
now Lord Mayor, has demonstrated a most worthy mind. Besides many worthy
Persons of birth and quality, and diverse others at their own costs are now
preparing for VIRGINIA. Neither is any man to be dejected because of some such
disasters as these that may seem to thwart the business.

What growing State was there ever in the world which had not the like? Rome
grew by opposition, and rose upon the back of her enemies. Mark but the
Spaniard who is in the same Continent with VIRGINIA, and has now perfected his
work; Mark and tell me, if he has not had more counterbuffes far then
we, as out of their own histories at large may be proved.

Columbus upon his return from the West Indies into Spain, having left his
people with the Indian in peace, and promise of fair usage toward them, yet
at his coming back again, he found no one man alive of them, but all by the
Natives treacherously slain.

After this again, when the Spanish Colony was increased in great numbers, the
Indians (from whom the Spaniards for trucking stuff used to have all their
corn) generally conspired together to plant no corn at all, intending thereby
to farnish them, themselves living in the mean time upon Cassaui (a root to
make bread) only then known to themselves: This plot of theirs by the
Spaniards ouer-sight (that foolishly depended upon Strangers for their bread)
took such effect, and brought them to such misery by the rage of famine, that
they spared no unclean, no loathsome beast, no not the poisonous and hideous
Serpents, but eat them up also, devouring one death to save them from another:
And by this means the whole Colony well-neare surfetted, sickned, and dyed
miserably.

After again, upon fresh and great supplies new made, an infinite company of
them by their incontinency dyed of the Indian disease, that has now got a
French name, which at first (as being a strange and unknown malady) was deadly
upon whomsoever it lighted. Besides (before they knew the cause and remedy)
very many lost diverse parts of their body, feet and hands principally, by a
little vermin less then a Flea, and skipping like it, called Nigua, which got
between the skin and the flesh before they were aware, and there bred and
multiplied, making swellings and putrefactions, to the decay and loss of their
bodily members.

What should I tell you that the Plantations diverse times were near undone, by
the (...), factions, and malice of the Commanders one unto another, Columbus,
to whom they were beholding for all, with his brothers, were sent home from the
West Indies into Spain bound with chains: and some other great Commanders
killed and murdered one another. Pizzarro was killed by Almagros son, and
him Vasco beheaded, which Vasco was taken by Blasco, and this Blasco was
likewise taken by Pizzarroes brother. Thus by their own spightfull and
auaritious quarrels did they well-neare shake the main pillars of that
Plantation.

These and many other calamities and mischiefs, too long to relate now, happened
unto them more then ever did to us. And at one time their plantation was even
at the last gasp, all their Colony being resolved desperately to leave it, had
not two ships unexpected come in with new supplies: yet we see for all these
miseries, that they have attained to their ends at last, Honor, power, and
wealth; In so much as that Country, which (when they were dishartned with
disasters) they began to be so weary of, that they were about to forsake it
all, in short time after (seeing all storms blown over, and fair weather
shining upon them) they were so in love with their great fortunes, that they
grew so jealous of them, as made them shut them up from the sight of any but
themselves. And then they petitioned their King, by an inviolable Decree to
annexe and unite the West Indies inseparably for ever to the Crown of Spain;
which (for their better security and satisfaction) was accordingly performed
and ratified, as it is to be seen in H^^^^^^ History of the West Indies. And
whereas before, few could be hired to go to inhabit there, now with great
suite they must obtain it.

Thus have they in time by industry, patience, and constancy effected this
great work of theirs, notwithstanding to increase their difficulties also,
they were to deal with a most populous and numerous nation, which they
overcame at last: So as Ouiedo in his third Book of the first Part of his West
Indie History says, that of a million of Indians at least, that were in
Hispaniola, there were not (in little more then forty years space after the
first beginning of the Plantation) five hundred of the^ and all their children
living: for the Indians that lived there, after were brought out of the
Continent into that Island, or out of one Island to be planted in another. On the
other side, the Natives in VIRGINIA are nothing populous, but thin and
scattered Nations, as is known to all.

Here by the way to make a little Digression, since I have mentioned Ouiedo who
lived above twenty two years in the West Indies, I will acquaint you with his
observation and judgment of the nature and disposition of the Indians there,
that you may compare and see in what, and how far, it agrees with that of the
Natives of VIRGINIA.

They are (says he) by nature sloathfull and idle, vicious, melancholy,
slouenly, of bad conditions, liars, of small memory, of no constancy or trust.
In another place he says, The Indian is by nature of all people the most lying
and most inconstant in the world, sottish and sudden: never looking what
dangers may happen afterward, less capable then children of six or seven
years old, and less apt and ingenious. This is the general disposition of
most of them, though there be some (says he) that be wise and subtle. And
indeed it should seem so, when they could ouerreach and go beyond the
Spaniard so much, to put that trick of staruing them (as aforesaid) upon them,
to their so great and almost total destruction.

But to come again to that which I first intended: Since the Spaniard (as we
see) in his Plantations has gone through far more hazards, and greater
difficulties then ever we have had, we therefore in looking to what is past,
upon great reason ought likewise not to be deterred, but so much the rather
invited to proceed with constancy and courage. And if besides we look (as
most men do) after the riches of a Country to inuit us on, ask those that
have been there, and have traveled far and near, and they will tell you,
that no Country in the world does naturally abound with more Commodities then
VIRGINIA does. The Clymate is known to be more temperate, and the soil more
rich then that of the West Indies is: neither does it want mines of all sorts,
no not of the richest, as is known to some now living, and shall be manifested
when fit time shall serve. And yet to think that Gold and Silver mines are in
a Country (otherwise most rich and fruitful) the greatest wealth of a
Plantation, is but a popular error, as is that opinion likewise, That the Gold
and Silver is the greatest wealth of the West Indies now at this present time.
True it is indeed, that in the first Conquest the Spaniards got great and
mighty treasure from the Indians, which they in long space had heaped up
together, and in those times the Indians showed them entyre and plentiful rich
mines, which by length of time (as is well known and published to the world by
those that have been there) are wasted and exhausted since, so as now the
charge of getting those metals is grown most excessive, besides the consuming
and spoiling many men of their lives, which are deprived of them by the vapors
that come out of the Gold and Silver mines, which are most pestilent and
deadly, as diverse authors auerre. Amongst others, a late Geographer speaking of
the West Indies, and of those mines there, says, Odor ex auri and argenti
fodinis noxius admodum; neque tamen prohibuit aeris corruptissimi violentia
Hispanos, ne in alio orb nouum moriendi locum quaererent. So as all things
considered by these mines, what by the lives of many men lost in them, and what
with the great charge otherwise in getting them, the clear gain to the
Adventurers from these metals (the Kings part defrayed) is but small to them,
nothing near so much I am sure, as is imagined. And were it not for other rich
Commodities there that enable and enrich the Adventurers, those of the
Contractation house were never able to subsist by this. For the greatest part
of their gain and profit I say consists not in these mines, but in their other
Commodities, partly native, and partly translated from other parts of the
world, and planted in the West Indies: As in their mighty wealth of Sugars (the
Sugar Canes being transported first from the Canaries,) and in Ginger, and some
other commodities derived from the East Indies thither: in their Cochanile,
their Indico, their Cotton, their infinite store of Hydes and Skins, their
Quicksilver, and Allom, Wood, and Brasill-wood, etc. And their many other
Dies, Paints, Petararana, Tobacco, Gummes, Balmes, Oils medecinall, and
Perfumes, their Sarsaparillia, and many other physical drugs, (for which,
learned Physicians and skillful Simplers were sent to take a survey, and make
an exquisite draught of all the Plants in colors.) These I say and other the
like commodities are the West Indies indeed unto the Adventurers, by which they
are enabled to enrich themselves, and to sustain the mighty charge of drawing
out the Gold and Silver* to the great and clear reuenew of their King.

I had many things of importance to say more, but I will detain the Reader no
longer now. To conclude then, seeing that Virginia is most abundantly
fruitful, and that this Massacre must rather be beneficial to the Plantation
then impair it, let all men take courage, and put to their helping hands,
since now the time is most seasonable and aduantagious for the reaping of those
benefits which the Plantation has long promised: and for their own good let
them do it speedily, that so by taking the prioritie of time, they may have
also the prioritie of place, in choosing the best Seats of the Country, which
now by vanquishing of the Indians, is like to offer a more ample and fair
choice of fruitful habitations, then hitherto our gentleness and fair
comportment to the Savages could attain unto. Wherein no doubt but all the
favor that may be, shall be showed to Adventurers and Planters. And for old
Adventurers, there is due unto them and their heirs (according to the Orders
of the Company) for each twelve pounds ten shillings formerly paid into the
treasury, one hundred Acres of Land, upon a first division, and as much upon a
second, the first being planted. And whosoever transports himself or any
other, at his charge into VIRGINIA, shall for himself and each person so
transported, before Midsummer, 1625. have to him and his heirs for ever, fifty
Acres of land upon a first Division, and as much more upon a second: the first
fifty being cultiuated or manured, if such person continue there three years,
either at once or several times, or dye after he be shipped for that Voyage.

Lastly, it is to be wished, that every good Patriot will take these things
seriously into his thoughts, and consider how deeply the prosecution of this
noble Enterprise concerns the honor of his Majesty and the whole Nation, the
propagation of Christian Religion, the enlargement, strength, and safety of his
Majesty's Dominions, the rich augmenting of his Reuennues, the imploiment of
his Subjects idle at home, the increase of men, Mariners and shipping, and the
raising of such necessary commodity, for the importation of which from foreign
Countries fo great and incredible sums are continually issued and expended.
Some may help with their purses, some with their persons, some with their
favor, some with their counsel: especially amongst others, let Ministers in
their public and private prayers commend these Plantations to the blessing of
Almighty God: To whom be all honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Here following is set down a true List of the names of all those that were
massacred by the treachery of the Savages in VIRGINIA, the 22 March last.
To the end that their lawful heirs may take speedy order for the inheriting
of their lands and estates there: For which the Honorable Company of Virginia
are ready to do them all right and favor.
At Captain Berckleys Plantation seated at the Falling Creek, some 66. miles
from Iames-Citie in VIRGINIA.
John Berkley Esquire. Thomas Brasington. John Sawyer. Roger David. Francis
Gowsh. Bartholmew Peram. Giles Peram. John Dowler. Laurence Dowler. Lewis
Williams. Richard Boscough. Thomas Holland. John Hunt. Robert Horner Mason.
Philip Barnes. William Swandal. Robert Williams, his Wife, and Child. Giles
Bradshawe, his Wife, and Child. John Howlet, and his son. Thomas Wood, and
Collins his man. Joseph Fitch Apothecary to Doctor Pots.
At Master Thomas Sheffeilds Plantation, some three miles from the Falling
Creek.
MAster Th: Sheffeild, and Rachel his wife. John Reeue. William Tyler a boy.
Samuel Reeue. John Ellen. Robert Tyler a boy. Matthew -- Iudeth Howard. Thomas
Poole Methusalem -- Thomas Tailor. William Tyler.
At Henrico Island about two miles from Sheffeilds Plantation.
-- Atkins. -- Weston. Philip Shatford. William Perigo. Owen Jones, one of
Capt. Berkleys people.
Slain of the College People, about two miles from Henrico-Citie.
SAmuel Stringer. George Sultan. William Basset. John Perry. Edward Ember.
Iarrat Moore. Thomas Xerles. Thomas Freeman. John Allen. Thomas Cook. John
Clements. James Faulkoner. Christopher Henley. William Jordan. Robert Dauis.
Thomas Hobson. William Baily.
At Apo-mattucke River at Master Abraham Pierce his Plantation some five miles
off the College People.
WIlliam Charte. Io: Waterhowse. John Barker a boy. Robert Yeoman.
At Charles-Citie and about the Precincts. of Capt. Smiths Company.
ROger Royal. Thomas Jones. Robert Marvel. Edward Heydon. Henry Bushel.
At other Plantations next adjoining.
RIchard Prat, and his Brother. Henry Milward, his Wife, his Child, and his
Sister. Richard a boy. Goodwife Redhead.
At Mr. William Farrars House.
MAster John England and his Man. John Bell. Henricke Peterson, and Alice his
Wife, and William her son. Thomas his Man. James Woodshaw. Maidserua^ts
Mary, and Elizabeth

At Berkley-Hundred some five miles from Charles-Citie.
CApt. George Thorpe Esquire. one of his Majesty's Pentioners. John Rowles. Richard
Rowles, his Wife, and Child. Giles Wilkins. Giles Bradway. Richard Fereby.
Thomas Thorpe. Robert Jordan. Edward Painter.
At Westouer, about a mile from Berkley-Hundred: And first, at Cap. Fr: Wests
Plantation.
James English. Richard Dash.
At Master John Wests Plantation.
Christopher Turner. David Owen.
At Capt. Nathanael Wests.
Michael Aleworth. John Wright.
An Lieutenant Gibs his Dividend.
John Paly. Thomas Ratcliffe. Michael Booker. John Higglet. Nathanael Earl.
John Gibbes. William Parker. Richard Wainham. Benomy Reyman. Thomas Gay. James
Vpfall. Daniel -- Mr. Dombelowes man.
At Mr. Richard Owens house.
RIchard Owen. Stephen Dubo. Francis, an Irishman. Thomas Pain. One old Maid
called blind Margaret. William Reeue.
At Master Owen Macars house.
OWen Macar. Garret Farrel. Richard Yeaw. One Boy.
At Master Macocks Dividend.
CApt. Samuel Macock Esquire. Edward Lister. Thomas Brown. John Downs.
At Flowerdieu- Hundred Sir George Yeardleys Plantation.
John Philips. Thomas Nuson. John Braford. Robert Tailor. Samuel Iarret.
Elizabeth Bennet.
At the other side of the River opposite to Flowerdieu-Hundred.
MAster Hobson, and his Wife. Richard Storks. John Slaughter. Thomas Philips.
Richard Campion. Anne Green.
At Mr. Swinhowe his House.
Mistress Swinhow, and Thomas and George Shinhow her sons. Richard Moss. John
Larkin. William Blyth. Thomas Grindal.
At Mr. William Bikars house.
WIlliam Bykar. Math: Hawthorn and his Wife. Edward Pierce. Nicholas Howsdon.
At Weynoack of Sir George Yeardley his people.
NAthanael Elie. John Flores. Henry Gape. -- Buckingham. William Pusset.
William Walker. John Gray. James Boat. John Suersby. Thomas Euans. Thomas
Ap-Richard. Henry Haynes. John Blewet. Henry Rice. -- Hurt. Jonas Alport.
Thomas Stephens. Samuel Goodwine. John Snow, and his Boy. Margery Blewet.
At Powle-brooke.
CApt. Nath* Powle, Esquire. and his Wife, Daughter to Mr. Tracy. Mistress Bray Adam
Rayners Wife. B^^bara Burges. William Head. Thomas Woolcher. William Meakins.
Robert -- Peter Jordan. Nathanael Leydon. Peter Goodale.
At Southampton-Hundred.
RObert Goffe, and his Wife, William Larkum. John Dauies. William Mountfort.
At Martin Brandons.
LIeutenant Sanders. Ensign Sherley. John Tailor, and his Wife. 2 Boys.
Matthew a Polander.
At Captain Spilmans house.
John Basingthwayte. Walter Shawe.
At Ensign Spence his house.
WIlliam Richmond John Fowler. Alexander Bale. William Fierfax. The Tinker.
Persons slain at Martins-Hundred some seven miles from Iames-Citie.
LIeutenant Rich: Kean. Master Tho: Boise, and Mistress Boise his wife, and a
sucking Child. 4 of his men. A Maid. 2 Children. Nathanael Iefferies wife.
Margaret Dauies. Richard Staples, his wife, and Child. 2 Maids. 6 Men and
Boys. Walter Dauies, and his brother. Christopher Guillam. Thomas Combar. 3.
Servants. Master John Boise his Wife. A Maid. 4 Men-seruants. Laurence Wats,
his Wife. 2 Men-seruants. Timothy Moise, his Man* Henry Bromage, his Wife, his
Daughter, his Man. Edward How, his Wife, his Child. A child of John Iacksons.
4 Men-seruants. Joshua Dary, his Wife, A Man. Ralphe Digginson, his Wife.
Richard Cholfer. George Jones. Cisly Cook, his Wife. David Bons, John Bennet.
John Mason. William Pawmet. Thomas Bats. Peter Lighborrow. James Thorley.
Robert Walden. Thomas Tolling. John Butler. Edward Rogers. Maximilian Russel.
Henry a Welchman.
At Mr. Thomas Pierce his house over against Mulberry Island.
MAster Tho: Pierce, his Wife, and Child. John Hopkins. John Samon. A French
boy.
At Mr. Edward Bennets Plantation.
MAster Th: Brewood his Wife, his Child, 2 Servants. Thomas Ferris. George
Cole. Robert Gray. John Griffin. Ensign Harrison. John Costard. David Barry.
Thomas Sheppard. Henry Price. Robert -- Edward Jolly. Richard -- Alice Jones.
Thomas Cook. Philip Worth. Matthew a maid. Francis Winder. Thomas Couly.
Richard Woodward. Humfrey Cropen. Thomas Bacon. Euan Watkins. Richard Lewis.
Edward Towse. Remember Michel. -- Bullock. Richard Chandler. Henry Moore.
Nicholas Hunt. John Corderoy. Richard Cockwell. John Howard. Mistress Harrison.
Mary Dawks Anne English. Rebecca -- Master Prowse. Hugh -- John -- Edward --
Mistress Chamberlen. Parnel a maid. Humfrey Sherbrooke. John Wilkins. John
Burton. Mr. John Pountis his men.
John Scotchmore Edward Turner.
Edward Brewster, Lieutenant Pierce his man. Thomas Holland, Capt. Whittakers
man.
At Master Walters his house.
MAster Edw: Walters his Wife, a Child, a Maid. a Boy.
The whole number is 347.

A TREATISE OF THE NORTHWEST Passage to the South Sea, through the Continent of
VIRGINIA and by Fretum Hudson.
THe noble Plantation of VIRGINIA has some very excellent Prerogatives above
many other famous Kingdoms, namely, the temperature of the air, the
fruitfulness of the soil, and the commodiousnesse of situation.

The air is healthful and free both from immoderate heat, and from extreme
cold; so that both the inhabitants and their cattle do prosper exceedingly in
stature and strength, and all Plants brought from any other remote climate, do
there grow and fructify in as good or better manner, then in the soil from
whence they came. Which though it do manifestly prove the fruitfulness of the
soil, yielding all kinds of grain or plants committed unto it, wi^h a rich
and plentiful increase, yet cannot the fatness of the earth alone produce
such excellent effects, unless the temperature of the Air be likewise so
favorable, that those tender sprouts which the earth does abundantly bring
forth, may be cherished with moderate heat and seasonable moisture, and freed
both from scorching drought, and nipping frost.

These blessings are so much the more to be esteemed, because they are
bestowed upon a place situated so conveniently, and at so good a distance both
from Europe, and the West Indies, that for the mutual commerce betwixt these
great and most rich parts of the habitable world, there cannot be devised any
place more convenient for the succor and refreshing of those that trade from
hence thither: whether they be of our own nation, or of our neighbors and
friends; the multitude of great and nauigable Rivers, and of safe and spacious
harbors, as it were inuiting all Nations to entertain mutual friendship, and
to participate of those blessings which God out of the abundance of his rich
Treasures, has so graciously bestowed some upon these parts of Europe, and
others no less desired upon those poor people: which might still have
remained in their old barbarous ignorance, without knowledge of their own
misery, or of Gods infinite goodness and mercy; if it had not pleased God thus
graciously both to draw us thither with desire of such wealth as those
fruitful Countries afford, and also to grant us so easy, certain, and safe a
means to go unto them: which passage is in mine opinion made much more secure
and easy by the commodious harbors and refreshing which VIRGINIA does reach
out unto us. The coasts of Florida to the West, being not so harborous; and of
New England to the East, somewhat more out of the way, amongst so many Flats
and small Islands not so safe. Neither is the commodiousnesse of VIRGINIAS
situation only in respect of this west Atlanticke Ocean, but also in respect
of the Indian Ocean, which we commonly call the South Sea, which lies on the
West and North west side of VIRGINIA, on the other side of the Mountains beyond
our Falls, and opens a free and fair passage, not only to China, Iapan, and
the Moluccaes; but also to New Spain, Peru, Chila, and those rich Countries of
Terra Australis, not as yet fully discovered. For the Sea wherein Master Hudson
did winter, which was first discovered by him, and is therefore now called
Fretum Hudson, does stretch so far toward the west, that it lies as far
westward as the Cape of Florida: So that from the False above Henrico City, if
we shape our journey toward the Northwest following the Rivers toward the
head, we shall undoubtedly come to the Mountains, which as they send diverse
great Rivers Southward into our Bay of Chesepiock, so likewise do they send
others from their further side Northwestward into that Bay where Hudson did
winter. For so we see in our own Country, from the ridge of Mountains
continued from Derbishire into Scotland, do issue many great Rivers on both
sides into the East Germane Ocean, and into the Western Irish Seas: in like
sort from the Alps of Switzerland and the Grizons, do run the Danubie
Eastward into Pontus Euxinus, the Rhene into the North Germane Ocean, the
Rhosne west into the Mediterrane Sea, and the Po South into the Adriatike Sea.
This Bay where Hudson did winter, strecheth it self Southward into 49.
degrees, and cannot be in probability so far distant from the False as 200.
Leagues; part of the way lying by the Rivers side toward the mountains from
whence it springs: and the other part on the other side cannot want Rivers
likewise, which will conduct us all the way, and I hope carry us and our
provisions a good part of it. Besides that Bay, it is not unlikely that the
Western Sea in some other Creek or River comes much nearer then that place:
For the place where Sir Thomas Button did winter, lying more Westerly then
Master Hudsons Bay by 190. Leagues in the same Sea, does extend it self very
near as far toward the west as the Cape of California, which is now found
to be an Island stretching it self from 22. degrees to 42. and lying almost
directly North and South; as may appear in a Map of that Island which I have
seen here in London, brought out of Holland; where the Sea upon the Northwest
part may very probably come much nearer then some do imagine: who giving too
much credit to our usual Globes and Maps, do dream of a large Continent
extending it self far Westward to the imagined Straight of Anian, where are
seated (as they fable) the large Kingdoms of Cebola and Quiuira, having great
and populous Cities of civil people; whose houses are said to be five stories
high, and to have some pillars of Turguesses. Which relations are cunningly set
down by some upon set purpose to put us out of the right way, and to
discourage such as otherwise might be desirous to search a passage by the way
aforesaid into those Seas.

Gerardus Mercator, a very industrious and excellent Geographer, was abused by
a Map sent unto him, of four Euripi meeting about the North Pole; which now
are found to be all turned into a maine icie Sea. One demonstration of the
crafty falsehood of these usual Maps is this, that Cape Mendocino is set in
them West Northwest, distant from the South Cape of California, about
seventeen hundred Leagues, whereas Francis Gaul that was employed in those
discoueries by the Viseroy of New Spain; does in Hugo Linscotten his book set
down their distance to be only five hundred Leagues.

Besides this, in the place where Sir Thomas Button did winter in 57. degrees
of latitude, the constant great tides every twelve hours, and the increase of
those tides whenever any strong western wind did blow, do strongly persuade
us that the maine Western Ocean is not far from thence; which was much
confirmed unto them the Summer following; when sailing directly North from that
place where they wintered, about the Latitude of 60. degrees, they were crossed
by a strong Current running sometimes Eastward, sometimes Westward: So that if
we find either Hudsons Bay, or any Sea more near unto the West, we may
assure our selves that from thence we may with great ease pass to any part of
the East Indies: And that as the world is very much beholding to that famous
Columbus for that he first discovered unto us the West Indies; and to the
Portingall for the finding out the ordinary and as yet the best way that is
known to the East Indies, by Cape Bona-Speranza. So may they and all the world
be in this beholding to us in opening a new and large passage, both much
nearer, safer, and far more wholesome and temperate through the Continent of
VIRGINIA, and by Fretum Hudson, to all those rich Countries bordering upon the
South Sea, in the East and West Indies. And this hope that the South Sea may
easily from VIRGINIA be discovered over Land, is much confirmed by the constant
report of the Savages, not only of VIRGINIA, but also of Florida and Canada;
which dwelling so remote one from another, and all agreeing in the report of a
large Sea to the Westwards, where they describe great Ships not unlike to ours,
with other circumstances, do give us very great probability (if not full
assurance) that our endeavors this way shall by Gods blessing have a prosperous
and happy success, to the increase of his Kingdom and glory amongst these
poor ignorant Heathen people, the public good of all the Christian world,
the neuerdying honor of our most gracious Sovereign, the inestimable benefit
of our Nation, and the admirable and speedy increase and advancement of that
most noble and hopeful Plantation of VIRGINIA; for the good success whereof
all good men with me, I doubt not, will pour out their prayers to Almighty GOD.

H. B.

A MEMORIAL OF Religious Charity exercised on Virginia to the glory of God
and good example of men, these three last years, 1619. 1620. 1621.
r. s^. d. Anno 1619
Mistress Mary Robinson by her Will gave toward the building of a Church in
VIRGINIA, 200. 0. 0. A Person unknown gave for that Church a Communion-cup
with a Cover, and a Plate for the bread of silver guilt: a silk damask
Carpet, a linen damask Table-Cloth, and other Ornaments, all valued at 20. 0.
0. A person unknown gave for the use of the College, a Communion-cup with a
Cover, and a Plate for the bread, of Silver guilt: a crimson velvet Carpet with
gold lace and fringe, and a linen damask Table-cloath: all valued at -- 30.
0. 0. A person unknown sent a Letter, the Copy whereof is registered; directed
thus, To Sir Edwin Sandys, the faithful Treasurer of VIRGINIA: and subscribed,
Dust and Ashes: And afterward by an unknown person sent a box to the house of
Sir Edwin Sandys with the same direction: which being opened in Court, therein
was found in gold 550. pounds, to be disposed of for the education of children
of the Infidels, in Christian religion and ciuility. 550. 0. 0. Anno 1620
Master Nicholas Farrar of London, deceased, has by his Will given 300 li. to
the College in VIRGINIA, to be paid when there shall be ten of the Infidels
children placed in it: and in the mean time 24. pounds by the year to be
disbursed unto three discreet and godly men in the Colonie, which shall
honestly bring three of the Infidels children in Christian Religion, and some
good course to live by. 300. 0. 0. A person refusing to be named, has given to
the benefit of the Plantation 10. 0. 0. Anno 1621
The Gentlemen and Mariners that came in the Royall-Iames from the East Indies,
being at Cape Bona-Speranza, homeward bound, gave toward the building of a
Free School in Virginia, to be called the East Indie School, 70. ^. 6.
Toward the furtherance of the East Indie School, an unknown person has
added the sum of 30. 0. 0. A person refusing to be named, has given the
sum of 40. shillings per annum for ever, for a Sermon, to be preached before
the Virginia Company. 40 s. per an. At the Quarter Court held the 30. of
January 1621. by a person not willing as yet to be known, was sent in gold 25
li. to help forward the East Indie School* 25. 0. 0. At the same Quarter
Court a small Bible with a Cover richly wrought, a great Church-Bible, the
Book of Common Prayer, and other books were presented to be sent to VIRGINIA,
in the name of a person who had the year before sent for the use of the
College at Henrico; S. Augustine De ciuitate Dei, Master Perkins his works,
and an exact Map of America: the giver is not known, but the books are valued
at 10. 0. 0. Given by Master Thomas Bargraue, a Minister in VIRGINIA deceased,
for the use of the College, a Library valued at 100. marks There is a
Contribution made by the Inhabitants in VIRGINIA for the building of a house of
entertainment for new comers, at Iames-Citie: amounting to the value of 1500.
0. 0. The Gentlemen and Mariners that came lately home from the East Indies, in
the two Ships called the Heart and Roe-Bucke, being at the Cape of Bona
Speranza, homeward bound, gave toward the building of the aforesaid
Free-Schoole in VIRGINIA the sum of 66. 13. 4.

FINIS.

