A little treatise called the Image of Idleness, containing certain matters
moved between Walter wedlock and Bawdin Bacheler. Translated out of the
Troyane or Cornyshe tongue into English, by Olyuer Old wanton, and dedicated
to the Lady Lust.

The Table of this present book.
THe preface of the translatour. Capi. i. The first part of a certain Epistle
sent by Bawdyn Bacheler to Walter Wedlock, wherein does apeare the ground that
caused the setting forth of this treatise* Capitulo.ii. Bawdyn Bacheler being
suter to a certain Gentylwoman for marriage, writes to a friend of hers for to
have his help and furtheraunce in the matter. Capi. iii. Whereas Bawdin had bin
suter to a certain Gentylwoman for marriage, and was in good hope to obtain,
he received knowledge to the contrary by letter from a gentleman that had been
partly a means for him, and thereupon wrote back to the said Gentleman as
follows. Capi. iiii. Here Bawdyn writes to the Gentlewoman mentioned in the
last letter. Ca. v. Where as a certain Gentlewoman bare in hand that she was
determined never to mary, and was nevertheless lykely to be much sued unto for
marriage, here Bawdyn informs her by his letter under what sort she were best
to use and give over her suitors. Capitulo.vi. Here Bawdyn writes to a certain
gentlewoman that was dangerous to be seen or spoken withal by such as came to
sue un to her for marriage. Capi. vii. Here Bawdyn wrytethe to a certain
Gentlewoman at whose hands he had bin disdeynefully refused upon treatye of
marriage. Capitulo.viii. Here Bawdyn writing to a certain gentleman his friend,
among other things bewayleth him self of his evil speed in wooing and
treaty of marriage. Capi. ix. Where as Bawdyn served in Garryson and had
compounded with a certain gentleman, his friend, to repair thither at all
times of danger, the same being so streyghted in a time of commotion, that he
was forced for his safeguard to take another howlde, where as were many
Gentlewomen, which furnyture the other greattly wanted. Here Bawdyn makes him
ryquest to have some fruition of that commodity. Capitulo.x. The answer made
to the said letter. Capitulo.xi. Here Bawdyn replyeth to the foresaid
answer, and percuing his continual evil speed, does determyne to give over
all such kind of suits. Capi. xii. The second part of the Epistle sent by
Bawdyn Bacheler to Walter Wedlock. Capitulo.xiii. Here Bawdyn to prove that
women are never so much addyet or bent to their own will and opinion, but that
by wisdom and good pollycy they may easily be broken thereof, shows a lively
example of late experience. Capi. xiiii. The third and last part of the
Epistle sent by Bawdyn Bacheler to Walter Wedlock. Capitulo.xv.
Here ends the Table.
The preface of the translatour. Capitulo primo.
To the right honorable and his especial good Lady, the lady Lust of
Pawesforde, Olyuer Oldwanton, your Ladyships bondeman, wyssheth a joyful life
and contynuall felicity.
GAllynge to mind the oppinion of Aristippus, a certain Philosopher of
thepicuriens sect, who by profounde arguments and sundry authorities used to
maynteyne, that it was lawefull for man and woman at vacant times to exercise
them selves with kyssinge and imbrasynge (together with the suites and
cerymonies thereunto belonging) rather then to sit still and be idle. The same
my ioly good Lady has caused me so greatly to detest the wicked vice of
Idleness, that in eschewynge thereof I have had sundry deuyses, how I might most
conveniently be occupied, and thereupon finding my self more apt then able,
for thexcercise aforesaid. And moreover as well ignoraunte in every craft and
faculty of bodily labor as destitute both of learning and knowledge, whereby
to inuente or set forth any worthy matter of new. I determined at length
because I have understanding in sundry tounges, to take upon me the
translation of some work into English, and for that purpose, perusing a
number of books, I chanced to find a little queare intiteled, the Image of
Idleness, written many years past in the Troyane or Cornyshe speech, being
the mother tongue of this noble Realm, then called Bryttayne, which made me
the more willing to take the same in hand, thinking that it might draw
again to memory the valiant people of Troy, whereof for my part (be it spoken
without aduante) I am one of the worthy ofspringe. But then came to my
remembrance the words of Plato, who says, that man lives not chiefly for
him self, but rather for his country, meaning that we should not apply our
travel or study to our private pleasure or commodity: but rather to
thaduauncement of our common wealth: which this purpose seemed not to concern,
and therefore might chance by some men's opynion ought not to be traueyled on.
Yet nevertheless like as commonly most men be not sone persuaded to give over
the thing that they are affectionated unto, upon any surmyse or report, that
the doing thereof should stand against the rule of good order: But rather to
justify their cause, will search for some colorable argument to prove that
the same may stand within the compase of order. Even so I being bent to this
translation, (with the help of my wits which in this case favored my will)
have under such sort wrested common reason, that in mine opinion (being inoughe
as I suppose for the discharge of mine own conscience) the doing thereof may
well enough stand with the precept of Plato. If not indirectely, yet at the
least way by a means which I prove as thus.

To be a studient of the laws, a counselor or a minister in the commonwealth
is well allowed with Plato, and then to encorage or assist such person in his
study or ministration, must needs be of like effect. And that in my mind
shall be accomplysshed in this work. For it is apparent unto us, that secious
and sad study which perteyneth to the governance and ministration in a
comcom wealth is so contrary to most men's nature, that if the mind be not
recreated with some pleasant matter, the wits will sone appalle, and the
lively spirits wax feeble or dull. And therefore it seems (that as it is
necessary) to have students councellers and ministers in a common wealth.
Even as necessary it is that some men should travel to set forth such matter
as may revive their spirits, being mortyfyed by contynuall grave study,
which otherwise as accloyed and werye, should of force be driven by unaptness,
to cease in their study or ministration, and surely Madame, the iniquity of
time is now such: that the very graueste and most wise sort of men (yea
and even they which have ministration in the common wealth) will sometime
soonest laughe and rejoice to here and read evil of women: yet not as though
being evil marched them selves, they should seem glad to perceive other
men in like case, as if the evil were as common as women are great in number,
or that they think that they may by reading of books more safely reprove
their wives faults then by express words. But rather comes as a certain
plage of lightness or franzie by thoperation of some peruers planet, or evil
humor that causes them indiscretly to condemn them selves, by defamynge
their most natural and best known parente. Like as if the Tercell would say
that his Ceryer or dame were a Puttocke or Kyte, which argues him self never
likely to prove good hawk: And even so it is of these mad men that delyght
to speak and here evil of women. Howebeit now very shortly, when by the
benevolence of the bodies above, there shall no more such occasions be
mynistred. I doubt not but that men will amend their misreportes and give over
such unseemly delectations. But yet in the mean season it shall be necessary to
serve the time. And therefore the matter of this translation being interlased
with certain surmysed faults ageynste women, seems to be as an aid to the
ministers in a common wealth, to refreshe with all their wits, being as I
said before, appalled with grave study. So that whereas such ministers by
their study and travel do serve the common wealth indirectly: Even so by this
work, which tends to meinteine and continewe their wits apt for study
and ministration. Me thinks I serve the common wealth by a means, so that my
traueyle herein may well inoughe stand with the precepte of Plato. And that
thereby at the least way I Hall deserve as much commendation, as the Smyth
which makes a wrest to tune thinstrument: Who although he be ignorant in
music, is yet worthy of some thanks for tharmony, by reason that and if his
traueyle had not bin, the stringes could not have binne brought to agree in
tune, and then had there been no melody at al. But alas, a lamentable case to
remember how the folly and malice of man is increased, sith the days of Saint
John the Evangelist, who for his recreation after long prayers (as these
discrete old wives bear in hand) used to refreshe him self in playing with
his bird. And likewise holy Saint Anthony in teaching his little Pygge to
tumble and vaulte, and did not delyght to here or understand of women's faults
or doublenes, as men do now a days, which alteration by thoppinion of some
doctors, comes by thinfluence of some disordered planet. As in deed Venus
of late to advance her self hasted her ordinary course, thinking to make
her ascendaunte above the head of Jupiter, but by a mischaunce she stumbled on
Scorpio, and under such sort was tangled, that not only she failed
thaduantage of her pretended purpose, but moreover lost two degrees, and half
of her possessed preemynence, the reuolusyon whereof seems to be a great part
of the cause that makes many women now adays to straye out of order, and
minister much occasion of evil report, as coveting to be accoumpted of
higher estate and ability then in deed they are, or in making their beauty
and come^ynesse seem more then it is, to garnyshe them selves with more
sumptuous apparel and costely Jewels then does apperteyne. For the
meyntenaunce whereof, they abuse that part of their bodies where as the sign
of Scorpio does commonly reign, and by such means for a time serneth well
their purpose, and does increase their preferment and estimation. Howebeit at
length either by smelling or suspicion, they fall into defame and oblequy of
the people, and be less esteemed or set by then when they first began. But what
soever the cause of such alteration be. Sythen I perceane that men are now so
peruersly bente to report and here evil of women, yet for the reverence and
zeal that I bear unto all women, I have thought best, because they may be the
redier with theyrs answer or excuse, if any of them shall happen to be
charged with any of the faults or evil properties mentioned in this book.
For to make them first privy thereunto, by directing of this my simple work
unto your Ladyshyppe, being of all honorable women in these days (none
discommended) as well for singular wit and good conueyghaunce, as for great
policy and long experience coumpted most notable, not doubting but that all
women by your Ladyshyppes good advise and instruction, will be well able to
defend or excuse them selves, what so ever shall be laid to their charge, which
chiefly has holdened me to bring this matter into our vulgar speech,
accoumptynge more honor for then to have it come in question and be well
answered, then by scylence to let it always remain in suspicion or doubtful.
In the furtheraunce whereof if it may lie in me either by my words or weapon,
to do them any service or pleasure: be their cause right or wrong, I am and
shall be both their advocate and champion till my lives end.

For doubtless Madame, I had rather a thousand men should peryshe by the
feeling of their faults (if any such were) then that I would defame or
condemn the very simplist woman of your Ladyshyppes train, by confessing of
ought that might make ageynste her. And for my trauetyle and good will in this
behalf do require nothing else at your Ladyshyppes hands, but only that after
this transytory life, when your good Ladyshyppe for your worthy works in
earth, shall be glorified in the celestial throne of the goddess Venus, that I
may be restored ageine to youth, and made page of your Ladyshyppes Chamber, and
that in the mean time it may please your Ladyshippe notwithstanding the
debilitie of my body, yet for the myghtynesse of my mind and skylfull
practyse, to admytte me Captain general of your band, which I doubt not,
what by mine own pollycies, and what by the diligence and secret shyftes of
mine expert Herauldes, and circumspecte espialles so aduysedly to lead and
govern, as they shall escape all reproach and danger of their bodies. And as
for the safegarde of their souls, because it concerns not the charge of that
office, I will refer the same to friar Floysterar, your Ladyshyppes Penitence,
who for a small portion of the spoil (as some folk bear in hand) will take
their whole peril on him self, as best knowethe the black Provincial, who
long preserve your good Ladyshyppe, and prosper your proceadynges for ever and
ever Amen.

The Image of Idleness. The first part of a certain Epistle sent by Bawdyn
Bacheler to Walter Wedlock, wherein does appear the ground that caused the
setting forth of this Treatise. Capitulo.ii.
GOodman Wedlock my hearty commendations laid apart, whereas I perceive by the
report of Thomas Talker your Secretary that ye say it is a shame for me to be
so long time unmarried, affirmynge that I despise and eschew marriage, as a
careful and unquiet life, being good for nothing else but only to bring
sinful people, that can patiently here it to heaven by the penance thereof, as
the very self purgatory that many learned men have so long time contended
upon. Doubtless Walter I do marueyle much what has moved you to charge me
with so great an iniquity, as that I should dispraise the blessed Sacrament of
matrimonye, being instituted by God him self, the very ground and sum of al
goodness, yea and that is of such perfection, that if any mortal man had
invented the same, he should thereby have worthily deserved immortal praise and
fame, the grounds thereof are so commendable and necessary. Nor surely I never
had other then very good and reverent opinion of it in all my life, and yet
in deed Walter I daily se and have said that wedded men for the more part have
always woeful and cumbrous lives, upon grounds and occation ministered by their
wynes. But for very trothe by the defaulte and negligence of them selves, that
commonly lacks either grace or discretion to order and use their wives as
they should do. Which never thelesse is not to be marueyled at, for surely the
right feate thereof is a secret that God reueleth not to all men, left then
they should live in such continual pleasantness and felicity that they
would never wyllyngly depart this life: which by thopinion of the Vtopyans is
a great suspecte of perdicion, but as for me in deed I have the gift thereof.
And therefore I ensure you, have bin very desirous to mary. Yet not so much for
mine own commodity, as for that I would give other men example how to use and
govern their wives in the right sort, whereby to expel the inconvenience that
I perceive does ensue by the contrary, but my chance has not bin to obtain.
For the devil uyll to e^mpesshe so good a purpose of quietness in the world by
one means or other, has always hyndred my suite, which is the very cause
that I am so long time unmarried, and for no such error or evil opinion as ye
have untruly surmysed of me, for the more plain declaration whereof, I have
herewithall, sent you a note or copye of such letters as with careful heart I
wrote before this unto diverse to entreat for my self upon marriage, which
when ye have perused, then will I declare unto you further of my mind in this
behalf.

Here Bawdyn Bacheler being fuset t^ a certain Gentlewoman for marriage,
writes to a friend of hers for to have his help and furtheraunce therein. The
third Chapter.
AFter my very hearty commendation, ye shall understand that partly for mine
own comfort and commodity, knowing by sundry means what joys and
felicity there may be in marriage: and partly moved of compassion,
perceiving a number of men ignorantly abusing them selves in ordering of
their wives (which by my good ensample might be reformed) live in misery and
great unquietness: I am utterly determined with all speed to be a married man,
but yet not minding to bestow my self so unadvisedly, for any haste, as to
choose a wife for couetise of goods or land whereas my heart will not serve me
to love and favor the person: nor for dotyng love or favor, where as there is
not some convenient ability in substance toward such charges as follows
marriage: another yet for both where as the age shall much dyffer from mine own.
Which things circumspectly considered, I judge them all according to my
hearts desire, with a number of good conditions to be joined together in
mystres B. your kynswoman, to whom of late I have bin suter in that behalf,
and do perceive by sundry means, that she will follow your aduyce. Wherefore sir
I shall very heartily desire you to have your help and furtheraunce therein.
Which to recompense (if my suit take place) I dare be bold to promise you a
thousand thanks of her part, for the spedynge of her to so good a husband,
as by my demeanoure toward her I entende to show my self. And yet for all
that, I have such despair and mistructe in the matter, that do the best ye
can, I will wage with you forty pound that I get her not, and on my fidelity
pay you truly if I lose. I learned this wager of a crafty priest that by such
means with losing of a little money, wan a good bynefice. Like as for my
part I trust in this case to lose and yet be a geyner, as knowethe the maker
of matrimony, whom I would gladly had somewhat enterlased the pleasaunce thereof
with some collar or bytternesse, for fear lest the continual case and
quietness that I shall find therein, should happen to cause me desist and
forget to wyshe and work for heaven. etc.

Whereas Bawdyn had been suter to a certain Gentlewoman for marriage, and was in
good hope to obtain, he received knowledge to the contrary by letter from a
Gentleman, that had partly bin a mean for him, and thereupon wrote back as
follows. The fourth Chapter.
AFter my right hearty commendations, ye shall understand that I have received
your letter containing a determinate nay in my suit to the Gentlewoman ye wot
of, which with a forced patience I am contented to accept accordyngely. And
in perswadyng my self the easelyer to bear the same, do consider that and if
my desire had been granted, the one of us should of necessity (being borne so
far a sunder) have bin constrained to abandon and forsake our country and
kynrede, whereby might ensue to us both more unquietness, then any commodity
thereof growing would be able to counteruayle.

With this and like conjectures, I am now feign to feade my fantasy of
intent to make light what lies at my heart most heavy. The devil I think,
for despyte caused me now (contrary to my common wont) to tender such suit so
earnestly: other else God has appointed it as my penance for that I have
oftentimes treated much of like matter, whereas in heart I mente nothing less,
which requires by consequence of equity to mind much and be little regarded*
as now it follows. And yet to accumpt indifferently, me thinks I can not
well ascrybe it to neither of them both, but all wholly to my self, that
entendynge by pollycie to expel (as it were) a smarte, have conceived a
continual ache. As thus, lamenting the loss of my very friend he late
husband, which to my heart was (...) less sorrowful, then if mine own life
should immediately have followed, I thought that yet if I might get some
commodity by his death, that dyrynge his life time, could not be obtained:
the comfort of the one would so quallifie the grief of the other, that it
should the more easily and sooner be disgested. And thereupon did consider that
the most soueraygne jewel in this world (which many men mysseth) is to have
a wife of commendable qualities and conversation. Whereof she (as I had known
by the report of him, whose judgment being grounded on experience, was not to
be doubted) did appear to be one. And therefore to recoue^ her as my
recompense, was the original and only cause of my suit at the first unto her.
Which sythens by circumstaunces did increase to such presu^pcion of speed (in
mine opinion) that I accounted her as obtained. And therewithal pacyfyenge my
former torment, as counterpoysed with the same, did reuyue my mortyfyed
spirits with the blossoms, whereof few men fyndeth the fruit, and accepted
her in heart none other but as a member or parcel of my self. Which now
being concluded contrary, can to me be no less peynefull, then the loss of
mine hands or any other lymme of mine own body, the langour whereof is
incredible to be written. Thus does it now apeare what it is to contend
against the divine purueyaunce, as in murmuring ageynste the hand of Godde,
(which we little know for what well or woe it is mente) to go about the
alteration thereof by worldely policy, which for the more part turns to
our own harm. As ensample by my self that intended to anoyde the smarte that
I have doubled.

Wherefore from henceforth my council and practice shall be in felicity not to
presume, nor in adversity to dispayze, neither yet to employ our wits for to
seek the alteration of neither, but with humble spirit suffer the governor to
proceade, trusting all to be for the best, as in deed for my part now in
this extremity and perverseness of fortune, I find the same by experience,
for by the missing of my mind, mine affection is altered into meditacion,
whereby I do consider both his power and mine own wekenesse, more then before
time I did. And therewithal as the best thing that I may perceive to have
obtained by this my suit and enterprise, I satyffie my self not thinking my
travel and good will to be spent all in vain, etc.

Of Idleness. Here Bawdyn writes to the Gentlewoman mentioned of in the last
letter. The fyfth Chapter.
Because I am loath to bestow more kindness on you, then of your part shall
thankefully be accepted, I have me commended even as heartily and as often as
best can content your mind and none other wise. Lo now may ye perceive what a
profitable and loving husband ye might have of me, if ye had bin happy, for
hereby does apeare that I love not to bestow any thing in wast, and yet the
same notwithstanding, to satisfye your fantasy, can be contented to give you
liberty over the threasure of my heart, to spend thereof at your own will and
pleasure. Further you shall understand that I have received your refuse
concerning my late suit unto you, which on the one pa^te because it does so
much contraty my desyze, ought not in reason to be a little mine unquietness of
mind. But yet on the other side, considering that such is your will and
pleasure, which I have always determined to prefer and follow a boue mine
own, I can but accept it in good part, and be contented therewith, and for
the time will no more trouble you with any further request in that behalf, as
in deed there is good cause why, for as I understand ye are already else where
promised, whereof God send you joy. And as for my part if reason in me do not
the rather subdue affection, I entende to practice the common proverb, which
says that new love dryueth away old sorrows. But surely it shall be done all
by protestation, that ye fall not wydowe again, for and if ye do, I will ones
more attempt you, what so ever promise shall happen to pass me in the mean
time, trusting to speed never the worse at your hands, though now for
certain considerations I seem to take the missinge of your good mind lyghter
then inwardely I feel it.

Further concerning my dear friend your notable late husband, like as it is
not possible to recover again his body, so were it injury to suffer his
deserved good fame peryshe. For the preservation whereof I have here Sithall
sent certain verses in manner of an Epytaph, which I pray you cause to be
graven and fixed on his sepulture, and thus heartily fare ye well.

The Epytaph.
Jews lies here, so fell his fatal hour
Blethin surnamed, of south wales the flower
In knowledge of the law, worthy eternal fame.
In wisdom and temperaunce, coequall to the same.
With all good qualities, shortly to conelude
And honest trade of life most plenteously endude,
Whom cruel death alas, in his.xxxv. year
Wasting of this world, has laid alonge on bear.
Wayle his want Welchmen, to rathe ebbed was his tide.
God send you many such, and longer to abide.
Where as a certain Gentlewoman bare in hand, that she was determined never
to mary, and was nevertheless lykely to be much sued unto for marriage, here
Bawdyn informs her by his letter, under what sort she were best to use and
give over her suitors. The syxt Chapter.
GOod mystres N. I commend me unto you, being right sorry that I can not
season my commendations with some hartinesse, how be it I assure you it is not
left undone for any lack of good mind, but only for that I am not as now
master of mine own heart, and can therefore in nothing utter any perfect
hartinesse, yet nevertheless if it may do you any pleasure to have my hearty
commendations, ye may be therein as it were your own caruer. For doubtless my
heart is with you, so that ye may use the office thereof even as ye list your
self. And then having the heart after such sort, it may not be forborne but
that the body must needs be at your commandment. And if ye doubt the contrary
on my behalf, I pray you command me to do what lately ye denied me of, and
then the truth will apeare. Further, where as ye refuse to accept me in
marriage: yet not for any mislykinge as ye say, but only for that ye are
utterly determined never to mary: Surely I account my self more bounden unto
you, for that gentle answer with your frendely enterteynemente besides, then I
should be to some other for the granting my whole request, and therefore if in
any thing I may do you service or pleasure, ye shall be well assured thereof. And
as a proof or ernest penny of the same, I will at this time be so bold as
somewhat to council you concerning such matter as, I suppose ye have
presently most need to be well aduysed of which is (sith as ye say ye are
determined never to mary) somewhat to show you under what manner is shall be best
for you to use, and give over such as may happen to sue unto you for marriage.
Which kind of suitors ye shall understand are divided in three sundry sorts.
The one sueth for love of the person, another for love of her living, and the
third are they that make of wooing their pastyme or recreation: practysynge
by suits at large done in sport, how to fashion them selves and place their
words against such time as they shall happen to be earnest suitors in deed, and
not meaning to marry although their request were granted, but rather
scoffyngly to retreat, and dishonestly make their aduaunte of that they might
have had. The diversity and dispositions of which persons it shall be necessary
for you to endeuer your self with all the sleyghtes and policy that possible
ye may deuyse to perceive and know, and thereafter to give them
enterteynement and answer.

For as to any of the first sort, a sudden refuse is death without redemption,
and therefore unto such you may not give the repulse at first, but rather with
an answer of double understanding, by little and little quayle their hope of
speed: Or otherwise by counterfaytinge your self to be fro ward or entangled
with some other evil tatche, to make them think you better lost then found,
so that they may rather seem to give over then to be refused.

But as for the second meyny (whereof God wot there are so many) ye can not
use them to evil. For surely unto such wretches, the very torment and pain
of hell (so that the poor soul were saved) is scarsly sufficient punishment.
And therefore besides an utter nay at the first, to show them as much sullayne
strangeness as ye can devise, whereby the rather to bring them in despair of
speed, shall be but well done: Respect yet somewhat to be had that ye seem not to
take unthankfully that which is offered under a friendly pretense, and beware
that in such case ye give no credyte to any creature that speaks in their
favor or furtheraunce. For no doubt it is often seen that such suits grounded
on couertise be so compassed with gold and gifts, that many times one friend
sells another, whereby both the byer and seller are geytners. But woe may be
the poor wife that pays for all, and yet is never the rather married, for in
such case the goods be married, and not the woman, and as we may se by
experience either of them cheryshed and set by accordyngly.

But now to the third sort of suitors, these eluyshe dissemblers that I spoke
of before, when ye have a little denied them, which I would wyshe were done
under a mylde indifferente sort, only to eschew that ye minister them none
occasion to boast of any thing granted, and not to bring them in utter
despair of speed, whereby to give over their suit and lose no more but their
labor* For that were to little penance, and therefore ye must in such case
when ye have said them nay, counteruayle your word with a loving lyppe or
friendly eye, as though, not perceiving their dissimulation, ye meant them much
better then ye spoke, and therwithall to increase their affection, ye must
enterteyne them with port and fashyon, as ye shall think most to their
contentation, which nevertheless must be done with such demure simplicity,
as it seem not to pass the bowndes of womanhed and honest estimation, and
under so good awayte, that ye seem not in the same presence to show the like
grace and familiarity to any other: assayinge by such means to make of such
counterfeytes right venerians, and then smiling at their smarte, scornefully
to give the^ over, on my faith I think in conscience were none offense at al.

I write you these things as a warning that ye recompense not the fayner with
the faythfulles reward, nor marry away your living, and remain wydowe your
self for fear of repentance, as in days paste, and not thinking thereby
the rather to allure you (although I be one of the first sort) to show me any
grace or favor. Yet nevertheless if any such good chance happen me being for
truth in my behalf not looked for, and yet much trusted upon, I assure you, ye
shall gratify your self with such a good turn, as upon the proof ye will be
sorry to have so long time forborne, and so fare ye well.

Here Bawdyn writes to a certain Gentlewoman that was dangerous to be seen
or spoken withal by her suitors. The seventh Chapter.
MYstres B. after my hearty commendations, whereas ye use to absente your self
and will not be spoken withal at such time as I and other good fellows come
to treat with you upon marriage, I can do no less for good mind that I bear
you, but to wyshe that ye would leave such demeanoure. For I assure you there
are many men that gather evil opinion thereof, and think the cause to be that
doubting your self to go with child, ye abashe to be seen in any presence of
skillful judgment. How be it as for my part, on my faith I suspect no such
thing, but reckon surely that ye do it only of intent thereby to avoid
suitors, whose presence and words might else happen to win you unto wedding, by
the which ye should leave your chaste wyddowyshe life, and lose the merit that
in heaven is for the same ordained. How be it, and if your meaning be none
other then so, then sith ye are so well assured in refusing of such
requests, as before this I have hard you bear in hand, better were in my
mind that ye common thereof with as many as list sue unto you, for the more
temptacion ye withstand, the greater shall be your mede. And yet because my
lernyng in scripture does not extend to discuss what blysfull reward may be
due for such unnatural and frutles penance, the best and surest way for you
in my judgment were to accept such one of your suitors to your husband or
familiar friend, as ye may think loves you most heartily, and in no wise to
refuse them all least hereafter ye repent as other have done. For what merit
God gives to the chaste sowles I know not, but it is very certain that the
Goddess Venus punishes right sharply the bodies that are repugnaunt to her
loving laws, as partly does apeare by the hystories following, which I tell
you are not feigned, but written by good authority in the book of Cupides
saints, and be thus. There was sometime a knight named Permalides that loved
most heartily the Lady Agglarose, who for no suit that possible might be made,
would ascent to his desire. The importunate sorrows whereof should shortly
have ended his woeful life days, had not bin the great mercy of Venus, who
by plain miracle, pyteinge to se her faithful servant so tormented with the
cruelty of a merciless Lady, made an exchange of both their desires, so that
this Lady loved this knight above al creatures, and he to the contrary hated
her beyond al reason, whereupon when she had long time followed him with many
lamentable and piteous complayntes requyrynge his favor and might not
obtain, dyed even of love. Lo thus ye may se Venus can wound her disobedient
subjects with their own wepon. There was also before this one Narcissus, of
such beauty and semelines, that diverse women came out of far countries only
to behold him, whereof many peryshed by his defaulte, for he would in no wise
incline to love, which caused Venus to take displeasure and to punyshe him as
ye shall here. On a time this Narcissus, to go in a disguising with other
company, happened to attire him self in the apparel and garments of a
woman, and passing over a bridge, perceived in the water the shadow of his
own comely person and strange attire, which him thought to be wonderful
semely, and thereupon for lack of discretion to know him self, which Venus
withdrewe from him, had no mind on his disguysed apparel, but judged verily
the same to be one of Dyanas Nymphs, who in such like places used oftentimes
for recreation in the summer season to make her abode, and theruppon waxed so
amorous of his own shadow, that after many humble requests of love, and
instaunt desires of speech, spedelesse he determined to refer him self to her
grace and mercy, saying that in so goodly a creature love nor pity could not
be absent, and then with arms displayed lepte into the river, thynkinge to
embrace his Lady, (who also held her arms abroad of ente^^t to his fond
opinion, only for to receive him) and was there drowned. Thus was his cruelty
rewarded with folly.

There was also not long agone in Genoa, both a knight and a Lady, who for the
excellency of their persons and qualities, were of such fortune, that diverse
sued unto them for love, and could by no means obtain. For not regarding
faithful heart and good mind, they covered so much high pare^tage and great
ability, that they thought none of their suitors worthy to be accepted. The
knights name was Malmtrophus, and the Ladies Syllera, who at length by
thappoyntment of Venus fell both in love, and were amorous each of other. Then
either of them called to remembrance how many suitors they had suffered to
peryshe by their obstinacy in love before time. And thereuppon fell into
despair by remorce of conscience, thinkyng verily that in so much as they had
so misused Venus laws, Venus from whom all grace to obtain in love does
preceade, would grant them none, although it were required and devoutly prayed
for. In so much that the one of them never durst motion the other of love, but
always tormented them selves with inward desire and desperate thoughts, till
at length this Lady Syllera in following the feminine nature, which of
necessity must by some means disclose their secret thoughts, wrought all
her mind and opinion with sylke in her sampler, and sone after dyed only of
love longing, whereof when Mal merophus had knowledge, and wist of he^ sampler,
as enraged for sorrow, he strangled him self therewith and so miserably ended.
Thus for lack of audacitie to disclose their minds each to other (which grace
for their stubburne boldenes in refusing of true lovers before time, Venus
withhelde from them, they dyed all both at mischief, which if it be well
noted, is a great ensample for other to eschew like offense in avoiding the
like or worse punyshement.

Wherefore I will advise you to accept some one of your suitors unto your
favor, and to leave this hardness of heart in scorning their paynefull lives.
For doutles Venus is now of as great a power as ever she was and as able to
punish her rebels. yea and although by her godly patience she space you a
season upon proof of amendment, yet may you be right sure, she will at
length punish you with some displeasure if ye thus continu^. Wherefore at your
parell do as ye list now that ye are warned, and thynke^ not that I write you
these examples of intent to far my self unto your favor, albeit that to my
judgment I am he that most loves you. For ye have so often denied me that I
am utterly desperate therein: as shortly will apeare by the end of my woeful
life days for sorrow of the same, which chance of all creatures ye shall have
most cause to lament. For thereby shall ye be sure both to lose a friend in
earth, and to have a shrewde Sollycitour in heaven. For when Venus shall
enquire the cause of my sudden coming thither, then must I needs disclose
your obstinate demeanor in love, which no doubt will be extremely punyshed,
unless your amendment may apeare upon some other in the mean time. Or else
and if your cruel heart be so stout that it will not alter for fear of her
displeasure and punishment, yet then let it alter in hope of her grace and
favor. For doubtless she is not so rigorous in punyshynge her rebels, but
that she is more benign and gentle in cherishing her faithful and obedient
servants. And there fore in all holy scripture this is taken for her posey or
proverb, love and lack not, and if that be not enough to bring her bounty
in your credence, ye shall to affirm the same, here of a miracle which in the
old days she wrought, and was thus. One Pigmalion, (a very conning grauer
or workman in stone and metal) made in Alabaster the image of a woman which
was of so goodly proportion, favor, and countenance, that on a time as he
beheld her he was sodaynely taken with her love, and that so fervently that he
could not suffer to have her out of his fight. Whereupon he bought her costely
and rich apparel, and daily would set he at his table, carue to her of his
best meats, at after none read before her stories of love, show her all his
mind in secret causes, and at night take of her clothes and lay her by him in
naked bed, greatly bewailing her deadly dombnesse, and so continued a long
season, notwithstanding the contrary council of all his friends. Which
demeanoure the blessed Venus from above right well beheld, greatly commending
his steadfast loving courage, and to recompense the same, on a winter night as
he lay in his bed, well nere frosen with embrasynge this cold image, she
gave her natural heat, life, and quyckenesse, so that they were afterward
married together, and lived long time in blysfull love, and much joy, till at
length this Pigmalyon dyed, and then was his wife turned again into an image
of Alabaster, which to this day so remains, and is accomp^ed through out all
Greece their best and chiefest pylgremage for to remove or expel the passions
and peynes of ielousy, which for truth came first to knowledge and credence by
this miracle. The princes of Tarent, but after some books of Ottronto,
finding her Lord and hushande in bed with one of her Chamberers, fell into
such a maylyncoly and pensifenesse, that in manner she was at the very point of
death, and then being warned by a vision to repair unto this blessed image
for help, did auowe her pilgrimage thither, and received this oracle,
(Marsoyse thees duan Guisea ancorne ^og hatre arta) being expounded by the
prestes of that temple to this effect in English.

If to wear the horn thou find thy self agreu^d. Give him back agaynt, and
thou shall sone be eased. Whereby both she and sythens that time a great
number of other being in like case have been wonderfully comforted and helped.
Whereas before the disease was in manner utterly incurable. And surely all this
is done by grace deryued from Venus. What creature then trow ye may better
spend their time then in the service of her that so benygnely rewards her
faithful servants, doubtless none. Wherefore yet ones again, as he that for all your unkindness showed, can bu^ wyshe youwel, I will exhort you to enter and
spend your life in blysfull love, which vnfeyled among worldly felicities is
the very greateste joy. Howbeit I sp^ke it not as he that has had any
experience thereof, for always it has bin my chance to love vnbeloued, which
for truth is the greatest pain in earth, but yet the same makes me perceive
in reason the blysfulnes which may be in your love, that are beloved: for of
this I am certain, contrary circumstaunce will have contrary effect, so that
like as my love is paynefull, because I am not beloved, even so must yours
needs be pleasant because ye are loved, wherefore enter into it hardely with a
glad heart, and that ye may well persevere in the same, ye shall be assured of
my daily prayer, that sometime trusted to be of like religion, and now an
abiecte al desperate, but yet not by mine own defaulte or deserving.
Wherefore my trust is that Venus will take at me no displeasure, but at least
way recompense my well meaning with the name of a Vencrian, which shall be a
suffici^nt title for me after this life, to challenge a tabernacle in her
eternal throne. And now to conclude if ye shall think me worthy to be
imputed of folly, for that I delare so much with such painted process upon so
weak a ground or matter, I pray you consider therewithal that the new wine
or other troubled lycour, being in a close vessel will for lack of air (if
it be not vented) swell and bruste his caske. For even so in likewise my poor
heart being replenished with the anguyshe of affection and desire, if it
should not thus by vtteringe of my mind be suffered to assuage and ease it
self, would over swell with deadly sighs, and shortly sever in funder. And if
ye be so hard of credence that ye will not think al these things to be true,
yet then I shall desire you at least way to take them for your pastyme in the
reading, as I have done in the writing. And so heartily fare ye well.

Here Bawdyn writes to a certain gentlewoman at whose hands he had bin
disdeynefully refused upon treaty of marriage. The.viii. Chapter.
Mystres G^after my hearty commendation, whereas by your sundry nayes upon the
suit that before this I made unto you for marriage, I was minded to give unto
the same. Yet your gentle interteynemente at our last being together, when as
ye granted to common with me further therein at convenient season, and after
appointed with my servant both time and place of metyng for such purpose, made
me somewhat to renew my former intent, and to attend for you accordyngly,
how be it ye came not, which caused me (being then bownde toward
Troynouant) to send a certain friend of mine to know the cause of your stay,
unto whom (not aunswering the same) ye under a disdeynefull sort utterly
refused me, which was more then neded to be spoken of at that time, albeit that
and if your fantasy had served you needs so to do, yet me thinks ye might
have done it with more temperaunce and less words, like as it is possible
enough I should have done toward you, if ye had granted my request, in which
case (on my faith) I am uncertain whether I would have taken or left, for I
never use thorowely to examine my self therein, till time it apeare I may be
at the choice, and that never found I at your hands. But and if I had a
gentle retreat with thanks for your confirmable good mind, had bin the least
of your recompense, and surely no less I looked for on your behalf, specially
considering that women are or should be of a myld and gentle nature. And yet
may chance that your meaning (...), was better then to some men's judge meant
it sounded, as thus. Perceauyng that mine affection toward you was grounded
on special good opinion, which I had conceived of you, ye doubted least I
should (even to the death) lament the loss of such a fautelesse wife, so
greatly desired, and therefore of intent to qualify my grief with the portion
of my harm, ye have right gentelly aggrauased the one to mollyfie the other,
and contrary to your conversation forced your tongue to declare you both
stubborn of heart, suspicious of imagination, and inconstance of mind, that
like as then all things considered, my loss was not great, my sorrows ought
not to be much. And if ye meant me so frindly, I am the more bounden to thank
you, how be it on my faith to say trothe, I neded nothing at all of any such
confortatyues. For like as some men delyght for to trace the hare, more to
perceive the wylynes of her doubling and subtle skyppes, then for any joy to
recover or bring home the game: Right so in likewise for my part, have I used
such kind of suits, more for my solace and recreation, and ^o understand the
dealinge and demeanor of some folks, then for any hope or intent to obtain
the thing that I seemed to seek for, as he that has alwass thought the pastyme
of wooing to be much better then the penance of wedding, or and if it
myshappen me at any time to be over desirous of speed therein, and in conclusion
be denayed, whereby for lack of good aduysement I chance a season somewhat to
lament my repulse, then in making consolation to my self. I call to
remembrance a number of mine acquayntaunce, that upon ^hteynynge in like
suits, whereas they sought and looked for all such commed^^es as I have judged
to be in you, when it came to the proof they had not only mist the same, but
moreover in the stead thereof, found the clean contrary, with wonderful
vnqu^e^nes and displeasure, repenting their speed al they life days after,
and tehn straight ways do rejoice mine own hap, and bewail theyrs, like as a
man that has escaped from a shypwracke, where many of his friends peryshed,
and ^herwithall am clean out of hand delivered from al such thought and care as
though I had never known the party, nor minded such matter. But yet for
all these brag, if it shall seem unto you by the manner of my writing, that I
take over light the myssing of your good mind, yet would I be right sorry that
ye should by the occasion thereof, either set the less by your self (as to
believe yt in deed the thing is no better worth) or yet to accumpt me so
ignoraunte, that I can not esteem things somewhat according as they are. But
rather think I pray you, the troth to be plain contrary on both parts, and
that I write under such sort either as a common policy, to set little by
the thing that can not be had, or else for that I doubt it might disteyne the
gravity which should be long to the number of mine years, for to be acknowen
any thing entangled with the afflictions of love, although that in deed it
touches my very nere, or otherwise that I do it because I serve in Barrison
and place of war, and would by the bold bearing out of such a loss, show
my self to be of such high spirit and inuinsible heart, that I will not seem
to be ouercommen with the thing, whereunto both the mighty and wise have
sundry rymes given place, whereby the outward apparaunce of my weke and simple
person, by counterfaytynge the inward virtue, after the opinion of some men
called magnanimity (temperately bearing both felicity and aduers fortune) I
may seem better worthy to supply the same, or better come, and so to assay
whether by the spending of my good mind unrewarded, I may find means to
obtain better estimation then I have deserved, or at least way if I mysse of
them both, yet thento quiet my self with the hope of the one, although in
vain. For doubtless this transitory life is entangled with so many kinds of
misery, provoking pensiuenes, that unless a man sometime will flatter him
self with some kind of vain glory, or contrary to the lively eye of his
reason, delyght or rejoice in some one tryfle or other, the calamity and
unquietness thereof, will so frette nature, that none shall be able to live out
half their natural course, and therefore although it shall seem unto you, that
I might better have spente the time then so to make su^e, or thus to declare my
self, yet bear so much in my favor I beseech you, as to think that it is
dome to some purpose of effecdte, and not all of folly, as in deed it may
happen ye shall hereafter so pereaue at large, and in the mean time I pray you
accept the simple verses following, as my frendely token, and so wyshynge you
as to myself both in lodging and otherwise, heartily face ye well.

The wise fathers of old have alwais tought
That we should not show unto our foo
The pen^^uenes of our secret thought
Though in our heart, we suffer deadly woo
But here it forth as if it were not foo
For our dicomfor* shall cause him to be glad
Where as our will is, for to make him sad.
But reason alas, in me is so appalled
That I can not unto such council fall
Though in my letter I have righ^ now assaid
And falsely my self a dissembler did call
Because that you my deadlyest foo of all
Should not peeceaue mine woeful heuinesse
For well I wot ye joy at my dystesse.
Yet folly now forces me, the truth for to express.
What so ever my letter does conteyne
Wherefore with woeful heart I openly confess
How yt your love has put me to such peine
That with the life I may no more sustain
And if there be no grace but that I shall be ded
Yet this shall be my last, God send you well to wed.
Of Idleness. Here Bawdyn writing to a certain Gentleman (his friend) among
other things, bewayleth him self of his evil speed in wooing and treaty of
marriage. The.ix. Chapter.
MAster D. After my very har^ye commendations, trusting that ye are past the
danger of this late universal sickness, the new swear, these shall be to
advertise you, that even so am I, and that with as much peril of life as ever
man escaped, how be it all for the best as it has chanced, for whereas
before time, by reason of my age and evil dyete, my complexion was plain
malynedlyke, mixed with over much collar, now by this means the unkindly
heates are subprest, and all evil humors so expelled, that (the blud
tempetately alayed with steume having mastry) I am turned to as goodly a
Sanguyne as ever ye saw, and therewithal grown as full of love, as any noppy
new alt is full of barme, the croppe whereof, much after the self same sort
(saving not altogether so high a lof^e) works, coveting vent and
^t^eraunce, nevertheless I am determined not to d^part therewith, but only
under the blylfull band of matrymony, which holy and pleasant sacrament,
because I will no there rashely enter into, nor yet bashefully (for any refuse at
a few hands) give over. I have with good aduysement made a calendar of all
such maidens, and wydowes (in these parts) as can content me that way, which
in the whole together with an old fellows wife, that I dare say will not
live out this next March, are to the number of.xi. Upon which appointment I
have not showed my self to be so nyce or daungetous to please, as to allow,
none other but only such as are clean without any fault, for fear least
then I should not have so ^iberall a choice in so small a circuit, and
therefore conferring their evil tatches with their good qualities, I have
accepted or rejected, according to the more part or greater number, having
respect therewithal for mine own advancement, that one profitable
commodity shall counteruayle to evil properties, unless they be of certain
notable fortes, which are not to be borne withal. And more over preventing
lest my tender simple heart might happen to brusie for sorrow of a repulse, if
I should lay all my whole love and good mind in one of them ^t once, and then
be refused, I have taken this order in my suit. When I am somewhat well entered
in communication of marriage, with the first, then after two or three meetings,
and before I demand to have any direct answer there, I begin to enterteyne
the second, and when I have noted in her some one thing or other to my
contentacion that the other has not, then straight ways I return to know
her determinate mind, which although it be not agreeable to mine, I greatly
force not, for then I stand in hope to be as well spedde or better of the
second, and so proceadynge in like manner with her, I go to the third, always
reteynynge one within possibility of speed, under this fort I have already
perused.vii. of my number, and yet fedyng my fantasy with hope that the best is
behind, my heart remains as fresh and whole as when I first began. But yet
by saint Mary like as it shall be wise dome to cast the worst before it fall, so
I consider that and if my fortune be so evil, that for lack of skylfull
interteynement I should chance to fail also of the rest, I doubt it would
bring me into such perplexity and sorrow, as I shall then be never able to
expel, for dangers once grown to thextremitie, are seldom or never
reconered, and therefore sir I shall de^yre you so much to assiste me herein, as
to ^certeyne me by your letter, under what sort ye vsyd your self, upon
obteynynge in like suit, that I may somewhat practice the same, wherein for
lack of power to recompense you otherwise, of this ye may be assuryd, mine
gotten by your means (as reason is) shall be at your commandment, and so
heartily fare ye well.

Where as Bawdyn served in Garryson, and had compounded with a certain
Gentleman, his friend, to repair thither at all times of danger, the same
being so sireighted in a time of co^motion, that he was forced for his
safegarde to take another howlde, where as were many Gentle women, which kind
of furnyture the other greatly wanted, here Bawdin makes him request to have
some fruition of that necessary commodity. The.x. Chapter.
The rather to allure you for to satysfye my necessity, having presentely a
certain kind of lack, I have thought good that ye should first be aduertysed
how well I intended toward you, if so were that for your part ye had neded of
me^, which is none other, but that my lodgyng was prepared to receue you, and
my force in redines for your defense, if ye had listed to have drawn hither
now in this dangerous time, according to the tenure of our composition and
old band of amity. My well meaning wherein, I crave not to be recompensed
with any gold or costly jewel. But (by your mediation) with the presence and
favor of some one of your fair Gentlewomen (whereof as I here say, ye have
plenty and spare) of intent that being now forced to be a man of war, in
very deed, whereas heretofore, I have bin but as it were a shadow thereof, I may
wax in love, and be valiant, whereby the rather not only to with stand, but
also to subdue these unruly and disobedient people that manase to assault this
Garryson, being a place I assure you, not only pleasant and of great
strength both by building and situation, but also plentuously furnished with
men, munitions, and al other things requisite for the wars, that grace of
amoures only excepted, which being had kyndely of it self, and not delayed
nor perverted with the band of wedlock, is to a man of war as a spur to a
dull or slow horse. Or to express more lively, well nere as great an
increase of hold and forward heart, coveting high enterprise, to obtain
honest estimation and favor at his mystres hands, as drery wed lock
appalling the lively spirits provoke cowardry. And yet to say trothe I have
sometime known wedded men in warlyke affairs do right boldly and well, but
that has been by way of desperation, choosing rather to dye, if Fortune would
ascent, then longer to live under such yoke of seruytude, from the which our
Lord deliver you, and preserve me.

The answer made to the said leter. The.xi. Chapter.
AFter my very hearty commendations, these shall be to aduertyse you that I have
received your letter, and by the same do plainly perceive your faithful
frendeshyppe meant toward me, greatly to my comfort and reioysyng, but not as
who would say, for that now in extremity and just time of trial, I should
have consolation to find my self in your behalf, assured of that which
before time I stood in doubt of, but rather for that it does now expressly
apeare, that my wits and judgment, whereof before time I doubted has serue^^
me a right, in choosing such an carnest^ friend as ye are coniecturynge of you
before hand, as justly has followed. Which to recompense with the best of my
little power, ye shall at al times be assured of. Nevertheless as to satisfye
your request in that ye write, concerning my Gentlewomen, whereof in deed I
have plenty, and spare, (as cause reasonable shall require) I can do you no
pleasure therein, for as ye know it must needs be done by their own consent,
and rests not in me to apoynte, having no further charge, but to the defense
of their persons. How be it for trothe I have in your behalf had
communication with sundry of them, as well Ladies as other, of whom I have
received sundry aunsweres, for some of them say that if your demeanor were
good, it is lykely that ye might be accepted nere home, whereas ye are better
known, and not forced thus to sue in forreyne parts, and some say that they
are uncertain whether of both may be most myslykte, your crabbed face or your
crooked conditions, and some of them say, that they disdain to take the refuse
of so many, as heretofore ye have bin suter unto, and some also says, that ye
are so spente with age and travail, that to theffect of their most need, they
think that they should be but deceived with you. This is as much as I can
hitherto get at their hands, but that they acquyte your gentle request, with
their hearty thanks, faithfully promising to do their best for your speed
elsewhere, so it be not on any of their friends, and in affirming the same, have
hereunto every of them set their hands, and so right heartily fare ye well,
wyshynge that the laws were of such liberty that every man might bestow his
own as him self lysteth, for then I know where ye should for a time be well
pleased, and your very friend thereby much eased.

Here Bawdyn replyeth to the same, and perceiving his continual evil speed,
determines to give over al such kind of suits. The.xii. Chapter.
IF I were ignorant of mine own impedidimentes, and evil fortune, or
forgetful of that I daily have in remembrance, (which for trothe, more then
the number of mine years, hastes me to my grave) ye should have done but well,
upon the answer of my late letter, to express my faults, and sufficient
cause of refuse, at your Gentlewoman hands, as ye have done, and yet
considering as the time now requires, that we are of all sides forced to
prepare and fashyon our selves for the wars, wherein bold and aduenturous
heart (who never shows so well, as where there is a plesaunt and amorous
mind) rests for a principal part, it should have been good policy for all
men (in mine opinion) not only to dissemble and bear each one with the folly
and faults of other, lest contrary might happen to engender either froward
controversy, or feeble pensiuents, but moreover every man for his own part to
feed and startes them selves with some kind of vanity or vainglory, without
having any respect to desert, or not deserving, which in deed depends much
upon the vain tryffles and toys of women, being a kind of creatures,
although scarce worthy to be accounted as reasonable, and rather an impediment
unto man, upon matters of gravity or importance, then any furtherer, yet to
encorage battle and like mischief, a very handsome and wouderful necessary
instrument, which was the only cause (the time thereunto now so requisite) yt
I made request to have some one of yours, for to reuine my dull spirits,
being mortis ^yed with contemplation, to stir up, and make the same more apt
for feats of arms and chyualry, altering every virtues quality of the
mind, into some boldly exercise of actiuitie or policy of war. But now
sithe I perceive my felfe by your writing to be thus evil accepted, at so
many dyscrete Gentlewomens hands, and for so sundry faults and impedimentes
as by them is alleged, I am become utterly desperate to obtain in any like
suits hereafter, and therefore do determine no more to attempt the same, but
rather if I may chance to escape the hasarde and danger of these wars, to
be professed an Armyre, and to live alone in wilderness, but yet for mine own
consolation in the mean time, consyderyng that the thing which can not be
had, ought wisely to be forborne, I thought it good policy to persuade my
self that their company is more comberous then comfortable, and for that
purpose did delyght to se and read such books as spoke or treated any thing
to the dispreyse or blame of women, whereas I found written as well by sundry
Philosophers, that know by learning and natural causes, as also by other
Sagies that wyste by practice and experience in manner and form following.
First one of them says that they are crafty conueyers, of all manner shrewdnes,
and ignorant innocents in all kind of goodness. Another says: Blame not all
women though one have offended, Say well by the worst, the best may be amended.
Another says: Of that they may have, they set little store, And what they can
not get, they long for evermore.

Another says: Liberty they covet, to do what they will, yet what they take in
hand commenly they spyll. Another says: What they be desired, they utterly
refuse, And what they ye denayed, most gredely will they use. Another says:
Abide by them, and they are sone cought, But out of sight, and out of thought.
Another says: For to know diverse they always love, Judging him to be best,
which they never did prove. Another says: They are discryuers of councels, and
fayners of fables, Not recking who rolleth his dyce on their tables. Another
says: Weary may they be, but satisfied never, Their box is enclosed in such a
kind of lether. Which sayings sounds most blyffull and comfortable to me,
and as I trust will shortly so crepe into my credence, and temper my desire
toward all women, that I shall think the best of them to be better lost
then found. For surely all old writers do thoroughly agree as a very ground or
principle, not to be denayed or doubted of, that the greatest felicity and
most pleafaunt part of matrymonie on the man's be half, rests only in the
wooing and entreaty of marriage, whereof the Gods be thanked, I have right
largely had my part and yet was always refused, which makes me to think my
self more happy then wise that under such sort inioyinge as it were the
grain and leaving the chafe, I escaped the harm that so busely I sought for.

The second part of the Epistle sent by Bawdyn Bacheler to Waltex Wedlock.
The.xiii. Chapter.
LO Walter, now may ye perceive how desirous I have been, and what means I
have made to marry. For although by some part of my writing I seemed to
reprove or scorn such as I was suter unto, yet for trothe I mente to entreat
or flatter them, considering that women will often times accept things clean
contrary, and therefore I thought besi to prove both ways, but al would not
avail me, for I was still refused, which brought me into such a perplexitis
and pensiveness of mind, that I was well nere faulne into a consumption by
plain despair and malyncoly, accumpting my self the most unfortunate of all
men, thus to lose with much traueyle, what commonly other folks get with ease,
and to lament the lesynge, of that other men repent the winning. But such is
the frowardnes of Fortune, that to comber all men, disposes peruerdy all
things, as a wife to him that lacks skyll how to guide her, and none at all
to the doctors of that science. Yet at length searching for mine own case,
how best to quiet my self, I did consider how God myndeth to furnyshe
heaven, as well of wyrgyns as of martyrs and other saynctes, judging that he
intends to reserve me in this estate, only for that purpose, whereby to
incrense my felicity in the world to come. For I remember where as Paul does
but barely allow matrimony, he commends virginite, and therefore for mine
own part, sith this is mine appointed talent, I am contented to slande
thereto, and from hence forth will seek for no change. The most that greueth
me is, that wedded men can not now learn at my hand as I intended they should
do, for doubtless the mystery of that doctrine can neither be disclosed nor
perceived by words or wryetynge, so well as it may by sight of the doing,
like unto the common experience of holding the ploughe, which is not so sone
learned by reporce, as by seeing the thing done. But yet sythen that now it
may be none otherwise, I will therein write partly mine opinion, trusting that
it shall take some effect, although not so much as I intended, if my suit for
marriage had taken place. There is a common opinion (and in deed experience
oftentimes approuethe the same) that the thing which is not well come by,
prospers not with the owner, I mean to this effect, men commonly now a
days come not by their wives as they ought to do, which causes them to agree
the worse when they be together. For where as they should marry for affection to
the woman and in hope of children to be broughe up in the fear and honor of
God, surely Walter the more part of your sect neglecting all both, does make
of marryage as it were a for hunting, which as you know is not meddled
withal, but when the case is somewhat worth. And then the hunter, after
knowledge had where the game is, besetteth the covert with hewers to course at
aduan^^ge, if he may preventing before hando upon diligente inquyry made,
what tochet or borowe it uses to resort unto, as his chief refuge, and there
at thentry takes it with a pursenet, when it thinks to be most out of
danger, and so being with much crafty pollycie and travel gotten, is carried
home with gladness, by common presumption to plain meaning people for love of
the flesh, but contrarywyse within a very short while the case is pulled of,
and the carcas not esteemed. And even so it is of these gredy men that marryeth
for the love of riches, without respect to the woman, or her qualities, who not
only suborneth her familiers for money, instead of hewers to be plain liars,
exalting the suter about all other men in such quallities or ability, as
they shall perceane the simple woman most to delight, or otherwise persuades
her under color of religion, as in safegarde of the dissemblers life, that
else would dye for love, where as in deed he never loved other then her living,
but moreover preuenteth her at such hands, as she is most lykely to resort
unto for council, which crafty counceller, although he mind to further the
purpose, yet will he not speak therein for doubt to be suspected of
corruption, but when she comes to sike his aduyce, he is then like a
pursenet, and knytteh up the matter which sone after is repented. For the good
man regarding none other but only the thing that he chefely sought (which
was the good and land) estemeth not the wife, and then she finding her self
disceaued of the love and good mind that she looked for, castethe to shorten
his days by anger and displesure, trustyng to speed better next. And so
maryages disorderly begone, have commonly combrous continuance, and an evil
end, I make this little dygression Walter to put you in remembrance, against
your next marriage, if you come thereto, for surely by that ye surmyse that I
have an evil opinion of marriage, I suspecte that either you feel the same
discommodities your self, and that you would gladly have me to be in like
case, or else you are like to the greedy rich man, that is loathe to have any
poor neighbors, yet not for any charity that is in him, but rather for fear
least they would be borrowers. What I mean hereby I doubt not ye know well
enough. And now to theffect of my promise which was to instruct you how men
might live most quyetely with their wives. You must first understand (Walter)
that notwithstanding* all the evil properties and shrew de tatches that ever
were written of women, yea or that is in them, in very deed (which for truth
is much more then conveniently may be expressed) yet are they not therefore to
be blamed or found fault withal, by reason the same is given them even of
very nature, whose gifts being in manner forced of necessity (be they good or
evil) deserve neither praise nor blame. For sithe the time that the serpente
tempted Adam and Eve, in the similitude and lykenes of a woman, doubtless the
fraud and mallyce of that spirit, has always bin most incident to the same
sects, and makes them naturally inclyned to dissimulation, in constancy, and
frowardnes, with a number of other vices. But what of that, should we exclude
them from our company as unworthy, or should we disdeynefully accept them
(according to the common term) as evil necessaries, or should we (being
worst of al) as mystrustyng that the Gods were not able to work therein
sufficientely them selves, take on us to alter them by art. As before this
Virgyl (whose presumption was prevented by death) For he after such time as he
had atchened many strange and defuse conclusions, enterprysed to make glass
abide the hammer, determyuynge sone after to make all women constant in lone,
and conformable to the will and pleasues of their husbands, and al by art
magyke and sorcery, nay nay gods forbid. And what then, mary let us consider,
that like as there is nothing in earth so thoroughly good, but that to some
purpose, and after some sort used, it may be evil. That even so there is
nothing of his own nature so evil, but that to some purpose, and after some
sort used, it may be good, and yet this hope we have of women above all other
things. The great god him self upon the creation of Adam (as apeareth in
Genesis) said, let us make man an helper, and then made Eve, of whom al other
women are descended, which proves that being skylfully used, they must needs
be helping and comfortable to man, for God never lies, and then me thinks
considering that the matter touches the quiet of man's person so hyghly as it
does, it is most necessary that men should apply their wyrtes to search out
the right use of them, so as they may justly serve the purpose that God
promised, as in deed (Walter) for my part I have done even so, and that with a
contemplative spirit, minding to live with them in marriage accordingly, and
do perceive the hole state and mystery thereof, being disclosed unto me by
revelation in my sleep, which in effect is thus. Ne^m^nedes the God of
matrymony, for the consolation of married men, upon lamentable complaynt of
their miserable estate (by reason of their wives crabbednesse) granted by a
certain branch of heauen^y influence to dystyll into the heart of the bryde
at every wedding, a certain kind of ^umour, called by the Bretians
Spurfalxe, being as much to say as the juice or vapor of the ring, and in
English named a wives to the, a term of long time known, and yet but lately
and to few men perceived. The nature whereof is vehemently to enforce her
sp^ites to cover pre-eminence in certain points, which being obtained and
allowed her, it dissolueth the malice of all her former evil qualities, much
after the common opinion, that one poison expels another. Hitherto (Walter)
I suppose ye find little comfort in my words, for that it seems they are not
by this miracle any thing amended, but rather altered from one euyil into
another, which may chance is worse, Nevertheless if you note me well, ye have
right good cause to rejoice, for hereby these e^abbedues that by long
continuance in many discentes was grown to be in manes natural, and therefore
vn^^rable, may be taken away, and instead thereof other things placed, that ye
may casely expel if ye list your self. I dare say you marvel what I mean
by this circumstaunce, and do long to know the effect thereof. Well, I am
content that you shall so. Surely the pre-eminence that the wives does couette
at their husbands hands by virtue of that humor, is none other, but onele to
have liberty in three kind of things, which is, to say what they will, to
have what they will, and to do what they will, wherein you know the husband may
easily bear with them, and surely doing so, they are the most quiet and
comfortablest creatures, that ever were ordained for man. But restraining them
thereof, they are so crabbed and so comberous, as that there is nothing so
displeasaunt as their company, which the discrete husband must by: his
wisdom consider, and for his more ease use them thereafter. For saying that
by the law they are al both but one body, and must remain at one bed and
bourde, it is not in mauer possible that he may long live in quiet, when she
is thoroughly offended. Wherefore it shall be necessary for him to use her, like as
he uses other bryttle things, as for example, If ye have a very fair
drinking glass, it is both necessary in use and pleasant to the sight, and
will so continue long enough if it be ordered accordyngly, but and if by
rashenes or lack of consideration, you force it more then the tender nature
thereof may suffer, you suddenly destroy your own commodity, for then will it
break and be worth nothing at all. And surely even so is it of a fair
plesaunt and loving wife, which is the greatest treasure and comfort that man
may have in earth, whilst she remains in that estate and that will she till
her dyinge day, if she be gentelly used, and left to have her liberty in
these three things. For althoughs they use of their own accord to submit
them selves enough, yet their noble hearts may in no wise suffer to be forced
nor brought into subjection by violence, muchs like for that purpose to the
hawke, whose nature of all living things they draw nerest unto, for the
female kind of them is always most stubborn, most eger, and most apt to
evil, and yet by gentle means may be recleymed and brought to do much
pleasure, but the Fawkener must beware that althought she chance to check,
or to sore awry and range, he may not therfure at her return misintreate her
with any rygoure, but skilfully considering the cause, as lacks of bathing, or
otherwise, must prevent to eschew the like, and so patiently suffering for the
time, may reform and win her from her wild and rammishe nature, by polycie
and gentleness. Much more reasonable is it then, that the husband should bear,
and by such gentle sufferaunce qualify the crabbednes of his wife. For whereas
the one purpose serves but only to meyneteyne his wayne pleasure, the other
touches him most hyghly, both in the quiet of his person, and estimation of
his name, which above all other the^^es is chefely to be considered, yea and
(...) (Walter) geuynge them a face of liberty to have their own will in these
three points, they may by pollycy be trained to do your, and in deed some of
them will so even of their own mind and free will: Like as the hawke when she
flies well and sleeth her foul, serves her masters purpose and does him
singular pleasure, and yet means none other then her own commodity, how be
it, both their de lyghtes being bent to one effect, are served under one Even
so some wives are wholly of like inclination as their husbands, and then leseth
he nothing at all by granting them such liberty, for then: doing the
thing that pleases her self, she in likewise contenteth him. And some of
them also are of such worthy and honorable qualines, that they will show them
selu^s in their benevolence, as it were able to compare with the great
Alerander, who after such time as he had in a dangerous battle with great
peril of his person, and loss of many men, overcome the mighty king Porus, a
certain prince of the Indians, coveting naught else but only the glory of
victory, and power to take what he list. Received him afterward into anutie,
and enlarged his dominion with an other kingdom of his own. And even so it
suffyseth such worthy wives only to obtain the pre-eminence at their
husbands hands without setting the same in vet, but will rather of their mere
and gentle nature inclyne the^ selves to the will and pleasure of their
husbands. But in deed some again are so presyse in keeping their prerogatyue,
that think if they do any thing wyttyngely to their husbands contentacions,
they less their liberties and shame them selves for ever Such wynes their
husbands may neither manace, nor yet entreat, but must compass them by
pollycie, as thus. Look what he would have them to do, let him seem to ^uette
the contrary, for then thinkinge to serve her own turn, she will serve his,
or else let him get some gestes to his table, that by way of talk shall surmyse
some other man's wife, which dwells a far of, to use her self toward her
husband, under such sort as the goodman would wyshe that his wife should do,
geuynge her much praise and commendations for the same, and then will she for
very vayneglory, to purchase like report, do in likewise, or else let him cause
some of her gossyppes, whom she has in displeasure (as commonly they are never
without some such) to rejoice and lawghe her to scorn, for the misusing of
her husband, for then will she amend only to spyte her enemy withal. But
(Walter) like as a crabbed Toulte must be rydden with a toughe byt, even so if
the wife be to outrageous she must be used after a more sharper sort, as
thus. Let the husband feign him self to be sick, complaining altogether in
his hedde, and thereupon send for the physician, with whom he must be at a
point before hand, who at his coming, shall in open presence make the matter
light and put him in comfort to do well, and then taking her a part, show
her in secret that he is wonderfully inclyned to a Franzie, ^serybynge him a
special dycie for the defense thereof, which as well for deynty feeding, under
pretense to engender good blud as also for gentle interteynment for dout to
stir up the collericke humors, shall be even as the goodman him self had
before hand devised, and if afterward he shall perceive her to break any
part of the same, then must he straight ways seem to be stark staring
mad, and among other light and unwonted parts be sure to beat her well,
and to enforce the matter, make as though he would leap out at the chamber
wyndow, but let not her be to nere at hand lest she happen to help him
onward, and when he has a while stormed in his rage, then let the physician
come again, and blaming the wife for breaking his order, seem to pacyfy him
by medicine, yet first hardly let him be well bound, even after the right
Bedlem fashyon, but let it not be to straight, least finding him at such
advantage, she happen to be even with him, and afterward when he is well come
to him self, and informed under what manner he misintreated his wife, let him
vtterlydenay it, as though he knew not what he had done in his woodnes,
swerynge and staring that and if he would be so lewd it were pyttie of his
life, affirming that in all the world, there is not so beninge and loving a
woman to her husband, no^ that so little does de^erue to be under such sort
used, but at length when by his wives tears, her broken eye, her black sides,
and sore bones, he must needs be persuaded that it was true, then must he
counterfeyte such woeful repentance, as though he should straight ways out of
his wit ageine for pure sorrow, wyshynge rather to dye a thousand sold, then
to be vexed again with the like passion. Let him use her two or three times
after this forte (Walter) and I dare wa raunt she will for her own case
observe the physicians order, albeit she would disdain to do the same at her
husbands appointment, but the husband nereth to beware and handle him self
wisely in those points, for and if she chance to espy his fetch, she is
incurable for ever, like unto the For, which being once tangled in a trap and
escapes, will be so e^rcumspiete, that he is never taken by any kind of
engine afterward. Sundry other means and sleigh^es there is to qualify the
rygoure of their lyb^rtie, which if the husband do consider and wyttely
provide for, their company (be they never so evil) is tollerarable enough. But
Walter in any wise, and as you inte^de to eschew the danger of all their whole
natural malyet, look yest swerve not from your principle, as to su^^^ the^ to
have their will in those three things, or else at least way, so to use them, as
they may think they have it, for surely the same is so incident unto them
that till time they have obtained it, they are never contented, nor in manner of
right mind or tractable, and that once allowed them, they are quyete enough,
and framable to many good purposes. Thus Walter I have performed my promise,
which was to instruct you how the husband may best use him self to live
quiet with his wife, I pray God all your sect may perceive and follow it well,
which I think they should do much the better, if I confirmed my doctrine by
some lively example of experience, but that can I not do in ought that chanced
under the yoke of matrymonye, by reason I have had no practyse that way,
nevertheless to make you understand, that by gentle means and good policy,
there is commodity to be had at women's hands, which rygoure or violence shall
never ob eyne. I will show you an example, whereunto I was somewhat pryuie,
that happened of late between a certain Gentleman and Genglewoman, both being
of mine acquantaunce, and was thus.

Here Bawdyn to prove that women are never so much addicte or bente to their
own will and opinion, but that by wisdom and good pollycie, they may easily
be broken thereof. Shows a lively example of late experience. The.xiiii.
Chapter.
ON a time a Gentleman of the Weshe parts (who shall be namelesse) at Charynge
Cross in his way home wards from London (then called Troynouant) over took a
certain fair Mystres, whom when he had saluted, and by communication did
perceive that she should ride four or five days in his company, he was
wonderful glad thereof. For being him self a cock of the game, he thought
her to be a hen of the same sort, and trusted well to have some jolly good
treading by the way. And therefore after a little acquayntaunce, demanded her
whether she could be contented to auowe and use her self as his wife in that
journey or not (which words nevertheless, were uttered under such sort, that
and if his motion were not well taken, all was spoken but in sport) whereunto
she dissemblyng as though she misunderstode him, (and the rather by some
pensiuenes appearing in her person, to persuade him that she was not apt to
receive such in^erteynement) said, that in deed she had been a wife but as
then was none, nor never would be. And thereupon taking occasion to speak of
her dead husband, seemed as thought she would shortly have followed him for
pure sorrow, which when this gentleman by good exhortacio^ had somewhat appesed,
and then after a little pawse resited again theffect of his former words,
promysyng that and if she would show him so much gentleness, he would not
only bear her expense, but moreover be glad to show her any kind of
pleasure that should apperteyne to the dewty of an husband for the time.
Whereunto she being then in manner forced to make dyrecte answer, with sober
countenance said. Alas how have I reioysed without cause, for whereas being
a stranget in these parts, I thought it a comfort to mete with company, the
same to have so evil opinion of me, as to demand such question, is most to
my discomfort, and therwithal protested before Godde that she never was woman
of that conversation, nor never would be. Then the Gentleman leaving to his
first advantage, swear that he durst depose the same in her behalf, and that
he spoke but in board to pass away the time, desiring her not to be offended
therewith. How be it for all that, he intended not so to give over his
enterprise, but determined to prosecute the same by another means, and
thereuppon thought good to do as men commonly use to do with sick folks, that
(for lack of appetite) when they are axed whether they will have this meat or
that made ready for them, they utterly refuse it, whereas being a cawdell or
other good morsel, if without such questioninge it be made ready and brought
them, the pleasant savor or sight thereof, will provoke their stomakes to
receive it, therefore although being after this manner refused, yet he thought
if he might mete her in convenient place with his things in redynesse, he had
good trust to be accepted, for the common proverb says, that women love
better to have it, then to hear sp^ke of it, and thereupon determined by sum
one pollycie or other to mete her warm a bed, and then to profer it without
making of any question or demand. But first as the physicians use to give
preparatyues before they minister the substance of their medicine. Even so
because he would the better be allowed when he came, he enterteined her before
hand with all kind of gentleness, for at her Inn she lacked not wine,
spyce, nor no other thing that he might perceive she coueted to have, nor no
gellyes, or other confections that were good to make her cockyshe hot or apt
to receive what he mente toward her, and by the way to help her up and
down, or to amend any thing that was amysse about her, her own servant was
not so attendaunt as he, so when he had by such expenses and diligence, brought
him self in some credit and favor, then to give he some warning before
hand, lest she should abashe to much at his coming. Among other pleasant
talk, he showed her how he doubted that he was not well chrystened, for as he
said, he used oftentimes to rise out of his bed in his stepe, and going
about the house, should do he wist not what him self, and that when he were
in such case, he might go whyther so ever he would, for there was another lock
nor bar but would open ageynste him, exhorstynge her therefore, that and if he
should happen to be vexed with that passion in her company, and come into her
chamber by night, that she should not be afraid thereof, nor make none outcry,
for he used not to do any harm at all, At which words she laughed and said,
that and if he came ther^ she would so scorge him with her rod, that he should
repent his coming. The night following (being in the Summer time) they came
to Salisbury, where as this Gentleman determined to set in ure theffecte of his
deuyse, and after supper, perceiving the Gentlewoman gone into the garden with
the wife of the house, and her servant in the stable, leaving her chamber
door abroad, he made his servant pryuie of his mind, and bad him lock fast
his chamber door, as though he had been gone to bed, and then secretly
getting into the Gentlewomans chamber, hyd him self under her bed,
intending when she were a stepe, to get in by her. And so deuysynge in his
mind what a busye night he should have, thought it good somewhat to refreshe
him self before hand, and so fell a stepe, during which time there came
into the same Inn one of sir Ogter Penkeyls servants, who when he was
alyghted, perceiving the door abroad, came sireyght into the same chamber and
leaving his capease there, locked the chamber door, and took the key with him,
which when the Chamberlayne perceived, he made request to have it again,
saying^ that he could not lie there, for that the come was otherwise
appointed, whereunto the the other answered that the same had always wont to be
his chamber, and there would he lie who so ever said nay, unless he were fet
out by the ears. In so much that the Chamberleyne knowing him to be a common
geste of the house, and a froward fellow, was loath much to strive with him,
and therefore showed the matter to the Gentlewoman (somewhat blamyng her
servant for leaving the door open) and desired her to take another chamber,
wherein she was sone entreated and did so. And when time came gate her to her
bed, as in like wise the serving man to his, all this while the Gentleman
lyinge under the bed fast a sleep, and knew nothing of this alteration.
About midnyght he awaked and harkening whether he could here any folk
sterrynge about the house, hard no thing save one softely drawing breathe
within the bed, which he supposed verily to be the Gentlewoman, wherwithal
his heart tyckled for joy, which straight ways was turned to high displeasure.
For as he came forth from under the bed, thinkyng to vnray him self, he
stumbled on the chamber pot, and made such a noise that the ^erurynge man
suddenly awaked, and under a ^ough sort asked who was there, when the Gentleman
contrary to his expectacio^ hard a man's voice, he was wonderfully abashed, but
yet (coniecturinge that it was the Gentlewomans servant abedde with his
mysteres) he boldly answered and said, it is I the good fellow that have
rydden so long in your company (Mystres I speak to you, although it be your
servant that asks me the question) and now to show you the cause of my
coming hither, the troth is, I suspected that ye were not so clear in your
living, as you would seem to be accounted by your words, for the proof
whereof I have purposely watched you, and now do perceive what ye are. When
the seruingeman hard this strange answer, not knowing what the matter meant,
he thought it was some naughty fellow that came to pycke his purse when he were
a sleep, and that now perceiving him to be awaked, would counterfepte him
self to be a fool, the rather to have his misdemeanour borne withal, and
thereupon leaping out of his bed to his weapon, cried out, thieves, thieves,
and made such a noise, that within a while the goodman of the house, and all
the other gestes, brake open the chamber door, and with torche light and clubbes
came into them and asked what was the matter, whereof being advertised by the
declaration of the serving-man (who mistaking the purpose that was meant, made
the act very heinous) Gogges body master Bacheler said the good man, little
need had you to use your self so in this house, for by the holy mast I would
rather have laid all the plate in my house at gage for you, then that ye should
lack money if I had known it. Gramarcy mine Host said the Gentleman, but to
make you perceive that I had no such need (the rather thereby to judge that I
meant no such thing) ye shall be pryuie with my purse, and therewithal opening
the same, showed forth in money and jewels, to the value of.xx. or, xxx.
pound, and then said, sith the matter is come to this point, I will now out
of hand show you the thing that I thought not to speak of till that lent were
come, that I should meet with my goostly father, and thereupon (geuynge money
to the residue of the company to depart, and drink a gallon of wine for their
pains) he took the good man of the house and the serving-man aside, and showed
them the whole circumstaunce of his purpose and intent, whereat when they had a
while well laughed (exhorting him to use more circumspection in the matter at
his next lodging) they departed, every man promising to keep council.
Howebeit according to the common proverb, which says that two may chance
to keep counsel, but three never. Even so this matter was so long talked of
in council from one to another, that before five of the clock in the morning
it came to the Gentlewomans ears, who although she were nothing in defaulte,
was nevertheless wonderful sorry to have it reported that such thing was meant
toward her, accomptynge that there might enter into the hearers thereof some
suspect of her evil, which by any honest woman should be eschewed, in manner
as much as the very evil it self. And therefore perceiving that she could
not remedy what was past, she thought yet to preuente what was to come, so
that in the morninge when this Gentleman sent to know when she would ride, she
feigned her self sick, and so forsook his company, wherewith he was not a
little offended, and thereupon imagininge the cause of her stay, determined to
remain all night at the next bayte, which was Shaftesbery, thinking that
when she had once perceived him past and gone, it should not be long or she
would come after, and even as he thought so it chanced, for in deed the same
night she came to Shaftesbery, whereof although the Gentleman were wonderful
glad, yet would he not be acknowen to her until the morning that she were a
horseback, for fear less she should feign like excuse, to eschew his
company as she had done before time. But in the morninge as soon as she was
gone, he came dashing after, and bad her good morrow, wherewith the
Gentlewoman being abashed, made answer and said, yea, are you there, had I
known ye were no further paste, I would not have been thus far forth, that
would God I had never seen you: Why so mystres said the Gentleman, have I
showed you any such unkindness, that ye should have cause thus to loathe my
company: Nay said she ye have showed me none, but rather the contrary what so
ever ye meant toward me But as the intent of every act deserves the thank or
blame, so the pretense of your gentleness tendering to my slander (as now I
know it did) deserves no thanks at all. As to show you what I mean by
these words, it shall not need, for I am sure ye know it well enough your
self, and in like wise does all the country. What rumoure for shame have ye
caused to be made of me the other night in the town behind, thence is no
other talk among the people but of you and me, wherein although for my part I
did nor meant any evil at all, yet am I assured by your means not to escape
slander, and therwithal began piteously to weep. When the Gentleman perceived
the matter taken in so evil part, he was right so ty, but yet somewhat
recomforted again because she wept (for commonly the spyte and displeasure of
a woman wereth away with her tears, so that when the one is spent the other is
past, and she then much more tractable to any frendely purpose then before)
whertupon after a little counterfeyte e^ghynge to be aduysed how to excuse him
self, he thought best, sithe his doings in the matter were so apparaunt that
it could not be denayed, that yet he would denaye any evil of his part mente
thereby, or of hers receaned. And then said, I wysse mystres whereas ye say
that I have caused you to to be slaundered, if ye understood aryght, there
could never thing chance better for the declaration of your honesty, then
for me to come into your chamber under such sort as I did, for whereas it might
be suspected that there was some misdemeanour used between us (riding together
as we have done) now that it is perceived home I durst not profer to come unto
your bed, but by stelth and unknown unto you, the same suffiseth for your
declaration in that behalf, for all men may judge that and if ye had been
pryuie, or assenting thereunto, I would have come in more boldly, so that in
my mind, there could never thing have happened better for your purpose, then
for me to do as I did, and as to think that I intended you any evil by my
coming, by the blessed Godde I mente you no more harm, then to mine own
body, wherefore good mystres I pray you quyete your self, and be not thus
offended without cause, no more harm then to your own body said she? no, I
think well that, howebeit what so ever ye would to your own body, I am sure ye
meant thereby none honesty toward me. As I be saved said he, I meant you no
dishonesty at all, and now to show you my mind further, sithe the matter is
come to this pass, on my faith mistres I never in all my life knew what love
meant till time I met with you, why and do ye know now what it means? said
she, yes mystres yes, much more to my pain, then I have as yet been acknowne of
said the Gentleman. For doubtless your comely person and discrete demeanor
has so drawn mine affection toward you, that without your presence and
favor, it is not possible for my life any while to endure, and surely to show
you thereof in secret^, and somewhat to be satysfyed therein, was the only cause
that made me attempt the coming to your bed, and for no dishonesty at all as
Godde shall be my judge. A well said she, now I perceive it shall be an easy
thing to prove you either a dissembler or a liar, or else both. For and if ye
say ye love me, and do not, then are ye a dissembler, and on the other side, if
ye do love me and would come to my bed (as ye say your self, to be saryffyed
in love) the same does imply as much as to dishouest me, and therefore to say ye
meant me no dishonesty though the term be rude ye are therein but a liar. Alas
mystres were it then your dyshonesty that I should imbrase and kiss you abedde
said the Gentleman, yea but meant you none other thing save only so, said
she? Why no by the blessed sacralente said he, and if I did or do intend,
otherwise toward you, God let me never light from this horse in my right
wits. So that in conclusion, with swerynge and staryng that he mente her but
all well, and partly in recompense of the Gentleness and liberality showed
in that journey toward her, she was contented the next night following to
leave her chamber door open, and to give him liberty with kissing and
enbrasynge to do his heart an ease. This thing so concluded, then brake they
into other talk that all their folks might here to dryne away suspicio^, and
so with pleasant thoughts passing the day, came the next night to Charde,
where as she was lodged at the one end of a long Gallery, and he at the other,
and in an other chamber, which stood between both, there lay another gest,
which was bownde toward London, and came in a little before them (one master
Iewegur a Gentleman of Deuonshyre) who being of the other Gentleman's
acquayntaunce, supped with him in the Gentlewomans chamber, and after supper
walked for recreation altogether into the garden, whereas after a little talk,
this master Iewegur (being a suspicious and wyly fellow) perceived by
countenances that his companyans coueted to have some secret talk, wherein to
give them scope under color to look in a little book that was in his bosom,
he slaked his pace, but nevertheless had his cares attentyfe to their talk,
and hard the Gentleman with a soft voice say, look ye keep your promise for
else ye sle me, and she to him yes yes, but for Gods sake look ye come
secretly. Yea thought the other: then I know what ye mean. Well? though I be
not bydde^ to the banquet, yet may I chance to have some part of the chere,
and thereupon repayrynge to them again, fell into sundry deuyses, till at
length a damsel of the house came to the Gentlewoman, saying her chamber was
ready, and that if it pleased her to go to it, she would bring her to bed,
whereupon the Gentlewoman departed, but the Gentlemen remained there as long
as the day light would serve them to walk, and when night came drew either of
them to his chamber, severally watching of a convenient time for one purpose,
how beit the smell feast had advantage of the bydden gest (for by that names
will I from henceforth call them) because he stood so in the way, that as long
as any steryng was in his chamber, the other had no safe passage. At length
when the smell feast perceived the householde abedde, and al things in quyete,
saving in the bydden gestes chamber (for whom he was determined how to
provide) he vnrayed him self to his bare shyrte, and then taking occasion to
look on his sword, found fault that the same was cankered, and then
deuysynge a meet place for such a purpose (in the Gallery not far from the
bydden gestes chamber door) he set his servant aworke with scouring
thereof, and in the mean time went him self to the Gentlewomans chamber,
whereas he found the door open, and was frendely interteyned, but yet whether
he were satysfyed with kyssinge and enbrasynge as was promised, or not, I
somewhat doubt because it was not he that made the promise. And surely the
self love of our unhappy time is such (God amend it) that we shall seldom se
any body forbear his own commodity, for the observing of another man's
promise, and again if she thynkyng him to be the same that made the promise,
should perceive him to profer further then was promised, yet were she better to
suffer in scilence, then to make any great noise in the rescue, lest it should
sownde in the ears of some (as in deed there lay strangers nere at hand) that
not knowing her simple meaning, would think her in defaulte to suffer him
come so nere. But what so ever was done in the mean time, in conclusion,
secretly as he came, so he departed, and she for her part supposinge that she
had honestely acquyted her self of her promise, determined for the residue of
the night to take her rest, and therefore rose up and softly locked the door
after him. So by this we may se that it is not to be marueyled at, though some
men labor sore, and can not thryne, and that some other doing nothing at all
waxes rich, for often rymes Fortune gives one man the fruit of another
travel. When the bydden geste who had long time walked up and down in his
chamber, Harkening here and there in abiding his good hour, understood all
things hushe and still, and that there was no blynche of candell light in any
where apearynge, then he thought time to set forwards, and with trembling
foot and hand, as though his life and death lay in balaunce, did even so, but
when he came to the Gentlewomans chamber, and found her door fast (thinking
then that she meant only to scorn him) all his hot love or lust (whether of
both I may best call it) was sodeynely turned into rage and fury, so that with
a swollen heart he returned back again to his own chamber, and there
tumbling on his bed, passed the residue of the night in great malyncoly and
displeasure. In the morning the smell feast departed very early without
taking of his leave (as commonly all men knowing them selves gylty, will be
lothe^ to tarry long nere their fault for doubt of espymge, but the bydden
gest rode not till it was nere.viii. of the clock, whom when he was a little
in his way, the Gentlewoman with a feigned frowning countenance began to
challenge and said. A sir, I can you thank, ye kept well your promise to
night, a woman is well at case to set her honesty in your hands upon any oath
(as who would say he had gone further then was promised) What so ever thank
ye can me for keeping of my promise (said the Gentleman) I can you none at
all for the breakinge of yours, and surely I am not contented with you, for ye
used me very noughtely therein, (very noghtely said she) I pray you why so?
Mary laid the Gentleman, because ye made me watch a great part of the night,
and to proule about in the dark, promising to leave your chamber door abroad
and did not so. Then wyste she well that she had bin deceived, and searching
for a woman's shyfte how to save al things vpryght, suddenly found one, and
said: Why sir and were ye there in deed? and I meant to challenge you because ye
came not. Yea that was I by the good Lord (said the Gentleman) even at
mydnyght, and found it falste locked. Now by out blessed Lady said the
Gentlewoman, then ye deceived your self, for my door was left open purposely
for you, mary there was another door fast by it which in deed was locked, and
of lykelyhod for lack of light ye took the one for the other. Now on my
faith, said the Gentleman, it was even so sure enough, and thereupon laughing
at the matter, held her excused, determining to use him self more
circumspecrely the next night following, but in the mean time as the devil
would, there came ageynste them a kynseman of the Gentlewomans (to gyde her
thither as she was bounden) who conneyed her out of his company. And so by the
crafty dealing of the subtle smell feast, the bydden gest was disapoynted of
his purpose, which by the peruersenes of Fortune without any default in the
woman, he could never recover afterward.

The third and last part of the Epistle sent by Bawdyn Bacheler to Walter
Wedlock. The.xv. Chapter.
By this experiment Walter we may (among other things) perceive
thinstabilitie of women's determinations, and how by discrete diligence and
policy, they may be allured whereunto men list, be it good or evil, so that
Fortune be not utterly bent to the contrary, as it seems she was ageynste the
bydden gestes enterprise. For in deed then there is no remedy, as before this,
the wife in excusing her self, when she was blamed for geuynge her husband
the lothesome lyuery, said that she could not do therewith, by reason that it
was his fortune to have it, and was thereby very well allowed both of Justice
Mynos him self, and of all the whole court. But Lord God Walter how rash
wytted am I become of late, for had I not chanced to fall again into like
matter, I should have omytted one of the chefest things that concerns the
purpose I treat upon, which is to preserve the quyete between man and wife.
For surely by ought that I can perceive, the greateste breach thereof, is when
she chances to lie with some other man, which thing the husband in some
countries uses to take wonderful grievously, and yet let the matter rest
there, as in deed it might well enough if he were discrete, and then were there
no harm done at all, for I have known a number of men so used, and yet
remain as wholesome in their bodies, as quyete in their minds, and as
sufficiently furny shed to all purposes, as if it had never so chanced.

What is it then think ye that causes their torment and distemperaunce, mary
the knowledge thereof: Why and whose defaulte I pray you is that, is it the
wives: Nay nay God wot, but his own that pryeth to perceive it, much like the
mad man that seeks for a knyfe to ^le him self. Oh vphappye plage, that
comes only by Satan, for nature would have it kept pryuie, and therefore
provoke to have it done in secret, nor God would not have it disclosed, and
therefore sets in the peoples hearts never to show the husband thereof,
though it were so that all the rest of his paryshe should happen to know it,
and will he then him self seek his own harm, and make earneste of game. Well
and if he will needs be so foolyshe, let him languyshe with the fruit thereof,
and I shrewe all such as will moan him, it is me thinks much like the eating
of a fly blow (being a certain kind of small worms that is oftentimes
found in cold mutton, and such like meats, in the summer time) whereof
although a man eat a thousand (as commonly men do when they feed hungerly,
and lokethe not for them, yet does it no harm at al. But and if afterward
searching more narowly, he perceaneth by them that are left, that in deed he
(...) eaten some. Then straight ways he (...) his gorge, and makes ado as if
he (...) poisoned, which for erothe is not for any ^uyll that is in the thing,
but comes only of a certain squeymyshenes and imper section of the stomach.
And surely Walter, even so is it in the other matter, yea and in all both
cases to think that it be so, is as great displeasure and unquietness of
mind, as if it were so in deed, which declares the inhicilitie of man's nature
in that behalf, and prouethe playnelye that it is rather a vain quarrel of
the mind grounded on no necessity, then any sufficient or effectual cause
of displeasure. But yet Walter for all that, if ye be one of these that can not
patiently bear it (if it so chanced) then mine aduyce shall be that ye never
mystruste it, nor yet make means to know it, for then I dare warrance ye shall
never be grieved therewith. Or cast the worst, as that ye chance to espy it
your self unlooked for, yet then beware that in no wise ye make any noise or
words thereof, but keep it as secret from all other men's knowledge as ye can.
For well wist the wytty Duyde what discommodities growethe by the contrary,
when he wrote the parable how Vulcanus fynding his wife in bed with Marse,
transformed the shetes that they lay between, by a certain magytycall means,
into a cage or net of wire, and brought all the Gods to wonder at the^, who
nevertheless did but laugh him to scorn for his folly showed therein, and
esteemed his discretion the less ever after. Doubtless a worthy example for us
to eschew the like mysdemeanoure, if we chance to come within the danger
thereof, for it appears that by so doing, we get nothing else but rebuke and
shame. No Walter, not so much as to let your wife her self perceive that ye do
know it, for then either will she be abominable bold, seeing you contented
to bear therewith. Or else must ye thinkyng to break her from it, make such a
styre and business, as all the world shall wonder at you both, and surely much
better it is to dissemble at the matter for a time and abide the coming of
age, who is the common amender of all such faults, to which effect I will
show you a notable experience that chanced of late, and was thus. In the
town of Penborgh a certain Smyth on a time came to the Prouest of the
college there, and told him that sir Henry Polmarghe a priest of the same
college resorting much to his house under pretense of cosynage, used his
wife over boldly. Whereunto the Proueste answered, peace John John, for I
dare say it is not so: or and if it be, I promise thee I will cause him to
leave it. Nay master said the Smyth I neither doubt of the one nor hope of the
other, but my desire shall be, that your master ship for my poor honesty, will
cause him to use him self more circumspectly therein then he has done, for
yesterdaye as he and I sat together at brekefast, master Saghers man called me
forth to shoe a horse, and when I came to the clinshing of the nails, I mist
my pyncers (being in my hall wyndowe) which when I came to fetch, I found my
wife and him interlased upon my bench, under such an homely sort, that on my
says I was ashamed to look on them, and thereupon went back again before
they espied me, and borrowed a pair of pyncers of my neighbor. And sir, as well
might there a stranger have come in, and shamed me for ever, as by my trothe,
if I had been certain where the pyncers had lain, I would have sent master
Saghers man in for them. And sir because the matter touches me so nets as it
does, I think it not best for me to speak unto them therein my self, as well
for doubt I shall not keep due temperaunce in my words, or for sundry other
considerations, nor in deed I would not they should perceive that I know so
much therein as I do, and therefore good master Prouest make no notherwyse unto
him, but that ye suspect it of your self upon report at large, for that shall
suffyce to make him more ware and circumspecte, which is as much as I look for
as yet. Nor sir I tell it not you, but as it were under confession, trusting
that ye will kept it secret. If this rude man this Smyth that never read
Ouyde, nor no other good aucthor, could after such discrete sort temper his
cause, much rather should they do so that art of more knowledge and better
learned. And to you ye Venerian wives, though ye chance to be narowly taken,
and charged therewith, yet be well ware ye never confess it to the death, but
speak and prate in your excuse to the vttermoste, as though ye were innocent
in the matter. For what so ever the presumption or lykelynes thereof be, yet of
this ye may be certain, the very effect rests on so defuse and secret a
point, that in manner it is not possible to be plainly known, without ye
will be so mad as to condemn your selves, and then farewell your good days
all your life after. Whereas by a little stout standing at your defense, with
a sober or circumspecte life following, ye shall sone grow out of suspicion,
for this ye must understand, men are easily persuaded to believe the thing,
such as in their heart they covet it should be. And for your parts ye Cupydyan
knights, ye must ieme to delyght in such pastyme and recreation, as ye shall
perceive the good man to do, whether it be hunting, hawkyng, gaming, or
otherwise, for so may ye best grow into familiarity with him, and color
your repair to the house to be only for his company. But then beware that
your open light demeanor, disclose not your secret intent, as the wenche that
pretended heroften going to the Church to be all for devotion, but when it
came to the purpose, her affection so much ouerpaste h^^ reason, that she set
aside the Paxe, and kyst the paryshe Clarke, whereby her mind that before time
was pryuate to her self, was made common to the whole paryshe, therefore take heed that ye do not in likewise, and when ye lift to reward your mystres with
some jewel or garment, look ye make no gift thereof, but lose it unto her upon
some wager, made in the husbands presence. And what so ever the vchemency or
ouerboldnes of her affection shall happen to be, yet be you well ware that ye
neither disapoynte or interrupte him at any such time, as he shall mind to have
her attendaunt him self, for that is odible, and will sone engender suspicion,
and besides that in deed it is against all good curtesye, wherein the people of
this Realm have bin accounted to excede all other. And surely a chief part
thereof, is to suffer the good man (be he never so simple) to have pre-eminence
and chief attendaunce of his own wife, notwithstanding her frendely
familiarity mente toward any other, being of better ability or more
estimation. Yet for my part not meaning hereby to excyte or intyce you to any
dissolute manners or incontinent trade of life, but only your selves being
bente thereunto, that then it may be so conneyed, as least rumor and
inconvenience may there of follow, in preserving the ^uyernesse that I wyshe
to have contynewed between man and wife, which I chiefly do for the reverence
I bear to the pleasant sacrament of matrymony, because my poor father was
sometime accounted to be one of that band. No syrs, nor by saint Mary I will
not known that such enterpryses of yours is lawful, for what so ever has bin
permitted upon considerations in the former ages, or written by the
Philosophers or Po^tes of that time, yet I remember well we have this famylier
proverb, of authority. (New Lords, new laws) and therefore may chance
that by the coming of Christ, such old rytes and customs are abrogated and
then is there peril in the use thereof.

And also it seems that the gift claymed by these wives from Neomenius, makes
not so much for their purpose as they think it does, for in deed it is none
other, but only to make them count liberty, for to say, do, and have what
they will, not expressing that the same shall be lawful for them, nor yet does
not dispense with thiniquitie thereof if it be otherwise. And surely Paul to
the contrary says, that the husband is the wives hedde, and that she should
hold her self to him only, and be confirmable to his will, and therefore
advise them at their own peril, for if they chose the wrong way, I will not
bear the wit thereof by abetting them thereunto. And now Walter to conclude
with you, whereas ye have unjustly accused me, that I should dispyse marriage, I
trust I have both sufficiently declared my self therein, and also given you
ensample of a Chrystian charity, as well in exhorting you (notwithstanding
your raylynge rage showed toward me) how patiently to suffer the harm that
can not be eschewed, as also in counsaylynge how the same may best be kept from
the knowledge and wondering of the world, which for troth in such case is more
pain and rebuke then the very evil it self, requyrynge no more at your
hands for all my traueyle and good will herein, but from hence forth, to have
your good word, and ye shall be sure of mine.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Wyllyam Seres, dwelling in Powles Church yard at the
sign of the Hedgehogge.


