THE Rare and most wonderful things which Edw. Web an Englishman borne, has
seen and passed in his troublesome travails, in the Cities of Jerusalem,
Damasko, Bethlehem and Galely: and in the lands of Iewrie, Egypt, Grecia,
Russia, and Prester John. Wherein is set forth his extreme slavery sustained
many years together in the Galleys and wars of the great Turk, against the
lands of Persia, Tartaria, Spain, and Portugale, with the manner of his
releasement and coming into England in May last.

Newly enlarged and corrected by the Author.

LONDON Printed for William Wright. 1590.



To the most Mighty, my gracious and renowned Sovereign, Elizabeth by the grace
of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith. etc. Your
Highness most humble subject Ed. Web heartily prays for the continuance of
your Majesty's health and prosperous reign to the worlds end.
COnsidering (most gracious and dread Sovereign) the wonderful providence of
Almightye GOD showed toward your Highness since the time of your most happy
and prosperous reign, as well in the preservation of your Majesty's person from
the hands of your Highness enemies, as also in defending this small Angle or
Realm of England from the force of foreign foes, and the continual
blessings of peace and plenty, with which ever since he has in bountiful
sort maintained it: I could not therefore but (according to my duty) render
humble thanks to almighty God for the same, when to my great comfort, even in
the midst of my grievous thraldom in Turkey, I heard it most truly reported
by a Christian captive, and your Highness clemency by him highly commended.
The report of whose fame truly described, as well in the administration of
Justice, and supporting of Christian religion, as also in relieuing and
succouring the poor distressed members of this land, gave me just cause to
pray heartely for my delivery, and to long inwardly until I came to see your
Highness (my dread Sovereign) and this my native Country. And now having
obtained my long expected wish, I do in all humbleness prostrate my self and
this plain discourse of my travels, to your most excellent Majesty: wherein
may be seen that if in Turkey I would have denied my Christ, or in my
travail would have forsaken my Prince to have served for Spain, thereby to
have become a Traitor to your Majesty and my native Country, I needed not to
have lived in want, but in great prosperity. But for as much as almighty God
has now set me fre from thraldom, and delivered me from many dangers, and
sent me into England, my desire is that I may be employed in such service and
affairs, as may be pleasing to God, and found profitable to my Prince and
Country. And thus trusting your Highness will accept in good* worth this true
discourse though rudely penned I humbly take my leave, praying for the
prosperous health and continual reign of your most excellent Majesty.

Your Highness most humble subject. Edward Web.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader, I have undertaken in this short discourse, to utter the most
part of such things as I saw and passed in the time of my troublesome travail
and slavish life sustained in the Galleys, and wars of the great Turk.

And this I protest, that in this book there is nothing mentioned or expressed
but that which is of truth, and what mine own eyes have perfectly seen. Some
foolish persons perhaps will cauil and say, that these are lies and fained
fables, and that it contains nothing else: but to those I answer, that what
soever is herein mentioned, he whosoever he be, that shall so find fault and
doubt of the truth hereof, let him but come and confer with me or make
enquiry of the best and greatest Travelers and Marchantes about all this land:
and they doubtless shall be resolved that this is true which is here expressed:
with a great deal more, which now I cannot call to remembrance, for that my
memory fails me, by means of my great and grievous troubles.

And whereas in the first edition of this book a great fault in number did
negligently escape in Folio 3. in these words 30. thousand for 300. thousand:
and 50. thousand for 500. thousand: that fault is truly amended in this
Edition. From my lodging at Black-wall, this nineteenth of May, 1590.

Your loving Country man, Edward Web.

Verses written upon the Alphabet of the Queens Majesty's name.
Eternal God who guides still your grace,
Lengthen your life in health and happy state:
Inspire your subjects hearts in every place,
Zealous in love and free from secret hate,
And shorten life in those that breed debate.
Behold her Lord, who is our strength and stay,
Even she it is, by whom we hold our own:
Turn not thy face from her in any way,
Hew down her foes and let them all be known.
Renowned Queen your Highness subjects joy,
Eeuen for to see the fall of all your foes,
God of his mercy shield you from annoy,
Intended treasons still for to disclose:
None of us all but will most duly pray,
Almighty God preserve you night and day.
FINIS.
E. Webb his travails.
I Edward Web an Englishman, borne at Saint Katherins near the tower of
London, was the son of one Richard Webb master gunner of England, my father
having some natural affection to me, when I was but xij. years old, did
prefer me to the service of Captain Ienkenson, at such time as he was sent
ambassador into Russia, with whom I went by sea and upon him I was daily
attendant: in which my journey, I was conversant among the people of that
country which were apparelled like to the Turks and Tartarians with furde
caps and long garments down to their shinnes: much like to Carbines or
Horsemen ready to the war. There I made my abode some space in the head
city of Russia called Musko, in which their building is all of fur, except
the Emperors Court, which is of lime and stone. They execute very sharp laws
among themselves, and are a kind of tyrannous people as appears by their
customs, of which among many other, these I speacially noted, viz. that if any
man be indebted one to another, and does not make payment at his day and time
appointed: the officers may enter upon the debtors and forceably break down
their houses and imprison them in grievous sort: where judgment shall
presently pass against him, which is with a mallet of wood he shall have so
many blows on the shins or on the forehead as the Judge shall award: and this
punishment shall be inflicted sundry days upon him. The Turks also uses to
beat debtors with a mallet, but not in that sort, for in Turkey they are
beaten for debt upon the soles of the feet with a Cane or cudgel if payment be
not made by a day. I also noted, that if any noble man offend the Emperor of
Russia, the said Noble man is taken and imprisoned with all his children and
kinsfolks, and the first great frost that comes (for the country is
wonderful cold and subject to frosts) there is a great hole made in the Ise
over some great river, and then the party principal is first put in, and
after him his wife, his children, and all other his kinsfolks, and so leave
none of his posterity to possess his lands or goods but the same are
bestowed upon others at the Emperors pleasure. There I stayed three years
attendant on my Master, in which time the crym* Tartarians otherwise named the
new Christians, made war upon the said city of Musko, which soon after was
betrayed and speedely burned, the people in great abundance massacred, and the
Tartarian soldiers had wonderful rich spoils in the same: there was I at
that time with seven other Englishmen taken prisoners, and for slaves were
altogether conuayed to Caffa, where the king of the Tartarians abides and
keeps a stately Court: being conveyed thither we were set to wipe the feet
of the kings horses, and to become ordinary slaves in the said Court, to fetch
water, cleave wood, and to do such other drudgerie. There were we beaten three
times a week with a Bulls pissell, or a horse tail. And in this sort and
miserable servitude we stayed there five years, then were we raunsomed from
thence by our friends, where we paid every man three hundred crowns which is
seven shillings six pence a piece, of current English money. Among that people
called the Tartarians, I noted specially this one thing, that their children
being newborn, do never open their eyes until they be nine days and nine
nights old. Thus being ransomed as is aforesaid, I returned home into England,
where having stayed some small time, I went again into Russia in the Heart of
master Kings at Ratcliffe with thirty sail of ships more in our company, at
which ^a^e her Majesty's ship cassed the Willoughby was our Admiral, and the
Harry appertayning to the company of the Marchantes was our vize-Admirall,
Master William Burrow then being our Captain and master. In which our voyage
we met with five Rouers or men of war whom we set upon, and burnt their
Admiral and brought those ships into Narre, and there the men were massacred
in this manner by the Russians: first great stakes stricken into the ground, and
they spitted upon powles as a man would put a pigge upon the spitte, and so
seven score were handled in that manner in a very tyrannous sort. We vnladed
our burden at Narre, and took in other lading for our commodities, but the
ship wherein I was which was called the Heart, having sailed but twelve miles
from thence stroke upon a rock, whereby the ship and goods were lost, the
residew of the fleet had no harm, and all the men in our ship saved their
lives by taking them into the boat of the said ship.

By means of which ship so cast away, I lost all that I had, and then came
again into England and gathered a new stock, and in the Henry of London I
went to Leuanta alias Legorne. This ship called the Henry, had been sold
before to Doctor Hector and other Italian Merchants, which was unknown unto us
so that at our coming to Legorne the ship was seized on by the factors of
those that were the owners thereof, and by them laden with marchandice to
Alexandria, in which shipp my self was master gunner.

But here Fortune began to lower on me again, and turn her wheel in such
sort against me, as that I was soon after brought to live in greater slavery,
then ever I did before, for we having safely arrived at Alexandria, discharged
our burden: and fraught our Ship with great store of that country
commodities, and returning back to Legorne, sodeinly in the way, we met with
fifty sail of the Turks Galleys: with which Galleys we fought two days and
two nights, and made great slaughter amongst their men, we being in all but
threescore men, very weak for such a multitude, and having lost fifty of our
60. men: faintnes constrained us to yield unto them, by reason we wanted wind
to help our selves, and the calm was so great a help unto them, as there was
no way for us to escape. Thus did the Turks take the Ship and goods, and in
the same found ten of us living whom they took prisoners, and presently
stripped us naked, and give us 100. blows a piece with an Ox Pissell, for
presuming to fight against them. Then were we sent to Constantinople, and
committed unto the Galleys, where we continued the space of six years: the
manner of our usage there was thus. First, we were shaven head and face, and
then a shert of Cotton and breeches of the same put upon us: our legs and
feet left naked: and by one of the feet is each slave chained with a great
chain to the Gallie, and our hands fastened with a pair of Mannacles. The
food which I and others did eat, was very black, far worse then Horse bread:
and our drink was stinking water, unless it be when we come to the places
where we took in fresh sweet water, at which time we supposed our diet to be
very dainty.

Thus as I said before, I remained six years in this miserable estate,
wonderfully beaten and misused every day: there have I seen of my fellows
when they have been so weak as they could not row by reason of sickness and
faintnes: where the Turks would lay upon them as upon Horses, and beat them
in such sort, as often times they died, and then threw them into the Sea.

Thus seeing my self still to continue in this miserable state, I was
constrained for want of victuals, to discover my self and to show them that I
had good skill in Gunners Art, which I thought would have been greatly well
esteemed at the Turks hands: but then for the same I was more narrowly looked
unto, yet somewhat better esteemed of then I was before. Not long after the
Turk made wars against the Persians, and gathered 700. thousand men
together, and these were conducted by his chief Bassaes into Persia. At which
time (for that had skill in Artillery) I was chosen forth of the Galleys to go
with the Army into Persia, and there to do the Turk service in the field,
with whom I traueiled on foot, but in our going thither, there died of our
Army by means of great sickness, disdiet, and want of victuals, about the
number of 300. thousand: so that when we came into Percia, we were 400.
thousand strong in the field, there we rested us one month, by which time we
having hartened our selves, gave a fierce assault upon the Persians, where the
Turks side got the worst, and lost 60. thousand men. Then the General over
the Turks Army, whose name was Sannon Basha, sent us so many soldiers more as
made us 500. thousand strong, there we stayed a long time, making wars
against the Persians and the great City of Damasko, where the Turk little
prevailed: for if the Turk were as polliticke as he is strong of power, the
Persians were not able to resist him. Thus leaving the Turks Army in Persia,
we came through Damasko to our City called the great Caier, which City is
threescore miles in compass, and is the greatest City in the world, it
stands upon the River of Nilo, and in the said City there are twelve
thousand churches which they term Muskots. This City at all times keeps
forty thousand men continually in Soldiers pay, and are ready at one hours
warning to serve under the great Turk: there we stayed to see the cutting or
parting of the River of Nilo, which is done once every year, upon the 25. day
of August. This City stands in the land of Egypt, and is under the
government of the great Turk. And there is a king over the said City, who is
called the king of the great Caer, and is the Uize Roy or Liefetenant to the
great Turk, and he is then present at the cutting of this river of Nilo: at
which time there is great triumph, and every Town and Country round about, to
the value of a thousand mile) send gifts and presents to the King of the great
Caer, in consideration of the water which comes to them from that River of
Nilo, by means of the cutting of it, which is but once every year.

It is therefore to be known, that in the land of Egypt it raineth not at all,
and all the ground throughout the land of Egypt is continually watered by the
water which upon the 25. day of August is turned into the countries round
about, by means of the wonderful growing and swelling of the water upright
without any stay at all, on one side thereof to the height of a huge
mountain, which begins to increase the 15. day of August, and by the 25. of
August is at the highest, on which day it is cut, by dividing of two pillars in
a strange sort, near to the city of the great Caer, and so turned of as from
a great mountain into the land of Egypt: by means whereof the Turk holds
all the land of Egypt in subjection to himself, and might if he would
dismiss them clean from having any water at all.

From thence I went with the Turks power and under his conduction to the land
of Iewry, and from thence to the city of Jerusalem, where part of the old
Temple is yet standing, and many Monuments of great antiquity, as herein after
shall be showed. In the land of Siria, there is a River that no Jew can get or
catch any fish in it at all, and yet in the same River there is great store of
fish like unto Samon Troutes. But let a Christian or a Turk come thither and
fish for them, and either of them shall catch them in great abundance, if they
do but put their hand into the water with a little bread, and an hundredth will
be about his hand.

Thus having seen a number of rare and most wonderful things, we went to the
city of Agowa, which is the head and chief City in all the East Indies,
there we gave battle against the Christians that keep the said city, which
are Portingalles, for that the Town apperteineth to the King of Portingal.
There we gave battle and lost three score thousand of the great Turks men, and
yet could not obtain it: nevertheless the great Turks Lieftenant or General
with his power, took a place called Armous, where they had great store of
treasure and Sowes of silver.

Thus being chief master Gunner in these Turkish wars, I was sent for
again by commandment of the Turk to Damasko, where I stayed all that winter
with twenty thousand men. And from thence made provision to make wars
against the land of prester John, who is by profession a Christian. In this
land of prester John, when it does rain, it continues at the least one whole
month. And in the gran Caer, there is a plague once in every seventh year,
which comes with such a fiercenes, that the most part of all the people there
do die of the said plague: and people in great numbers lose their eye sight
with the vapors and great heat which comes from the ground.

I remember one battle which the Admiral of the great Turk named Ally
Basha, made with three score Galleys, and seized upon a Town where the said
Ally Basha was borne himself, named Trybusas, which is in the Confines of
Calabria, and under the government of the King of Spain, at which Town he
landed his Army an hour before day, thinking to have taken it by treason: and
thereupon in great fury scaled the walls with Lathers: but the watch bewrayed
us, and on a sudden, cried Arm, arm, which was soon done: for every man
took him to his tools and weapons of defense. But it is worthy of memory, to
see how the women of that Town did ply themselves with their weapons, making a
great Massacre upon our men, and murdered 500. of them in such speedy and
furious sort as is wonderful: we needed not to have feared their men at all,
had not the women bin our greatest overthrow, at which time I my self was
master Gunner of the Admirals Gally, yet chained grievously, and beaten naked
with a Turkish sword flatling, for not shooting where they would have me, and
where I could not shoot.

It is but a few years since that in the city of Constantinople, there
happened a great plague, where there dyed in six months space, seven hundredth
thousand persons, at which time Master Harbarne Ambassador for the Turkey
company was there, and lost sundry of his servants.

From Damasko we went into the land of prester John who is a Christian, and is
called Christien de Sentour: that is, the Christian of the Gerdell: against
this Prester John, I went with the Turks power, and was then their master
Gunner in the field, the number of Turkish Soldiers sent thither, was five
hundredth thousand men who went thither by land, and pitched themselves in
battle ray at Saran, near to the place where the son of Prester John
keeps his Court. There Prester John with his power, slew of the Turks to the
number of sixty thousand, only by policy of draw Bridges to let forth
water, made as secret Slewses for that purpose, in which water so many Turks
perished. The next day following, the Turks power did incompasse Prester John's
son and took him prisoner, and sent him for a Present to the great Turks
court then being at Constantinople, but soon after, Prester John him self,
made an agreement between the great Turk and his son, that the one should
not demand tribute of the other, and so his son was released and sent home
again.

It is to be understood that the great Turk paid tribute unto Prester John,
before the time of these wars, and the Turk did demand a tribute of Prester
John's son, which had been paid unto him many years before: whereupon
Prester John, when his son was taken prisoner, gave consent to forgive the
one tribute for the other, and thereby they were set at liberty the one from
the other.

This Prester John of whom I spoke before, is a king of great power, and
keeps a very bountiful Court, after the fashion of that country, and has
every day to serve him at his table, 60. kings, wearing leaden crowns on
their heads: and these serve in the meat unto Prester John's table: and
continually the first dish of meat set upon his table is a dead man's skull,
clean picked and laid in black earth, putting him in mind that he is but
earth and must dye. These 60. kings are all his Uize Royes in several places,
and they have their deputies to supply their rooms, and these kings live
continually in Prester John's Court, and go no further then they may be still
attendant upon him without leave from their Emperor Prester John.

In the court of Prester John, there is a wild man, and another in the high
street at Constantinople, whose allowance is every day a quarter of raw
mutton: and when any man dies for some notorious offense, then are they
allowed every day a quarter of man's flesh. These wild men are chained fast to
a post every day, the one in Prester John's court, and the other in the high
street of Constantinople, each of them having a Mantell cast about their
shoulders, and all over their bodies they have wonderful long hair, they are
chained fast by the neck, and will speedely devour any man that comes in
their reach.



There is a beast in the court of Prester John, called Arians, having four
heads, they are in shape like a wild Cat, and are of the height of a Mastie
Curre.

In his court also there is Fowls called Pharoes fowls, whose feathers are
very bewtifull to be worn, these fowls are as big as a Turkey, their flesh
is very sweet, and their feathers are of all manner of colors.

There is Swannes in that place, which are as large again as the Swans of
England, and their feathers are as blew as any blew cloth.



I have seen in a place like a park adjoining unto Prester John's Court, three
score and seventeen Unicornes and Oliphants all alive at one time, and they
were so tame that I have played with them as one would play with young Lambs.

These Oliphants together with many other wild and tame beasts will not
drink of any water until the Unicornes do begin thereof: these Unicornes when
they come to drink of any river, they put in their horn which is blackish and
but short: and forth of that water will rise a great skum, and thereby cleanse
all the filth and corruption that is within the same, and this horn grated to
powder in drink, is a present remedy against any manner of poison.

When Prester John is served at his table, there is no salt at all set on in
any saltseller as in in other places, but a loaf of bread is cut cross, and
then two knives are laid a cross upon the loaf, and some salt put upon the
blades of the knives and no more.

Being thus in the land of Prester John, I travailed within eighteen degrees
of the Sun, every degree being in distance three score miles.

I was at the Red sea at the place where Moses made passage with his wand for
the children of Israel, where I saw a ship called the graund Maria, she
draws but xi. foot water, and against this ship three score gallyes and
ships have fought at one time and can not conquer her: and this is under the
government of the great Turk.

This ship is built almost flat, and is of such burden, that she will
carry in her ten thousand fighting men, with their furniture.

I have been in the Courts of the three great Patriarks, the first whereof is
kept at Jerusalem, the second at the gran Caer, and the third is at
Constantinople: these have their Courts in very stately sort, and attended on
by none but Priests.

When I was at Jerusalem I saw the sepulcher wherein it is said that Christ was
buried: it is as it were in a vault, and has seven doors and seven roes of
marble steps or stayers to go down into the same, and then at the bottom of
the stayers there is a fair Chapel, with an Altar and a Lamp burning
continually day and night before it, and the grave is full of white earth so
white as chalk, and a tomb of the same earth made and laid upon stone,
whereon are sundry letters written, but I could not read them. Upon the left
hand of which Chapel is a rock of stone, of a blackish color, being all of
that stone that we commonly call the load stone, which is of this nature: that
it will draw iron unto it: this stone is the principallest instrument which
Mariners and Sailors do use for directing of their compass at the sea.

The great Turk has some profit coming by the keeping of this monement, and
has therefore builded at his own charges an Hospital within Jerusalem, which
his Genezaries do keep: and this Hospital is to receive all Pilgrims and
travelers to lodge in when so ever they come. And all that come to see the
sepulcher do pay ten Crowns a piece, whereof the Turk has but one, and the
rest goes to the Church, and so they may stay there so long as they list to
lodge in that new Hospital, and have lodging, bread, victuals and water so
long as they will remain there, but no wine: such as come thither for pilgrims
have no beds at all, but lie upon the ground on turkey karpets, and before the
sepulcher of Christ there is mass said every day, and none may say the Mass
there, but a man that is a pure virgin: there was one that died when I was
there, that daily said and sung the Mass before the sepulcher, and he was an
hundred and thirty years of age before his death, and now another is in his
room, but whether the old man that dead is, or this which is now in place to
sing and say the said Mass, were pure virgins I know-not, but sure I dare not
swear for them, because they are men, and flesh and blood as other are.

After that I had thus long traveled and spent my time in the wars and
affairs of the great Turk, I was returned again to Constantinople, where at
my ariuall a penny loaf of English starling money, was worth a crown of
gold, such was the sickness, misery, and dearth then upon the said city,
and happy was he that so could get bread to eat. Nevertheless, because I
was a Christian, and for that the Turk had no cause presently to use me in my
office of gunnership, I was there imprisoned, where I found two thousand
Christians pinde up in stone walls locked fast in iron chains, grievously
pinched with extreme penury, and such as wished death rather then in such
misery to live: amongst these was I placed, and took part with them
accordingly: greeuing at my hard hap that the wars had not ended me before I
came thither.

Thus I remained there with the rest, guarded and daily watched, that we could
stir no manner of way, there we were suffered to work upon any manner of
trade or occupation wherein we were any way expert: and what we did or made, we
sold to the Turks, and they gave us money for the same: and thus were we
suffered to work until it were time to go and gather snow, which is there
used yearly of custom to be gathered: for the Turk has great sums of
money paid him for the said snow, which is gathered and sold to his
subjects for a penny the pound, which pound, is two pound and a half English:
and this snow they use only to cool their drink in the summer season. And no
man may sell any snow until the Turk has sold all his.

Thus living in this slavish life as is before said, a long time, diverse of us
compl^tted and hamered in our heads how we might procure our releasement:
whereupon I attempted with the consent of five hundredth Christians, fellow
slaves with my self, to break a wall of fourteen foot broad, made of earth,
lyme, and sand, which we greatly moystened with strong viniger, so that the
wall being made moist therewith through the help of a spike of iron, five
hundred of us had almost escaped out of prison: but look what shall be, shall
be, and what God will have, shall come to pass and no more, as appears by
us, for we having made means for our speedy flight, as we were issewing
forth, we were bewrayed by the barking of a dog, which caused the Turks to
arise, and they taking us with the manner, stopped us from flying away and gave
us in recompense of our pains taking herein, seven hundredth blows a piece
with a bulls pissell upon the naked skin, viz. three hundred on the belly,
and four hundred on the back.

Thus lying still prisoner in the Turks dungeons, it pleased God to send
thither for the releasement of me and others, a worthy gentleman of this land,
named Master Harborne Ambassador thither for the company of Merchants, who to
the great honor of England did behave himself wonderful wisely, and was a
special means for the releasement of me and sundry other English captives,
who were set at liberty soon after the death of the great Basha: thus by the
means of the said master Harborne I was set free from thraldom, and by him
sent into England where I arrived on the first of May. 1589.

Whilst I was remaining prisoner in Turkey, and kept in such slavish manner as
is before rehearsed, the great Turk had his son circumcised, which was the
foreskin of his privy members was taken off, at which time there was great
triumphs and free liberty proclaimed for a hundred days space, that any
Nobleman, gentleman, traveler, Christian or other, might freely (without being
molested) come and see the triumphs there used, which were wonderful: I my
self was then constrained to make a cunning piece of fire work framed in
form like to the Arc of Noye, being 24. yardes high, and eight yardes broad,
wherein was placed 40. men drawn on six wheels, yet no man seen, but seemed
to go alone, as though it were only drawn by two fiery Dragons, in which show
or Arc there was 12. thousand several pieces of fire work.

At the same time that I was released, there were set at liberty about twenty
English men, whereof I was one of the last: some of them are at this present in
England. My self and others were released by means of her Majesty's
favorable letters sent to the great Turk, brought by the aforesaid master
Harborne, some by the ransom money gathered at sundry times by the Merchants
in the City of London, for that godly purpose: of which, some of their names
that were released were these. Hamond Pan, John Beer, John Band, Andrew
Pullins, Edward Buggins and others.

Here may the bountiful Citizens of London see (as in a glass) the fruits of
their liberality and charitable devotion given at several times in the year
toward the releasment of poor captives, such as are constrained to abide most
vilde and grievous tortures, especially the torture and torment of conscience
which grieved me and all true Christians to the very soul: for the Turk by
all means possible would still persuade me and other my fellow Christians
while I was there the time of thirteen years, to forsake Christ, to deny him,
and to believe in their God Mahomet: which if I would have done, I might have
had wonderful preferment of the Turk, and have lived in as great felicity as
any Lord in that Country: but I utterly denied their request, though by them
grievously beaten naked for my labor, and reviled in most detestable sort,
calling me dog, devil, helhound, and such like names: but I give God thanks,
he gave me strength to abide with patience these crosses. And though I were but
a simple man void of all learning, yet still I had in remembrance that Christ
died for me, as appears by the holy Scriptures, and that Christ therein
says, He that denies me before men, I will deny him before my father which is
in heaven: and again he says, Whosoever belieueth on me shall be saved and
have life everlasting: this comfort made me resolute, that I would rather
suffer all the torments of death in the world, then to deny my Savior and
Redeemer Christ Jesus.

After my free liberty granted in Turkey, I intending my journey toward
England, came by land to Uenicie, where I met at Padua thirty Englishmen
students, I met also with an Englishman, who lived in the state of a Friar, he
brought me before the high Bishop, where I was accused for an heretic, and he
brought in two false witnesses to be sworn against me (having before known me
in Turkey) nevertheless I disproued his witnesses, and they were found
forsworn men, then was I set at liberty, and constrained to give fifteen
Crowns toward the finishing of our Ladies shrine at Padua, and my accuser and
his witnesses were punished.

From thence I came to the Duke of Ferrara, where I was well entertained and
liberally rewarded with a horse and five and twenty Crowns for the sake of
the Queens Majesty of England.

From thence with my pasporte, I came to Bolony in Italy, where I met with a
popish Bishop being an English man which showed me great friendship, he is
called Doctor Poole: from thence to Florence, there I met with an English
gentleman, named master John Stanley. And from thence I went to Rome, there I
was nynteene days in trouble with the Pope, and the English Cardinal Doctor
Allen, a notable Arch papist, where I was often examined, but finding nothing
by me, they let me pass, and understanding that I had been a Captive a long
time in Turkey, the Pope gave me his blessing, and twenty and five crowns.
And before I went out of Room, I was again taken by the English College, and
put there into the holy house three days, with a fools coat on my back
half blew, half yeallowe, and a cockes-combe with three belles on my head,
from whence I was helped by means of an Englishman whom I found there, and
presented my petition and cause to the Pope: who again set me at liberty.
From thence I departed to Naples, where I met with a Genowis, who apprehended
me and brought me there before the Uice-roy, saying I was a man of great
knowledge and an English spy. Then I was committed to a dark dungeon fifteen
days, which time they secretly made enquiry where I had lain before, what my
words and behavior had been while I was there, but they could find nothing
by me.

Thrice had I the strappado, hoysted up backward with my hands bound behind
me, which stroke all the iointes in my arms out of joint, where a Physician
was ready to set my arms in joint again presently, I was also constrained to
drink salt water and quicklyme, and then a fine lawne or callico thrust down
my throat and plucked up again, ready to pluck my heart out of my belly, all to
make me to confess that I was an English spy. After this there were four
barde horses prepared to quarter me, and I was still threatened to dye, except I
would confess some thing to my harm.

Thus seven months I endured in this misery, and yet they could find no
cause against me, then I wrote to the Uice-Roy to do me justice, he did write
to the K. of Spain to know what should be done with me: whereupon the king of
Spain wrote that I should be employed in a gunners room: then was I
entertained, and had 35. crowns a month, and had the kings pattent sealed
for the same, and then understanding that three ships were coming toward
England, I departed and fled from thence with them to my native country, in
the grace of London by the help of one Nicholas Nottingham master thereof.
Thus came I into England with great joy and hearts delight, both to my self and
all my acquiantance.

The report in Rume, Naples, and all over Italy, in my travel which was at such
time as the Spaniards came to invade England, after I had been released of my
imprisonment, as I passed thpough the streets, the people of that parts asked
me how I durst acknowledge my self to be an English man, and thereupon to
daunt me, did say, that England was taken by the Spaniards, and that the
Queen of England (whom God long preserve) was taken prisoner, and was coming
toward Rome to do penuance: and that her highness was brought thither,
through deserts, moist, hilly and foul places: and where plain ground was,
hoales and hollow trenches were dug in the way of her Majesty's passage, to
the intent that she might have gone up to the mid leg in oes or mire: with
these speeches they did check me, and I said, that I trusted God doubtless
would defend my prince better, then to deliver her into the hands of her
enemies, wherefore they did greatly revile me.

Many things I have omitted to speak of, which I have seen and noted in the
time of my troublesome travel. One thing did greatly comfort me which I saw
long since in Sicilia, in the city of Palerms, a thing worthy of memory,
where the right honorable the Earl of Oxenford a famous man for Chivalry, at
what time he travailed into foreign countries, being then personally present,
made there a challeng against all manner of persons whatsoever, and at all
manner of weapons, as Turniments, Barriors with horse and armor, to fight and
combat with any whatsoever, in the defense of his Prince and country: for
which he was very highly commended, and yet no man durst be so hardy to
encounter with him, so that all Italy over, he is acknowledged ever since for
the same, the only Chiuallier and Noble man of England. This title they give
unto him as worthily deserved.

Moreover in the land of Egypt near to the River of Nilo, within six miles of
the gran Caer. There are seven Mountains builded on the out side, like unto
the point of a Diamond, which mountains were builded in King Pharaos time to
keep corn in, and they are mountains of great strength. It is said that they
were builded about that time when Joseph did lade home his brethrens Asses with
corn, in the time of the great dearth mentioned in the scripture. At which
time all their corn lay in those mountains.

In the river of Nilo, there is long fishes of ten or twelve foot long, which
swimmeth near the shore, they are called the fishes of King Pharao, they are
like unto a Dolphin. These fishes are so subtle, that swimming near the shore
side, they will pull men or women suddenly into the river and devour them.

In the city of the gran Caer, the houses are of a very old building, all of
lime and stone, and in most of the houses, the roofes are covered with fine
gold, in a very workmanly sort.

In Egypt there is small store of water, because it never raineth in that
country, so that their water is very dangerous to drink. They have no
springs at all in that country, and yet there falls such a dew every night,
as does refresh and keep their herbs and plants in due sort, and makes them
spring very fruitfully.

The people of those countries before mentioned are for the most part of a
reasonable stature, yet of a brounish and swart complexion: their women go
muffled: and generally in the land of Iewry they wear hye steepled hats, much
like unto the form of a sugar loaf.

The city of Damasco is very fruitful and greatly replenished with all manner
of fruits whatsoever, as Pombgranades, Oringes, Limons, Apples, Pears,
Plumbes, Grapes, and all other like fruits.

The Turks are a people that at some time they will attempt to do wonderful
things, as going upon Ropes, and thrusting their swords into their naked
flesh, and stick their swords in their flesh like unto a Scabbard: and many
other things of great danger.

In Turkey no man may strike the gran Cadie, that is their chiefest judge, if
any man do strike him, he loses his right arm for his labor, without
redemption.

At my coming over into England from Rome, I was fame to steal away, being
then retained in yearly fee to the King of Spain, to be one of his cheifest
Gunners. And if the Ship wherein I came over, had been taken, both they and I
my self had died for that offense.

The old City of Jerusalem, is a very desolate place, nothing to be seen but
a little of the old walls which is yet remaining, and all the rest is grass,
moss, and weeds, like to a piece of rank or moist ground. They have no
tillage in those parts.

The City of Jerusalem where the Temple stands, is almost a mile from the
old walls of Jerusalem: it is of a very old building, and there stands all
the old relikes preserved and kept as monuments of great treasure.

Now to return where I left of, and declare unto you wherein I employed my
self since my coming into England: here I visited my friends from May till
November, and then departed into France, where I had entertainment at the
hands of the renowned king and captain of this age, Henry of Burbon king of
France and Navarre, who received me into pay, and appointed me his master
Gunner in the field.

So that upon Ashwednesday last, at his most renowned battle fought on the
plain of Saint Andrew nere Dreux. I was in service under him, where I gave
three charges vhon the enemy, and they in stead thereof, gave us fifteen
shot, and yet (God be thanked) prevailed not against us. There were we
constrained to make Bulwarks of the dead bodies of our enemies and horses:
where for my pains taking that day, the king greatly commended me and
honorably rewarded me. But soon after my first arrival in France, I was
hated by some lewd Gunners, who envying that I should have the title to be
master Gunner in France, practiced against me, and gave me poison in drink
that night: which thing when the king understood, he gave order to the
governor of Deep, that his Physician should presently see unto me, who gave
me speedily Unicornes horn to drink, and there by God and the Kings good
means, I was again restored to my former health.

It is to be remembered that at this great battle I made one shot of such an
accustomed mixture, that did slay the Kings enemies in great abundance,
whereat the enemies greatly wondered, considering they could neither find
bullet, chaineshot, nor could see any other thing more then plain powder, and
yet the people straungely slain out right, and lay dead in great abundance.

At my departure forth of France, the Kings Secretary gave me certain
letters of commendation to bear with me to the States of England, wherein was
declared my good service, and how willing he was still to have employed me in
his wars, and would have given me sufficient rewards if with him I would
have remained: but being sent for, to come again into my native country, to
the intent to be employed in her Majesty's affairs, I could do no less but
make have toward England, to take in hand any service which I were able to
perform.

At which time I being in the French Kings Court, and ready to depart toward
England, there came certain news to the King from Roane, that Monsieur de Lego
Captain of the Castle in the said town of Roane, with sundry other
Protestants, being gentlemen and gentlewomen of good account, had conspired
against the traitorous Leagers that do there rebelliously withstand the King,
and had yielded up the Castle with the keys unto a Captain of great courage,
to the use of the French King: whereupon all the power this Captain could
make, was not able to keep it above half a day: for the Kings power lay far
from the same, yet upon the sudden they made toward Roane so fast as they
might: But all they did was in vain, for before the Kings force could get
within six miles of the said town, the enemy had won it again by force of
cannon shot, and took sundry persons as prisoners which they found in the said
Castle, and apprehended sundry other in the town which consented thereunto.
Among whom was a Lady and her three waiting gentlewomen, who were by the leager
and traitors to the King, taken and imprisoned.

The Captain of the said Castle perceiving that the enemy would have
grievously tormented him, stood upon battelments of the said castle, and
fought very valiantly, and would not yield, nor suffer him self to be taken by
no means: but after he had slain with his own hands about fourteen or
fifteen seuerail persons, he seeing the enemy come in great abundance upon
him, thereby entending to take him, suddenly flung his weapons at them, and
without any regard of saving his life, wilfully flung him self headlong over
the castle wall, and thereby broake his neck: The rest were grievously
tormented and put to death for consenting thereunto.

But it greeueth me to report the extreme tyranny which those Traitorous
Leagers inflicted upon the Lady aforesaid and her three waiting Maids, only
for delivering the keys which they had in their custody. These were massacred
in this manner: first they were all stripped naked in a field wherein they
were executed: they were all severally by the hands and legs bound to the
feet of four sundry horses provided for that purpose, and every one being made
fast upon a sudden to the horses, some whipped each horse forward: and then
with axes, swords, and hatchets quartered them alive: which report when the
King understood thereof, he vowed to revenge their death upon those tyrannous
Tormentors.

Thus have you heard the manner of my tedious and grievous travail, my
misery, slavery, and captivity, which I suffered therein, the manner of some
old monuments and the customs of such as dwell in foreign Nations far off,
and in places where our Savior and his Apostles were resident, and preached
upon the earth: my services done under the great Turk in Persia, Tartaria,
Grecia, and places of service: I omit herein my service at the taking of
Tunnys, and what I did in the Royle under don John de Austria: and many other
things which I could here discover unto you, only let this suffice, that I
shall be glad, and do daily desire that I may be employed in some such service
as may be profitable to my Prince and Country.

FINIS.

