THE Lamentations of Amyntas for the death of Phillis, paraphrastically
translated out of Latin into English Hexameters by Abraham France.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, for Thomas Newman, and Thomas Gubbin. Anno Dom.
1587.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, virtuous and learned Lady, the Lady Mary, Countess
of Penbroke.
MIne afflicted mind and crased body, together with other external calamities
have wrought such sorrowful and lamentable effects in me, that for this whole
year I have wholly given over my self to mournful meditations. Among others,
Amyntas is one, which being first prepared for one or two, was afterward by the
means of a few, made common to many, and so pitifully disfigured by the
boistrous handling of unskillful pen men, that he was like to have come abroad
so unlike himself, as that his own Phillis would never have taken him for
Amyntas. Which utter undoing of our poor shepeheard, I knew not well
otherwise how to prevent, but by repairing his ragged attire, to let him pass
for a time under your honorable protection. As for his foes, they either
generally mislike this unusual kind of verse, or else they fancy not my
peculier travail. For the first, I never heard better argument of them then
this, such an one has done but ill, therefore no man can do well, which
reason is much like their own rimes, in condemning the art, for the fault of
some artificers. Now for the second sort of reprehenders who think well of the
thing, but not of my labor therein, mine answer is at hand. If there were
any penalty appointed for him that would not read, he might well complain
of me that publish it to be read. But if it be in every man's choice to read
it, or not to read, why then not in mine also to publish or not to publish it?
He that will, let him see and read; he that will neither read nor see, is
neither bound to see nor read. He that takes no delight in reading, let him
think that among so many men so diversely affected, there may be some found of
a contrary humor. If any begin to read, when he begins to take no delight,
let him leave of and go no further. If he follow on in reading without
pleasure, let him neither blame me that did what I could, nor be angry with
the thing which has no sense, but reprehend himself who would continue in
reading without any pleasure taking.

Your honors most affectionat. Abraham France.

The First Lamentation.
IN flower of young years fair Phillis lately departing,
With tears continual was daily bewayld of Amyntas,
half mad Amyntas, careful Amyntas, mournful Amyntas.
Whose mourning al night, al day, did weary the mountains,
Weary the woods, and wyndes, and caves, and weary the fountains.
But when he saw in vain his cheeks with tears to be watered,
cheeks al pale and wan, yet could not find any comfort,
comfortles then he turns at length his watery countnance
Unto the shril waters of Thames, and there he begins:
Here, O nymph, these plaints, here, O good nymph, my bewailings,
And convey them down to thy kinsmans watery kingdom,
Down to the world washing main sea with speedy reflowing:
World washing main-sea will then convey to the worlds end
This grievous mourning, by the shore, by the sands, by the desert,
Desert, sands, and shore which witness were to my mourning.
And great God Neptune perchance, his mightily thundering
Triton, will command to recount what I feel, what I suffer,
Raging heat of love, passing outrageous Aetna.
So th'infamous fame of wretched lover Amyntas,
Blown from the east to the weast, by the sounding trump of a Triton,
Through deep seas passing, at length may pearce to Auernus,
And fyelds Elysian where blessed souls be abiding.
And there meet Phillis, sweet soul of Phillis among them,
Sweet soul of Phillis, still, still, to be mournd of Amyntas,
O what a life did I lead, what a blessed life did I lead then,
Happy shepherd with a loving less, while destiny suffered?
Under a beech many times we sat most sweetly together,
Under a broad beech tree that sunbeames might not anoy us,
Either in others arms, still looking either on other:
Both, many rimes singing, and verses both many making,
And both so many words with kisses so many mingling.
Sometimes her white neck, as white as milk, was I tutching,
Sometimes her pretty paps, and breast was I bold to be fingring,
Whilst Phillis smyling and bushing hanged by my bosom,
And these cheeks of mine did stroke with her yuory fingers,
these cheeks with young hear like soft down all to be smeared,
O joyful spring time with pleasure wished abounding,
O those blessed days while good luck shyn'd fro the heavens,
But since Phillis, alas, did leave most cursed Amyntas,
Pains have plagued, alas, both flesh and bones of Amyntas,
No day rises, alas, but it hears these groans of Amyntas,
No night comes, alas, that brings any rest to Amyntas,
Night and day thus, alas, still Phillis troubles Amyntas.
Now if northern blasts should sound their fearful alarm,
And boistrous tempests, come thundering down fro the heavens,
So that I were compeld with sheep and kidds fro the pastures
Down to the broad brancht trees and thick set groves to be skudding,
There to remain for a while, and al for fear of a scowring,
Phillis then do I want, then my sweet Phillis is absent,
Phillis then do I want: whose wont was then to be harckning
All that I could of love, and gods lovely remember:
Songs of lusty satyrs, and Fauni friends to the mountains,
And cheerful Charites: such songs, as none but I only,
Only Amyntas made, for none compared with Amyntas.
But now, Phillis I want, and who shall now be my Phillis?
Who shall mark what I sing, what I say, forsaken Amyntas?
If that I praise Phillis, these hills give praise to my Phillis,
And Phillis, Phillis, from rocks with an Echo, reboundeth,
Thus by the whistling winds my mournings, made but a jesting.
If that I groan, these trees with bending, yield many gronings:
And very ground for grief shows her complexion altered:
So this ground, these trees, these rocks, and Echo resounding,
All that I hear, that I see, gives fresh increase to my sorrow.
Go poor sheep and kidds, sometimes the delight of Amyntas,
Seek now somewhere else both gras and boughs to refresh you,
Make your way by the fields, and never look for Amyntas,
Lodge your selves at night, and never look for Amyntas.
Some pitiful goodman will take compassion on you,
And feed you wandering, and bring you home by the euning.
And I alone, yielding due mourning unto my Phillis,
Phillis mine and yours (for you also she regarded)
I Will now wander alone, still alone, by the rocks, by the mountains,
Dwelling in dark dens by the wild beasts only frequented,
Where no path for man, where no man's seen to be passing:
Or to the woods I Will go, so dark with broadshadoe branches,
That no Sun by the day, no star by the night do anoy me,
And that I hear no voice, but Goblins horrible outcries,
Owls baleful scrikings, and crows unlucky resoundings.
There shall these mine eyes be resolud in watery fountains:
There shall these fountains flow over along by the pastures:
There will I make such plaints, as beasts shall mourn by my playnings,
Such plaints, as strong trees shall rent and riue fro the rooting,
Make wild Panthers tame, and mollify lastly the flintstone.
And if I needs must sleep* I Will take but a nap by my sleeping,
On bare and cold ground, these lims al weary reposing:
No green turfe to my head, shall stand in steed of a pillow,
No bows or branches geeue cou'ring unto my carkas,
That some foul serpent may speedily give me my deaths wound:
That this poor soul may from flesh and blood be released,
And passing stygian waters, may come to the fair fields,
Elysian fair fields, and daily resort to my Phillis.
Mean while, friendly shepherds and plowmen, mark what I tell you,
Mark what I say (for I think you knew and loved Amyntas.)
Disdain dainty Venus, give no ground unto the blind boy,
Young boy, but strong boy: take heed, take heed by Amyntas.
The One with a fire has burnt, and the other pearst with an arrow
Flesh, and bones, and blood: what is worse then a fire, then an arrow?
O bitter fortune of too too wretched Amyntas.
The second Lamentation.
WHen by the pleasant streams of Thames poor caitif Amyntas
Had to the dull waters his grief thus vainly revealed,
Spending all that day and night in vainly revealing,
As soon as morning her shining hears fro the mountains
Had shown forth, and dryu'n al starlight quite fro the heavens,
Then that unhappy shepherd still plag'd with unhappily loving,
Left those barren banks and waters no pity taking,
And on a crookt sheephooke his lims all weary reposing,
Climed a loft to the hills, but, alas, very faintily clymed,
Kiddes, and goats, and sheep driving, goodman, to the mountains,
for sheep, goats, and kidds with pastures better abounding,
Then by the way thus he spoke, to the sheep, to the goats, to the young kidds.
O poor flock, it seems you feel these pangs of a lover,
And mourn thus to behold your mournful master Amyntas.
Your wont was, some part to be bleating, some to be skipping,
Some with bended brows and horned pates to be butting,
Sheep to be gnapping grass, and goats to the vines to be climing.
But now no such thing, but now no lust to be lively,
Sheep and seelly shepherd with lucklesse love be besotted,
You for Amyntas mourn, for Phillis mourns Amyntas,
O with what miseries poor mortal men be molested?
Now do I know right well what makes you thus to be mourning,
Thus to be tired, thus to be quailed, thus to be drooping:
Phillis while she remaynd, milkt my goats ever at euning,
Goats that brought home duggs stretched with milk ever at euning.
Phillis brought them flowers, and them brought unto the welsprings,
When dogdayes reigned, when fields were al to be scorched,
Whilst that I lay sleeping in cooling shade to refresh me.
Phillis again was wont with Amyntas, sheep to be washing,
Phillis again was wont my sheep thus washed to be shearing,
Then to the sweet pastures my sheep thus shorn to be driving,
And from fox and woolfe my sheep thus dryu'n to be keeping
With watchful bawling and strength of lusty Lycisca,
And in folds and coats my flock thus kept, to be closing:
Least by the Northern winds my sheep might chance to be pinched
Least by the frost or snow my kids might chance to be grieved.
Phillis loved you so, so Phillis loved Amyntas,
Phillis a guide of yours, and Phillis a friend of Amyntas.
But sweet sheep, sweet goats, spare not to be lively, for all this,
Look not upon my weeping face so sadly, for all this,
Harken not to my plaints and songs all heavy, for all this,
Harken not to my pipe, my pipe unlucky, for all this.
But sweet sheep, sweet goats, leave of your master Amyntas,
Leap and skip by the flowring fields, and leave of Amyntas,
Climb to the vines and tender trees, and leave of Amyntas,
Climb to the vines, but run for life, for fear of a mischief,
When the old Silenus with his Ass comes lasilie trotting,
Let me alone, me alone lament and mourn my beloved,
Let me alone celebrate her death by my tears, by my mourning:
Like to the silver swan, who seeing death to be coming,
Wandreth alone for a while through streams of lovely Caister,
Then to the flowring banks all faint at length he repaireth,
Singing there, sweet bird his dying song to Caister,
Giving there, sweet bird, his last farewell to Caister,
Yielding up, sweet bird, his breath and song to Caister.
How can Amyntas live, when Phillis leaves Amyntas?
What for fields, for woods, for meadows cares Amyntas,
Meadows, woods, and fields if my sweet Phillis abandon?
Mighty Pales fro the fields, fro the meadows learned Apollo,
Faunus went fro the woods, when Phillis went from Amyntas,
No good sight to my eyes, no good sound came to my hearing.
But let Phillis again come back, and stay with Amyntas,
Then shall woods with leaves, and fields with flowers be abounding,
Meadows with green grass to the poor man's daily reioicing,
Mighty Pales to the fields, to the meadows learned Apollo,
Faunus comes to the woods, if Phillis come to Amyntas,
No bad sight to my eyes, no bad sound comes to my hearing.
Come then, good Phillis, come back, if destiny suffer,
Leave those blessed bowers of fowls already departed,
Let those sparkling eyes most like to the fire, to the Crystal,
Overcome those hags and fiends of fearful Auernus.
Which have overcome those stars of cheerful Olympus.
And by thy speech more sweet then songs of Thracian Orpheus,
Pacify the infernal furies, please Pluto the grim god,
Stay that bawling curre, that three throt horrible helhound,
For virtue, for voice, thou art like to Sibilla, to Orpheus.
Sweet heart, come, to thy friend, to thy friend come speedily sweethart.
Speedily come, least grief consume forsaken Amyntas.
Phillis, I pray thee return, if prayers may be regarded,
By these tears of mine, from cheeks aie rueful abounding,
By those arms of thine, which sometimes clasped Amyntas,
By lips thine and mine, joined most sweetly together,
By faith, hands, and heart with true sincerity pledged,
By songs, by wedding with great solemnity vowed,
By jests, and good turns, by pleasures all I beseech thee,
Help and succor, alas, thy forlorn lover Amyntas.
Or by thy tears entreat those nimphs of destenie fatal,
No pity taking nimphs entreat, that I live not alone thus,
Pind thus a way with grief, suffering unspeakable anguish,
But let death, let death, come speedily give me my pasport,
So that I find fair fields, fair seats, fair groves by my dying,
And in fields, in seats, in groves fair Phillis abiding.
There shall Phillis again, in courtesy strive with Amyntas.
There with Phillis again, in courtesy strive shall Amyntas,
There shall Phillis again make garlands gay for Amyntas,
There for Phillis again, gay garlands make shall Amyntas,
There shall Phillis again be repeating songs with Amyntas,
Which songs Phillis before had made and song with Amyntas.
But what, alas, did I mean, to the whistling winds to be mourning?
As though mourning could restore what destenie takes.
Then to his house, full sad, when night approcht, he returned.
The third Lamentation.
ANd now since burial of Phillis lovely, the third day
At length appeared, when that most careful Amyntas
Loost his kids fro the fold, and sheep let forth fro the sheepcoats,
And to the neighbor hills full set with trees he resorted,
Where, as amidst his flock, his less thus lost he bewaileth,
And makes fond wishes with deep sighs interrupted,
And the relenting air with his owtcries all to bebeateth;
Echo could not now to the last words yield any Echo,
All oppressed with love, for her old love still she remembered,
And she remembered still, that sweet Narcissus her old love,
With tears all blubbred, with an inward anguish amassed.
When she begins to resound, her sobs still stay the resounding,
When she begins her speech, her grief still stops her half speech,
With which her wont was with lovers sweetly to dally.
During these her dumps, thus again complains Amyntas,
During these his plaints, she with all compassion harkneth.
O what a war is this with love thus still to be striving?
O what a wild fire's this conueid to my heart by the blind boy?
That neither long time can bring any end to my striving
Nor tears extinguish this wild fire thrown by the blind boy?
Then then, alas, was I lost, o then then, alas, was I undone,
When the corallcolored lips were by me greedelie vewed,
And eyes like bright stars, and fair brows daintily smiling,
And cheareful forehead with gold wire al to bedecked,
And cheeks al white red, with snow and purple adorned,
And pure flesh swelling with quick veins speedily moving,
And such fine fingers, as were most like to the fingers
Of Tithonus wife, platting the old beard of her husband.
What shall I say to the rest? each part united in order,
Each part unspotted, with long roabes covered each part.
What shall I say to the rest? many kisses joined to the sweet words,
And many words of weight in like sort ioind to the kisses,
Under a green Laurel sitting, and under a myrtle,
Myrtle due to Venus, green Laurel due to Apollo.
That little earthen pot these joys has now fro me snatched,
That little earthen pot where Phillis bones be reserved,
O thrice happy the pot, where Phillis bones be reserved,
And thrice happy the ground, where this pot shall be reserved.
Earth, and earthen pot, you have the beloved of Amyntas,
Natures sweet deareling, and only delight to the whole world,
And sun of this soil, of these woods only Diana,
Only Pales of seellie shepeheards, Pandora the gods,
Excluding all faults, including only the goodness,
O thrice happy the earth, but much more happy the earth pot.
O thrice happy the grass that grows on grave of a gods,
And shooting upward, displayes his top to the heavens.
Sweet blasts of Lephyrus shall make this grass to be seemelle,
No Sith shall touch it, no serpent craftelie lurking
With venomous breathing, or poison deadly shall hurt it:
No Lioness foul paws, Bears foot, beasts horn shall abuse it,
No birds with pecking, no vermin filthy by creeping,
No winters hoare frost, no night dewes dangerus humor,
No rage of suns heat, no stars or power of heavens,
No boistrous tempest, no lightnings horrible outrage.
Drive hence, good plowme^, drive hence your wearied oxen,
And you, friendly shepeheards, keep back your sheep fro the graves grass
Least your sheep unawares may chance by my love to be harmed,
Least by the bulls rude rage her bones may chance to be bruised,
Whilst with foot and horn he the graves ground teareth asunder.
Make have you young men, make have all you pretty damsels,
With sacred water this sacred place to besprinkle:
Burn Piles of beache trees, and then cast on the sabaean
Spice to the Piles burning, send sweet perfumes to the heavens,
Cinnamon, and Cafia, violets, and loved Amomum,
Red colored roses, with Bearebreech cast ye together.
And then on every side set tapers sacred in order,
And beat your bare breasts with fists all weary for anguish,
And sing sweet Epitaphes, lifting your voice to the heavens,
Sing sour sweet Epitaphes in death and praise of a gods.
Wanton fleshly Satyrs, and Fauni friends to the mountains,
Nimphs addict to the trees, and in most gracius order
Three graces ioining, shall bear you company mourning.
And I my self will dress, embalme, and chest my beloved,
And following her coarse, (all pale and wan as a dead man,)
Weary the woods with plaints, and make new streams by my weeping
Such streams as no banck shall bar, streams ever abounding,
Such streams as no drought shall dry, streams never abating.
With me Parnassus, with me shall mourn my Apollo,
And Venus, all chafed that destenie took my beloved.
And that same vile boy that first did join me to Phillis,
His lamp shall lay down, and painted quiver abandon,
And with his own pretty tears trickling, and sweetly beseeming,
Help me to mourn, although that he gave first cause to my mourning.
But what, alas, do I mean to repeat these funeral outcries.
Still to repeat these songs, and still too late to repeat them?
Thrice has Phoebus now displaid his beams fro the mountains,
Thrice has Phoebus now descended down to the maine sea,
Since my beloud was dead, since our good company parted,
Since Phillis buried, since all solemnities ended,
Since my delites, poor wretch, were all inclosd in a coffin,
Yet do I mourn here still, though no good coms by my mourning,
Adding tears to my tears, and sorrows unto my sorrows,
And no stay to my tears, and no rest coms to my sorrows.
O strong boy, strong bow, and O most dangerus arrow,
Now do I find it a pain, which first did seem but a pleasure,
Now do I feel it a wound, which first did seem but a smarting,
When strong boy, strong bow, shot first that dangerus arrow.
Thus did Amyntas mourn, and then came home by the sonset.
The fourth Lamentation.
Thrice had shining sun withdrawn his face fro the heavens,
And earth all darkened, since Phillis friendly departed,
And when fourth day came, then again true lover Amyntas,
Mindful of old love still, took no joy flock to be feeding,
But still alone wandering, through fields, to the banks, to the waters,
Leaned his head on bank, and eyes cast down to the waters,
With tears incessant his cheeks full waterie washing.
What now rests, alas, to be done of woeful Amyntas?
No sense, no knowledge in these insensible ashes,
In grave no feeling, in death there is no pity taking.
Phillis makes but a jest, dead Phillis mocketh Amyntas.
Phillis breaks her faith, and plays with Pluto the black prince,
Pluto the black prince now enioies those ioies of Amyntas,
Speak on, good sweet nymphs, if you can tell any tidings,
Whether among those trulls that wait on Queen of Auernus,
My Queen and Empres, my Phillis chance to be spinning?
Speak, for I fear, for I fear, she will never come to Amyntas,
And thou Syluanus, Siluanus good to the mountains,
And flocks on mountains, o help most helples Amyntas,
Help by thy self, by thy friends, thou god cause gods to be helping,
For my religion, for my devotion help me,
For thine own boys sake, for love of sweet Cyparissus,
Either let Phillis be returned back to Amyntas,
Or let Amyntas dye, that death may succor Amyntas.
And thou naughty Cupid, yet say on, give me thy counsel,
What shall I do, shall I dye? shall Amyntas murder Amyntas?
Dye then Amyntas: death will bring Phillis to Amyntas.
O hard hearted love, thou see what I bear, what I suffer,
Heart with flames, and eyes with mournful water abounding,
Head with cares possessed, and soul full of horrible anguish,
This thou see, and sure I do know, it greeus thee to see this,
Though they call thee tyrant, though so thou justly be called,
Though thy nature pass Busiris beastly behavior:
For what makes me to mourn, may cause thee: yield to my mourning:
One rude rock, one wind, and one tempestuus outrage
Batters, breaks, and beats thy ship, my ship to the quicksands.
Our harms are equal, thy ship wrack like to my shipwreck,
Love did love Phillis, Phillis was loud of Amyntas,
Phillis loves dearling, Phillis dearling of Amyntas,
Dearling, crown, garland, hope, joy, wealth, health of Amyntas,
And what more shall I say? for I want words fit for Amyntas.
And thou churlish ground, now cease any more to be fruitful,
Cease to be decked with flowers, and all in green to be mantled,
Thy flower is withered, my garland latlie decayed,
Phillis thine and mine with death untimely departed,
Whose sweet corpse thou bar'st, whose footsteps in thee be printed,
And whose face thou did admire for beawtie renowned,
Belch out roaring blasts with gaping jaws, to the heavens,
That those toaring blasts may scour by the skies, by the heavens,
And foul struggling storms cast down fro the clouds, fro the heavens
For such foul weather will best agree with a mourner.
Howl and mourn thou earth, and roar with an horrible outcrie,
Howl as then thou did, when mountains were to the mountains
Put, by thy cursed brood, to be clyming up to Olympus,
When great flakes of fire came flashing down fro the heavens,
When thy crawling sons came tumbling down from Olympus.
Howl as lady Ceres did then, when prince of Auernus
Stole her daughter away from fields that joined on Aetna,
Unto the dungeons dark, and dens of his hellish abiding.
Thou ground, forgetful what was by duty required,
Should send, unbidden, with Phills, tears to Auernus.
Her blessed burden thou wast unworthy to carry,
Therefore tender girl in flowring age she departed,
O frowning, fortune, o stars vnluckilie shining,
O cursed birth day of quite forsaken Amyntas.
Phillis, alas, is changd, Phillis converted in ashes,
Whose pretty lips, neck, eyes, and hair so sweetly beseeming,
Purple, snow, and fire, and gold wire seemd to resemble,
Tithonus fair wife coms always home by the sunset,
Every night coms home to that old Tithonus her husband,
Sweet Cephalus leaving, and gray beard heartily kissing:
But my Phillis, alas, is gone as far as Auernus,
Gone too far to return, and this tormenteth Amyntas.
White is black and sweet is sour to the sense of Amyntas,
Night and day do I weep, and make ground moist by my weeping,
Mourn, lament, and howl, and power forth plaints to the heavens.
So do the Nightingales in bushes thorny remaining
Sing many doleful notes and tunes, sweet harmony making,
Their young ones mourning, their young ones daily bewailing.
Phillis, alas, is gone, she will never come to Amyntas,
Never again come back, for death and destiny stay her,
Stay her among those groves, and darksome dens of Auernus,
Where Is no path to return, no starting hole to be scaping,
Desteny, death, and Hell, and howling hydeus helhound,
Loathsome streams of stix, that ninetimes compass Auernus,
Stay her amongst those hags in dungeons ougly for ever.
Only the name and fame, and her most happy remembrance
still shall abide, shall live, shall flourish freely for ever.
Thus did Amyntas speak, and then came feyntily homeward.
The fyfth Lamentation.
SInce Phillis burial with due celebration ended,
Phoebus again aduanct his blasing face fro the maynesea
And with morning Star dispelling night fro the heavens
Quickly the fifth time brought broad day light unto Amyntas:
But yet Phillis in heart, in mind, and soul of Amyntas
Still did abide, and still was Phillis mournd of Amyntas.
No care of driving his goats and kidds to the mountains,
No care of following his sheep and lambs to the pastures,
But dailight loathing, and days work wonted abhorring,
Straight to the woods does he walk, in no man's company walking,
Where he the weeping flower making al weary by weeping,
Untuned speeches cast out, and desperate outcries,
Where, with sobs to the winds, with tears increase to the waters
Still did he give, and still vain love most vaynly bewailed.
As loving Turtle seeing his lately beloved.
Turtle-doue thrown down from tree, with a stone, with an arrow,
Can not abide sunbeams, but flies fro the fields, fro the meddows,
Unto the darkest woods, and there his desolat harbor
Makes in a Cypres tree, with lightning all to be scortched,
Or with Winters rage and black storms fowly defaced:
Where on a rotten bow his lyms all heavy reposing,
Still does he groan for grief, still mourn for his only beloved,
Then consumed with grievous pangs, and weary with anguish,
Down to the ground does he fall with fainting wings fro the barebow,
Beating dust with wings, and feathers fowly beeraying,
Beating breast with beack til blood come freshly abounding,
Till life gushing forth with blood go jointly together,
So did Amyntas mourn, such true love made him a mourner.
O what a vile boy's this, what a grievous wound, what a weapon?
O what a dart is this that sticks so fast to my heart root,
Like as roots to the trunck, or life as vine to the Elmetree,
Iuy joined to the walls, or green mos cleeues to the foul ponds.
O pitiles lous-god: poor lovers how be we plagued?
O strong dart of love which each thing speedily pearceth
This dart God Saturn, God Mars, and great God of al Gods
Jove himself did wound, unless that fame do beely them.
Although God Saturn were old and like to a crushed crabb,
Although Mars were armd with tried, Vulcanian armor,
Although Jove with fire and thunder makes a rumbling.
Yea thine own mother, thine own invincible arrow
Hurt: and pricked those papps which thou wast wont to be sucking.
Neither spar'st thou him that raigns in watery kingdom,
Neither spar'st thou him that rules in fearful Auernus,
Pluto know what it is with a paltery boy to be troubled,
Neptune knows what it is by a blind boys check to be mated.
Then since heaven, seas, and hell are naught by thee spared,
Earth and earth dwelling lovers must look to be pinched.
O what gaping earth will Amyntas greedily swallow,
O what goulf of Seas, and deepes, will quickly devour him?
And bring him living to the deadmens souls in Auernus.
Gods of skies (for love has pearst often up to the heavens)
If pity move your hearts, if you from stately Olympus
Can vouchsafe to behold these inward wounds of Amyntas,
Free this troubled soul from cares and infinite anguish,
End these endless toyls, bring ease by my death to my deaths-wound.
O that I had then died when Phillis lived with Amyntas,
In fyelds when Phillis sang songs of love with Amyntas,
In fyelds when Phillis kissed and embraced Amyntas,
In fyelds when Phillis slept under a tree with Amyntas,
Blessed had Amyntas been, if death had taken Amyntas,
So my Phillis might have come and sat by my deathbed,
Closing these eye-lidds of dead, but blessed Amyntas,
Blessed, that he died in her arms, that his eyes were closd by her own hands.
But what, alas, do I mean, for death thus still to be wishing
Fool that I am? For death coms quickly without any wishing.
Inward grief of troubled soul has brought me to deaths door,
Woonted strength does fail, my lyms are fainty with anguish,
Vital heat is gone like unto a smoke, to a vapor,
Yeasterday but a boy, and now grayheaded Amyntas.
O luckles lovers, how always are we beewitched?
What contrarieties, what fancyes flatly repugnant,
How many deaths, lives, hopes, fears, joys, cares still do we suffer?
O that I could forget Phillis, many times am I wishing,
O that I had died, for Phillis, many times am I wishing,
Thus distracted I am ten thousand times by my wishing.
Like to a shipp through whyrling goulfs vnsteadily passing,
Floating here and there, hence thence, with danger on each side,
Fearing Scyllaes jaws, and mouth of greedy Charibdis:
Whylst by the rage of Sea brusd shipp sticks fast to the quick sands,
And by the mighty rebounding waves is lastly devoured
But what, alas, do I mean mine old love still to be mourning,
Forgetting pastures, and flocks, and vines by my mourning?
My naked pastures with fludds are like to be drowned,
My fyelds untilled with thorns are like to be pestred,
My poor sheep and goats with cold are like to be pinched,
My pretty black bullock will come no more to my white cow,
And by the swynes foul snout my vines are like to be rooted,
For want of walling, for want of customed hedging,
Rank boughs in vinetree there is no body now to be cutting,
Cut boughs with wythy twiggs there is no body now to be binding,
Pecking pyes from grapes there is no body now to be keeping.
You rocks help me to mourn: rocks, pynetrees loftily bearing:
You woods help me to mourn: woods always wont to be silent:
You wells help me to mourn: wells clear and like to the Crystal:
Vines forlorn; forsaken shrubbs lament with Amyntas:
On you rocks many times Phillis way wont to be walking,
In you woods many times Phillis was wont to be sitting,
With you wells many times Phillis was wont to be smyling,
And you vines and shrubbs Phillis was wont to be fingring.
Now 'twas just darknight, and home came seelly Amyntas.
The sixth Lamentation:
SInce Phillis burial, six times sprang light fro the mountains,
Six times had Titan brought back his coach fro the mainsea,
And flying horses, with salt waves all to bedashed,
With puffed up nosthrils great fire flames lustilie breathing:
When to the wild woods went careless, yet careful Amyntas,
Leaving flock in fold, no creatures company keeping
Beating breast with fist, with tears face foulie defacing,
Filling ways as he went, with such and so many wailings
As were sometimes made by the sweet Rhodopeian Orpheus,
When by the rocks of Thrace, by the fatal water of Haebrus,
His sweet Euridice with most sweet voice he bewailed,
Euridice twice lost, by the cursed laws of Auermus,
When sweet voice sweet harp joined most sweetly together,
Made both birds and beasts and stocks and stones to be mourning.
Every beast in field wishes dark night to be coming,
Morning star by the birds in fields is sweetly saluted,
As soon as she begins by the break of day to be peeping.
Every beast in field wishes dark night to be coming,
Euning star to the kids well fed coms hartelie welcome,
As soon as she begins by the nights aproch to be shining.
Neither day nor night can please displeased Amyntas;
All day long do I mourn, and all night long am I mourning,
No dai's free fro my plaints, and no night's free fro my plaining.
Who so thinks it strange, that thus tormented Amyntas,
Can thus long endure: who thinks it strange, that Amyntas,
Lius, yet takes no rest, but still lius, still to be dying;
This man knows not, alas, that love is daily triumphant,
This man knows not, alas, that love can work many wonders,
Love can abide no law, love always lous to be lawles,
Love altreth nature, rules reason, maistreth Olimpus
Laws, edicts, decrees; contemns Jove mightily thundering,
Jove that rules and raigns, that with beck bends Olimpus.
Love caus'de Hippolitus with bry'rs and thorns to be mangled,
For that he had foul love of lusting Phaedra refused.
Love made Absyrtus with sisters hands to be murdered,
And in pieces torn, and here and there to be scattred.
Love forced Pasiphae man's company long to be loathing,
And for a white bulls flesh, bulls company long to be lusting.
Love and luring looks of lovely Polixena caused
Greekish Achilles death, when he came to the Church to be wedded.
Love made Alcides that great invincible Heroes,
Master of all monsters, at length to be whipped by a mistres.
Love drowned Laeander swimming to the beawtiful Hero,
Unto the town Cestos, from town of cursed Abydos.
Love made Jove, that is ruler of earth, and ruler of heaven,
Like to a seely shepherd, and like to the fruitful Echidna,
Like to a fire, to a swan, to a shower, to a bull, to an Aegle,
Sometimes Amphytrion, sometimes Dyctinna resembling.
But what need I to show this blindboyes surly behavior,
Lewd pranks, false policies, slye shifts, and wily devises,
Murdring mind, hardhart, dead hand, bent bow, ready arrows?
No body knows better what bitter grief is abounding
In loves lewd kingdom, then luckles lover Amyntas.
Whether I go to the groves, or whether I climb to the mountains,
Whether I walk by the banks, or whether I look to the fountains,
Love still waits at an inch, and never leaus to be pinching.
Every thing complains, and answers unto my playning,
Euere thing gives cause and new increase to my mourning.
If that I mourn in woods, these woods seem al to be mourning,
And broadbrauncht Oak trees their upright tops to be bowing.
If that I sigh or sobb, this pine tree straight by the shaking,
This peereles pine tree for company seems to be pyning,
As though himself felt th'enduring pangs of Amyntas.
And that byrd of Thrace, my woeful company keeping,
Cries, and calls for Itys, with monstrous villainy murdered,
Murdered, alas, by the diu'lish crafts and means of a mother,
Boiled, alas, by the merciles heart and hand of a sister,
Eaten, alas, by the cursed mouth and teeth of a father.
And poor Turtle-doue her mates good company missing,
Sitts on a naked bough, and keeps me company mourning.
When that I climb to the ragged rocks, and creep to the mountains,
Staying feeble knees with a staff, for fear of a falling,
If that I then curse death, and rail on desteny fatal,
For marring that face, those cheeks, those yuory fingers
Of my sweet Phillis: Phillis coms back with an echo,
Echo returns Phillis five times fro the rocks, fro the mountains,
Every beast which hears these woeful plaints of Amyntas,
Coms, and sitts him down twixt legs of woeful Amyntas:
Suffers back to be stroakt with staff of mourneful Amyntas:
Claps his tail it is belly beelowe, and moan's with Amyntas:
As that good lioness, which first was cured by a Roman,
In Romain theater gave life for life to the Roman.
O if such pity were in desteny no pity taking,
Phillis I should not miss, nor Phillis miss of Amyntas.
If that I come to the banks and cast mine eyes to the waters,
Waters augmented with these my watery fountains,
Then these foulemouth'd froggs with iarring tunes do molest me,
So that I am compeld with bowing knees to be praying.
Praying unto the nimphs in bowrs of water abiding,
That they would vouchsafe to receive my carkas among them,
And fro the sight of man, fro the light of sun to remove it,
As that loved Hylas they sometimes friendly received.
But yet I wish in vain, and naught can I get by my wishing,
And of my wishing these lewd winds make but a whistling.
So nothing contents poor mal-contented Amyntas,
Clogd with an heap of cares, and closed in an hell full of horror.
Then to his homely Cabin, by the moon light hasted Amyntas.
The seventh Lamentation.
Six nights now were past, and seu'nth day hastened outward,
When with fretting cares, al spent and wasted Amyntas,
Went to the wood, stark wood, with great extremity weeping,
And to the dull deaf winds his late lost freshly bewayling.
O how much this Amyntas is altered from that Amyntas,
Which was wont to be captein of every company rural?
Nothing nimble I am with willowe staff to be threshing,
Nor with toothed rake round heycock for to be making.
Nothing nimble I am, my braunched vines to be cutting,
Nor with sharp edged suck my fruitful soil to be plowing.
Nothing nimble I am my scabbed sheep to be curing,
Nor with leaping lads, with tripping trulls to be daunsing.
Nothing nimble I am sweet rimes and songs to be making,
Nor sweet songs and rymes on pleasant pype to be playing.
My sense is dulled, my strength extremely decayed,
Since that fair Phillis my love did leave me for ever,
Who was worthy to live, and worthy to love me for ever.
Phillis, fair Phillis, thou dearling dear of Amyntas,
What less durst compare with dearling dear of Amyntas,
For wit, for learning, for face, for seemly behavior?
My sweet less Phillis was no more like to the gray gowns,
And country milkemaids, then nightingale to the lapwing,
Rose to the green willow, or silver swan to the swallow.
Phillis amidst fair maids did fairemaids company countnance,
As ripe corn does fields, as clustred grapes do the vinetrees.
As stout bulls do the droues, as bayleaus beautify gardens.
Phillis name and fame, which is yet freshly remembered,
Passed abroad so far, so far surpast Amarillis,
As that it yrkt and grieved disdainful proud Amaryllis,
Who still thought her self for beauties praise to be peereles.
But let her hartful of hate still pine, let her eyes full of envy
Still be resolved in tears, Phillis surmounts Amaryllis.
Phillis dead is alive, and so shall live to the worlds end,
Phillis praise shall escape from death and grave to the worlds end.
But what auails it alas dead Phillis now to be praising?
Phillis, alas, is dead, it is too late now to be praising,
And to renew old thoughts and fond conceits by my praising.
Better it is to be low and never climb to a kingdom,
Then fro the scepter again to be tumbled down to the dunghill,
For what auails it now that Phillis lulled Amyntas,
Lulled him a sleep in her arms and slept her self with Amyntas,
Under a cooling shade from scorching beams to defend us,
Which sight made Aeglon and Mopsus teeth to be watrie?
Or what auails it now to have gathered jointly together
Fragrant herbs and flowers by the mantled fields, by the meddows,
Daffadil, and Endive, with mourning flower Hyacinthus,
Thyme, Casia, Violets, Lillies, and sweet pretty roses
For nymphs and woodgods gay garlands duly preparing?
Or what auails it now to have plucked at strawbery brambles,
Blackebery briers to have spoild, to have bared mulbery branches,
With such country fruits our baskets heavily loading?
Or what auails it now to have given her so many kisses,
And to have taken again in like sort so many kisses?
Or what auails it now to have drawn our talk to the morning,
Or to have made our names with box tree bark to be growing,
Names and vows which naught but death could cause to be broken?
Woeful wretch that I am, Phillis forsaks me for all this,
And forsaken of her death, has possessed me for all this.
And yet I am not sick (unless that love be a sickness)
But death coms creeping, and lingering life is a flytting,
And this differring of death is worse then a dying.
Lingering fire by degrees has spent and wasted Amyntas,
As Meleager of old, whose life was left in a firebrand,
Firebrand cast to the fire by the murdring hands of a mother,
When fatal firebrand burning did burn Meleager.
Every day do I weep, and every hour am I wayling,
Every hour and day dismal to the wretched Amyntas,
Yea much more wretched, then that poor seely Prometheus,
Who for his aspyring, for stealing fire from Olympus,
Was by the Gods decrees fast bound with chains to the mountain
Caucasus, huge and cold, where he is compelled an Eagle,
Eagle still feeding, with his own heart still to be feeding.
O Pan, o Fauni, that love with maids to be lively,
Leave your pipes, your songs, your dance, leave off to be lively,
Join your tears with Amyntas tears, and mourn with Amyntas,
And mourn for Phillis, for Phillis leaves Amyntas.
Phillis for your sake fine wafers duly prepared,
Phillis pleased your eyes whilst Phillis daintily daunced,
Phillis amidst fair maids was deemed still to be fairest,
And gave grace to the rest with her eyes and comely behavior,
As fair Laurel trees be adornd with beautiful iuye,
As fine gold is adornd by the shining light of a jasper.
Since death of Phillis no joys enjoys Amyntas,
Every good thing's gone: Phillis took every good thing,
Country soil laments and country men be a weeping.
And thou garden green now power forth plaints with Amyntas,
Phillis thy sweet banks and bedds did water at eu'ning,
Phillis amidst thy flowers always wast wont to be walking,
But now no walking, but now no water at euning,
Now best flower is dead, now Phillis gone fro the garden.
And you Crystal springs with streams of silver abounding,
Where fair Phillis saw fair Phillis face to be shyning,
Power forth fludds of tears from those your watery fountains,
From those your fountalns with green mos all to be smeared:
Phillis will no more see Phillis sit by the fountains,
Phillis will no more her lips apply to the fountains,
Lips to be joined to the lips of Jove that rules Olympus.
And you darkesome dales, and woods aye wont to be silent,
Where she amidst the shepherds, and toiling boisterous heard men,
Her milkwhite she goats many times was wont to be feeding,
Lament and mourn for this nymphs untimely departure.
But Pan, and Fauni, but garden green of Amyntas,
But you springs, and dales, and woods aye wont to be silent,
Leave of your mourning, I Will give you leave to be silent,
Leave to be silent still, give you me leave to be mourning,
Leave to be mourning still, let this most heavy departure,
This death of Phillis bring wished death to Amyntas.
Here did he pause for a while, and home at night he returned.
The eight Lamentation.
SInce death of Phillis, since Phillis burnt by Amyntas,
Since Phillis burnt bones were chested duly, the eighth time,
Night gave place to the light, and euning unto the morning:
When to the woods so wild, to the wild beasts dangerus harbors,
Forsaking hye ways, by the bye ways passed Amyntas:
And there sets him down al wearied under a myrtle,
For grief still groaning, with deep sighs heavily panting,
Still Phillis naming, still Phillis feintily calling.
And must one wench thus take all the delights fro the country?
And must one wench thus make every man to be mourning?
Every man whose flocks on these hills use to be feeding?
And must Aeglon weep, and must that friendly Menalcas
Wear his mourning roab, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must good Coridon lament, must Tityrus alter
His pleasant melodies, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must Damoetas for grief leave of to be loving?
Must Amarillis leave, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must drooping bull consume as he goes by the meddowe?
Must sheep look lowering, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must sighs seem winds? must tears seem watery fountains?
And must each thing change for death of my bony Phillis?
O then what shall I do, for death of my bony Phillis?
Since that I loved bony less Phillis more dearly then al these.
Since that I loved her more then I love these eyes of Amyntas.
O then what shall I do forlorn forsaken Amyntas,
What shall I do, but die, for death of my bony Phillis?
Phillis who was wont my flock with care to be feeding,
Phillis who was wont my mylch she goats to be milking,
Phillis who was wont, (most handsome wench of a thousand)
Either clouted cream, or cakes, or curds to be making,
Either sine basketts of bulrush for to be framing,
Or by the green meddows gay dancing dames to be leading,
Phillis whose bosom fill beards did love to be filling,
Phillis for whose sake green laurel loved to be bowing,
Phillis, alas, sweet less Phillis, this brave bony Phillis,
Is dead, is buried, maks all good company parted.
O how often Phillis conferd in fields with Amyntas?
Whilst for nymphs of woods gay garlands framed Amyntas.
O how often Phillis did sing in caves with Amyntas,
Joining her sweet voice to the oaten pipe of Amyntas?
O how often Phillis clypt and embraced Amyntas,
How many thousand times has Phillis kissed Amyntas,
Bitten Amyntas lips, and bitten again of Amyntas?
So that Amyntas his eyes inuied these lips of Amyntas.
O sweet soul Phillis w'haue lived and loved for a great while,
(If that a man may keep any mortal joy for a great while)
Like loving Turtles and Turtledoues for a great while:
One love, one liking, one sense, one soul for a great while,
Thefore one deaths wound, one grave, one funeral only
Should have joined in one both love and lover Amyntas.
O good God what a grief is this that death to remember?
For such grace, gesture, face, feature, beauty, behavior,
Never before was seen, is never again to be looked for.
O frowning fortune, o death and desteny dismal:
Thus be the poplar trees that spread their tops to the heavens,
Of their flouring leaves despoiled in an hour, in a moment:
Thus be the sweet violets that gave such grace to the garden,
Of their purpled roabe despoyld in an hour, in a moment.
O how often did I roar and cry with an horrible howling,
When for want of breath Phillis lay feintily gasping?
O how often did I wish that Phoebus would fro my Phillis
Drive this fever away: or send his son from Olympus,
Who, when lady Venus by a chance was pricked with a bramble,
Healed her hand with his oils, and fine knacks kept for a purpose.
Or that I could perceive Podalyrius order in healing,
Or that I could obtain Medaeas exquisite ointments,
And baths most precious, which old men freshly renewed.
Or that I were as wise, as was that crafty Prometheus,
Who made pictures live with fire that he stole from Olympus.
Thus did I call and cry, but no body came to Amyntas,
Then did I rail and rave, but naught did I get by my railing,
Whilst that I called and cried, and raged, and rau'd as a mad man,
Phillis,, alas, Phillis by the burning fitts of a fever,
Quickly before her day, her days unluckily ended.
O dismal deaths day, with black stone still to be noted,
Wherein no sun shined, no comfort came fro the heavens,
Wherein clustred clouds had cou'red lightsome Olympus,
Wherein no sweet bird could find any joy to be chirping,
wherein loathsome snakes from dens were loath to be creeping,
wherein foul skriche owls did make detestable howling,
And from chimney top gave woeful sign of a mischief.
O first day of death, last day of life to Amyntas,
which no day shall drive from soul and heart of Amyntas,
Til Neptune dry'de up withdraw his fludds fro the fishes,
And skaled fishes live naked along by the sea shore,
Till stars fall to the ground, til light hearts leap to Olympus.
For since Phillis went and left forsaken Amyntas,
Joys and pleasures went and left forsaken Amyntas.
Perplexed speaking, and vain thoughts only remained,
Immoderate mourning, and mad love only remained.
Thou Jove omnipotent, which do with mercy remember
Mortal men's miseries: which know what it is to be loving,
And thou god Phoebus that sometimes driu'n from Olympus
Feeding sheep did love, help luckles lover Amyntas
Feeding sheep and goats, help poor man, young man Amyntas.
Thou that abridgest breath, thou daughter dear to the darkness,
Cut this thread of life, dispatch and bring me to darkness,
Infernal darkness, fit place for mournful Amyntas.
So shall Amyntas walk and talk in darksome Auernus,
So shall Amyntas love with Phillis again be renewed,
In fields Elysian Phillis shall live with Amyntas.
Thus do I wish and pray, this praying is but a prattling,
And these wishing words but a blast, but a wind, but a whistling.
Dye then Amyntas Dye, for dead is thy bony Phillis.
Phoebus went to the sea: to the poor house hasted Amyntas.
The ninth Lamentation.
SInce Phillis burial now fair aurora the ninth time
Showed her shining face, and Phoebus lightened Olympus:
When from couch all wett with tears, confounded Amyntas
Raised his crasd carkas, with mind still abroad to be wandering,
Unto the wilde-beasts dens and fearful vnhospital harbors,
Where was nothing else but certain death to be looked for.
But whilst naked lims with roabs al ragged he cou'red,
Often did he call and cry for Phillis, for bony Phillis,
With deep sighs and grons still Phillis, Phillis he called:
And then dressed, up he gets, and gets himself to the desert,
Desert dens, man's sight, and Sunns light ever abhorring.
There by the woods wandering, and love unlucky bewayling,
More and more did he feed that wonted wound of a lover.
Like as a trembling heart, whose heart is pearct with an arrowe,
Runs, and yet running his death still bears about him,
Runs to the thickest groves, yet sweats and bleeds as he runs,
Runs, and so with toil and grief death hasteneth onward:
Then with tears does he seek Dyctamus flower by the desert,
Seeks, but cannot find Dyctamus flower by the desert,
Like to the trembling heart went hartles lover Amyntas.
And thus again at length (his cheeks with water abounding)
From sullen silence abruptly began to be raging.
Since Phillis locked up that starlight lively for ever,
Since fair Phillis slept that long sleep, what shall Amyntas
Think, conceive, contriue, or what shall Amyntas imagine,
What shall Amyntas do, that Amyntas go not a begging?
For no care is of health, no care of wealth in Amyntas,
No joy, no comfort, but Phillis abyds in Amyntas.
Who will fodder now in Winter give to my bullocks?
Who will now any more bring my white bull to my heifer?
Who will goats and kidds to the ragged rocks be a dryuing?
Who will sheep and lambs from rau'ning woolues be defending?
Who will look to my rams, and wash their fleese in a river?
Who will anoint scabb'd sheep, least that contagius humor
Once take vent, make way, and spoil whole flock of Amyntas?
Who will let them blood, when raging fire of a fever
Runs along by the bones, and marrow quickly deuoureth?
Who will tender sheep drive up fro the fields, to the mountains,
When deep Thames increast with rain or snow from Olympus,
Drives down wanted walls, and banks all beats asunder,
Ouerflowing fields, and pastures foulie defacing?
O poor flock, poor heard, o life, and love of Amyntas:
Phillis life and love is gone, o wretched Amyntas.
Even as a merchant man that lost his ware by a shipwreck,
And ship left on sands with blind rocks broken a sunder,
Swims on a board stagg'ring with salt waves all to bedashed:
Driu'n hence thence with winds, and knows no place to be landing*
VVandring here and there, and sees no star to be shining:
So twixt hope and fear, twixt life and death does Amyntas
Daily delaie his days, yet deaths wound bears about him.
For since Phillis, alas, in a dead sleep slipped from Amyntas,
Inconstant, wandering, distracted, moydred Amyntas
Raungeth alone by the rocks, by the woods, by the dens, by the deserts,
Deserts, dens, and woods, and rocks, where no body walks,
No body dare aproch for fear of slipperie serpents,
And crawling Adders with balefull poison abounding.
And yet I can not find what I seek, what I look, what I long for,
Phillis I mean by the rocks, by the woods, by the dens, by the deserts,
Since that time, that time of grief and woe the beginning,
Neither sun by the day, nor moon by the night did Amyntas
Ever see sleeping, though weak and weary by watching.
And no food I desire for I feed to fast on a fancy,
Love fills faintie stomach, and every part of Amyntas.
And I desire no drink, for I drink up waterie fountains.
Fountains of salt tears, still trickling, ever abounding,
Like showers in winter driu'n down with winds from Olympus.
O most mighty Pales, which still bar'st love to the country,
And poor country folk, have thou forgotten Amyntas.
Now, when as other Gods have all forsaken Amyntas,
Thou on whose feast days bonefires were made by Amyntas.
And quite leapt over by the bouncing dancer Amyntas,
Thou, for whose feast days great cakes ordained Amyntas,
Supping milk with cakes, and casting milk to the bonefire?
And thou surly Cupid, thou churlish dame Cytheraea,
With whose praise I did once, whilst Phillis abode with Amyntas,
Make these fields to resound, make beasts and men to be wondering,
On pitiful poor wretch is no care, no pity taken?
What? shall I nothing get for making so many offerings,
So many sweet perfumes, for saying so many prayers?
All with a green garland with leaves of myrtle adorned?
Are gods unthankful? can no grace come from Olympus?
Are gods unmindful? why then, what mean I to worship?
Worship I know not what for a god, when it is but an Idol:
For no guerdon, alas, no good things left for a good man.
Poor fool, what did I mean, on gods or stars to be railing?
As though stars or gods could alter destinies order.
Poor fool, what did I mean incessant tears to be sheading?
Still to the hills, to the woods, to the fields, to the floods to be wailing?
Since these hills, these woods, these fields, these floods to my weeping,
Can lend no feeling, can aford no sense to my wailing.
Yet will I call Phillis, though no body come by my calling,
And weep for Phillis, though no good come by weeping,
Thus will I do: many men, many minds: this pleases Amyntas,
And yet I can not abide any more by the woods to be raunging,
And this living death, this dying life to be leading:
Dye then Amyntas, dye, let Amyntas murder Amyntas,
So shall that grim Sire, and foul faced prince of Auernus,
Some pity take, when he sees this wound of murdered Amyntas,
This wound wide and large: and loss of grau's but a small loss.
So shall Amyntas walk, and Phillis walk with Amyntas,
Through those pleasant groves and flowring fields of Amyntas.
But yet again to his house, with doubtful mind he returned.
The tenth Lamentation.
SInce that fatal day and hour unlucky the tenth time
Fair Aurora betimes by the days break rose from her husband,
Husband old and cold, and drove dark cloads from Olympus,
Making way to the sun, taking her way to the yonker,
Brave yonker Cephalus, whom fair Aurora desired.
Aeolus, of purpose, auroraes fancy to further,
Sent forth sweet Zephyrus with tender breath to be blowing,
And moist deaw by the fields with whistling blast to be drying,
Least nights cold moisture might stay their louly proceedings,
Stay brave Aeolides, stay brave Aurora fro kissing.
Every thing did smile, woods, fields, air, watery fountains,
Every lapwing sang, and made sweet mirth to the morning,
And cheereful Charites with goldlocks gaily bedecked,
Daunced along by the fields in due and gratius order:
And th'vnruly satyrs by the sound of a paltery pyper,
Leapt and skipt by the woods, in most lasciuius order.
Only Amyntas loathed these sports, and these pretty pastimes,
Only Amyntas mourned, and old griefs only remembered,
Leaving house and home, and deserts only frequenting,
Scratching face with nails, and Phillis freshly bewailing.
O what means Phillis, can Phillis cast of Amyntas.
O consider, alas, consider careful Amyntas,
And forget not, alas, forget not faithful Amyntas,
Who for Phillis sake, for love and fancy to Phillis,
Bears this fire in his heart, and still this fire is a feeding.
What means Phillis alone in those fair fields to be walking,
In those Elysian fair fields, and leave me behind her?
What Is there no more care of flock in Phillis abiding?
What? no care of love, no care of lover Amyntas?
O unthankful wench, if this thing come by thy causing,
And accursed fate, if desteny cause thee to leave me.
See what a strange effect these cares have wrought in Amyntas
Needeles cares have driu'n all needful cares from Amyntas.
No care, no comfort in driving goats to the mountains,
When rising Phoebus displayes his beams in a morning.
No care, no comfort in bringing sheep to the sheep coats,
When sitting Phoebus withdrawes his face in an euning.
Rimes are quite set a side, and seu'nhol'd pipe is abandond,
Rimes that I played on pipe: pipe used at every dancing.
Leather bottel's lost, and tarrebox broken a sunder,
Shoone, and mittens gone, and sheephooke cast in a corner,
And little old Lightfoote has lost his master Amyntas,
Whose watchful barking made wolves afraid to be biting.
See, how Phillis death does make my goats to be dying.
No body gives them time and other flowers to be gnapping,
No body gives them drink and water fresh to be sipping,
No body brings them back to the fold, or shade to refresh them.
See, how Phillis death does make my sheep to be dying,
Whilst th'vnlucky shepherd neglects his sheep to be feeding,
Lambs in woeful wise by the wolves are daily devoured,
Ews in loathsome sort with scabbs are fowly molested,
And their wool with dust and dirt is filthily fowled.
O but, alas, poor fool, whilst thou thus rayl'st on Olympus,
Phillis fair, perchance in pleasant fields of Auernus,
Keeps better goats, and better sheep is a feeding,
Leaving this poor flcok, and their poor master Amyntas.
And must only my death cause endless plagues to be ended?
And shall I never die, till time that desteny pointed?
O what a life is this, with life and death to be striving?
And yet I love this life, this strife, and every moment
Reason yields to my rage, and rage gives place to my reason.
And whilst breath shall abide in burning breast of Amyntas,
Perpetual sobbing shall make these sides to be smarting,
Perpetual playning shall make this mouth to be sounding,
Perpetual weeping shall make these eyes to be swelling.
As soon as Titan with face all fyrie returns,
With violent clamors great clouds will I cast on a cluster:
As soon as dark night does spread her mantle among us,
With tears still trickling I Will make springs ever abounding.
What lou's like to my rage? what fancy's like to my folly?
That not a day, not an hour, not a moment scapeth Amyntas,
But still Amyntas mourns, since Phillis grave was a making,
That lewd Lord of love drew my destruction onward,
That boy bred my bane, my death untimely procured,
When by the sight of a less, by the flaming eyes of a virgin
Fire did pearce by my flesh, to my soul, to my bones, to my marrow,
And there burns and boils like scalding sulphur of Aetna.
Who would think thou love could bear such hate to a lover?
Or would work such harm to a countrieman that is harmeles?
But bloody boy thou art, thou bear bloody mind, bloody weapons.
And thou most spiteful Nemesis, whose hasty revenging
Hands are ever at hand: whose mind is mutable always,
At miseries laughing, at men's felicity grudging,
Why durst thou deal with? what did thou mean to be meddling
With loving Phillis, with Phillis lover Amyntas?
If that Phillis I kissed* or Phillis kissed Amyntas,
If that Phillis I clipped, or Phillis clipped Amyntas,
If that I spent many hours in talking under a myrtle,
VVast any great offense, any great disgrace to a Goddess?
We were country folk, two seelly'st souls of a thousand,
Those golden diadems, that state of a king, or a kingdom,
Those vaunting titles, that pomp of a duke, or a dukedom,
Those flaunting buildings, that pride of an Earl or an earldome,
More fit for Nemesis: Phillis more fit for Amyntas.
Who would think thou could on beggars thus be triumphing?
Why should seelly shepherds be molested thus by a Goddess,
Nay Godless Nemesis? for thou do no body goodness,
And where is no goodness, who thinks there can be a Goddess?
And thou most hellish Lachesis, more fierce then a fury,
What reason foundst thou such mischief for to be working,
That by the griping pains, by the cold hoate fitts of an ague,
Phillis fit for a man, should die thus before she be fitted?
O why should thou take all comfort quite fro the country,
And make country men thus comfortles to be mourning?
Could not that sweet face, nor that most seemly behavior,
Nor that league of love still lasting lead thee to mercy?
Who would think that thou would have thus dealt with a milkmaid*
But thy delight is death, and blood thou only desire,
Therefore bring me to death, take living blood from Amyntas,
For my delight is death; death only desires Amyntas,
And to procure quick death, it is fully resolved by Amyntas,
That fair Phillis again may love her lover Amyntas.
And yet about euning, with staggring stepps he returned.
The last Lamentation, and the death of Amyntas.
ANd now since Phillis dead corpse was laid in a coffin,
Came th'eleuenth day, when weak, yet wakeful Amyntas
Spied through tyles of his house, fair Phoebus beams to be shining:
Which when he saw, then in have himself he began to be stirring,
And with trembling knees, with mind extreemlie molested,
Passed along to the fields, where grave of Phillis apeared:
Meaning there to the grave, to the ghost, to the scattered ashes,
His last lamenting in woeful wise to be making.
But when he saw fresh flowers, and new grass speedily start up,
And Phillis sweet name ingrau'n by the hand of Amyntas,
Then did he stay and weep with an inward horror amassed:
And at length his knees on grave there faintilie bowing,
With dolorus gronings, his fatal hour he bewailed.
This day, this same day, most blessed day of a thousand,
Shall be the first of joy, and last of anoie to Amyntas,
This shall bring me my self to my self, and bring me to Phillis.
Let neither father, nor mother mourn for Amyntas,
Let neither kinsman, nor neighbor weep for Amyntas,
For Venus, only Venus, does lay this death on Amyntas,
And Phillis sweet soul in fair fields stays for Amyntas.
If you needs will show some sign of love to Amyntas,
Then when life is gone, close up these eyes of Amyntas,
And with Phillis corpse lay this dead corpse of Amyntas,
This shall Phillis please, and Phillis lover Amyntas,
And thou, good Damon, drive forth those sheep of Amyntas,
Least that Amyntas sheep die with their master Amyntas.
And thou fair Amarillis, when thou gang'st to the mountains,
Drive on Phillis goats, fair Phillis goats to the mountains:
For now it is certain, I Will leave this life for a better,
And seek for mending in a most unnatural ending.
Hills and dales farewell, you pleasant walks of Amyntas,
Wells and fludds farewell, sometime the delight of Amyntas,
Now shall I never more my sorrows utter among you,
Now shall I never more with clamors vainly molest you.
Must then Amyntas thus but a stripling murder Amyntas?
O what an imperious princess is Queen Cytheraea?
For still watching love would never let me be resting,
Nor never sleeping, since Phillis went from Amyntas.
And no longer I can sustain these infinite horrors,
And pangs incessant, which now are freshly renewed,
And much augmented: therefore am I fully resolved
Of lingering lou's wound to be speedily cured by a deaths wound.
Thus when he had contrived in his heart this desperate outrage,
And meant fully to die, with an hellish fury bewitched;
What do I stay, quoth he, now? it is loss of time to be lingering.
Then with a fatal knife in a murdring hand; to the heavens
Up did he look for a while; and groaned with a deadly resounding,
With these words his life and Lamentation ending.
Gods, and ghosts, forgive, forget this fault of Amyntas,
Pardon I crave of both: this knife shall bring me to Phillis,
And end these miseries, though desteny flatly deny it.
Even as he spoke these words down fell deep wounded Amyntas,
Fowling hands and ground with streams of blood that abounded.
And good natured ground, pytying this fall of Amyntas
In most loving wise very gent'ly received Amyntas
And when he fell, by the fall, in mournful sort she resounded.
Jupiter in mean time, and the other gods of Olympus,
When they saw his case (though great things were then in handling,)
Yet lamented much, and then decreed, that Amyntas
Soul, should go to the fields where blessed Phillis abides,
And bloody corpse should take both name and form of a fair flower
Called Amaranthus; for Amyntas friendly remembrance.
VVhylst these things by the gods were thus decreed in Olympus,
Senses were all weak, and almost gone from Amyntas,
Eyes were quite sightles, death pangs and horror aproched:
Then with his head half up, most heavily groned Amyntas,
And as he gron'd, then he felt his feet to the ground to be rooted,
And seeking for a foot, could find no foot to be sought for.
For both legs and trunck to a stalk were speedily changed,
And that his old marrow to a cold juice quickly resolved,
And by the same cold juice this stalk still lively apeared.
Which strange chang when he felt, the^ he lifted his arms to the heavens,
And when he lifted his arms, the^ his arms were made to be branches.
And now, face and hear of Amyntas lastly remained,
O what mean, you gods, to prolong this life of Amyntas?
o what mean you gods, with an hollow sound he repeated,
Until his hollow sound with a stalk was speedily stopped,
And faireface and hear bare form and shape of a fair flower,
Flower with fair red leaus, fair red blood gave the beginning.
Then with bow and shaft and painted quiver about him
Vprose Lord of love, from Princelike seat in Olympus,
And when it was too late lament's this loss of a lover,
Speaking thus to the gods of this new flower of Amyntas.
Myrtle's due to Venus, green Laurell's due to Apollo,
Corn to the Lady Ceres, ripe grapes to the young merry Bacchus,
Popplar t'Alcides, and Olives unto Minerua,
Gentle Amaranthus thou fairest flower of a thousand
Shall be my flower he^ceforth, and though thou came from a bleeding,
Yet blood shall thou staunch: this gift will I give thee for ever:
And by the pleasant fields where gentle minded Amyntas
Lately bewaild his love, there thy leau's lovely for ever
Boys, and gyrles, and nymphs shall take a delight to be plucking,
Take a delight of them their garlands gaye to be making.
And now in mean time whylst these things were thus a working,
Good loving neighbors for a long time missed Amyntas,
And by the caves of beasts, by the dungeons dark, by the deserts,
And by the hills, by the dales, by the wells and watery fountains,
Sought for Amyntas long, but never met with Amyntas.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
A the first page, line 14. wants a periode at the end. The same page, for
outrageous read outragius. Page 2. line 2. for bushing read blushing. Page 5.
line 4. for loved read loved. The last line of the same page, for fearful
read fearful. Page sixth, line 4. for throt read throat. Page 7. for shall read
shall. Page 8. for Lephyrus read Zephyrus. In the same for venomous read
venymous.

B.
In B. the 3. page, 2. line, for cause thee yield, read cause to yield. 5. page
line 15. at the end of the line a comma too much. Page 7. line 26. for way read
was.

C.
In C. the second page, for woeful read woeful. Page 3. line 1. for outward read
onward. Line 6. of the same page, for captein read capten. Line 8. for heycock
read heycocks. Page 5. for boisterous read boysterus. Page 8. line 11. for
sign read signs.

D.
In D. page 2. line 8. for wanted read wonted. Page 3. for will read will, also
for shall read shall. Ibid. line 31. for Amyntas read Auernus.


