BRIEF PRINciples of religion, for the exercise of youth: done by Christopher
Watson.
Demand. How wast thou created? The first part pronounces our condemnations



Answer. By the hand of God.


De. What is God?


An. He is almighty, creator of all things, incomprehensible, invisible,
eternal, preserver and governor of heaven and earth. etc.


De. Why did he create thee?


An. To serve him.


De. What service requires he of thee?


An. Obedience to his laws.


De. Which are they?


An. God spoke all these words:

1 Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Exodus 21.10. the 18.


2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under
the earth: thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day.

5 Honor thy father and mother.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house: thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is thy neighbors.


De. Art thou bound to observe these precepts, in thought word and deed?


An. Yea, for if I break but one of them in thought, once only in all my
life, I shall be guilty of eternal death.


De. Is eternal death then the reward of breaking these statutes?


An. Yea.


De. Do thou keep them?


An. No, nor no man living.


De. Then thou grauntest thy self, with all men worthy of Gods displeasure and
eternal damnation.


An. Yea truly, I feel Gods wrath, and see hell to be my proper inheritance,
and the fruits of my deserte.


* De. How shall thou escape gods wrath and this damnation? The second
declares our delivery by Christ.



An. Only by Jesus Christ.


De. How shall he save thee?


An. Because he being God and man, has suffered all the punishment due for my
sins, and fulfilled the law.


De. Shall all men be saved by Christ?


An. No, none but such as believe effectually in him.


De. Who believe thus in him?


An. They only which assure themselves that all his sufferinges was for
them, and so travel mortification of the flesh.


De. Who assures thee of this belief?


An. The holy ghost works it by hearing the word preached.


De. Declare the effect of thy belief.


An. I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in
Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified dead and
buried. He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead.
He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almightye. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the holy ghost. The holy Catholyke Church. The Communion of saints. The
forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
Amen.


De. Is thy faith perfect as soon as thou beleeuest?


An. No, but increases continually by hearing the word preached, with using
ye Sacraments and prayers.


De. How many Sacraments be there?


An. Two, Baptism and the Lords supper.


De. What meanest you by Baptism?


An. It declares the washing away of my sins by Christ's blood, and my new
birth.


De. Then without this sacrament none can assure themselves of salvation.


An. I say not so, Gods grace is not tied to outward signs: we believe his
promise, and therefore doubt not, but the children of the faithful are saved,
which dye before they be baptized.


De. What think thou by the Lords Supper?


An. I believe, that as my body is nourished with ye bread there broken, and wine
powered forth, that even so my soul is nourished spirituallye by Christ's body
broken, and blood shed for the remission of my sins.


De. Are all, named Christians, fit to receive this sacrament?


An. No, none but such as are able to discern the Lords body.


* De. The third our duty to God for all his benefits.
Thou saydest, prayer was a help to increase faith.


An. Yea, for it assures me that I shall have all that I ask in Christ's name,
according to Gods word.


De. What praiest thou for?


An. For such things as ye Lord has taught me, Sayings.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed he thy name, Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive the^ that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, ye power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


De. Do rhou pray to god only, and not to the saints?


An. Yea, for prayer is due to god only.


De. Art you not bound to God for this thy wonderful creation, preservation, and
delivery from eternal death?


An. Yea, so I account my self.


De. What duties craves he at thy hands for the same?


An. To serve and honor him precisely, according to his word: which I purpose
to do, as he by his holy spirit shall enable me, knowing yt he shines to none
but ye elect, which labor according to their measure in reforming themselves,
with a certain persuasion that Christ has performed al their duties, and
discharged their disobedience, in which holy work, God give me strength (for
Christ's sake) to labor all the days of my life.


De. Even so. And God increase thy faith, to the full assurance of thy
salvation in CHRIST. God save our Queen Elizabeth.


PRINTED AT LONDON, by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creed lane, near unto
Ludgate. 1581.

Cum priuilegio.

printer's device of Hugh Singleton, of his rebus and a tun or barrel, after
McKerrow 127, with the motto arranged in a surrounding square as in McKerrow
250 GOD IS MY HELPER.


