AN OVLD FACIONED LOVE. Or a love of the Old facion.

By I. T. gent.

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for William Mattes, dwelling in fleetstrete at the
sign of the hand and plough. 1594.

To the Worshipful and my singular good friend mistres Anne Robertes.
I Do not (good Mistres Roberts) present these papers unto you as either worthy
of your view and gravity, or any way answerable to the least part of your
great courtesies, but being many ways highly bounden, I have sought by such
means (as unable students are wont) to perform to you as to my good
Patroness, some show of gratitude by my pen, which I am not able to express
in any other meet furniture of fortune. Accept therefore I pray you, not so
much the value which is of no worth, as the mind of him who carries you in all
due and reverent estimation. And so beseeching God to yield you all the effect
of your virtuous desire, I humbly take my leave.

Yours in all due affection and commandment. I. T.

To the courtious and friendl^e.
AFter many cunning and well penned poems, you may parhaps marvel (gentlemen)
what folly, or rather fu^ie should draw me to diuulge this poor pastor all
conceipte: The truth is, that perusing (at idle hours) the author of Amyntas
joys, I found it in latin, a passion much answerable to my purpose both for
the matter and manner, and for the apt discovery of honest plain meaning
affection, not vnpleasa^t nor unmeet to be clothed with an English suit as
well as others of like nature and condition, whose translations remain to
their praise though my self neither seek nor deserve, standing rather to
entreat your pardons then to hope for praise. If ought be to your liking I
rejoice: if ought amiss, attribut it to youth as not stepped to the place of
sound judgment: or if you determine otherwise, I leave my self and it, to
your favorable censures, praying yet that you will please to measure the matter
according to the mind of the author which in all intention is faultles.

Fare you well.
Faul^ escaped amend thus if they be not already corrected.
In the 2. page 23. line read lives 7. p. ^li^re. shall 11. 12. ^. borrows 11.
p, 15. ^. least 13. 5. fonding 16. 5, ^rounes 24. 23. ^oueth 32^5. Batch 33. 7.
yea 38. 7. even a^.

THE FIRST EPISTLE.
Countries delight, sweet Phillis, Beuties pride:
Vouchsafe to read the lines Amyntas writes,
And having red, within your boosome hide,
What first of love my fearful muse inditeth.
When once my mother set me flocks to keep,
Bare fifteen years of age, in lether clad,
A maple hook, to get and hold my sheep,
A waiting dog, a homely scrip I had.
No skill in beasts, on love I never thought,
Yet but a boy, the friendly shepards route
Admitted me, and country secrets taught:
To heal my flocks, to fould them round about.
In threatened storms, to lead them to the lee,
To sheare in time, to drive the wolf away,
To know the course, of stars that fixed be:
To pipe on meadow reeds, each holy-daie.
To sing in rhyme, as sometimes shepards use,
To dance our Iiggs on pasture graced with flowrs
What learnd I not, what toil did Irefuse,
To quench loves flames, and pass over idle houres^
At last; when heaven did wome^s callends show,
And custom would that every swain should profer
Unto his choice, as they do sit are we:
Such favors, as poor shepards use to offer.
Silk garters Egon, first began to tie,
About the calves, of her he loved best,
And lifting up her clothes, she said Naie sie.
With blushing smils, his hand she downward pressed.
Then Titerus a ryband did bestow,
On Driades his love and whole delight.
In token of the joys, they hope to know.
When wedding chamber gives the happy night.
Of marigoldes, with figured love and name,
A chaplet Melibeus had devised.
On Clitias head then pinned he the same.
And vowed his love should never be demised.
To Glicery old Mopsus fay rings giueth^
Menalcas and the rest gave where they lou^d;
But who is he, that always happy live ^
What joys so firm, as grief has not removed?
Faustulus, and Caridon, well borne, and well allied
Both rich, both strong, and both for virtues praised
Lou'de you alike, and were alike denied.
Yet for your sake, great strife there had they raised
A gem the one, a whelpe the other brings,
Both fair enough, yet you did both refuse,
Lest hate which often from rival passion springs,
This merry meeting, rudely should abuse.
And yet these lads do strive, with words and deeds
Love gave the^ staves, their blows ar strongly placed
They call their friends the best but badly speeds.
Full pale you rose ( I markte how palenes graced)
And truce with moving tears you did desire.
But all in vane, for tears, the fight increased:
Whereat (me thought) my heart began to fire,
And pity longd to see this battle ceased.
Then rushed I, amidst this churlish fraie.
And war with war, I conquered at the last:
With force, or threats, the fearcest did I stay.
You gave me thanks, when all the broile was past.
Oh had not sweetest Phillis thankful been.
And yet I wish too much against your kind.
But had not I those gracious gestures seen,
might have still, enjoyed a quiet mind.
For when your tempting eyes, I did behold,
And heard your voice, more sweet then musiks sound,
The passions which I felt, may not be told,
Then; then, it was that first loves force I found.
The one mine ^are, the other pleased mine eye,
This pleasure bread such storms within my heart.
As poor Amyntas, wretchedlie must die:
Except fair Phillis, shall redress his smarte.
My doubtful mind so too and froe does move,
Unlike himself, your servant now abides,
Constant in naught, but only in your love:
fear presses hope, and shame affection hides.
Believe me sweet (new lovers cannot feign)
Awake, asleep, still Phillis do I see,
And from your looks I gather joy or pain:
Even which it please you, to bestow on me.
If merrily, Amyntas you salute,
A merry hope, do make me happy straight,
But if you frown, then do I fear my suit:
And on my thoughts, a thousand cares do weight.
Confounded thus, and overcome with grief,
To fluds with tears, to air with sighs I melte,
In vain I seek each way for my relief:
I think such torments, never lover felt.
Yet lest a coward justly I were thought,
At first to yield, unto my first desire.
Fond rage with reason, to suppress I sought:
And with discretion, to quench out the fire,
I chide my self, and call into my mind,
Such medicines, as our annals have in store,
I prove them all, and yet small ease I find:
For still my love increases more and more.
I sit up late, I rise before the day,
I do repeat each vanity in love,
I check fair beauty, by her quick decaie:
And twenty other helps, I fondly prove.
I think how Sirens, catch the listening ear,
And how affection is increast by sight,
Sweet Phillis pardon though the truth you hear:
And though against my will, love kept your right.
For I did strive to free me from affection,
But beauty was too strong, for mine endeavor,
Who has so forced my love to your subjection:
As till you free me, I am bound for ever.
To stop mine ears with wax, mine eyes to blind,
To hide me from your sight, amidst the wood,
In all these helps no help at all I find:
My love is such, as they will do no good.
As Pelias spear, could hurt and healde again,
So therefore let me crave but this of thee,
That as love made, so love may ea^e my pain:
And as you mine, so I your best may be.
The second Epistle:
I St true indeed? was Phillis so unkind
With hand and heart, vnred in pieces rent,
To send my verses to the scattering wind^
When they to you and no where else were meant.
Those snow-white fingers, soft as any cloud,
^should not such shreudnes under beauty shroud.
And could you braule with Mopsus in such sort?
For bri^ging you a pledge of true affection.
It was no fault your praises to report.
And he did naught but after my derection.
Amyntas wrote the verses you did tear,
If so you like Amyntas name to hear.
Did you command that I should write no more?
Why love commands that I should write again?
Besides your looks affords such flowing store,
As makes a Poet write with little pain.
Yea you have power, in every merry smile,
To force a loute, to match Appollos style.
What greeud you then, what made you so to chide?
Were you affeard, old Mopsus would reveal it,
When next I write (because I will it hide),
I Will bring^t my self, and so we may conceal it.
My silent hand, ^ in your hand bestow,
That which none else but you and I shall know.
Nor Faustulus, nor Corridon shall hear it,
Or once suspect our love if you a^gree:
Our joined lips, so to and froe shall bear it,
As air nor Ecco, shall a witness be.
Till you my wife, my happy arms shall fill,
Then let them prattle, what and where they will.
When last I wrote, some angry stars had power,
And bad aspects, agreed to show their kind:
Yet now I hope, I chose a better hour,
And better hap, I do not doubt to find.
Do you but read, to read you need not fear,
Or if you will, I Will read and you shall here.
I write not ought that may offend your eye,
Your servant, does no more but show his love:
The wound you made perhaps you there may spy
With some such passions as desire does move.
Which if you will not take awai^ from ^:
Yet what your beauty wrought, take pains to se
Do but behold, what guiltles I endure,
(Accept true love, a guilty fault you deem)
For then my pains your ^ will ^:
If you be she, whom v^wardly you seem,
If those fair eyes, your ^ emorce reveal,
The would you made you cannot choose but heal.
Fear no deceit, I coppie from my heart,
No more then honest love, does now sugiest,
The pen where with I write, can ^aine no smart,
Being the index of a faithful breast:
It is not long, sense love did let it fall,
Out of his wing, for me to write withal.
No doubt he meant; your praises I should paint,
So to unmask, the virtues you would hide:
For, knowing that my wonder made me faint,
And that our quills, such works may not abide,
He has supplide, such pen, such lasting ink
As will perform, as much as I can think.
Read therefore with desire, read with delight,
Diana knows, that I do mean none ill:
Here are no charms, I use no magiks might:
In truth I love almost against my will.
And never might they thrive who ly in wait,
To snare poor damsels with their lewd deceit.
I am not I Demophion, though you be
Another Phillis, far more richly prised:
In virtue more, and far more fair then she,
Else half her prayers had her saint suffi^ed.
Had she been you, then he like me had loved,
And then I know he might not be removed.
Now as that Phillis, yelds to you in beauty,
So does that periurd wretch, that truthlesse Knight
Submit himself, in ^aith, in love, and dewtie,
Unto Amyntas as he ought by right:
Whose blouming age, by all men spotles view^d,
With such foul deeds, shall never be imbrew^d:
Oh therefore look upon my melting heart,
And open the wound, that you the depth may see:
Unless you know, how shall you ease my smart?
And who should help, if Phillis help not me?
You did the harm, you may the worst amend,
Phillis my foe may so become my f^end.
No more my foe, if you my health afford,
Then will I call you life, or some thing better:
Yea if I knew a more effectual word,
I would not long therefore remain your detter.
You, you shall be to me even what you will,
Upon condi^ion you my suit fulfill.
Sweet were my breast, such as the light through shind
That so you might behold as in a fountain
Your thrice fair Image (there devoutly shrinde)
Daunced upon aliuelie leaping mountain.
Then should you se how like a queen you reign,
Commanding laws of pleasure and of pain.
There should you see how all my senses watch,
Ready to run at every beck and wink,
Like straining grahounds striving to dispatch,
Each thing that they to your contentment think.
Yea wit to will, and will to love resigneth:
And glad is he that so himself combineth.
Or if you search my secret heart within,
It Is strange to see how love does revel there,
Placing new pains where erst there non has bin
And raising wars and discord every where.
To se what broils despair and hope does keep
would make a harder heart then yours to weep.
Yea every part, the liver, lungs and all,
Do witness well that they with love have met:
The liver which the seat of love men call,
With scorched sides do show where he has set.
My longs with grievous sighs consume away,
While they would save the bodies whole decaie
My wanton spleen, sometime fulfild with sport,
Has lost his laughing and his merry cheer:
My tougn mine eyes like mischief can report,
And so would all the rest if you would hear.
My tongue does tire with begging your relief,
mine eyes shed tears which show both joy and gref
Since therefore thus I suffer for your sake,
It were injustice to increase my sorrows,
Good Phillis grant some pity now to take,
And let sweet words restore what beutie borro^^^
Happy am I if you agree to this,
But if you frown, a wretch your servant is.
The third Epistle.
^ast with strange doubts more pains your friend; abides
Good Phillis auswere these my growning fears,
Let that sweet voice which yet your pity hides.
Pronounce the end of all my beggin tears.
But if some shame (for modest you werr ever)
With hold those words which love to me does owe
Then may you write, for paper blusheth never,
And trust me well, there is no man shall it know.
Stand not upon your over curious writing,
When letters leap each other, I can spell it:
Neither do I desire your choice inditing,
For love seems best, if plainly we do tell it.
When half abasht, and stutting in my speech;
My trembing hand, delivered you my writ:
When waterie eyes your mercy did beseech,
And every part bewraid a lovers fit.
I mused to see your countenance changed so,
Flashing quick passions with a subden grace:
And white, and red, so often to come and go,
As if deep thoughts, were written in your face.
So have I seen, the moon eclipsed wade,
When shadowy earth, from Phoebus her deuideth:
Now meetely light, and now that light do fade,
Now peeping forth, and now her self she hides.
Which made me think, some other sun you had,
And Fastulous, or Corridon was he,
I doubted least my shadow made you sad,
For plain it was this change did come from me.
Nor durst I hope (though hope well pleased my mind
That new affection, wrought this new aspect
And though I longed to see you prove so kind,
Yet did I fear some other worse effect.
And even this fear a wretch Amyntas makes,
Whilst stormy motions, in my thoughts arise:
Whilst fonding love, each action still mistaketh,
Striving in kindness, all things to comprise.
Oh happy, if Amyntas you esteemed,
Or if I could not see my self deceived:
But what blind eyes, your favor would have deemd,
Where my small gifts, so hardly were received.
Mad Tigers yeald, with vows and prayers tamed
But fervent zeal, is neither strange nor nice:
That proud disdain; that Rustik love is named,
Which only yealds, to mercenary price.
Love would not make your fainting hand so slack,
To take the verses, your Amyntas brought you:
It was not love, that turned away your back,
When them to read, I earnestly besought you,
You need not fear, the murmur of my muse,
An vnpoluted hand, a pen more just:
A mind which knows no fraud, nor none will use,
Did draw the model, which you so mistrust.
Not Venus son, nor any lusting spirit,
Do hale me on, to think one wicked thought:
My love is new and grows from your demerit,
As pure as gold that finers fire has wrought.
And yet at first, I did my self mistake it,
For (truth to speak) I thought it Cupids fire:
And therefore did I wrestle to forsake it,
For never could I like of foul desire.
But now by holy trial I do find,
That mine and that, are easelie known a sunder:
They disagree in habit, and in kind,
To see their difference you perhaps would wonder.
Of Mars, and Venus, that the Bastard is,
This is of virtue, only son and heir:
That known to most, but few have met with this,
That blacks our souls, but this does make the^ fair.
He flies with wings and ioies in false designs,
This loving truth on milk wight steed is mounted,
Stark naked he does show his sin by signs,
This uses clothes least lewd he were accounted.
With pitch-black scarf he vales his cruel eyes,
To show how guiltles men he leads astray:
Quick sighted this each dangerous doubt espies,
And by just laws all actions well does weigh.
Two arrows Cupid in his left hand wears,
Two arrows my love in like sort does carry:
And in their right hand each a fire brand bears,
Yet shaftes and brand^ in their effects do va^ie.
His torch does only smoke to smother wit,
The other clearly flames with sacred fire:
His poisoned arrows fester where they hit,
These do but prick us with a chaste desire.
Our bondage he by words and deeds procures,
Yea such a bondage as few slaves do find:
But this with sweet content our hope inureth,
Blessing with quiet the obaieng mind.
Such is my love and such is all his fruits,
Even this was he which praisd your matchles bewty:
This first aduisd me to commence my suits,
This taught me first a faithful lovers dewty.
Good Phillis therefore yeald me my request,
Amyntas does not love as you supposed:
And Faustulus sings Flora ^ his best,
His flocks within her pinfold he has closed.
Phillis I sing, on her are all my notes*
My sheep none other fellowship will take:
Mad Corridon do buz on clownish otes,
As balde a verse as any lob can make.
But want on nimphs the satires and the fairies,
My seven stopped pipe (as sweet as mi^maides voice:)
Will force, to dance about you the canaries,
Whilst they shall wonder at my happy choice.
Now Faustulus (lest you should think him old)
Pickes forth his hoary hears, with too much pain,
His cheeks are ^ubd, least blud should seem too cold
He were a youth, if al his frames were plain,
Our ages (being like) must needs agree,
The down appears upon my face but newly:
Proud Corridon, will your commander be,
But poor Amyntas, will attend you duly.
What should I trouble you with hearing more?
Wherein my riualls are uneven with me,
These are enough, yet have I better store,
Sweet therefore let the worthy crowned be.
The fourth Epistle.
AS music gives, and takes away our lives,
Whilst we with heed, attend her heavenly strains.
Eue^ so (my life) your answer both reuiues
And kills your servant, with a world of pains.
For though at first, my fainting hop^s it mended
The end (alas) a ^^rdering fear portended.
Whilst (fai^^) I heard you say you red my letters,
And that you were not with my suit displeased:
If all the churles of Asia, were my de^^ers,
Their depts my heart so much had never eased.
Me thought I felt the strangest quicking grow,
That ever hoping lover yet did know.
But doubt of death so much could heardly move,
Or daunt your servant well reso^^d to die:
As when I heard you say you knew not love,
Nor ever meant his madding for to try,
Oh then I wished that with the self ^ame dart,
Love would strike you wherewith he perst my heart.
Yet so I praide and pray him hit my sweet,
As only I may be your first election:
In hope that when our equal passions mee^e,
We both shall strive to conquer in affection.
For I should die to see you so ab^sed,
As him to love by whom you are refused.
And since they say it is the ancient use,
That for our loves we Venus must entreat:
Because I will admit you no excuse;
Words of great weight to hi^ I will repeat.
And words with gifts right humbly shall be sealed,
In ^ope that so this fever may be healed.
Two milk white doves, a rich and precious chaplet
Wrought al of gold and perles fetched from the east,
Baskets of flowers, the Rose, the Violet,
To set upon her best beloueds crest.
These shall she have and I will bribe her son,
Cost is no cost, so Phillis may be won.
A pair of chirping sparrowes will I bring him,
And ever kissing turtles truly matched,
Options of love, and sonets will I sing him,
What would I not, so this may be despatched?
So Phillis may my love with love requite,
I do not weigh the price of my delight.
Now if ^ chance (and sometimes so it chances)
That chaste Diana take him in her traps:
Whilst close in bushes with her maids he daunceth
Or like a wag does wanton in their laps,
If then ^ ^obbes the boie of all his treasure,
Well shall he find that I will do him pleasure.
For though she sends him naked as my nailne,
Home to his mother sad to see that sight,
With clipped wings without his pitch-blacke veil
Of bow, of darts, of torch ber^ued quite.
Amyntas will his losses soon restore,
As good or better then they were before.
Wings, bow and shafts, a scarf, a burning tarch,
Shall richly be supplied by my art,
To catch, to shoot and pierce, to blind, to scorch
Your self, your side, your eyes, your frose^ heart.
For do you think that I will let him want,
The means whereby he may disdain suplant?
In your fair eyes new arrows must be ^ound,
For if they hidden there did not remain,
How did your sight enforce this gaping wound,
Or what was it that causd me all this pain?
There must he seek and there he sur^ shall have the^
Phillis may not say naie, if love do crave them.
His wings above your ancle he shall find,
For if they had not wings to cut the air,
How could you fly more swif^ then any wind?
The vows of sheppards ^rged by despair.
And till these wings be parted from your heels,
You cannot mark the smart Amyntas feels.
Her crystal breast transparaunt to the view,
To make loves quiver seems passing fit,
Yet but to keep those arrows that be ^rue:
For fashood doub^^es has no place in it.
And might I wish then only should it hold,
That arrow which is headed all with gold.
These must you give, the rest shall come from me,
My bending arms shall serve him for a bow
For as they only long to circle thee,
So would they hit none other that I know.
And in my clowdy eyes with tears half blind,
To hide my wants he scarf enough may find.
His torches shall he kindle in my breast,
Where love to blow the fire never cease:
And as desire can enioie no rest,
So ever moving, ever heat increases.
These weapons, wings, this quiver, scarf, and flame
Your cursed ha^t shall with triumph shortly ^ame.
The very arrows which to love you lend,
Put in mine arms (he drawing then the string):
Shall rush on you, so as before they end,
Some of my notes you shall be taught to sing.
And when your trial does loves force discover,
You will no more delaie your truest loue^.
Mean time (my chick) whilst thus you shall be used,
Think not that your Amyntas will be idle:
Those stubbern thoughts which cannot be excused,
With fair entreaties I intend to bridle.
My pleasing verses in your stone hard mind,
Shall stab in ^ony wounds to make you kind.
Churl that I am) deserve I not much blame?
To call her hard that is so mild and soft?
A stone was I, a stone that breast to name,
Which with my verses has been filled so often.
Too largely did I give my threats their scope,
Since you did mildly grant me leave to hope.
And hope I will as Phillis does desire,
Or quick or slow your becks my hope shall frame:
If stay you bid, then will I quench the fire,
But if you have, I will become a flame.
For my contentment never may be wrought,
With that which shall displease you but in thought
Forgive me therefore though I did amiss,
Or beat me well, but not with staves or whips:
My punishment shall be enough for this,
If your sweet mouth do rap me on the lips.
Your praise hereafter shall I better sing,
When more experience greater art shall bring.
Nere will I rest but I will practice still,
To pass them all that live upon this plain:
And if my strength agrees to my will,
You shall confess I labor not in vain.
Your beawty shall so echo in the air.
As all this I Will shall sing that you are fair.
I speak not rashly for I know the trouble,
That is requirde so many to exceed:
Yet doubt I not but that my force will double,
Your gracious looks assisting at my need.
Our goulden wits (if you will favor me)
Shall say Amyntas loves more then we.
So strives the nightingale to please his choice,
Reposing on a thorn his sleepie breast:
Seeming in pains as richly to rejoice
As other birds are used to do in reast.
P^owd that his love in virtue so excels,
To day and night her worthiness he tells.
Yet if with mine he shall compaire his skill,
When once your smiles my knowledge have amended
Though honest envy does his worst fulfill,
My conquest yet with honor shall be ended.
Then shall you find before we part asunder
That Phillis in Amint as works a wonder.
Me think I see how pertlie first he rowseth,
As preface to some new devised strain,
Opening his clap as does a hawke that bowseth:
To send forth tumes fit for Marenzoes vain.
Now long, now short, now high and now as low,
Each corner of his voice he strains to show.
Me think his nimble tongue I plainly se,
How it does labor to divide each note,
And whilst in vain he works to vanquish me,
It seems to dance the antike in his throat.
Now sings he mirth, and now he semes to weep,
Sometime aloud, sometimes as half asleep.
But were this combat true as it is fained,
And were we euenly listed in the field:
Fear least the weakest should be most disdained,
would burst his bowels ere he once would yield.
His very best what sluggard would not prove*
Rather then like a wretch to die with love,
The Fifth Epistle:
Letters you take, why take you not my gifts?
Enforcing charms I utterly detest,
Your mind I wrest not with unlawful shifts.
Only I seek to win you by request.
And with my self I never would dispense,
In thought to perpetrate so foul offense.
These worthles presents (measuring your deserts)
Are but the pledges of unfeigned love,
Given by an honest hand and such a heart,
As only your unkindness may remove.
So might you take the^ with like hand, like mind
For greater ^aith I do not wish to find.
Bar not my merits of their due access,
This ring of gold, this paile fear not to take,
Though small they be yet were they somewhat les
I hope you will accept them for my sake.
And if my flock another year do mend,
A richer gift I promise you to send.
Yet are they better then parhaps they seem,
This ring I tell you I do give the rather,
Because my mother did it much esteem,
Being the first love token of my father.
Who putting it upon her little finger,
Told her that love could not endure to linger.
The very words my heart to Phillis pleads:
The mot engraven do speak, Drawn by demerit:
It Is strange how fortune every action leads,
Making the son his fathers wounds inherit.
So loved he then, so loue^ now his heir,
Both we were constant, both our loves we feire.
Mark how the payle is curiously inchased,
In these our days such works are seldom found:
The handle with such anticks is embraced,
As one would thinck they leapt above the ground,
The Ammell is so fair, and fresh of hew,
As to this day it seems to be new.
That glass where in the sun does sometime pry,
To see his harp, and quiver placed right:
And to amend those locks that are awry,
Against he meets his best beloved at night.
That glass (I say) the rainebow I intend,
Not half these colors from her clouds do send
The substance wrought deserves but little price,
Comparing to the workmanship of it:
More then them both I value his devise,
That in small space so may things did fit.
Yet imitats the life in every shape,
As if the caruer had been natures ape.
But since the emblems some what secret be,
I will declare each charge and what is meant:
Even as my mother uttered them to me,
When unto you both ring and paile she sent.
The order I must keep and first is set,
A Lady covered with a golden net.
Look how at church or in the open street,
A sluttish bawd, or some unquiet skould:
That for her sins does penance in a sheet,
A cloth before her shameless face does hold.
So in this net the trembling Lady stands,
Hiding her blushing cheeks with both her hands
The net is loves right worthily supported,
Bacchus one end, the other Ceres guides:
Like Tramellers this god and gods sported,
To take each foul that in their walks abides.
And as by night they up and down did iumble,
Upon Minerua by mischance did stumble.
Minerua in their nets so strangely masked,
As struggling was too weak to set her fre^:
Till by loves censure she was straightly tasked,
From that time forth his drudge and slave to be.
To teach us first this first of all was placed,
That love by nicenes will not be disgraced.
For though when nature used on roots to bite,
And ^rinck such liquor as the well did give*
Though then to catch her, love had small delight,
As better pleased in fatter minds to live.
Yet since the world with ^ diet ^lowes,
Both her and all the rest ^e overthrows.
Wretched Prometheus next to these here stands,
Whose side do freshly seem even now to bleed:
His fettered legs and his inchained hands,
does hold him whilst the Egles on him feed.
The Eagles tear, and tier upon his heart,
But though he shrinks he cannot shun the smart.
Mark how his forhead does both frown and skoule
To show that he both wrath, and grief sustaines:
Mark how he gapes as if he meant to howl,
Or else to bite the workers of his pains.
His staring eyes right bitterly did threat,
To drive those hasty feeders from their meat.
Even as a wolf whom hunters staff does choke,
Whilst angry dogs his torments more increase:
New smart with his resistance does provoke,
And may nor fight nor yet procure a peace.
So stands Prometheus to abide his throws,
And end whereof he neither hopes nor knows.
Though day by day his heart they do devour,
And rifell all the intralls they can catch:
Yet have nor beaks nor griping tallants power,
His soul from marty^ed carca^e to dispatch.
But still he lives for night does still restore,
What gorged Eagles eat the day before.
Perhaps the cause here of you do admire,
And why this penance thus he does perform:
Some say he filtcht from Jove the lively fire
Wherewith he quicneth every perfect form.
And yet (no doubt) it has another sense,
Not plain in show, but plain by inference.
By such as fire from heaven do steal away,
Is meant al those that place their love too high:
For such do yeald their hearts to them a prey,
Who ever killing never make them die.
Soul fretting cares as fa^t our quiet eat,
As empty Eagles do devour their meat
Yet hope, and rest, as much by night repaires,
As care by day (too greedily) did wast,
Thus lives and deaths from hopes and from dispaires,
To climing minds incessantly are cast.
Why therefore should we wish more the^ we need?
An hundred hands must fifty bellies feed.
The third by shape, or form, appears a monster,
Having both head and feet and al things double:
But least the truth thereof you should misconster,
I will declare it (were it not your trouble).
This personage Androgina was named,
Thus man and woman jointly first were framed
All of one piece their loins and heads did grow,
Diffrence of sex was utterly unknown:
So ioind their forheads and their parts below,
As equal men together had been fowne.
Like to indentures met twice twenty toes,
And when they move the one half backward goes.
So may you see by two Laualto danced,
Who face to face about the house do hop:
And when one mounts; the other is advanced,
At once they move, at once they both do stop.
Their iestures show a mutual conscent,
I think this last the first did represent.
Four eyes it had yet so their forheads grew,
As they could neither glaunce nor look amiss:
Only the one, the other still did view,
Much like to wantons smothering of a kis.
One health, one voice, at once they laugh and weep
Happy are they that such agreements keep.
And thus (no doubt) these had remained ever,
(So euenly were they macht, at first by nature:)
If discord had not labored to disseuer,
And par^e them both by altering of their stature,
With sickness therefore striue^ this concord breker
To make one half thereof become the weaker.
And sickness made indeed the one so tangle,
That then her growth was hindered much thereby:
Which causd the united so to wrangle,
As boys for cloths, when they a could do lie.
Whereat the stronger falls to flat disdain,
And now he minds to part though to his pain.
The sick consents and says as he does say,
Their arms are straind, their joining skin is rent,
The stronger by his force does ^eare away,
A greater share then ere was to him meant.
Hence quarrels grew: ^oue knows it was unjust
But still the weaker to the wall is thrust.
Thus discord made that simphathy divide,
Thus parted was, the tongue, the flesh, the brain
Much better had they been one to abide,
Then still to long to join themselves again.
But soft me thinks my pen too fast does trot,
In uttering that which now concerns it not.
For I should tell the meaning of this twin,
Which only signifies the Gordion knot:
That tongue tide knot, which but with deadly sin,
Or wealth* or woe, or time dissolueth not.
To speak more plain it shows the marieng states
To chose and to converse them with their mates,
Their Birth, their wealth, and age, alike should be,
Equality do sweeten much that life:
An hateful sight I guess it were to see,
The Lions daughter made the moushis wife.
So therefore was Androgina devised,
As just one height and bigness it comprised.
By going backward alwaise of the one,
Is meant the yealding wedlock does require:
And that one ought not ever rule alone,
But some time cross himself in his desire.
Yea from our likeings we must backward go,
And though we would not; say it should be so.
The inward placing of their double eyes,
Was to restrain the nimble wandering thought:
For searching sight so many motes espies,
As often it makes us think of that is naught.
And thought in time will breed a free consent,
From whence proceeds a danger pestilent.
But least I dwell too long upon this toie,
I next will speak a little of the last
Upon a bancke there sits the flying boy,
His bow unbent his quiver loosely cast.
With wings al wet as beaten with a shower,
Who sees him now would scarsely fear his power
One foot upon the others lap does lie,
His right hand groping round about that heel:
The left do put the finger in the eye,
As if he plaind for smart that he does feel.
So have I seen old Batche the painter trace,
A whipped boy look up with crying face.
His broken scarf hangs down upon his arm,
Cupid now sees who erst was deemed blind,
A prick he caught which does him all this harm
For which he seeks but no where can it find:
Yet still he looks where often he looked before,
With that my mother smild and said no more.
THE ANSWER OF PHILLIS TO A MINT AS BY THE TRANSLATOR.
TO satisfy her friend thus Phillis writes,
Scarce well aduisde to whom or what she does
For trembling hand whilst fearful thought inditeth
Do tell me often, men speak not always sooth.
And that too many seem as they where just,
In whom our trialles find but little trust.
Yet I have heard how much they use to glory:
(As if it were some news of good import)
Of us to tell an over loving story,
Where with they make themselves and others sport
But in what case is that poor seely maid?
That by her own good nature is betrayed.
Now twice too kind ( I must confess) it is,
For us to write or show our bad inventions;
The lines we send prove maps of our amiss,
Wherein you men false measure our intention.
And though of love, the verses have no savor,
Yet are they deemde too prodigal a favor.
We vergins on an open stage are set:
Where many eyes examine every deed:
Where slander hides in every bush a net
To warn us in our ways to take good heed.
Then may we hope that lines will ought conceal?
Which like bad servants all they know reu^ale.
The inside of our hearts must not be seen:
We must lock up the secrets of the mind,
And though Amyntas ever true has been,
Yet Phillis must not show her self too kind.
With these persuasions did I hold my hand,
Till your intreties gave a counter-mand.
Where with the love which once I did conceive*
(Before your sight to get what I would keep)
Began a new impression to receive
In hope to charm your fond desires asleep.
For (truth to speak) before your suit began
I thought Amyntas was an honest man.
Yet such as chastely mean to live and die,
Must shun occasions, tempting their intent,
And hate such suitors as in wait do lie
To make our thoughts become incontinent.
My maidenhood was promisd to my grave:
An others right Amyntas may not have.
And I did tell old Mopsus when he brought,
(Too pander like) the verses first you sent,
That since to wrack my chastity you sought,
I would revoke the friendship erst I meant:
It Was wisely done to send him on that arrant,
Since of his council you had little warrant.
Now if I should (which nere is like to be)
Forsake the sweetness of this single life,
In truth, I rather had be matched with thee,
Then otherwise become a Prince his wife.
Yet do not mend your hope with this I say
For trust me Phillis neither will nor may.
For who do mark the dangers that arise,
And see the pains and cares the wedded v^nter:
But will prevent (at least if they be ^)
That they such troubles shall not rashly enter.
But grant some maids their happiness would loose
Yet can you scarcely teach us how to choose,
For may we take those men whose ^ies do sue?
Gazing as if in us they sought their hearts:
Or may we think their shamefast gestures true,
Whose signs appear the patterns of their smarts
So wrought Ortello, yet how false was he?
And why should his succeeders truer be?
Or are they best who with their heart-sicke woes,
A spotless faith right solemnly will swear:
Or such as with old begging words compose,
A bosom love to hackn^y every where.
The periurd lovers look as others do,
The last to show their cunning only woo.
What counsel then since ^ares and eyes may err?
And error breed^s both smart and bitte^ shame:
If we misgrant the futes they do prefer,
Repentance cannot stanch our bleeding fame.
So that if signs, and words, and vows be forceles,
Women have cause (I think) to be remorceles.
And since both good, and bad, their truth will bost
(Bearing themselves as if no harm they meant),
Considering that the worst are ever most,
We must suspect the very best intent.
For deep deceit will speak as fair as he,
Who loves best and fainest loved would be.
Now some (again) (too fond) amongst the rest,
For present time do love with ^eruent mind:
Yet when a while their loves they have possessed,
In who^ ^ diffrence from their thoughts they find
Perceiving how their hopes were the^beguiled,
All fo^mer love by them is quite exiled.
Then others fortunes they begin to measure,
Guessing how well some other men have sped:
Their own is ^, the r^st (they think) are treasure
And now they tell how much they were mi^led.
In neighbors fields the corn is better grown,
And every thing is richer then their own.
From whence there does a world of michiefs slide
For then has thrift his paspo^ to be gone:
All honest and love is laid aside,
Yea and those michiefs seldom come alone.
For lothing minds are longing to be free,
And care not how so it effected be.
I am not angry (though I shrewdly speak),
For sin it were with love to be displeased*
Only I seek your vain desires to break,
Which yet but spark^ (I hope) may be appeased.
And I dare swear that, you are none of those,
That with ^ are practiced to gloz^.
Yet must I prosecute my first occasion,
By all good means affection to subdue:
And might I so prevail by my persuasion,
As hencefor^h you such suits would not ^enew.
Might I (Amyntas) thus those toies remove,
Then should I think that Phillis you did love.
Why: feign I were a man as you do say,
And that my bew^y did so far exceed:
Is It therefore strange if you should have a nay,
Do every suitor of his purpose speed.
That which you did demand is ^ought by many
But I will neither give it you nor any.
And yet to you before a thousand more,
Were they as rich as Crassus in his pride:
And were Amyntas more then thrice as poor,
When I may love to him my love is tid'^.
But til our friends conscent, we have ^o power,
The covenant of that knot is none of our.
For as from parents we our flesh do borrow,
So must we pay the dept which kind do owe:
And you shall always see the maid have ^orrow,
Which cross their liking does her self bestow.
Whose careful eyes all danger will epsy,
When our blind fancies lead us clean awry.
And though my mother favors you too much,
And partially to me reports your praise,
Yet what may she do since the world is such:
As now the husband every action swaies,
Of whose consent there is no little doubt,
Farewell for now my wasted light goes out.
FINIS.

