A SPARING DISCOVERY OF OUR ENGLISH IESVITS, and of Fa. Parsons proceedings
under pretense of promoting the Catholic faith in England:

For a caveat to all true Catholics, our very loving brethren and friends, how
they embrace such very vncatholike, though Jesuitical deseignments.

Eccles. 4.

Vidi calumnias quae sub sole geruntur, and lachrymas innocentium, and neminem
consolatorem.

Newly Imprinted.

1601.

The Epistle to the Reader.
WIse was the painter in his amorous conceit, who in pourtraying out the
pourport of Venus, drew her picture with so great art, slight, and
significant resemblance of her natural blazon, as the pourtraict of her
foreparts all ouershadowed with the porch where she entered in, posteriora eius
on the back, being only seen going into the Temple, presented an abstract to
the beholders of so rare excellency, as the type of the prototypon by signs
and symptons seemed to say: Give back enamorades of Ladies bewties: seek not
to see the face of the peerless: content your curious eyes with this, which
though the meanest part of the delightful object, yet of that perfection, as
wherein you may behold the works of Dame Nature to be so far above reasons
reach, as wit and art should skip beyond their skill, if they should attempt
to set forth the worthiest parts of this goddess paragon sance pere. And yet
was Venus but a very strumpet: a common queen, fitter for Vulcane the black
Smith, then for Mars the Captain, and more admired at, talked of and followed
for her want on tricks, insatiable lust, and shape to frame an eye to vice,
then for any complement all perfection to be found in the purest parts of her
filthy carcass, or lineaments of her vading, though seeming fair sweet
blesfull cheeks, shrouded in the auriflame of carnation dye, dropped in every
line mathematical with argent and Gules, milk white and scarlet red.

This I have said, to bring into discourse the matter whereupon I mean to
treat: and whereunto the treatise following does wholly tend in chief, as
entitled: A sparing discovery of our English Jesuits, and of Father Parsons
proceedings, under pretense of promoting the Catholic faith in England, etc.
For if wise were Apelles, or whosoever the Paynter was, in conueighing of his
pensill, by such cunning to show Venus on the back, as all men did deem her
face, and foreparts to be of such exquisite perfection, as impossible by art
to counterfeit her beauty, and therefore in policy thought it meetest to
ouervaile her in a Temple: this glimpse of her seeming glory, being the only
way to procure alonging desire of a full view to be had of her; a love in such
fondlings, kernes, lobcocks, and lewd priuadoes as had never seen her, and a
concealment of what soever was amiss in her, or might breed lothsomnes in
her followers: Then sure no fools were the first Panegyricks of the Jesuits
praises in the use of their wits, heads, hands, and pens; by setting forth to
the worlds theater in many strange proiects, antique stews and emblemes, the
hinder parts of the Jesuitical perfection, leaving out the fore-parts (scil.
their drifts, practices, and devises which are first in intention and framing
of platformes) ouershadowed with hypocritical zeal pharisaicall pretense, and
catholic show of so true religion, as impossible for any one to equal them in
any degree of perfection: whereas in very deed they are men of the most
corrupt manners, imperfect life, and stayne of religion, that live in the
Cathol. Romans Church this day, as this ensuing discourse will in part declare.

And yet they stand so much upon their pumptoes in the euerweyn'd conceit of
their puritanian perfection, partly by means of fame, which following false
reports has made them famous: partly by folly, which has made their followers
dote Pigmaleon-like upon their shrines, and shadows of virtue and devotion;
and partly, (and most of all) by cousening policy in the paynter, or her aults
of their blazon, in setting forth a counterfeit of moral perfection,
concealing the essentials of christian Cathol. religious piety, because these
are not in them to be found. Insomuch as one (and he their chief Polypragmon)
Father Parsons by name, scorneth to have any secular Priests witness of the
Jesuitical worthiness, and of his own worthy deserts: but thinks it
enough to merit the honor, point of all excellency, worth, praise, and
perfection, by possessing the minds of the mobile vulgus with an opinion of
their hinder parts, to be such as themselves are (forsooth) peerless,
matchless, and none to be compared with the meanest puny father of their
society. And hereupon in one of his letters like a proud Nemrod, taking upon
him to be the holy Apostles peer (if not above him) he writes, and in this
manner: What (says he) an indigemus iam co^mendatitijs literis: an non vos
estis literae nostrae? who are priests and laborers in Gods Vineyard by our
hands, and without our helps, and labors, and love toward you, you never had
bin such; no, nor these that are our most contradicters or maligners there etc.
Least therefore we should but incur a scoffing contempt, and receive but a
flap with a foxtaile for commending of these peerless perfectiues: for my
part I will promise good Father Parsons faithfully, that hereafter he shall
never have my worthless commends, nor any of his remaining Jesuits. And
further, in the same letter he accounts the secular priests ungrateful, for
not applauding to their own destruction, contempt of priesthood, abuse of
Pope, and Prince, and ruin of all Catholics, and Catholic religion, in
prowdly arrogating to his society that all we have, comes from them. Which is
as false, as contradiction can make it: for all their credit, and what else
they have worth the naming, comes from the secular clergy and priestly
prerogative. So then, this admonition of his given (though with many
absurdities) is to be taken for a gentle caveat for all reverend priests, and
other Catholics, to beware how ever they admit, accept, or receive from
henceforth any favor at a Jesuits hand; or yield them any countenance, or
afford them any furtherance in attayning to any place, office, or calling of
credit, gain, or other advancement: being sure by the former to be vpbrayded
ever after with disgraceful speeches, making a mountain of a molehill (if any
good be gotten by their means:) and by the latter, as certain to make a rod
for their own tails (as the term goes) less or more sharp, agreeing to
the quality of the profit, or preferment that any one shall enfeoffe, enrich,
or possess a Jesuit with thereby. And by both manifest it is, that whether
you give any thing to, or receive any thing from them: the very gift, receipt,
contract, bargain, condition, familiarity, or act of intermedling with them;
is a plague infectiue, a poison remediless, and a pitch that floods of watery
tears (nay what if I said bloody) will not wash away: so dangerous are their
inchauntments and charm. For give them but an inch, and they will take an ell.
Admit them to parlee, and straight they fall to practice. Afford them but a
favor in civil courtesy, and they incroch upon a freedom by absolute
authority. And once comply, comport, combine your self with them; and they
pray upon you. Aliene, sequester, or disioynt your self once from them, after
acquaintance made with them, and you are sure to be devoured by them: their
baytes of calling to their lure are so sweet: their backbitings in giving of
gorges for off castings, so cruel, (gladij enim ancipites linguae eorum:) and
their familiarity so fatal, as like Seians jade they are unfortunate,
mischievous, and work the heavy downe-fall of those that deal with them. So
as some have wished that those priests who first (of mere charity I dare say)
procured and were means of the Jesuits coming into England, as also of their
preferment to secular priests offices in the same: had bought their absence
with their dearest blood out of the one, and the other, the English Colleges,
and the English Dominions. But seeing the dismal days of our heavy
calamities have calculated to our hard fortunes, to bring those amongst us that
should augment our miseries: Let Father Parsons and his associates from
henceforth spare their pens, and (if they please) their liplabor besides,
from rejecting our witness of their good names; and receive with grateful minds
this testimony ensuing, by a discourse of their own words, acts, and
proceedings, as letters commendatitiats of the unsavory fruits of their
lucklesse labors. And because their face and foreparts (understood by their
intention, which should make their acts perfect indeed: for intentio non actus
perficit actum) are masqued with a veil of policy in external show of
piety, so as the ignorant sort of their foolish Enamorades have nothing but
their backs, or posteriora, that is, the fruits of their labors to judge them
by: therefore say I, by a demonstration a posteriori, or of the effects, the
testimony of their own handwritings and deeds done, will we, or nill we, will
be such letters of commendations for them, and on their behalf, as we are
unwilling to open, were we not forced thereunto; their friends will be sorry
(for their adversaries will put them thereby to their trials:) Angels will
blush at them: feendes will laugh them to scorn: and they themselves (if any
grace, remorse, or shame be in them) will hide both their backs and faces for
ever hereafter: never vaunt of their virtue, of their learning, of their
wisdom, of their government, of their graces: never pluck up their plumes
again, never seek to ouerpearke, ouercrow, ouertop their betters, their
ancients, their independents, of whom they do and must depend in their priestly
function, their highest dignities, their whole authority, and the chief
flower of their garland: spite of their pride, maugre their malice, though Don
Lucifer be their Captain.

I might (gentle Reader, dear Cathol. Engl. Recusants, of all degrees and both
sexes) here enlarge my self with a long discourse of the Jesuits to too
great impiety by application of the example brought out of the picture of
Venus: what foul, loathsome, and fearful vices are amongst them,
pharisaically ouershadowed with a pretense of a religious zeal. I could here
touch 20. sundry persons in particular manner, if confession-reuealers, if
murders, if extortions, if cousenage, if what not more dreadful offenses worse
then these (if worse may be) can touch them; and with witnesses of special
credit, with more odious crimes then ever they can justly lay (as most falsely,
injuriously, and unjustly they have already laid them) to any of these secular
priests charge: who now do stand in opposition against them. I could here set
down in a positive discourse an history of a great part of their whole life,
even from the beginning of Ignatius Layola a Span. Captain their first founder,
to this present hour; all within one age of a man: how they are gone from
their first institution, and have corrupted and broken the rules of their order
or society: for they are so far out of all order, as they must needs have a
new name, scz. to be called the Fathers of the society (even as the Puritanes
have such a like name) scorning to be called or said to be of the order of
this, or that man, as the Benedictines are of the order of S. Bennet: the
Dominicans of S. Dominicks order: the Franciscanes of S. Francis, because the
Jesuits are of the society (forsooth) or fellowship, and that of no meaner
person then Christ Jesus: how of all other religious orders (for religious they
would be counted, though not of or in any order) they have the soonest failed
and fallen from all religious piety in general (for some of them no doubt are
good men in special, but I doubt those are not Engl.) of any one order of
religion that ever was confirmed (as theirs was) to this day. How many signs,
demonstrations, and moral certainties there are, that their best days are
past: their rare, memorable, and worthy fame, at the highest pitch: their
haughtie-aspiring-towring-wits at a shameful non plus: their
prowde-ambitious-mounting-thoughts in the next turn to a Luciferian fall. I
might take occasion here to descry in the anatomy lecture of the Jesuitical
ghosts, the diversity of such wicked spirits, as transforming themselves into
angels of light, lead more souls to hell with them, then the feends of most
ugly shape appearing in their own proper colors. I might from hence deduct a
triple alphabet entire of Machiuilian practices used by the Jesuits, setting
down their rules atheall in order of their platform laid for a perpetuity of
their intended government despoticon, and mock-weale public oligarchicall:
how, when, amongst whom, and by whom, this and that stratageme is to be
practiced: what maxims, axiomaes, or rules are general or common to all: and
which are special, and but proper to some in particular: how that vtiscientia,
omnia ordine ad Deum, omnia propter bonum publ. societ. omnia pro tempore nihil
pro veritate, with many the like, makes (by their interpretation) all lying,
perjury, swearing, for swearing, murder, incest, sacrilege, simony, idolatry,
and whatsoever else, lawful, profitable, commendable and necessary. How this
politician or state-father is to be employed in Princes Courts as a lieger for
advice: how to canton a Kingdom: how to refine a Monarchy into the form of a
Province: how to insinuate himself in proper person or by his agents into his
Sovereigns favor, or some nearest about the seat of Majesty, to know all the
secrets of the land: how to alien the minds of most loyal subjects, and draw
them to consent to what unnatural invasion, rebellion, conspiracy, riot, or
what else, and when, and as he pleases: how to know the occurrents of chance
and change in state affairs: and when and how to color treacheries, treasons,
and popular tumults, under glorious styles of common wealths, and zealous
actions. I might here dilate upon the manifold injuries, calumnies, and
slanders, breathed out by them against Popes and Princes, against the Cathol.
Rom Church and common wealth of England: nay of every Christian Kingdom:
against the Mother City, where stands inuiolate the fortress of our faith and
religion: against all monastical and religious orders: against the secular
Clergy, and especially Seminary Priests: against all noble and generous
bloods, titles, honors, and princely prerogatives from the regal Throne of
Majesty to the seat of worship against the right of inheritance to arms,
lands, and honors, even from the Sovereign to the Freeholder or Tenant in fee
simple of all degrees: against all and every parcel, part, and member of the
public weal, molested, endaungered, infested by them. I might here set down
the final conclusions of their intention, for, and to what end, they do these
things: scil. to advance themselves, and pull down all that are not they. For
this cause it is that all their cormorant crows, are milk white doves: their
black birds, swannes: their haggardhawkes, gentle fawcons of the Tower. For
this cause it is that their sots are Salomons: their preuadoes, saints: their
silents, politics: and all amongst them rare, matchless, peerless. For this
cause it is, that they have a more near familiarity with God, greater skill,
and more abundance of grace given them, for edifying, directing, and
instructing of souls, then any other Priest. For this cause it is that they
dare presume to call the Pope himself an heretic: the Kings of France and
Scotland reprobates: and to give her Majesty and the State here names so
odious, as too often it is once to repeat them after them. No marvel then if
the secular afflicted Priests be subject to their torturing toongs in all
extreamenes that may be thought upon. For this cause it is that they (the
Spanish faction I mean) have labored these 30. years space and upward (for so
long it is since the Bull of Pius Quintus came out by the Jesuitical humorists
procurement) for depriving her Majesty of her life, Kingdom, Crown, and all
at once: for setting this flourishing common wealth on fire and flame: for
establishing their own Allobrogiall conceited sovereignty, under pretense of
restoring this whole I Will to the ancient Cathol. Romans faith and Religion. For
this cause it is, that no Religion, devotion, piety, charity, no nor any face
of a true reformed Cathol. Church (as they term it) must be spoken of, or
thought to be any where, but amongst the
Donatistiall-Africanian-Spanish-Iesuites: No not in Rome it self, without the
Jesuits residence were any true religion to be found. For this cause it is,
that all secular Priests or other Catholics must be censured, judged, and
condemned by these arrogant Jesuits for irreligious malcontents, atheall
politicians, apostataes: and what not vile terms are given unto them, that
favor not, nay, that will not applaude, further, and swear to the Ladies
Infantaes title to the English Crown: or that will seem any way to defend,
wish, or show any favor in their poor and worthles conceits, (as what other
opinion can afflicted subjects have) to the line of King Henry the seventh, or
any one of the blood royal of our own Nation, borne and living within the I Will
of Albion. For this cause it is, that the secular Priests must be holden for
men infamous, detected of most notorious vices, scandales, passionate,
ignorant, unlearned, and unfit for government. For this cause it is that an
innouate or new authority must be gotten and given to one Master George
Blackwell, (a man by so much the more fit for to serve their turn, by how much
as he is the most unfit of an 100. secular Priests within the Realm, for the
purpose in show pretended by them) for to extend over all England, Scotland,
and Wales, with a premuniriall style and title of regal dignity, derogating as
well to the sea Apostolic, as to the seat of Majesty. And yet he thus
authorized stands at the devotion of the Jesuits to run and turn like a
lackey boy in a french Ioupe, and is to attend on his good Lord and Master Fa.
Garnets will and pleasure, being but advanced to the dignity, honor, or
office of a viceroy, nay but of a viceregent, nay but of a vicepresident, nay
but of a viceprotonotary, nay but of a viceuiridary: nay but of a mere
spiritual rackmaster at the most. For he has nothing to do with any Jesuit,
among whom there is a subordinate authority by degrees ascendent even to
Emperor Robert Parsons, or their General; but is at the command of the
meanest puny father amongst them, to strike with ecclesiastical censure,
whomsoever any of them willhaue smitten down: and therefore he must needs be
said to be in some inferior calling under them, as the word Archpriest
imports. For the meanest Jesuit (though a lay brother) being accounted far
better, and to be preferred before any ordinary Seminary, or secular priest; it
follows then, that any Jesuit priest is to be preferred before an
extraordinary secul. priest, that is to say, before an Archpriest or chief
master and head-priest over the rest of the seculars. For this cause it is,
that the seeming to take notice of the Jesuits falsehood, treacheries, and
treasons against the Cathol. Church, and commonwelth, intended by institution
of this new puritanianlike superintendency, or authority, and thereupon
resisting it (as the secular priests did, first by non-acceptance of him, and
then by appealing from him) is termed schism, disobedience, disloyalty,
rebellion, and what not offense, committed against Pope Clement, or Q.
Elizabeth, (for the words schism, rebellion, etc. must needs have a relation
to some supreme Majesty) and seeing the secular priests have only (if against
any) schismatiz'd and rebelled against M. Geor. Blackwell and his Jesus
masters: ergo by necessary sequel it must ensue; that he is the Pope in respect
of the schism, and the Prince in respect of the rebellion incurred and
committed against him. But then withal I do infer, that he is an absurd usurper
and traitor to them both alike, by his dotage in suffering such vain
Jesuitical applauses to his own destruction. For this cause it is, that he
the said M. Blackwell must by the Provincial, or other superior or inferior
Jesuits, command, excommunicate, suspend, and take away faculties from what
priest they please; yea, and their goodnames besides. Nay which is not more
cruel, tyrannical, barbarous, and monstrous, then childish, ridiculous,
peevish, and indiscrete, void of all wit, sense, learning, religion,
conscience, ciuility, humanity, or honesty; he must and does forbid men to
defend their good names, to say, or think they are wronged by him, or the
Jesuits: to seek for any justice: to appeal from him in any thing. And in
few, such absurdities are desperately diuulged by him, as neither Prince nor
Pope in like cases can make lawful: being against the law of God and Nature,
wherein the Pope cannot dispense, much less M. George Blackwell suspend,
inhibite, or abrogate, at a Jesuits pleasure. For this cause it is: that all
manner of books, writings, or other passages of speech are contemned and
condemned that favor not Fa. Parsons popularitie in his books of titles, or
his treasons and slanders against our sovereign and state in the late Bull of
Excommunication 1588 set out against her Majesty etc. or other railing books
of Philopater, the scribe, the wardword (derogating to secular priests in
sundry places) especially his high counsel of Reformation etc. For this cause
none but Span. and Jesuits are secretly nominated to rule the roast in
England, upon the pretended Span. invasion for restoring of religion: all the
english that are not Jesuits being but fools or atheists, and libertines,
unfit for government. For this cause it is, that they (the Jesuits) have bin
plotting about this monarchy, how to bring both states ecclesiastical and
temporal under them above these 20. years space: first beginning to tyrannise
over the students and secular priests at Rome: then at Wishich; after that,
throughout England: and now in every place where any of them are opposite to
their ambitious designements. For this cause it is, that Fa. Parsons was so
beneficial to some engl. soldiers though heretics, taken prisoners in Spain,
that he so spedily obtained of the King Cathol. there to institute three
Seminaries on his Majesty's costs and charges: that graynes and indulgences
must be published in England on the Span. behalf, for all that take his part:
that all who come out of Spain, must swear, vow, profess, or at least
acknowledge an obedience to Master Blackwell in all things; yea even to become
rank traitors against their Prince and Country, for that is principally
intended. In few: for this cause it is, that the Jesuits labor in all things
to be holden for peerless, and to have all the secular Priests to be
accounted of as abiects unworthy the naming.

These with many the like particular points are here and in other books
handled more at large: of all which, as I might enlarge my self beyond the
limits of an Epistle: so desiring the gentle Cathol. charitable, and friendly
Reader to peruse these, with this ensuing discourse advisedly, void of
passion, affection, or other partial doom: I crave only in recompense of my
pains taken for their sakes to bring them out of error, a kind censure of my
well meant endeavors, with a charitable remembrance of my poor sinful soul in
their Cathol. religious devotions, and at the time of their best remembrance:
as one that can not let pass any of my brethrens works that have hitherto, or
shall hereafter come into my hands, without an exhortatiue Epistle unto all
true English hearted Catholics, to beware of the Jesuitical poison. Dixi.

Yours as you love our holy ancient, Apostolical Cathol. Romans Church. W. W.

A sparing discovery of our English Jesuits, and of Fa. Parsons proceedings
under pretense of promoting the Catholic faith in England.
OMnis Christi actio est nostra instructie. Our Savior Jesus his deeds are to
all true Catholics so many documents. The Scribes and Pharisees religious men
had in process of time through their hypocrisy utterly discountenanced the
ordinary Priesthood. It is strange by Josephus report, into what credit they
were grown with the people, and especially with women. But ficta non diu
fallunt: dissemblers for a time may bear a sway: but being like the apples of
Sodom, touch them, and they turn into ashes: their continuance willnot be
long. Christ our Lord the truth and the light, finding these maskers ietting in
his Church, plucked off their vizards, and with many woes disclosed their
dissimulation: leaving us an example to imitate, when we perceive any religious
persons countenanced with never so high titles, to shift and practice by the
like fraud, how for their own advancement, they may discredit the secular
Priests, on whose shoulders, and not upon religious men's, the cure and charge
of all christian men's souls are chiefly laid by the institution of Christ, and
by the continual practice of the Catholic Church. We do not make this mention
of religious men, as disliking of those most holy and religious orders, we are
verily persuaded that they were devised and founded by the spirit of God: some
of them especially to contemplation, and some to join therewith their pains
and travel for the assisting of us that be secular Priests in so great a work
committed unto us: but not to deal with us, as these our new masters the
Jesuits do, to oppose themselves against us factiously, or to calumniate and
slander us falsely, or to allure the peoples hearts from us hypocritically, or
to insult and tyranize over us most prowdly and disdainefully. For this is
plain Pharisaisme, and may not any longer be well endured: it has already
taken deeper root in short time amongst us then many men deem of: and will
grow to be pernicious to the Catholic Church, if with the greater foresight
and diligence as pestilent weeds they be not plucked up.

Some of their followers have presumed by their directions to affirm in
writing, that the Jesuits are more free from error, more familiar with God,
more particularly illuminated in all their meeds, and more specially endued
with the spirit of guiding souls, then are the secular Priests in the harvest
of God: and thereupon an admonition is given to all Catholics to take diligent
heed, and beware of all Priests in general, that are not either them selves
Jesuits, or such else, as have relation to them, and are in all their
proceedings advised and guided by them. And concerning women, some of them are
admitted by our Archpriest and the Jesuits into their secret Counsels: and
both there and elsewhere amongst their gossips, they censure us in the depth of
their great judgment very wisely: they rail upon us of their charity very
devoutly, and they condemn us before they hear us very iudiciously: their
seducing guides do fawn upon them, flatter, and magnify them, and that makes
the poor souls to be so fond of them, and to doat as they do, and run riot
after them. We confess and thank God for it very heartily, that as yet there
are many sound and grave Catholics both men and women, that are not bewitched
with the Sirens songs of these new inchaunters. Marry the infection of this
sore does daily as a Gangrene so spread it self, as we have thought it our
duties a little to sear it, until the disease may be undertaken hereafter, by
some more skillful Chirurgions, that may, if it mend not, have power to cure it.

In the applying of our remedy for the same, we will not tell you of the bones
and rottennes that are in these graves or sepulchers, or of the inward
filthiness that remains within their pots and platters, or of any such inward
uncleanness and iniquity. For except the very out sides of their monuments and
of their vessel, notwithstanding all their cunning paynting and scowring be
foul enough, and loathsome to any that will not foolishly shut their eyes, we
shall very greatly marvel at it when we know it. For our parts the truth is,
that brag the Jesuits and their adherents never so greatly of their
familiarity with God, and of their particular illuminations: yet we profess
and glory in our calling, that we do not hold it necessary for the better
credit of our functions to vaunt of our more near acquaintance with the
Almighty, then our predecessors and brethren have had: and that we are most
confident, not only in the excellency of our Priesthood, but also in assurance
that we in the execution of our functions have a sufficient direction of Gods
holy spirit, although with the Zuinckfeldians and Anabaptists we neither brag
nor boast of any particular illuminations. Nay if the fruits that ensue from
our English Iesuitisme do proceed from their supposed familiarity with God,
and from what we know not more secret inspirations: we do greatly fear that
their said familiarity has bred some great contempt in them: and do pray with
all our hearts that God will evermore deliver us poor secular Priests from such
familiarity with his divine Majesty; and from their phanaticall dreams of
extraordinary illuminations, inspirations, insufflations, or what else you will
call them. We as we trust shall always content our selves with the graces of
God bestowed upon us at the imprinting into our hearts of the indeleble
character of Priesthood, and multiplied as we trust by Gods assistance in the
discharging of our duties by winning of souls, and our diligent endeavor to
propagate and defend the Catholic faith: without any further expectation of
these Hispanicall conceits to win or continue our credits and estimation with
you.

In this our rough draught to shadow out in some sort unto you the contagion
and practices of our English, Iesuitisme and Jesuits, we do first entreat of
them and such like as they are more generally, and then we will be bold a
little to claw Father Parsons where he itcheth not, as the man that has bin
and still continues the chief firebrand that has and does inflame so many
both men's and women's hearts with pride, disdain, and malice against us, their
ancient, most loving, and faithful ghostly Fathers: who notwithstanding their
unkindness toward us, do love them still unfeignedly, and praying for them
continually, are every day ready to offer our lives for the honor of the
Catholic Church, and for the confirmation of their faith. Now for the first
point, that you may more truly discern what manner of fellows the Jesuits
are, that thus have bewitched many of you: we do refer you (the better to
ease our pains herein) unto certain treatises which have bin published to the
world by sundry good Catholics, as they have professed them selves to be
against these kind of men and their enterprises in other Cuntries. A Gentleman
of Polonia has set them down at large in their colors: his discourse is thus
entitled: Equitis Poloni in Iesuitas actio prima. We have seen two treatises:
and there is a third also containing their practices in France, and the causes
of their banishment out of that Kingdom. The parties that made them were the
Kings Advocates: men of great estimation: Master Anthony Arnold, Master La.
Dolle, and Master Simon Maryon. The first of these treatises is in Latin, and
the other two are in French: which you that understand that language may easily
procure. But what is this to our English Jesuits? You said truly, were they
not all in a manner birds of one feather: and that by one you might in effect
discern the rest: yet are there also some other particular treatises that come
nearer home unto us. Master Cecill a Catholic Priest has written a discourse
against Fa. Criton a Jesuit, and Master Charles Paget an other against Fa.
Parsons, they are both in print, and in english. Get them if you can: for in
the perusing of them, although sometimes you will be much grieved, yet there
are many occasions ministered now and then of some little disdainefull mirth, to
see the folly of those Fathers, how they think they can play at tennis with
kingdoms. Four other treatises have also lately bin made by our Countrymen
and Catholics: and three of them by the most ancient and grauest Priests in
England: such as have endured the greatest affliction for the Catholic faith
of any that now live amongst us. One of these treatises is in english, written
of purpose to satisfy all true Catholics concerning the garboyles amongst us:
the other three are in Latin, two of them dedicated to the Popes Holiness, and
the third to the Inquisition at Rome. One of them is called a Memorial, penned
Anno 1597. and the other is entitled Declaratio motuum and turbationum: and
the third, Relatio compendiosa etc. the two last being set out this year with
the said english treatise, are all of them in print. They do all four
discourse at large of the Jesuits of our Nation, and of their Machiuilian
practices. But because as we suppose you will hardly come to the sight of them;
and for that sundry things were omitted in them as impertinent to the matters
there entreated of, or avoided purposedly, least they should have bin tedious,
as also peradventure because you have seen none other of the treatises before
specified: we have here described many ofthem after a slight manner, until
you may hereafter know them better, as well by the said treatises when they
shall come to your hands, as by our small pains undertaken of conscience (God
he knows) for the benefit of ye Church, that either they may be in time
reformed, or with speed avoided.

The order of that society being approved by the Pope is to be honored of all
good Catholics, and the men them selves are to be reverenced; such we mean as
live according to their calling and first institution: which few of them do.
For of late years many of that order take such a course, as if religion were
nothing else but a mere political devise, conceived, framed, and vpheld only
by humane wisdom, and sleights of wit: and they were the men that by
Machiuels rules are raised vpto maintain it by equivocations, detractions,
dissimulation, ambition, contention for superiority, stirring up strife,
setting kingdoms against kingdoms, raising of rebellions, murdering of
Princes, and by we know not how many stratagems of Satan, coming out of hell,
and tending to confusion.

The old saying was, let the Shoemaker meddle with his slipper, the Smith with
his anuill, and the Priests with their prayers; but the Jesuits like frank
gamesters are in at all. He is not worth a rush amongst them that is not able
to manage a kingdom. Matters of State, titles of Princes, genealogies of
Kings, rights of succession, disposing of scepters, and such affairs, are
their chief studies. Some fear that they are more cunning in Aretine, Lucian,
and Macbiuell, then either in their breuiaries, diurnals, or portuise:
assuredly they do not behave them selves like any other religious men. He that
should tell them of living in a Cloister, were as good to go a mile about, as
fall into their fingers: such a base kind of life is so far unworthy of
their excellentnes. There are few kings Courts in Europe where some of their
maisterships do not reside, of purpose to receive and give intelligence unto
their General at Rome of all the occurrents in these parts of the world: which
they dispatch to and fro by secret ciphers; having either a Jesuit or some one
altogether Iesuited in the most of those Kings Counsels, who propter bonum
societatis, must without scruple deliver to them the secrets of their
Sovereigns to their uttermost knowledge.

It is true, that all orders of religion have an especial estimation of their
particular founders: but the Jesuits are therein ouercarried with humor above
all measure. For the Inuentor of their order being a Spaniard and a soldier,
of what country soever any of his disciples are by their birth, in their hearts
and practices they are altogether Spanish, breathing little but cruelties,
garboyles, and troubles. They have by their writings, their Sermons, and by all
their endeavors labored to persuade all Catholics, that the King of Spain and
ourfaith are so linked together, as it is become a point of necessity in the
Catholic faith to put all Europe into his hands, or otherwise that the
Catholic religion will be utterly extinguished and perish: which is a
ridiculous, nay a wicked conceit, and like themselves, building the faith of
Saint Peter and his successors upon the King of Spaynes Monarchy, as if he
have not all, the Church must come to nothing. But these courtly Rabbis do
think they may easily carry us poor secular Priests after their shadows, and
make us to admire whatsoever they will tell us. How they labored in France
(even the French Jesuits themselves) to have lifted the Spaniard into the
throane of that kingdom, with the consequent overthrow of their own native
country, you are not ignorant: all Christendom to their perpetual shame
ringing so lowdly of it. With which prodigious, and more then heathenish
practices, if they were only stained, and that the contagion of them had not
infected the Jesuits borne amongst us here in England, it would much less
have grieved all discreet English Catholics, and especially us the secular
Priests. But to our infinite danger it is far otherwise. For what stir have
some of them kept in Spain, to persuade the King to invade this our Country (a
designement containing in it the very ocean of all desperate calamities)
yielding unto him many reasons why he was bound to undertake that enterprise,
and assuring him of great assistance here, if once his forces were landed.
Since which time, who almost is ignorant how they urged him to a second, and to
a third attempt, for the surprising of Arwennick Castle, with ye hill
Pendenice, two other stratagems tending to invasion. Hereunto may be added
(though out of place) how many they have entitled to the Crown of this
Kingdom: as the Duke of Parma, the Earl of Darby, and others, exciting some
of them by force of arms to assail her Majesty, and buzzing into their ears
how easily the Scepter might be wrung out of her hands, and they obtain it.
But most pertinent to the purpose in hand is that their plotting and compassing
how to set the Diadem of this Realm upon the head of the Princess Isabella
the Infanta of Spain. To this purpose they have written a book, and set out
her title (when none of the rest will serve their turns) wherein they give her
such an interest, as they make the Kings of this land for many years to have
bin usurpers. I omit the pains they have further taken to procure men by
indirect means to subscribe to this Ladies Sovereignty over us, and how one
Master Midleton was driven for fear to fly out of Spain, because he refused
so to do. If we the auncienter sort of secular Priests in England could have
bin drawn to have run this course, whereat the new government (now obtruded
upon us) aymeth altogether: we had not bin so traduced and oppressed with false
calumniations, as we are by them at this present. We can say for one of us,
that offers have bin made unto him, that if he could have eaten gold and would
but have given his countenance and assistance that way, he should have had it.

The particulars last mentioned, a man would think were very unmeet for
Priests to deal in: but what if these Fathers countenanced with so great a
name have proceeded further? We are in an horror to mention it, and would
hardly have bin drawn thereunto, were it not that the things themselves are
too manifest. What (we say) if some of them have conspired among themselves,
and with sundry other most wicked persons at diverse times, to have laid
violent hands upon the Queen, and bereaved her thereby of her life? It cannot
be denied, but that they have done so: the circumstances have showed it, the
parties themselves with whom they practiced have confessed it, and sundry
Catholics beyond the Seas do very well know it, and have charged in their
writings foam of them with it.

We know the Jesuits many of them have a course that there is nothing so
manifest which they will not deny, when things fall not out according to their
plottings: whereas otherwise if they sorted to their desires, they would glory
in them. And amongst many things that give her Majesty and the State very just
cause to think the more hardly of us (especially that be secular Priests) this
is one not of the least: in that these our pretended brethren of that society,
and such as follow their steps, do in their writings so calumniate, or deny, or
falsify all the actions and doings of the State, be they never so iudicially
and publicly proceeded in, never so apparently proved true, and known of many
to be most certain. For either they do pretend that the parties that confess
such things were urged thereunto with tortures, or that it was a plot of the
State to make all Catholics odious, or that there was no such matter, or we
wot not what, but they have always some shift or other to bleare men's eyes
with, to the discredit of all the proceedings in such cases within the Realm.
If any of our brethren dye in prison, it is said, they were poisoned or
famished: if any kill themselves, it is given out they were murdered. Which we
write not (God is our judge) in any othersense, but to show unto you how much
we think all good Catholics ought to detest these kinds of dealings. We have
sufficient matter to charge our adversaries truly with concerning their hard
dealing with us, though we take not this course, which cannot choose, but make
us very odious, and does much impair our credits in those things which we
report truly ofthem. Let these men brag as much as they list of their
policies, their foresights, and their pragmaticall wisdom, they shall never
whilst we live, have in these courses our approbation.

An other thing also is generally misliked in these our Fathers, and breeds
us indeed very great hatred, besides the danger; and it is their equiuocating,
which you may term in plain english, lying and cogging. For this amongst
others is one of their rules: that a man framing to himself a true
proposition, when he is asked a question, he may conceal thereof as much as he
thinks good. For example: One demanding of you whether if the Pope should
come in warlike manner to invade this land by force of Arms, you would take
his part, or the Queens: you framing this answer in your mind: we will take
the Queens part, if the Pope will command us so to do: may by their doctrine
give this answer lawfully: viz. we will take the Queens part, and conceal
the rest: whereby he that asked the question is plainly deluded. Much after
this sort one Standish a Priest, but altogether Iesuited, abused the Popes
Holiness not long since: who asking him whether the matter which he propounded
unto him, touching the setting up of our now Hierarchy, was done by the
consent of the rest of the Priests in England, said (but most falsely) that it
was: reserving (as since he has confessed) this to himself as I presuppose or
presume. Which lying sleights being known by our adversaries, do work us much
woe and discredit already, and we fear, will be more and more prejudicial
unto us. For by this means, they begin to give it forth, that the Catholics
are not to be trusted in any thing they say. And besides, they may charge us by
this ground with any treason whatsoever, and we have no way left unto us to
acquit our selves from it. For be our answers neuerso direct and true (as
honest men ought to answer their christian brethren, if they will at all give
them any answer, and so much more the Civil Magistrate) our adversaries may
say unto us, that we keep this or that to our selves, which (as they can frame
it) is sufficient to hang us. For example: they may ask us whether we have
taught or affirmed, that her Majesty has no interest to the Crown of
England: and we answer: that we never have either so taught or affirmed. Tush
(say they) you equivocate with us: you keep this in your minds, viz. as long
as the Bishop of Rome will suffer her, or some such like point. We answer,
that we do keep no such thing in our minds. Oh (say they) you keep no such
thing in your minds to tell us: we know your shifts. And thus indeed the
Jesuits doctrine give them just occasion (not knowing our innocence) to deal
with us, and ever (...) suspect the worst of us. Whereby you see into what a
gulf of danger and discredit this double dealing of the Fathers with their
heathenish position has brought us poor secular Priests, and other more
honest and single hearted Catholics: such as cannot stoop to their false lure.

Again, were it that these our Fathers bent themselves only against Heretics,
and to defend the Catholic faith, many of their imperfections might the better
be borne with: but such is the intolerable pride and hypocrisy of many of
them, as nothing is well done except they like it or do it themselves. No
government is well managed but by their direction: wheresoever they come they
thrust them selves into our harvest: they ever will find something amiss:
either we have wanted discretion, or zeal, or learning, or somewhat that they
forsooth are able to reform, as being of an other more excellent mould. By
which their arrogant proceedings it is well known, that the rest of the
Clergy for the most part both secular and religious in Spain, France, and
Italy, do greatly dislike them, finding no means how to reform them. For
such and so ample are their privileges, as go whether they list, neither
Chauncellor, Bishop, nor Archbishop may intermeddle with them when they do
amiss: their own pleasures are their guides. If they do but pretend
whatsoever they take in hand that it is done ordine ad deum, they may not be
reproved nor called into question for it.

This immunity of the Jesuits last mentioned, howsoever for a time his Holiness
does tolerate it: yet assuredly as it is now used by many, it cannot last long:
except it shall be thought meet that the rest of the Clergy shall be subject
to them. Which if ever it happen (as it is in good forwardnes at this day in
England amongst us that be Catholics) you shall peradventure live to hear
news. We will omit all the mischiefs that may grow by the pursuing of those
points which before we have touched, and offer to your consideration but their
boldness in maynteyning any follies that they themselves like of. These
erroneous, temerarious, and heretical assertions contrary to the Catholic
faith, have bin defended with great eagernes and vehemency amongst our
Iesuited brethren in Wisbich. The Stews are in Rome cum approbatione. The
Stews are in Rome as lawful as any Citizen: as lawful as any Magistrate: as
lawful as any order of religion. The Stews are at Rome cum approbatione, as
lawful as the Pope is himself. The Stews are very good and very necessary.
In that a Priest is made by tradition of the Chalice, Patten, and Host into his
hands, they say it is but a toy. They hold that the ancient Fathers rem
transubstantiationis ne attigerunt. Some other of their positions we have
touched before: but we pray you, how may we think of these? If the Jesuits in
other Countries do grow to such giddines, what will Religion come to in short
time, they ruling the roast? They say, that we the secular Priests are more
subject to error then the Jesuits; but (we thank God) they are not able to
charge us with any particulars, as we are able to charge them. In this last
section, having acquainted you with some of their positions, there comes an
other to our minds, which we account to be very odious and seditious: and it
is; that the people may depose their Princes, and choose others at their
pleasures: have they any or no right to the Crown, that it is not material,
so it be done ordine ad deum, that is (by our interpretation) as the Fathers
shall appoint it. It had bin well if they had left this point to some of our
enemies to have branded them with, for rebellious subjects when they cannot
hauetheir wills? but it has pleased the Fathers to stayne both themselves and
the Catholic cause with it. The issue whereof, if Kings will take the pains
to understand it, must needs be exceeding pernicious to the Catholic Church.
For what Prince will endure such persons in his Kingdom, as under pretense of
Religion, shall infect his subjects with such hateful conceits, so dangerous
to his estate? We that have long borne the brunt in this Realm for the
Catholic cause, have found some woeful experience of the unseasonable
exempting of subjects from their due obedience, though it proceeded from his
Holiness: and what then shall we expect, if we leave the Diadem to the
disposition of the multitude, and inuest them to a right for their proceeding
in that so wicked and detestable a course? We are persuaded that no Catholic
King living or dead, either did at any time, or will ever hereafter give the
authors of this doctrine any thanks for their pains.

Here we would have you to note an other rule of our English Jesuits, which
must concur with that of ordine ad deum: and it is this: that all things must
be wrought and framed as the times and occasions require. For example: if the
King of Spain, or the Infanta, can by no other practice obtain the Crown of
England, then in that case the people are to have a right to do what they list,
so they will choose one of them for their sovereign. But that done, a new
doctrine quite contrary must be delivered abroad, that there was a happy
mistaking, which advanced him or her into this throane: but hereafter the
people must take heed of attempting the like: some check must be given to the
publishers of such documents: a dispensation must be procured, and all shall be
well hereafter. Of this course or rule Master Charles Paget (as it is thought)
discoursing at large, says, that the old proverb may be well applied to it,
omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate: they measure all according to the time,
and nothing to the truth. We will not dispute against this rule, but refer
you to his treatise printed and published against Fa. Parsons as it is before
mentioned. This only we will say, that our pretended Fathers build Castles in
the air, and feed themselves with their own follyes: as though where the
people do once get a head, it be not as hard a matter to suppress them, as to
stop the breach of the sea, when in fury it has once mastered the banks. The
experience hereof is more then manifest.

Furthermore, we pray you observe an other practice and course of our Jesuits
here at home amongst us, and tell us what you think of it. Mark their
behavior well in such Gentlemen's houses as they reside in, and you shall find
them that they will command and overrule all, as knowing best how every thing
must be done (forsooth) ordine ad deum. No lease must be let, but by their
advise: the Tenants must please them or repent at leisure: such fines are to be
taken as they think convenient, and some part of them must be employed as they
shall prescribe ordine ad deum. In effect they do so rule and overrule, as
scarsly can the Master or Mistres of the house give a piece of bread at their
doors, but it must be done with their approbation. And for the servants, they
are much more at their commandment, then at theirs whom they serve: we would
be loath to tell you how all this comes to pass. Only this understand, that
our Jesuits are most rigorous in their taking of men's confessions, whereby
they know as well by the servants as by their Masters and Mistresses their
several confessions, all the secrets in those families: the wifes against her
husband: the husbands against his wife, and the servants of them both: which if
they abuse to tyranize over them, and to dispose of their civil affairs under
a pretense of their ordo ad deum; they deal not like true Catholic Priests,
but will in the end be found what they are. Is this their most special
endowment with the spirit ofguiding of souls, that they brag of so much?

It is most manifest, to as many as know the course of many Jesuits, that
although they pretend all their designements to be directed to the common good
of the Church: yet their chiefest care is how to advance and increase their
own society, hoping of likelihood by their number to bring one day some great
matter to pass. For where they make such fair shows and offers; when they
come into some Country to teach the youth: their principal drift therein is to
find out the aptest wits for their purposes, with whom they take
extraordinary pains, and so work them by kindness and cunning allurements
(especially if they be of good parentage, which is a chief point with them)
till they get them to promise, that they will be of their society, or somewhat
to that purpose: which is sufficient to seize upon them, do their parents and
friends what they can, except they will hazard an imputation to be inclined to
heresy, or to some mischief, or to we wot not what: for so they use to
calumniate any that do cross their proceedings. This course of alluring the
fittest wits and ofthe best towardnes to their society, they held in diverse
Seminaries within the Duchy of Millan: which the good Cardinal Boromeo well
observing, thought them no meet men to remain there, and so banished them out
of all those places: esteeming it far more necessary to have such apt men to
become secular Priests, and to take upon them the cure of souls, then to have
them intruded into any order of religion, which intermedleth not with any such
charge, but live after their own fashion privately to themselves, as religious
men ought to do.

It were to be wished, that other States would follow this Cardinals example,
at the least until these Fathers were brought to some better moderation and
knowledge of them selves. For our own parts, it shall be our continual
prayer, that howsoever other States do, it may please God to move the heart of
his holiness to remove all Jesuits out of the English College at Rome, where
there are other manner of practices, then were ever attempted by any Jesuits
in the territories of Millan. All Europe talks (we suppose) of the iarres in
that College: many secular Priests being honest men, have bin sent home unto
us, laden till their backs cracked with the Jesuits calumniations: and none
but such as will be Iesuited altogether may find any favor there. Well, of
this matter you may peradventure hear and see more hereafter. In the mean
time it may be sufficient for you to know that Machiauell the Atheists rule
divide and impera, is as cunningly in practice by the Rector there, as in any
place we think in Christendom, we had almost said in Turkey.

If the Jesuits when they came first hither, could have bin content to have
joined with us that were Priests, and to have intermedled no further then with
their Priestly functio^s, we should have greatly honored the^ still. But as now
we perceive, they were no sooner entertained amongst us, but they put in
practice their divide and impera. It seemed strange to some of us how at their
first entrance into our labors, they exalted themselves above us. Father
Parsons coming hither with Master Campion, and another as their Provincial,
they presently reekoned of us but as their assistants, in helping them to
administer the Sacraments: as though we could neither have preached, nor done
any thing else: and that they our great Masters were to be further employed in
other matters of greater importance then we simple men were any way fit for:
hereof you may read in Fa. Campions letter out of England to their General at
Rome. But this was then the imagination of a few: their drifts were deeper,
then we ever dreamed of: for mysteries are hardly known, until they fall out
into practice. It is true, that when they came over with such ample faculties,
larger then they had bin granted before to any of us, we might have foreseen
the inconvenience of it: knowing how apt we are in England to admit of
novelties: and likewise what before we had heard of some Jesuits abroad. Nay
to the aggravating of our great oversight, in that we did not at the first
oppose our selves against them, or at the least seek to have them recalled
from us: we may not deny it but that it was foretold us by that excellent
Cardinal then living, that the Jesuits would prove but thorns in our sides,
and be the cause of great troubles amongst us. But for our sins, they and
such of that order as came after them, did by their fair gloses, and pretense
of zeal, so blind and bewitch us, as we gave way unto them: whereby and
through their cunning carriage with the people, they have by little and little
carried all before them. No alms was thought sufficiently meritorious, except
they were sanctified by the Jesuits distribution: so as in short time, the
greatest part of our allowances that were in prison, came unto us through the
Jesuits hands, pretending (forsooth) that they were but religious Collectors
for us and some others distressed Catholics. But how faithfully they have
dealt with us herein, when you shall happen to see the said Memorial, it will
appear unto you. Some one of them spends more yearly upon himself, then
would maynteyne ten of the best of us: if we said twenty, we think there
would be no exception taken unto it. And to conclude, they have so dealt with
us, as where before, we were honored for our works sake, and had many ghostly
children that did depend upon us, as upon their spiritual fathers and
shepeards of their souls, we are now through their falsehood, their
calumniations and untrue suggestions to our superiors brought into contempt:
our said children (as if we had bin but their stepfathers) have forsaken us:
their charity toward us is so cold, as we are very hardly able to live, and
what will become hereof, God himself knows, and we do greatly fear it. If
they had bin hired by our common enemies to have wrought us mischief, and the
cause we have defended, they could hardly have done it more artificially or
effectually. And yet men will not see it: they will not understand it.

You have heard how the Jesuits became our Collectors, or rather not ours, but
their own: to whom for their accounts the false Steward in the Gospel we
suppose may give place. One Jesuit (as we can prove it) has taken at times
above 500. pound that was given to the imprisoned Priests then at Wisbich, and
employed the same at his own pleasure. Percye the Jesuit escaping from
Wisbich, took fraudulently from benefactors abroad 57. pound 17. shillings,
and the year after stole 27. pound of the common money by the consent of the
other his fellow Jesuits. They have so fleeced their favorers, as over and
above their own expenses (which are exceeding great) they have bin able to
send not long since 2200. pound toward the Low countries: the prisoners then
at Wisbich being in great want. Now if you will know how they scrape together
so much money, you must understand that they have many sleights to that end,
besides their apparent cousenages, frauds, and thefts before mentioned. You
are not ignorant of the means that Verres the Proconsull used in pilling and
spoiling Sicilia, nor how odious it was amongst the Romans: But the course
that our Jesuits do take here for their pillage both in England and Scotland,
are so much more shameful, as spiritual robberies pass all temporal
pilferings, we will set down unto you three or four of their tricks. They
have gotten (as they say) certain faculties from the Pope to abstract from
what Parsonages and Vicarages they list all spirituality (for preventing of
simony) thereby to make them merely temporal and saleable, which done, they
are to be sold at the highest rates upon pretense that the money must be
divided betwixt Saint Peter and poor prisoners. What Saint Peter gets amongst
them we know not, and we think but little: sure we are the poor prisoners
have not much: one good Father or other says, Dominus opus habet, and make
always the best part of it their own clear gaynes. Again, those that come
to great wealth either by Usury, or by buying or selling, and making gain by
anticipation or dilation of payment, or by injustice, or by taking more of
clyents that are suitors at the law then their ordinary and moderate fees, or
by patronizing any evil cause, Landlords, Sheriffs officers, whosoever high or
low that get any thing falsely or indirectly, all must make restitution. But
forasmuch as oftentimes it falls out, that the parties neither know how much
nor to whom such restitution is to be made: therefore they must in those cases
compound with the Fathers, giving certa pro incertis, to the use (forsooth)
before expressed: sometimes one man has given 500. pound to that end: but
Saint Peter and the poor do still come short of their share: the Fathers
themselves do swallow it up, amounting yearly to a mighty sum of money.

Moreover to the effect last mentioned, we have a notable history to tell you.
Amongst many devises which the Jesuits have invented to enrich and increase
their order, they have one, whereof it is fit that the world should take
notice. It is termed by them an holy exercise, and is put in practice when
they find any, that are meet to serve their turns, either for their
extraordinary pregnancy of wit and learning, or for their parentage and
friends, or for their wealth and possessions, and cannot otherwise allure them
to their society. The course which they hold in the said exercise is after this
sort. When they find one, whom they think fit for their turn; they
insinuate themselves into him, keep him company, use him with all kind of
sweet behauior and curtesy: and pretend to have an especial care of his well
doing, but principally how he may attain to be in high favor with God. To
which purpose they enter by degrees into certain discourses of hell: wherein
they omit none of their skill by authorities, fables, and large amplifications,
to make the same as terrible as possibly they can. By which course they cast
the party in time into great fear and pensiuenes; which were well done, if it
were to a good end.

When they have held on after this sort so long as they think convenient,
intermingling now and then some comforts, least otherwise the parties under
their fingers should grow very weary of them, then they begin to be more
plentiful in the setting forth of such comfortable promises as are made in the
scriptures to the children and saints of God. Here they omit no part of their
skill to describe the Heavens, the Majesty and glory of God, the happy estate
and joys of the Saints in that everlasting kingdom, which is prepared for
those who in this life shall embrace the Christian faith, and become obedient
children in their true calling unto their holy Mother the Church of Rome.

Hereunto they add a discourse concerning the diversity of such callings as
God has ordained for his servants and children to walk in: showing how
necessary it is for every man to understand and know what calling that is,
which particularly belongs unto himself, and what danger ensues, when men
do rashly undertake any occasion, either for profit or pleasure, to follow this
or that course of life: as when great men, being borne to great possessions, do
think it sufficient for them to follow the steps of their Ancestors:
esteeming that to be the calling which God has prepared for them: whereof it
comes to pass diverse times, that they make a shipwreck of all their estates,
and fall into many calamities, God approving of and sanctifying no calling,
which is not entered into by the direction of his holy spirit. Many (say they)
through their own rashness are spiritual persons, who ought by Gods ordinance
to have bin of the Layty: and many on the other side are (as we term them)
Lay men, which ought to be Ecclesiastical: both of them perishing in their
own courses through their own faults, in that they had no care to learn and
know their own proper callings ordained for them, which God would have
sanctified, to their eternal comforts, if they would have used the means to
have understood and embraced them. In the description of which means, the
height, the depth, and the breadth of all their cousenage does consist, being
the exercise it self before mentioned. Of these means they do at the first
speak only in generality, entering into a discourse of the loving kindness of
God, in that he has prepared a way, whereby every man that list, may know how
to serve him: whereinto as many as will enter, may have assurance in themselves
by the testimony of the holy Ghost, what their several vocations are,
whereunto God has called them: and which they must undertake, if ever they
mean to come into the joys and consolations of the Paradise of God.

Thus after they have laid these ginnes, no marvel if the parties so kindly
and cunningly carried on, do fall into their traps. Howbeit you must observe
that in all these discourses made to such parties, they carry themselves so
aloof, as that there may be no suspicion of their intents to draw them by such
their practices to be of their society. So as when the poor souls (as
ravished with a desire to attain unto the said means or exercise so highly
commended, and so necessary as they suppose, for all that truly thirst after
the kingdom of God and joys of Heaven) do entreat the holy Fathers, that
they may be received into that happy and blessed exercise; their motion in
that behalf the good Fathers at the first seem little to regard: saying, that
peradventure this their desire proceeds of passion: and therefore their
manner is to leave them in this sort for the first time: adding, with what
deliberation and judgment that sacred exercise is to be undertaken, as being
the ladder of Jacob, whereby they may ascend into the third Heaven, and there
see and behold the admirable mysteries of God.

If the party thus caught be of great possessions, wealth, or parentage, they
are much the sooner entreated to admit him to this exercise: the manner whereof
is as follows. The party at the time appointed, coming to the holy Father
who must deal with him, is recluded from the speech of any body but the said
Father for a certain time. Upon his first reclusion the Father comes unto
him, and gives him a meditation to study upon for some four or five hours:
willing him in the mean while carefully to remember all the cogitations that
do come into his mind. The said four or five hours expired, in comes this
good Father: and then the party must be confessed, and is to reveal all his
particular thoughts of what matter soever good or bad that came into his head,
all the time of his aforesaid meditation. Which done, the Father gives the
party an other meditation with the like instructions to the former: and after
the like distance of time returning, hears his confession. And thus the
party is exercised diverse times, every day the space of nine days or
thereabouts. In which time the holy Father having framed the said meditations
according to his own drift: for example: if the party be rich, then of the
contempt of the world, and the vanity of worldly riches: and further
perceiving by his confessions, his disposition, and what effect the said
meditations have wrought, and are likely in the end to work in him, which
always must be the forsaking of the world, as they term it; and for the most
part, if they find him by this trial, a fit man for the entrance into some
profession of religion: then he tells him a long tale of the fruit of his
said exercise, as that he well perceives by his sundry confessions, how the
spirit of God has wrought in him by the means of his said meditations, and
that he now supposes him to be fit to enter into the consideration and choice
of that calling, whereunto God himself has ordained him, to lead his life
and walk in toward the attaynement of everlasting happiness. Whereupon the
party has time to consider with himself, whether he will be a Dominican, a
Benedict, a Jesuit, a Friar, or what he list. Which time expired, the holy
Father enters into a new stratageme.

The said party so exercised (as is before expressed) coming thus unto his
election, has peradventure determined to be a Dominican, or to take some such
other course as he himself has thought of. So as when the said holy Father
comes unto him, if he find him bent to any other profession, then to be a
Jesuit, he begins to cast many doubts, and collecteth at his pleasure by
something that he has confessed unto him, that his said choice is not
agreeable to such godly motions, as the spirit of God wrought in him in the
time of his exercise, and therefore advises him to consider with himself
better of his choice, that the same may be suitable to the said motions of the
holy Ghost. The conclusion is, that the holy Fathers by this means, having
sundry poor souls in their hands to work them by terrors, devises, and
persuasions (as they list) never leave them, or suffer them to be quiet, until
(if it be possible) they make choice to be of the society of Jesus: if in all
these practices with them, they find them fit men for their turn. Howbeit
sometimes it comes to pass that the said devout Fathers do meet with such
persons, as will rather choose to be of some other order, do what they can,
then to be Jesuits. In which cases, when their practices to win the parties
for their learning, strength of wit, parentage, and other good parts more then
ordinary do fail, they desist from dealing with them by little and little, and
so in the end give the^ quite over, meaning nothing less, then by such their
pains to increase the number of any other order of religious persons, and so
leave them to take what course they list: but with this fruit of their
exercises, that they will never love or induce them afterward, but rail on
them, and plague them as much as possibly they can.

If the parties were undertaken by them for their wealth and large possessions,
when they come to their election, commonly their riches, and their said
possessions are a hinderance unto them from entering into any religious
profession. For the removing of which obstacle, the holy Fathers are furnished
with many texts of scripture: as of giving all and following Jesus etc. and do
for the most part so farrepreuaile, as either they allure them to be
ecclesiastical Jesuits, if they have any tolerable gifts besides their
riches: and then all that they have must be sold, and the money committed to
the Fathers discretions, or at the least they draw them to be lay brethren,
finding no other good stuff in them. In which case they get from them either
all, or the most part of their riches, and turn them either to be some of
their officers, or leave them at large to be practisers for them in such
matters as they think fit to employ them in abroad: as to be solicitors for
them, and to stir up the charity of the people toward that society, not
ceasing to persuade as many as they can to follow their examples. And this was
the effect of one M. Gilberts, and one Master Druries exercises and some
others: viz. they got from them all they had, and then employing them as is
before expressed, procured the Popes blessing for them, for the better
approving unto them of that their new calling: as appears in the faculties
granted to Parsons, Campion, Heywood, and the rest about twenty years since.
The evidence of which proceedings with the said Gentlemen, was so apparent and
manifest unto many, that disliked greatly of such kind of exercises, as that
some in jest would say: such a one is Gilberted, and such a one is Druryed: and
others to the like effect: they shall never Gilbert me, nor Drury me, nor
cosen me with such their holy sleights.

An other young Gentleman not long since, entering into this exercise under a
young Jesuit here in England, was found by his meditations to have lands yet
unsold, worth a hundredth marks a year, which hindered his journey to heaven.
Whereupon he offering the same to the said young Jesuit, the good Father
allowing the offer, said, that if he should receive the land, her Majesty
would take it from him: but (quoth he) sell it, and then I am capable of the
money. By which ghostly counsel the Gentleman set his land to sale, and was
offered 900. pound for it: but the holy Father insisting upon a 1000. pound, the
Gentleman dyed before a chapman could be gotten, and so the good Father lost
all. I omit how many poor young men, falling into these good Fathers hands to
be exercised, have fallen into sundry inconveniences, and grown to be
broken-brayned ever after. The truth is, that amongst many deurses which they
have to enrich themselves, this is not one of the least, which being now
known, may peradventure be a hinderance unto them hereafter, and drive both
Father Garnet and his yonkers to leave their coaches and stables of horses, and
to be glad to walk on foot as their betters do.

We have troubled you long in this matter of Jesuitical gayning: and yet if
you will bear with us a little longer, we will inform you of an other devise,
not in esse, but in spe: marry it is very royal, and may be termed an
Imperial hunting, such a one as was never seen on earth before, pursued by
any religious person whosoever, since Nimrod the Giant hunted; qui erat
robustus venator coram Domino, who was a very rough huntlman. Of this kind of
hunting, there is a just Volume set forth by Father Parsons and his General,
called the high Counsel of reformation for England to take place and be in
force, when the Catholic conqueror shall be established in great Britain.
First, no religious order will that famous Volume permit in great Britain, but
Jesuits, and Capuchines: Benedictines, Carthusians, nor Dominicans must enter
here, sicut placuit Iesuitis: for the holy Ghost has forsaken all religious
orders, and is only in the Capuchines and Jesuits. If you ask us why they
make choice of the Capuchines only? We answer you, as a good Capuchine did to
the like question. We suit best (quoth he) with the humor of the Jesuits: for
their drift is to have and rule all; and on the contrary, our orders are such,
as we must neither rule at all, nor have any thing. These Jesuits ( homines
secundum cor meum, as God said of David) do profess voluntary poverty, and
to renounce the world, with all that belongs thereto. But yet so mortified
they are, that with the worlds weapons they will conquer the world. In these
three Kingdoms England, Scotland, and Ireland, there are 100. Bishoprics
great and small: how many Parsonages and Vicarages, and how many religious
Monasteries, it is hard to tell. All which must be no more in the hands of
Bishops, Abbots, Parsons, and the rest, as heretofore it was accustomed. But
all the holy society of Jesus, their father Provincial must cull out four
Jesuits, and two secular Priests, which must be demi Jesuits. These six
Vicars, these mighty great Lords, shall have the Lands, Manors, Lordships,
Parsonages, Monasteries, and whatsoever, into their own hands; allowing the
Bishops, Parsons and Vicars competent stipends or pensions, sicut plasuit
Iesuitis, as the Romans in their leagues were wont to write. All the rest must
be employed in pios vsus, as father General of Rome shall think good. The
Colleges in both Universities must be so likewise in the power of these
mortified creatures: no Bishop, no Parson, or Vicar, no fellow of any College
must be so hardy as once to demand an account what is become of their
revenues, Lands, and Lordships. If they do, this shall be the answer, mirantur
superiores etc. The Nobility must be limited also what retinue they shall
keep: what they shall have to spend yearly, and what diet they shall keep at
their Tables. Lastly, the common laws of our country must be abolished, and
the civil bear the sway another while: those are barbarous: these are
learned, and of more excellency; happy is he that can see this book, called
the Counsel of Reformation: where he may read these wonderful platformes of
Jesuitical government, devised by the second Nimrod, the Smiths son of
Stockgersee, or rather the Parsons son of that parish, expelled from Balioll
College for his illegitimation, of whom, anon.

In the writing of this discourse, we were not ignorant into what a sea of
Jesuitical calumniations we have launched. For they have an other position not
yet mentioned: and it is: That detraction in general is lawful: as if a
Jesuit should say, that amongst the prisoners at Wisbich, there were many and
so grievous enormities, as that Father Weston and his adherents were
constrained to separate themselves from the other Priests: and being charged to
name some particulars, or else if he could not, he was to be reckoned for a
detractor, and therein to have offended greatly in slaundering the whole house,
he should answer: Nay my words were general, and therefore I offended not.
But what talk we of their general calumniations: we shall be sure to have
their particular commendations cast abroad against us with heue and ho in a
mischief, as we have endured many of their thunderbolts already. Howbeit, as
we regard it not, so do we not wonder at it, considering their dealing with all
men that offend them, be he whom he shall, Bishop, or Cardinal: yea or the
Pope himself, they care not.

Master Doctor Gifford, a man of very good desert, did but a little offend
them, in not admiring of them and their designements, and shortly after they
devised sundry most vile and unjust accusations against him: they defamed him
in England for a sower of sedition, charging him further, to be an informer
against the Jesuits, and the exhibiter of the memorial to the Pope. They
procured him to be examined before the Nuncio in the Low countries, who after
long delays, affirmed in plain terms that the Doctor had wrog. Failing of
their purpose against him this way, Father Baldwyn, a man of the right stamp,
dealt with the Nuncio for a general pacification and remission on all sides:
whereunto the Doctor at the Nuncio his entreaty yielded. And first by order
taken in that behalf, the said Baldwyn in the name of Father Parsons, and all
that society, asked him forgiveness: and the Doctor for his part in civility
performed as much: with this addition, if he had offended any of them. Which
being done, the Nuncio commanded them both to be secret of what had passed in
favor indeed of the Jesuits. Which commandment the Doctor obeyed: but
Father Baldwyn omitting what he had done in the name of the rest, instantly
gave it forth after a glorious sort, that the Doctor had asked father Parsons
and the Jesuits forgiveness: and thereby to disgrace him a new, and to make
their former injuries done unto him more probable, they caused the same to be
openly promulgated out of the Pulpit in the College at Rhemes. So shameless
(you see) they are, as the very Pulpits are profaned by them, when it stands
them in hand to maintain their reputations per fas aut nefas they care not how.

One Fisher a young man going to Rome with some such messages from certain of
our brethren, as were not acceptable to these good Fathers, after they had very
cunningly used him, to wring from him what they were able that might serve
their turns, they sent him to the Gallyes at Naples, where he remains a
gally-slaue (as we are informed) if he be yet alive. An other of our brethren a
Priest, in that he opposed himself in some things to certain of that order,
they have persecuted him ever since with such mallce, as he could remain in no
place in England with any Catholic, but they hunted him thence with one lie or
other, giving it out, when nothing else would serve, that he was a spy for the
State, to bring them to their utter ruin. In so much as not daring to go
beyond the seas, knowing (as after he has professed) that there they had laid
their snares, either for his imprisonment or murdering, he was driven to go
into Scotland, and to hide his head there. Hereunto we might add a long
catalogue of above a hundredth persons by name of this Island, whom these
extraordinarily illuminated Fathers have most lewdlie and falsely slaundered,
because they disliked of sundry their Machiauilian proceedings. But here we
omit them, referring the further discourse here of to him, who has already
made a particular Register of them.

The Bishop of Cassane Doctor Jews, was a man by whom the Jesuits had
received very extraordinary benefit. By his procurement they got the Rectorship
of our English Seminary in Rome, God forgive his soul for it, as we trust he
has. He was a man so favored by diverse Popes, as first he was made
Monseignior, then Bishop of Cassane, afterward Nuncio for Gregory 14. to
Lucerna, and then Visitor general of Rome and all the Popes dominions. When
two and twenty Jesuits should all of them bin banished out of the City of
Perugio for their cunning fishing to enrich themselves, one of them being
notoriously detected for alluring a Gentlewoman to give them a very rich chain
of pearl without her husbands priuitie: this provident good Bishop being their
general Visitor, used such means, as all that matter was hushed, and they
continued there still. We should be too long if we should remember unto you all
the benefits which the Jesuits in Rome and elsewhere from time to time
received at his hands: all the which notwithstanding, yea though they had bin a
thousand more, the kind Fathers could not endure him, because in their
garboyles at Rome about the Students in the English Seminary, he disliked their
courses and practices with them. Hence it proceeded, that whilst he was alive
they caused their disciples to rail upon him most despitefully: tearming him a
factious, an ambitious, and a partial man. And a little before his death they
amongst them cast out a Libell against him, which was brought unto him, wherein
they laid many horrible crimes to his charge, and in the course of their hot
charity, made this devout prayer full like themselves, vel Turca vel mors vel
Damon eum eripiat anobis: and indeed not long after he dyed: we leave it to
Gods judgment, whether they were the causers of it, or not. But being dead,
when in all humanity their malice should have bin buried with him, they ceased
not, notwithstanding to follow his happy memory with their Jesuitical
calumniations, and that most irreligiously. For whereas the good Bishop not
four hours before his death, upon occasion protested that he had bin most
falsely charged with upholding, and mayntayning the Students in the English
Seminary against the Jesuits: yet that impious caytife Father Parsons in a
letter dated the 13-of July 1598. and sent hither into England not to be kept
secret, writes of him after his slye fashion in this sort. A third cause
(says he) there was, meaning of the Students opposing themselves against the
Jesuits, no less important perhaps then any of the rest, or more then both
together: which was a certain disgust given at the very foundation of the
College, unto a certain principal man of our Nation, and his friends then
resident in Rome, who afterward not affecting greatly the government or
governors of the said College, was ever in re, or in opinion, a back unto them
that would be discontented. Thus far this charitable Father against this
blessed Bishop now in Heaven, and contrary to his profession upon his
deathbed: who when he was alive, might if he had bin disposed, have curbed
many of that crew, being their Visitor general, and peradventure curried a
little before-time this good Father for many insolences: but a milder man
lived not, or one more apt to put up and forgive all injuries: and of purpose
he refrayned for visiting of that crew, because he knowing their hard conceits
of him, would not give them any occasion to say, he was partial, if he should
have dealt more roundly with them. But by the way you may observe out of
Parsons words, that this good Bishop had a dislike of the Jesuitical
government and governors of the English College in Rome: so as we are not the
men alone that have thought amiss of both. Peradventure you may see hereafter
the very exhibits themselves, which the Jesuits presented unto him, as their
Visitor, one against another, and then it will appear unto you what little
cause he found to magnify either their persons, or their government.

The most blessed Cardinal Doctor Allane, a man most reverenced of our Nation
(and very worthily, one or two actions excepted, whereunto he was drawn by
Father Parsons) in the end passed not untouched by the Jesuits: because in
very deed he daily saw further into them, then he had done: and therefore not
only disliked, but disfauored diverse their proceedings, especially toward his
latter end. In which respect, that they might be even with him in some sort,
they gave out sundry disgraceful words against him, as that he was a good
simple man, but not of any esteem or reckoning in matters or affairs handled
in the Popes Consistory, a man of weak advice, and never used but a little for
some matters of learning. And such was their hatred toward him, as it was
verily thought by many in Rome that he was poisoned: which conceit the Rector
then Hieronimo Florauantio a Jesuit, would gladly have turned from his
society upon the good Bishop of Cassane, but ridiculously indeed, though
maliciously enough. When this worthy Cardinal lay upon his deathbed, he
would gladly have had all the English Students to have come unto him: but this
good Rector would not yield unto it, for what cause God knows. God will at
one day judge all hypocrites, and bring their secret mischiefs to light. Upon
the death of this so memorable a person they openly triumphed, and amongst
other their Jesuitical calumniations against him, said, that God had taken him
away in good time: for if he had lived longer, he would have disgraced
himself, and lost the credit which he had got. These men have the best fortune
in the world: for no man if once they begin to hate him does live any long time
after it: quo artificio viderint ipsi.

Furthermore, concerning these two notable persons, the Jesuits have practiced
an other of their rules upon them. As to advance themselves, they traduce all
others, discommending their gifts, abilities, government, learning, discretion,
policy, and all other good qualities in them: as who should say, we are the
only men that are to be accounted of, honored, extolled, and admired by all
sorts in all places: so have they a trick to advance one and the same men's
credits, whom before they have to an other end most notoriously disgraced and
slaundered, when it may serve their turns to work some inconvenience or
hinderance to a third person, whom likewise they do malign and hate. For
example, to hinder and discountenance the Bishop of Cassanes Nephew Monsegnior
Hugh Griffyn, they commended his Uncle exceedingly, to insinuate that he did
far degenerate from his Uncles virtues. And on the other side after the
death of Cardinal Allane, when they feared that the Bishop of Cassane should
have had his place, and bin made Cardinal, besides their reports of his
enmity to their society, and stirring up all their garboyles in the said
College, they spared not to spread it abroad, as men that had worshipped
Cardinal Allane, and loved him with their whole hearts, that the said Bishop of
Cassane could never endure him the said Cardinal, but was ever his enemy, and
had wrought him much woe and grief in his time. Whereupon to make that
Machiuilean report the more odious, and to blemish the good opinion had of the
Bishop thereby to trump in his way, till he was triced indeed out of their way:
they entered into a large discourse of his extraordinary singularities: how
beneficial he had bin to their College: how much he was esteemed of all
Princes in Europe that knew him: how dearly he had bin accounted of by the
Popes holiness, and by other Popes his predecessors: how his greatest care was
ever bent for the good of his Country, for the reducing of the same to the
Catholic faith: what great honor he had in the Court of Rome: how much he was
admired by the rest of the Cardinals, and how highly reverenced always by
themselves. All which particular points, saving the last were most true, and
ought to have their true use, as we hold of all the good words and confessions
and reports made and given out by the Scribes and Pharisees, and by the Devil
himself of our Savior Jesus Christ, though they did the same to a wicked
purpose to have dishonored or entangled him in his speeches or otherwise, if by
any means they had bin able: as these good fellows dealt with the good
Cardinal, not that they so deemed of him, as their words imported, but only to
hinder the said Bishop, as we have said, from the preferment they feared and
was like enough would have been laid upon him, if he had lived: being forsooth
a man no way fit for it, that had opposed himself in faction to so worthy and
high a Prelate. But what do we insist upon their malice and slanders against
meaner men, nay this good Bishop and this most renowned Cardinal, when they
favor not their Jesuitical doings? We will proceed to their presumptions
against the Popes themselves.

Xistus 5. called before him the General of the Jesuits, and demanded of him,
why they called themselves Jesuits: who answered, that they did not so call
themselves, but only Clerks of the society of Jesus. To whom the Pope
replying, said: why should you appropriate your selves to be of the society of
Jesus, more then all other Christians, of whom the Apostle says: Vocati sumus
in societatem filij eius? And whereas the Benedictines, are so called of their
first author Benedictus, and the Dominicans of Dominicus their founder, why
should not you be called Ignatiani, according to the first author, and also
keep the Quier, and rise at midnight, and in all things do as other religious
men do? These words of the Pope they took so grievously, as he lived but a
short time after (to omit what has been reported) and after his death, they
have not ceased very wickedly to deprave him. Some of them preached openly
against him in Spain: they have termed him a Wolf, and said he was a
Lutheran. It was given forth by them; that if he had lived a little longer, he
would have undone al Christendom. They called the manner of his death into
question, and reported that at his departure he had no confessor with him.
Bellarmine himself hearing of his death, used these words: Qui sine
poenitentia viuit and sine poenitentia moritur, procul dubio ad inferna
descendit. Of likeliehoode it is a matter of damnation, to endeavor to bring
some Jesuits into order, without great penance done for it. But for this
worthy person, now a Cardinal, we will not take upon us to interpret his
meaning: marry that another miscreant in respect of any order should slander
Christ's late Vicar upon earth, being so worthy a Bishop in his time, as his
deeds will louud out his praise, whilst Rome stands; we hold it
intolerable, had they been the best Jesuits that now live, who should have so
disgraced him. But the chief point that we meant to observe unto you in one of
these lewd companions speeches, is; how upon some opposition and objections
made against some of his slanderous reports of that worthy Pope, he fell to
the maintenance of this most wicked assertion, Hominem non christianum posse
esse Romanum pontificem: and yet this proposition is not revoked, nor the
graund Archpriest has censured him for it; who is so ready to punish others
his ancients, and as obedient and honest men as himself, that we go no
further.

The Bishop of Cassane so often before mentioned, being the general Visitor in
Rome of all religious men, had many accusations exhibited unto him by the
Jesuits, one against another, and many petitions, desiring him to come and
visit them. With these complaints and iarres amongst them, the Bishop
acquainted Pope Clement that now is. Whereupon at the next general Chapter
held by the Jesuits, his holiness attended with the said Bishop of Cassane,
and four or five Bishops more, went into their house, and rebuked them
sharply for their pride, and for their disorderly apparel, and for their
prodigality, charging them earnestly to be more humble, and to frame the
course of their lives and behavior hereafter more like religious men, the^
they did at that time. How these words were taken by the Fathers, we make no
doubt: with indignation enough you may be sure: and since (as we fuppose) some
of that society have been so bold with his holiness, as they have affirmed
peremptorily, that he erred in absoluing the French king that now is, being
deceived by his Divines. Of likelihood they were not of the Popes counsel in
that action, to have given him better direction. But the said absolution did so
much tend to the prejudice of the king of Spain, and to their deseignments
with him, as no marvel if they do so caluminate it: daring by their rule of
ordine ad Deum, to do and speak almost what they list.

Now if these men may presume thus far with so famous men, Bishops, Cardinals,
and with the Popes themselves, upon so small occasions, how will they crucify
us poor wretches, that have been thus bold with their worships. And yet if
the worst should fall out, having such company to undergo with us, the malice
and spite of their lavish tongues: the grief will be the less. We pray God
from the bottom of our hearts, that they may follow the counsel of his
holiness, and become more lowly in their own eyes: for otherwise some great
inconvenience will ensue of it. We are not Prophets, nor the sons of any
Prophet, to foretell the event of things before they fall out. But if we have
any understanding (as we hope herein we have none) if these fellows have the
reins laid on their necks, and be suffered to run forward with the bit in
their teeth a little longer, they will hardly be reclaimed, without great
danger of apostasy: such is their pride and haughtines of mind. It is great
pity that so worthy an order should be profaned with so many machiuilians,
and that they will not rather choose to follow their founder in humility, and
many most excellent persons of that society. Cardinal Toledo of worthy
memory, Cardinal Bellarmino yet living: Gregory de Valentia, Suarez, and
many others even worthies in their days; who bestowed not their time in
canuasing of kingdoms, and deposing of Princes, or in any such like
vnpriestlie practices, as you have heard of before that our Jesuits do.

And thus for this time we leave the Jesuits of our nation, to deal in
generalities any farther with them, or with their extraordinary illuminations
or spirits of guiding souls: and do address our selves to that virtuous
Paragon Father Parsons, the unworthy Rector of our English Seminary at Rome.
But before we begin with him, we had need to entertain you with some short
Preface. For some no doubt will startle that he should be touched, what? Dare
any presume to call him in question? Will you intermeddle with his actions?
They are not to be sifted or canuased or discountenanced by any secular Priests
whosoever, his holiness excepted. Beware what you do: it is sure a note of an
evil spirit: we pray God those men be sound that dare take this course. He is
a religious man, a lesuit, the rarest wise man of our nation, most familiar
with Princes, admired in Spain, reverenced in Italy, and only hated in
England: which is a sufficient argument of his integrity. But by your good
favor a little: run not headlong with these general conceits. These
propositions be to too large, these apprehensions are too abstract: descend a
while into particulars. Consider his actions: let those (not general conceits)
prove or disprove the man; may not a religious person be exorbitant: a wise man
forget him self, and an evil man win favor? What greater means to work
injustice then favor and wit? Fools never reach far. And what thing sooner
deceives, and longer cloketh deceit, then a religious habit upon an evil
person; since most men judge the inward man, by the outward appearance. The
wolf never more deceives then when he is clothed in a sheep skin: yet is
not this a reproach unto religion, nor a disgrace to the habit, but a greater
reproof to the person, that will abuse innocent means to nocent actions.
Seeing then, that a velvet hearse may sometimes cover a corrupted and stinking
carkas: let not the outward appearance and habit only carry away and
preiudicate men's conceits, where the effects do disclaim. If he be a
religious man, he is sequestered from the world: what then has he to do with
kingdoms and titles? If he have abiured the world, let him show it to be so,
in his conversation, and sincere affections indeed, and not determine of common
wealths and kingdoms. If his profession will not draw him thereto, yet let
charity move him to forbear, because thereby he gives matter to increase our
persecution at home. Princes are jealous, and many times have cause to be so:
why should he the^ provoke our Prince to be suspicious of us by his follies?
And as touching our selves, you shall find us sure and sound enough by Gods
grace: some of us having stood unto it, per mult as tribulationes, when this
worthy champion took his heels, and left us to sink or swim for him. Whilst
he has accompanied himself with Princes, and lived at his pleasure in kings
courts: we poor souls, have been tossed from pillar to post, and hurryed
from prison to prison, and the best of us have for your sakes lived in
sufficient affliction: And will you now begin to doubt of us? If Father Parsons
had kept himself within the compass of his own calling: he should have bin
quiet for us. But his dealings being such, as should we not disclose and
reprove them, we should be inuolued in his traiterous deseignements, and after
our long sufferance for our consciences be hanged for high treason: bear with
us, if we seek to prevent that scandal. We will therefore proceed by your
good leaves, with our purpose: following in one and the same cause, the
examples of some of our brethren, who in their books before mentioned have
given some little touch of him.

And first for his birth. Master Southwell a Jesuit and whilst he lived his
obedient subject, according to the prouer be mulus mulum scabit, has told us
this tale of it. As for Father Parsons, he having placed the uttermost of his
ambition in the contempt of honor, and the highest of his wealth in voluntary
poverty, will easily acknowledge his birth to have been of more honest then
great parents: yet were they not so mean but that they were able to afford him
such education, as might have made his good parts a way to no small preferment.
For this fair gloss being most untrue, we doubt not, but that Father Parsons
either has, or will hereafter by some worthy monument of his memory requite
him, were it not that the Jesuits have a special privilege to write what they
list, be it never so untrue, if it may be covered with either of their
principles, propter bonum societatis, or ordinem ad deum; this fellow would not
thus have adventured to have abused those to whom he has avouched it. For in
truth the said master Parsons his graund Provincial, is by his birth a
bastard, beggotten upon the body of a very base woman by the Parson of the
parish where he was borne: and his right name is not Parsons but Cowbuck.
Which defect, because it did not proceed from any fault in him, we could have
wished had bin omitted by our very reverend brethren in their late declaration
to his holiness: had not both they and we thought it expedient thus far to
touch it, because the gentleman is so high minded, and does take upon him so
usually to debase other men's parentages, not sparing like a wicked person with
an overmuch hardened forehead, sundry of the Nobility of England, nor his
own Sovereign and her most worthy progenitors. Besides, it may be a good
caveat unto him to look well to his orders: considering the Canon law in that
point, least otherwise it cost him his Rectorship. Master Southwels smoothe
tale will not serve his turn, if the matter be ripped up against him. But to
follow our course: the said Parson that begat him, did afterward foster him,
and having brought him up at the school, sent him to Oxford, and placed him in
Balioll College: from whence he was in effect expelled, being Master of
Arts, not for religion as he has vaunted, but for his Bastardie, factious
conversation, libelling, and other misdemeanors. But hereof you need no
further information, then the said declaration: where you shall find, that
there was such lamentation at his departure from the College, as for joy he
was rung thence with Bells. Doctor Bagshawe being then fellow of the said
College, was his stiff adversary in the matters objected against him: which
the good Father of his Jesuitical charity, does not, when occasion serves
forget: having within these three years last past, by a very lewd stratageme,
as touching the villainy against her Majesty, undertaken by one Squier,
brought both him and some others as we think, for his sake, in great danger of
their lives.

After this Father his said expulsion, or his leaving the said College by
compulsion, he repaired to London, and having often resort to one James Clarke,
his old schoolefellowe, abiding then in the inner Temple, he protested to him
the said Clarke, upon some occasion of speeches betwixt them, that he neither
then was, nor ever meant to be any Papist (as it then pleased him to term us
Catholics) and offered, for his better satisfaction therein to affirm so much
upon his oath. His resolution was as he said, to study physic, and that he
was purposed to travel for that end to Padua: and rather thither, then to any
place else, because one Lane a Master of Arts, and his old acquaintance, in
Oxford, was there placed, and in good reputation. Whereby you see the
Gentleman's zeal to the Catholic Roman Religion, which drive him to leave
Oxford.

Not long after the said conference with Master Clarke, he departed beyond the
Seas: and so framed the course of his life there, as within short time, he
became a Jesuit: being a man very violent in Cardinal Allanes opinion, and of
an unquiet spirit. In this calling he did profit exceedingly, and was almost
upon the sudden a very great Statist, little behind many of his ancients,
for plotting and practicing of sundry vnpriestly enterprises. We are verily
persuaded (by diverse other his like desseignments suitable thereunto) that this
new good Father had his finger in the attempts for Ireland, anno 1578. when
Stukeley should have gone thither: and also anno 1579. when Saunders went
indeed. Of this second expedition you may read in our own Chronicles: and
for the first, thus the matter stood. About a year before the overthrow of
the King of Portugale in Afric, Stukeley being in Rome, persuaded Pope
Gregory the 13. that he the said Stukely would make his the said Popes son
James (then Duke of Sora) the King of Ireland: if he the said Pope would
furnish him with men and money sufficient for that expedition. Whereunto the
Pope agreed, and set him forth with money, and with about 3000. men, directing
his letters to the King of Spain for his assistance likewise in that
enterprise. But the King (aiming at that kingdom more himself) refused either
to receive him into any of his Ports, or at all to aid him. Stukeley being
deceived of this hope, cast about to the King of Portugal (then preparing for
his Affrican voyage) who gladly received both him and his men, promising unto
him, that if he would go with him in that voyage, he would at their return
furnish him sufficiently for the accomplishing of his purpose in Ireland.
Stukeley yielded: goes into Affrike, is there slain, and the Pope was greatly
discontented, that he had been so greatly ouerreached by him.

At such time as it was perceived in Rome what the Pope intended by the
instigation of Stukeley, concerning their said desseignements for Ireland, one
Master Shelley, named the graund Prior for England, cast out words to this
effect: what (says he) because there are no more Cities of Parma and Placenza
to bestow upon his Son, will he now have Ireland, the patrimony of the
Crown of England? The said Prior being moved by the Pope to undertake that
journey with Stukeley, he refused so to do, and told him that he the said
Stukeley was but a shifting and a vaunting fellow, and that he would assuredly
cosen him in all that he committed to his charge and trust. But the Pope was
so much addicted to that attempt, that partly in respect of the Prior his said
words, and partly of this his said refusal, he grew into such dislike with
him, as for the safeguard of his life he thought it meet to fly to Venice.
Whether Father Parsons was then in Rome to blow this coal against the Prior,
or where he was, the matter is not great, considering the daily correspondencie
by letters between the Fathers of that society from all places in
Christendom. Besides you may peradventure hear more hereof at another time.

About eleven or twelve years after his said expulsion, and that being a
Jesuit he had won to himself by his said factious disposition and practices
the reputation to be made the Provincial for the Jesuits that were to be sent
into England, he came hither with two subjects only, Father Campion, and Father
Cotham, Anno 1580. having got a great start of Father Campion, who was Proctor
not long before in Oxford, when Father Parsons commensed but Bachelor of Arts,
if our memories do not fail us therein.

This his said coming into England being known, Master Blackwell (now his
darling and Archpriest by his direction) bewailed the same to a friend of his
being then in prison: saying unto him, that it was a very indiscreet fact of
the President at Rhemes (meaning Doctor Allane) to send him hither, as being an
unfit man to be employed in the causes of religion. And being asked why he was
unmeet for that employment, he answered, because this casting out of Balioll
College, and other articles and matters depending upon it, betwixt him and
Doctor Squier (then living) were very likely to be renewed, and so to work
great discredit both to him, and the cause Catholic.

The holy Father was no sooner come into England, but besides the vanity of his
challenge to all Protestants (being deemed an unfit man to have performed the
same) he began to bestirre himself in matters of State, especially how to
advance a certain King by the favors of diverse foreign Princes: to the great
prejudice of her Majesty's both Crown and safety, as appears by a letter of
his written to a noble man bearing date from Rome the 24. of January 1600. In
which kind of affairs he so busied himself, as diverse Catholics were in
that respect greatly discontented with him, and told him plainly, that if he
would not desist from those courses, they would deliver him into the hands of
the Civil Magistrate.

The year after, viz. 1581. Fa. Heywood being delegated by the Duke of
Bauaria, to Pope Gregory the 13. his holiness upon knowledge that he was an
English man, and experience of his eloquence, and diverse other good parts in
him, took him from the Duke, and sent him into England: where finding Fa.
Parsons with the authority of a Provincial, and he the said Fa. Heywood
refusing to submit himself unto him, a great heartburning did arise betwixt
them. Father Parsons alleged that being the Provincial over the Jesuits in
England, he the said Father Heywood must consequently be his inferior: but
Father Heywood answered, that his mission hither was singular, directed by the
Pope himself, and therefore said, he was thereby exempted from any subjection
to him. This quarrel grew to be hot, and had many priests and others as
partakers on either side: some holding with one, and some with another.

The same Father Parsons having stirred 'vp stirs, dangers, and garboyles by
his seditious challenges, and dealings in England and Scotland: and finding
that many Catholics were offended with him for it, he made great
collections of money, pretending therewith to relieve prisoners: but being once
master of that mint, ehe fled into France, leaving his friends in England to
shift for themselves, and the prisoners to feel and endure the want. When he
came to Paris, as a man having lately bin in possession of his new
Prouincialitie, he put in practice this stratageme following, of purpose to
exempt himself from the Provincial and his superior there. He persuaded them
that without their own great peril, they could not entertain him in their
College: affirming that the Queen of England (good Lady) being sore afraid to
have so great a personage to be harbored so near her, had proscribed him, and
promised no small sum of money to the party that would kill him: and
hereunto he added, that he had perfect knowledge from his friends in England,
that they were already in Paris, who had undertaken that cruel deed. Therefore
he prayed the Rector, that none of the society might be suffered to walk
forth in his company: saying that if they did, they should surely perish with
him. And to make this conceit the more probable, he suborned (with his own
money) two English men well appointed, and a Flemming with them, to go lately
in the evening, and enquire for one Fa: Parsons at the College. Whereupon the
Jesuits believing, that all he said was true, dismissed Father Parsons to go
forth freely whither he would, and to dispose of himself at his own
pleasure, to avoid death forsooth, verifiyng the old proverb, Caelum non
animum mutant qui trans mare currunt: as crafty a crouder, and as lying a
companion now amongst the Jesuits, after almost thirty years profession, as
he was in Balioll College amongst his fellows there.

We told you before of the contention betwixt this good Father, and his
pretended subject Father Heywood: who^ for disciplines sake you may be sure he
did not forget, having of likelihood, some further matter against him, by
reason of his courses held here amongst us. The said Heywood assembled a Synod
in Norfolk, and made such constitutions as are mentioned in the treatise
before expressed, dedicated to the Pope. At this assembly Master Dolman being
present, required of Fa. Heywood to see his Commission; who being not able to
show him any, he the said Master Dolman did inhibite him to proceed any
further: and told him plainly that he usurped upon the Bishop of Lincoln
then being in prison, and that if he proceeded so to do, he the said Master
Dolman in defense of the old customs of the Church would resist him, vsque ad
sanguinem. Furthermore, after the said Fa. Parsons departure hence: some of
the Priests finding their usual contributions to be greatly diminished, and
perceiving one cause thereof to be the lavish expenses of Father Heywood in
keeping so many men, horses, and coaches (as Fa. Garnet' does at this present)
they dealt with him in that behalf, signifying their dislike of such his
prodigality: and alleged that Fa. Parsons spent not so much, when he was
here. To whom Fa. Heywood answered, that Fa. Parsons was his inferior, in that
he the said Fa. Parsons was sent hither but by their General, whereas he (Fa.
Heywood) had his mission from the Pope himself.

What advantages Fa. Heywood gave to Fa. Parsons by these or any other his
proceedings here, we mind not at large to express. It is susficient to let
you know that Fa. Parsons after his departure hence, sending thirty articles
against him to the Court at Rome, he the said Fa. Heywood was shortly after
called for by authority to come out of England, but was apprehended before he
could get hence. Howbeit not long after, he was banished, and then he repaired
to Rome, or to some place near unto it: where he was not so well entreated as
he looked for. Insomuch as being moved with diverse enormities amongst the
Jesuits, he wrote sundry letters to the Pope, instantly desiring his holiness
that the Jesuits might be reformed, saying that otherwise, he should see their
ruin (he feared) in his own days. Whereupon the Pope called their General
Aquauiue, and demanded of him what those deformities were, which father
Heywood complained of, to whom he answered, that the old man did it of dotage,
not knowing what he said: and withal to stop him from writing any more to the
Pope, he sent him to Calabria: where (as we have bin informed) he was by the
said Generals commandment kept close prisoner: and so or in little better
case remains, if he be yet alive: but as we think he is dead.

But to return to our devout Father of Stockgersee (natale solum) after his
said arrival in France, as he began with cousening his superiors in Paris for
his greater liberty, so did he continue his Machiuilian practices in matters
of State, and has not ceased since that time to seek the betraying and
destruction of his own Country like a Monster; besides the publishing of
sundry his most seditious writings and letters, whereby her Majesty, and the
State have bin so justly irritated, as we poor men innocent and ignorant of
all his unnatural deseignements, have felt the smart of his wickedness,
himself being without danger, and like a coward and false shepherd, having
left both us and the flock in the briars. Within a while after his going into
France, he plunged himself up to the ears in the Scottish causes then in
hand, and was an especial instigator of the Duke of Guise, Anno 1583. or
thereabouts, for his sudden surprising the City of London, and her Majesty's
person, with 5000. men: assuring him, that the Catholics would assist him if
need required. Besides, it being determined that the said Duke should come
hither in his own person, for the performance of the attempt, there was not
any man found more fit for his dexterity and forwardnes in that matter, then
Father Parsons (as Mendoza reported) to be employed to Rome to make trial, if
by his policy any money might have bin gotten from his holiness for the
furnishing of that journey. But we think he lost his labor. Furthermore,
considering that one of the Dukes chief cares was to know the fittest Havens
to land in, and that Frauncis Throckmerton was employed for that purpose by the
instigation and advise of Sir Frauncis Englefeild, Mendoza, and others, (all of
them Father Parsons especial friends) it is more then probable that his
Fatherhood was, if not a practicioner for that purpose, yet one of that
counsel and confederacy, or at the least acquainted with it.

It is not unknown what a villainous attempt the traitor Parry undertook
against the life of her Majesty the same year, Anno 1583. pursuing the same,
till by Gods mercy he came to the gallows the year after. With this
outrageous plot sundry Jesuits were acquainted: nay, they were the incouragers
of him to proceed in it valiantly, omitting no persuasions or means they
could use to that effect. It makes our hearts to bleed, that the blessed
Sacrament should ever be made a means to animate villains in such devilish
enterprises. But what is all this to Father Parsons? Surely it concerns him
more then we are glad to report. For the said Parry having apprehended a
certain necessity for the good of the Catholic cause, that her Majesty must
be taken out of the way; and finding a great aptnes and desire in himself to
be an instrument to that effect: yet was he perplexed in his mind with some
doubts and objections, why he might not lay violent hands upon her person. For
the clearing and remoouing of which difficulties, Father Parsons was offered him
to confer with, as being accounted one ofthe meetest men to resolve him in
such matters. It is true that Parry refused to talk or confer with him: but
yet the very offer does argue that the good Father was acquainted with Parries
intent, or at the least that he was known to be one, that if he talked with
Parry, would have animated him in that course, with all his Jesuitical
arguments and best persuasions. You will say this is but a conjecture: and
therefore for your better satisfaction of the truth herein, you shall
understand, that it is to be showed by one ofthis Fathers own letters to
Master Charles Paget, that whilst this mischief was in consultation, a
certain Gentleman of good quality coming unto him, told him of it, and said,
that assuredly he would reveal it: but he the godly Father dissuaded him with
all his skill, and would not suffer him so to do: which was (as we think) a
more vile part in Father Parsons, being borne her Majesty's subject, then in
any stranger whosoever, that thrust Parry forwards into that most barbarous
stratageme.

Furthermore, this good Father that he might leave no stone unturned, which
could tend to the trouble and mischief of his native Country, when his
dealings with more private persons would not succeed, then he returned to
those of higher place, and excited them to undertake some exployts upon them,
which might be answerable to his Jesuitical, that is, most bloody
deseignements. He made a lewd discourse, wherein he entitled Alexander Duke of
Parma to her Majesty's Crown, and endeavored with all his skill to persuade
the Duke in the right of his son Ranutius to set upon this Realm with all
his force, propounding unto him diverse means (as one by marrying his son to
a certain english Lady) for his better effecting ofthat enterprise.

But the attempt of 1588. by the King of Spain against her Majesty and this
whole Kingdom, as it is and ought to be abhorred by all true hearted
Englishmen: so we trust the memory of those wretches borne in our own
Country, that were either procurers, perswaders, or Agents in it, shall be had
in perpetual detestation. In which number, this our Jesuit was a chief
firebrand, and had his hand in that pernicious book, that was then printed for
the stirring up of her Majesty's subjects to have taken part with the Spaniard
if he could have arrived: which book upon their foil and overthrow was
presently burnt for shame, that ever the world should see so impious a
treatise, we mean the whole impression was burnt, saving some few that escaped
their hands. We are the more earnest against this enterprise, because it
touched all English Catholics here, as much as it did in effect the
Protestants. For it is known right well both from the Duke of Medina his own
mouth, and by other certain intelligence, that all the Catholics in England,
as well as others, and perhaps rather, were designed to the slaughter. For the
said Duke being told, that there were some Catholics in England: answered, I
care not: I will make the best Protestants in England as good Catholics as
they, if I have them once under my sword. I respect neither the one nor the
other: I mean to make room there for my master. This he has spoken diverse
times in the hearing of Master Wencelade, a Devonshire man. And this also the
Jesuits themselves confess, as amongst others Father Southwell at Wisbich, in
the hearing of diverse of the Priests there prisoners.

At what time Father Parsons went into Spain we do not remember, we think it
was about the year 1589. but sure we are that when it was known here, and
that he was commended thither by Don Bernardino de Mendoza his fellow Jesuit,
many Catholics of sounder judgment did utterly dislike it. They knew the
ambition of the Spaniards: and how bellum sacrum pretended by Ferdinando, and
continued since as a thing hereditary to that kingdom, under sundry pretenses
for the defense of the Catholic faith, did tend to nothing else, but to make
them selves monarchs. Besides, they were not ignorant with what eagernes the
Jesuits began to advance the Spaniard: which made them to suspect that Father
Parsons going thither, would still bring forth some further mischiefs: and
indeed it fell so out. For through Mendoza his credit, he became not only upon
the sudden a Courtier, but grew very soon into great favor with the King:
which you know must needs be easily wrought (as the King stood then affected
against England, having bin so much dishonored by his repulse the year before)
by his Majesty's experience of this good Fathers mortal hatred to his own
country, in plotting and casting about, how his highness might be revenged. We
will not tell what we fear concerning the motives wherewith this Father
persuaded the King to erect the Seminaries for our Countrymen in Spain, and
elsewhere, the end oftheir institution was most religiously politic, and holy:
but if we shall find those wholly employed for increasing either of Jesuits or
of other Priests, such as must follow and applaude to all their traiterous
courses against our Country, for our own parts we wish they had never bin
erected.

In the year 1589. the same year that this Father came into Spain, the
Seminary was erected in Valledolid by his means. In commendation whereof, he
writes very amply, and mentions one thing by the way, which (saving his
Maisterships Fatherhood) we do not believe to be true: he knows full well how
to keep himself warm. For he says, that the Students there hearing of the
rigor and cruelty in England, were (in short time after the said erection) so
animated and desirous to see themselves in that battle: as he himself was
ofttimes thereby moved (had he bin a few years younger, and could have borne
that mission) to have gone once again with them into England. But except he
may come hither with Gloria patri, we will undertake it for him he will not
greatly trouble us here with his presence.

In the year 1592. the King with his son and daughter went to Valledolid:
and being there, did visit his english Seminary at Father Parsons suite. In
which visitation you shall see the continuance of this fathers deadly malice,
breathed out in his scholars orations. Wherein her Majesty is by all means
depraved: the Kings honor and excellency is extolled above all measure: her
Highness downe-fall, and his victories are prophesied, and nothing is omitted
that might advance the one, and depresse the other. One of them delivering the
good father his directions, offered to the King in his oration, not only
himself, but in the name of the rest, all his fellows: nay their whole
Country, their parents, and friends, with all their Allies, confederates, and
acquaintance. Which oration, and all their other proceedings then at Valledolid
coming to Cardinal Allane in Rome, he wept for sorrow, seeing what they still
aimed at. Do not you think that our Country is like to receive great comfort
by these Spanish scholars, if they shall proceed according to these
beginnings? If you can get this Fathers relation printed the said year 1592.
concerning this visitation of the Seminary, you shall see many other
particulars: but this we warn you of, that in the printed copy, that part of
the youths oration is omitted, wherein the said great offer is made to the
King. That is not a point to be made too vulgar, till the time and opportunity
serve.

The year after 1593. Father Parsons, because men should not think him idle,
has offered to the world a further testimony of his good will to her Majesty,
and his Country, in a treatise entitled, News from Spain. Herein, besides
certain exercises by the english young Priests in an other Seminary at Civil,
tending in effect to the same purpose with the former: it pleases him to
discourse of some pleasant conceits, and certain empreises: and in one; how
King Henry the second, and King Henry the eight, Saint Thomas of Canterbury
and the Queens Majesty are marshalled in a table together. Many devils with
instruments of torments in their hands are painted under king Henry the eights
picture: and her Majesty is made to stand as it were in great sadness, looking
both upon her Father and King Henry the second, set out with many Angels and
garlands for his repentance. For Priests in a strange country to deal thus
with their own Kings, argues little Religion, and less discretion: it being
imprinted thereby in every man's mind, that sees these or the like courses:
that let any King offend them, and they will not fail to use him with the like
contempt. But the chief part of these news is of a certain conference at
Amsterdam, concerning the succession to the Crown of England: and how many
pretenders there are that do gape after it. This conference was at this time
but in papers, you shall hear of it anon come out in Print. When this fellow
was made a Religious person, it had been good for the Church that a Mill stone
had been tied about his neck, and he cast into the Sea: such scandal has and
will arise hereafter by his more then Machiuiliean devises.

In the said year also 1593. Fa: Parsons and Father Creswell (neither barrel
better hering) set out in Spain another book under the counterfeit name of
Andreas Philopater: that is, Andrew love his country: wherein like two arrant
companions they presume diverse times to speak to her Majesty (their natural
Sovereign) as if they were themselves two Emperors, and she but a milk
maid. Besides, for that Bastard and most ignominious filius terrae Parsons,
for him (wesay) to be one, that with a brazen forehead should dare to object
the mean parentage of sundry great personages, who have been in great
authority in this kingdom: nay for him so vile a rascal to deprave and
extenuate the blood Royal which is in her Majesty's sacred person, descending
from the renowned King Henry the Seventh; what true English heart can endure
it? Bear with us: for before God we are much moved with the consideration of
it. He inueieth very bitterly against the cruelty of her Highness laws; which
we wish had been more mild: but he never mentions that he and his fellows
have been the occasion of them by their traitorous courses, both against her
Crown and life. For our own parts we have felt the burden of some of them:
whereas these companions being in safety themselves, care not what mischief
they bring upon our heads. Besides in this book, are sprinkled here and there
some of their seditious positions touching their setting up of subjects against
their Princes, and of cutting off the right heirs to the Crown, under
pretense of Religion: which we account to be very pernicious doctrine. For as
when Religion is received into any kingdom, it medleth not with, or makes
better any Kings title to his Crown; so when it is banished thence, it does
not diminish any Princes right or inheritance, but leaves (in our opinions)
the same as it found it.

Now these said positions with many more (passing from hand to hand by
conference and in papers, for two or three years in Spain) begun to show
their heads in print, and are compiled into a book: the chief scope whereof
is this (if Master Charles Paget or we do understand it) viz. the deposing of
her Majesty: the alteration of our ancient laws and customs: the
disinheriting of all her Majesty's lawful successors, and the aduanncing of
the Infanta of Spain to the royal throne of this Kingdom. When these points
with their appurtenances were first published, whether in papers or in print,
we know not, Father Parsons being half sick, acquainted the scholars in
Civil publicly with them, and read the whole discourse himself unto them,
and the same he procured to be done to other english Students at S. Lucars, as
a friend of his has lately written into England in the good fathers
commendation. Who tells us further, that father Parsons demanding how they
the scholars liked that treatise, especially concerning the Infanta, they
answered, that they did not only like it, but diverse Priests and others
subscribed their names unto it, for a testimony of their approbation of it.
This that these men subscribed unto, was as seems a short draught of the
Infantaes pretended title, containing also the form of a submission for their
present acknowledgme^t of the Infanta to be their Queen and Sovereign. It was
reported here by certain Priests, that the said Students refused to subscribe
to any such matter, and that father Parsons by false information procured them
to subscribe to a blanck, both in Civil, and in Valledolid, which he supplied
after to the effect before mentioned, and offered the same to the Infanta.
Master Charles Paget reports hereof something, and to this effect, viz. that
father Parsons caused diverse by fair means and threats to subscribe, that in
all conferences they should when they came into England advance the Infantaes
title, not intending thereby to expect her Majesty's death, but by all means
to remove her from the present possession of her royal estate. If these things
should come to the knowledge of the State, who will blame the same, if such
Priests as come hither out of Spain be not very well interteyned? Neither
shall those that come from Rome be in any better plight, now that father
Parsons is the Rector of that Seminary: because it may be well supposed, that
he being no changeling, his scholars must either dance after his pipe, or sit
still and dance not at all. Kings have bin ever jealous of their estates, and
will take any occasion to prevent the worst. Whereby you see what our cases
are: he practices, and we are punished: the Catholic cause is greatly
endangered and hindered by him.

To this good Fathers proceedings, the death of Cardinal Allane in the end of
the year 1594. and of the Bishop of Cassane a little after, gave no little
furtherance, for they both disliked them. But then he rid in his own course a
gallop, laboring with his assistants and mates to persuade as many as they
could both in their sermons and in their writings, that the Catholic faith and
the King of Spain were so lincked together, as it was a point of necessitye in
the Catholic faith to put all Europe into his hands: else the Catholic
religion would perish. A position you know most absurd and blasphemous, as
though Gods truth and religion had only depended upon the old King of Spain.
Well, this foundation laid, father Parsons assured the King, that the Jesuits
in Eagland were so highly esteemed, so greedely followed not only of
Catholics, but of Protestants that were of the wiser sort, and in such
authority, that he doubted not but that shortly the King should be in every
man's heart. For the effecting whereof, his riches, his greatness, his
liberality, justice, and love toward the English were daily commended: and
father Parsons was enabled to procure the liberty of such English men as were
taken prisoners: of purpose that when they came home, they might sound out the
praises of the King of Spain, and Parsons. If you say we set not down these
particulars in their due places, you have our excuse before.

About the year 1596. the King of Spain excited partly by Father Parsons
allurements last mentioned, and by other his seditious associates (alleging
that Julius Caesar got not Britain at his first assault) attempted a second
exployt for Famouth, with a new Armado, intending therewith to have gotten into
his possession Arwennike Castle, with the hill Pendennice. Which Armado as it
was coming from Lisbone toward Ferroll (the place of rendeuow) was greatly
scattered in the way, so as 34. Ships perished in one night, with the loss of
5000. men. Thereby the Kings purpose for that time was stayed: but yet not long
after his Majesty enterprised the same attempt again for the said Castle,
and had the like success: his Ships were dispersed, and all came to naught.
That Fa. Parsons was likewise acquainted with this deseignement, if not a
chief instigator, may appear by one of his own letters to a friend of his in
the year 1597. We pray God, that no practice or deseignement set on foot,
either by this good Father, or by any other, for the inda^gering of her
Majesty, or of our native Country, have ever better issue, but may perish as
the untimely fruit of a woman. If once God shall be pleased to restore ye
Catholic faith by holy and good means, and that we may live to see it, we
shall be very joyful men, having so long (poor prisoners) expected the same:
but otherwise we are content to languish still, and dye in our sorrows.

We are almost weary with raking in the dunghill of this good Fathers
practices: and yet something of him further. When he found less hope by means
of the King of Spain, or at the least whilst his Majesty was in furnishing
himself, Parsons or his dependants, Holt and Worthington, with his priuitie,
if not advice (as Master Charles Paget notes) practiced the advancement of
the Earl of Darby to the Crown of England. Which plot being discovered to the
Earl by a Gentleman one Hesket, employed by them to his Lordship, he the said
Earl as a most dutiful subject disclosed their treason, which wrought his
untimely death as many say. With this deseignement Master Charles Brown
(otherwise as true an hearted Catholic as the prowdest of them) was so greatly
moved, as he writ to Master Stapleton (then in preparation toward Rome)
desiring him to present to his holiness certain articles (which he had framed
against these Jesuits, and then sent likewise unto him) concerning their
intituling the said Earl of Darby to the Crown, their dealing with him, and
the success of them to the greatest staunder of all Catholics, and hurt of
the general cause. He also was earnest with Master Stapleton, that he would
himself make known to the Pope what infinite garboyles and mischiefs these
fellows had stirred up amongst us, whilst his holiness imagined that they were
laboring faithfully to win poor souls to the Catholic faith, as it was the
duty of truly religious persons.

Amongst all these tragical deseignements of this good Father, we will tell
you one of his pretty tricks. One Master Fixer a Priest (having a protection
here in England from the Lord Treasurer) was so vexed and calumniated by the
Jesuits, that he renounced it, and thereupon went into Spain, intending to
read in some religious house. Being at Lisbone in good credit, he procured the
release of 14. or 15. English men that were taken prisoners: willing them to
thank Master Bluet and Doctor Bagshaw for their liberty. Hereof Parsons having
notice, sent for him into Spain, under pretense of his preferment: but when he
had him, he procured him to be laid in prison for a spy, where he remains
still, unless he be dead.

You see by the premises a little glimpse of this holy Fathers proceedings in
Spain: and the rest of his society were no less busied to the same purpose
elsewhere. Howbeit, the secular Priests both in Rome and England did utterly
dislike both him and all the rest with their so treasonable deseignements
against their own Country: whereof the King of Spain having notice, did
write earnestly to the Pope that now is, and to other Cardinals, that in any
case they should support and maynteyne the credit of the Jesuits against the
complaints of the English, who without all cause, but seduced by the Queen of
England, did greatly calumniate them as he affirmed. The two practicing
Prelates also of the Low countries, Fa. Holt, and Doctor Worthington, drew a
formal letter supplicatiue, in the names of all the english soldiers,
laborers, artizans, pensioners, as well men, as women (yea the very serving
maids and laundresses were not omitted) the same to be presented to ye King of
Spain: most humbly beseeching his Majesty, in regard of his great affection
and care of England, and the afflicted English, that he would deal earnestly
with the Pope to prefer the worthy Father and Prelate Father Parsons to the
dignity of a Cardinal: affirming it to be the only way to bind and unite the
English to his Majesty.

In expectation of the same preferme^t, and for what causes else it is not
material, this good Father went out of Spain to Rome in the year 1597. At
his coming thither, he was visited in his lodging (or as they say courted) by
two Cardinals, viz. Baronius, and the other a Spanyard. Which extraordinary
courtesy and honor done unto him, gave present occasion of some speeches in the
City, that out of doubt Father Parsons should be made a Cardinal. This
conceyt thus begun in Rome, ended for thattime with a merryiest. For Father
Parsons being counseled by the Physicians to keep his stomach warm, sent his
brother for scarlet to make him a stomacher, who oflikelihood as soon as ever
he heard the name of scarlet, was so possessed of a sudden with an opinion of
his brothers advancement, that forgetting his intent to have only a stomacher,
he procured two Merchants to carry in a wagon diverse pieces ofscarlet to his
brothers lodging for the making of his Cardinals roabes, giving it out by the
way to all his acquaintance both going and coming, that his brother forthwith
should be made a Cardinal. When this good Father saw such packs of scarlet
brought unto him, no marvel ifhe wondered at it. But finding his brothers
error, he was in a great chafe, and much confounded, as easily foreseeing what
sport it would procure amongst those that heard of it. Whereupon in all haste
he dismissed the said Merchants with their scarlets at a back door as secretly
as he could. Howbeit, the thing was so notorious, as it could not be concealed,
and caused indeed very many to jest and laugh at him. One, (a man little
favored by this good father) hearing hereof, went in meriment to his lodging to
congratulate his new advancement. But when the father knew the purpose of his
coming: yea (quoth he) does he know it? It will be then in England within this
fortnight.

We have before acquainted you with this fathers dealings concerning his
reading to the Students and Priests at Civil: of his discourse for the
Infantaes title: and now understand further, that he was no sooner seated in
Rome, but to inure the Priests and Students there with his diabolical
conceyts, he required that his english book of titles might be read publicly
in their refectorie as a Chapter of the Bible is read at such times in our
Universities, and promised, that in so doing, if they liked it, he would
afterward let them read his high counsel of reformation. Wherein (as they
report that have seen it) the whole Realm of England is made a Province
dependant upon Spain and Iesuitisme. The lands and Segniories of Clergy and
Nobility and Universities are abridged: and of some in particular in his vain
and childish hope are confiscated. For example, Cecyll house must be Casa
professa: and another house by it, there, Nouitiatum. Whereunto an imagined
principle of the Jesuits (for which they adventure both credit and conscience
very far) being added, viz. that the Jesuits must prevail where once they
set footing, it makes many to condemn them and wish that the mask of
religion being taken from them (which by their occasions and turmoylings is
blasphemed) they might appear in their own colors, that the world might no
longer be decciued by them.

It were a work of very great labor to trace this fellow in all his apparent
devises and practices. And for his rules, whereby both he and his adherents do
square their actions, they are uncertain, and hold as the time serves, and
they think convenient. If they have any vie of a man, they make fair weather
with him: and afterward least he should expect some benefit from them, they
have ways and tricks to shake him off very Iesuitically. Master Barret was
for a long time one oftheir chief instruments to many purposes, whom they
requited in the end with all manner of disgraces and disgusts, even to his last
breath. For example, Master Barret being sent for to come to Rome about the
breach of the students with the Jesuits, Cardinal Tolet hoping that he would
have taken part with the students, intended to make him Rector, and to cast out
all the Jesuits (as he did cast out six) but Barret contrary to the
Cardinals expectation became Iesuited, and did what he could against the
students in favor of the Jesuits. Whereupon Cardinal Tolet rejected him as an
unworthy man. The Jesuits afterward sent him down to Doway to his old
charge: and Parsons craftily made him purchase a house, which cost 1700.
Crowns, and withal stopped at Rome the Popes pension for the College two
years. Whereupon Doctor Barret in the behalf of the College fell in debt
3000. crowns: the Jesuits all the while keeping him from the annual pension.
Whereupon he sending to Rome to complain and require the money: gentle Father
Parsons went to the Pope, and accused him of excess and evil hnsbandrie, in
dissipating the Popes pensions, and suffering the house to fall to extremity,
and intended to cast him out, and place in the Jesuits, saving that his death
prevented it.

I have elsewhere mentioned unto you the Jesuitical axiom of winning or
redeeming of time: which is in effect to run with the time, in altering their
positions, so as they may best serve to win their desires. The practice of
which ground is in no one of their affairs so manifest, as in laboring to set
up, now this man, now that man, to attempt the Crown: furnishing every one
with sufficient authority, that of right it belongs unto him. And true it
is, that rather then fail, they care not who he is, or of what race, nor of
what nation that will step in for the Kingdom, so he be a Catholic.

Father Parsons notwithstanding all his fair shows to Spain, has still been
practicing from time to time, whilst the Spaniard has been in breathing, to
have raised up others to get the Kingdom if they could, and so to have pulled
that morsel out of the Spaniards jaws: so her Majesty were deposed, he
respects not by whom. For as before the Earl of Darbie with his priuitie was
dealt with particularly to that purpose: so at an other time he writ a
discourse which was sent into England, and published to many of the best
Catholics here: that he would wish and advise them, when the commodity
served, that they should make an election of some principal noble English
Catholic to be their King. But still when none neither pretender, nor people
will be so mad as to follow his deseignements, then he has ever his recourse
to the King of Spain: and at this time insisteth upon the Infanta: debarring
himself from following of none that will in the mean time take Arms against
her Highness.

Master Charles' Paget in one of his letters tells us of a maxim amongst
our English Jesuits, and others seduced by them: that whosoever does not
approve and advance Fa. Parsons and some of his followers, their conceits and
courses touching our Country and Nation, though they be never so foolish, rash,
furious, scandalous, and dangerous, nay though men be desirous to fit still,
and meddle nothing with them, or their actions one way or other: yet if he do
not aid and assist them, it is lawful; yea, necessay, that such persons be
infamed, by casting out against them any calumniations that may discredit them.
The practice of which maxim, howsoever Master Paget learned it, we are sure
that many poor Priests in England and elsewhere, have felt it, honester men
then either he, or many of his adherents. The contention which has bin in Rome
betwixt our english Students and the Jesuits, is not unknown to all Europe.
The compounding whereof this good Father takes to himself: and so has
ordered the matter, that the Jesuits (forsooth) were always blameless, and
the whole fault was in the Students. For further declaration whereof, the
wretch lays about him in one of his letters like a mad man: insinuating that
such of the said Students as opposed themselves to the Fathers, were not well
established in the grace of God when they came to Rome, or had no due
preparation to the calling of Priesthood, or (we know not what) was amiss in
the^ Nay, he spares not our mother City, the seat of Christ's Vicar in earth,
but impeacheth the credit of it very greatly.

And for his reports of us (poor men) that lie in prison, and are subject to
many dangers, being ready to follow our fellows, who have offered their lives
in the defense of the Catholic Church: how he acquainteth the world with our
estimation in Rome, and what account is made of us there, his sayings following
will declare unto you; set down as they stand in his said letter, dated at
Naples the 13. of July, in the year 1598.

When I came to Rome (says he) I found the College as a field, with two
hostile camps within it: Father general and his assistants wholly auersed and
thoroughly resolved to leave the government. And in an other place taking upon
him to show the causes why our English Students have of a long time bin so
troublesome in that College, he writes thus: you shall hear him at large.

Some think that it is in great part the nature of the place, that ingendreth
high spirits in them that are not well established in Almighty Gods grace. For
coming thither very young, and finding themselves presently placed and provided
for abundantly, and acquainted daily with sights and relations of Popes,
Cardinals, and Princes affairs, our youths that were bred up at home with much
more simplicity, and kept under by their Parents and Masters then the Italian
education does comport, forgets easily themselves, and breaks out to
liberty, I mean such as have run astray, and lost respect to their superiors
in Rome.

This opinion of the circumstance of the place is greatly increased by the
judgment of Strangers both Spaniards, Frenchmen, and Flemings, and other
Nations: who affirm, that they try by experience their people that live in
Rome, if they be not men of great virtue, do prove more headie afterward and
less tractable, then others brought up at home. But yet to this, other men of
our Nation do add a second reason for the English College which is at Rome,
being a place whereunto many young men do resort: only upon a desire of seeing
novelties.

When any come thither of the English Nation, finding such a commodity of
study and maintenance there, and themselves in want and misery, they made suite
for that, whereunto perhaps they had not true vocation from God, nor due
preparation in themselves to so holy and high estate. And so being once
admitted, fell afterward to disorder, and to put out of joint both themselves
and others. Thus far the Father of the want of grace in some, and of a true
calling in others that disagreed with the Jesuits: and how dangerous a matter
it is for Parents to send their children to Rome, except they will have them
Jesuits, or at the least to run their tray terous courses: the very place
will mar them.

But now hear his report of the estimation that our English Students and
Priests have gotten by their being at Rome: he shall tell it himself. Baronius
often told me, that our youths bragged much of Martyrdom, but they were
refractary (that was his word) and had no part of Martyrs spirit, which was in
humility and obedience. His holiness oftentimes told me, that he was never so
vexed with any Nation in the world: for on the one side they pretended zeal
and piety, and on the other, showed the very spirit of the Devil, in pride,
contumacy, and contradiction, etc. And ever now and then his holiness would put
his finger to his brain, signifying that there stood their sickness: and so
would most of the Court when they talked of Englesye were Indiauoluti, and like
words. His holiness added also that he knew not what resolution to take: for on
the one side, to punish them openly would be a scandal by reason of the
heretics: and if he should cast them forth of Rome, some had told him that
they would have become heretics etc.

Again, in his letter to Master Bishop, writing of the report that he the
said Master Bishop and Master Charnock had made to the Commissary of the
Inquisition at their being in Rome: he says thus to Master Bishop: You talked
before your restraint here with the Commissary of the Inquisition, and you
gave him such a relation of our English matters, as afterward when Master
Doctor Haddock and Master Doctor Array had talked with him also, and informed
him (as they thought) of the very truths of matters, he told an Honorable man
in Rome, and a great friend of mine, that four English Priests having talked
with him, they had taken from him all list to believe any English men or
matters more, they told him so different tales, and yet all of them would seem
to be men of zeal. And again, thus he writes in the other letter: I have
heard his holiness often, and diverse Cardinals more often, repeat with
exceeding dishonor to our Nation, the headynes and obstinacy of our youths: so
as now many great and wise men begin to suspect, that the sufferings of our
blessed Martyrs and Confessors in England was not so much for virtue and love
to Gods cause, as of a certain choler and obstinate will to contradict the
Magistrate there.

What think you Sir ofthese reports by Parsons? In what case are we poor
Priests? The chief cause of our affliction is our defending of the Church of
Rome, and therein his holiness authority. And think they no better of us for
it? If this do come to the knowledge of our adversaries, what advantage will
they make of it? Woe worth that Jesuitical brood, that to mayntaine their
ambition, have wrought us this discredit. We have bin in better reputation with
his holiness, and so we hope to be again, when this Machiuilian companion shall
reap the shante himself of this report. For it is not possible, if ever his
holiness will be pleased to be informed of him, but that he will reward him with
ignominy, as he has deserved.

You know our estates at home, and you have heard what estimation both we and
all our Nation have at Rome, if Parsons write truly, as we trust he does not.
Our chiefest hope must therefore be in her Majesty's goodness and mercy toward
us, to grant unto us, if it be possible the liberty of our consciences. But
herein observe this viperous Jesuit. At the league of peace between the
French and the Spanish Kings, there was a rumor that the Queen would enter
into that league, and so grant a toleration of religion: which Parsons did
utterly dislike; saying, that either they would have all or none; they will
admit of no conditions. And his reason is this: because (says he) a toleration
would make the Catholics of England dull, and without spirit. It is indeed
quicknes that this Father desires, but such a quicknes, as deserves a quick
dispatch at the Gallows. We trust he shall never draw our Catholics here to
any such quicknes: but that after our dull manner we shall for ever continue
her Majesty's most faithful subjects: and with such quicknes as becomes us,
oppose our selves to his restles, quick, and bloody deseignements against our
Country. But observe we pray you that we say: our hope is thus of all English
Catholics, which hope may be subject to some little doubt, especially if his
wicked platform do proceed here amongst us: that all Catholics must
hereafter depend upon Blackwell, and he upon Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons,
and Parsons upon the Devil: who is the author of all rebellions, treasons,
murders, disobedience, and all such deseignements as this wicked Jesuit has
hitherto devised against her Majesty, her safety, her Crown, her Kingdom,
and her life. So as our conclusion shall be with a branch, which we will
always remember as an addition when we say the Letany: a Machinationibus
Parsoni, libera nos Domine. And thus we end: desiring God to bless us all.

Amen.

