THE MOST PLEASANT AND DELIGHTFVL HISTORY of Curan, a Prince of Danske, and
the fair Princess Argentile, Daughter and Heir to Adelbright, sometime King
of Northumberland.

SHOWING His first Love unto her, his succeslesse suite, and the low deiections
he underwent for her sake. His second love to the same Lady unknown, taking
her for a poor Country damsel. She by reason of the unkindness of King
Edell her uncle and Guardian) having forsook the Court, and undertook the
profession of a Neatheardes Maid.

His constant love (after her long continued unkindness) rewarded with her
wished consent, their happy Nuptials, and mutual reioycings, his valor and
victorious war with King Edell: And lastly, his peaceful installment in the
Kingly Throne.

ENTERLACTE With many pretty and pithie praises of beauty, and other amorous
discourses, pleasing, smooth and delightful.

By WILLIAM WEBSTER.

LONDON Printed by Barnard Alsop for Richard Higgenbotham, and are to be sold
at his shop at the sign of the Cardinals Hatte near S. Sepulchers Church.
1617.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL Mr. THOMAS EVErard of Heather, in the County of Leycester,
Esquire all increase of such Blessings as make this life happy and comfortable,
and of such Graces, as may make the next Blessed and Glorious.
SIR, purposing to impose some task on my wandering thoughts so to reuerse
their somewhat uncomfortable strayings, my rasher election suddenly singled
out this subject, which though suting too nearly with my brain in barrennes,
the product is this Pamphlet, which perused by some friends of judgment, was
pronounced worthy the Press. Whereunto I the rather referred it, that
dedicating the same unto you, I might (at least) manifest my remembrance of
that love, kindness, and courtesy, which (while my residence was in loved
Leycester-shire,) made me so much affect that Familiarity, which you then
pleased to afford me, in regard whereof my love leads me to present this to
your patronage, and your affection to Poesy, makes me presume of your
acceptance: the grace you give a Verse in reading it, makes it pleasing, if it
be but passable, therefore I doubt not your liking. And if this (which is not
unlike) gain your approbation, I shall not pass for the Censures of such as
are more apt to find fault, then able to find a fault. Had I but the name of
a Poet, and opinion on my side, I should rely thereupon as Caesar on his
Fortune, yet does not my obscurity discourage me, but rather the contrary,
for Fame is rather to be ventred for then ventred.

An instigation to the writing hereof, was the commendation which I heard a
Judicious divine give of a young Student in divinity, for his dexterity in
English Poesy, who affirming it to be an ornament to any profession, I was
thereby induced to reduce that affection I bore it, to practice. And in
publishing the same I have imitated Apelles, who having drawn a picture
pleasing to himself, hanged it in open view, that he might hear the verdite
of others. Nor is it unlike but I also shall have a shoo-maker Censuring the
Leg, when his skill extends but to the latcher. So (referring it to your
favorable survey, and kind acceptance) I humbly desire Almighty God to
Crown you, and your adopted-selfe, with his best blessings in this life, and
with Immortal glory in the next.

Your Worships Kinsman, to be commanded, in a more acceptable service. WILLIAM
WEBSTER.

The Author to his Patron.
T To wish your happiness, if that could give
H Happiness unto you, I Would make you blessed
O On Earth, so long as you on Earth shall live,
M May you be even of Earths best things possessed,
A And may you joys enjoy when this life's ended,
S Such as can but by Saints be apprehended.
E Ever may you, and your Posteritee,
V Until dissolu de shall be this mortal frame:
E Even till this world shall cease a world to be,
R Retain the luster of this ancient Name.
A And be chief Pillors to support the same,
R Repair and grace that House, from whence to me
D Derived is (in part) my Pedigree.
To M. John Euerard Senior, Gentleman.
YOu sole suruiuer, yet the eldest brother
Of four, and of a Sister, my late Mother;
Who, (next before you) tendered Natures debt,
Which yet you owe, and long may owe it yet.
What is it? your Courage keeps you still alive,
To be the first, and yet the last of five.
Sure it is your valor; Deaths approach thus stays,
Which was admired in your more youthful days.
If in a mortals looks may boldness lie
Which may the pale Horse-ryder terrify,
Then (it may be) he shunnes because he fears you,
And until Age subdue you, thus forbeares you.
Your oft-tryde valor, valor often did try,
Which now intombed in your Age does lie.
And if your gravity think not unfit,
Let these lines be the Epitah for it,
As for your Virtues, they yet live, and they
Shall be remembered in your Epitah.
TO THE READER.
READER, Let not thy gentle eye disdain
To walk along my lines so smooth so plain;
Delightful walks they happily may prove,
So they may catch thy liking, I thy love;
This volume, (though not large) at large discouers
The fortunes of a pair of princely Lovers,
Prince Curan and the Princess Argentile.
He stranger, she a native of our Isle.
He one for lineaments, and gifts of mind:
Such as the like to him was hard to find:
And sure, if to be amorous be no blot
To virtue, then his virtues had no spot,
And she, a dame whose beauty so excelled,
That in those days she was not paralelled,
And, if she were not coy more then she should,
No imputation could on her take hold,
How love, from Lordlinesse does him debace,
And makes him to supply a peasants place:
And how his love to shun, the assaults of love,
From Court to Cottage does her self remove.
These things are here discourst, and here is shown
How he the second time loves her unknown,
How long he wooes her, how at last he sped,
Though not till then, when all his hopes were dead,
Then how he conquered him in bloody fight
That wrongfully usurped his Ladies right,
(Then which) his former task was far more hard,
This last was easy with the first compared,
It Was more to him his Ladies love to gain
Then to give end unto a tyrants reign:
To conquer her affections was a thing
More hard to him then to vncrowne a King,
Nay, all the weapons in these wars imployde,
Against the Prince, not him so much annoyed,
As did his Ladies angry frowns, for those
Could daunt him more then all his armed foes:
How he was raised unto a Kingly throne,
That low deiections long had undergone,
Concludes this book, which read unto the end,
Perhaps to thee, it may it self commend:
Thus (of thy wishes) wishing thee possessed,
(For kind acceptance only.) Thine I rest.
W. W.

TO THE FAIR READER, OF THE FAYRER SEX.
YOu lovely DAME, whose beauty is as much
As was this lovely Dames, fair Argentile:
For in the world, where should we look for such,
If not where she was bred, in this fair I Will.
For breeeding such, our Clime; then other Climes
More fertile is, our times, then former times.
You are the very same, yea, you are she,
Whose Beauty in this Book is so commended:
And though your Name not Argentile it be,
Yet know your self is she that is here intended.
These lines were writ for you, of them make use,
And Beauties praises to your self reduce.
You living, lovely Dame, it was for your sake,
That this ensuing task I undertook:
Not hers, shee'^ dead, she will no requital make,
But at your hands (at least) for thanks I look.
To grace what graceth you, I here have sought,
Then deigne to grace me with a gracious thought.
You are fair (as was she) but be not tho,
Coy (as was she) O varry you in this:
I would not for the world you should be so,
For then as good that you the world did miss.
Unless your kindness should (as hers) at last,
Make large amends, for your unkindness past.
Had I praised Bounty(so)perhaps my pain,
Might have been recompensed with reward:
Then let me not praise Beauty (thus) in vain,
Afford me in requital some regard.
You I have sought to please, and I from you,
Due thanks, and due respect, expect: Adue.
THE PLEASANT AND delightful Story of Prince Curan, and the Princess
Argentile.
THen when our English I Will (which now in one
United is, the more our happiness)
Under divided Soueraignety did groan,
Ichouah shield it from the like distress;
Seven Kings then reigned in this land, but now
All hearts, all knees, love one, to one do bow.
(Then Diria) called now Northumberland,
Was of the foresaid seven small Kingdoms one,
Nor was that Scepter swayed by one man's hand,
Division had the Clime so ouergone,
Two, each a semi-king reigned jointly there
In friendly peace, for they near Kinsmen were.
Edell and Adelbright the Kings were called,
For each of them the kingly title bears,
And each is in the kingly throne instal'd,
Thing seldom seen) well, after diverse years,
King Adelbright deceast, and left his Heir
To Edell's ward, young Argentile the fair.
Yet ere he dies, to Edell thus he spoke,
Edell, quoth he, my death approaches near,
My Kingly right to thee I do betake,
During the nonage of my daughter dear,
But after it shall be to her resigned,
So thou thy self to me by oath shall bind.
His oath for this, his promise took beside,
To deal with her, as if his child she were.
The good King Adelbright soon after did,
For whom young Argentile shed many a tear:
And time increast her grief, for afterward
Edell nor oath, nor honesty regardes.
The Scepter whole now his, he will not divide,
Usurping that, that is the Ladies right;
(Though he from that by oath himself had tide;)
For in sole sovereignty he found delight,
By her he knows he cannot be constrained,
Therefore he will not forgo what he has gained.
Mean while the Lady in despite of woes,
Which still too much afflict her tender heart,
The fairest underneath the sky she grows,
Beauty is hers in full, and not in part;
Besides, she is modest, sober, gentle, chaste,
Her beauty these, and these her beauty graced.
But when her beauty grew yet more mature,
All beauties then in her seemed to combine,
Her beauty other beauties did obscure,
As stars eclipsed are by Luna's shine.
In all the land was none so fair as she,
In all the world a fayrer could not be.
Her beauty seems to be be (...) soul,
It does in excellence so much exceed,
Her eye so swayes, so rules, does so control,
And hend the hearts of men, as wind the reed,
All like, all praise, and many love, but few
(Dispayring of their worth) for love dare sue.
The richest beauties (to adorn this Dame)
In her fair treasury, fetched Nature thence,
Which near unto divine perfection came,
They did so much exceed in excellence.
She Is beauties sun, whose beams been fame and praise
Go through and through the world like Phabus rays.
That beauty was but such (if it was such)
That carried Troy to Greece, and Greece to Troy;
She Is more then fair, and therefore more then much
Will be his joy that once shall her enjoy.
But he must sail, ere he such Haven gain,
Close by the margent of Caribdis maine.
Her eye loves Arbor is where beauties meet,
Her cheek loves garden is where beauties grow:
Love walks there, for there the air is sweet:
Which always when she breathes does gently blow.
Her blushing lip, her breath, for show, for smell,
The Rose exceedes, the Violet does excel.
As many as behold her, do admire her,
In beauty, she all beauties does outstrip,
All thoughts commend her, and all hearts desire her:
Yea, Nature wonders at her workmanshippe,
Admiring her own skill, and cunning great,
In framing such a beauty, so complete.
Nature, another cannot make more fair,
Though to that purpose all her power were ben't,
No, though she would from fire, earth, water, air,
Extract the quintessence to that ineene.
For in this Dame there no ingredient lackt,
That should make beauty perfect and exact.
Had Jupiter the earth frequented then,
When her bright beauty graced the sunshine day,
Or had this Beauties Patragon lived when
He in the world did wanton, sport and play.
O what would he have done, what not have done?
What shapes would he have took her love to have won?
Surely he would have thought her love a feast
More pleasing then th'imbracement of his queen;
And Juno's jealousy had sure increast,
If she this peerless princess should have seen.
For, that his heart was tractable she knew,
For such attractiue beauty to subdue.
In this regard she might have feared much,
Had this Dames beauty been to Jove apparrant:
But the chaste heart of this chaste Dame is such,
That Inno might have took it for her warrant.
Diana's warrant could not be more strong
Touching her self, concerning such a wrong.
When Mars in Venus arms was entertained,
Her breasts disclosed, her bosom open laid,
Her dear imbracements had not him restrained,
Nor would he in that Circle fair have stayde.
Had such a one as Argentile past by,
Her face presented to the War-god's tie.
Her neck, barbrests, her hand (...) leg, (...),
All corespond the beauty of (...) face.
Who would not (might he be preferred vntoot)
With willingness her wand like wast imbeace,
And if her (...) cast in a circle were,
Who would not wish himself the Center there.
Had Hereules fallen into such fair arms,
So strong they are (strength in their fairness lies)
That though the sounding trumpets shrill alarm's
Had called him thence to some great enterprise,
They would have held him still, still him detained;
Ah, who could struggle, that were so inchain'd.
Fayrer was she then I have said she was,
Nor have I half her beauties worth disclosed,
Nor can I door, it did so much surpass.
But what is vnexprest, let be supposed,
And as her beauty, so her virtues shinde;
Men joyed, heaven joyed, to see her face, her mind.
But I must leave her beauty so excelling,
For I would have, and therefore shun delays:
Yet on this theme is such delightful dwelling,
That I am loath to leave her beauties praise;
How she was loved, (Love waits on beauty so
As shadow does on substance) now i will show.
A sweet young Prince of Danske (by fame called forth)
Curan he hight; this Prince to England came
To see the Dame, whose matchless beauties worth,
Was brought to him upon the wings of Fame:
He sees the Dame, her beauty sees he,
And prayseth in his thoughts what he does see.
And though report had so extolled her name,
And praised her for sweet loveliness so much,
He finds that Fame but lispt, and was to blame,
For (seeing her) he see's her beauty such,
As sores above her praise, yea, I may say,
Above superlatiue, if beauty may.
And now in him his progress love began,
From looking, liking, love from liking grew,
The spacious world could not produce a man,
That loved with a love so firm, so true,
But for her love much woe he underwent,
Ere she (unkind) would to his suit consent.
This sweet young lovely Prince is such another,
As was Adonis in his greatest pride:
This Dame is Venus, (that was Capid's mother,
That by Adonis was of love denide:)
One like that Adon, here does Venus love,
One like this Venus there did Adon prove.
Not Clcopatra's son and daughter fair,
Whom their proud sire the Sun and Moon did style
Could match (for beauty) with this princely pair;
Prince Curan to the Princess Argentile,
Comes near in comeliness, he happy were,
If she in kindness came, to him as near.
With Ganimede and with Narcissus he
May take his place, that were the fairst of men,
And with the ratest she may ranked be,
That ever yet was praised by Poets pen,
How will the world be graced with beauty sweet,
When in their children both their beauties meet.
Well, he is now in Love, up to the heart,
Yet can he not obtain a second view:
From Princes eyes, and men of high desert.
Her jealous Guardian keeps his Niece in miew,
Between the world, and Beauties-sunne so bright
He interposeth clouds, as black as night.
Her beauty which does all men's eyes delight,
Save only his, he seeks to keep unknown:
Lest Beauties same should men of Fame invite,
To seek her Love, he wishes she had none,
To stop Fames mouth, and dim her Beauties beam,
He therefore strives: but strives against the stream.
Her beautyes praise breaks forth in his despite,
And almost like the air it self extends:
He Would stop the current hyding her from sight,
But so her beauty he the more commends,
The more she is in her Closet kept retyrde,
The more she is talked of, and the more admyrde.
So quite his ends are crossed, he would suppress
Her beautyes praise, but see how he mistakes
His course (though he intended nothing less)
Her famous, but himself infamous makes,
This fact of his, does more divulge her Fame,
But to posterity records his shame.
For it directly shows his thoughts are base,
And such as ill beseem a bosom Royal:
Argues him consciencelesse and void of grace,
And proves him to be perjured and disloyal.
His thoughts, desires, ambitious, auaritious,
Vicious his life, his proiects are pernicious.
O was it not enough (Kinsman unkind,)
That he from her should so withhold her right,
But to her chamber she must be confinde,
To see, and to be seen do maids delight;
But Aegentile is hid behind a skreene,
She is not, must not, where she would, be seen.
But the base minded King, to Peasants base
Admits access, to noble men denide,
To view and woo be grants them time and place,
And his best furtherance affords beside.
To marry her to some base Groom he thought,
That so her right might rest vnclaim'd, unsought.
Curan perceyning this, what did he do,
He changed his rich attire for base array:
(O Love, what shifts thou putst the Prince unto)
His name he changed, his Titles put away;
And so transformed himself into a drudge;
Now if he loved or not, the world may judge.
Thus lived he there, and thus access he gained,
And on her beauty now his eye he feeds,
But in his thoughts full sore the Prince is pained,
Love in his breast a thousand passions breeds:
And to express his love, dumb signs he used
He looked, he blushed, he sighed, he plained, he mused.
She, whose chaste thoughts even equal love reiec't,
Does see, but will not see, his love unfit,
She thinks it is not worthy of respect,
And therefore will no notice take of it,
Making a show of pride, though pride she hate,
Because she knows pride best does pride abate.
Scarce knows she how to look disdainefully,
For never pride and she acquainted were;
Beauty has got possession in her eye,
And will not suffer scornefulnes come there,
Fain would she frown, and yet she knows not how,
So calm a smoothnes dwells on her fair brow.
When most of all she him would terrify,
That he should dare to love, or look no more,
Then does she frown, ah, but so pleasingly,
That more he loves then he loved before,
Between her smiles and frowns small ods there lies,
for both of them her beauty beautifies.
Her frowns cannot her beauty bright obscure,
For such sweet loveliness does them adorn,
That they entice and powerfully allure,
Although they argue coins, pride and scorn,
The more she frowns, the more he loves her still,
His love they kindle, though his hopes they kill.
At last, love boiling in his breast compels him
Himself and his affection to bewray,
And craves her love, but to his grief she tells him,
That husbandlesse she is resolved to stay,
Still seeking his solicitings to shun,
So do they still, that still would be vnwunne.
When (meeting her) he kindly bids good morrow,
She strangely does salute him with farewell,
And so his joy is ouertooke with sorrow,
To meet seems heaven to him, to part seems hell:
Parting which pleases her, does him displease,
Meeting which he desires, is her disease.
He joys to see her, grieves to see her coyness,
Her voice is heavenly music in his ears,
Yet are her words unkind, and make him ioylesse,
Thus are poor Lovers tossed t'wixt hopes and fears.
Twixt care and comfort, pain and pleasure still,
So pallats taste the sweet displeasing pill.
In his assumed shape he still remains,
Nor does the gentle Lady him disclose:
He courts her often, but at her hands he gains
Nothing but that that does augment his woes.
At last (for hearty love is hard to hide)
His love (but not himself) the King discride.
From him to her past many an amorous glance,
Which did his love unto the King explain:
Glad is the King and does his slave advance,
So to encourage more the saucy swain,
And him prefers unto promotions high,
To make the Groom more gracious in her eye.
Nay, the base-minded guilty-thoughted King,
Himself an interambulator makes,
That he the match might to conclusion bring,
The miser spends, and pains the gowtie takes,
A peasant for a Princess he would choose,
That he might find the greatness she should loose.
An earnest Intercessor to his Niece,
Still is he, and if he her thoughts may sway,
A prize surpassing far the golden fleece
Which Jason gained, the base must bear away.
Base thought he him, the Prince no prince he thought,
Yet to confer this Iem on him he sought.
Should Edell now have known for whom he spoke,
In whose behalf his arguments he feigned
As sometime greater sees will Lawyers make,
To counterplead the cause they late maintained,
So had he turned (had he the truth discride)
Against the Prince, with whom he so does side.
The Lady pestered was with his persuasions,
And Curans love, for both upon her war'd:
Yet in her breast they could make no invasions,
For resolution did her bosom guard,
That pleads, and this persuades, and both entreat her,
Yet all they do, but makes her grief the greater.
That Edell knows not Curans worth she knows,
And yet in his behalf does plead so much,
From hence her grief, from hence her sorrow grows,
This great unkindness does her nearely touch,
That he should hold her in from men of worth,
And to so base a match should thrust her forth.
Curan perceiving now, his love offends,
And that he happy has no hope to prove,
He lets fall his suit; his wooing ends,
For (in a sort his love does curb his love,
Because he loves he will not give offense,
Therefore (though loving) not his suit commence.
Her beauty breeds his amorous love, her grief
Compassionate affection in him breeds,
And though his loue-sicke heart does lack relief,
Yet he forbeares to seek the salve he needs,
For to that flood he adds (if it he seek)
Which her fair eye distills on her fair cheek.
His passions from his amourous love do grow,
But such a blessed love in him is found,
As makes him to compassionate her woe,
And in his better love his worse is drowned,
His passions urge to prosecute his suit,
Compassion (thoe) preuayles and makes him mute.
That love that from his amorous thoughts does rise,
Does unto that that pity breeds give place,
Glances and tears go both from Curans eyes,
Caused by her beauty and her wretched case.
And since his amourous love her grief increast,
His tender love so wrought that that love ceast.
At least, he close concealed it in his breast,
What though it seemed to scald his heart within,
In signs nor syllables he it expressed,
For, to augment her grief he held it sin.
Curan she hates thy love, ah cruel she,
And lest it move her, it must martyr thee.
The King now sees how he his love restraines,
He sees it, though to see it he is loath:
For this Apostacy put's him to pains
More then before, for now he wooes them both:
He wooeth her to love, and him to woo,
O avarice what putst thou him unto.
Curan that loved the Lady with his soul:
To recommence his suite is easily brought,
The ashes are removed, and now the cole
Is found alive that dead before was thought:
They grieve again the Lady, but in vain,
They plow the sands where there will grow no grain.
But why was Argentile so much unkind?
She knew the Prince, his worth, his Love, and these:
More powrefull Orators to bend the mind,
But Women will not love before they please.
She will not, No, she will not love: and why?
Because she will not; Women so reply.
What a strong hold, strong Resolution is!
Where this chaste Dames chaste love immured lies?
Not Danaes brazen tower, was like to this,
Ione entered there by sleights and subtilties,
But here a Guard does even the keyhole keep,
Lest sly insinuation in should creep.
A Woman's will is like to Danaes tower,
Nay, more impregnable is woman's will:
Was never man that yet by strength or power,
Could win this Fort, that force repulseth still.
A woman's will can never be constraind,
Nor can her love against her will be gained.
The will is strong, but yet the senses weak,
Weak is the Guard, although the Fortress strong:
Yet its impossible the Gate to break,
Or skale the wall, if true themselves among.
But lyking-oft, which is Loves Usher slye,
Gains entrance here: when flattered is the eye.
Therefore wise Jove, when he to Dardan came,
Engine, nor instrument of war he brought:
He knew if so he should assault the same,
He never should obtain the thing he sought.
No thundring-wide-mouthd Ca^non does he bring
Nor Ram for battrie, nor no such like thing.
In stead of these, he brings a Pe^lars pack,
Full of fine toys, that did for show exceed:
And many a gawd, and many a goodly knacke,
Which not necessity it self does need.
Her Female-gard, corrupts he with these,
Who favoring him, he enters there with ease.
For he had pleased them so well that day,
That they to lodge him there do all agree:
While one vnboults, another turns the key,
Open is the wicket. and in leapeth he.
So Danaes tower was won; and fancies Fort,
Is never won, but it is in such like sort.
The weakest Virgins will is of more strength,
Then is a gate of steel, or wall of brass:
For to compulsion those may yield at length,
This will not be compelled, nor never was.
But it is strange, that still Prince Curan fayles,
Who by prevailing means his Love assayles.
He fittes her humors vain, he gives her gifts,
That she may favor him, he flatters her:
And to the sky, her praises up he lifts,
Fore Hellen's beauty, he does hers prefer.
He grieueth sore, he sighs exceedingly,
He pules, he pines, he tells her he will dye.
He prays, and he persuades, and all he says:
And all he does, that may be said or done:
He tryes to win her Love a thousand ways,
A thousand women's loves some times are won,
With fewer words, and with far lesser pains,
Then Curan spends, and takes, ere here is he gains.
Some win as soon as they begin to woo,
And straight the Clerks Amen confirms the match,
And then to bed, there is no more to do,
Yea marry sir, here is a quick dispatch:
And so they speed, when humor serves that speak:
But Curan has a harder shell to break,
Nay, of so strange a humor, some there are,
That he that loves and love, for love desires,
Does (quite unlike, as Soldiers do in war)
Fail when he fights, and foil when he retires.
So (him that follows it) his shadow shunnes,
And follows after him, that from him runs,
And Curans practice argued that he knew
This secret, for as I have said before,
From beauties bar his action he withdrew,
Yet she to love inclined nere the more,
From this strange humor Argentile is free,
It is not universal then we see.
And some will stiffly stand in their denial,
So that a man would think the clock went true,
When it (God wot) agrees not with the Dyall,
As would be seen, if thoughts lay open to view,
But Argentile does not coin coyness so,
Her thoughts direct her tongue to answer no.
It fits not here to be Satyricall,
More of their humors I would else reveal,
And since fair Argentile is free from all,
Her sexes faults I Will for her sake conceal:
As for her coyness, bear with her therein,
If it was a fault, why yet it was not a sin.
Her Guardian now perceiving that intreates,
Are bootlesse spent as stones against the wind;
He now begins to menace her with threats,
And in his countenance she reads his mind,
He now no more does flatter her, but now
Seeks by compulsiue means her will to bow.
They that have tasted of the like distress,
May judge of hers, her grief cannot be spoke:
Yet it she wisely strives to suppress,
Lest else her close intendments should be broke.
But yet she in this April of her years,
Sheds in her closet April showers of tears.
Griefs property is beauty to impair,
(For beautie's but a casual good they say)
But on her face so fixed is the fair,
That it will not to grief it self give way.
Through sorrows veil her beauty shines so,
That beauty seems graced by beauties foe.
Obseruers might have reason to surmise,
(Seeing her looks so lovely, yet so sad)
That some such humor did Loves queen surprise,
When she (for supreme fair) the verdet had:
For it is the tuch that does true beauty try.
When in sad looks sweet loveliness does lie.
Her grief so well becomes her, that the tears
Distilled upon her cheeks, fair, white and red
Appear, as that same morning dew appears,
Which sable night on freshest flowers has shed,
Which falling from her cheek, a man may say,
Her eyes do seem, with pearls to strew her way.
And she perceyning now what small good will
Her griple minded Guardian to her bears,
Fearing constraint, or else some worser ill,
She practiced how she might prevent her fears:
From Curans love, from King, from Court she steals,
While she her self in strange disguise conceales.
When Curan heard she was departed so,
His love (before the chief of his affections)
Is matched, nay ouermatched now with woe:
Reason in vain prescribes his grief directions:
For boundless and confused his sorrows be,
And after her from Court departs he.
The Lady late, and Curan now are gone,
Blind love and fortune blind lead them astray:
They pace unused paths to them unknown;
(But ranging rouers cannot loose their way,)
Nor know they whereunto their iournyes tend,
Nor when, nor where their Pilgrimage shall end.
Vain finds he his pursuit, and fears as vain
His suit would prove if he should find his love,
From further quest, he therefore does refrain,
And cast's what course is best for his behoue.
To Court he will not return, there is he knows,
Dawes, not his Dove, brambles, but not his rose.
Long does the Prince debate, long does he muse,
Long are his busy thoughts in him at strife,
Before he does resolve what course to choose:
At last he does prefer the Shepherds life:
A flock, a dog, a sheepehooke he prouides,
Tar-box, and all his implements besides.
He, who while in his fathers Court he stayed,
Was then a Martialist although but young)
Has changed his lance, (for lou^ must be obay'd)
For tools that to the Shepherds trade belong:
From warlike Mars to rusticke Pan he is sweru'd,
But will return to him that first he served.
It Is strange, he in contempt should find content,
Yet that he found in this despised estate,
Disgrace the Prince with pleasure underwent,
For ceased is the discord and debate
That was between his thoughts ere they declined,
And those hope crossing haps to him assigned.
A brace of years (well pleased) he thus remains,
His thoughts are settled, and his mind is free,
Suiting himself unto the country Swains,
Courtship for clownishnesse exchangeth he,
He that late struck the Citternes filuer strings,
Now pipes on oaten strawes, and Iigs he sings.
Time, grief, and labor by this time did change
The Princes thoughts, his Love is quite forgot:
His reason will not let his love there range,
Where can no comfort fall unto his lot:
Her absence, like good Physic to the sickly,
Makes him more sick at first, yet cures him quickly.
Most loath was he the sight of her to loose,
For, as fond Patients cherish their diseases,
And will no Physic, if themselves may choose,
Because perhaps the Pallat it displeases.
Her absence so, fit physic for his fit,
Is forced on him, ere he I give way to it.
Her fight and presence he did (...),
And was unwilling to forgo the same;
Yet that the suell was, maintained the fire,
Causing his heart to fry in Cupids flame:
But (that removed whereon his harm depended)
He finds, his scorching dog-dayes now are ended.
Now see the course of things, sayre Argentile,
Who when she left, the Court left not her cares,
Disguised wanders like a poor exile,
And with the most distressed, distress she shares:
Now here, now there, she soiourneth a space,
But yet she finds no certain biding place.
But now at last behold the Princess sweet,
Is by a Country Neatheard entertained
To feed his droues, a work for her unmeet;
Yet glad is she, that she the place has gained.
For here she hopes to find content of mind.
Which in King Edels Court she could not find.
And where feeds she her herds, even on that plain
Where Curan (shepherd now) his flocks attends,
See, against Destenie she strives in vain:
Fates have decreed, she cannot cross their ends.
To that same place whereas the Prince abides,
Some power above her own the Princess guides.
This tricksie Gyrle the shepherd soon espide,
Like a plain homely Country wench attirde,
Much did her base disguise her beauty hide;
And yet he saw so much that he admired.
The more he her admired, the more he gas'd,
The more he looked, the more he was amas'd.
For (viewing her) he thinks her somewhat such
As Argentile, but this her strange disguise
From that she was has altered her so much,
She Is hid behind such dark obscurities,
That though his Lady Argentile he see,
The silly shepherd never thinks her she.
Though so (perhaps) his eye would him persuade,
He will not think that this is Argentile,
That she should now profess so mean a trade,
So to conceive of her, he holds it vile.
He will not therefore entertain a thought,
That this the Lady is that late he fought.
No more dare she give credits to her eyes,
For seeing him a Shepherd so complete,
That this should be the man, she will not surmise,
Whom Edell so advanced to honors seat.
Both are deceived, both take their aims amiss,
Whereof their meanness, the maine reason is.
He loved, and left, but now he loves a new,
His love to Argentile he has forgot,
And yet to Argentile he still is true,
For Argentile he loves, but knows it not.
His love has found her out, and says it is she,
But yet opinion says, it cannot be.
As Phoebus beam when Winter new is fled,
Reuiues the withered herb, and sapples plant,
Her beauty so reuiues his love (as dead)
And gives it life which it did seem to want.
Now to his love, so withered and decayed
Is Juice, sap, life, by beauties beam conuay'd.
He that was (...) a Lord is now a swayne,
Nor that, nor this estate from (...) secures him:
For then he loved, and now he loves again.
A Lady then, a Neatresse now, allures him.
He loved her rich, he loves her poor again,
Wealth was no four, nor want is now no rain.
He notes the Wench, and sees her beauties rays,
Which through sad clouds of discontent shine bright,
Such the new morning in the East displayes,
Which (through some yet left darkness) show their light.
Beauty he knows he sees, but does not know
That Argentile does that sweet beauty owe.
Attractiue, pleasing, powerful beauty here,
In him produce their true effects, for why,
He looks, he likes, he loves; so captin'd were
His eye, his thoughts, his heart; and now he will try
If she, whose outside makes so fair a show,
Bears kindness in her bosom, yea or no.
He frolic is, his thoughts prognosticate,
That he the Lasses Love shall easily win:
He thinks of Love he does not dream of hate,
He countes her won ere he to woo begin.
She cannot choose but love presumes he,
Being (though lovely) yet of low degree.
For such presumption (thoe) himself he checked,
When doubts into his cogitations came,
As a rash Writer does his work correct,
When he with more advise survayes the same.
Now touching Women, he does thus debate,
That without reason why, they love and hate.
He thinks how they, (...) their humors mou^ them.
Are coy or kind to high or low degree;
How they that best defense, and most do love them,
Often times by them the worst rewarded be:
And thinks that he shall speed as be shall find
In her a humor to be coy or kind.
With this conceit he somewhat calmed his love,
When (looking Eastward) down the hill descending,
He spies the Neatresse leading forth her Drove,
Her beauty bright with Titans beams contending,
Which sight reuiues his love, and in his breast
Such passions breeds, as breed his great unrest.
And then he walks to meet her on the plain,
Where usually she does her cattle graize;
To show his love, and sue her love to gain
He means, admitting now of no delays:
But now behold when he is come unto her,
(Alas) the shepherd faints and fears to woo her.
Her beauty which allured him to love her.
Now makes him fearful to commence his suite,
Her beauty made him purpose now to prove her;
And now behold her beauty makes him mute:
For when he sees her beauty so exceeding.
He fears to speak, because he doubts of speeding.
Beholding her he stands, in silent pause,
Pleased is his eye, his thoughts perplexed are,
For his much looking does more liking cause,
So is his love augmented, so his care,
Yet mute he stands, for doubts dismay his mind.
Lest beauty make her proud, and pride unkind.
Why wooes he not, now th^e and place does ^it,
Since sh^^ that may (...) we count half won?
He finds access, but (...) use of it,
To gain the which the great Alcides spunne.
But though long d^^be, at last beesilence breaks,
And having once begun he freely speaks.
He praised her first, but why did he do so?
The fair need not be told that they are such:
It Were better they their beautyes did not know,
For in this point they (Knowledge got too much)
When Eve did taste the fruit that was denide,
For this too much infecteth them with pride.
Affection sure put out his Judgments eye,
And made him take a course so indirect:
Alas, his level quite was laid awrye,
Praise not her beauty whom thou do affect.
For praise ore-sats their breasts, and then there breeds,
Pride, scorn, disdain, and such pernicious weeds.
Some take in undeserved praise, a pride,
Who when their hair is like the black-byrds quill:
Will pleased be to hear themselves belyde,
When its compared unto the black-byrds bill.
Say, Crow is white: they credit all you say,
For their own thoughts, the parrasites do play.
But we (the fair) should but commend in thought
(as Chapmen, not commend what they would buy)
Let them alone, they need not to be taught,
To rate their beauties worths, at prises high.
By praises their proud thoughts are higher raised,
Who of themselves are proud enough vnprais'd.
Well, curan (...) begins to court his Less,
And though he Clownish^^^ do now (...):
Yet nerethelesse some shape of that he was,
His carriage, while he Courts her does express.
Better his gesture, better are his words.
Then with his clownish Shepherds shape accords.
Fair neatresse, Natures parragon says h^e,
Mine eye, when it thy beauty first discovered:
Made to my thoughts such fair report of thee,
that ever since about thee they have houer'd.
Still will they dwell with thee, for only there
Abounds all (in this world) that I hold dear.
Adonis Garden thou to them do seem,
Where all things pleasing plenteously abound:
What ever in this world is worth esteem,
Is in this Land of Milk and Honey found.
For here all spices, fruits, and flowers do grow,
That wholesome are for use, or fair for show.
Say, shall I sweet, empale this pleasng place?
For my possession, I will ask but this:
Shall I be Neptune: and with my embrace
Make it an Island, called the I Will of bliss?
But to come to the matter now more nearly,
Believe it firmly, I do love thee dearly.
If gentle kindness so adorn thy mind,
As beauty does thy Face, then unto me
Thou will be pleasing, debonnaire, and kind,
And hope persuades me thus and thus of thee.
For it would argue Nature much too-blame,
To give a cruell-heart so fair a frame.
Should, I but call the^ ^ayre, I should the while,
Seem from thy glorious beauty to detract.
Fair, is for one so fair too low a style,
To show her skill did nature thee compac't.
Lovely thy locks thy forehead more then fair.
Thy hair, thy temples: temples grace thy hair.
If by comparisons I would set forth
The beauty of thy eye, and thy fair cheek,
I cannot find a Semile of worth,
Unless above this earth for it I seek.
Thine eyes do grace thy face, thy face thine eyes,
As Skies do grace the Sun, and Sun the Skies.
Thy beauties native are, not like to those,
That Natures Apes by art do counterfeit,
Upon thy cheeks the Lilly and the Rose
To set the truest fairness forth are met
On thy fair cheek is that fair color fixed,
Which their fair colors make together mixed.
When thou do smile, then beauties sky is clear,
(Such were the smiles of lovely Paphos Queen,)
When thou do blush, upon thy cheeks appear
Carnation clouds, the like so seldom seen,
That they the world may with amazement strike,
For great Olimpus cannot show the like.
And who? (unless the aged, dull and dead,
Whose veins and bones do blood and marrow miss)
Can look upon thy lip, so round, so red,
And not desire to rob it of a kiss,
For, as it has a power to please the eye,
Another tempting strength in it does lie.
While this he speaks, often times he changes hue,
Now red as blushing rose, now pale again,
And when she does these variations view,
She is confirmed the shepherd does not feign:
Of Lovers passions these are signs she knows.
Therefore she thinks the shepherd does not gloss.
Yet thus she answers, fie, says she, no more,
Forbear this idle praises to bestow,
Undue to me, a damsel plain and poor,
Nor is it like that you should beauty know,
How can a Shepherds skill extend to this?
That sees it not, nor comes not where it is.
O yes, says he, a shepherd sees the sky,
The Sun, the Moon, the stars a shepherd sees,
And these are beautiful none will deny,
So then of beauty he may judge by these,
Whose vnmask^ beauties lie even open to swains,
Yet fayrer Creatures then the Court contains.
May I not call her fair, whose face I see
The Sky resemble, so me thinks does thine;
Save that in this two Suns there seems to be,
Which thy fair face so grace with their fair shine,
That there is no earthly thing that I can name,
Whose beauty comes so near that heavenly frame.
Thy plainness plainly proves thee fair, for why,
It Is the deluding property I know
Of ornaments and art to mock the eye,
By making them seem fair that are no so,
And of thy beauty, I should have suspicion,
But that from these it takes no addition.
And what although thou art of (...) degree,
Yet may thy beauty me^^^ commendation,
(Though poor) yet rich in beauty thou may be,
Is Nature partial in the dispensation
Of her fair guists, must they be needs restrained,
Only to such as fortunes gifts have gained.
It Were heresy to be of this opinion,
For she is often as prodigal we see,
Even to a Beggar, as to Fortunes minion.
And since her fairest gifts have graced thee,
May I not praise thee, yes, I Am tide unto it;
It were detraction if I should not do it.
When her objections he had answered thus,
He thus proceeds, O thou art fair in all,
I cannot in particular discuss
The beauties of thy face, which I may call
A shop of several beauties, nay to me,
Even beauties little world it seems to be.
My neck beneath Loves yoke thy neck has brought
It is so fair, so soft, so smooth, so white,
Thy lower beauties they are seen in thought,
And in conceit are viewed with much delight.
Those Iuorie banks (thy breasts) the^ thought discries
And Loves smooth shadie walk that twixt the^ lies.
Thought wanders there, and wonders strange discouers
Delightful wonders, wonderful delights;
There Is no concealing from the thoughts of Lovers:
For all lies open to their deepe-searching sights.
Loves pearcing thought, through all oposure drives
And where best pleasing objects are, ariues.
The whitest color soonest takes a stain,
And therefore wonderment it breeds in me,
That still thy hand such whiteness should retain,
Whiteness and it sure cannot parted be,
Whiteness and softness which yet never failed,
Seem to thy dainty hand to be entailed.
So white, that Lillies are not half so white,
So soft that Cignets Down is nothing such,
The whiteness serves to bewitch the sight,
And yet it more inchanteth with the touch,
And for thy wrist, the whiteness there is graced
By azur'd veins that there are interlac't.
But, to set out at full thy beauties praise,
For my performance were a task too great,
Though I about the same should spend my days,
I could not all thy beauties praise repeat.
How fair thou art, sweet wench, I cannot show,
Nor how much thee I love, for being so.
Little loves he, that can declare how much,
Loved I but so, my love were then but small,
My love, sweet Less, believe it is not such,
As can in compass of relation fall:
As thy much beauty draws much love from me,
Let my much Love some kindness draw from thee.
Peace, peace, says she, for praising me so much,
You in the air your breath but idely scatter,
For, (knowing I am neither so nor such,)
How can I choose but know that you but flatter,
It seems that you suppose (but you are wide)
That I Will be pleased to hear my self belide.
You almost out of breath, your self have (...),
In seeking prayseforme (unworthy far)
And rackt your wits, yet all that you have done,
But makes me think that you a flatterer are,
And to suspect the sequel this does move me,
you but dissemble when you say love me.
O do not harbor such a thought (says he)
I do not flatter, do not think I do:
If with my thoughts my words do disagree,
It is because they cannot reach unto
That ample height of praise and adoration,
I give to thee in thought and cogitation.
And for dissimulation wherewithal
Thou chargest me, O would thou knew'st my heart.
Then thou would soon these words of thine recall,
Wherewith thou blamest me without desert,
And would (no doubt) ask pardon with submission
For this thy over hasty rash suspicion.
Such there are some, but I am none of those
That will dissemble, flatter, lie and feign,
If I be such, then may thou me expose
To thy eternal! hate, and coye disdain:
And let thy kindness so with comfort store me,
As I sincerely love thee, and adore thee.
Fair maids by kind are kind, and she does go
A stray from her true Nature, I am sure,
That is disdainefull, scornful, proud, or so,
For where sweet beauty wounds, kindness should cure:
But beauty kills, loves arrow strikes dead,
When scornful pride impoysoned has the head.
Then be not thou (my love) with pride (...),
It Will make thy beauty, it is so vile a thing,
Like unto pleasing cates with poison taynted,
For hateful pride is beauties hurtful sting,
No matter though the beautilesse be proud,
But in the fair pride cannot be allowed.
For why, if pride on pleasing beauty wait,
There danger lies, and we have cause to fear it,
Else pride is but a hook without a bayte,
And hurts none, because there is none comes near it.
Danger becomes more dangerous by bearing.
A pleasing form, not like it self appearing.
But thy fair face persuades me not to doubt,
In thy fair bosom much fair kindness lies,
The beams whereof through thy fair eyes shine out;
If these fair likelyhoods prove certaineties,
Fair hap will crown fair hope, and I shall then
Rejoice in my fair choice; Fates say Amen.
From out a world of women, thee alone,
For sovereign of my thoughts do I select,
So high a place in my hearts love has none,
As has thy self whom only I respect,
And since I love in no undue regard,
The rather let my love have due reward.
Respect of riches which with most bear sway,
No motive is at all, in my Election,
On Natures, not on fortunes gifts I lay,
The base and groundworke of my firm affection,
I count those native riches thou do owe,
More worth then all that fortune can bestow.
Yet Riches now a days are all in all,
Wealth goes before, and beauty comes behind:
Riches we see of Beauty takes the wall,
To Riches is the higher room assignde.
Nay like a Cipher is poor beauty thought,
It must be Joined with wealth, or stand for naught.
But I (thou see) am of another mind,
I will not suffer so my thoughts to err:
I am not with the world so much declin'de,
More Fortunes gifts, then Natures to prefer.
More rich then Mines of India, thou do seem,
Thy Beauty makes thee such in my esteem.
Though Fortune blind, her gifts from thee detaines.
Yet Nature prodigal has been to thee:
Thy For-head, hair, eye, cheek, lip, neck, Skin, veins,
Smooth, bright, gray, fair, red, white, soft, blew they be.
And there does lie in every one of these,
A greater power then is in Gold, to please.
Thou need'st not: Art not, Richly, proudly decked,
Pearls have no need to be adorned with gold.
What needs supplyment where there is no defect,
Or what needst thou (my Love) thy locks infold.
In costly Calls of gold, and Laces gay,
When thy fair tresses are more rich then they?
Yet think not, (though thy Beauty so excel)
It is too Rich for use, and but for show:
Lest thou against Natures sacred laws rebel,
Not for thy self do thou such Beauty owe.
Beauty has not such strong attractiue power,
To fade untouched, like an ungathered flower.
Nor let thy beauty so thy thoughts delude,
That thou should think because thou art so fair.
The heart of some great one shall be subdude
To love, and list thee so, to honors chair.
Waine not for this, let me in this direct thee;
Left beauty sade the while, and none respect thee.
Or say, that fair desert should crowned be,
And thou for that sweet beauty thou do owe,
Should be advanced unto high degree:
Why many have been railed for ^eauty so,
Who afterward with woes acquainted grew.
Which ere their exaltation scarce they knew.
On high Estates huge heaps of cares attend,
But there is contenement in a shepherds life,
Not us (as them) does fortune nice offend,
Disdain not then to be a sheapheards wife.
Nor am I beggarly, although a Swain,
The flock is mine that mantles yonder plain.
Our lowly sails are free from enuies gust,
We do not climb, nor do we falling fear
Our states, with winds and waves we do not trust,
We have two certain haruests every year,
By force some, some by fraud rise, we by neither,
We conscience, and plain dealing live together.
We live contented, we at none do grutch,
The labor our profession does require,
Is not perplexiue to the body much,
Less to the mind, which freely may aspire,
Nor is it clogged with cares, nor is it held
Down, as are theirs that great affairs do weld.
We leisure and occasions too do find
For contemplation, as our flocks we feed,
Heaven still in fight, is also still in mind:
The Life contemplative does all exceed,
And nearest comes for comfort and content,
To that that shall be after this is spent.
Fresh wholesome air a shepherd wants not,
Which many thousands do, yet by the skies
He is not persecuted, when it is hot,
Some thick broad branched tree, him canopies:
Whose green leau'd bows that largely do extend,
VVaft cooling air and pleasing shadow lend.
And his flocks fleeces cloth him from the cold,
And arm him against the sharpest Northern blast,
The pleasures that we have are manifold,
Our troubles such as soon are ouerpast,
If thou would troubles shun, and pleasurs prove,
Live with a shepherd, be a shepherds love.
I promise if thou will but pleased be,
My love with love, and kindness to repay,
I will resign supremacy to thee,
Do thou but love, I Will honor and obey.
Yea, (were it possible) if thou wear't mine,
My very thoughts should suited be to thine.
Then you says she, no more but love do crave,
That which includes all would you content:
You but the body of the sun would have,
Whence light and heat cannot themselves absent,
What need you more demand, Love will not be
A streamlesse fountain, nor a fruitless tree.
But I am not disposed to love, says she,
Which if I were, I surely should disdain,
You should preposterously resign to me
That which by right to you does appertain:
Of all d^e offices the chief is love,
That Is the first mo^er makes the rest to move.
Not so disposd, why do thou then propound
Such bl^sse (says he) to him that gains thy love,
Making the lougings of my mind abound,
By showing that thou tractable wilt prove:
This is as if thou happiness should show,
Then snatch it from me, so to work my woe.
Thy words, to show thy loves worth, thou do frame,
And how much good does on the same depend,
So kindling my desires to gain the same,
While thou the same do so to me commend.
I hope thou will this praised ware forgo,
Though thou art yet disposed to answer no.
I Will buy thy love, if it be to be sold,
O that I may a happy Chapman prove:
But it is too precious to be bought with gold,
What shall I give, I Will give thee love for love:
And daily pay, though but in part, for why?
Thou can not have full payment till I die.
For like as springing fountains which do owe
Their streams unto the sea, though still they pay,
Yet still they are in debt, directly so,
Though I shall still be paying day by day;
Yet shall I be, even till I cease to be,
Thy debt or still, still thou must credit me.
Not all the wealth that Cr^ssus did possess,
Should buy thy love (if it were mine) from me,
No greater height of earthly happiness
Desire I, then to be beloved of thee
A prize worth all the world falls to my Lot,
If thou (to grant thy love) de^ie me not.
Once entertain me in thine arms, and then
I Will once be blessed, in spite of (...) spite:
And then i will ^ell the world, if tongue or pen
Can give expressure to so much delight.
What thy imbracements yield, what Joy, what bliss,
But when, ah when shall I discourse of this?
Oh, hold not from me that felicity,
Which they afford, that do afford their loves,
And with their loves a multiplicitie
Of pleasutes and delights; sure it behoues
That thou propound such for thing Imitation,
That answer thus the end of their Creation.
Good, now no more, I cannot love says she,
Against the Hair then urge me not vntoot,
Excuse me (tho) the fault is not in me,
My stars were opposite, I cannot door.
Thus puts she off her fault, and shows the while,
A fault derived from Eve to Argentile.
She will not love, yet lest he think her wilful,
She answers thus, she cannot love she says,
And as she were in constellations skillful,
Her humors fault upon the stars she lays:
But Curan though this answer makes him doubt,
Will not for this repulse of hers give out.
Your stars, says he, tush, hold not this opinion:
Admit the chastest of them (Luna) reigned,
Did not I pray thee Luna, Jove Endimion,
And was not she with loves sweet passions pained,
yes Luna's self did love, else Poets feign,
Then how can Luna's influence love restrain.
No, I not fear the enmity of those,
Be thou but willing, I desire but this,
They cannot my wished happiness oppose,
Nor be a bar to my desired bliss.
Let churlish and malignant stars repine,
I care not; so thy will to love incline.
Therefore as erst I said, I say again,
Give pride no place I pray thee in thy breast,
Away with soornefulnesse and coy disdain,
Which most do plague the kindest men and best,
For the best natures still most subject be,
To loue-sicke passions (most in this agree.)
As thou art fair, so be thou kind my dear,
Should pride (which heaven forbid) contracted be
To thy sweet beauty, it would cause (I fear)
A separation twixt my joys and me.
I^ kindness from thy beauty thou should sever,
My joys and I are then diuerst for ever.
As beauty does, even so let mercy rest
In thy fair eye, for these are two fair twins:
Deny not lodging to so kind a guest:
At that sayre sign where her fair sister Innes,
Beauties kind sister must keep with her still,
Else where she conquers, cruelly shee-l^kill.
Thus still he pleades, and though she still withstand:
Yet does not his affection change or varrie:
For why? his love is winnowed, clens'd, and fan'd,
No light inconstant chafe with it does tarry.
In vain does she deny, for still he tries,
In vain he tries her, for she still denies.
What boots it her, although her tongue deny,
Forbidding love, refusing love to grant:
Since the mean while her lip, her cheek, her eye
Plant that, which she endeavors to supplant:
Her tongue forbids, her beauty bids again,
Love yields to loveliness, and words are vain.
Though she her name, her state, her tire, her train,
Had so dismissed, cast off, forgone, and changed,
Yet her own thoughts she still does entertain.
Curan had sped if they had been estranged:
They told her she that lately did disdain
A Princes love, now must not love a Swain.
Of all her outward worth with her remains
Only her beauty, all the rest is gone,
But that by lawful means she still maintains,
And blame her not if she preserude her own.
Rather blame them (if such be to be found)
That lay dead colors on a lively ground.
Her beauty will abide the touch, it is true,
Her lovely cheeks have beauties dye in grain;
For they their sweet eye-pleasing native hue,
In spite of Phoebus fiery eye retain:
Her beauty has a strange rare quality,
Subject to nothing but mortality.
And it is Curans hungry eye's repast,
Yea and a pleasing dish to it indeed,
And fith when she is absent it must fast,
When she is present it does frankly feed,
To it that can (with fasting) not away,
A Lent in length seems every fasting day.
Officiously heserues his mistress coy,
He runs for her, he helps her guide her drone,
Proud is the Prince if she will him employ,
See here the power and potencie of love:
Her for no better then she seems he takes,
yet willingly himself her slave he makes.
And if she do but daigne him one kind look,
Quite ouerpayde he holds himself to be,
For all the pains that he for her has took,
So pleased with a gentle look is he:
And on her smiles and frowns does he attend,
As life and death did on her looks depend.
As fares it with a ship tossed on the maine,
When winds and waves conspire her overthrow:
She Is hoysed up, and then cast down again.
From tops of liquid mounts, with Curan so,
Her smiles do hoyse his hopes into the air,
Her frowns do beat them down beneath despair.
Yet not her smiles, his hopes do him beguile,
For he his hopes does from mistaking take:
She but derides his folly with a smile,
Which he an argument of love does make.
Alas for him, how desperate is his state,
When his best signs of love, are signs of hate.
Well, let him rest content though thus forlorn,
And not repine, though now he pine and droope:
He shall (ere long) enjoy a Princess borne,
But the high towering Eagle will not stoop
To the base Kite, nor she to him, till he
(Being vnvaild) a Peasont cease to be.
But her dear Love, he first must dearly buy,
It Will cost him many a sigh and many a tear,
That having bought it at a price so high,
Accordingly, he then may hold it dear.
The more is now his grief, and his annoy,
When she is his, the more will be his joy.
Leander kind, as he to Her^ went,
The pains he took, the perils that he past,
The more they were, the more was his content,
When in his weary arms he her embraced.
So when Prince Carans present sufferings cease,
They (to his future Joys) shall give increase.
Well may he, while he has her Jove in chase,
Endure the worst that Fortune can inflict:
For Fates have marked her his, though for a space,
His Fortune seems his Fate to contradict.
And now the more he suffers for her sake.
The more shall he of comfort then partake.
She must be his, but yet some misery,
For her dear sake he must endure before:
That Joys (succeeding grief their contrary,)
May to his apprenension seem the more,
But that she shall be his, did he but know,
Then in his bosom were no place for woe.
But this, he does not know; nay, there is thrown
So thick a mist before his iudgements-eye:
That she her self is still to him unknown,
Though he be daily in her company.
He must not know her his, nor know her neither,
Till he (twice happy then) know both together.
Daily, as duly as he goes to field,
He Courts his wench, but not at all preuailes:
Yet still he hopes that she at last will yield,
Therefore he plyes her still, but still he fails,
One day at last beneath a shady tree,
He closely siding her, thus pleads he.
Why art thou still unkind, why cruel still?
Why is thy breast so empty of remorse?
My heart thou may with thy unkindness kill,
But thou can not divert Loves constant course.
Still do I love, though still thou do disdain me,
Beauty does so persuade: nay, so constrain me.
My Love, if it but ordinary were,
Mixed with a negligent indifferency:
Why thy unkindness then I well could bear,
Nor could it once so much as trouble me.
Some cannot love until they kindness find,
Nor longer then their Loves continue kind.
He that loves so, (nor are such Lovers strange)
Can sport at her that falsely does deceive:
Smile at the change, if smiles to frowns do change,
Love while she loves, and leave when she does leave.
It Is harmless Love, on kindness that depends,
To love the unkind, that is the love offends.
This I find true, yet hopefully suppose
Thou bearst not such an unrelenting mind:
But that thou will compassionate my woes,
And wilt not prove eternally unkind,
While thy unkindness wounds my mind with grief.
Hope of redress is all my hearts relief.
My Love with thy unkindness long has strived,
Except these prove to be of equal strength:
Well may I hope my grief is not long liu'de,
For one of these will sure be foiled at length.
When either shall be foiled and overthrown,
Then ends my grief and sad lamenting-mone.
Till or my Love, or thy unkindness cease,
Needs must my grief and languishment still last:
It is not possible I should find ease,
Till I can either say the fit is past.
Or till thou do my Love with Love repay,
Which would to thy unkindness not give way.
But that my Love will cease, and so my woe,
I have small hope, though still unkind thou prove:
I know my I oue more lasting is then so,
Nor is it fit that we by fittes should Love.
Then all my hope of comfort does depend
On this, that thy unkindness once will end.
Then when desire my Fantasy does sway
Such as I wish thou art to it presented:
My Love with Love, me thinks thou do repay,
And from thy unkind self thou seem absented.
But when I wake, thy kindness is away,
No longer then I dream, my Joys will stay.
To find thee kind thus in my idle Dreams,
What Comfort in thy kindness ly'es does show:
Whereby my woes wax on to worse extremes,
That good I must not taste, I would not know.
So to the damned soul in hell, that is
Hell's, the more hell, because he knows there is bliss.
And though I know that Dec^mes are idle fictions,
And that they much in them do ^^ldome carry:
But still succeed like Al^anackes Prodictions,
Which tell how wind and weathers state will varrie.
Kindness to come, they promise (tho) in thee,
And comfort in reuersion so to m^^.
Yet they perhaps do but delude m^ (tho,)
And do no more but seem to promise this:
Then is my hope but vain, if this be so,
And that (I catch) but Comforts shadow is,
Fear does consound the hope that hence does rise,
Since Dreams are but such mere incertainties.
Disdain to me is like infectious air,
As that of health, so this of hope depriues:
As that disease, so this does breed despair,
Yet against that there are preservatives.
But none against this, disdain the heart does kill,
Even in dispight of Drug and Doctors skill.
Thus pules the Prince, and thus does he complain,
Even melted with the Sunshine of her eye:
Nor can his manly heart the stroke sustain,
Of Cupids Childish-dart, fie Curan, fie.
From a weak woman's Fading-beauty, he
Deriues his strength, yet he has foiled thee.
And is it (...)
Th^^ ^^ding beauty should be of such force
The nature of this Impe of Mars to change,
And from his warlike Patron him diuo^ce.
It Is strange, yet beauty has this seace affected,
(...) the which he has himself subjected.
Beauty be^itcheth him, and makes him ^ote,
Then Che^^ltie be cease to pursue:
Himself to Cupid se^^ice to denote;
To Mars and Martial feats he bids adue.
But when he shall his Ladies love obtain
The warlike Prince will be himself again.
But (yet) she him denies and answers thus,
Do you not think my ways are negatiues:
Scarce are they so indeed in some of us,
Scandal too-much from such, our selves deriues.
B^^ do ^ot think me such, such am not I,
I hate the tongue that does the thoughts belie.
I always strongly have oppos'de your trials,
Not like to her that yeeldingly denies:
I wrap not up consent in nice denyalls,
Nor have I pruned your hopes with my replies.
But rather to supplant them I have sought,
For I to yield to Love, will not be brought.
Such were her words, her thoughts were also such,
She does not love, she means to love never:
But on her strength she does rely too-much,
For in her power it is not to persevere.
Strong is her resolution, yet too-weake,
The high disposers purposes to break.
You do (says she) but vain (...),
While thus you (...) love with worth,
Loves Harbeng^^ still enters by the eye,
Small comfort kn^^king at the (...) affordes,
For till the eye let liking in, the breast
Nere lodges L^^^, that thought disturbing guest.
C^^se therefore thus to spend your breath in vain,
Auert your Love, because you are not loved,
Love not where Love for Love you cannot gain:
Let your ill placed liking be removed:
Shut in your wandering eye, your thoughts restrain,
Refuse to give your rash desires the rain.
Thus counsels she, yet courts he her again,
But cannot (tho) her resolution shake:
Only her ears his words do entertain:
But to her heart they no intrusion make.
Nor fears, nor shuns she his assaults, for why?
On her approved strength she dare rely.
From his assaults she held her self aloose
At first, but now she does not fear nor doubt,
Against Loves darts she thinks her breast is proose,
Because that it so long has held them out:
Yet opportunity the Prince does fail,
Nor can his importunity prevail.
But now behold, when she to Love thinks least,
And thinks her self best able to withstand,
And now his hopes that languisht are deceast:
Now Love himself does take his cause in hand,
Despair makes Curan now leave off to woo her,
yet wins her as he tells his fortunes to her.
Grown desp^^^^ now, he thus to her complained,
Of all men's Fo^^^mes mine is sure the worst,
Thus twice to love, and twice to be disdai'nd.
Ah Wretch, was ever man so much accursed,
Love that imparadi^eth some, to me
Gives hell it self, if hell on earth there be.
Pigm^lion was more blessed then I, for he
Succesfully, an Iuorie Image loved,
Venus wrought miracles for him, but she
Is deaf to my intreates, she will not be moved
To turn to flesh that flintie heart of thine,
And to reioycings these complaints of mine.
Love unto some much happiness does bring,
But unto me it brings nothing less,
My Love's a bitter root from whence does spring
Anguish, grief, sorrow, woe and wretchedness,
And that I twice should love the Fates have cast,
And so should twice these hellish torments taste.
She that first caused my anguish and my smart
Was fair like thee, and thou unkind as she,
She had thy beauty, and thou have her heart,
She took, thou take, my joys, my life from me.
I loved, I love, in both unhappy I,
I languisht then, but now for love I die.
The Neatresse (yet vnsatisside) enquires
What wench it was he first affected so:
He (vrdg'd to speak of her) his blood retires,
Pale were his looks, scarce could he speak for woe.
It Was Argentile, so much admired, says he,
Only in state an ouermatch to thee.
Did you, says she, know that young Lady fine,
I did, says he, and dearly I her loud:
She was my Saint, I offered at her shrine
Tears, vows and sighs, and for her sake I proved
A torment worse then death it self can be,
And now a torment worse then that for thee.
At Kirkland in my Fathers Court, my days
In sweet content I spent, until mine ear
Was filde with Argentiles sweet beauties praise,
But then could I no longer tarry there,
I came to see, I saw, I loved, and so
(For lucklesse was my love) began my woe.
And then (for the ungentle King denide
Access to Noble men of note and fame)
Forthwith my dignities I doft aside,
And for her sake a Peasant I became,
And by that means access I did obtain,
Yet mist my end, her love I could not gain.
I did as much as hearty love could do,
To gain her love, but still was she unkind:
The King himself in my behalf did woo,
Yet my entreats, with vrgings his, combinde,
Were still successesse, for she still denide,
So still I dying lived, and living did.
No thought, no instigation of new love,
Since her I lost did enter once my breast,
Until thine eye, that would dull Saturn move,
Replanted love, and robbed me of my rest:
Thy powerful beauty shouldered all a side.
That Loves reentrance hindered or de^^'e.
With my new Love (alas) began new woes,
For nothing else but grief and wretchedness,
Does hapless, hateful love on me impose:
But death I hope, ere long will give redress.
Far off is comfort, but despair is nigh,
Ah then why do I not despair and dye.
Nay stay, says she, and tell me first your name,
Your own true name which you have changed I know.
I have quoth he for love, but not for shame,
For Curan is my name, the truth is so:
Then grief her heart, and tears her eyes ore-filde,
And down her cheeks some crystal drops distild.
He wept to see her weep, and asked the cause,
Wherefore she did that precious liquor spill,
And why she sighed, and why she so did pause.
Yet still she wept, still sighed, and mused still.
He seeing this, with her will partner be,
He wept, he sighed, he mul'd, as well as she.
His wonder was, to see her wonder so,
His sorrow was to see her sorrow such,
She mused he should his love so twice bestow,
She grieved that she had made him grieve so much.
Thus they do now each others harms condole,
And sympathize as both had but one soul.
At last she spoke, the words that from her went,
Bore comfort with them on their ayrie wings:
And every Messenger that so she sent
To Curans ear, a joyful burden brings,
And Curans ear near blessed until that day,
Does their dear present to his heart convay.
C^ran, quoth she, the Fort you sought to win,
With this last battrie is so sore distressed,
That now the Gate is open to let you in:
Be happy, if my love can make you blessed,
Your twice beloved Argentile is yours,
In weal and woe, so long as life endures.
The pallat used to bitter tastes we see,
Can sweetness at the first scarce well en dure;
His eyes with light at first offended be,
That long has line in dungeon deep obscure,
So Curan used to grief and sad lamenting,
Offended is with joy, at first presenting.
As he that (sleeping) does illusions see
So fearful, that for dread thereof he quakes,
Seeming to be in dangers such that he
Feels fear's impression, still when he awakes:
So Curan fares, free from his seares he is set,
But cannot apprehend his safety yet.
But now by this he finds his Joys to be
True and substantial, though he late did fear,
(So much transported from himself was he)
That they delusiue and fantastic were,
But now the sun of comfort shines out bright,
And fears and griefs, like mists are put to flight.
Like as with him that in his sleep does prove,
That strange disease, feeling upon his breast
A deadly weight which he would feign remove,
But strives in vain, till he awakt, finds rest.
With Curan so it fared, and so it fares
Oppressed with, and eased of his cares.
He would express his hearty joy, yet long
He like a senseless statue stands mute,
Joy does so ouerwhelme him that his tongue
Cannot as yet this office execute:
So when the heart is drowned in sorrows deep,
The eye (we see) often times forgets to weep.
And much she joyed, though not in so much measure:
Yet in this ecstasy a part she bears:
Now happy mutual love produces pleasure,
Fears are removed, ceased are sighs and tears:
The worse dependants now are banished quite,
And on their love attends sweet delight.
What hellish torments does that man endure,
That coyly finds his hearty love rejected:
Again, if earth yield joy, he tastes it sure,
That dearly loves, and dearly is affected.
Curan, late as the first, now as the last,
Seems snatched from Limbo, and in Eden placed.
When to himself, him Joy and Wonder left,
He said, and are you Argentile my dear:
In happy time was I of you bereft,
That I thus happily might find you here.
Twice blessed may I my new blessed knowledge call,
I know you now, and know you mine withal.
A thousand griefs this heart of mine have grip't.
By your unkindness caused, that your consent,
Has them away (as they had nere been) wiped.
And in their place has planted sweet content,
O happy sufferings, whereupon depends
Such happy Issue, and such blessed ends.
By this her heart with Cupids dart is thrild,
Her coyness erst, is turned to kindness now,
With Loves sweet malladie her breast is side,
And many favors she does him allow:
Now strangeness being banished for his sake,
She frankly gives what she refused to take.
O what a Metamorphesis is this,
That here is wrought: this D^^^sell but of (...),
Would scarsly for a Kingdom give a kiss,
Which now she vallues at an easy rate.
Her kindness was exceeding mean indeed,
But now almost it does all mean exceed.
She now is molded new, and made most kind,
Kindness for kindness kindly she repayes:
In seeling syllables he shows his mind,
And she in speaking t^ches hers bewrayes,
And now if he embrace her tender wast,
About his neck her arms are kindly cast.
Why how now Argentile, what is this he,
Whom you did say you would not love ere while:
Yes this is Curan, but you are not she
That spoke those words, you are not Argentile,
At least that Argentile coy and unkind,
you are not now, for you have changed your mind.
Nor shall she be condemned for this mutation,
Or held light and unstable for this change:
No, rather this deserves much commerdation,
When she grows kind, that late was coy and strange,
Maids are not blamed for this inconstancy,
But that which unto this is contrary.
As she that makes much show of much good will,
And call's her self another, not her own,
Vows and protests to be constant still,
Yet afterward though she just cause have none,
She flies off, and most unkind does prove,
Fie, that fair maids should be so false in love.
Well, now (in part) are crowned Curan^ wishes,
For Loves Feast-royall he begins to taste,
Where the first ser^^ce being such sweet dishes,
Superlatinely sweet must be the last.
Which now he is like to taste, for who so was kisses
In soil and season fit, and harvest misses.
I (unexperienced) cannot express
How much they Joyed embracing and embraced.
But they of this perhaps can nearly guess.
That have as high in fortunes love been placed:
Yet are their joys not perfect, though begun,
Not at their height, but like the forenoones sun.
Which till they be, they badly brook delays,
And on that wished day agreed they are,
The interposed time they count by days,
Not years, nor months, for it will not reach so far,
Soon were they wed, their joys the want supplide
Of meet solemnity that have denide.
Heaven upon earth seems to his share to fall,
That does enjoy a fair, kind, virtuous wife:
He that has one that fayles herein, in all,
He seems to be in hell even in this life.
Prince Curans hap does match the best of these,
So exquisitly well his choice does please.
She is adorned, she is indude likewise
With the best gifts of body, and of mind:
And (whence much comfort does to him arise)
She Is sober, chaste, still, tractable and kind:
Not such a one as women are is she,
But she is such a one as they should be.
She does not (for she knows she should not do it)
Bear wilful sway as they that headship share:
So that oftimes the head is made the foot.
But they that bear this, too base minded are.
Shall men be made their humors slaves, when they
Were made for men, and were inioyn'd to obey.
A lovely sweet Companion has he got,
Which heaven in love did upon him bestow,
Now happiness is falue unto his lot,
If happiness a man may have below.
For it is a hap beings happiness with it,
To happen on a ch^yce in all things fit.
He that would be so blessed, and so rejoice,
Must heed, and good advise (in choosing) take,
As well, or ill; a man does make his choice,
Better, or worse, his fortune he does make.
Nay, (which is more) the man that wisely wives,
Much good to his posterity deriues.
If she be fair, and of a comely seature,
May not her like be then on her imprinted:
And if she be a kind good natured creature,
She Is not so to her self confined and stinted:
But that the branch that springs from such a tree,
May bear like fruit, and of like nature be.
If she have more then Nature can convey,
Good quallities by education got:
They are communicable, and she may
Confer them on her Issue (may she not?)
Then he that makes good choice deriues thereby
Good to himself and his posterity.
If she with goodness be indu'de and grace,
Why then (with her) does she Heavens blessing bring.
And he within whose bosom these have place,
Will more make these his aim then any thing.
These and what else may breed his bliss beside,
Are the Endowments of Prince Curans Bride.
And now though he till now had lived obscure,
Lostin Loves Labrinth, doting so upon her:
Now that he has her in possession sure,
His valor now redeems his morgadg'd honor.
For Fiery quallitie from Mars he took.
Though she could daunt him with an angry look.
What could he do, while he wore Beautyes Gyues?
What could he do, while he Loves Prisoner was?
He could not, did not then, but now he strives,
Even Hercules in valor to surpass.
A brauer Knight, lived not in any Land,
For Courage, Skill in Arms, and strength of hand.
Elsewhere he warred, and won, ere claimed his right,
Of Edell, in behalf of Argentile:
(Deny'de of it) he vows in bloody fight,
To win the same, if Fortune on him smile.
If not, for what shall hap, prepar'de is he,
Brave minds for Fortunes both, resolved be.
An Army soon (though small) he had prepared,
(By him exampled) bold and guided well,
And with the same on Edell false be war'd,
Beneath his sword on heaps his foe-men fell,
Who (trembling) think he is Mars himself, and wonder,
At his great strokes, which kill like stroke of thunder.
He rides amongst the thickest of his foes,
And deals his alms about on every side,
So setting blood abroach still as he goes,
That purple streams along the field did glide,
As often as his vplifted sword descends,
So often a soul he to Elizian sends.
So many bodies he deprived of breath,
That weary waxed his victorious arm,
While tugging Caron almost toiled to death,
Transports the Ghosts to'th' Stigion banks that swarm:
And still as fast as Caron waftes them ore,
Prince Curans conquering blade vnbodieth more.
To ward his blows, their bucklers are too thin,
So are their armours to defend their fides,
Not walls of iron secure their lives within,
Through shield and shirt of male his Fauchion glides,
Expelling from those houses frail of clay,
Those fair immortal guests that there did stay.
So pearcing were the pushes of his spear,
So sharp his thrusts, so ponderous his blows,
That his strong foes though ten for one they were,
Like to a stream or storm he overthrows.
For as a Lion tears a tender Kid,
So (vndermatcht) even what he would he did.
There was no strength that Curans strength withstood,
He lops their arms, or else their heads he cleft,
And so he passes on imbrued with blood,
The field behind all strewn with corpse he left,
A Giant then suborned to Edels aid,
Opposed the Prince, his bloody progress stayde.
Huge, stern this Giant was, and passing proud,
And scornd the Prince as much his vndermatch,
And his base voice he lifting up aloud,
Cries here he comes, that will thee soon dispatch:
But his proud brags could not Prince Curan sear,
They rather to his courage whestones were.
Look how those vapors meet that out are blown,
From two huge Cannons, mouth to mouth opposed,
The meeting of these Warriors such was known,
Such their encounter was, and so they closed,
Long (to confound the Prince) the Giant strives,
But fails, for Curan him of life depriues.
(He dead) the rest betakes themselves to flight,
And time it is for he that stays he dies:
Yet Edell discontinued not the fight,
So loath was he to loose his dignities.
Nor would he cease till him Prince Curan slew,
And paid the debt that long before was due.
Mercy was offered, he did it despise,
And at the Prince with eager sury smit,
Just angers flames shined then in Curans eyes:
To surie, ruth, mercy to rage submit.
With that he strikes, nor need he strike again,
That stroke gave end to Edels life and reign.
This done, upon the Crown Prince Curan seas'd,
A pleasing purchase though with peril bought,
Nor durst the people show themselves but pleased,
They him applaud, and presents to him brought,
The Nobles too, present their loves cachone,
And by those steps, he mounts the kingly throne.
Curan and Argentile now crowned are,
She fair, wise, virtuous, thence her praises rose,
He grave and just, a thunderbolt in war,
A Lamb, a Lion, to his friends and foes,
Northumber's crown vndiuidable now,
Even till his death adorned his kingly brow.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the letter B. page 3. line 11, for been fame, read being same. In C. page
5. line 3. for more powerful, read were powerful. In C. page 7. line 12, for
him runs, read it runs, In G. page 3. line 16. for our selves, read our sex.


