THE LOT OR PORTION OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

A COMFORTABLE SERMON, PREACHED AT THE Cathedral Church of Gloucester, upon the
fifth day of August: Anno Domini. 1615.

By Richard Web, Preacher of Gods word, at Rodborough in Glocestershyre.

Job. 13. verse. 15.16. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him,
and I will reprove my ways in his sight.
He shall be my salvation also. For the Hypocrite
shall not come before him.
LONDON, Printed by Tho: Creed, for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreet, over against the Conduit. 1616.

TO THE MOST HIGH and mighty King, King James, King of great Brittane, France,
and Ireland, defender of the true Christian faith: grace and peace from God the
father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
MOst dear and gracious Sovereign, (before whom I bow in all subiectiue
manner) I doubt not, but that worthy saying of David a worthy king, is worthily
written in the heart of your majesty our king, Rabboth Ranghoth Tsaddic,
Vmirrullam Iattsilennu Jehovah. 1. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but
the Lord delivers him out of them all. Of all the states in the world, your
highness, the only great state of the world, has had best experience of the
truth of this point, your troubles, we know to the grief of our hearts, have
been many; and your deliverances also, we know to the comfort of our souls,
have been as many. This sentence of the prophet, most worthy to be written, not
only in sheets of gold, but also in the hearts of all men by the point of a
Diamond, was my text upon the fifth of August last past: which day was kept
solemnly by us in our solemn city of Gloucester, to the Honor of your
Highness, and for the triumph of your blessed victory out of Gowries wicked
conspiracy. Since that day, I have been solicited and importuned by friends,
that my Sermon might be printed in papers, which then I desired only to be
imprinted in the hearts of my hearers; which being done, I make bold, (if not
too bold) to dedicate to your majesty, as being your own, for that it was
preached on your day, for your sake; to your Honor, and by your subject, who
is your devoted servant to death it self. My hope and hearts desire is, that
as Christ rewarded the poor widows Mite, which was cast into the treasury of
the Temple, though it were nothing in quantity comparable to the great sums
of money, which the rich cast into the same: so your highness will respect this
little book of mine, your poor servant, though it be nothing to those great
volumes, which are consecrated to your majesty by the learned Rabbis of the
land. The almighty bless your highness, and grant in favor unto us all, that
your majesty may be evermore in wisdom most admirable like Daniel: in
courage most valiant, like David: in zeal most fervent, like Phinehas: in
godliness most singular, like Josiah: in care most provident, like Joseph: in
riches most abundant, like Saloman: in counsel most sound, like Achitophell:
in love most kind, like Jonathan: in body most healthful, like Moses: in mind
most joyful, like Simeon: in reign amongst us in our English coasts, most
long, like Manasses: And lastly, that your highness at the last may be carried
by the Angels into the bosom of Abraham, like Lazarus. And hereunto let all
your subjects and friends, both domestical and foreign, say, Amen. And so
upon the bended knees of my heart, I ask pardon for this my boldness, and rest

Your Majesty's most humble, and truly devoted Subject, Richard Web.

The Contents of the Sermon following.
THe Exordium or Praeface. The Analysis, or Paraphrase. The sum and parts.
Four Questions about the righteous. There are Righteous persons in the world.
Who they be that are righteous. By what means men are made righteous. The
marks whereby Righteous men may be known from others. Christians must have a
respect to all the commandments of God. In all good works men must have an
eye to Gods glory. Godly persons must continue in their godliness to the
end. Men must love goodness in others as well as in themselves, and labor to
make others good like unto themselves. The righteous shall have troubles here
in this world. God in love will correct the Righteous. The devil in malice
will assault the righteous. The world in hatred will pursue the righteous.
There are seven things, wherein righteous persons pass others. The end which
God does aim at, in correcting the righteous, is always for their good.
Afflictions are no sign of reiection, but a mark rather of Election, to
everlasting life. Comfort and succor must be ministered unto the righteous in
their troubles. Holy persons must prepare their hearts for troubles. The
preparation that must be made against troubles, stands chiefly in the
meditation of 3. things, (viz.) of the necessity of trouble, of the utility
of troubles, and of the multiplicitie of those promises, which God has made
unto us about our troubles. The commodities which troubles do bring unto the
righteous, are four: two belonging to this life; two others, respecting the
next life. Godliness and credit for this life. An assurance of glory, and a
larger measure of glory for the next life. The troubles of the righteous are
many. Many for the persons from whom they come: many for the means through
which they come: many for the times wherein they come: many for the parts to
which they come: many for the sorts by which they come: many lustly, for the
effects which they bring at their coming. Six causes, why the troubles of the
righteous are many, (viz:) because their sins are many: their graces many:
their enemies many: their blessings many: their exercises of religion many: and
their contentions against the world, the flesh, and the devil many. A comfort
to the godly, who have many troubles. The difference between the troubles of
the wicked, and the godly, which stands in 3. things, (viz.) the cause of
their troubles: the manner of bearing their troubles, and the end or fruit
which does follow upon their troubles. Righteous persons must labor to have
patience, as a most needful thing for them in all their troubles. Holy persons
must evermore look for crosses in this life. God will deliver the righteous
out of all their troubles. Four reasons why God does rid the righteous out
of their troubles, (viz) his love toward them: his promise unto them: his
feeling with them: and his glory from them: joined with their loving trust in
him, and trusting love toward him. GOD must have the only praise of those
deliverances which the righteous have. In all miseries holy persons must resort
unto the Lord, and rely only upon him for their deliverance therefrom. A
comfort to the Saints against all their tribulations. GOD does save his
sometimes by means, and sometimes without means, and sometimes contrary to
all means. A cooling-card to the world, who oppose themselves against the
righteous. The troubles wherein the Kings Majesty was in Scotland, by Gowries
conspiracy, divided into 3. parts, together with his deliverances from the
same. The Kings thanking of God for his victory, and the great rejoicing of all
the land for his deliverance. A Prayer for the King. An Application to the
Auditorie, wherein six reasons are set down, why troubles should not trouble
any of them though they be many.
THE LOT AND PORTION OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
Psalm 34.19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
him out of them all.


MOses, an holy man of God, speaking to the people of God, concerning the
Institution of the Passe-ouer, to be kept at his appointed season, from year
to year, says: Exodus 13.14.
When thy Son shall ask thee, What is this? Thou shall say unto him, With a
mighty hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: and
in remembrance hereof, we celebrate this Feast. In like manner, when your
children (right reverend father, right worshipful, and well beloved brethren in
Christ Jesus) shall ask of you, what this our assembly means; You shall
answer, that it is, to give God thanks for that great benefit, which we
received at his hands, as on this day, when in his mercy, he saved our King
after a miraculous manner, and delivered him out of the hands of bloody and
desperate traitors, who had vowed his death, to the hurt of us all, and to the
harm of Gods whole Church besides. This is the day, Psalm. 118.24.
which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad therein. Upon this day God
showed us the light of his gracious countenance, and had mercy upon us, in
preserving for us so great a treasure, so good a governor, so learned a
Master, so worthy a King. The Lord grant, that we may enjoy him many happy
years, and become most thankful unto his Majesty for him. But to draw to my
text; in it you shall find two points, most worthy of your observation, and
most correspondent unto this our days celebration.

In the first, you shall see what entertainment you are to expect for here in
this world. In the second, you shall behold what favor you are to look for,
from the Lord your God out of this world. The first of these will show you you
troubles, the latter your deliverance from your troubles; and both of them
jointly together, will show you both the hands of God: the one like a wound,
maiming you, the other, a plaster healing you. Oh mark and consider things
well. The righteous must look for more troubles then others. And again, they
must hope for greater deliverances then others. Their afflictions here will
be many, like the Host of the Aramites: and their redemptions also will be
as many, like the Host of the Israelites. David being a righteous man, and
one according to Gods own heart, found this most true by his own experience.
He had many troubles, yet he was delivered out of all his troubles. For this
cause does he here (measuring as it were, other men by his own foot) declare
unto us, what is the estate or condition of all righteous persons. On the one
side, he does tell us, that they are subject to manifold troubles and
afflictions. On the other side, he does assure us, that they shall not continue
in these their troubles and afflictions, but in time convenient be delivered
out of them all; and that, by the gracious hand of the Lord their God, who does
watch over them still for their good. So that the spirit of God directed him to
those two chief things, which make men take their crosses grievously. One,
because they do not look for them before they come: another, because they do
not behold their deliverer from them, when they are come. The prophet does
prevent both these, and tell us, that the righteous shall have many troubles;
and that the Lord will deliver him out of all his troubles. I pray remember you
both the sentences: how, to wit, you must go through a Sea of troubles: And
how then, you shall come to an haven of rest; that so, when any troubles do
come on you, they may not trouble you, like other men, who look not for their
troubles, nor know not where to have a remedy against their troubles. Thus
you have heard the Analysis; now mark the sum and parts. The sum sets down the
state or condition of the righteous. The parts are two. The first does note out
his misery. The second, his deliverance from his misery. His misery is
described out two ways. First, by the nature or quality of it. Then secondly,
by the magnitude or quantity of it. The nature, or quality, in this word,
Troubles. The magnitude or quantity, in the other word, Many. Many are the
troubles of the righteous. His deliverance from his misery, contains two
branches under it. The first is the person, who does deliver him. The second is
the thing, from which he is delivered. The person that does deliver him, is the
Lord. The thing from which he is delivered, are all his troubles: but the Lord
delivers him out of all his troubles. Now of these in order.

But before I begin with them, because the whole, Tsaddik.
and every part, does concern the Righteous: and whatsoever is now to be
spoken, must have a secret relation unto them; necessity and opportunity do
require of me, that I should speak a few words concerning them. Yet speaking
of the righteous, I will not speak of all the things which do belong to the
Righteous. There are four questions, which may justly be moved concerning
them. The first is, whether there be any righteous persons in all the world,
yea or no: Seeing John does teach us, that the whole world does lie in
wickedness. John. 5.19.
The second is, that if there be any, who they be: and what they are. The
third is: How and by what means, they that be, and are, are made Righteous,
seeing all by nature are corrupt, and unrighteous, according to Christ's
words, when he says: That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. John. 3.6.
The fourth and last is, by what tokens or signs, they that are, and are made
righteous, may be known from other men, considering that they do live amongst
others, like men. If I should be long in the opening of these things before
you, I must have a large time to open them unto you. But now seeing that I must
measure my speech, by the measure of the clock, in running his hour, you must
give me leave to run over these points, and rather to point at them, then
in any point to dwell upon them. Wherefore referring all these matters rather
unto your own private meditation, then pursuing any one of them, by any long
declaration. Thus I shut up all in a few words, as follows.

1. Though the whole world does lie in wickedness, yet there are righteous
persons in the world: for as the word (...), or world, there, in that place of
John, does not note out all men, which are in the world, but the wicked only,
who are the greatest part of the world, and who also are scattered over all the
world, being as it were, a world of it self: So the scripture elsewhere does
witness in many places, that the Lord has some Righteous persons still here in
this world, howsoever this world be not worthy of them.

Heb. 11.28.
Such an one was Noah, of whom it is said, That he was a just and upright
man; and one that walked with GOD: Genes 6.9.
Such an one was Job, of whom it is said, that he was an upright and just man,
one that feared GOD, and eschewed evil: Job. ^.1.
Such an one was Lot; of whom it is said, That he being righteous, and
dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing and hearing them, vexed his righteous
soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds. 2. Peter 2.8.
Such an one was Zachary, and his wife Elizabeth: of who^ it is said, that
both were just before GOD, and walked in all the commandments and admonitions
of the Lord, without reproof. Luke. 1.6.
Such an one lastly, is every faithful man and woman, upon the face of the
earth: Of whom it is said, The Righteous do love thee. Cant. 1.3.


2. Those that are righteous, and such as are purged from their sins,
wherewith they are naturally defiled, and are qualified also with new and
heavenly graces, to do such things as are well pleasing unto the Lord: They
are not only cleansed from their filthiness, but are renewed also, according to
the image of God, to walk in his commandments. Surely whosoever fails in
either of these, comes too short of being righteous. For both must be joined
together, in all those, that will be righteous. Agur speaks of the former,
when he says, There is a generation, that are pure in their own concey^, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness. Prou. 30.12.
And John the Apostle does make mention of the latter, in these words, Little
children, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness, is righteous,
as he is righteous: he that commits sin, is of the devil, and so
forth. 1. John. 3.7.8.


3. The means whereby men are made righteous, is twofold. The one is by
Justification, and the other by Sanctification. For there is a righteousness of
Justification, and a righteousness of sanctification: the one (as it were) to
make us righteous before God; the other, to make us righteous before men. The
first of these is without us: the second is within us. That which is without
us, is from Christ; and that which is within us, is from the spirit. The
former of these, which is the righteousness of Christ, is apprehended of us by
faith, and made our own by Imputation. The latter of these, which is the
righteousness of the spirit, is possessed of us by love, and made our own by
inhesion. Now both these righteousnesses must concur to make a man truly
righteous to salvation, as they did in the Corinthians: of who^ we read thus;
And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 1.
Cor. 6.11.
And surely where both these are, there may men and women truly be called
righteous, though that sin does still remain, and dwell within them. First,
because one manner of righteousness is in them, in a full perfection, even the
righteousness of Christ, which is imputed and applied unto them by their
faith. Then secondly, because an other manner of righteousness is in them, in
the operative beginnings of it, even the righteousness of the spirit, who does
work daily within them, and labor to renew them more and more, according to
Gods image, wherein they were created at the first.

The marks or signs, by the which the righteous may be known from others,
are chiefly four. The first is, by the Generality of their obedience. For
every righteous man (who is righteous indeed) has a care of the whole course
of his life, and looks respectively to all the commandments of God. He does
not take liberty in any one sin, but strives to avoid all sins, nor
omitteth one good duty, but endeavors to perform all good duties. He is not
like to Naaman the Syrian, who professed the true God of Israel; and promised
to serve and worship him alone; yet desired to be borne withal, for one
special sin: which was, to be in the house of Rimmon; 2. King. 5.
and there to uphold his Master, leaning on his hand, and to bow before that
Idol, whom he did worship. Neither is he like to Herod, who feared John the
Baptist, reverenced him, heard him gladly, and did many things after his
teaching; but yet he kept still his brothers wife, and would not put her away,
according to Gods commandment. Mat. 16.18.
But he is like to Josiah, who turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with
all his soul, and with all his strength, according to all the law of Moses. 2.
King 24.25.
And unto Zachary, and Elizabeth, who were just before God, and walked in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, without reproof. Luke 1.6.
And no marvel. For he does know full well, that whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. ^^^ 2.10.
That a ship, though it be sound in all parts, save one, and leaketh in no
place save only one: yet it may be drowned by means of that one. That the
walls of a City, though they be strong and well fortified in all places save
one, and have no breaches in them, save only one: yet they may be taken of the
enemy by means of that one. That lastly, a bird, though it be free in all
members save one, and be tide in no member, save only one, whether leg, or
wing, yet may be held fast, by means of that one. Hereof is it, that he does
labor to purge himself from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to
grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God, according to Paul's
exhortation to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 7.1.


2. The second is, by the end whereunto all their works or deeds do tend. For
every righteous man, (who is righteous indeed) has a special eye unto the
praise and honor of his God, in all things which he does take into his hands,
according to our Saviors saying; Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16.
And after the Apostles rule, when he says, Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever else ye do, do all to the gory of God. 1. Cor. 10.31


Surely, though men practice never so many good works, yet if in doing of them,
they propound not this end unto themselves, they are not to be accounted
righteous men: no more then he is to be esteemed a good Archer, which can draw
a strong Bow, has a fair loose, and does shoot far, and yet always
shootes a great way off from the mark. In this regard, the Scribes and
Pharisees in the days of our Savior, were not accounted by him in the number
of righteous men, but styled rather of him, by the name of Hypocrites, because
all that good, which they did at any time, was not for Gods glory, but for
their own praise, that they might be seen of men. They did fast, and pray,
and give alms, but all was for to have a name, and a commendation of the
world. Mat. 6.^.
In like sort the Papists fail in this point, now in our days. For they do
all their good works in a manner to merit thereby, like to hired servants, and
laborers, who work for their wages, and would do little or nothing for their
Masters, unless they might be well paid for their pains. But Christians must
acknowledge themselves not to be servants, but children, and not children of
the bondwoman, but of the freewoman; and that they ought of duty to serve
the Lord, all the days of their lives, though they should receive nothing for
their labor. Doubtless in all our works we must seek his glory: and if he
bestow any reward upon us, we may take it as an undeserved gift of his
bountiful goodness. For when we have done all that we can do, or which is
enjoined upon us, we must confess, that we are unprofitable servants. Luke.
17.10.


True it is, that righteous persons have some hypocrisy and vain glory
mingled with sincerity in their best actions, and do some things as well for
their own praise, as Gods glory: yet if their sincerity prevail over their
hypocrisy, they lose not the name and dignity of righteous persons. For as
the philosopher teaches, concerning elementarie bodies, that they are not made
of one element only, but of all four, yet have their names of the predominant
element: And as the physicians say, of the humors in man's body, that although
they be not pure, but mixed one with another, yet every one does carry the
name of that humor, which does most abound: So may we say (and that truly too)
of the general conversation and the particular actions of men, that if in them
they seek more the glory of God, then their own praise, pleasure or profit,
they are truly righteous; though imperfectly righteous. The third is by their
perseverance in righteousness. For every righteous man (who is righteous indeed)
will continue in his righteousness unto the end. He will not begin only well,
but he will end also well. He is not like unto the snaile, that pusheth out a
long pair of horns, which being touched never so little, go in again.
Neither is his righteousness like a morning cloud, or as a morning deaw, which
is dried up quickly, and vanishes away, so soon as the Sun ascends on
high. But he is rather like unto the tree, that never fades, but bears
fruit still. And his righteousness is like to the Iuie, that is always green,
though the Sun parch it: to the Diamond, that is always hard, though the
hammer beat it: and to the good vine, that is always growing, though the knife
cut it. Whosoever is borne of God (says S. John) sins not, for his seed
remains in him: neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
And surely, true and saving righteousness is one of those gifts of God, which
are without repentance. Romans 11.29.
It cannot be lost fully and finally: Those which turn from their
righteousness, and commit iniquity, shall not live: their former righteousness
shall be forgotten, and they shall dye in their sins, which they have
committed. Ezekiel. 18.24.
He only, which continues righteous to the end, shall be saved. Mat. 10.22
Wherefore as God never cease to bestow blessings upon us, so let us never
cease to do service unto him: for proemium aeternum, aeternam requirit
seruitutem: a continual reward, does require a continual service. Doubtless
the Heavens above us, the earth under us, the beasts about us, and our people
with us, do daily cry upon us, for the performance of this duty by us; for
they all serve us evermore, and howsoever we do abuse them often in their
service, yet they do continue therein still, and never give it over. Let this
then be the conclusion of this point, that howsoever we hire servants but for
a year, and take Apprentices but for seven or eight years, yet must we our
selves serve the Lord our God, for all our years, and that in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our lives, Luke 1.17.
doing as Paul did, when he said, Brethren, I count not my self, that I have
attained unto it, but one thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and
endeavor my self unto that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark,
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13.14.


The fourth and last is, by their affection to righteousness in others. For
every righteous man (who is righteous indeed) will love righteousness as well in
others, as in himself: yea, he will love all others in whom he beholds any
seeds of righteousness. His delight will be in the Saints, that are on the
earth, and in the excellent, according to David's example, in these words: My
well-doing extends not to thee (o Lord) but to the Saints that are in earth,
and to the excellent, all my delight is in them. (...).
It is well observed by the Prophet in the fifteenth psalm, and the fourth
verse thereof: That those that shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and rest in his
holy mountain, do honor all such as fear the Lord. You know, that he which
loves a child for his fathers sake (as David loved Mephibosheth, for
Ionathans sake,) loves the father himself better: So he which loves
righteousness, for righteousness sake, declares thereby, that he loves
righteousness it self far better. Besides this, a righteous man loves
righteousness so well, that he will labor to make others as righteous as
himself. David promised, that if the Lord would create in him a clean heart,
and renew a right spirit within him, and so refer him to the joy of his
salvation: he would then teach his way unto the wicked, and use means to
convert sinners unto him. Psalm 51.13.
And Peter, when he is converted, must strengthen his brethren. Luke 22.32.
Doubtless as every thing seeks to beget his like: so a righteous person
seeks to make an other righteous. And as fire cannot be smoothered, when once
it has taken hold in any place, and finds matter sufficient to work upon,
but will burn further and further, till it has consumed all before it: So
true righteousness, wrought in the soul of one, cannot there be suppressed,
but will spread it self abroad, and work upon others for their conversion. In
one word then, he which would be reputed righteous, and yet keeps in all his
righteousness to himself, and does not impart it unto others, may justly be
suspected to have little or no sound righteousness at all within him.

Thus far for the person, of whom the Prophet does speak. Now let us come
to the things, whereof he does speak. The troubles (says he) of the
righteous are many. By the word Troubles, you must understand, all such things,
as do molest or disquiet him. The Hebrew word is Ranghoth in the plural
number, Ranghoth.
of Raughah, in the singular. And howsoever it be taken now and then,
Adiectiuely, for that which is sinful or painful, yet here it is put
substantiuely, and does note out Evils, or afflictions; not evils, as they are
sins, but as they are chastiseme^ts. For evil is of 2. sorts, the one is
Malum Culpae, and the other is malum paenae; the one the evil of sin, the
other is the evil of punishment. And well may evils or afflictions be called
Troubles, even of the effects of them, because they are wont to trouble such as
have them. You see now the meaning of the words, the doctrine arising from them
is this. That good men and good women shall have troubles here in this world.
Look how many will truly fear the Lord, and taking hold of Christ Jesus by a
lively faith, will carefully endeavor to walk in Gods commandments; to the
end of their days, they shall have crosses and troubles, there afflictions
and tribulations do belong to them, and they shall be sure to have their
portion therein. So much may we gather out of Esayes words, when he says,
Behold, I and the children (meaning the true members of Christ, that were
willing to hear and obey the words of God, whereof he spoke before) whom the
Lord has given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel, by the Lord of Host,
which dwells in mount Sion. Esaias, 8.18.
So much we may gather out of Ieremies words, when he says, Hear I pray you,
all people, and behold my sorrow, (speaking of the church of God under his own
person) My Virgins and my young men are gone into captivity. I called for my
Lovers but they deceived me, my Priests and mine elders perished in the city,
while they sought their meat to refresh their souls. Behold o Lord, how I am
troubled:my bowels swell, mine heart is turned within me, for I am full of
heaviness, the sword spoyleth abroad, as death does at home. They have heard,
that I mourn, but there is none to comfort me; all mine enemies have heard of
my trouble, and are glad, that thou have done it. Lament. 1.18.19 20 21.
So much we may gather out of Zacharies words, when he says, Arise o sword
upon my Shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of
Hoasts, smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn
mine hand upon the lettle ones. And in all the Land, says the Lord, two parts
therein shall be cut off, and dye: but the third shall be left therein: And I
will bring that third part through the fire, and will fine them, as the silver
is fined: and will try them, as the gold is tried. They shall call on my Name,
and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people, and they shall say, the
Lord is my God. Zach. 13.7.8.9.
So much we may gather out of Christ's words, when he says: Behold (speaking to
his disciples) I send you as sheep in the mids of wolves. Beware of men, for
they will deliver you up to the councels: and will scourge you in their
Synagogues: And the brother shall betray the brother to death; and the Father
the Son; and the Children shall rise against their Parents, and shall cause
them to die. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Name. Mat.
10.16.17.18.21.22.
So much we may gather out of Paul's words, when he says, For we are made
a gazing stock unto the world, and to the Angels, and to men, unto this hour,
we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no
certain dwelling place, and labor, working with our own hands: we are
reviled, and yet we bless: we are persecuted, and suffer it: we are evil
spoken of, and we pray: we are made as the filth of the world, 1. Cor. 4.9.1.
the off-scowring of all things unto this time. So much lastly may we gather,
(to omit many other places) out of David's words, when he says, have mercy upon
meo Lord for I am i^ trouble, mine eye, my soul and my belly, are consumed
with grief. For my life is wasted with heaviness, and my years with
mourning; my strength fails for my pains, and my bones are consumed. I was a
reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbors, and a
fear to mine acquaintance, who seeing me in the street fled from me, I am
forgotten, as a dead man out of mind. I am like a broken vessel: for I have
heard the railing of great men: fear was on every side, while they conspired
together against me, and consulted to take my life. Psalm. 31.9.10.11.
GOD himself: Ioh. 1.13.
Is it, because they are more wicked then others, by their works, and ways?
No: for in that respect, they are the holiest persons in all the world: as
being washed from their sins, Reu. 1.5.
and as having their conversation above in the heavens themselves. Phil. 3.20
Is it, because they are more detestable in the eyes of God then others, by
their estate and condition? No: for in that respect they are the dearest Prou:
15.9. Acts 10 ^5. Ioh. 14.23.
persons unto him in all the world: as being incorporated into the body of his
Son, and made his children by adoption. Ephesians. 1.4.5.
Is it because they are more beggarly then others by their portion of goods and
inheritance here below? No: for in that respect they are the richest persons in
all the world, if not by profession, yet by right, as being the heirs of all
things; yea, coheyres with Christ, of every thing. Romans 8.17.
So that a man may say to them, as Paul did to the Corinthians, in these words,
Let no man rejoice in men: for all things are yours: whether it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, whether they be things
present, or things to come, even all are yours. 1. Cor. 3.21.22
It is, because they are more troublesome then others, by their quarrelsome
contentions and brawlings? No: for in that respect they are the quietest
persons in all the world: as turning their spears and swords into mattocks and
sythes, Esal. 2.4.
and as going like sheep to the slaughterhouse, to be slain of others
themselves. Romans 8.36.
So that a man may say most truly, as Esaias hath-it in his prophecy, that in
the mount of the Lord, there is no hurt done. Esaias. 11.9
Is it, because they are more carelessly attended upon for defense, then others
by their place and calling? No: for in that respect they are the safest persons
in all the world: as having the Angels of heaven above them for their guard,
Psalm. 91.11.
and the almighty himself for their protection. Palm. 125.2.
Is it lastly, because they are more fruitles then others by their idleness and
want of care to do men good? No: for in that respect they are the profitablest
persons in all the world: as being full of good works, and doing good unto all
men. Job 29.120. Acts. 9.39. Acts, 10.2.
So that many do fare the better for their sakes. As Laban did for Jacobs
sake. Genes. 30.27.
Potiphar for Joseph's sake: Genesis 39 5.
the Israelites for Moses sake. Zoar Exodus 32.14.
for Lot sake: Gen 19.21.
and the mariners for Paul's sake. Acts. 17.24.
You see then, that it is not for any of these causes: nay, for these causes a
man may wonder, why they have any troubles at all: seeing thus that they are
the honourablest, the holiest; to God, the dearest: in right to all things the
richest; by a sweet courage, the quietest; through angels protection the
safest; and to men of the world, the profitablest persons that are in the
world: a wonder I say may be made, why they should have any troubles at all.

My son, refuse not the chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his
correction, for the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does
the child, in whom he delights. Prou: 3.11.12
In the Hebrews in these words. My son, despise not the chastning of the
Lord, neither faint, when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he receives. Heb. 12.4.6.
In the Revelations, in these words, As many as I love, I rebuke, and chasten,
be zealous therefore and amend. Romans 3.20,


The end that God does aim at in correcting his, is always good. In respect
of them it is twofold. The one is principal: the other is subordinate, serving
to that principal. The principal, is their salvation, according to Paul's
saying, in these words: For this cause many are weak, and sick among you, and
many sleep: For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: but
when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world: 1. Cor. 11 31.32.
The subordinate, serving to the principal, is their Sanctification:
accordingly as we read in the Hebrews, in these words. For they verily
(speaking of the fathers of our bodies) for a few days chasteneth us after
their own pleasures; but he (speaking of God, the Father of our spirits,
chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Heb: 12.20.
In which Sanctification of theirs, the Lord has an eye, either to their
sins, or to their graces. To their sins, either past, that they might
repent for them: or present, that they might leave them; or to come, that they
might prevent them. To their Graces, either for the receiving of them, that
they might be fit to entertain them: or for the discovering of them, that they
might appear to the world: to the praise of the giver, to the comfort of the
possessor; and to the profit of the beholder: or for the exercising of them,
that they might not rust by lying still, like iron; or grow unsavory, like
standing-water; but glister like gold in the fire, and prosper like the tree
by the rivers side.

How the Devil in malice will assault them. You may find in Job, in Zachary,
in Matthew, in Mark, in Luke, in Paul, in Peter, and in the Revelations. He
tormented Job, and spared not. Job. 1. and 2.
He stood at the right hand of Iehoshuah the high Priest to resist him: Zach.
3, 1.
He tempted Christ in the wilderness. Matt. 4.26.
He set upon the Apostles, and winnowed them like wheat. Luke. 22.31.
He threw a young man often into the fire, and into the water, to destroy him.
Mar. 9.22.
He buffeted Paul, and was a prick to him in the flesh. 2. Cor. 1.2.7.
He cast out water after the Woman, like a flood to drown her, and went and
made war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Reu. 12.15.16.17.
Being losed out of his prison, he goes out to deceive the people which are
in the four quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together
to battle against the Saints. Rou. 20.8.9.
In a word, he walks up and down, like a roaring lion, seeking daily whom
he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.8.


How lastly, the world in hatred will pursue them, you may see in the Psalms:
in Obadiah, in Matthew, in John, in Paul, and in the Revelations. In the
Psalms, in these words, Thou make us to turn back from the adversaries,
and they which hate us, spoil for themselves. Thou give us as sheep to be
eaten, and do scatter us among the Nations. Psalm. 144.10.11
In Obadiah, in these words: For thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob, shame
shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever. When thou stoodest on the
other side, in the day that the strangers carried away his substance, and
strangers entered into his gates, and cast lottes upon Jerusalem, even thou wast
as one of them. Obad. 10.11.
In Matthew, in thesew words, Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the
counsels, and will scourge you in their Synagogues. And the Brother shall
betray the brother to death, and the Father the Son: and the children shall
rise against their parents, and shall cause them to die. And ye shall be hated
of all men for my Name. Matt. 10.17.21.22.
In John, in these words, If you were of the world, the world would love his
own: but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. Ioh. 15.
In Paul, in these words, Gal, 4, 29.
But as then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne
after the Spirit. Even so it is now. Lastly, in the Revelations, Reu. 20.9.
in these words, And they went up (speaking of Gog and Magog, whom the devil
had gathered together like the sand of the Sea) into the plains of the earth,
which compassed the tents of the Saints about, and the beloved City, but fire
came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.

reiection, but rather a mark of Election. As the Apostle says, If you endure
chastening, God offers himself unto you, Heb. 12.7.8
as unto his sons. For what Son is it whom the Father chasteneth not? If
therefore you be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are you
bastards, and not sons. To hell a man may sail with a forewinde, and meet
with few or no troubles in his way, but not so to heaven.

When Israel was going to Aegipt, they met no foes: but when they came from
Aegipt to go to Chanaan, they met with many. Lazarus had a bitter battle as it
were in his way to heaven, when the rich Glutton sailed smoothly to hell, with
never a rub as it were in his way. Doubtless as the purest corn is cleanest
fanned: the finest gold is oftenest tried: and the sweetest grape is hardest
pressed: so the truest Christian is heauiest crossed: He is like the Ox,
always held to the plough: but others, who are reprobates, are like the beasts
in a fat pasture, designed to the slaughterhouse. Their judgment then is
erroneous, who brand them with the black coal of reprobation: that are
scorched often with the hot beams of tribulation. Let their credit and
authority be as great for wisdom and for piety, as ever the credit of
Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar was: yet they are to be censured of us, in this
point, and their judgment to be valued of us not worth a point, as they and
theirs were of God, Job. 42.7.
for condemning Job for his troubles, who was a man more excellent then
themselves, and Job. 42.8.
dearer unto the Almighty, then any of them.

Secondly, out of this we may learn, not to be ashamed of all such, as are
here in this world, in troubles, and afflictions, seeing good men and good
women are subject thereunto; but rather to make much of such, and to regard
them above others; as we are advised for to do, both by precept, and by
pattern. By precept, Heb. 2, 13, 3.
in the Hebrews, in these words; Remember them that are in bonds, as though you
were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if you were also
afflicted in the body. Heb: 10.32, 33 34
By pattern, in the same book, when he says, Now call to remembrance the days
that are passed, in the which, after you had received light, you endured a
great fight in afflictions, partly while you were made a gazing stock, both by
reproaches and afflictions, and partly, while you became companions of them
which were so tossed too and fro. For both you sorrowed with me for my bonds,
and suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your solues, how
that you have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance.

Thirdly, from hence we may see, that righteous persons do stand in need of
help and favor from others, considering thus, that their estate is full of
troubles: Prayers are to be made unto God for them, as they were for Peter,
when he was in prison. Acts, 12.5
Money is to be conferred upon them, as it was upon the brethren in Judea, when
there was a great famine amongst them, in the days of Claudius Casar. Acts 11,
99.
Comfort must be ministered unto them, as it was unto the incestuous Corinthian,
when he was dejected with too much sorrow for his sin. 2. Cor. 2.7.
Lastly, heavenly exhortatio^s must be made amongst them, as they were amongst
the Saints of Lystra, Iconms, and Antiochia, when Paul and Barnabas came to
confirm, and to exhort them to continue in the faith. Acts 14.22.


Finally, out of this place we gather, that look how many of us, as do
intend to be righteous, we must prepare our hearts for troubles, and not be
dismaide at the same, when they fall upon us; as though some strange thing did
happen unto us, according to Peter's words, when he says; Deerly beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is among you to prove
you, as though some strange things were come unto you; but rejoice, in as much
as you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall appear,
you may be glad and rejoice. 1. Pet. 4.12.13.
Wherefore my beloved brethren, prepare your hearts for troubles, and look for
them every day. Behold, as we must prepare for war, when we hear of the
coming of our enemies: and as we must prepare for a shelter, when we see the
coming of a storm. Like as Noah prepared an Arc against the coming of the
flood. So in wisdom must we prepare for the coming of our troubles, that so
when they do come, they may either not trouble us at all, or else trouble us
but a little. Now the means of preparation stands chiefly in the meditation
of three points. The first is of the necessity of troubles, how they will and
must come, do man what he can to the contrary: As our Savior said to Peter,
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou
would, but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and
an other shall guide thee, and lead thee whither thou would not. Ioh, 11.18
For praemonitus, praemunitus, he that is fore-warnde, is fore-armde:
afflictions are lightened in the expectation. Hereof was it, that Christ did
foretell his disciples, how they should be entertained here in this world:
Mat. 10, 16.17
and did show Paul how many things he was to suffer for his Names Acts. 9.16
sake.

The second is, of the utility of troubles, how they will bring great profit
to them who are exercised therewith. And these profits are chiefly four:
whereof two do concern this life, and other two the next life. Those two
which do concern this life, are holiness and credit. Holiness is wrought in
man by afflictions, as we may read in the Hebrews, in these words: For they
verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasures, but he
chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness:
Heb. 12.10.11.
Now no chastising for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: but
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are
thereby exercised. It is an old saying, and a true one, Crux pendentis,
Cathedra docentis: the cross of the hanged, is the chair of the learned. The
Crosse-house is the Schoole-house.

Surely Afflictions as they are (...); so are they also (...); as they are
passions, so they are instructions: they are not only burdens upon us, but they
are also good lessons unto us: They are like the wind, which does cleanse the
good grain, though it does blow cold: and like the Fire, which does purify
the bad gold, though it does burn hot. Hagar was proud and blind in
Abraham's house, but in the wilderness she is humbled, and begins to look to
the Lord. Genes. 16.4.
Israel learned not to mourn, until they were sent to Babell. Psalm. 137.10.
Jonah sleep in the ship, but walks and prays in the whales belly. Iona.
1. and 2. chapt.
Manasses cares not for God at liberty, but seeks him out in the prison. 2.
Cron. 33.12
David went astray before he was afflicted, but then he learned to keep Gods
word. Psalm, 119.67
In a word, every Christian is bettered by his troubles. His knowledge is
sounder then it was: His faith is stronger then it was: his hope is firmer then
it was: his love is hotter then it was: his humility is lower then it was:
lastly, his goodness in general, is greater then it was: greater toward God,
greater toward his neighbor, greater toward himself, and greater toward
all the creatures both great and small.

As thus we have holiness by afflictions, so also have we credit. Unto you it
is grace: For Christ (says Paul,) that not only you should believe in him,
but also suffer for his sake. Phil: 1.29.
In the second chapter of the Revelation, and 13. verse, it is recorded as a
thing of great honor, that Antipas was slain, as a faithful martyr, in the
Church of Pergamus, where Satan had his throne. And the Apostles did take
themselves highly credited of the Lord, when he did count them worthy to suffer
for his Names sake. Acts 5.41.
So that honor and reputation comes to men by all such afflictions as they do
undergo here in this world for Gods cause, and the confirmation of the truth.
The other two profits, which does concern the next life, are these. First, an
assurance of glory to come. For this is certain; that if we do here suffer
with Christ, we shall hereafter reign with Christ. Romans 8.17. 2. Tim. 2.13.
1. Pet. 3.10.
And therefore James does say, Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him. Iam 1.12.
Secondly, an increase of glory to come. For (as Paul does teach us) our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent
and an eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.
So that the more troubles that we do here endure for our God and his laws,
the more and greater will our glory be at the last, when we shall be rewarded
according to our works. 2. Cor. 5.10.


The third and last means of preparation for troubles, is the consideration of
the multiplicitie of those promises which God has made unto us in his word,
about our troubles, which promises are chiefly three. The first is, that he
will lay no more upon us then we can bear: according to Paul's words, when he
says, There has no temptation taken you, but such as appertains to man: and
God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be
able, but will give the issue with the temptation, that you may be able to
bear it. 1. Cor. 10.13.
The second is, that he will deliver us from that which he does lay upon us,
according to David's words; when he says, As the mountains are about Jerusalem,
so is the Lord about his people, from hence forth, and for ever. For the rod of
the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put
forth their hand unto wickedness. Psalm. 125.2.3.
The third and last is, that he will turn that which he does lay upon us, and
from which he will deliver us, unto our good in the end: according to the
Apostles words, when he says, Also we know that all things work together for
the best unto them that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose.
Romans 8.28.
Thus by the contemplation of the necessity of troubles, of the utility of
troubles, and of the multiplicitie of the promises, which God has made unto us
about our troubles; you may make your selves strong, and prepare your hearts
against all your troubles. And so I leave the first branch of the misery of
the righteous, which does concern the nature or quality of it, and come to
the second, which does respect the magnitude or quantity of it.

Many are the troubles (says the Prophet) of the Righteous. The word which is
here translated Many, Rabboth.
in the Hebrew tongue is Rabboth, and it coms of the verb Rabab, with signifies
to multiply or to increase. Some there are, who read it thus, Great are the
troubles of the righteous. True it is, that the word Rab and Rabbah, whereof
come Rabin and Rabboth in the plural, do signify now and then that which is
great: but yet you must know, that it is but seldom, and that for the most
part it is taken only for that which is much, or many, and so is it here. For
the Prophets meaning is, that there is a generality of crosses, and a
plurality of troubles, that do belong to the righteous. GOD the Father, the
Son and holy Ghost. Secondly, there is the devil and his angels. Thirdly,
there is the world, and all ungodly persons who are in the world, that are
almost infinite in number, being as the sand of the Sea. Reu. 20.8.
The means through which troubles do come, are many and diverse: For they
come sometimes through the means of our Children: sometimes through the means
of our servants: sometimes through the means of our friends: sometimes through
the means of our enemies: sometimes through the means of our Neighbors:
sometimes through the means of strangers: and sometimes lastly, (to omit many
other means,) through the means of our own foolish or sinful ways. The
times wherein troubles do come, are many and diverse. For sometimes they come
in the morning, sometimes at noone, sometimes in the evening, and sometimes in
the night: Sometimes in our infancy, sometimes in our childhood, sometimes in
our youth, sometimes in our middle-age, sometimes in our olde-age, sometimes in
our dotage. The sorts by which troubles do come, are many and diverse. For some
are the diseases of the body, as the gout, the stone, the collicke, the ague,
the fever, the toothach, and the like.

Some are wants of outward things, as of houses, Cattle, money, Apparel,
Diet, Friends, liberty, and the like. Some are losses of goods; as when a man
is robbed of his money, of his plate, of his clothes, of his beasts, of his
servants, of his children, and the like. Some lastly (to pass over other
sorts) are the common plagues of the world; as burnings by the fire, as
drownings by the water, as infectings by the air, as deuourings by the Sword,
as destroyings by the pestilence, as slanderings by the tongue, and the like.
The parts to which troubles do come are many and diverse. For sometimes they
come unto the soul, and sometimes to the body, and sometimes both to the soul
and body together. Likewise in the body, they come now and then unto the head:
now and then to the belly: now and then to the back: now and then to the
stomach: now and then to the arms: now and then to the thighs: now and then to
the legs: now and then to the feet: now and then to the hands: and now and
then in a word, to all the joints and members of the body together. The effects
which troubles do bring forth at their coming, are many and diverse. For
sometimes they make men merry, and sometimes again they make them sad: sometimes
they make them pray; and sometimes again they make them curse: sometimes they
make them quiet, and sometimes again they make them rage: sometimes in a word
they make them the worse, and sometimes again they make them the better. Thus
the troubles of the righteous are many. Innumerable troubles (says David) have
compassed me. Psalm. 40.12.
The Church does thus complain: They have oftentimes afflicted me from my
youth, (may Israel now say) they have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth,
but they could not prevail against me. The plowers plowed upon my back, and
made long surrowes. Psalm. 129.1.2.3.
And we must (says Paul and Barnabas) through many afflictions enter into the
kingdom of God. Acts 14.22.
(...); through many compressions or twistings together of the Greek word
(...) does import. For this cause afflictions are compared to waters, because
as one wave falls upon another, so one trouble comes after another. Psalm.
42.7.
I might make this more manifest unto you, by manifold examples out of Gods
word: as by the example of Jacob, of Joseph, of Job, and others: but at this
instant I will give you instance only in two: namely, in David and Paul, whereof
the one is in the old Testament, and the other in the new. 1. Sam. 17.34.
A lion (you know) came to David to devour him: a bear to tear him: 1. Sam.
17.41.
a giant to kill him: 1. Sam. 20. and 21.
a king to behead him: 2. sam. 15.12.
a son to vnthroan him: 2. sam. 20.10
a subject to reject him: and many 2. sam. 8.10.
out-la^dish princes to captive or conquer him. These were troubles, yea many
troubles, but yet they were not all. For besides these, you may read, how his
wives were taken by the enemies, like prisoners; 1. sam. 30.5.
how his concubines were defloured openly like whores: 2. sam. 16.22.
how his children were defiled with incest and murder, like pagans: 2. sam.
13.14.32.
how his subjects were destroyed with pestilence and famine, like beasts: 2.
sam. 21.1.24.15.
how his soldiers were up in a mutiny for to stone him, like rebels: 1. sam.
30.
how his friends were in a confederacy against him, like traitors: Psalm.
41.9. and 55.12.
lastly, how he himself was strangely handled both in body and soul, by God
himself, like a castaway. Psalm. 38.2. and 32.4.


But to leave him, and to come to Paul, in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians,
and 11. chapter, you may plainly see how many his troubles were, by his own
report, who knew them best. He had many labors and many stripes. He was often
in prison: he was near unto death many times. Of the Jews he received 5. times
40. stripes saving one. He suffered shipwreck 3. times. Night and day was he in
the deep Sea. In iournying he was often in peril of waters, in peril of
robbers, in peril of his own nation, in peril among the Gentiles, in perils
in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in peril in the sea, in perils among
false brethren. In wearines and painfulnes, in warchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides the things which are
outward, he was cumbred daily, and had the care of all churches. So that this
is a clear doctrine, that the troubles whereunto the children of God are
subject, are many and diverse.

Man suffers for his sin (says Jeremy) in the Lamentations. Lam. 39.3.
And fools (says David) by reason of their transgressions, and because of
their iniquities are afflicted. Psalm. 107.17.
You may see more of this at your leisure, in Psalm. 40.12. in Esai. 57.17. in
Lament. 1.22. and John 5.14. God does know that we are like dogs, who so
long as they are hungry, they fasten their eyes upon their master, but he no
sooner casts down a crust or a bone, but they look downward, and run after
it, little regarding him who feeds them.

So is it with us, so long as we are kept under, we look unto the Lord our
master, and have a respect to his commandments: but when we are full, and
laden with fatness, we spurn with the heel, and regard not the strong GOD of
our salvation. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
For this cause does the Lord oftentimes send a deluge upon the face of our
earthly pleasures, and throw us down into the floods of tears: that so
thereby he might extinguish the heat of unlawful desires within us, and
cleanse the corruptions of our sinful lives, and all to this end, that we
might not be condemned with the world, but might be saved at the day of
judgment: as the Apostle does well observe in his epistle to the Corinthians,
according to that which was quoted before, the first Epistle, the 11. chapter,
and the latter end of the same.

Secondly, because they have many enemies. For all the world does hate them,
and the devil and his power is wholly bent against them, and so they will
always be working one mischief or other, to overthrow them. Satan will never
be quiet, but he is compassing the earth too and fro at all times, Job. 1.7.
and goes about like a roaring lion seeking evermore whom he may devour. 1.
Pet: 5.8.


Thirdly, because they have many graces. For as God does bestow more heavenly
gifts upon them, then upon all the world besides: so he will have these gifts
of theirs to be tried, and made known unto others, for the praise of his own
Majesty who gave them. They must be beaten like spice in the mortar, that
they may smell the better all abroad. Paul must have the bufferings of Satan to
continue with him still, because he had grace sufficient to bear the same. My
grace (says God unto him) is sufficient for thee. 2. Cor. 12.9.
Surely in this respect he deals with us, as we are wont to do with our
children. The stronger they be, the more and heauyer burdens do we lay upon
them: but the weaker, the fewer, and the lighter. The more able that we be to
undergo troubles, the more will the Lord exercise us with troubles, but the
feebler that we be to bear them, the fewer shall we have.

Fourthly, because they have many blessings. For the more favors that they do
receive from the Almighty, the more are they spited at here in this wretched
world: and the more do the wicked oppose and set themselves against them, to
their utter ruin and overthrow, if it may be. Because the Lord had respect
unto Habel and to his offering, but unto Cain and his offering, he had no
regard. Cain was exceeding wroth, and his countenance fell down, and
afterward he rose up against Habel his brother, and slew him. Genes. 4.4.5.8
In like manner, because Isaac waxed mighty, and still increased, till he was
exceeding great: (for he had flocks of sheep, and herds of Cattle, and a
mighty household,) therefore the Philistims had envy at him: insomuch that the
Philistims stopped and filled up with earth, all the wells which his Fathers
servants dug in his Father Abraham's time. And Abimelech the King also said
unto him, Get thee from us, for thou art mightyer then we a great deal.
Genes. 26.13.14.


Fifthly, because they have many exercises of holy religion. For as Daniel was
troubled and cast into the lions den, because he did pray unto the Lord his
God, contrary to the edict of the king. Dan. 6.10.
And as the Apostles were apprehended and thrown into prison, because they did
preach in the Name of Christ, contrary to the charge of their governors, the
highpriests, and others, Acts 5, 18.
So all those that shall be bowed at any time, in the practice of holy
duties, and be earnest and fervent in setting forward the exercises of true
religion, they shall be sure to be assaulted with manifold troubles here amongst
the sons of men.

Finally, because they have many contentions in the world against sin for
righteousness, and against the devil for their God. For as the word of God is
in their hearts like a burning fire, shut up in their bones, which do make
them weary with forbearing, and unable for to stay. Ier. 20.9.
And as they do testify of the world, that the works thereof are evil. Job.
7.7.
So the world and the devil do rage the more against them for the same. All
were quickly up in a tumult against Paul, when he spoke against their idolatry,
and by name condemned their gods Diana. Acts. 19.25.
The Jews could not hold when Stephen laid to their charge their great
impiety, but their hearts brast for anger, and they gnashed at him with their
teeth: yea, they gave a showte with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and
ran upon him all at once, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him. Acts.
7.54.
And howsoever Herod did reverence John the Baptist, and heard him gladly, yet
at the last he did imprison him, and caused his head to be cut off, because
he told him of his faults, and said unto him; It is not lawful for thee to
have thy brothers wife. Mar. 6.18.
Thus you see the reasons why the troubles of the righteous are many. It is
because their sins are many. It is because their enemies are many. It is
because their graces are many. It is because their blessings are many. It is,
because their exercises of religion are many. It is lastly, because their
contentions against the world, the flesh, and the devil are many.

Heb: 12.2.
And therefore let us remember what our Savior does say of this matter in the
Gospel according to Saint Matthew, in these words. Blessed are you, (speaking
to his disciples) when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of
evil against you for mysake falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
Matt. 5.11.12.
And let us also often think upon that which James has in his Epistle, when
he says; My brethren, count it exceeding joy, when you fall into diverse
temptations, knowing that the trying of your faith brings forth patience;
and let patience have her Iam. 1.2.3.4.
perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire lacking nothing.

Many sorrows shall come to the wicked. Psalm. 32.10.
And according to that which is recorded in the Revelation, in these words: And
the fourth Angel powered out his vial on the Sun, and it was given unto him
to torment men with heat of fire, and men boiled in great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these plagues: and they
repented not to give him glory: And the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon
on the throane of the beast, and his kingdom waxed dark, and they gnew their
tongue with sorrow, and blasphemed the God of heaven, for their pains and for
their sores, and repented not of their works. Re. 16.8.9.10


Non poena, sed causa facit martyrem: It is not the punishment, but the cause
that does make a martyr. Some are like to Ismaell, of whom it is said, He
shall be a wild man; his hand shall be against every man, and every man's hand
against him. Gene^. 16.12
Because they trouble others, therefore they have many troubles themselves. But
if any be railed upon for the Name of Christ, they are blessed: and all those
who suffer, not as a murderer, nor as a thief, nor as an evil dooer, nor as
a busie-body, in other men's matters, but as a Christian, they are happy, and
need not to be ashamed, but may glotifie God in that behalf. 1. Pet.
4.14.15.16.
The second, is the manner of bearing their troubles. For righteous persons do
quietly undergo the same, and bless the Lord their God in the midst thereof,
saying with old Ely, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: 1.
sam. 3.18.
With valiant David, carry the Ark of GOD again into the City, if I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me
both it, and the tabernacle thereof. But if he thus say, I have no delight in
thee, behold, here am I: Let him do to me as seems good in his eyes. 2. sam.
15.25.26.
And with patient Job; Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return again: the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it: blessed be
the Name of the LORD. Job. 1.21.
But ungodly persons do break out exceedingly, and not only seek unlawful
means to help themselves in their troubles: as Saul resorted to the witch of
Endor, 1. Cor. 10.13.
and many enquire at them that have a spirit of divination, and at the
Soothsayers, which whisper end murmr, forsaking the living, to go to the
dead, and the Creator, to go to the creature: Esaias. 8.19.
But they also storm and rage now and then like madmen, and withdraw all
their trust from the Lord the fountain of all happiness, not praying unto his
Majesty for succor and help, but rather blaspheming his glorious name, with
their leaud and wicked tongues; as was observed a little before out of the
Revelations. The third and last is the end, what fruit does follow: upon their
troubles. For the godly are bettered by them, but the wicked are not. David and
other righteous men received goodness from them, as was proved before: but Saul
and other ungodly wretches remain still in their sinfulnes notwithstanding
them; yea by them they grow worse and worse, according to Paul's words, when he
says; Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. But the evil men and deceivers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived. Mi. 27.3.12.13.
Whereunto agrees that which the prophet Esaias has in these words; they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are
gone backward. Wherefore should you be smitten any more? for you fall away more
and more, the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy. Esaias. 1.4.5.
Now to conclude this point, if the cause be holy for which you suffer, if it
be for God and a good conscience, and not for your own defaults or foolishnes:
if secondly, you take your troubles quietly, and possess your souls with
patience in the midst thereof, relying only upon God, and using no unlawful
means for your help therein: if lastly you be amended and made better by such
chastisements as are laid upon you, so that now you do become more devout and
religious in the whole course of your lives then ever you were before, you may
assure your souls that your case is good, and think the better of your selves
for these your troubles, and not the worse. They must be so many pledges and
seals to you of your everlasting happiness.

Secondly, seeing the troubles of the righteous are many, righteous persons
have need of great patience, a little part or portion thereof will not serve
their turns. And therefore let all those who intend to be righteous indeed,
endeavor to the uttermost of their power, to attain to a good measure of
patience, which is like a privy coat upon the soul to save it; a marble
pillar in the house to uphold it; a strong post under the tree to stay it: a
precious balm about the head to heal it: and a two edged sword in the hand to
defend it. Doubtless Sampson never gained so much by his hair upon his head
(and yet when his hair was on his head he did always overcome, and was never
overcome) as we shall gain by patience to help us in all our troubles. For
this will be a general salve to us for all our sores, and as the lid about the
eye is made to shut and open to save the eye, so this is placed in our souls
by the Lord, to guard and keep our souls. For as a light burden borne at the
arms end, weighs heavier by much, then a burden of treble weight, if it be
borne upon the shoulders, which are made to bear. So if a man set impatience
to bear his cross, which is not fit to bear, it will start and shrink, and
let the burden fall on his head, like a broken staff, which promises to help
him over the water, and leaves him in the ditch. But if you put it to
patience, and set her to bear it, which is appointed to bear, she will
undergo it, and carry it away as nothing. For she is like the hearty spies,
that came from Canaan, and said; Surely, the Lord has delivered into our
hands all the land, for even all the inhabitants of the country, faint because
of us. Joshua. 2.2^.
Or like to Caleb, that stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go
up at once, and possess it. For undoubtedly we shall overcome it. Numb. 13.31
So patience does evermore heart us on against all troubles that may be, and
persuade our hearts that we shall overcome them well enough in the end. She
does tell us, that it is nothing to fast, nothing to watch, nothing to read,
nothing to labor, nothing to be envied, nothing to be slandered, nothing to be
buffeted, nothing to be imprisoned, nothing in a word to be racked, or to be
put to death for the Lords cause. She does assure us, that we shall be more then
conquerorstherin, according to Paul's words, in his epistle to the Romans, Romans
8.37.
Labor then I beseech you for patience, and follow the Apostles counsel in
this repect, when he says: Be patient therefore brethren unto the coming of
the Lord; Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth,
and has long patience for it, until he receive the former and latter rain.
Be ye also patient therefore, and settle your hearts, for the coming of the
Lord draws near. Iam. 5.7.8.
And surely, he that wants it, is like a man that stands trembling in the
field without his Armor, because every one can strike him, and he can strike
none again. The least push that is, of disgrace, or of loss, or of sickness,
or of poverty, or of pain, does trouble those persons more, which have not
patience to bear the same, then forty trials can move such as are armed with
patience to undergo them, like a golden shield in their hand, to break the
stroke of every cross, and to save the heart, though the body suffer. For
while the heart is whole, all is well. A sound spirit (says Solomon) will
bear his infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can sustain it? Prou. 18.44.


Lastly, considering the afflictions of the godly are many, we that are godly,
must never promise to our selves peace and quietness here, but after one
trouble, we must still look for another; saying with the Poet, Finis alterius
m^li. gradus est futuri: the end of one evil, is a step toward another. Many
do deceive themselves with vain hopes in this respect. They think that all
shall be well with them, that they shall have the Sun evermore to shine upon
them, if they can but rid themselves out of their present troubles. But let
them mark it well, it shall not be so; oh my brethren, suppose you were as
wise as Solomon; as strong as Sampson; as warlike as David; as meek as Moses;
as lovely as Jonathan; as beautiful as Absalom; as rich as Croessus; as great
as Assuerus; as swift as Asahel; as free born as Paul; as noble as Foestus; as
big as Goliath; as patient as Ioh; and as wise as Christ himself: yet you shall
have troubles still during your lives, so long as any of you shall breath with
any life. As the life of Christ your Lord and master was a warfare upon the
earth, so your lives that are Christians, must be a warfare upon the earth.
Here we live in a sea of troubles. The Sea is the world, the waves are
calamities; the Church is the ship; the anchor is hope; the sails are love;
the Saints are passingers; the haven is heaven; and Christ is our Pilot.

Now when the Sea can continue without waves, the ship without tossings, and
passengers not be sick upon the water, then shall the Church of God be without
trial, but not before. Therefore I beseech you, beloved in the Lord, promise
your selves no security in this world, but look still for troubles: and when
you have slain a lion, look for a bear: and when you have killed the bear,
look for a Goliath: and when you have overcome Goliath, look for a Saul: and
when Saul is wounded to death, look for the Philistims: that is, when you have
overcome one trouble, or vanquished one enemy, look still for an other
trouble, and for an other enemy, and that until you die, and the spirit
return to God that gave it.

for all that, his whole life here upon the earth, was nothing else but a
continual cross. And therefore let this be our daily meditation, that when we
have borne one trouble, we do prepare our hearts to bear an other, and
evermore to look for new troubles, so long as we live here in this world, like
new men. And so I leave the misery of the righteous, and come to his
deliverance from his misery, But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

Here are two points to be stood upon. The person, who does deliver the
righteous, and the thing, from which the righteous is delivered. But because
the time is well near spent, and Idfrustra fit, per plura, quod fieri potest
per pauciora, That is done in vain by more things, which fewer to perfection
brings; I will conioyne them both together, and from thence deliver unto you
this doctrine, JEHOVAH
that there is no trouble which the righteous have, but the Lord does deliver
them out of the same. This you may see by Ieremies words, when he says: For
the Lord will not forsake for ever, but though he send affliction, yet will he
have compassion, according to the multitudes of his mercies: o Lord thou have
maintained the cause of my soul: and have redeemed my life. Iam. 3.31.32.58.
This you may see by Esayes words, when he says, I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth. I have seen his ways, and will hear him. I
will lead him also, and restore comfort unto him, and to those that lament
him. I create the fruits of the lips to be peace: peace unto them that are a
far off, and to them that are near (says the Lord) for I will heal him.
Esai. 57.16.


This you may see by David's words, when he says, Behold his eye is upon them
that fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls
from death, and to preserve them in famine. Psalm. 33.18.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles. Psalm. 34.6.
The Lord preserves the simple, I was in miscrie, and he saved me. Return
unto thy rest o my soul, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee: because
thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet
from falling, I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Psalm.
116.6.
The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, and lifts up all that are ready to fall.
The Lord is near to all that call upon him: yea, to all that call upon him in
Truth: he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. He also will will
hear their cry and save them. The Lord preserves all that love him. psalm.
145, 14.18.


Then they cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from
their distress, and led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a
City of habitation. psalm. 107.6.7.
This you may see by Paul's words, when he says: But thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of living, purpose, faith, long suffering, love, patience,
persecutions, and afflictions, which came unto me at Antiochia, at Iconium, and
at Lystra, which persecutions I suffered, but from them all the Lord delivered
me. 2 Timothy 3:10.11.


Finally, this you may see by many particular examples, Abraham was in exile:
Lot was in captivity: Job was in bodily extremity: See more for this in my
Sermons on the second psalm page. 24.
Joseph was in prison: Moses was in the water: Jeremy was in the dungion:
Dauiel was in the Lions den: Jonah was in the whales belly: Mordecay was in
the power of Hamon: Peter was in the Gaile: the three children were in the
burning furnace: and Israel was in the bondage of Aegipt: yet all these were
delivered, and came out of their troubles, every one of them. So that we may
conclude this point with the saying of David, in these words: For the Lord
loves judgment, and forsakes not his saints, they shall be preserved for
evermore: mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man
is peace; the salvation of the righteous men shall be of the Lord, he shall be
their strength in the time of trouble, for the Lord shall help them, and
deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked, and shall save them,
because they trust in him.

psalm. 37.28.37.39.40.
that the righteous are not always delivered out of their troubles, but do
now and then continue in them still, and do rather miscarry by them, then ever
come out from them, considering that they die and perish through them.

Psalm, He sent a man before them. Joseph was sold for a slave: They held his
feet in the stocks, and he was laid in irons until his appointed time came,
and the counsel of the Lord had tried him. psalm. 105.17.
The second is, that small and short troubles will not amend some, and fit them
well, either for the worship of their God, while they be here, or for their
own actual entrance into the kingdom of heaven hereafter, they are so
seated in their sins, and so double died in their transgressions. And
therefore the Lord is compelled as it were, for his own glory, and their
good, to continue them still in their afflictions, until he has renewed them,
and made them tractable to his voice. Read more of this in my 1. sermon upon
the second psalm,
The third and the last is, that these that end their lives by their troubles,
are most of al delivered from their troubles, because then they are no more
molested with any trouble, but presently do enter into their joy of rest, as
John does show, saying; Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord, even so
says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them. 1. Cor. 14.13.


Because he has loved me, therefore will I deliver him, I will exalt him
because he has known my Name, he shall call upon me and I will hear him. I
will be with him in trouble, and I will deliver him, and glorify him with long
life: I will satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Psalm. 91, 14
The second is, because he does love them, and is bound unto them by his
promise; according to that which is in Deuteronomie, in these words: The Lord
did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in number
then any people: for you were the fewest of all people. But because the Lord
loved you, and because he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto your
Fathers, the Lord has brought you out by a mighty hand, and delivered you out
of the house of bondage, from the hand of Pharach king of Aegipt. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8


The third is, because he is touched with their grieuances, and all their
troubles do trouble him, according to that which is in Esaias, in these words:
In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angel of his presence saved
them, in his love and in his mercy, he redeemed them, and he bore them, and
carried them always continually. Esaias, (...). 9
Hereunto add that whith is in Judges; His soul was grieved for the misery
of Israel. Judge(...).
The fourth and last is, because he has glory and honor by their deliverance,
according to that which is in Ezechiel, in these words: But I favored mine
holy Name, which the house of Israel had polluted among the heathen, whither
they went. Therefore say unto the house of Israel. Thus says the Lord God, I
do not this for your sakes, o house of Israel, but for my holy names sake,
which you polluted among the heathen, whither you went. And I will sanctify my
great name, which was polluted among the heathen, whom you have polluted, and
the heathen shall know that I am the Lord; says the Lord God, when I shall be
sanctified in you before their eyes, for I will take you from among the
heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you ^^ 16.22.
into your own land. Hereunto you may well join that which is in Esaias, where
he says: For my Names sake will I defer my wrath, and for my praise will I
refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not off. Behold I have fined thee, but
not as silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of afflictions: for mine own
sake, for mine own sake will I do it; for how should my name be polluted?
surely I will not give my glory unto another. Esa. 48.9.10.11
So that his love, his promise, his feeling, and his glory, together with their
love and goodness, do stir God up to help the righteous, and to deliver them
out of all their troubles. The consideration whereof may afford unto us
plentiful observations.

Moses did: Exodus 15.1.
as Deborah did: Judge. 5.1.
as Samuel did: 1. Sam. 12.8.
as David did: Psalm. 12.4.
as Iehosophat did: 2. Chro. 20.26.
as Daniel did: Dan. 6.22.
as Paul did: 2. Tim. 3.11.
and as all must do, Psalm. 107.16.
Praised be the Lord, said David, even the God of our salvation, which leads
us daily with benefits, this is our God, even the God that saves us, and to
the Lord God belong the issues of death. Again he says, praise ye the Lord,
for his mercy endures for ever. Let them which have been redeemed of the
Lord, show how he has delivered them from the hand of the oppressor, and
gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West, from the
North, Psalm. 6.68.19.
and from the South. And he does often repeat this saying in the same Psalm:
Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men. That is ever true, which is in
Hoseah, where the Lord does say; O Israel, one has destroyed thee: but in me
is thy help. Hds: 13.9.
For this cause I beseech you (beloved brethren) let none of us sacrifice unto
our own net, or burn incense unto our own yarne, but whenever any of us
are delivered out of any danger or distress, let us blessed the Name of the
Lord our God for the same, and put that in practice, which is required of us by
the prophet David, when he says; Ye sons of the mighty, give unto the Lord
glory and strength give unto the Lord glory due unto his Name, worship the
Lord in his glorious Sanctuary. Psalm. 29.1.2.


The second is, that in all troubles the righteous must run to God, they must
seek him out, and labor to have his favor and assistance. They must not
look unto themselves, or rest upon their own strength: for they are weak,
and unable for to help themselves. That which Christ said in one sense, is
true in this. Without me ye can do nothing. Ioh. 15.5.
Neither must they look to man, for all the world is against them. Ioh. 15.19.
But they must look to the Lord their God, saying with Israel, Come, and let
us return unto the Lord; For he has spoiled, and he will heal us: he has
wounded us, and he will bind us up: after two days will he revive us, and in
the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Hos: 6.1.2.
Saying with Iehoshaphat, when the Moabites, Ammonites, and the Idumeans of
Mount-Seir came to battle against him; O our God will thou not judge them? For
there is no strength in us to stand before this great multitude that comes
against us: neither do we know what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2.
Chron. 2.20.
Saying with David, Have mercy upon me o GOD, have mercy upon me, for my
soul trusts in thee, and in the shadow of thy wings will I trust, till
these afflictions ouerpasse, I will call upon the most high GOD, even to the
God that performs his promise toward me: He will send from heaven and save
mo from the reproof of him that would swallow me. Selah, God will send his
mercy and truth. Psalm. 57.10.
Saying with Asa, when the Aethyopians came against him with an Host of ten
hundred thousand, and three hundred charrets; Lord it is nothing with thee to
help with many, or with no power: help us, o Lord our God: for we rest on
thee, and in thy Name, are we come against this multitude, O Lord thou art our
God, let not man prevail against thee. 2. Chro. 14.11.
Saying with Herechia: O lord God of Israel, which dwell between the
Cherubims, thou art very God alone, over all the kingdoms of the earth: Lord
bow down thine ear and hear: Lord open thine eyes, and behold and hear the
words of Sanacherib, who has sent to blaspheme the living God. Now therefore,
o Lord our God, I beseech thee save thou us out of his hand, that all the
kingdoms of the earth may know that thou o Lord art only God. 2. King.
19.10.16.19.
Saying lastly, with the godly in the psalm, I lift up mine eyes to thee that
dwell in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of
their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: So
our eyes wait upon the lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. Psalm:
123.1.2.
O my brethren, there is much gadding abroad, but I beseech you let us not
wander, as others do therein. We must not with Pharaoh, rely upon enchaunters:
We must not with Saul rely upon witches: we must not with Asa rely upon
physicians: we must not with Israel rely upon the Aegiptians: we must not with
Iezabel rely upon Idols: we must not with papists rely upon the dead, or
canonized saints: we must not with the worldling, rely upon the wedge of
gold, or earthly wealth: we must not in a word with Goliath, rely upon our own
strength or power: But we must rely upon the Lord our God. We I say, who are
professors, who are Christians, who are the visible members of the Church, who
are the true children of God, Gol.
even all we, I say must rely only upon the Lord our God, whatsoever others
do besides. Sother. Ereptor.
Surely he only must be our Goel; our Soter; our Ereptor; that is, our
Redeemer: our Savior: our deliverer. He must be our strength, our refuge,
our shield, our rock, our fortress, and the horn of our salvation. As David
does speak in the 18. Psalm, and 2. verse. And therefore I pray, let us do
evermore as that good man did, who said: Whom have I in heaven but thee? and I
have desired none in the earth with thee. My flesh fails, and mine heart also
but God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever. For lo they
that withdraw themselves from thee shall perish: thou destroyest all them that
go a whoring from thee. As for me, it is good for me to draw near to God.
Therefore I have put my trust in the Lord, that I may declare all thy works.
Psalm. 73.24.


The third is a comfort unto the righteous against all their troubels. Rejoice
o daughter Zion (says Zophonie) be ye joyful, o Israel; be glad and rejoice
with all thine heart, o daughter Jerusalem. The Lord has taken away thy
judgments: he has cast out thine enemy, the king of Israel, even the Lord is
in the midst of thee, thou shall see no more evil: Zeph. 3.14.
Fear not (said God unto Israel his people) for I am with thee, be not
afraid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, and help thee, and will
sustain thee with the right hand of my justice. Behold all they that provoke
thee, shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that
strive with thee shall perish. Esa. 41.10.
Doubtless as David gave charge unto the soldiers, that they should not kill
Absalom his son, though he sent them against Absalom to stay his rebellion:
so God does command crosses not to destroy his children, though he send them
against his children, either to correct them, or to try them. And therefore as
the viper lept upon Paul, and lept of again, so troubles leap upon the
righteous and leaps off again, as though they had mistaken the party, and
rapt at the wrong door. Look then how all the accusers went out, one by one,
beginning at the eldest, even to the last, and left the poor adultresse woman
alone only with Christ, there being not so much as any one left behind,
either to condemn her, or to stone her with stones: John. 8.9.
So do all troubles vanish away from the righteous, one by one, and leave
them, safe and alone without one, either to vex them, or to destroy them with
destructions. For be it, that the lawier cannot deliver his client but from his
strife: the Physician his patient but from his sickness: the master his servant
but from his bondage: the father his child but from his poverty: the tutor his
scholar but from his ignorance: the captain his soldier but from his wounds:
yet God can and will also deliver his from all their troubles whatsoever. And
howsoever these their troubles do come in a thousand ways, like waters
through many grates, yet he can and will also meet with them all. For he can
work, and does also often work, by means, without means: and contrary to
all means.

By means, yea by weak means, he saved Israel, when he overthrew the
innumerable army of the Midianites by Gedeons three hundred men. Judge. 9.7.
By means, yea by weak means, he saved Saul and his people, when he slew a
garrison of the philistines by Jonathan, and his armorbearer. 1. Cor. 14.
By means, yea by weak means, he saved Lot, when he conquered Chadorlaomor,
and three other kings with him, by Abraham and his family. Genes. 14.
Lastly by means, yea by weak means, he saved the nation of the Jews, when
he destroyed Goliath by David. Sisera by Iael, and Abimilech by a woman. 1. Sam.
17. Iud. 4. and 9.


Without means he saved Iehosophat and his people, when he himself did
overthrow the Moabites, the Ammonites, and them of mount Seir, which made war
against them. 2. Chron. 20.
Without means he saved Moses and his people, when he himself drowned Pharaoh
and his army in the red sea, pursuing after them: without means he saved
Ezechiah and his people, Exodus 14.
when he himself slew the huge army of the Assirians, who came with a purpose
to destroy them. 2. King. 17.
Lastly, without means he saved Elisha, and his man, when he himself smote
with blindness the Syrians, who besieged Dothan, the city where the prophet was,
and came to take him. 2. King. 6.


Contrary to all means, he saved the three children from burning, being in
the fire. Dan. 3.
Contrary to all means, he saved Jonah from consuming, being in the Whales
belly. Ion^^ 2.
Contrary to all means, he saved Daniel from devouring, being in the Lions
den. Dan. 6.
Finally, contrary to all means, be saved the Isralites from drowning, being
in the bottom of the sea. Ezod. 14.
Wherefore my beloved brethren, faint not whatsoever your troubles be, but be
of a good comfort, and cheer up your hearts in the Lord, and doubt nothing, but
all shall be well with you in the end. Oh say with David, when your hearts are
disquieted, Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, he is my present help
and my God. Psalm. 42.11.
Doubtless he will come, he will come, wait but a little, and you shall see
your deliverance. And so I conclude this worthy observation with the prophets
needful exhortation, in these words: Hope in the Lord, be strong, and he shall
comfort thine heart, and trust in the Lord. Psalm. 27.14.


The fourth and last, is an Instruction to the world, to warn them in their
evil courses, that they go not about to trouble the righteous, and to
qualify them in their joyful mirth, that they do not exult too much in the
misery of the righteous. For seeing that the Lord will deliver the righteous
out of all their troubles, it is a great folly for the world to go about to
trouble them, and a greater vanity in them to rejoice at their troubles, as
though they should continue ever in their troubles, and never see an end of
their troubles. Here, here, let the wicked remember what is in Zophonie, when
the Lord says, After a certain time will I gather the afflicted, that were of
thee, and them that bear the reproach for it: behold at that time I will
bruise all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth, and gather her
that was cast out, and I will give them praise, and fame in all the lands, of
their shame. Zoph. 3.18.19
Here, here, let the wicked remember what is in Esaias, where the almighty says:
But thus says the Lord, even the captivity of the mighty shall be taken away,
and the prey of the tyrant shall be delivered, for I will contend with him that
contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children: And will feed them that
spoil thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own
blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know, that I the Lord am thy
savior and thy redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. Esai. 49.25.26
Here, here, let the wicked remember what is in the Proverbs, when Solomon
says, The righteous escapes out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his
fleede. Pro. 11 8.
Again, the wicked shall be a ransom for the just, and the transgressor for
the righteous. Prou. 21.18.
Here, here, lastly, let the wicked remember what is in Micha, when the prophet
says, Rejoice not against me, o mine enemy; though I fall, I shall arise when
I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, I will bear the
wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause,
and execute judgment for me. Then will he bring me forth to the light, and I
shall see his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy, shall look upon it,
and shame shall cover her, which said unto me, where is the Lord thy God? mine
eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the
streets. Mic. 7.8.9.10.
Hitherto you have had, well-beloved in the Lord, such things only, as concerned
my text, and which in a general manner flowed out of the same for the good of
us all. But now I pray give me leave in a few words to make some particular
application thereof unto that honorable and most worthy person, our most high
and mighty king, for whose sake we are here this day assembled together. You
are not ignorant how his troubles have been many: neither are you ignorant how
his deliverances also have been many. Out of all doubt, that which David does
here say, his Majesty may truly say: Many are the troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord does deliver him out of the^ all. For he has had good experience
of the^ both in his own person. But not to speak of al, but only of one thing
amongst them all: You know, that as upon this day heretofore in Scotland, his
Highness was near unto his death, but the Lord did deliver him from that his
death. Alexander Ruthwen, one of the Gowryes, the Earls own brother, through a
wicked train, drew his Ma: into a little study, in the Earls own house, the
plotter of that treason: to the which none could come for his rescue, it was so
far remote, and so many doors were fast locked betwixt them. In that study he
had set a man with a weapon, a dagger at his girdle. They three only being now
in the studdy, and the studdy-doore fast locked upon them, Alexander put on his
hat on his head, and drawing the dagger from that other man's gyrdle, held the
point of it to the Kings breast, avowing now that the King behooued to be in
his will, and to be used as he list, swearing many bloody oaths, that if the
King cried one word, or opened a window to look out, that dagger should
presently go to his heart, affirming that he was sure, that now the Kings
conscience was burdned for murdring his father.

Behold, here was one part of his highness trouble. Now mark how the Lord did
deliver him from the same. First, he made the man there set, to do nothing but
to tremble and quake, and to beg Alexander (for Gods sake) not to meddle with
his Majesty, nor to do him any harm. Secondly he stayde Alexander, that he
thrust not at all at the King with his weapon. Thirdly he put into the K: mouth
such an holy and powerful speech, and directed his tongue, with such a
perswasiue language, that Alex: himself appeared to be somewhat amazed, and
uncovering his head again, swore and protested, that his Majesty's life should
be safe, if he would behave himself quietly without making noise or crying:
and that he would only bring in the Earl his brother, to speak with his
Majesty. And so he went forth unto his brother, looking the door behind him,
and leaving his Ma: with that man he sound there before him. To proceed, back
again comes Alex: to the King, with a sword at his side, after that he had
talked with the earl his brother; and at his incomming to his Majesty, he did
cast his hands abroad in a desperate manner, and said, he could not mend it,
his Majesty behooved to dye: And with that, offered a garter to bind his
Majesty's hands, with swearing, he behooued to be bound.

Behold, here was an other part of his highness trouble, now mark how the Lord
did deliver him from the same. First, he caused the man that remained with the
King, to do nothing against the King, as before, but in the absence of
Alexander, when he went to talk with his brother, He opened the studdy-window
at the request of the K: which was a benefit unto the King. Secondly, he did
so besotte Alexander, that he left the studdy door unlocked, at his coming in
at this time for haste, and did not go about to kill the King with his weapon,
but to bind him with his garter. Thirdly, he gave that strength and ability to
the King, that he was hard enough for Alexander, and with struggling drew him
out of the studdy. Fourthly, he directed the Kings train to come under the
studdy window, at the same time, when the King and Alexander were griping
together, who heard and knew the Kings voice, crying out, that they were
murdering him, in that trasonable form. Fifthly, he moved the said K: train
to retire, and in returning, he caused some of them to hit upon an open way
(which was a turn-peck-doore, provided only for the Earl and his servants, as
appeared for that purpose. For ever before it was wont to be shut, and was
only then left open) to come immediately to the King. Lastly, he caused Sir
John Ramsey (after he was entered into the chamber, and had found his May: and
Alexander struggling together) to strike Alex: with his dagger, some two or
three times: and taking him by the shoulders, to throw him down the stairs:
who was no sooner shut out at the door, but was met by Sir Thomas Erskin, and
Sir Hugh Hereis, who there upon the stairs ended him. To conclude this point,
no sooner could the said Sir Thomas Erskine, and Sir Hugh Hereis with an other
servant enter into the chamber where his Majesty was, but that the said Earl
of Gowrie (before they could get the door shut) followed them in at the back,
having cast him directly to come up that privy passage, as is before said,
who at his first entry, having a drawn sword in every hand, and a steel
bonnet on his head, accompanied with seven of his servants, every one of them
having in like manner, a drawn sword, Cried out with a great Oath, that they
should all dye as Traitors.

Behold here was an other part of his highness trouble: now mark how the Lord
did deliver him from the same. First he moved the hearts of his servants to shut
his majesty back into the little study, and the doord shut upon him, that so
he might be put in safely from all strokes. Secondly he gave them that courage
and strength, that though they were but four against eight, yet they durst
encounter with the earl and his servants, and after many strokes on all hands
got the victory of them, the said Earl of Gowrie being stricken dead with a
stroke through the heart, which the said Sir John Ramsey gave him, without
once crying upon God, and the rest of his servants dung over the stairs with
many hurts. So let all thine enemies perish o Lord; but they that love him
shall be as the sun, when he rises in his might.

The victory thus going on his majesty's side, he being now safe, and his
enemies being destroyed before him, (howsoever they were many, even to the
number of some three or four score, and his company was but small, not above
fifteen persons in all, who also were without any kind of armor, except
swords, no not so much as daggers and whingers) down he falls upon his knees
in the midst of his servants, who also kneeled round about him, even
immediately before he came out of the chamber, and with his own mouth he
thanked God for that miraculous deliverance and victory: assuring himself,
that God had preserved him from so desperate a peril, for the perfitting of
some great work behind to his glory, and for procuring by him the weal of
his people, that God had committed to his charge. The which being done, and the
whole town of Saint John Stone being appeased, his majesty returned home, with
the great joy, and love of all sorts of persons throughout the land, who
triumphed exceedingly for his deliverance, and gave manifold thanks unto the
Lord for the same. Wherein my beloved brethren, let us labor to parallel them,
and strive rather therein to go beyond them, then in any sort to come behind
them. O let us pray daily unto the Lord for him, and upon our knees give him
most hearty thanks every day, because we do enjoy him. Gracious God, we beseech
thee, cover him evermore under the shadow of thy hand, make him a chosen
shaft, and hide him still in thy quiver. Let him rejoice ever in thy strength
and in thy salvation, give him, o give him, his hearts desire, and deny him not
the request of his lips, prevent him with ^iberall blessings, and set still a
crown of pure gold upon his head. Give the nations before him, subdue the kings
that rise up against him, give them as dust to his sword, and as scattered
stuble to his bow. Let judgment also run down in his days, as waters, and
righteousness, as a mighty river; yea let him feed his people according to the
simplicity of his heart, and guide them by the discretion of his hands. Thus o
Lord, thus o Lord, let it be done unto him, that so he may reign here with us
many years prosperously, and with thy self in the heavens for ever
triumphantly, to thy glory, and his everlasting happiness. Amon, Amen.

But now to end all, and to speak a word or two unto you all by way of
application, who are now my present Auditory. I beseech you (my beloved
brethren) remember what now has been delivered unto you. Though troubles fall
upon you, yet shrink not, but stand fast, and quiet your selves like men.
There be many I confess in the world (I will not say amongst you) who fain
would have a Church (as it were) of sugar, and a spouse of Roses. They would
feed upon Manna, and tread upon velvet. In serving of God, they would be
served themselves, and be made free from all afflictions. They love Canaan, but
they loath the wilderness. They like the crown, but they love not the cross.
They are like James and John, who sought to sit in the seat of honor, but not
to drink of the cup of afflictions. But the truth is, as you have heard, and
you must believe it, The way to heaven is no easy way, it is not strewed with
flowers, but it is a sharp way, it is set with thorns: and happily in your
own experience you shall find that to be true, which the Prophet does here say:
Many are the troubles of the righteous. Yet be not discouraged at it. For
first, though your troubles be many, yet you are able for to bear them. The^e
is no more laid upon you, then you can carry. God is like a wise Physician in
this case, who does weigh his Drugs, and fit them according to our strength.
We are afflicted on every side (says Paul) yet are not in distress: in
poverty, but not overcome of poverty: we are persecuted, but not forsaken:
cast down, but we perish not. 1. Cor. 4 8.
Secondly, though they be many, yet sometimes you are alone without them. As you
have a time of fasting, so have you a time of feasting: as you have a time of
mourning, so have you a time of laughing: as you have of sickness, so have you a
time of health: as you have a time of shame, so have you a time of praise: in a
word, as you have a time of misery, so have you a time of felicity. Thirdly,
though they be many, yet they do not hurt you, but rather do you good: you
come forth better often from them, then ever you went into them. Consider with
your selves how they set your wits to study, your conscience to examine, your
memory to repeat, your will to affect, your heart to pray, your tongue to
entreat, your ear to hearken, your foot to go, your hand to work, and every
member to do his duty. Call to mind also, how they do cause you to seek
knowledge, to understand Gods promises, to seek Faith, to apprehend Gods
promises, to seek Hope, to wait for the performance of Gods promises, to
seek lastly Prayer, to hasten God to accomplish his promises. Fourthly, though
they be many, yet you have deserved them: yea, more the^ that, you have
deserved more then them. GOD has not dealt with us (says David) after our
sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Psalm. 103.10.
Fifthly, though they be many, yet you are not alone in them, but others are
conjoined with you, in the partaking of them: yea, men and women, I doubt not
in your own judgment, better then your selves; as you may see in Matthew:
chapt. 5.12. and in Peter, 1. Pet: 4.12.13. Lastly, though they be many, yet
you shall not continue still in them, but come forth in time convenient from
them, according to the latter part of my Text, But the LORD does deliver him
out of them all. Mark the word well, Out of them all. We startle at the cross
often, because we are like the Prophets servant, who did see his foes, but not
his friends. We see our sore, but not our salve. Deliverance seems a far off
like Abraham in the Heavens, as though it would never come so long as we be.
But let us know, and ever remember for our comfort, that the Lord will come,
and deliver us: And as Moses would leave no hoof behind him, when he was to
deliver the Israelites out of Aegipt: so when the Lord comes to deliver us:
who are his, he will not leave a trouble behind him, but rid us out of al our
troubles. Comfort your selves, oh comfort your selves, I beseech you, with
these sayings; And the God of all grace be ever with you all, to instruct you,
to direct you, to defend you, to redeem you, to comfort you, to enrich you:
and in a word, to bless and to save you, through JESUS CHRIST our SAVIOVR; to
whom with the FATHER, and the HOLYGHOST, one Eternal GOD, and three distinct
persons, be rendered, as is most due, all honor, all glory, all praise, all
power, all dominion, and all thanksgiving, both now and evermore. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

