THE TRAGEDY OF THE DVTCHESSE Of Malfy. As it was Presented privately, at the
Blackfriars; and publicly at the Globe, By the Kings Majesty's Servants. The
perfect and exact Copy, with diverse things Primed, that the length of the
Play would not bear in the Presentment.

Written by John Webster.

Hora. -- Si quid --
-- Candidus Imperti si non his vtere mecum.
LONDON: Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, (...) JOHN WATERSON, and are to be sold
(...) the sign of the Crown, in Paul's Church yard, 1623.

The Actors Names.
Bosola, I. Lowin. Ferdinand, 1 R. Burbidge. 2 I. Tailor. Cardinal, 1 H.
Cundaile. 2 R Robinson. Antonio, 1 W Ostler. 2 R. Benfeild. Delio, I.
Underwood. Forobosco, N. Towley. Malateste. The Marquess of Pescara, I. Rice.
Siluio, T. Pollard. The several mad men, N. Towley. I. Underwood, etc. The
Duchess, R. Sharp. The Cardinals Mis. I. Tomson. The Doctor, R Pallant.
Cariola, R Pallant. Court Officers. R Pallant. Three young Children. Two
Pilgrims.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE HARDING, Baron Barkeley of Barkeley Castle and
Knight of the Order of the Bat^e To the Illustrious Prince CHARLES.
My Noble Lord,
THAT I may present my excuse^ why, (being a stranger to your Lordshippe) I
offer this Poem to your Patronage, I plead this warrant; Men (who never sa^ the
Sea, yet desire to behold that regiment of waters,) choose some eminent River,
to guide them thither; and make that as it were, their Conduct, or Postilion:
By the like ingenious means, has your fame arrived at my knowledge, receiving
it from some of worth, who both in contemplation, and practice, owe to your
Honor their clearest service. I do not altogether look up at your Title: The
ancien'st Nobility, being but a rellique of time past, and the truest Honor
indeed being for a man to confer Honor on himself, which your Learning
strives to propagate, and shall make you arrive at the Dignity of a great
Example. I am confident this work is not unworthy your Honors perusal for by
such Poems as this, Poets have kissed the hands of Great Princes, and drawn
their gentle eyes to look down upon their sheets of paper, when the Poets
themselves were bound up in their winding-sheetes. The like courtesy from your
Lordship, shall make you live in your grave, and laurel spring out of it when
the ignorant scorners of the Muses (that like worms in Libraries, seem to
live only, to destroy learning) shall wither, neglected, and forgotten. This
work and my self I humbly present to your approved censure. It being the
utmost of my wishes, to have your Honorable self my weighty and perspicuous
Comment: which grace so done me, shall ever be acknowledged

By your Lordships in all duty and Observance, John Webster.

In the just VVorth, of that well Deseruer, Mr. JOHN WEBSTER, and Upon this
Maister-peece of Tragoedy.
IN this Thou imitat'st one Rich, and Wise,
That sees His Good Deeds done before he dies;
As He by Works, Thou by this Work of Fame,
Have well provided for thy Living Name;
To trust to others Honorings, is Worth's Crime,
Thy Monument is raised in thy Life Time;
And it is most just; for every Worthy Man
Is his own Marble; and his Merit can
Cut Him to any Figure, and express
More Art, then Deaths Cathedral Palaces,
Where Royal Ashes keep their Court: thy Note
Be ever Plainnes, it is the Richest Coat:
Thy Epitaph only the Title he,
Write, Duchess, that will fetch a tear for thee,
For who e're saw this Duchess live, and dye,
That could get off under a Bleeding Eye.
In Tragaediam.
Vt Lux ex Tenebris ictu percussa TONANTIS;
Illa, (Ruina Malis) claris fit Vita Poetis.
Thomas Middletonus, Poeta and Chron: Londinensis.

To his friend Mr. John Webster Upon his Duchess of Malfy.
I Never saw thy Duchess, till the day,
That She was lively body'd in thy Play;
How'ere she answered her low rated Love,
Her brothers anger, did so far all prove,
Yet my opinion is, she might spe^ke more;
But (never in her life) so well before.
WILL: ROVVLEY.

To the Reader of the Author, and his Duchess of Malfy.
Crown Hi^^ a Poet, whom no^ Rome, nor Greece,
Transcend in all their's, for a Masterpiece:
In which, whiles words and matter change, and Men,
Act one another; He, from whose clear Pen.
They All took life, To Memory has lent
A l^sting Fame, to raise hi^ Monument.
JOHN FORD.

Actus Primus.
Scena Prima.
Antonio, and Delio, Bosola, Cardinali. Delio. YOU are wel-come to your Country
(dear A^toni^)
You have bin long in France, and you return
A very formal Frenchman, in your habit.
How do you like the French Court?

Ant. I admire it,
In seeking to reduce both State, and People
To a fixed Order, there iuditious King
Begins at home: Quits first his Royal Palace
Of flattring Sicophants of dissolute,
And infamous persons which he sweetly terms
His Masters Masterpiece (the work of Heaven)
Considring duly, that a Princes Court
Is like a common Fountain, whence should flow,
Pure siluer-droppes ingenerall: But if 't chance
Some cursed example poyson't near the head,
"Death, and diseases through the whole land spread.
And what is it makes this blessed government,
But a most provident Council, who dare freely
Inform him, the corruption of the times?
Though some oth'Court hold it presumption*
To instruct Princes what they ought to do,
It is a noble duty to inform them
What they ought to foresee: Here comes Bosola
The only Court-Gall: yet I observe his railing
Is not for simple love of Piety:
Indeed he rayles at those things which he wants,
Would be as leacherous, covetous, or proud,
Bloody, or envious, as any man,
If he had means to be so: Here Is the Cardinal.

Bos. I do haunt you still.

Car. So.

Bos. I have done you
Better service then to be slighted thus:
Miserable age, where only the reward
Of doing well, is the doing of it.

Car. You enforce your merit to-much.

Bos. I fell into the Galli^s in your service,
Where, for two years together, I wore two Towells in stead of
A shirt, with a knot on the shoulder, after the fashion of a
Roman Mantle: Slighted thus? I will thrive some way:
Black-birds fatten best in hard weather: why not I,
In these dog days?

Car. Would you could become honest,

Bos. With all your divinity, do but direct me the way to it, I
Have known many travel far for it, and yet return as
Arrant knaves, as they went forth; because they carried
Themselves always a long with them; Are you gone?
Some fellows (they say) are possessed with the devil,
But this great fellow, were able to possess the greatest
Devil, and make him worse.

Ant. He has denied thee some suit?

Bos. He, and his brother, are like Plum-trees (that grow crooked
Over standing-pooles) they are rich, and ore-laden with
Fruit, but none but Crows, Pyes, and Catter-pillers feed
On them: Could I be one of their flattring Panders, I
Would hang on their ears like a horse-leach, till I were full, an
Then drop off: I pray leave me.
Who would rely upon these miserable dependances, in expectation to
Be advanced to morrow? what creature, ever fed worse, then hoping
Tantalus? nor ever did any man more fearfully, then he that hoped
For a pleadon: There are rewards for hawks, and dogs, and
When they have done us service; but for a Soldier, that hazards his
Limbs in a battle, nothing but a kind of Geometry, is his last Supportation.

Del. Geometry?

Bos. I, to hang in a fair pair of slings, take his latter-swinge in the
World, upon an honorable pare of Crowtches, from hospital
To hospital, fare ye well Sir. And yet do not you scorn us, for
Places in the Court, are but likes beds in the hospital, where this
Man's head lies at that man's foot, and so lower, and lower.

Del. I knew this fellow (seven years) in the Galleys,
For a notorious murder, and 'twas thought
The Cardinal suborned it: he was released
By the French General (Gaston de Foux)
When he recouer'd Naples.

Ant. It Is great pity
He should be thus neglected, I have heard
He Is very valiant: This foul mellancholly
Will poison all his goodness, for (i will tell you)
If too immoderate sleep, be truly said
To be an inward rust unto the soul;
It then does follow want of action
Breeds all black malcontents, and their close rearing
(Like mothes in cloth) do hurt for want of wearing.

SCENA II.
Antonio, Delio, Ferdinand, Cardinal, Duchess, Castruchio, Siluio, Rod^cico,
Grisolan, Bosola, Iulia, Cariola. Del. The Presence 'gins to fill, you promised
me
To make me the partaker of the natures
Of some of your great Courtiers.

Ant. The Lord Cardinals
And other strangers, that are now in Court,
I Shall: here comes the great Calabrian Duke.

Ferd. Who took the Ring oftnest?

Sil. Antonia Bologna (my Lord)

Ferd. Our Sister Duchess great Master of her household?
Give him the Jewel: when shall we leave this sportiue-action,
And fall to action indeed?

Cast. Me thinks (my Lord)
You should not desire to go to war, in person.

Fer. Now, for some gravity: why (my Lord?)

Cast. It is fitting a Soldier arise to be a Prince, but not necessary
A Prince descend to be a Captain?

Ferd. Noe?

Cast. No, (my Lord)
He were far better do it by a Deputy.

Ferd. Why should he not as well sleep, or eat, by a Deputy?
This might take idle, offensive, and base office from him,
Whereas the other depriues him of honor.

Cast. Believe my experience: that Realm is never long in quiet,
Where the Ruler, is a Soldier.

Ferd. Thou toldst me
Thy wife could not endure fighting.

Cast. True (my Lord.)

Fred. And of a jest, she broke of a Captain;
She met, full of wounds: I have forgot it.

Cast. She told him (my Lord) he was a pitiful fellow, to lie,
Like the Children of Ismael all in Tents.

Ferd. Why, there is a wit were able to undo
All the Chyrurgeons of the City, for although
Gallants should quarrel, and had drawn their weapons,
And were ready to go to it; yet her persuasions would
Make them put up.

Cast. That she would (my Lord)
How do you like my Spanish Gennit?

Rod. He is all fire.

Ferd. I am of Plin^y's opinion, I think he was begot by the wind,
He runs, as if he were ballass'd with Quicksilver.

Sil. True (my Lord) he ro^les from the Tilt-often.

Rod. Gris. Ha, ha, ha.

Ferd. Why do you laugh? Me thinks you that are Courtiers
Should be my touch-wood, take fire, when I give fire;
That is, laugh when I laugh, were the subject never so wity,

Cast. True (my Lord) I my self have heard a very good jest,
And have scorned to seem to have so silly a wit, as to understand it.

Ferd. But I can laugh at your Fool (my Lord*)

Cast. He cannot speak (you know) but he makes faces,
My Lady cannot abide him.

Ferd. Noe?

Cast. Nor endure to be in merry Company: for she says
Too much laughing, and too much Company, fills her
Too full of the wrinckle.

Ferd. I would then have a Mathematical Instrument made for
Her face, that she might not laugh out of compass: I shall shortly
Visit you at Millaine (Lord Siluio.)

Sil. Your Grace shall arrive most wel-come.

Ferd. You are a good Horseman ( Antonio) you have excellent
Riders in France, what do you think of good Horse-man-ship?

Ant. Noblely (my Lord) as out of the Grecian-horse, issued
Many famous Princes: So, out of brave Horse-man-ship,
Arise the first Sparks of growing resolution, that raise
The mind, to noble action.

Ferd. You have be-spoake it worthily.

Sil. Your brother, the Lord Cardinal, and sister Duchess.

Card. Are the Galleys come about?

Gris. They are (my Lord.)

Ferd. Here Is the Lord Siluio, is come to take his leave.

Del. Now (Sir) your promise: what is that Cardinal?
I mean his Temper? they say he is a brave fellow,
Will play his five thousand crowns, at Tennis, Dance,
Court Ladies, and one that has fought single Combats.

Ant. Some such flashes superficially hang on him, for form:
But observe his inward Character: he is a mellancholly
Churchman: The Spring in his face, is nothing but the
Ingendring of Toades: where he is iealious of any man.
He lays worse plots for them, then ever was imposed on
Hercules: for he strewes in his way Flatters, Panders,
Intelligencers, A thiests,: and a thousand such political
Monsters: he should have been Pope: but in stead of
Coming to it, by the primative decensie of the church,
He did bestow bribes, so largely, and so impudently, as if he would
Have carried it away without heavens knowledge. Some good he Has done.

Del. You have given too much of him: what is his brother?

Ant. The Duke there? a most perverse, and turbulent Nature,
What appears in him mirth, is merely outside,
If he laugh heartily, it is to laugh
All honesty out of fashion.

Del. Twins?

Ant. In quality:
He speaks with others Tongues, and hears men's suites,
With others Ears: will seem to sleep o'th bench
Only to entrap offenders, in their answers;
Doombes men to death, by information,
Rewards, by hearsay.

Del. Then the Law to him
Is like a foul black cob-web, to a Spider,
He makes it his dwelling, and a prison
To entangle those shall feed him.

Ant. Most true:
He neu'r paies debts, unless they be showed turns,
And those he will confess, that he does owe,
Last: for his brother, there, (the Cardinal)
They that do flatter him most, say Oracles
Hang at his lips: and verily I believe them:
For the Devil speaks in them.
But for their sister, (the right noble Duchess)
You never fixed you eye, on three fair Meddalls,
Cast in one figure, of so different temper:
For her discourse, it is so full of Rapture,
You only will begin, then to be sorry
When she does end her speech: and wish (in wonder)
She held it less vainglory, to talk much
Then your penance, to hear her: whilst she speaks,
She throws upon a man, so sweet a look,
That it were able raise one to a Galliard
That lay in a dead palsy; and to doat
On that sweet countenance: but in that look,
There speaks so divine a continence,
As cuts off all lascivious, and vain hope.
Her days are practiced in such noble virtue,
That, sure her nights (nay more her very Sleeps)
Are more in Heaven, then other Ladies Shrifts.
Let all sweet Ladies, break their flattring Glasses,
And dress themselves in her.

Del. Fie Antonia,
You play the wire-drawer with her commendations.

Ant. I Will case the picture up: only thus much,
All her particular worth, grows to this sum:
She stains the time past: lights the time to come,

Cariola. You must attend my Lady, in the gallery,
Some half an hour hence.

Ant. I shall.

Ferd. Sister, I have a suit to you:

Duch. To me, Sir?

Ferd. A Gentleman here: Daniel de Bosola:
One, that was in the Galleys.

Duch. Yes, I know him:

Ferd. A worthy fellow h'is: pray let me entreat for*
The prouisorship of your horse.

Duch. Your knowledge of him,
Commends him, and prefers him.

Ferd. Call him heither,
We now upon parting: Good Lord Siluio
Do us commend to all our noble friends
At the Leagues.

Sil. Sir, I shall.

Ferd. You are for Millaine?

Sil. I am:

Duch. Bring the Carroches: we'll bring you down to the Haven.

Car. Be sure you entertain that Bosola
For your Intelligence: I would not be seeene in it.
And therefore many times I have slighted him,
When he did court our furtherance: as this Morning.

Ferd. Antonio, the great Master of her household
Had been far fitter:

Card. You are deceived in him,
His Nature is too honest for such business,
He comes: I Will leave you:

Bos. I was lured to you.

Ferd. My brother here (the Cardinal) could never abide you.

Bos. Never since he was in my debt.

Ferd. May be some oblique character in your face, made him suspect you?

Bos. Does he study Phisiognomie?
There Is no more credit, to be given to th'face,
Then to a sick man's vryn, which some call
The Physicians whore, because she cozens him:
He did suspect me wrongfully:

Ferd. For that
You must give great men leave to take their times:
Distrust, does cause us seldom be deceived;
You see, the often shaking of the Cedar-Tree
Fastens it more at root.

Bos. Yet take heed:
For to suspect a friend unworthily,
Instructs him the next way to suspect you,
And prompts him to deceive you.

Berd. There Is gold.

Bos. So:
What follows? (Never raind such showers as these
Without thunderbolts in the tail of them;) whose throat must I cut?

Ferd. Your inclination to shed blood, rides post
Before my occasion to use you: I give you that
To live in the Court, here: and observe the Duchess,
To note all the particulars of her hauiour:
What suitors do solicit her for marriage
And whom she best affects: she is a young widow,
I would not have her marry again.

Bos. No, Sir?

Ferd. Do not you ask the reason: but be satisfied,
I say I would not.

Bos. It seems you would create me
One of your familiars.

Ferd. Familiar? what is that?

Bos. Why, a very quaint invisible Devil, in flesh:
An Intelligencer.

Ferd. Such a kind of thriuing thing
I would wish thee: and ere long, thou may arrive
At a higher place by it.

Bos. Take your Devils
Which Hell calls Angels: these cursed gifts would make
You a corrupter, me an impudent traitor,
And should I take these they 'll'd take me Hell.

Fer. Sir, I Will take nothing from you, that I have given:
There is a place, that I procured for you
This morning: (the Prouisor-ship of the horse)
Have you heard out?

Bos. Noe.

Fer. It Is yours, is it not worth thanks?

Bos. I would have you curse your self now, that your bounty
(Which makes men truly noble) ere should make
Me a villain: oh, that to avoid ingratitude
For the good deed you have done me, I must do
All the ill man can invent: Thus the Devil
Candies all sins are: and what Heaven terms vild,
That names he complementall.

Fer. Be your self:
Keep your old garb of melencholly: 'twill express
You envy those that stand above your reach,
Yet strive not to come neere'em: This will gain
Access, to private lodgings, where your self
May (like a pollitique dormouse,

Bos. As I have seen some,
Feed in a Lords dish, half a sleep, not seeming
To listen to any talk: and yet these Rogues
Have cut his throat in a dream: what is my place?
The Prouisors-ship o'th horse? say then my corruption
Grew out of horse-doong: I am your creature.

Ferd. Away.

Bos. Let good men, for good deeds, covet good fame,
Since place, and riches often are bribes of shame
Sometimes the Devil does preach. Exit Bosola.

Card. We are to part from you: and your own discretion
Must now be your director.

Ferd. You are a Widow:
You know already what man is: and therefore
Let not youth: high promotion, eloquence,

Card. No, nor any thing without the addition, Honor,
Sway your high blood.

Ferd. Marry? they are most luxurious,
Will wed twice.

Card. O ^ie:

Ferd. Their livers are more spotted
Then Labans sheep.

Duch. Diamonds are of most value
They say; that have past through most Iewellers hands.

Ferd. Whores, by that rule, are precious:

Duch. Will you hear me?
I Will never marry:

Card. So most Widows say:
But commonly that motion lasts no longer
Then the turning of an houreglasse, the funeral Sermon,
And it, end both together.

Ferd. Now hear me:
You live in a rank pasture here, in the Court,
There is a kind of honney-dew, that is deadly:
'Twill poison your fame; look to it: be not cunning:
For they whose faces do bolye their hearts,
Are Witches, ere they arrive at twenty years,
I: and give the devil suck.

Duch. This is terrible good council:

Ferd. Hypocrisy is wouen of a fine small thread,
(Subtler, then Vulcans Engine: yet (beleeu't)
Your darkest actions: nay, your priuat'st thoughts,
Will come to light.

Card. You may slatter your self,
And take your own choice: privately be married
Under the Eues of night.

Ferd. Think It the best voyage
That ere you made; like the irregular Crab,
Which though it goes backward, thinks that it goes, right,
Because it goes its own way: but observe;
Such weddings, may more properly be said
To be executed, then celibrated.

Card. The marriage night
Is the entrance into some prison.

Ferd. And those joys,
Those lustful pleasures, are like heavy sleeps
Which do fore-run man's mischief

Card. Fare you well.
Wisdom begins at the end: remember it.

Duch. I think this speech between you both was studied,
It came so roundly off.

Ferd. You are my sister,
This was my Fathers poyniard: do you see,
I'll'd be loath to see it look rusty, 'cause 'twas his:
I would have you to give ore these chargeable Revels;
A Vizor, and a Masque are whispering rooms
That were neu'r built for goodness: fare ye well:
And women, like that part, which (like the Lamprey)
Has neu'r a bone in it.

Duch. Fie Sir:

Ferd. Nay,
I mean the Tongue: variety of Courtship;
What cannot a neat knave with a smooth tale,
Make a woman believe? farewell, lusty Widow.

Duch. Shall this move me? if all my royal kindred
Lay in my way, unto this marriage:
I'll'd make them my low foote-steps: And even now,
Even in this hate (as men in some great battles
By apprehending danger, have atchieu'd
Almost impossible actions: I have heard Soldiers say so,
So I, through frights, and threatenings, will assay
This dangerous venture: Let old wives report
I wincked, and chose a husband: Cariola,
To thy known secricy, I have given up
More then my life, my fame:

Carolia. Both shall be safe:
For I Will conceal this secret from the world
As warily as those that trade in poison,
Keep poison from their children.

Duch. Thy protestation
Is ingenious, and hearty: I believe it.
Is Antonio come?

Cariola. He attends you:

Duch. Good dear soul,
Leave me: but place thy self behind the Arras,
Where thou may ouer-heare us: wish me good speed
For I am going into a wilderness,
Where I shall find nor path, nor friendly clewe
To be my guide, I sent for you, Sir down:
Take Pen and Incke, and write: are you ready?

Ant. Yes:

Duch. What did I say?

Ant. That I should write somewhat.

Duch. Oh, I remember:
After this triumphs, and this large expense
It Is fit (like thrifty husbands) we enquire
What Is laid up for to morrow:

Ant. So please your beauteous Excellence.

Duch. Beauteous? Indeed I thank you: I look yo^g for your sake.
You have taken my cares upon you.

Ant. I Will fetch your Grace the
Particulars of your reuinew, and expense.

Duch. Oh, you are an upright treasurer: but you mistook,
For when I said I meant to make enquiry,
What Is laid up for to morrow: I did mean
What Is laid up yonder for me.

Ant. Where?

Duch. In Heaven,
I am making my will, (as it is fit Princes should
In perfect memory) and I pray Sir, tell me
Were not one better make it smiling, thus?
Then in deep groans, and terrible ghastly looks,
As if the gifts we parted with, procured
That violent destruction?

Ant. Oh, much better.

Duch. If I had a husband now, this care were quit:
But I intend to make yon Ouer-seer;
What good deed, shall we first remember? say.

Ant. Begin with that first good deed, began i'th'world,
After man's creation, the Sacrament of marriage,
I Would have you first provide for a good husband,
Give him all.

Duch. All?

Ant. Yes, your excellent self.

Duch. In a winding sheet^?

Ant. In a cople.

Duch. St. Winfrid, that were a strange will.

Ant. 'Twere strange if there were no will in you
To marry again.

Duch. What do you think of marriage?

Ant. I take it, as those that deny Purgatory,
It locally contains, or heaven, or hell,
There Is no third place in it.

Duch. How do you affect it?

Ant. My banishment, feeding my mellancholly,
Would often reason thus.

Duch. Pray let us hear it.

Ant. Say a man never marry, nor have children,
What takes that from him? only the bare name
Of being a father, or the weak delight
To see the little wanton, ride a cocke-horse
Upon a painted stick, or hear him chatter
Like a taught Starling.

Duch. Fie, fie, what is all this?
One of your eyes is blood-shot, use my Ring to it,
They say it is very sovereign, 'twas my wedding Ring,
And I did vow never to part with it,
But to my second husband.

Ant. You have parted with it now.

Duch. Yes, to help your eyesight.

Ant. You have made me stark blind.

Duch. How?

Ant. There is a saucy, and ambitious devil
Is dancing in this circle.

Duch. Remove him.

Ant. How?

Duch. There needs small coniuration, when your finger
May do it: thus, is it fit?

Ant. What said you? he kneeles

Duch. Sir,
This goodly roose of yours, it too low built,
I cannot stand upright in it, nor discourse,
Without I raise it higher: raise your self,
Or if you please, my hand to help you: so.

Ant. Ambition (Madam) is a great man's madness,
That is not kept in chains, and close-pent-roomes,
But in fair lightsome lodgings, and is girt
With the wild noyce of prattling visitans,
Which makes it lunatique, beyond all cure,
Conceive not, I am so stupid, but I aim
Whereto your favors tend: But he is a fool
That (being a cold) would thrust his hands i'th'fire
To warm them.

Duch. So, now the ground's broake,
You may discover what a wealthy Mine,
I make you Lord off.

Ant. Oh my unworthiness.

Duch. You were ill to sell your self,
This darkning of your worth, is not like that
Which tradesmen use i'th'City, their false lights
Are to rid bad wares off: and I must tell you
If you will know where breathes a complete man,
(I speak it without flattery) turn your eyes,
And progress through your self.

Ant. Were there nor heaven, nor hell,
I should be honest: I have long served virtue,
And neu'r taken wages of her.

Duch. Now she paies it,
The misery of us, that are borne great,
We are forced to woe, because none dare woe us:
And as a Tyrant doubles with his words,
And fearfully equiuocates: so we
Are forced to express our violent passions
In ridles, and in dreams, and leave the path
Of simple virtue, which was never made
To seem the thing it is not: Go, go brag
You have left me heartlesse, mine is in your bosom,
I hope 'twill multiply love there: You do tremble:
Make not your heart so dead a piece of flesh
To fear, more then to love me: Sir, be confident,
What is it distracts you? This is flesh, and blood, (Sir,)
It Is not the figure cut in Allablaster
Kneeles at my husbands tomb: Awake, awake (man)
I do here put of all vain ceremony,
And only do appear to you, a young widow
That claims you for her husband, and like a widow,
I use but half a blush in it.

Ant. Truth speak for me,
I will remain the constant Sanctuary
Of your good name.

Duch. I thank you (gentle love)
And 'cause you shall not come to me, in debt,
(Being now my Steward) here upon your lips
I sign your Quietus est: This you should have begged now,
I have seen children often eat sweete-meates thus,
As fearful to devour them too soon.

Ant. But for your Brothers?

Duch. Do not think of them,
All discord, without this circumference,
Is only to be pitied, and not feared:
Yet, should they know it, time will easily
Scatter the tempest.

Ant. These words should be mine,
And a'l the parts you have spoke, if some part of it
Would not have sauour'd flattery.

Duch. Kneel.

Ant. Hah?

Duch. Be not amazed, this woman's of my Council,
I have heard Lawyers say, a contract in a Chamber,
( Per verba presenti) is absolute marriage:
Bless (Heaven) this sacred Gordian, which, let violence
Never untwine.

Ant. And may our sweet affections, (like the Spears)
Be still in motion.

Duch. Quickening, and make
The like soft Music.

Ant. That we may imitate the loving Palms
(Best Emblem of a peaceful marriage)
That neu'r bore fruit divided.

Duch. What can the Church force more?

Ant. That Fortune may not know an accident
Either of joy, or sorrow, to divide
Our fixed wishes.

Duch. How can the Church build faster?
We now are man, and wife, and it is the Church
That must but echo this: Maid, stand a part,
I now am blind.

Ant. What Is your conceit in this?

Duch. I would have you lead your Fortune by the hand.
Unto your marriage bed:
(You speak in me this, for we now are one)
We'll only lie, and talk together, and plot
To Appease my humorous kindred; and if you please
(Like the old tale, in Alexander and Lodewicke)
Lay a naked sword between us, keep us chaste:
Oh, let me shroud my blushes in your bosom,
Since it is the treasury of all my secrets.

Car. Whether the spirit of greatness, or of woman
Reign most in her, I know not, but it shows
A fearful madness, I owe her much of pity. Ex^^^^.

ACTVS II.
SCENA I.
Bosola, Castruchie, an Old Lady, Antonio, Delio, Duchess, Redorico, Grisolan.
Bos. You say you would feign be taken, for an eminent Courtice?

Cast. It Is the very maine of my ambition.

Bos. Let me see, you have a reasonable good face for it already,
And your nightcap expresses your ears sufficient largely,
I would have you learn to twirle the strings of your band with a
Good grace; and in a set speech, (at the end of every sentence,)
To hum, three, or four times, or blow your nose (till it smart again,)
To recover your memory, when you come to be a president in
Criminal causes, if you smile upon a prisoner, hang him, but if
You frown upon him, and threaten him, let him be sure to escape
The Gallows.

Cast. I would be a very merry president,

Bos. Do not sup a nights, 'twill beget you an admirable wit.

Cast. Rather it would make me have a good stomach to quarrel,
For they say, you roaring-boyes eat meat seldom,
And that makes them so valiant:
But how shall I know whether the people take me
For an eminent fellow.

Bos. I will teach a trick to know it,
Give out you lie a dying, and if you
Hear the common people curse you,
Be sure you are taken for one of the prime night-caps,
You come from painting now?

Old Lady. From what?

Bos. Why, from your scuruy face-physicke,
To behold thee not painted enclines somewhat near
A miracle: These in thy face here, were deep rutts,
And foul sloughes the last progress:
There was a Lady in France, that having had the small pockes,
Flead the skin off her face, to make it more level;
And whereas before she looked like a Nutmeg-grater,
After she resembled an abortiue hedgehog.

Old Lady. Do you call this painting?

Bos. No, no but you call carreening of an old
Morphew'd Lady, to make her disembogue again,
There Is rough-cast phrase to your plastique.

Old Lady. It seems you are well acquainted with my closset?

Bos. One would suspect it for a shop of witchcraft,
To find in it the fat of Serpents; s^awne of Snakes, Jews spittle,
And their young children ordures, and all these for the face:
I would sooner eat a dead pidgeon* taken from the soles of the feet
Of one sick of the plague, then kiss one of you fasting:
Here are two of you, whose sin of your youth, is the very
Patrimony of the Physician, makes him renew his
Foote-cloth with the Spring, and change his
High-priz'd curtezan with the fall of the leaf:
I do wonder you do not loath your selves,
Observe my meditation now:
What thing is in this outward form of man
To be beloved? we account it ominous,
If Nature do produce a Colt, or Lamb,
A Fawn, or Goat, in any limb resembling
A Man; and fly from't as a prodegy.
Man stands amazed to see his deformity,
In any other Creature but himself.
But in our own flesh, though we bear diseases
Which have their true names, only taken from beasts,
As the most vlcerous Woolfe, and swinish Meazeall;
Though we are eaten up of lice, and worms,
And though continually we bear about us
A rotten and dead body, we delight
To hide it in rich tissew all our fear,
(Nay all our terror) is, least our Physician
Should put us in the ground, to be made sweet.
Your wife's gone to Rome: you two cople, and get you
To the wels at Leuca, to recover your aches.
I have other work on foot: I observe our Duchess
Is sick a days, she puykes, her stomach seethes,
The ^ins of her eie-lids, look most teeming blew,
She waines i'th'cheeke, and waxes fat i'th'flanke;
And (contrary to our Italian fashion,)
Wears a loose-bodied Gown, there is somewhat in it,
I have a trick, may chance discover it
(A pretty one) I have bought some Apicocks,
The first our Spring yields.

Del. And so long since married?
You amaze me.

Ant. Let me seal your lips for ever,
For did I think, that any thing but the air,
Could carry these words from you, I should wish
You had no breath at all: Now Sir, in your contemplation?
You are studdying to become a great wise fellow?

Bos. Oh Sir, the opinion of wisdom, is a foul tettor,
That runs all over a man's body: if simplicity
Direct us to have no evil, it directs us to a happy
Being: For the subtlest folly proceeds from the
Subtlest wisdom: Let me be simply honest.

Ant. I do understand your inside.

Bos. Do you so?

Ant. Because you would not seem to appear to the world
Puffed up with your preferment: You continue
This out off shashion mellancholly, leave it, leave it.

Bos. Give me leave to be honest in any phrase, in any
Complement whatsoever, shall I confess my self to you?
I look no higher then I can reach:
They are the gods, that must ride on winged horses,
A Lawyers mule of a slow pace, will both surt
My disposition, and business: For (mark me)
When a man's mind rides faster then his horse can gallop,
They quickly both tire.

Ant. You would look up to Heaven, but I think
The Devil, that rules i'th'aire, stands in your light.

Bos. Oh (Sir) you are Lord of the ascendant,
Chief man with the Duchess, a Duke was your
Cosen German, removed: Say you were lineally
Descended from King Pippin, or he himself,
What of this? search the heads of the greatest rivers in
The World, you shall find them but bubles of water:
Some would think the souls of Princes were brought
Forth by some more weighty cause, then those of meaner persons,
They are deceived, there is the same hand to them:
The like passions sway them, the same reason, that makes
A Vicar go to Law for a tithe-pig,
And undo his neighbors, makes them spoil
A whole Province, and batter down goodly
Cities, with the Cannon.

Duch. Your arm Antonio, do I not grow fat?
I am exceeding short-winded: Bosola,
I would have you (Sir) provide for me a Littor,
Such a one, as the Duchess of Florence road in.

Bos. The Duchess used one, when she was great with child*

Duch. I think she did: come hither, mend my ruff,
Here, when? thou art such a tedious Lady; and
Thy breath smells of Lymmon pills, would thou had done,
Shall I ^ound under thy fingers? I am
So troubled with the mother.

Bos. I fear to much.

Duch. I have heard you say, that the French Courries
Wear their hats on fore the King.

Ant. I have seen it.

Duch. In the Presence?

Ant. Yes:
Why should not we bring up that fashion?
It Is ceremony more then duty, that consists
In the remoouing of a piece of felt:
Be you the example to the rest of the Court,
Put on your hat first.

Ant. You must pardon me:
I have seen, in colder countries, then in France,
Nobles stand bare to th'Prince; and the distinction
My thought showed reverently.

Bos. I have a present for your Grace.

Duch. For me sir?

Bos. Apricocks (Madam.)

Duch. O sir, where are they?
I have heard of none to year.

Bos. Good, her color rises.

Duch. Indeed I thank you: they are wondrous fair ones:
What an unskillful fellow is our Gardener?
We shall have none this month.

Bos. Will not your Grace pare them?

Duch. No, they taste of musk (me thinks) indeed they do:

Bos. I know not: yet I wish your Grace had parde'em:

Duch. Why?

Bos. I forgot to tell you the knave Gardne^,
(Only to raise his profit by them the sooner)
Did ripen them in horse-doung.

Duch, O you jest:
You shall judge: pray taste one.

Ant. Indeed Madam,
I do not love the fruit.

Duch. Sir, you are loath
To rob us of our dainties: it is a delicate fruit,
They say they are restoratiue?

Bos. It Is a pretty
Art: this grafting.

Duch. It Is so: a bettring of nature.

Bos. To make a pippin grow upon a crab,
A dampson on a black thorn: how greedily she eats them?
A whirlewinde strike off these bawd-farthingalls,
For, but for that, and the loose-bodied gown,
I should have discovered apparently
The young spring-hall cutting a caper in her belly.

Duch. I thank you (Bosola:) they were right good ones,
If they do not make me sick.

Ant. How now Madame?

Duch. This green fruit: and may stomach are not friend^
How they swell me?

Bos. Nay, you are too much swelled already.

Duch. Oh, I am in an extreme cold sweat.

Bos. I am very sorry:

Duch. Lights to my chamber: O, good Antonio,
I fear I am undone. Exit Duchess.

Del. Lights there, lights.

Ant. O my most trusty Delio, we are lost:
I fear she is fallen in labor: and there is left
No time for her remove.

Del. Have you prepared
Those Ladies to attend her? and procured
That politic safe conueyance for the Midwife
Your Duchess plotted.

Ant. I have:

Del. Make use then of this forced occasion:
Give out that Bosola has poisoned her,
With these Apricocks: that will give some color*
For her keeping close.

Ant. Fie, fie, the Physicians
Will then flock to her.

Del. For that you may pretend
She Will use some prepared Antidote of her own,
Least the Physicians should repoyson her.

Ant. I am lost in amazement: I know not what to think on it. Ex.

SCENA. II.
Bosola, old Lady, Antonio, Rodorigo, Grisolan: servants, Delio, Cariola. Bos.
So, so: there is no question but her teatchiues
And most vulterous eating of the Apricocks, are apparent
Signs of breeding, now?

Old Lady. I am in have (Sir.)

Bos. There was a young wayting-woman, had a monstrous desire
To see the Glasse-house.

Old La. Nay, pray let me go:

Bos. And it was only to know what strange instrument it was,
Should swell up a glass to the fashion of a woman's belly.

Old La. I will hear no more of the Glasse-house,
You are still abusing women?

Bos. Who I? no, only (by the way now and then) mention
Your fraileties. The Orrenge tree bear ripe and green
Fruit* and blossoms altogether: And some of you give entertainment
For pure love: but more, for more precious reward. The lusty
Spring smells well: but drooping Autumn tastes well: If we
Have the same golden showers, that rained in the time of Jupiter
The Thunderer: you have the same Danes still, to hold up their
Laps to receive them: did thou never study the Mathematiques?

Old La. What Is that (Sir.)

Bos. Why, to know the trick how to make a many lines meet
In one center: Go go; give your foster-daughters good councel^
Tell them, that the Devil takes delight to hang a woman's girdle;
Like a false rusty watch that she cannot discern how
The time passes.

Ant. Shht up the Court gates:

Rod. Why sir? what is the danger?

Ant. Shut up the Posternes presently: and call
All the Officers of the Court.

Gris. I shall instantly:

Ant. Who keeps the key of the Parke-gate?

Rod. Forobosco.

Ant. Let him bring't presently.

Servant. Oh, Gentlemen, of the Court, the fowlest treason.

Bos. If that these Apricocks should be poysond, now;
Without my knowledge.

Seru. There was taken even now a Switzer
In the Duchess Bedchamber.

2. Seru. A Switzer?

Seru. With a Pistol in his great cod-piece.

Bos. Hh, ha, ha.

Seru. The cod-piece was the case for it.

2. Ser. There was a cunning traitor.
Who would have searched his cod-piece?

Seru. True, if he had kept out of the Ladies chambers:
And all the mowldes of his buttons, were leaden bullets.

2. Seru. Oh wicked Caniball: a fire-lock in's cod-piece?

Seru. 'Twas a French plot upon my life.

2. Ser. To see what the Devil can do.

Ant. All the Offices here?

Seru. We are:

Ant. Gentlemen,
We have lost much Plate you know; and but this evening
Jewels, to the value of four thousand Ducats
Are missing in the Ducthesse Cabinet,
Are the Gates shut?

Ser. Yes.

Ant. It Is the Duchess pleasure
Each Officer be locked into his chamber
Till the Sun-rysing: and to send the keys
Of all their chests, and of their outward doors
Into her bedchamber: She is very sick.

Rod. At her pleasure.

Ant. She intreates you take it not ill: The Innocent
Shall be the more approved by it.

Bos. Gentleman of the Wood-yard, where is your Switzer now?

Seru. By this hand 'twas creadably reported by one of the Black-guard.

Del. How fares it with the Duchess?

Ant. She Is exposed
Unto the worst of torture, pain, and fear;

Del. Speak to her all happy comfort.

Ant. How I do play the fool with mine own danger?
You are this night (dear friend) to poast to Rome,
My life lies in your service.

Del. Do not doubt me,

Ant. Oh, It Is far from me: and yet fear presents me
Somewhat that look like danger.

Del. Believe it,
It Is but the shadow of your fear, no more:
How superstitiously we mind our evils?
The throwing down salt, or crossing of a Hare;
Bleeding at nose, the stumbling of a horse:
Or singing of a Criket, are of power
To daunt whole man in us: Sir, fare you well:
I wish you all the joys of a blessed Father;
And (for my faith) lay this unto your breast,
Old friends (like old swords) still are trusted best.

Cariola. Sir, you are the happy father of a son,
Your wife commends him to you.

A^t. Blessed comfort:
For heauen-sake tend her well: I Will presently
Go set a figure for's Nativity. Exeunt.

SCENA. III.
Bosola, Antonio. Bos. Sure I did hear a woman shreike: list, hah?
And the sound came (if I received it right)
From the Duchess lodgings: there is some stratagem,
In the con^yning all our Courtiers
To their several wards: I must have part of it,
My Intelligence will freize else: List again,
It may be 'twas the mellencholly bird,
(Best friend of silence, and of solitarines)
The Oowle, that schream'd so: hah? Antonio?

Ant. I heard some noise: whose there? what art thou? speak.

Bos. Antonio? Put not your face; nor body
To such a forced expression of fear,
I am Bosola; your friend.

Ant. Bosola?
(This Moale does undermine me) heard you no^
A noyce even now?

Bos. From whence?

Ant. From the Duchess lodging.

Bos. Not I: did you?

Ant. I did: or else I dreamed.

Bos. Let Us walk toward it.

Ant. No: It may be, 'twas
But the rising of the wind:

Bos. Very likely:
Me thinks it is very cold, and yet you sweat.
You look wildly.

Ant. I have bin s^^^ing a figure
For the Duchess Jewels;

Bos. Ah: and how falls your question?
Do you ^ind it radical?

Ant. What Is that to you?
It Is rather to be questioned what design
(When all men were commanded to their lodgings)
Makes you a night-walker.

Bos. In sooth I Will tell you:
Now all the Court's asleep, I thought the Devil
Had least to do here; I came to say my prayers,
And if it do offend you, I do so,
You are a fine Courtier.

Ant. This fellow will undo me;
You gave the Duchess Apricocks to day,
Pray heaven they were not poysond?

Bos. Poysond? a spanish fig
For the imputation.

Ant. Traitors are ever confident,
Till they are discovered: There were Jewels stolen too,
In my conceit, none are to be suspected
More then your self.

Bos. You are a false steward.

Ant. Sawey slave: I Will pull thee up by the roots;

Bos. May be the ruin will crush you to pieces.

Ant. You are an impudent snake indeed (sir)
Are you scarce warm, and do you show your sting?

Ant. You Libell well (sir.)

Bos. No (sir,)
Copy it out: and I will set my hand to it.

Ant. My nose bleedes: One that were superstitious, would coun^
This ominous: when it merely comes by chance.
Two letters, that are wrought here, for my name
Are drowned in blood: mere accedent: for you (sir) I Will take order:
In The morn you shall be safe: it is that must color
Her lying-in: sir, this door you pass not:
I do not hold it fit, that you come near
The Duchess lodgings, till you have quite your self;
The Great are like the Base; nay, they are the same.
When they seek shameful ways, to avoid shame. Ex.

Bos. Antonio here about, did drop a Paper,
Some of your help (falce-friend) oh, here it is:
What Is here? a childs Nativity calculated?
The Duchess was delivered of a Son, 'tweene the hours twelve, and one, in
the night* Anno Dom: 1504. (that is this year) decimo nono Decembris, (that is
this night) taken according to the Meridian of Malfy (that is our Duchess:
happy discovery) The Lord of the first house, being combust in the ascendant,
signifies short life: and Mars being in a human ^igne, joined to the tail of
the Dragon, in the eight house, does threaten a violent death; Caeteta non
scrutantur.

Why now it is most apparent: This precise fellow
Is the Duchess Bawd: I have it to my wish:
This is a parcel of Intelligency
Our Courtiers were caside-vp for? It needs must follow,
That I must be committed, on pretense
Of poisoning her: which I Will endure, and laugh at:
If one could find the father now: but that
Time will discover; Old Castruchio
In The morning poasts to Rome; by him I Will send
A Letter, that shall make her brothers Galls
Ore-flowe their Liuours, this was a thrifty way.
Though Lust do masque in nea'r so strange disguise,
She Is often found witty, but is never wise.

SCENA. IIII.
Cardinal, and Iulia, Servant, and Delio. Card. Sit: thou art my best of
wishes, pre-thee tell me
What trick did thou invent to come to Rome,
Without thy husband.

Iul. Why, (my Lord) I told him
I came to visit an old Anchorite
Hear, for devotion

Card. Thou art a witty false one:
I mean to him.

Iul. You have prevailed with me
Beyond my strongest thoughts: I would not now
Find you inconstant.

Card. Do not put thy self
To such a voluntary torture: which proceeds
Out of your own guilt.

Iul, How (my Lord?)

Card. You fear my constancy, because you have approou'd
Those giddy and wild turning in your self.

Iul. Did you ere find them?

Card. Sooth generally for women;
A man might strive to make glass male-able,
Ere he should make them fixed.

Iul. So, (my Lord)

Card. We had need go borrow that fantastique glass
Invented by Galileo the Florentine,
To view an other spacious world in the Moon,
And look to find a constant woman there.

Iul. This is very well (my Lord.)

Card. Why do you weep?
Are tears your justification? the selfsame tears
Will fall into your husbands bosom, (Lady)
With a loud protestation, that you love him
Above the world: Come, i will love you wisely,
That Is iealously, since I am very certain
You cannot me make cuckould.

Iul. I Will go home
To my husband.

Card. You may thank me, (Lady)
I have taken you off your mellancholly perch,
Boar you upon my fist, and showed you 'game,
And let you fly at it: I pray the kiss me,
When thou was it with thy husband, thou was it watched
Like a tame Ellephant: (still you are to thank me)
Thou had only kisses from him, and high feeding,
But what delight was that? 'twas just like one
That has a little lingering on the Lute,
Yet cannot tune it: (still you are to thank me.)

Iul. You told me of a piteous wound i'th'heart,
And a sick liuour, when you woed me first,
And spoke like one in physic.

Card. Who Is that?
Rest firm, for my affection to thee,
Lightning moons ^low to it.

Ser. (Madam) a Gentleman
That Is come post from Malfy, desires to see you.

Car. Let him enter, i will withdraw. Exit.

Ser. He says,
Your husband* (old Castruchio) is come to Rome,
M^st pitifully tired with riding post.

Iul. Signior Delio? it is one of my old Suitors

Del. I was bold to come and see you.

Iul. Sir, your are wel-come.

Del. Do you lie here?

Iul. Sure, your own experience
Will satisfy you no, our Roman Prelates
Do not keep lodging, for Ladies.

Del. Very well:
I have brought you no comendations from your husband*
For I know none by him.

Iul. I hear he is come to Rome?

Del. I never knew man, and beast, of a horse, and a knight,
So weary of each other, if he had had a good back,
He would have undertook to have borne his horse,
His breech was so pitifully sore.

Iul. Your laughter,
Is my pity.

Del. Lady, I know not whether
You want money, but I have brought you some.

Iul. From my husband?

Del. No, from mine own allowance.

Iul. I must hear the condition, ere I be bound to take it.

Del. Look on it, it is gold, has it not a fine color?

Iul. I have a Bird more beautiful.

Del. Try the sound on it.

Iul. A Lute-string far exceedes it,
It has no smell, like Cassia, or Cyu^t,
Nor is it physical, though some fond Doctors
Persuade us, seeth's in Cullisses, i will tell you,
This is a Creature bred by --

Ser. Your husband's come,
Has delivered a letter to the Duke of Calabria, that,
To my thinking has put him out of his wits.

Iul. Sir, you hear,
'Pray let me know your business, and your suite,
As briefly as can be.

Del. With good speed, I would wish you
(At such time, as you are non-resident
With your husband) my mistress.

Iul. Sir, i will go ask my husband if I shall,
And straight return your answer. Exit.

Del. Very fine,
Is this her wit, or honesty that speaks thus?
I heard one say the Duke was highly moved
With a letter sent from Malfy: I do fear
Antonio is betrayed: how fearfully
Shows his ambition now, (unfortunate Fortune)
"They pass through whirle-pooles, and deep woes do shun,
Who the event weigh, ere the action's done. Exit.

SCENA V.
Cardinal, and Ferdinand, with a letter. Ferd. I have this night dig'd up a
man-drake.

Car. Say you?

Ferd. And I am grown mad with it.

Car. What Is the progedy?

Ferd. Read there, a si^ter dampn'd, she is loose i'th'hilt^:
Grown a notorious Strumpet.

Car. Speak lower.

Ferd. Lower?
Rogues do not whisper't now, but seek to published,
(As servants do the bounty of their Lords)
Aloud; and with a couetuous searching eye,
To mark who note them: Oh confusion sease her,
She has had most cunning baudes to serve her turn,
And more secure conueyances for lust,
Then Towns of garrison, for Service.

Card. Is It possible?
Can this be certain?

Ferd. Rubarbe, oh, for rubarbe
To purge this choler, here is the cursed day
To prompt my memory, and here'it shall stick
Till of her bleeding heart, I make a sponge
To wipe it out.

Card. Why do you make your self
So wild a Tempest?

Ferd. Would I could be one,
That I might toss her palace 'bout her ears,
Root up her goodly forests, blast her meades,
And lay her general territory as wast,
As she has done her honors.

Card. Shall our blood?
(The royal blood of Arragon, and Castile)
Be thus attaincted?

Ferd. Apply desperate physic,
We must not now use Balsamum, but fire,
The smarting cupping-glasse, for that is the mean
To purge infected blood, (such blood as hers:)
There is a kind of pity in mi^e eye,
I Will give it to my hand-kercher; and now it is here,
I Will bequeath this to her Bastard.

Card. What to do?

Ferd. Why, to make soft lint for his mother wounds,
When I have hewed her to pieces.

Card. Cursed creature,
Unequal nature, to place women's hearts
So far upon the left-side.

Ferd. Foolish men,
That ere will trust their honor in a Bark,
Made of so slight, weake-bull-rush, as is woman,
Apt every minn^t to sink it?

Car. Thus
Ignorance, when it has purchased honor,
It cannot weild it.

Ferd. Me thinks I see her laughing,
Excellent Hyenna, talk to me somewhat, quickly,
Or my imagination will carry me
To see her, in the shameful act of sin.

Card. With whom?

Ferd. Happily, with some strong thigh'd Bargeman;
Or one th'wood-yard, that can quoit the sledge,
Or toss the bar, or else some lovely Squire
That carries cole^ up, to her privy lodgings.

Card. You ^lie beyond your reason.

Ferd. Go to (Mistress.)
It Is not your whores milk, that shall quench my wildfire,
But your whore a blood.

Card. How idly shows this rage?
Which carries you, as men conuai'd by witches, through the air,
On violent whirle-windes, this intemperate noyce,
Fitly resembles deafe-mens shrill discourse,
Who talk aloud, thinking all other men
To have their imperfection.

Ferd. Have not you,
My palsy?

Card. Yes, I can be angry
Without this rupture, there is not in nature
A thing, that makes man so deformed, so beastly,
As does intemperate anger: chide your self,
You have diverse men, who never yet expressed
Their strong desire of rest, but by unrest,
By vexing of themselves: Come, put your self
In tune.

Ferd. So, I will only study to seem
The thing I am not: I could kill her now,
In you, or in my self, for I do think
It is some sin in us, Heaven does revenge
By her.

Card. Are you stark mad?

Ferd. I would have their bodies
Burned in a coale-pit, with the ventage stopped,
That their cursed smoke might not ascend to Heaven:
Or dippe the sheets they lie in, in pitch or sulphur,
Wrap them in it, and then light them like a match:
Or else to boil their Bastard to a cullisse,
And giue't his leacherous father, to renew
The sin of his back.

Card. I Will leave you.

Ferd. Nay, I have done,
I am confident, had I bin damned in hell,
And should have heard of this, it would have put me
Into a cold sweat: In, in, i will go sleep,
Till I know who leapes my sister, i will not stir:
That known, i will find Scorpions to string my whips,
And fix her in a general eclipse. Exeunt.

ACTVS III.
SCENA I.
Antonio, and Delio, Duchess, Ferdinand, Bosola. Ant. Our noble friend (my
most beloved Delio)
Oh, you have bin a stranger long at Court,
Came you along with the Lord Ferdinand?

Del. I did Sir, and how faires your noble Duchess?

Ant. Right fortunately well: She Is an excellent
Feeder of pedegrees: since you last saw her,
She has had two children more, a son, and daughter.

Del. Me thinks 'twas yester-day: Let me but wincke,
And not behold your face, which to mine eye
Is somewhat leaner, verily I should dream
It were within this half hour.

Ant. You have not bin in Law, (friend Delio)
Nor in prison, nor a Suitor at the Court
Nor begged the reuersion of some great man's place,
Nor troubled with an old wife, which does make
Your time so inseucibly hasten.

Del. 'Pray Sir tell me,
Has not this news arrived yet to ^he ear;
Of the Lord Cardinal?

Ant. I fear it has,
The Lord Ferdinand, (that is newly come to Court,)
Does bear himself right dangerously.

Del. Pray why?

Ant. He is so quiet, that he seems to sleep
The tempest out (as Dormise do in Winter,)
Those houses, that are haunted, are most still,
Till the devil be up.

Del. What say the common people.

Ant. The common-rable, do directly say
She is a Strumpet.

Del. And your grauer heads,
(Which would he pollitique) what censure they?

Ant. They do observe, I grow to infinite purchase
The leaft-hand way, and all suppose the Duchess
Would amend it, if she could: For, say they
Great Princes, though they grudge their Officers
Should have such large, and vnconfined means
To get wealth under them, will not complain
Least thereby they should make them odious
Unto the people, for other obligation
Of love, or marriage, between her and me,
They never dream off.

Del. The Lord Ferdinand
Is going to bed.

Ferd. I Will instantly to bed,
For I am weary: I am to be be-speake
A husband for you.

Duch. For me (Sir?) 'pray who is it?

Ferd. The great Count Malateste.

Duch. Fie upon him,
A Count? he is a mere stick of sugar candy,
(You may look quite thorough him) when I choose
A husband, I will marry for your honor.

Ferd. You shall do well in it: How is it (worthy Antonio?)

Duch. But (Sir) I am to have private conference with you,
About a scandalous report, is spread
Touching mine honor.

Ferd. Let me be ever deaf to it:
One of Pasquils paper-bullets, court calumney,
A pestilent air, which Princes palaces
Are seldom purged off: Yet, say that it were true,
I power it in your bosom, my fixed love,
Would strongly excuse, extenuate, nay deny
Faults where they apparent in you: Go be safe
In your own innocence.

Duch. Oh blessed comfort,
This deadly air is purged. Exeunt.

Ferd. Her guilt treads on
Hot burning cultures: Now Bosola,
How thriues our intelligence?

Bos. (Sir) uncertainly,
It Is rumored she has had three bastards, but
By whom, we may go read in the Stars.

Ferd. Why some
Hold opinion, all things are written there.

Bos. Yes, if we could find Spectacles to read them,
I do suspect, there has bin some Sorcery
Used on the Duchess.

Ferd. Sorcery, to what purpose?

Bos. To make her doat on some desertles fellow,
She shames to acknowledge.

Ferd. Can your faith, give way
To think there is power in potions, or in Charms,
To make us love, whether we will or no?

Bos. Most certainly.

Ferd. A way, these are mere gullcries, horred things
Invented by some cheating mounte-banckes
To abuse us: Do you think that herbs, or charms
Can force the will? Some trialls have bin made
In this foolish practice; but the ingredients
Were lenatiue poisons, such as are of force
To make the patient mad; and straight the witch
Swears (by equivocation, they are in love.
The witchcraft lies in her rank bood: this night
I will force confession from her: You told me
You had got (within these two days) a false key
Into her Bedchamber.

Bos. I have.

Ferd. As I would wish.

Bos. What do you intend to do?

Ferd. Can you guess?

Bos. No:

Ferd. Do not ask then:
He that can compass me, and know my drifts,
May say he has put a girdle 'bout the world,
And sounded all her quicksands.

Bos. I do not
Think so.

Ferd. What do you think then? pray?

Bos. That you are
Your own Chronicle too much: and grossly
Flatter your self.

Ferd. Give me thy hand, I thank thee:
I never gave Pention but to flatterers,
Till I entertained thee: farewell,
That Friend a Great man's ruin strongely checks,
Who railes into his belief, all his defects. Exeunt.

SCENA. II.
Duchess, Antonio, Cariola, Ferdinand, Bosola, Officers. Dutch. Bring me the
Casket hither, and the Glass;
You get no lodging here, to night (my Lord.)

Ant. Indeed, I must persuade one:

Duch. Very good:
I hope in time 'twill grow into a custom,
That Noble men shall come with cap, and knee,
To purchase a nights lodging, of their wives.

Ant. I must lie here.

Dutch. Must? you are a Lord of Misse-rule.

Ant. Indeed, my Rule is only in the night.

Dutch. To what use will you put me,

Ant. We Will sleep together:

Dutch. ^la^, what pleasure can two Lovers find in sleep?

Car. My Lord, I lie with her often: and I know
She Will much disquiet you:

Ant. See, you are complained of.

Car. For she is the sprawlingst bedfellow.

Ant. I shall like her the better for that.

Car. Sir, shall I ask you a question?

Ant. I pray thee Cariola.

Car. Wherefore still when you lie with my Lady
Do you rise so early?

Ant. Laboring men,
Count the Clock oftnest Cariola,
Are glad when their task's ended.

Duch. I Will stop your mouth.

Ant. Nay, that is but one, Venus had two soft Doves
To draw her Chariot: I must have another:
When will thou marry, Cariola?

Car. Never (my Lord.)

Ant. O sic upon this single life: forgo it:
We read how Daphne, for her peevish slight
Became a fruitless Bay Tree: Siriux turned
To the pale empty Reed: Anaxarate
Was frozen into Marble: whereas those
Which married, or proved kind unto their friends
Were, by a gracious influence, transhap'd
Into the Oliffe, Pomgranet, Mulbery:
Became Flowers, precious Stones, or eminent Stars.

Car. This is a vain Poetry: but I pray you tell me,
If there were proposed me, Wisdom, Riches, and Beauty,
In three several young men, which should I choose?

Ant. It Is a hard question: This was Paris case
And he was blind in it, and there was great cause:
For how was it possible he could judge right,
Having three amorous Goddesses in view,
And they starcke naked: 'twas a Motion
Were able to be-night the apprehention
Of the seueerest Counselor of Europe.
Now I look on both your faces, so well formed
It puts me in mind of a question, I would ask.

Car. What is it?

Ant. I do wonder why hard-fauour'd Ladies
For the most part, keep worse-fauour'd waieting women,
To attend them, and cannot endure faire-ones.

Duch. Oh, that is soon answered.
Did you ever in your life know an ill Painter
Desire to have his dwelling next door to the shop
Of an excellent Picture-maker? 'twould disgrace
His face-making, and undo him: I pre-thee
When were we so merry? my hair tangles.

Ant. 'Pray-thee (Cariola) let us steal forth the room,
And let her talk to her self: I have diverse times
Served her the like, when she has chafde extremely:
I love to see her angry: softly Cariola. Exeunt.

Duch. Does not the color of my hair 'gin to change?
When I wax gray, I shall have all the Court
Powder their hair, with Arras, to be like me:
You have cause to love me, I entered you into my heart
Before you would vouchsafe to call for the keys.
We shall one day have my brothers take you napping:
Me thinks his Presence (being now in Court)
Should make you keep your own Bed: but you will say
Love mixed with fear, is sweetest: I Will assure you
You shall get no more children till my brothers
Consent to be your Ghossips: have you lost your tongue? it is welcome:
For know whether I am doomb'd to live, or die,
I can do both like a Prince. Ferdinand gives her a poniard.

Ferd. Die then, quickle:
Virtue, where art thou hid? what hideous thing
Is it, that does ecclipze thee?

Duch. 'Pray sir hear me:

Ferd. Or is it true, thou art but a bare name,
And no essential thing?

Duch. Sir:

Ferd. Do not speak.

Duch. No sir:
I will plant my soul in mine cares, to hear you.

Ferd. Oh most imperfect light of human reason,
That make so unhappy, to fore see
What we can least prevent: Pursue thy wishes:
And glory in them: there is in shame no comfort,
But to be past all bounds, and sense of shame.

Duch. I pray sir, hear me: I am married,

Ferd. So:

Duch. Happily, not to your liking: but for that
Alas: your sheeres do come untimely now
To clip the birds wings, that is already flowne:
Will you see my Husband?

Ferd. Yes, if I
Could change eyes with a Basilisque:

Duch. Sure, you came hither
By his confideracy.

Ferd. The howling of a Wolf
Is music to the (schrech-Owle) prithee peace:
What ere thou art, that have enjoyed my sister,
(For I am sure thou hearst me) for thine own sake
Let me not know thee: I came hither, prepared
To work thy discovery: yet am now persuaded
It would beget such violent effects
As would dampe us both: I would not for ten Millions
I had beheld thee: therefore use all means
I never may have knowledge of thy name;
Enjoy thy lust still, and a wretched life,
On that condition: And for thee (vilde woman,)
If thou do wish thy Leacher may grow old
In thy Embracements, I would have thee build
Such a room for him, as our Anchorites
To holier use enhabite: Let not the Sun
Shine on him, till he is dead: Let Dogs, and Monkeys
Only converse with him, and such dombe things
To whom Nature denies use, to sound his name.
Do not keep a Paraqueto, least she learn it;
If thou do love him, cut out thine own tongue
Least it bewray him.

Duch. Why might not I marry?
I have not gone about, in this, to create
Any new world, or custom.

Ferd. Thou art undone:
And thou have taken that massiy sheet of lead
That hid thy husbands bones, and foulded it
About my heart.

Dutch. Mine bleedes for it.

Ford. Thine? thy heart?
What should I nam't, unless a hollow bullet
Filled with unquenchable wildfire?

Dutch. You are, in this
Too strict: and were you not my Princely brother
I would say to wilful: My reputation
Is safe.

Ferd. Do thou know what reputation is
I Will tell thee, to small purpose, since th'instruction
Comes now too late:
Upon a time Reputation, Love, and Death,
Would travel ore the world: and it was concluded
That they should part, and take three several ways:
Death told them, they should find him in great Battles:
Or Cities plagued with plagues: Love gives them council
To enquire for him amongst vnambitious shepherds,
Where dowries were not talked of: and sometimes
Amongst quiet kindred, that had nothing left
By their dead Parents: stay (quoth Reputation)
Do not forsake me: for it is my nature
If once I part from any man I meet
I am never found again: And so, for you:
You have shooked hands with Reputation,
And made him invisible: So fare you well.
I will never see you more.

Dutch. Why should only I,
Of all the other Princes of the World
Be cas'de-vp, like a holy Relic? I have youth,
And a little beauty.

Ferd. So you have some Virgins,
Th^^ are W^^ches: I will never see thee more. Exit.

Dutch. You saw this apparition.

Enter Antonio with a Pistol. Ant. Yes: we are
Betrayed; how came he hither? I should turn
This, to thee, for that.

Car. Pray sir do: and when
That you have cl^ft my heart, you shall read there,
Mine innocence:

Dutch. That Gallery gave him entrance.

Ant. I would this terrible thing would come again,
That (standing on my Guard) I might relate
My warrantable love: ha, what means this?

Dutch. He left this with me: she shows the poniard.

Ant. And it seems, did wish
You would use it on your self?

Dutch. His Action
Seemed to intend so much.

Ant. This has a handle to it,
As well as a point, turn it toward him,
And so fasten the keen edge, in his rank gall:
How now? who knocks? more Earthquakes?

Dutch. I stand
As if a Mine, beneath my feet, were ready
To be blown up.

Car. It Is Bosola:

Dutch. Away,
Oh misery, me thinks unjust actions
Should wear these masks, and curtains; and not we:
You must instantly part hence: I have fashioned it already. Ex. Ant.

Bos. The Duke your brother is taken up in a whirle wind
Has took horse, and's rid poast to Rome.

Dutch. So late?

Bos. He told me, (as he mounted into th'sadle,)
You were undone.

Dutch. Indeed, I am very near it.

Bos. What Is the matter?

Dutch. Antonio, the master of our household
Has dealt so falsely with me, in's accounts:
My brother stood engaged with me for money
Taken up of certain Neopolitane Jews,
And Antonio let us the Bonds be forfeyt.

Bos. S^ange: this is cunning:

Dutch. And hereupon
My brothers Bills at Naples are protested
Against: call up our Officers.

Bos. I shall. Exit.

Dutch. The place that you must fly to, is Ancona,
Hire a house there. I Will send after you
My Treasure, and my Iew^ls: our weak safety
Runs upon engenous wheels: short sillables,
Must stand for periods: I must now accuse you
Of such a fained crime, as Tasso calls
Magnanima Mensogna: a Noble Lie,
'Cause it must shield our honors: hark they are coming.

Ant. Will your Grace hear me?

Dutch. I have got well by you: you have yielded me
A million of loss; I am like to inherit
The peoples curse^ for your Stewardship:
You had the trick, in Audit time to be sick,
Till I had signed your Quietus; and that cur'de you
Without help of a Doctor. Gentlemen,
I would have this man be an example to you all:
So shall you hold my favor: I pray let him;
For h'as done that (alas) you would not think of,
And (because I intend to be rid of him)
I mean not to publish: use your fortune elsewhere.

Ant. I am strongely armed to brook my ouer-throw,
As commonly men bear with a hard year:
I will not blame the cause on it; but do think
The necessity of my maleuolent star
Procures this, not her humor: O the inconstant,
And rotten ground of service, you may see:
It Is even like him, that in a winter night
Takes a long slumber, ore a dying si^e;
A-loth to part from't: yet parts thence as cold,
As when he first sat down.

Dutch. We do confifcate
(Toward the satisfying of your accounts)
All that you have.

Ant. I am all yours: and it is very fit
All mine should be so.

Dutch. So, sir; you have your Pass.

Ant. You may see (Gentlemen) what it is to serve
A Prince with body, and soul. Exit.

Bos. Here Is an example, for extortion; what moisture, is drawn out of the
Sea, when foul weather comes, powers down, and runs into the Sea again.


Dutch. I would know what are your opinions
Of this Antonio.

2. Offi. He could not abide to see a Pigges head gaping,
I thought your Grace would find him a Jew:

3. Offi. I would you had bin his Officer, for your own sake.

4. Offi. You would have had more money.

1. Offi. He stopped his ears with black wool: and to (those came a woman.
To him for money) said he was thick of hearing.

2. Offi. Some said he was an hermophrodite, for he could not abide

4. Offi. How scuruy proud he would look, when the Treasury was full:
Well, let him go:

1. Offi. Yes, and the chippings of the Buttrey fly after him,
To scowre his gold Chain. Exeunt.

Dutch. Leave us: what do you think of these?

Bos. That these are Rogues; that in's prosperity,
But to have waited on his fortune, could have vvish'd
His dutty Stirrup ri^^ted through their noses:
And followed after's Mu^e, like a Bear in a Ring.
Would have prostituted their daughters, to his Lust:
Made their firstborn and Intelligencers: thought none happy
But such as were borne under his blessed Plannet:
And wore his Liuory: and do these Lyce drop off now?
Well, never look to have the like again;
He has left a sort of slattring rogues, behind him,
Their doombe must follow: Princes pay flatterers,
In their own money: Flatterers dissemble their vices,
And they dissemble their lies, that is Justice:
Alas, poor gentlemen,

Duch. Poor? he has amply filled his cose^s.

Bos. Sure he was too honest: Pluto the god of riches,
When he is sent (by Jupiter) to any man
He goes limping, to signify that wealth
That comes on god's name, comes slowly, but when he is sent
One the devils arrand, he rides poast, and comes in by se^ttles*
Let me show you, what a most vn^^lu'd jewel,
You have (in a wanton humor) thrown away,
To bless the man shall find him: He was an excellent
Courtier, and most faithful, a soldier, that thought it
As beastly to know his own value too little,
As deuillish to acknowledge it too much,
Both his virtue, and form, deserved a far better fortune:
His discourse rather delighted to judge it self, then show it self.
His breast was filled with all perfection,
And yet it seemed a private whispring room.
It made so little noise often.

Duch. But he was basely descended.

Bos. Will you make your self a mercinary herald,
Rather to examine men's pedegrees, then virtues?
You shall want him,
For know an honest statesman to a Prince,
Is like a Cedar, planted by a Spring,
The Spring bathes the trees root, the grateful tree,
Rewards it with his shadow: you have not done so,
I would sooner swim to the Bermoothes on two Politisians
Rotten bladders, tide together with an Intelligence^ hart-string
Then depend on so changeable a Princes favor.
Fare-thee-well (Antonio) since the malice of the world
Would needs down with thee, it cannot be said yet
That any ill happened unto thee, considering thy ^all,
Was accompanied with virtue.

Duch. Oh, you render me excellent Music.

Bos. Say you?

Duch. This good one that you speak of, is my husband.

Bos. Do I not dream? can this ambitious age
Have so much goodness in it, as to prefer
A man, merely for worth: without these shadows
Of wealth, and painted honors? possible?

Duch. I have had three children by him.

Bos. Fortunate Lady,
For you have made your private nuptial bed
The humble, and fair Seminary of peace,
No question but: many an vnbenific'd Scholar
Shall pray for you, for this deed, and rejoice
That some preferment in the world can yet
Arise from merit. The virgins of your land
(That have no dowries) shall hope, your example
Will raise them to rich husbands: Should you want
Soldiers 'twould make the very Turks and Moors
Turn Christians, and serve you for this act.
Last, the neglected Poets of your time,
(In honor of this trophee of a man,
Raised by that curious engine, (your white hand)
Shall thank you, in your grave for it; and make that
More reverend then all the Cabinets
Of living Princes: For Antonio
His fame, shall likewise flow, from many a pen,
When Heralds shall want coats, to sell to men.

Duch. As I taste comfort, in this friendly speech,
So would I find concealment.

Bos. O the secret of my Prince.
Which I will wear on th'in-side of my heart.

Duch. You shall take charge of all my coin, and jewels,
And follow him, for he retires himself
To Ancona.

Bos. So.

Duch. Whether, within few days,
I mean to follow thee.

Bos. Let me think:
I would wish your Grace, to faigne a Pilgrimage
To our Lady of Loretto, (scarce seven leagues
From fair Ancona) so may you depart
Your Country, with more honor, and your flight
Will seem a Princely progress, retaining
Your usual train about you.

Duch. Sir, your direction
Shall lead me, by the hand.

Car. In my opinion,
She were better progress to the bathes
At Leuca, or go visit the Spaw
In Germany, for (if you will believe me)
I do not like this jesting with religion,
This feigned Pilgrimage.

Duch. Thou (...) superstitious fool,
Prepare us instantly for our departure:
Past sorrows, let us moderately lament them,
For those to come, seek wisely, to prevent them. Exit.

Bos. A Politician is the devils quilted anvell,
He fashions all sins on him, and the blows
Are never heard, he may work in a Ladies Chamber,
(As here for proof) what rests, but I reveal
All to my Lord? oh, this base quality
Of Intelligencer? why, every Quality i'th'world
Preferres but gain, or commendation:
Now for this act, I am certain to be raised,
"And men that paint weeds, (to the life) are praised. Exit.

SCENA III.
Cardinal, Ferdinand, Mallateste, Pescara, Siluia, Delio, Bosola. Card. Must
we turn Soldier then?

Mal. The Emperor,
Hearing your worth that way, (ere you attained
This reverend garment,) ioynes you in commission
With the right fortunate soldier, the Marquis of Pescara,
And the famous Lanoy.

Card. He that had the honor
Of taking the French King Prisoner?

Mal. The same,
Here Is a plot drawn, for a new Fortification,
At Naples.

Ferd. This great Count Malastete, I perceive
Has got employment?

Del. No employment (my Lord)
A marginall note in the muster-booke, that he is
A voluntary Lord.

Ferd. He Is no Soldier?

Del. He has worn gunpowder, in's hollow tooth, for the toothache.

Sil. He comes to the leaguer, with a full intent,
To eat fresh beef, and garlic, means to stay
Till the sent begone, and straight return to Court.

Del. He has read all the late service,
As the City Chronicle relates it,
And keep two Pewterers going, only to express
Battles in model.

Sil. Then hell; fight by the book.

Del. By the Almanacke, I think
To choose good days, and shun the Critical*
That Is his mistress skarfe.

Sil. Yes, he protests
He would do much for that taffita,

Del. I think he would run away from a battle
To save it from taking prisoner.

Sil. He is horribly afraid,
Gunpowder will spoil the perfume on it,

Del. I saw a Duch-man break his pate once
For calling him pot-gun, he made his head
Have a boar in it, like a musket.

Sil. I would he had made a touchhole to it.
He is indeed a guarded sumpter-cloath
Only for the remove of the Court.

Pes. Bosola arrived? what should be the business?
Some falling out amongst the Cardinals.
These factions amongst great men, they are like
Foxes, when their heads are divided
They carry fire in their tails, and all the Country
About them, goes to wrack for it.

Sil. What Is that Bosola?

Del. I knew him in Padua, a fantastical scholar,
Like such, who studdy to know how many knots was in
Hercules club, of what color A^hilles beard was,
Or whether Hector were not troubled with the toothache,
He has studdied himself half bleare-ei'd, to know the
True semitry of Caesar's nose by a shooing-horne, and this
He did to gain the name of a speculatiue man.

Pes. Mark Prince Ferdinand,
A very Salamander lives in's eye,
To mock the eager violence of fire.

Sil. That Cardinal has made more bad faces with his oppression
Then ever Michael Angelo made good ones,
He lifts vp's nose, like a foul Por-pisse before a storm,

Pes. The Lord Ferdinand laughes.

Del. Like a deadly Cannon,
That lightens ere it smoakes.

Pes. These are your true pangues of death,
The pangues of life, that strugle with great statesmen,

Del. In such a deformed silence, witches whisper their charms.

Card. Does she make religion her riding hood
To keep her from the sun, and tempest?

Ferd. That: that damnes her: Me thinks her fault, and
Beauty blended together, show like leaprosie
The whiter, the fowler: I make it a question
Whether her beggarly brats were ever christened.

Card. I will instantly solicit the state of Ancona
To have them banished.

Ferd. You are for Lorett^?
I shall not be at your Ceremony: fare you well,
Write to the Duke of Malfy, my young Nephew,
She had by her first husband, and acquaint him,
With His mothers honesty.

Bos. I will.

Ferd. Antonio?
A slave, that only smelled of yncke, and coumptets,
And neu'r in's like, looked like a Gentleman,
But in the audit time, go, go presently,
Draw me out an hundredth and fifty of our horse,
And meet me at the fort-bridge. Exeunt.

SCENA IIII.
Two Pilgrims to the Shrine of our Lady of Loretto. 1. Pilg. I have not seen
a goodlier Shrine then this,
Yet I have visited many.

2. Pilg. The Cardinal of Arragon
Is, this day to resign his Cardinals hat,
His sister Duchess likewise is arrived
To pay her vow of Pilgrimage, I expect
A noble Ceremony.

1. Pilg. No question: -- They come.

Here the Ceremony of the Cardinals enstalment, in the habit a Soldier:
performed in delivering up his Cross, Hat, Robes, and Ring, at the Sh^^ne; and
inuesting him with Sword, Helmet, Sheeld and ^purs: Then Antonio, the Duchess,
and their Children, (having presented themselves at the Shrine) are ( by a
form of Banishment in dumbe-shew, expressed toward them by the Cardinal, and
the State of Ancona) banished: During (...) Ceremony, this Ditty is sung (to
very sollemne Music) by diverse Churchmen, and then Exeunt. Arms, and
Honors, deck thy story,
To thy Fames eternal glory,
Adverse Fortune ever flie-thee, The Author disclaimes this Ditty to be his.

No disastrous fate come nigh-thee.
I alone will sing thy praises,
Whom to honor, virtue raises;
And thy study, that diuine-is,
Bent to Marshiall discipline-is:
Lay aside all those robes lie by thee,
Crown thy arts, with arms: they will beautify thee.
O worthy of worthiest name, adorned in this manner,
Lead bravely thy forces on, under wars warlike banner*
O may thou prove fortunate, in all Marshiall courses:
Guide thou still, by skill, in arts, and forces:
Victory attend thee nigh whilst fame sings loud thy powers,
Triumphant conquest crown thy head, and blessings power down showers.
1. Pilg. Here Is a strange turn of state, who would have thought
So great a Lady, would have matched her self
Unto so mean a person? yet the Cardinal
Bears himself much too cruel.

2. Pilg. They are banished.

1. Pilg. But I would ask what power has this state
Of Ancona to determine of a free Prince?

2. Pilg. They are a free state sir, and her brother showed
How that the Pope fore-hearing of her looseness,
Has seaz'd into th'protection of the Church
The Dukedom, which she held as dowager.

1. Pil. But by what justice?

2. Pilg. Sure I think by none,
Only her brothers instigation.

1. Pilg. What was it, with such violence he took
Of from her finger?

2. Pil. 'Twas her wedding ring,
Which he vowed shortly he would sacrifice
To his revenge.

1. Pilg. Alas Antonio,
If that a man be thrust into a well,
No matter who sets hand to it, his own weight
Will bring him sooner to th'bottome: Come, let us hence.
Fortune makes this conclusion general,
"All things do help the unhappy man to fall. Exeunt.

SCENA V.
Antonio, Duchess, Children, Cariola, Servants, Bosola, Soldiers, with
Vizards. Duch. Banished Ancona?

Ant. Yes, you see what power
Lightens in great men's breath.

Duch. Is all our train
Shrunk to this poor remainder?

Ant. These poor men,
(Which have got little in your service) vow
To take your fortune: But your wiser buntings
Now they are sledg'd are gone.

Duch. They have done wisely,
This puts me in mind of death, Physicians thus,
With their hands full of money, use to give ore
Their Patients.

Ant. Right the fashion of the world,
From decaide fortunes, every flatterer shrinkes,
Men cease to build, where the foundation sinkes.

Duch. I had a very strange dream to night.

Ant. What was it?

Duch. Me thought I wore my Coronet of State*
And on a sudaine all the Diamonds
Were changed to Pearls.

Ant. My Interpretation
Is, you will weep shortly, for to me, the pearls
Do signify your tears:

Dutch. The Birds, that live in the field
On the wild benefit of Nature, live
Happier then we; for they may choose their Mates,
And carroll their sweet pleasures to the Spring:

Bos. You are happily ore-ta'ne.

Duch. From my brother?

Bos. Yes, from the Lord Ferdinand; your brother,
All love, and safety

Dutch. Thou do blanch mischief
Would make it white: See, see; like to calm weather
At Sea, before a tempest, false hearts speak fair
To those they intend most mischief.
A Letter. Send Antonio to me; I want his head in a business: (a politic
equivocation)
He does not want your council, but your head;
That is, he cannot sleep till you be dead.
And here is annother Pitfall, that is strewn ore
With Roses: mark it, it is a cunning one.
I stand engaged for your husband, for several debts at Naples: let not
That trouble him, I had rather have his heart, then his money.
And I believe so too.

Bos. What do you believe?

Dutch. That he so much distrusts my husbands love,
He will by no means believe his heart is with him
Until he see it: The Devil is not cunning enough
To circumuent us in Ridles.

Bos. Will you reject that noble, and free league
Of amity, and love which I present you?

Dutch. Their league is like that of some politic Kings
Only to make themselves of strength, and power
To be our after-ruine: tell them so;

Bos. And what from you?

Ant. Thus tell him: I will not come.

Bos. And what of this.

Ant. My brothers have dispersed
Bloodhounds abroad; which till I hear are muzell'd
No truce, though hatched with nere such politic skill
Is safe, that hangs upon our enemies will.
I Will not come at them.

Bos. This proclaims your breeding.
Every small thing, draws a base mind to fear:
As the Adamant draws iron: fare you well sir,
You shall shortly hear from's. Exit.

Dutch. I suspect some Ambush:
Therefore by all my love; I do conjure you
To take your eldest son, and fly toward Millaine;
Let us not venture all this poor remainder
In one unlucky bottom.

Ant. You council safely:
Best of my life, farewell: Since we must part
Heaven has a hand in it: but no otherwise,
Then as some curious Artist, takes in sunder
A Clock, or Watch, when it is out of frame
To bring't in better order.

Dutch. I know not which is best,
To see you dead, or part with you: Farewell Boy.
Thou art happy, that thou have not understanding
To know thy misery: For all our wit
And reading, brings us to a truer sense
Of sorrow: In the eternal Church, Sir,
I do hope we shall not part thus.

Ant. Oh, be of comfort,
Make Patience a noble fortitude:
And think not how unkindly we are vs'de:
"Man (like to Cassia) is proved best, being bruiz'd.

Dutch. Must I like to a slaue-borne Russian,
Account it praise to suffer tyranny?
And yet (O Heaven) thy heavy hand is in it.
I have seen my little boy, often scourge his top,
And compared my self to it: naught made me ere go right,
But Heavens scourge-sticke.

Ant. Do not weep:
Heaven fashioned us of nothing: and we strive,
To bring our selves to nothing: farewell Cariola,
And thy sweet armefull: if I do never see thee more,
Be a good Mother to your little ones,
And save them from the Tiger: fare you well.

Duch. Let me look upon you once more: for that speech
Came from a dying father: your kiss is colder
Then that I have seen an holy Anchorite
Give to a dead man's skull.

Ant. My heart is turnde to a heavy lump of lead,
With which I sound my danger: fare you well. Exit.

Duch. My Laurel is all withered.

Car. Look (Madam) what a troop of armed men
Make toward us. Enter Bosola with a Guard.

Duch. O, they are very welcome:
When Fortunes wheel, is ouer-charg'd with Princes,
The weight makes it move swift. I wonld have my ruin
Be sudden: I am your adventure, am I not.

Bos. You are, you must see your husband no more,

Duch. What Devil art thou, that counterfeits heavens thunder?

Bos. Is that terrible? I would have you tell me
Whether is that note worse, that frights the silly birds
Out of the corn or that which does allure them
To the nets? you have hearkened to the last too much.

Duch. O misery: like to a rusty ore-char'd Carnon,
Shall I never slye in pieces? come: to what Prison?

Bos. To ^one*

Duch. Whether then?

Bos. To your Palace.

Duch. I have heard that Charons boat, serves to convey
All ore the dismal Lake, but brings none back again.

Bos. Your brothers mean you, safety, and pity.

Dutch. Pity? with such a pity men preserve alive
Pheasmes, and Quails, when they are not fat enough
To be eaten.

Bos. These are your children?

Dutch Yes:

Bos. Can they pratle?

Dutch. No:
But I intend, since they were borne accur^^d;
Cursses shall be their first language.

Bos. Fie (Madam)
Forget this base, low-fellow.

Dutch. Were I a man:
I'll'd beat that counterfeit face, into thy other

Bos. One of no Birth.

Dutch. Say that he was borne mean.
Man is most happy, when is own actions
Be arguments, and examples of his Virtue.

Bos. A barren, beggarly virtue.

Dutch. I pre-thee who is greatest, can you tell?
Sad tales befit my woe: I Will tell you one.
A Salmon, as she swam unto the Sea,
Met with a Dog-fish; who encounters her
With this rough language: why art thou so bold
To mix thy self with our high state of floods
Being no eminent Courtier, but one
That for the calmest, and fresh time of the year
Do live in shallow Rivers, rank'st thy self
With silly Smylts, and Shrympes? and dare thou
Pass by our Dog-ship, without reverence?
O (Quoth the Salmon) sister, be at peace:
Thank Jupiter, we both have passed the Net,
Our value never can be truly known,
Till in the Fishers basket we be shown,
In The Market then my price may be the higher,
Even when I am nearest to the Cook, and fire.
So, to Great men, the Morrall may be stretched.
,,Men often are valued high, when they are most wretch'd.
But come: whether you please: I am armed against misery:
Bent to all swaies of the Oppressors will.
There Is no deep Valley, but near some great Hill. Ex.

ACTVS IIII.
SCENA. I.
Ferdinand, Bosola, Duchess, Cariola, Servants. Ferd. How does our sister
Duchess bear her self
In her imprisonment?

Bos. Nobly: I Will describe her:
She Is sad, as one long used to it: and she seems
Rather to welcome the end of misery
Then shun it: a behavior so noble,
As gives a majesty to adversity:
You may discern the shape of loveliness
More perfect, in her tears, then in her smiles;
She will muse four hours together: and her silence,
(Me thinks) expresses more, then if she spoke.

Ferd. Her mellancholly seems to be fortifide
With a strange disdain.

Bos. It Is so: and this restraint
(Like English Mastiffes, that grow feirce with tying)
Makes her too passionately apprehend
Those pleasures she is kept from.

Ferd. Curse upon her:
I will no longer study in the book
Of another heart: inform her what I told you. Exit.

Bos. All comfort to your Grace;

Dutch. I will have none:
'Pray-thee, why do thou wrap thy poysond Pills
In Gold, and Sugar?

Bos. Your elder brother the Lord Ferdinand
Is come to visit you: and sends you word
'Cause once he rashly made a solemn vow
Never to see you more; he comes in the night:
And prays you (gently) neither Torch, nor Taper
Shine in your Chamber: he will kiss your hand:
And reconcile himself: but, for his vow,
He dares not see you:

Duch. At his pleasure:
Take hence the lights: he is come.

Ferd. Where are you?

Dutch. Here sir:

Ferd. This darkness suites you well.

Dutch. I would ask you pardon:

Ferd. You have it;
For I account it, the honorabl'st revenge
Where I may kill, to pardon: where are your Cubbs?

Duch. Whom?

Ferd. Call them your children;
For though our national law, distinguish Bastards
From true legitimate issue: compassionate nature
Makes them all equal.

Duch. Do you visit me for this?
You violate a Sacrament of the Church
Shall make you howl in hell for it.

Ferd. It had bin well,
Could you have lived thus always: for indeed
You were too much in the light: But no more,
I come to seal my peace with you: here is a hand, gives her a dead man's hand.
To which you have vowed much love: the Ring upon it
You gave.

Duch. I affectionately kiss it:

Ferd. 'Pray do: and bury the print of it in your heart:
I will leave this Ring with you, for a Loue-token:
And the hand, as sure as the ring: and do not doubt
But you shall have the heart too: when you need a friend
Send it to him, that ow'de it: you shall see
Whether he can aid you.

Dutch. You are very cold.
I fear you are not well after your travel:
Hah? lights: oh horrible:

Ferd. Let her have lights enough Exit.

Dutch. What witchcraft does he practice, that he has left
A dead-mans hand here? -- Here is discovered, (behind a Trauers;) the
artificial figures of Antonio, and his children, appearing as if they were
dead.

Bos. Look you: here is the piece, from which 'twas t^'^e;
He does present you this sad spectacle,
That now you know directly they are dead,
Hereafter you may (wisely) cease to grieve
For that which cannot be recovered.

Duch. There is not between heaven, and earth one wish
I stay for after this: it wastes me more,
Then were it my picture, fashioned out of wax,
Stuck with a magical needle, and then buried
In some foul dunghill: and yond's an excellent property
For a tyrant, which I would account mercy,

Bos. What Is that?

Dutch. If they would bind me to that liueles truncke,
And let me freeze to death.

Bos. Come, you must live.

Dutch. That Is the greatest torture souls feel in hell,
In hell: that they must live, and cannot die:
Portia, I Will new kindle thy Coals again,
And revive the rare, and almost dead example
Of a loving wife.

Bos. O sye: despair? remember
You are a Christian.

Dutch. The Church enioynes fasting:
I Will starve my self to death.

Bos. Leave this vain sorrow;
Things being at the worst, begin to mend:
The Be when he has shot his sting into your hand
May then play with your eye-lyd.

Dutch. Good comfortable fellow
Persuade a wretch that is broke upon the wheel
To have all his bones new set: entreat him live,
To be executed again: who must dispatch me?
I account this world a tedious Theater,
For I do play a part in it against my will.

Bos. Come, be of comfort, I will save your life.

Dutch. Indeed I have not leisure to tend so small a business.

Bos. Now, by my life, I pity you.

Dutch. Thou art a fool then,
To wast thy pity on a thing so wretch'd
As cannot pity it: I am full of daggers:
Puff: let me blow these vipers from one.
What are you?

Ser. One that wishes you long life.

Duch. I would thou were hanged for the horrible curse
Thou have given me: I shall shortly grow one
Of the miracles of pity: I Will go pray: No,
I Will go curse:

Bos. Oh fie:

Dutch. I could curse the Stars.

Bos. Oh fearful:

Dutch. And those three smyling seasons of the year
Into a Russian winter: nay the world
To its first Chaos.

Bos. Look you, the Stars shine still:

Dutch. Oh, but you must remember, my curse has a great way to go:
Plagues, (that make lanes through largest families)
Consume them:

Bos. Fie Lady:

Dutch. Let them like tyrants
Never be remembered, but for the ill they have done:
Let all the zealous prayers of mortefied
Churchmen forget them,

Bos. O uncharitable:

Dutch. Let heaven, a little while, cease crowning Martirs
To punish them: Go, howl them this: and say I long to bleed
,,It is some mercy, when men kill with speed. Exit.

Ferd. Excellent; as I would wish: she is plagued in Art.
These presentations are but framed in wax.
By the curious Master in that Quality,
Vincentio Lauriola, and she takes them
For true substantial Bodies.

Bos. Why do you do this?

Ferd. To bring her to despair.

Bos. 'Faith, end here:
And go no farther in your cruelty,
Send her a penetentiall garment, to put on,
Next to her delicate skin, and furnish her
With beads, and prayer books.

Ferd. Damn her, that body of hers,
While that my blood ran pure in it, was more worth
Then, that which thou would comfort, (called a soul)
I will send her masks of common Curtizans,
Have her meat served up by baudes, and ruffians,
And ('cause she will needs be mad) I am resolved
To remove forth the common Hospital,
All the mad-folke, and place them near her lodging:
There let them practice together, sing, and dance,
And act their gambols to the full o'th'moone:
If she can sleep the better for it, let her,
Your work is almost ended.

Bos. Must I see her again?

Ferd. Yes.

Bos. Never.

Ferd. You must.

Bos. Never in mine own shape,
That Is forfeited, by my intelligence,
And this last cruel lie: when you send me next,
The business shall be comfort.

Ferd. Very likely,
Thy pity is nothing of kin to thee: Antonio,
Lurkes about Millaine, thou shall shortly thither,
To feed a fire, as great as my revenge,
Which neu'r will slack, till it have spent his fuel,
"Intemperate agues, make Physicians cruel. Exeunt.

SCENA II.
Duchess, Cariola, Servant, Madmen, Bosola, Exe^^^ioners, Ferdinand. Duch.
Wha^ (...) ^oyse was that?

Car^ ^
Of Madmen (Lady) which your Tyrant brother
Has placed about your lodging: This tyranny,
I think was never practiced till this hour.

Duch. Indeed I thank him: nothing but noyce, and folly
Can keep me in my right wits, whereas reason
And silence, make me stark mad: Sit down,
Discourse to me some dismal Tragedy.

Cari. O 'twill increase your mellancholly.

Duch. Thou art deceived,
To hear of greater grief, would lessen mine,
This is a prison?

Cari. Yes, but you shall live
To shake this durance off.

Duch. Thou art a fool,
The Robin red-brest, and the Nightingale,
Never live long in cages.

Cari. Pray dry your eyes.
What think you of Madam?

Duch. Of nothing*
When I muse thus, I sleep.

Cari. Like a madman, with your eyes open?

Duch. Do thou think we shall know one an other,
In the other world?

Cari. Yes, out of question.

Duch. O that it were possible we might
But hold some two days conference with the dead.
From them, I should learn somewhat I am sure
I never shall know here: I Will tell thee a miracle,
I am not mad yet, to my cause of sorrow.
Th'heauen ore my head, seems made of molton brass.
The earth of flaming sulphur, yet I am not mad:
I am acquainted with sad misery,
As the tan'd galley-slaue, is with his Oar,
Necessity makes me suffer constantly,
And custom makes it easy, who do I look like now?

Cari. Like to your picture in the gallery,
A deal of life in show, but none in practice:
Or rather like some reverend monument
Whose ruins, are even pitied.

Duch. Very proper:
And Fortune seems only to have her eie-sight,
To behold my Tragedy: How now,
What noyce is that?

Servant. I am come to tell you,
Your brother has intended you some sport:
A great Physician, when the Pope was sick
Of a deep mellancholly, presented him
With several sorts of madmen, which wild object
(Being full of change, and sport,) forced him to laugh,
And so th'impost-hume broke: the self same cure,
The Duke intends on you.

Duch. Let them come in.

Ser. There Is a mad Lawyer, and a secular Priest,
A Doctor that has forfeited his wits
By jealousy: an Astrologian,
That in his works, said such a day o'th'moneth,
Should be the day of doom; and failing often,
Ran mad: an English Tailor, crais'd i'th'braine,
With the studdy of new fashion: a gentleman usher
Quite beside himself, with care to keep in mind,
The number of his Ladies salutations;
Or how do you, she employed him in each morning:
A Farmer too, (an excellent knave in grain)
Mad, 'cause he was hindered transportation,
And let one Broaker, (that is mad) loose to these,
Youl'd think the devil were among them.

Duch. Sit Cariola: let them loose when you please,
For I am chained to endure all your tyranny.

Here (by a Madman) this song is sung, to a dismal kind of Music. O let us
howl, some heavy note,
some deadly-dogged howl,
Sounding, as from the threatening throat,
of beasts, and fatal foul.
As Ravens, Schrich-owles, Bulls, and Bears,
We'll bill, and bawle our parts,
Till yerk some noyce have cloyed your ears,
and co^asiu'd your hearts.
At last when as our quire wants breath,
our bodies being blessed,
We'll sing like Swans, to welcome death,
and die in love and rest.
1. Madman. Doomes-day not come yet? I Will draw it nearer by a perspectiue, or
make a glass, that shall set all the world on fire upon an instant: I cannot
sleep, my pillow is stuff't with a littour of Porcupines.


2. Mad. Hell is a mere glasse-house, where the devils are continually
blowing up women's souls, on hollow yrons, and the fire never goes out.


3. Mad. I will lie with every woman in my parish the tenth night:
I will tithe them over like hay-cockes.

4. Mad. Shall my Pothecary out-go me, because I am a
Cuck-old? I have found out his roguery: he makes allom
Of his wives vrin, and sells it to Puritaines, that have sore
Throats with ouer-strayning.

1. Mad. I have skill in Harroldry.

2. Have?

1. You do give for your creast, a wood-cockes head, with the
Brains picked out on it, you are a very ancient Gentleman.

3. Greek is turned Turk, we are only to be saved by the
Heluetian translation.

1. Come on Sir, I will lay the law to you.

2. Oh, rather lay a coraziue, the law will eat to the bone.

3. He that drinks but to satisfy nature is damned.

4. If I had my glass here, I would show a sight should make
All the women here, call me mad Doctor.

1. What Is he, a rope-maker?

2. No, no, no, a snufling knave, that while he shows the
Tombs, will have his hand in a wenches placket.

3. Woe, to the Caroach, that brought home my wife from
The Masque, at three a clock in the morning, it had a large
Feather-bed in it.

4. I have paired the devils nails forty times, roasted them
In Ravens eggs, and cured agues with them.

3. Get me three hundred milch bats, to make possets*
To procure sleep.

4. All the College may throw their caps at me, I have made a
Soape-boyler costiue, it was my masterpiece: -- Here the Dance consisting of
8. Madmen, with music answerable there unto, after which, Bosola (like an
old man) enters.

Duch. Is he mad to?

Ser. 'Pray question him: I Will leave you.

Bos. I am come to make thy tomb.

Duch. Hah, my tomb?
Thou speak, as if I lay upon my death bed,
Gasping for breath: do thou perceive me sick?

Bos. Yes, and the more dangerously, since thy sickness is insensible.

Duch. Thou art not mad sure, do know me?

Bos. Yes.

Duch. Who am I?

Bos. Thou art a box of worme-seede at best, but a saluatory
Of green mummey: what is this flesh? a little cruded milk,
Fantastical puffe-paste: our bodies are weaker then those
Paper prisons boys use to keep flies in: more contemptible:
Since ours is to preserve earth-wormes: did thou ever see
A Lark in a cage? such is the soul in the body: this world
Is like her little turfe of grass, and the Heaven ore our heads,
Like her looking glass, only gives us a miserable knowledge
Of the small com^^sse of our prison.

Duch. Am not I, thy Duchess?

Bos. Thou art some great woman sure, for riot begins to sit on thy
Forehead (clad in gray hairs) twenty years sooner, then on a
Merry milk m^ydes. Thou sleep'st worse, then if a mouse
Should be forced to take up her lodging in a cats ear:
A little infant, that breeds it is teeth, should it lie with thee, would
Cry out, as if thou were the more unquiet bedfellow.

Duch. I am Duchess of Malfy still.

Bos. That makes thy sleeps so broken:
"Glories (like glowe-wormes) a far off, shine bright,
But looked to near, have neither heat, nor light.

Duch. Thou art very plain.

Bos. My trade is to flatter the dead, not the living
I am a tombe-maker.

Duch. And thou come to make my tomb?

Bos. Yes.

Duch. Let me be a little merry,
Of what stuff will thou make it?

Bos. Nay, resolve me first, of what fashion?

Duch. Why, do we grow fantastical in our deathbed?
Do we affect fashion in the grave?

Bos. Most ambitiously: Princes images on their tombs,
Do not lie, as they were wont, seeming to pray,
Up to heaven: but with their hands under their cheeks,
(As if they died of the toothache) they are not carved
With their eyes, fixed upon the stars; but as their
Minds were wholly bent upon the world,
The selfsame way they seem to turn their faces.

Duch. Let me know fully therefore the effect
Of this thy dismal preparation,
This talk, fit for a charnell?

Bos. Now, I shall,
Here is a present from your Princely brothers, A Coffin, Cords, and a Bell.
And may it arrive wel-come, for it brings
Last benefit, last sorrow.

Duch. Let me see it,
I have so much obedience, in my blood,
I wish it in there veins, to do them good.

Bos. This is your last presence Chamber.

Cari. O my sweet Lady.

Duch. Peace, it affrights not me.

Bos. I am the common Bell-man,
That usually is sent to condemned persons*
The night before they suffer:

Duch Even now thou said,
Thou wast a tombe-maker?

Bos. 'Twas to bring you
By degree^ to mortification: Listen.
Hark, now every thing is still,
The Schritch-Owle, and the whistler shrill,
Call upon our Dame, aloud,
And bid her quickly don her shroud:
Much you had of Land and rent,
Your length in clay's now competent.
A long war, disturbed your mind,
Here your perfect peace is signed,
Of what is it, fools make such vain keeping?
Sin their conception, their birth, weeping:
Their life, a general mist of error,
Their death, a hideous storm of terror,
Strew your hair, with powders sweet:
D'on clean linen, bath your feet,
And (the foul feend more to check)
A crucifixe let bless your neck,
It Is now full tide, 'tweene night, and day,
End your groan, and come away.

Cari. Hence villains, tyrants, murderers: alas!
What will you do with my Lady? call for help.

Duch. To whom, to our next neighbors? they are mad-folkes.

Bos. Remove that noise.

Duch. Farewell Cariola,
In my last will, I have not much to give
A many hungry guests, have fed upon me,
Thine will be a poor reuersion.

Cari. I will die with her.

Duch. I pray-thee look thou give my little boy
Some sirrop, for his cold, and let the girl
Say her prayers, ere she sleep. Now what you please,
What death?

Bos. Strangling, here are your Executioners.

Duch. I forgive them:
The apoplexy, cathar, or cough o'th'loongs,
Would do as much as they do.

Bos. Does not death fright you?

Duch. Who would be afraid on it?
Knowing to meet such excellent company
In the other world.

Bos. Yet, me thinks,
The manner of your death should much afflict you,
This cord should terrify you?

Duch. Not a whit,
What would it pleasure me, to have my throat cut
With diamonds? or to be smothered
With C^ssia? or to be shot to death, with pearls?
I know death has ten thousand several doors
For men to take their Exits: and it is found
They go on such strange geometrical hinges,
You may open them both ways: any way, (for heaven sake)
So I were out of your whispering: Tell my b^others,
That I ^erceiue death, (now I am well a wake)
Best gift is, they can give, or I can take,
I would feign put off my last womans-fault,
Il'd not be tedious to you.

Ex^c. We are ready.

Duch. Dispose my breath, how please you, but my body
Bestow upon my women, will you?

Exec. Yes.

Duch. Pull, and pull strongly, for your able strength,
Most pull down heaven upon me:
Yet stay, heaven gates are not so highly arched
As Princes palaces, they that enter there
Must go upon their knees: Come violent death,
Serve for Mandragora, to make me sleep;
Go tell my brothers, when I am laid out, They strangle her.
They then may feed in quiet.

Bos. Where Is the waiting woman?
Fetch her: Some other strangle the children:
Look you, there sleeps your mistress.

Cari. Oh you are damned
Perpetually for this: My turn is next,
Is It not so ordered?

Bos. Yes, and I am glad
You are so well prepared for it.

Cari. You are deceived Sir,
I am not prepared for it, I will not die,
I will first come to my answer; and know
How I have offended.

Bos. Come, dispatch her:
You kept her counsel, now you shall keep ours.

Cari. I will not die, I must not, I am contracted
To a young Gentleman.

Exec. Here Is your wedding Ring.

Car. Let me but speak with the Duke: I Will discover
Treason to his person.

Bos. Delays: throttle-her.

Exec. She bites: and scratches:

Car. If you kill me now
I am damned: I have not bin at Confession
This two years:

Bos. When.

Car. I am quick with child.

Bos. Why then,
Your credit's saved: bear her in toth' next room:
Let this lie still.

Ferd. Is she dead?

Bos. She is what
You'll'd have her: But here begin your pity, Shows the children strangled*
Alas, how have these offended?

Ferd. The death
Of young Wolffes, is never to be pitied.

Bos. Fix your eye here:

Ferd. Constantly.

Bos. Do you not weep?
Other sins, only speak; Murder shreikes out:
The Element of water, moistens the Earth,
But blood flies upwards, and bedewes the Heavens.

Ferd. Cover her face: Mine eyes dazell she di'd young.

Bos. I think not so: her infelicitie
Seemed to have years too many.

Ferd. She, and I were Twins:
And should I die this instant, I had lived
Her Time to a Mynute.

Bos. It seems she was borne first:
You have bloodely approved the ancient truth,
That kindred commonly do worse ag^ee
Then remote strangers.

Ferd. Let me see her face again;
Why did not thou pity her: what an excellent
Honest man, might thou have bin
If thou had borne her to some Sa^ctuary?
Or (bold in a good cause) opposed thy self
With thy advanced sword above thy head,
Between her Innocence, and my Revenge?
I bad thee, when I was distracted of my wits*
Go kill my dearest friend, and thou have don't.
For let me but examine well the cause;
What was the meanenes of her match to me*
Only I must confess, I had a hope
(Had she continued widow) to have gained
An infinite mass of Treasure by her death:
And that was the main cause; her Marriage,
That drew a stream of gall, quite through my heart;
For thee, (as we observe in Tragedies
That a good Actor many times is curss'd
For playing a villains part) I hate thee for it:
And (for my sake) say thou have done much ill, well:

Bos. Let me quicken your memory: for I perceive
You are falling into ingratitude: I challenge
The reward due to my service.

Ferd. I Will tell thee,
What I Will give thee,

Bos. Do:

Ferd. I Will give thee a pardon
For this murder:

Bos. H^h?

Ferd. Yes: and it is
The largest bounty I can study to do thee.
By what authority did thou execute
This bloody sentence?

Bos. By your^

Ferd. Mine? was I her Judge?
Did any ceremonial form of Law,
Doombe her to not-Being? did a complete Jury
Deliver her conviction up in the Court?
Where shall thou find this Judgment registerd
Unless in hell? See: like a bloody fool
Thou Have forfeyted thy life, and thou shall die for it.

Bos. The Office of Justice is perverted quite
When one Thief hangs another: who shall dare
To reveal this:

Ferd. Oh, I Will tell thee:
The Wolf shall find her Grave, and scrape it up:
Not to devour the corpse, but to discover
The horrid murder.

Bos. You; not I shall quake for it.

Ferd. Leave me:

Bos. I will first receive my Pention.

Ferd. You are a villain:

Bos. When your Ingratitude
Is Judge, I am so;

Ferd. O horror!
That not the fear of him, which binds the devils
Can prescribe man obedience.
Never look upon me more.

Bos. Why fare thee well*
Your brother, and your self, are worthy men;
You have a pair of hearts, are hollow Graves,
Rotten, and rotting others: and your vengeance,
(Like two-chain'd bullets) still goes arm in arm,
You may be Brothers: for treason, like the plague,
Does take much in a blood: I stand like one
That long has taken a sweet, and golden dream.
I am angry with my self, now that I wake.

Ferd. Get thee into some unknown part o'th* world
That I may never see thee.

Bos. Let me know
Wherefore I should be thus neglected? sir,
I served your tyranny: and rather strove,
To satisfy your self, then all the world;
And though I loathed the evil, yet I loved
You that did council it: and rather sought
To appear a true servant, then an honest man.

Ferd. I Will go hunt the Badger by Owle-light:
It Is a deed of darkness. Exit.

Bos. He Is much distracted: Off my painted honor,
While with vain hopes, our faculties we tire,
We seem to sweat in ye, and freeze in fire;
What would I do, we^e this to do again?
I would not change my peace of conscience
For all the wealth of Europe: She stirs; here is life:
Return (fair soul) from darkness, and lead mine
Out of this sencible Hell: She Is warm, she breathes:
Upon thy pale lips I will melt my heart
To store them with fresh color: who is there?
Some cordial drink: Alas! I dare not call:
So pity, would destroy pity: her Eye opes,
And heaven in it, seems to open, (that late was shut)
To take me up to merry.

Dutch. Antonio.

Bos. Yes (Madam) he is living,
The dead bodies you saw, were but faign'd statues;
He Is reconciled to your brothers: the Pope has wrought
The atonement.

Dutch. Mercy. she dies,

Bos. Oh, she is gone again: there the cords of life broake:
Oh sacred Innocence, that sweetly sleeps
On Turtles feathers: whilst a guilty conscience
Is a black Register, wherein is writ
All our good deeds, and bad: a Perspectiue
That shows us hell; that we cannot be suffered
To do good when we have a mind to it?
This is manly sorrow:
These tears, I am very certain, never grew
In my Mothers Milk. My estate is suncke
Below the degree of fear: where were
These penitent fountains, while she was living?
Oh, they were frozen up: here is a sight
As direful to my soul, as is the sword
Unto a wretch has slain his father: Come, I Will bear thee hence.
And execute thy last will; that is deliver
Thy body to the reverend dispose
Of some good women: that the cruel tyrant
Shall not deny me: Then I Will poast to Millaine,
Where some what I will speedily enact
Worth my deiection. Exit.

ACTVS V.
SCENA. I.
Antonio, Delio, Pescara, Iulia. Ant. What think you of my hope of
reconcilement
To the Aragonian brethren?

Del. I misdoubt it
For though they have sent their letters of safe conduct
For your repair to Millaine, they appear
But Nets, to entrap you: The Marquis of Pescara,
Under whom you hold certain land in Cheit,
Much against his noble nature, has bin moved
To ceize those lands, and some of his dependants
Are at this instant, making it their suit
To be invested in your Revenues.
I cannot think, they mean well to your life,
That do deprive you of your means of life,
Your living.

Ant. You are still an heretic.
To any safety, I can shape my self.

Del. Here comes the Marquis: I will make my self
Petitioner for some part of your land,
To know whether it is flying.

Ant. I pray do.

Del. Sir, I have a suit to you.

Pesc. To me.

Del. An easy one:
There is the Cittadell of St. Bennet,
With some demeasnes, of late in the possession
Of Antonio Bologna, please you bestow them on me?

Pesc. You are my friend: But this is such a suit,
Nor fit for me to give, nor you to take.

Del. No sir?

Pesc. I will give you ample reason for it,
Soon in private: Here Is the Cardinals Mistress.

Iul. My Lord, I am grown your poor Petitioner,
And should be an ill beggar, had I not
A Great man's letter, here (the Cardinals)
To Court you in my favor.

Pesc. He entreates for you
The Cittadell of Saint Bennet, that belonged
To the banished Bologna.

Iul. Yes:

Pesc. I could not have thought of a friend, I could
Rather pleasure with it: it is yours:

Iul. Sir, I thank you:
And he shall know how doubly I am engaged
Both in your gu^^t, and speediness of giving,
Which makes your grant, the greater. Exit.

Ant. How they fortefie
Themselves with my ruin?

Del. Sir: I am
Little bound to you:

Pesc. Why.

Del. Because you denide this suit, to me, and gau't
To such a creature.

Pesc. Do you know what it was?
It was Antonios land: not forfeyted
By course of law; but ravished from his throat
By the Cardinals entreaty: it were not fit
I should bestow so maine a piece of wrong
Upon my friend: it is a gratification
Only due to a Strumpet: for it is injustice;
Shall I sprinckle the pure blood of Innocents
To make those followers, I call my friends
Look ruddier upon me? I am glad
This land, (taken from the owner by such wrong)
Returns again unto so foul an use,
As Salary for his Lust. Learn, (good Delio)
To ask noble things of me, and you shall find
I Will be a noble giver.

Del. You instruct ^e well:

Ant Why, here is a man, now, would fright impudence
From sawciest Beggars.

Pesc. Prince Ferdinand's come to Millaine
Sick (as they give out) of an Appoplexie:
But some say, it is a frenzy; I am going
To visit him. Exit.

Ant. It Is a noble old fellow:

Del. What course do you mean to take, Antonio?

Ant. This night, I mean to venture all my fortune
(Which is no more, then a poor lingering life)
To the Cardinals worst of malice: I have got
Private access to his chamber: and intend
To visit him, about the mid of night.
(As once his brother did our noble Duchess.)
It may be that the sudden apprehension
Of danger (for I Will go in mine own shape)
When he shall see it freight with love, and duty,
May draw the poison out of him, and work
A friendly reconcilement; if it fail;
Yet, it shall rid me of this infamous calling,
For better fall once, then be ever falling.

Del. I Will second you in all danger: and (how ere)
My life keeps rank with yours

Ant. You are still my loved, and best friend. Exeunt.

SCENA. II.
Pescara, a Doctor, Ferdinand, Cardinal, Malateste, Bosola, Iulia. Pesc. Now
Doctor; may I visit your Patient?

Doctor. If It please your Lordship: but he is instantly
To take the air here in the Gallery,
By my direction.

Pesc. 'Pray-thee, what is his disease?

Doc. A very pestilent disease (my Lord)
They call Licanthropia.

Pesc. What Is that?
I need a Dictionary to it.

Doc. I Will tell you:
In those that are possessed with it there ore-flowes
Such mellencholy humor, they imagine
Themselves to be transformed into Woolues,
Steal forth to Churchyards in the dead of night,
And dig dead bodies up: as two nights since
One met the Duke, 'bout midnight in a lane
Behind St. Marks Church, with the leg of a man
Upon his shoulder; and he howled fearfully:
Said he was a Woolffe: only the difference
Was, a Woolffes skin was hairy on the outside,
His on the Inside: bad them take their swords,
Rip up his flesh, and try: straight I was sent for,
And having ministerd to him, found his Grace
Very well recovered.

Pesc. I am glad on it,

Doc. Yet not without some fear
Of a relaps: if he grow to his fit again
I Will go a nearer way to work with him
Then ever Paraclesus dreamed of: If
They Will give me leave I Will buffet his madness out of him.
Stand aside: he comes.

Ferd. Leave me.

Mal. Why does your Lordship love this solitarines?

Ferd. Eagles commonly fly alone: They are Crows, Dawes, and
Sterlings that flock together: Look, what is that,
Follows me?

Mal. Nothing (my Lord)

Ferd. Yes:

Mal. It Is your shadow.

Ferd. Stay it, let it not haunt me.

Mal. Impossible; if you move, and the Sun shine:

Ferd. I will throtle it.

Mal. Oh, my Lord: you are angry with nothing.

Ferd. You are a fool:
How is it possible I should catch my shadow
Unless I fall upon it? When I go to Hell,
I mean to carry a bribe: for look you
Good gifts euer-more make away, for the worst persons

Pesc. Rise good my Lord.

Ferd. I am studying the Art of Patience.

Pesc. It Is a noble Virtue;

Ferd. To drive six Snailes before me, from this town
To Mosco; neither use Goad, nor Whip to them,
But let them take their own time: (the patientst mani'th' world
Match me for an experiment) and I Will crawle after
Like a sheepe-biter.

Card. Force him up.

Ferd. Use me well, you were best:
What I have don, I have don: I Will confess nothing*

Doctor. Now let me come to him: Are you mad
(My Lord?) are you out of your Princely wits?

Ferd. What Is he?

Pesc. Your Doctor..

Ferd. Let me have his beard sawed off, and his eye
Brows filled more civil.

Doct. I must do mad tricks with him,
For that is the only way on it. I have brought
Your grace a Salamanders skin, to keep you
For sun-burning.

Ferd. I have cruel sore eyes.

Doct. The white of a Cockatrixes-egge is present remedy.

Ferd. Let it be a new laid one, you were best:
Hide me from him: Physicians are like Kings,
They brook no contradiction.

Doct. Now he begins to fear me,
Now let me alone with him.

Card. How now, put off your gown?

Doct. Let me have some forty vrinalls filled with Rose Water:
He, and I Will go pelt one an other with them,
Now he begins to fear me: Can you fetch a friske, sir?
Let him go, let him go upon my perrill:
I find by his eye, he stands in awe of me,
I Will make him, as tame as a Dormouse.

Ferd. Can you fetch your friskes, sir: I will stamp him into a Cullice:
Flea off his skin, to cover one of the Anotomies,
This rogue has set i'th'cold yonder, in Barber-Chyrurgeons hall:
Hence, hence, you are all of you, like beasts for sacrifice,
There Is nothing left of you, but tongue, and belly,
Flattery, and leachery.

Pes. Doctor, he did not fear you thoroughly.

Doct. True, I was somewhat to forward.

Bos. Mercy upon me, what a fatal judgment
Has fallen upon this Ferdinand?

Pes. Knows your grace
What accident has brought unto the Prince,
This strange distraction?

Card. I must faigne somewhat: Thus they say it grew.
You have heard it rumor'd for these many years,
None of our family dies, but there is seen
The shape of an old woman, which is given
By tradition, to us, to have bin murdered
By her Nephews, for her riches: Such a figure
One night (as the Prince sat up late at's book)
Appeared to him, when crying out for help,
The gentlemen of's chamber, found his grace
All on a cold sweat, altered much in face
And language: Since which apparition,
He has grown worse, and worse, and I much fear
He cannot live.

Bos. Sir, I would speak with you.

Pes. We'll leave your grace,
Wishing to the sick Prince, our noble Lord,
All health of mind, and body.

Card. You are most welcome:
Are you come? so: this fellow must not know
By any means I had intelligence
In our Duchess death: For (though I counseled it,)
The full of all th'ingagement seemed to grow
From Ferdinand: Now sir, how fares our sister?
I do not think but sorrow makes her look
Like to an o^t-^^'d garment: She shall now
Taste comfort from me: why do you look so wildely?
Oh, the fortune of your master here, the Prince
Deiects you, but be you of happy comfort:
If you will do on thing for me, I Will entreat
Though he had a cold tombe-stone ore his bones,
I'll'd make you what you would be.

Bos. Any thing,
Give it me in a breath, and let me sly to it:
They that think long, small expedition win,
For mu^^ng much o'th'end, cannot begin.

Iu^. Sir, will you come in to Supper?

Card. I am busy, leave me.

Iul. What an excellent shape has that fellow? Exit.

Card. It Is thus: Antonio lurkes here in Millaine,
Enquire him out, and kill him: while he lives,
Our sister cannot marry, and I have thought
Of an excellent match for her: do this, and style me
Thy advancement.

Bos. But by what means shall I find him out?

Card. There is a gentleman, called Delio
Here in the Camp, that has bin long approved
His loyal friend: Set eye upon that fellow,
Follow him to Mass, may be Antonio,
Although he do account religion
But a Schoole-name, for fashion of the world,
May accompany him, or else go enquire out
Delio's Confessor, and see i^ you can bribe
Him to reveal it: there are a thousand ways
A man might find to trace him: As to know,
What fellows haunt the Jews, for taking up
Great sums of money, for sure he is in want,
Or else to go to th'Picture-makers, and learn
Who brought her Picture lately, some of these
Happily may take --

Bos. Well, I Will not freeze i'th'businesse,
I would see that wretched thing, Antonio
Above all sightes i'th'world.

Card. Do, and be happy. Exit.

Bos. This fellow does breed Bazalisques in's eyes,
He Is nothing else, but murder: yet he seems
Not to have notice of the Duchess death:
It Is his cunning: I must follow his example,
There cannot be a surer way to trace,
Then that of an old Fox.

Iul. So, sir, you are well met.

Bos. How now?

Iul. Nay, the doors are fast enough:
Now Sir, I will make you confess your treachery.

Bos. Treachery?

Iul. Yes, confess to me
Which of my women 'twas you hyr'd, to put
Loue-powder into my drink?

Bos. Love powder?

Iul. Yes, when I was at Malfy,
Why should I fall in love with such a face else?
I have already suffered for thee so much pain,
The only remedy to do me good,
Is to kill my longing.

Bos. Su^e your Pistol holds
Nothing but perfumes, or kissing comfits: excellent Lady,
You have a pretty way on it to discover
Your longing: Come, come, I Will disarme you,
And arm you thus, yet this is wondrous strange.

Iul. Compare thy form, and my eyes together,
You Will ^ind my love no such great miracle: Now you will say,
I am wanton: This nice modesty, in Ladies
Is but a troublesome familiar,
That haunts them.

Bos. Know you me, I am a blunt soldier.

Iul. The better,
Sure, there wants fire, where there are no lively sparks
Of roughnes.

Bos. And I want complement.

Iul. Why ignorance in court-ship cannot make you do amiss,
If you have a heart to do well.

Bos. You are very fair.

Iul. Nay, if you lay beauty to my charge,
I must plead unguilty.

Bos. Your bright eyes
Carry a Quiver of darts in them, sharper
Then Sunbeams.

Iul. You will mar me with commendation,
Put your self to the charge of courting me,
Whereas now I woe you.

Bos. I have it, I will work upon this Creature,
Let us grow most amorously familiar:
If the great Cardinal now should see me thus,
Would he not count me a villain?

Iul. No, he might count me a wanton,
Not lay a scruple of offense on you:
For if I see, and steal a Diamond,
The fault is not i'th'stone, but in me the thief,
That purloines it: I am sudaine with you,
We that are great women of pleasure, use to cut off
These uncertain wishes, and unquiet longings,
And in an instant join the sweet delight
And the p^^tty excuse together: had you bin in'th'streete,
Under my chamber window, even there
I should have courted you.

Bos. Oh, you are an excellent Lady.

Iul. Bid me do somewhat for you presently,
To express I love you.

Bos. I will, and if you love me,
Fail not to effect it: The Cardinal is grown wondrous mellancholly,
Demand the cause, let him not put you off,
With faign'd excuse, discover the maine ground on it.

Iul. Why would you know this?

Bos. I have depended on him,
And I hear that he is fallen in some disgrace
With the Emperor, if he be, like the mice
That forsake falling houses, I would shift
To other dependence.

Iul. You shall not need follow the wars,
I Will be your maintenance.

Bos. And I your loyal servant,
But I cannot leave my calling.

Iul. Not leave an
Ungrateful General, for the love of a sweet Lady?
You are like some, cannot sleep in feather-beds,
But must have blocks for their pillowes.

Bos. Will you do this?

Iul. Cunningly.

Bos. To morrow I Will expect th'intelligence.

Iul. To morrow? get you into my Cabinet,
You shall have it with you: do not delay me,
No more then I do you: I am like one
That is condemned: I have my pardon promised.
But I would see it sealed: Go, get you in,
You shall see me wind my tongue about his heart,
Like a skeine of silk.

Card. Where are you?

Seru. Here.

Card. Let none upon your lives
Have conference with the Prince Ferdinand,
Unless I know it: In this distraction
He may reveal the murder:
Yond's my lingering consumption:
I am weary of her; and by any means
Would be qui^ off.

Iul. How now, my Lord?
What ailes you?

Card. Nothing.

Iul. Oh, you are much alterd:
Come, I must be your Secretary, and remove
This lead from off your bosom, what is the matter?

Card. I may not tell you*

Iul. Are you so far in love with sorrow,
You cannot part, with part of it? or think you
I cannot love your grace, when you are sad,
As well as merry? or do you suspect
I, that have bin a secret to your heart,
These many winters, cannot be the same
Unto your tongue?

Card. Satis^ie thy longing,
The only way to make thee keep my council,
Is not to tell thee.

Iul. Tell your echo this,
Or flatterers, that (like echoes) still report
What they hear (though most imperfect) and not me:
For, if that you be true unto your self,
I Will know.

Card. Will you rack me?

Iul. No, judgment shall
Draw it from you: It is an equal fault,
To tell ones secrets, unto all, or none.

Card. The first argues folly.

Iul. But the last tyranny.

Card. Very we^l, why imagine I have committed
Some secret deed, which I desire the world
May never hear of?

Iul. Therefore may not I know it?
You have concealed for me, as great a sin
As adultery: Sir, never was occasion
For perfect trial of my constancy
Till now: Sir, I beseech you.

Card. You Will repent it.

Iul. Never.

Card. It hurries thee to ruin: I Will not tell thee,
Be well advised, and think what danger it is
To receive a Princes secrets: they that do,
Had need have their breasts hoop'd with adamant
To contain them: I pray thee yet be satisfied,
Examine thine own frailety, it is more easy
To tie knots, then unloose them: it is a secret
That (like a lingering poison) may chance lie
Spread in thy veins, and kill thee seven year hence*

Iul. Now you dally with me.

Card. No more, thou shall know it.
By my appointment, the great Duchess of Malfy,
And two of her young children, four nights since
Were strangled.

Iul. Oh heaven! (sir) what have you done?

Card. How now? how setles this? think you your
Bosom will be a grave, dark and obscure enough
For such a secret?

Iul. You have undone your self (sir.)

Card. Why?

Iul. It lies not in me to conceal it.

Card. No? come, I will swear you to it upon this book*

Iul. Most religiously.

Card. Kiss it.
Now you shall never utter it, thy curiosity
Has undone thee: you are poisoned with that book,
Because I knew thou could not keep my council,
I have bound the to it by death.

Bos. For pity sake, hold.

Card. Ha, Bosola?

Iul. I forgive you,
This equal piece of Justice you have done:
For I betrayed your council to that fellow,
He over heard it; that was the cause I said
It lay not in me, to conceal it.

Bos. Oh foolish woman,
Could not thou have poisoned him?

Iul. It Is weakness,
Too much to think what should have bin done,
I go, I know not whether.

Card. Wherefore come thou hither?

Bos. That I might find a great man, (like your self,)
Not out of his wits (as the Lord Ferdinand)
To remember my service.

Card. I Will have thee hewed in pieces.

Bos. Make not your self such a promise of that life
Which is not yours, to dispose of.

Car. Who placed thee here.

Bos. Her lust, as she intended.

Card. Very well, now you know me for your fellow murderer*

Bos. And wherefore should you lay fair marble colors,
Upon your rotten purposes to me?
Unless you imitate some that do plot great Treasons,
And when they have done, go hide themselves in the graves,
Of those were Actors in it?

Card. No more,
There is a fortune attends thee.

Bos. Shall I go sue to fortune any longer?
It Is the fools Pilgrimage.

Card. I have honors in store for thee.

Bos. There are a many ways that conduct to seeming
Honor, and some of them very durty ones.

Card. Throw to the devil
Thy mellancholly, the fire burns well,
What need we keep a stirring of (...) and make
A greater smoother? thou will kill Antonio?

Bos. Yes.

Card. Take up that body.

Bos. I think I shall
Shortly grow the common Bear, for Churchyards?

Card. I will allow thee some dozen of attendants,
To aid thee in the murder.

Bos. Oh, by no means,
Physicians that apply horse-leiches to any rank swelling,
Use to cut of their tails, that the blood may run through them
The faster: Let me have no train, when I go to shed blood,
Least it make me have a greater, when I ride to the Gallows.

Card. Come to me after midnight, to help to remove that body
To her own Lodging: I Will give out she did of the Plague;
'Twill breed the less enquiry after her death.

Bos. Where Is Castruchio, her husband?

Card. He Is rod to Naples to take possession
Of Antonio's Cittadell.

Bos. Believe me, you have done a very happy turn.

Card. Fail not to come: There is the Master-key
Of our Lodgings: and by that you may conceive
What trust I plant in you. Exit.

Bos. You shall find me ready.
Oh poor Antonio, though nothing be so needful
To thy estate, as pity, Yet I find
Nothing so dangerous: I must look to my footing;
In such slippery y^e-pauements, men had need
To be frost-nayld well: they may break their necks else.
The President's here before me: how this man
Bears up in blood? seems feareles? why, it is well:
Security some men call the Subut^s of Hell,
Only a dead wall between. Well (good Antonio)
I Will seek thee out; and all my care shall be
To put thee into safety from the reach
Of these most cruel biters, that have got
Some of thy blood already. It may be,
I Will join with thee, in a most just revenge.
The weakest Arm is strong enough, that strikes
With the sword of Justice: Still me thinks the Duchess
Haunts me: there, there* it is nothing but my mellancholy.
O Penitence, let me truly taste thy Cup.
That throws men down, only to raise them up. Exit.

SCENA. III.
Antonio, Delio, Echo, (from the Duchess Grave.) Del. Yond's the Cardinall's
window: This fortification
Grew from the ruins of an ancient Abbey:
And to yond fide of the river, lies a wall
(Peec^ of a Cloister) which in my opinion
Gives the best Echo, that you ever heard;
So hollow, and so dismal, and withal
So plain in the destinction of our words,
That many have supposde it is a Spirit
That answers.

Ant. I do love these ancient ruynes*
We never tread upon them, but we set
Our foot upon some reverend History*
And questionles, here in this open Court
(Which now lies naked to the injuries
Of stormy weather) some men lie Enterr'd
Loved the Church so well, and gave so largely to it,
They thought it should have canopide their Bones
Till Doombes-day: But all things have their end:
Churches, and Cities (which have diseases like to men)
Must have like death that we have.

Echo. Like death that we have.

Del. Now the Echo has caught you:

Ant. It groaned (me thought) and gave
A very deadly Accent?

Echo. Deadly Accent.

Del. I told you 'twas a pretty one: You may make it
A Huntes-man, or a Faulconer, a Musician,
Or a Thing of Sorrow.

Echo. A Thing of Sorrow.

Ant. I sur^^ that suites it best.

Echo. That suites it best.

Ant. It Is very like my wives voice.

Echo. I, wifes-voyce.

Del. Come: let us us walk farther from't:
I Would not have you go toth' Cardinals to night:
Do not.

Echo. Do not.

Del. Wisdom does not more moderate, wasting Sorrow
Then time: take time for it: be mindful of thy safety.

Echo. Be mindful of thy safety.

Ant. Necessity compells me:
Make scruteny throughout the passes
Of your own life; you will find it impossible
To fly your fate.
O fly your fate.

Del. Hark: the dead stones seem to have pity on you
And give you good counsel.

Ant. Echo, I will not talk with thee;
For thou art a dead Thing.

Echo. Thou art a dead Thing.

Ant. My Duchess is asleep now,
And her litle-Ones, I hope sweetly: oh Heaven
Shall I never see her more?

Echo. Never see her more:

Ant. I marked not one repetition of the Echo
But that: and on the sudden, a clear light
Presented me a face folded in sorrow.

Del. Your fancy; merely.

Ant. Come: I Will be out of this Ague;
For to live thus, is not indeed to live:
It is a mockery, and a^ase of life,
I will not henceforth save my self by halues,
Loose all, or nothing.

Del. Your own virtue save you:
I Will fetch your eldest son; and second you:
It may be that the sight of his own blood
Spread in so sweet a figure, may beget
The more compassion.
How ever, fare you well:
Though in our miseries, Fortune have a part,
Yet, in our noble sufferings, she has none,
Contempt of pain, that we may call our own. Exe.

SCENA. IIII.
Cardinal, Pescara, Malatest^, Rodorigo, Grisolan, Bosola, Ferdinand, Antonio,
Servant. Card. You shall not watch to night by the sick Prince,
His Grace is very well recouer'd.

Mal. Good my Lord suffer us.

Card. Oh, by no means:
The noyce, and change of object in his eye,
Does more distract him: I pray, all to bed,
And though you hear him in his violent fit*
Do not rise, I entreat you.

Pes. So sir, we shall not,

Card. Nay, I must have you promise
Upon your honors, for I was enioyn'd to it
By himself; and he seemed to urge it sencibly.

Pes. Let out honors bind this trifle.

Card. Nor any of your followers.

Mal. Neither.

Card. It may be to make trial of your promise
When he is a sleep, my self will rise, and faigne
Some of his mad tricks, and cry out for help,
And faigne my self in danger.

Mal. If your throat were cutting,
I'll'd not come at you, now I have protested against it.

Card. Why, I thank you.

Gris. 'Twas a forle storm to night.

Rod. The Lord Ferdinand's chamber, shook like an Ozier.

Mal. 'Twas nothing but pure kindness in the Devil,
To ^ocke his own child. Exeunt.

Card. The reason why I would not suffer these
About my brother, is, because at midnight
I may with better priuacy, convey
Iulias body, to her own Lodging: O, my Conscience!
I would pray now: but the Devil takes away my heart
For having any confidence in Prayer.
About this hour, I appointed Bosola
To fetch the body: when he has served my turn,
He dies. Exit.

Bos. Hah? 'twas the Cardinals voice: I heard him name,
Bosola, and my death: listen, I hear ones footing.

Ferd. Strangling is a very quiein death.

Bos. Nay then I see, I must stand upon my Guard.

Ferd. What say' to that? whisper, softly: do you agree to it?
So it must be done in the dark: the Cardinal
Would not for a thousand pounds, the Doctor should see it. Exit.

Bos. My death is plotted; here is the consequence of murder.
"We value not desert, nor Christian breath,
When we know black deeds, must be cur'de with death.

Ser. Here stay Sir, and be confident, I pray:
I Will fetch you a dark Lantern. Exit.

Ant. Could I take him at his prayers,
There were hope of pardon.

Bos. Fall right my sword:
I Will not give thee so much leisure, as to pray.

Ant. Oh, I am gone: Thou have ended a long suit,
In a mynut.

Bos. What art thou?

Ant. A most wretched thing,
That only have thy benefit in death,
To appear my self.

Ser. Where are you Sir?

Ant. Very near my home: Bosola?

Ser. Oh misfortune.

Bos. Smother thy pity, thou art dead else: Antonio?
The man I would have sau'de above mine own life?
We are merely the Stars tennys-balls (struck, and banded
Which way please them) oh good Antonio,
I Will whisper one thing in thy dying ear,
Shall make thy heart break quickly: Thy fair Duchess
And two sweet Children.

Ant. Their very names
Kindle a little life in me.

Bos. Are murderd!

Ant. Some men have wished to die.
At the hearing of sad tidings: I am glad
That I shall do it in sadness: I would not now
Wish my wounds balm'de, nor healed: for I have no use
To put my life to: In all our Quest of Greatness;
(Like wanton Boys, whose pastime is their care)
We follow after bubbles, blown in the air.
Pleasure of life, what is it? only the good hours
Of an Ague: merely a preparatiue to rest,
To endure vexation: I do not ask
The process of my death: only commend me
To Delio.

Bos. Break heart:

Ant. And let my Son, fly the Courts of Princes,

Bos. Thou seem to have loved Antonio?

Ser. I brought him hither,
To have reconciled him to the Cardinal.

Bos. I do not ask thee that:
Take him up, if thou tender thine own life,
And bear him, where the Lady Iulia
Was wont to lodge: Oh, my fate moves swift.
I have this Cardinal, in the forge already,
Now I Will bring him to th'hammer* (O direful misprision:)
I will not Imitate things glorious,
No more then base: I Will be mine own example.
On, on: and look thou represent, for silence,
The thing thou bear. Exeunt.

SCENA. V.
Cardinal (with a Book) Bosola, Pescara, Malateste, Rodorigo. Ferdinand,
Delio, Servant with Antonio's body. Card. I am puzzell'd in a question about
hell:
He says, in hell, there is one material fire,
And yet it shall not burn all men alike.
Lay him by: How tedious is a guilty conscience?
When I look into the Fish Ponds, in my Garden,
Me thinks I see a thing, armed with a Rake
That seems to strike at me: Now? art thou come? thou look ghastly:
There sits in thy face, some great determination,
Mixed with some fear.

Bos. Thus it lightens into Action:
I am come to kill thee.

Card. Hah? help: our Guard.

Bos. Thou art deceived:
They are out of thy howling.

Card. Hold: and I will faithfully divide
Revenues with thee.

Bos. Thy prayers, and proffers
Are both unseasonable.

Card. Raise the Watch: we are betrayed.

Bos. I have confinde your flight:
I Will suffer your retreyt to Iulias Chamber,
But no further.

Card. Help: we are betrayed.

Mal. Listen:

Card. My Dukedom, for rescew.

Rod. Fie upon his counterfeyting.

Mal. Why, it is nor the Cardinal.

Rod. Yes, yes, it is he:
But I Will see him hanged, ere I Will go down to him.

Card. Here Is a plot upon me, I am assaulted: I am lost*
Unless some rescew.

Gris. He does this pretty well:
But it will not serve; to laugh me out of mine honor.

Card. The sword's at my throat:

Rod. You would not bawle so loud then.

Mal. Come, come: lets's go to bed: he told us thus much aforehand.

Pesc. He wished you should not come at him: but beleeu't,
The accent of the voice sounds not in jest.
I Will down to him, howsoever, and with engines
Force open the doors.

Rod. Let Us follow him aloof,
And note how the Cardinal will laugh at him.

Bos. There Is for you first: 'cause you shall not vnbarracade the door
To let in rescew. He kills the Servant.

Card. What cause have thou to pursue my life?

Bos. Look there:

Card. Antonio?

Bos. Slain by my hand unwittingly:
Pray, and be sudden: when thou kill'dst thy sister,
Thou tookst from Justice her most equal b^^^^^ce,
And left her naught but her sword.

Card. O mercy.

Bos. Now it seems thy Greatness was only outward:
For thou fall'st faster of thy self, then calamity
Can drive thee: I Will not wast longer time: There

Card. Thou have hurt me:

Bos. Again:

Card. Shall I die like a Le^oret
Without any resistance? help, help, help:
I am slain.

Ferd. Th'allarum? give me a fresh horse:
Rally the vaunt-guard: or the day is lost:
Yield, yield: I give you the honor of Arms,
Shake my Sword over you, will you yeilde?

Card. Help me, I am your brother.

Ferd. The devil?
My brother fight upon the adverse party? He wounds the Cardinal, and (in the
scuffle) gives Bosola his death wound.
There flies your ransom.

Card. Oh Justice:
I suffer now, for what has former bin:
"Sorrow is held the eldest child of sin.

Ferd. Now you're brave follows:
Caesar's Fortune was harder then Pompeys:
Caesar died in the arms of prosperity,
Pompey at the feet of disgrace: you both died in the field,
The paine's nothing: pain many times, is taken away, with
The apprehension of greater, (as the toothache with the ^ight
Of a Barbor, that comes to pull it out) there is Philosophy for you.

Bos. Now my revenge is perfect: sink (thou maine cause
Of my undoing) the last part of my life,
Has done me best service. He kills Ferdinand.

Ferd. Give me some wet hay, I am broken winded,
I do account this world but a dog-kennell:
I will vault credit, and affect high pleasures,
Beyond death.

Bos. He seems to come to himself, now he is so near the bottom*

Ferd. My sister, oh! my sister, there is the cause on it.
" Whether we fall by ambition, blood, or lust,
" Like Diamonds, we are cut with our own dust.

Card. Thou have thy payment too.

Bos. Yes, I hold my weary soul, in my teeth,
It Is ready to part from me: I do glory
That thou, which stood'st like a huge Piramid
Begun upon a large, and ample base,
Shall end in a little point a kind of nothing.

Pes. How now (my Lord?)

Mal. Oh sad disastre.

Rod. How comes this?

Bos. Revenge, for the Duchess of Malfy, murdered
By the Aragonian brethren: for Antonio,
Slain by his hand: for lustful Iulia,
Poisoned by this man: and lastly, for my self,
(That was an Actor in the maine of all,
Much against mine own good nature, yet i'th'end
Neglected.)

Pes. How now (my Lord?)

Card. Look to my brother:
He gave us these large wounds, as we were struggling
Here in the rushes: And now, I pray, let me
Be laid by, and never thought of.

Pes. How fatally (it seems) he did withstand,
His own rescew?

Mal. Thou wretched thing of blood,
How came Antonio by his death?

Bos. In a mist: I know not how,
Such a mistake, as I have often seen
In a play: Oh, I am gone,
We are only like dead walls, or vaulted graves,
That ruined, yeildes no echo: Fare you well,
It may be pain: but no harm to me to die,
In so good a quarrel: Oh this gloomy world,
In what a shadow, or deep pit of darkness,
Does (womanish, and fearful) mankind live?
Let worthy minds, nere stagge^ in distrust
To suffer death, or shame for what is just,
Mine is an other voyage.

Pes. The noble Delio, as I came to th'Pallace,
Told me of Antonio's being here, and showed me
A pretty gentlemen his son and heir.

Mal. Oh Sir, you come to late.

Del. I heard so, and
Was armed for it ere I came: Let us make noble use
Of this great ruin; and join all our force
To establish this young hopeful Gentleman
In's mothers right. These wretched eminent things
Leave no more fame behind 'em, then should one
Fall in a frost, and leave his print in snow,
As soon as the sun shines, it ever melts,
Both form, and matter: I have ever thought
Nature does nothing so great, for great men,
As when she is pleased, to make them Lords of truth:
"Integrity of life, is fames best friend,
Which noblely (beyond Death) shall crown the end. Exeunt.

FINIS.

