A PETITION TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, In the behalf of ancient and
authentic Authors, For the universal and perpetual good of every man and
his posterity:

Presented by JOSEPH WEB, Dr. in Ph.

Printed 1623.

A PETITION TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, In the behalf of ancient and
authentic Authors, For the universal and perpetual good of every man and
his posterity.
ALiud est Grammatice, aliud Latin loqui, is a distinction of a thousand five
hundred and forty years standing; the Author is Quintilian; and his sense is
thus:

There are two sorts of Latin, whereof one is Grammar-Latine, and the other
Latine-Latine.

By Latine-Latine I mean such as the best approved Authors wrote, and left us
in their books and monuments of use and custom.

By Grammar-Latine I understand that Latin that we now make by Grammar rules:
the first intention of which rules, and their collection out of that custom,
and those Authors, was, to make us write and speak such Latin as that Custom
and those Authors did; which was, Latine-Latine: but it succeeded not.

Wherefore my Petition is to this high Court of Parliament, (not that Grammar
should be questioned, in yt it is our old acquaintance, and has a long time
been a ledger here amongst us, on the behalf of these Authors; but,
considering it is not able to give us Authors Latin) that these Authors, whom
we seem to have so much respected in our Schools and Universities, coming
themselves as it were in person, and offering to dwell amongst us, may to their
deserved honor and our desired benefit, be now received, privileged and
admitted to tell their own tales, and teach us their own Latin.

This admittance of theirs, have I these eighteen years contrived, and these
five last years seriously solicited, and cannot as yet find any way to
compass it, without manifest danger of ruining my self and mine assistants,
unless by favor of this high and honorable Court I may be allowed father of
mine own children, and Author of mine own works and inventions: that is, that
no man else may print them or import them nor any man teach Languages by that
method that I propose, but such as I think fitting; and that these privileges
may continue for the space of 21 years after the publication of every book of
this nature that shall be published within the term of years before
specified; with prohibition that no man shall hereafter, during that time,
attempt the same way in any other Author or Language, without my special
allowance.

Herein I have not only had the gracious ear of his Majesty, but Prince like
encouragement of his Highness, the assent of many of the Nobility, and the
favorable desires and wishes of some of the greatest Scholars of this
kingdom; but especially of such whose ends and private respects led them not
to a preiudicate opinion concerning it.

But whilst this hopeful beginning engaged me with full sail to prosecute my
first intention, I found in the very maine of my business some secret Remora,
suddenly to stop my helpless ship, although the winds of my devotion thereunto
blew very strongly.

Whereupon, not knowing who did hurt me, or what might help me, I began to
listen partly to mine own surmises, partly to what my friends suspected, and
partly to the mutterings of such as were incredulous: for all these brought
sundry objections and demands; to which I made these following answers; most
humbly submitting both my self and them unto the censure and definitive
sentence of your Honorable Wisdoms, whether I shall stop here and sink, for
attempting to bring a benefit to your posterity, or set forward to effect what
I pretended.

The first objection was,

This objection I answered in mine Appeal to Truth, in the Controversy
between Art and Use, published ( Anno 1622. and extant at the brazen Serpent
in Paul's Churchyard) to show the opinions of the grauest Authors to this
purpose: and first, what Grammarians thought one of another; then, what others
thought of Grammarians and their Art; and lastly, what way they approved of, to
come to purity of language.

This approved way go I, which in the generality is theirs, and none of mine;
nor is it new, in that it has been ever since speaking was, which was long
before Grammar, and is where no Grammar ever came, and therefore may and will
subsist subsist without her. From whence it may be gathered, that I am so far
from being presumptuous or arrogant in putting on so public and so great a
benefit, that I might rather have been held negligent or envious in concealing
it; especially being a professor of letters, and as it were one of the
Parliament in the Common wealth of learning.

The second objection was,

Whereunto I answered, ye any man might take the groundwork of this particular
way from Cicero, who was the first that taught me to divide the man, or body
of speech into the parts thereof and knittings. I mean not those eight sorts
of parts, whereof 4 are declined, 4 undeclined, after the vulgar Grammar; but
after Cicero's Grammar, into one sort of parts, that is, into clauses, which
are undeclined. Now if Cicero's Grammar, that consists of one part of speech,
and that undeclined, were not much easier than that of eight parts, and 4
declined; and should not thereby rid us of much labor, and to better purpose,
I should not be so ready to embrace it. But, as for that which is built upon
this ground work, for the peculiar use of every man, and the bringing of that
into act, which these grave men have given us hitherto but to contemplate: that
(without presumption) I call mine; as the pipe of lead calls the water which it
conveyes to many cisternes; always acknowledging the waters of all true
understanding to proceed only from the eternal fountain of all wisdom my
Creator.

But seeming still to doubt of the possibility thereof, they would often ask
me:

Hereupon I showed them Quintilians fore-alleaged distinction; and then, I
replied thus: It is not possible to learn Grammar-Latin without Grammar; but
it is possible to learn Latin-Latin (that is, the Latin that was in use
amongst the ancient Latins) without Grammar. And moreover, I told them, that I
thought, the way to write and speak this last Latin, was the true way recte
scribendi atque loquendi; else Cicero and his equals wrote not rightly. And I
inferred, that if this be true, we must either pull out recte, or put in
Grammatice, or vulgar Grammar would have but an imperfect definition. For recte
scribendi atque loquendi ars, must run along with the custom and use of
speaking that was observed by those ancient-Authors: which, I must confess,
the vulgar Grammar aims at, or else it should want all color and authority:
but Quintilian, and that that is more then ten Quintilians, the very practice
tells us, it hitteth not the mark of writing rightly. God is my record. I
speak not this to deprive Grammar of her scholars, (for she has her own
worth, and according unto it should be respected) but my humble Petition is,
that the old authentic Authors and chief Lords of Language, our best and
syncerest friends, may not be thrust out of their own patrimony, by those
whose chiefest grace it is to be thought their followers.

They replied: Authors-Latine is better then Grammar-Latine, what proofs bring
you that it is possible for you to help us to a way to learn this better
Latin; that we may be assured that you can be as good as your promise?

Whereunto I again made answer: If I lay my grounds in that wherein all the
Languages of the world agree, and out of which no Languages have perfect
correspondence, and upon these grounds and foundations can erect a solid and
complete edifice, doubtless it will be possible for me to help you to that
way, whereby I may perform what I have promised. And proceeding yet further, I
told them, that the grounds of speech are laid in things, in the meanings of
which things all tongues meet. Therefore as they are all the meanings of
things, so they are all the meanings of one another. But if we will search unto
the depth for the roots and elements of all these meanings, we shall find
that farthest off they consist all in a point; a little nearer in a point, and
in a right and crooked line; yet nearer in literal characters produced of
these point and lines; and nearer yet, in syllables produced of these letters:
and yet somewhat nearer, in words produced of these syllables. And upon this
ground of words, all ordinary ways insist.

But they are not yet come to that which they pretend; for no two languages in
the world do perpetually and infallibly meet in words: wherefore we must go
yet a step further, till we come at our foundation, which is laid in sense or
meaning; which consists not always of simple words, but now of simple, now
composed. For, as letters that are knit together, make one character of this or
that word: so words knit together, make one character of this or that sense.
These characters of sense are the nearest elements of speech, understandingly
acknowledged by Cicero under the names of joints and members; and are delivered
unto us in their native forms and substances by Custom and Authority. But
Art amazed at the not well apprehended, or ill distinguished magnitude of this
substance, matter or body of speech, presuming of her own ability of bringing
us a nearer way to Languages, has taken both matter and forms thereof, and
torn them all in pieces: of the forms she has made a Grammar; of the matter
a Dictionarie: and has dispersed them amongst all nations for their several
uses in foreign languages. And now, every nation desirous of a foreign tongue,
runs presently to Art to borrow these pieces, and thinks by her instruction to
compose a perfect and well shaped body of speech in some desired foreign
language. But they are deceived: for first, though Art know what similar parts
(as we term them) as, what nerves, films, flesh, bones, etc. every
isntrumental member consists of; yet, she being universal for all nations,
and all nations naturally varying the situation and position of these pieces or
particles of members, according to their own native Idiom; they must (as not
taught by Art any other variation) lay all these pieces of foreign speech,
according to the situation of these pieces in their own language. Whereupon,
not to run into France or Italy for an example, a Welch-man, not yet well
grounded in our tongue, (speaking Welch-English) bids us here in England, give
him bread white, and meat fat, after the native position of these pieces of
speech in his language, and is laughed at for his labor. In like manner an
English man in Wales speaks English-Welch, and bids give him gwin barra and
brasekige, that is, white bread and fat meat, after his position of these
pieces, and is as much laughed at there, as they here, and as worthily. And this
is not only found in the English and Welsh, but in all other languages, to be
most ridiculous: and yet no Grammar provides for this mischief, nor indeed
can it provide, unless every nation should make so many several Grammars of
one and the same tongue, as there are several sorts of nations to communicate
with it: which were a very great and a voluminous inconvenience.

Again, in such members, wherein two several tongues may place these pieces
of speech alike, so that every piece of the one be answerable to every piece of
the other, both in place and signification: the whole member put together in
the one and the other tongue, shall be good and perfect sense in the one, and
no way understood in the other language. For though the words thereof be all,
by both tongues acknowledged; yet being put together, the one of these nations
receives, the other disclaimes the member: which is manifest between the
English and the Italian. For, though un be an; cavallo, horse; di, of; buon,
good; metallo, metal: and [An horse of good metall] put together be good
English; yet the Italian understands not un cavallo di buon metallo to be
Italian, but disclaimes it. Neither does any Grammar remedy this particular,
nor indeed can remedy it, unless it draw all the proprieties of every
language of the world, and apply them to it self in and for every different
language; which would prove a greater inconvenience then the former. If
therefore we would not (with Art) fall upon these deformities of mispeccing and
mismembring languages, we must rely wholly upon Authority, from whence, even
Art her self was drawn, though insufficient; and to which, when Art can say
no more, she often referrs us. Now if this Authority be so reduced by Analysis
to practice, that we neither tear in pieces, or break the members of speech,
nor hurt the joints or wheels on which it runs: and then be made up a new
composition or method of writing after mine intention; it shall not only
demonstrate the possibility of a way to learn this better Latin, (and thereby
assure you that I can be as good as my promise) but it shall also (as I have
said in mine Appeal) give any man a real power of writing rightly the first
day he sets upon it. But, understand me, this power is in my books, and not in
his brains that writes, till he by daily practice have reduced this power of
my books to an habit in himself. And no doubt but an habit may this way in
half the time be gotten, that is spent in Grammar. And then, our habit is made
in Latine-Latine, the other in Grammar-Latine; the differences whereof have
formerly been debated. Neither shall we in this Latine-Latine stand in need of
rules of constructio^ (which Grammars for the most part give) or position and
propriety (which they give not;) for these fall all in sense and meaning,
wherein all the members and clauses of all Languages have their meetings.

But they continue to object,

To this I answer, that senses, clauses or members, consist as well in form as
in matter. In form, they are all in Authority; otherwise Art had not found
them, being only produced from Authority; and therefore they occur in my
method out of Authors. In matter they are also the most part there, excepting
some few names of things that fell not within the discourses of mine Authors;
or have since their times been invented; and these shall be affoorded by
supplement, which is also drawn out of authority. And therefore I crave leave
to print these Authors with this supplement, which some have thought that I had
never dreamed of, but upon their objections made within these twelve months:
whereas I have good testimony of the thing begun and almost half done above
these six years. Moreover, every sense may in one and the same tongue be many
ways altered in the words or clauses, and yet produce always the self same
meaning. Now, as every tongue has this variety; so any, or every one of these
varieties is not only a due expression of that sense in one and the same
tongue, but also of all and every particular variation of that sense in every
other language. Otherwise the Poet should not be able to express himself
Poetically both in other numbers and other frames and forms of speech than are
usual amongst Orators: nor could Orators give us their meanings now in an
humble, now in a lofty, now in a middle, or other kinds or styles of writing.
And yet every one of these can produce, after his own manner, every thing that
may be spoken; witness the Poets Quicquid conabor dicere versus erit. And
considering that all these ways of expression fall within the limits of mine
instrument, either by authority or supplement, I cannot so much as dream of
an impossibility of producing any thing that may be spoken.

Hereupon they further demand,

This were but hard measure (said I) considering so many presidents to the
contrary. There was a Patent, and an Act of Parliament passed before the
bringing of the New-riuer water from Ware to London; and the like for cutting
the passage of a river from Tame to Oxford. Now, if men that pretended good but
to some parts of private Cities, be thus favored; it is not likely that I
(that plead for every man's posterity, yea his, what ere he be, that is most
against me; as also in the behalf of many nations and whole kingdoms, and for
those Authors that they so much desire and reverence) should be driven to
hazard both time, labor, and expenses, without some kind of assurance as well
from his Majesty as the Parliament, that I shall not ruin both my self and
others which have herein aided me. Epecially considering how apt men are now
adays to snatch the bread out of other men's mouths, and to sell their labors
to their own profits, and grow fat upon them, while those that sweat and
groned to produce them, perish with famine. Which oftenest happens to poor
students, who are contented to be given to understand, that it is enough for
them to have the honor of their books, in lieu of their labor, time and
charges: and in the mean season are laughed at, as foolish Logitians that will
lose the substance for so poor an accident. But admit yet farther, that after
privilege granted, I should not be able to perform what I intended; there is
no man's reputation, no man's time, labor and expenses lies at stake but mine.
So that if I perform, it was well granted; in that every man shall reap the
benefit: if I perform not, yet was it well granted; in that it turns to my
just punishment: and therefore in my opinion I should not be urged to a greater
inconvenience, (as to bestow yet other four or five hundred pounds) to produce
that, which when it is produced, gives me no more assurance of a privilege,
then at this present.

Then was it objected,

Whereupon I demanded, what hinderance the Goldsmiths privilege was to the
Brasiers. I desire not the suppression or hinderance of Grammar, but the
purity of Latin. Again, this Grammar was privileged to forbid all other
Grammars: but I seek not to introduce another Grammar, except we shall very
improperly call it Cicero's Grammar. My desire is only, that such as are weary,
and would not, or can no longer go by Grammar, or are not desirous of
Grammar-Latine, might be admitted to an easy and profitable use of Authors,
and to these Authors own way of teaching their own language without Grammar; as
being two sundry courses, to two diverse ends. For Authors cannot bring a man to
Grammar-Latine, nor Grammars unto Authors Latin, as is proved. Nay further, I
find the Preface it self to this privileged Grammar, to be more favorable on
my behalf then this opinion: for it says plainly, that it is not amiss, if
one seeing by trial an easier and readier way than the common sort of teachers
do, would say what he has proved, and for the commodity allowed; that other
not knowing the same, might by experience prove the like, and then by proof
reasonably judge the like: not excluding [by this privileged Grammar] the
better way when it is found out, but in the mean season forbidding the worse.
Now, I having by trial proved this way by Authors, to be another, and an
easier and readier way than that of Grammar, and allowing thereof for the
infinite commodity that I find therein, humbly entreat that I may be
privileged to produce my books, that may make others prove and judge as I
do; according to the intent of the forealledged Preface.



I answered, a twofold proof: one, of a power that these books bring to any
man, the first day to write rightly by them: And another, of this power,
reduced by an exercise to an habit of writing rightly without them. Of the
first kind (in that this method holds in all Languages as well as in Latin)
take this Italian Letter, translated by a Gentlewoman that knows not two words
of that language, and that, the first day that she applied her self unto it.

Fratello mio carissimo.
Quantu^que mi paia di poter esser piu che certo, che tutti gli uffici li quali
ho fatto per te, ti sono stati gratissimi: and che questa fu la cagione, che tu
mi hai renduto piu che non havevi riceuuto: nondimeno. perch veggo nelle tue
lettere, che tu hai qualch'ambra di me, son constretto a giustificarmi con
teco: Perioche, il primo di Gennaio, ho voluto intier amente farti palese
l'animo mio, and diogni cosa ti darei conto particolare, ma che il consiglio
non mi pareva punto nocessario, potendosi torcere quello, che con sincera mente
e stato scritto, a sentimento contrario. Laonde, se tu mi ami all'usato, basta
quello ch'io scrissi. Io non posso esser piu vostro che mi sia. Ec mi vi
raccomando.

Di Londra a li 10. de Decembre. 1620. Di V. S. Fratello affmo. N.


Of the same kind is this other in Latin, translated out of English, through
power given in my books, to a capable young man, that had been six years at a
Grammar School, and had discontinued eighteen months.

Non qui parum habet, sed qui plus cupit, pauper est. Ad hoc enim multis illi
rebus opus est; ad illud, tantum animo sano, and erecto, despiciente fortunam.
Sed, quem mihi dabis, cui quantulumcunque superest, sat est? Si volueris
attendere; ad manum est quod sat est: sed, nisi sapienti sua non placent.
Adhuc, concipere animo non potes, quam sic se contentus, qui fictilibus sic
vtitur, quemaamodum argento: sed, oum puerilem animum deposueris, and, te in
viros Philosophia transcripserit, Intelligas sapientem se ipso esse contentum,
and hominem tam been culmo quam auro tegi. Sed vt epistolae finem imponam; mihi
creed, Non est beatus, esse se qui non putat. Haec, and huiusmodi versanda in
animo sunt, vt tibi conting at vera libertas, and vt possis aequo animo vitam
relinquere. Vale.


But, because I was desirous to see how well he could translate it of
himself, without the power given him by these books, I made him first make it
in his own Latin, which (with some help of such as had done it before him)
was as follows: Iste non est pauper qui parum habet, sed qui plus appetit.
Nam huic multa desunt; illi, animo solum integro, and erecto, fortuna
dispicientia. Sed, quisnam, qui contentus est rebus suis: Si enim in mentem
tuam been introspicias, satis adest; sed nulli preter sapientes placati aut
contenti sunt eo quod habent. Adhuc enim in animo non sorbeas, quam contentus
est semitipso qui vasibus fictilibus vtitur vice toreumatis; Sed cum animum
puerilem deponas, and Philosophia in numeros hominum te referat, inuenies quod
hominem est aeque culmene tectum quam aurum. Sed vt literam concludam (creed
mihi) hominem istum non esse beatum quem seipsum it a esse non cogitat. Hec and
similia sepe sunt ad cogitanda vt veram libertatem paras and vitam tuam
libenter linqueres.

In verse also, these are of that first kind, made by men of great judgment,
who were desirous to make some proof thereof.

Ignarus facti cecini sine lumine carmen. And this Distichon, made upon this
following English: Without sense or reason a thing promised cannot be believed.

Promissis adhibere fidem sine lumine sensus,
Aut mentis, levit as creditur ingenij.
By the second way, that is, by the power of those books, reduced by a months
practice to the beginning of an habit, these exercises were made without those
books.

In the Latin of Seneca.
Si aliquem amicum existimas (mi Philippe) qui nusquam est, quia vbique est;
vehementer erras. Nam, aegri animi ista iactatio est. Nihil aeque sanitatem
impedit, quam remedior um crebra mutatio. Nec coalescit veraeamicitiae planta,
quae saepe transfertur. Itaque, diu cogita, an tibi in amicitiam aliquis
recipiendus sit. Ante amicitiam iudicandum, Sed, cum placuerit fieri, cum amico
omnes curas omnes cogitationes tuas misce. Nam, multi fallere docueruat dum
timent falli. Vale.


In Caesar's Latin.
Vbi per exploratores Henricus certior factus est, Gallis esse in animo, eum
rapinis populationibusque prohibere; non expectandum sibi statuit. Qua de
causa, maturat ab agro Bononiensium proficisci. Et quam maximis itineribus
potest in Normandiam vlteriorem contendit, and ad Rothomagum per venit. Pontem
iubet rescindi: A Sequana, ad montem Sanctae Katharinae, millia passuum novem,
murum, in altitudinem pedum sexdecim, fossamque perduit. Galli iam per fines
Picardorum suas copias traduxerant, and in Normannorum fines pervenerant.
Henricus negat se posse iter ulli per Normandiam dare. Et, si vim facere
conentur, prohibiturum ostendit. Postero die, castra ex eo loco movent, etc.


In Cicero's Epistolatorie Latin.
Amantissime amice,
Nostris rationibus maxim conducere videtur, plurimos nostros amicos inveniri:
quoniam videtur in suffragijs multum posse aduersarius noster. A vunculus tuus
observat Cancellarium maxim: sed, fuit and mihi and Edvardo fratri magno vsui.
Cum a Iudicijs forum refrixerit, scribam ad te: vides enim, quod adhuc
coniectura prouideri possit, in quo cursu sumus. Multum te amamus. Sed, abs te
peto vt mihi hoc ignoscas. Vale.


The like may be done in the Latin of other ancient or modern Authors, as of
Livie, Pliny, Tacitus, or of Lipsius, or any other whatsoever: and that not
only (as is said) in Latin, but in every other language also.

But we understand,

Whereunto I answered: First, you may by trial find, that this construing word
for word, is altogether impossible in any language: Next, you may see the
inconvenience thereof by the French-mans English: for while he follows the
correspondence of words, he forgets their placing; and therefore says, I you
pray Sir, placing our English as his Ie vous pry Monsieur is placed, which is
absurd and barbarous; and proceeds only from his construing word for word;
every man applying the words of a foreign language according as they are
ranged in his own. Wherefore I had rather a scholar should remember the
natural and received position of a clause by keeping the words always all
together, than understand the particular correspondence of the words, and
thereby lose their proper places. For discretion, and comparison of clause with
clause, will at length bring the understanding of the words, whether we will or
no; but nothing will bring the true position of these words again, by reason
that our own tongue does therein still misguide us, and makes us always to be
distinguished for strangers, even in our very writing. And the mainest reason
thereof is this, that clauses are almost of the same condition that words are.
For, as out of words of 2.3.4. or 5. letters, there may be 2.6.24. or 120.
various reuolutions, and yet but one of those variations shall be allotted to
signify this or that one thing in particular: So is it in clauses of 2.3.4. or
5. words, whose variations may be as many as was before said of the letters;
yet use has commonly made choice but of one of those reuolutions of words to
stand for this or that sense: which if you precisely take not, without adding,
diminishing or transposing; you either alter the sense, manner of style, or
dialect; or else you speak a kind of non sense. And that clause or sense, that
use has taken hold of in one language, shall not many times have the self
same number of words in another; and therefore you must fail of your verbal
translation: and in those that have the self same number, you seldom find
the words that signify and express each other, to have in both tongues the
same position. Wherefore, if you take not the whole clause together in the one
and the other tongue, you must at some time speak barbarously of necessity.
Now if this be that, which you call theft or stealing, there are none of us
that fall not hourly within the compass of this kind of theevery. For, if you
mark it well, all speech runs in this manner, and every man speaks each
others clauses. True it is, that one and the same clause or sense, may (as I
have said) be diverse ways delivered; but then you keep not the same words or
number of them, but vary per Synonomiam, Enallagen, Antonomasiam, Periphrasin,
Metaphoram, and other such like variations; which all must also keep their
received clauses, or else we shall do wrong to languages.

Other demands and objections less material, as not touching the thing it
self, but some particular and by-respects, would cloy your ears with more
then becomes a modest brevitie: wherefore leaving them, till some farther
occasion offered; and most humbly entreating you to cast a favorable eye on
this Petition. I in all obedience dedicate my self, my labor, and the rest of
my life, in the full extent of my whole talent, to the eternal glory of my
God, to the loyal service I owe unto my Sovereign and his Succession, and to
the future good of you and your posterity.

FINIS.

