Nouem. 24. Number. 7. THE VVEEKELY News, containing these particulars. The
surprising of two Towns by the Prince of Oranges forces, and the manner of
their taking, with the several pasages of Spinolas army lying before Breda,
and our camp at Rosendale: as also the death of the Earl of Southampton and
his Son at Bergan-vp-Zoome. The taking of many places in the Grisons Country
by the French Kings forces. Likewise the entertainment of many thousands of
men by the State of Venice, under the Command of Colonel Ouentuant, once one
of Count Mansfields chief commanders. The Hollanders fortunately meeting with
one of the King of Spaines Plate Ships coming from the West Indies the which
in a short time they overcame and took: with a great victory obtained by the
Duke of Tuscans Galleys, against the Pirates of Argier. The disagreement which
is like to happen between the Emperor and Bethlem Gabor, and the Turk and
the Emperor: the receiving of many thousands of men, being newly dismissed by
Monsier Tillie, into the pay of the French King.

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for THOMAS ARCHER, and are to be sold in Popes head
Ally, over against the Sign of the Horse-Shooe. 1624.

The Weekly News from Italy, Germany, France, Spain, and the Low Countries,
etc.
From Vienna the 24. of October.
We understand here how that the Turkish Chiany who is come to the Imperial
Commissioners which are at Commora, has brought with him some hard points and
Articles, which are proponuded by the Grand Signieor,

The conditions of peace which the Ambassodors of Bathlem Gabor has offered
unto his Imperial Majesty in the name of his Master, they are likewise very
hard and intolerable, so that there is little or no hope at all, that any
peace or truce shall be concluded betwixt the Emperor, or any of them.

They write out of Silecia, that the Cossacks have quite left both Silecia and
Morauia, and that the lie upon the frontiers of Polonia and Silecia, expecting
the merciful resolution and pardon of the King of Poland, that they may come
safely home.

From Vienna the 26. of October.
Concerning the Turkish treaty of peace, we have yet no other tidings, but
that there is come a Turkish Chiany (being accompanied with few persons) to the
Imperial Commissioners, to salute and receive them: and that he has
propounded some few Articles, which the Emperor is not to admit in any manner
of ways, although the Grand Signieur would moderate them.

They write from Raba, that they stand there in fear that the Turks will come
and pillage the Country there about, and that they keep strong watches, and
have planted their Ordnance upon their walls and bulwarks, to salute them at
their arrival: as likewise how that there being a house fired by casualtie,
the Inhabitants and Soldiers which are in Commora were mightily afraid, and
suspected that it had been done by the Turks to surprise the place the better.

In the beginning of this Month was a Proclamation at Linty in the upper
Austria proclaimed in the name of the Emperor, to cite all such as have been
guilty in the former Rebellion, to appear within the space of six weeks and
three days in the head Town of Linty, before the Imperial President and
Counsel Namely, the Count of Neggaw, Governor of the lower Austria, the Lord
of Hoyes Presedent of the Counsel of the lower Austria, the Lord of Reck, one
of his Majesty's Imperial Counsel, the Lord Heggenmiller Chanceler of the
lower Austria, the Doctors Mosmiller, and Barthold, and to clear themselves.
But the Preachers are authors of the Rebellion (as they write thence) are some
8. days ago dismissed of their charge, and commanded to depart within the space
of 8. days, which expired yesterday: At the same time was not only the
preaching forbidden to the Ministers, but also the ringing and sounding of
Belles to the Sextons, upon pain of death.

On the 15. of this Month were the Booke-sellers Shops viewed in this City,
and the selling of Protestant Books forbidden. On the same day arrived here
the Count Nicolas Wolsky Great Marschall of the Kingdom of Polonia, and it is
rumored that he is to go thence into the Low Countries to the Infanta, which
lies at Brussell.

Two days ago perrished two Barks in the River of Donaw, that were sailing
with Corn to the frontier Towns and Castles of Hungary.

The tidings which we had hear lately, how that Monsieur Tilly had taken the
bridge of Strasbourg is false, but it is sure that he has stopped the passages
of the Rhyne, that nothing can come up or down without his leave.

From Vienna the 26. of October.
The 19. of this Month departed the great Marschall of Pelonia hence, and went
as it is rumored toward Florence.

On the same day came his Imperial Majesty here back again from Ebersdoof,
and gave on the next Sunday after he had heard the Mass audience to the
Ambassador of Bethlem Gabor; he did the like on the following Monday to the
Ambassador of the Elector of Cullen, and granted on the next Tuesday the
Regalia and Fulde to the Commissioners of the Abbot of Fulden, which demanded
them in his name. On the next Wensday, as likewise yesterday went the Emperor
abroad to hunt the wild Bore.

Few days ago arrived here the Archbishop of Pragne coming here post, and
it is rumored that the Land-graue Charles of Lichtenstayn is likewise to come
hitherwards with great speed.

The Count Serin Banus of Croatia, who came here likewise few days ago,
reports that he has not only slain many Turks, which were pillaging the
same Country, but that he also himself has made an inroade on the Turkish
Dominion, and gotten there rich booties. The Turkish treaty of Peace is not
begun as yet, by reason that the Turkish Commissioners are not come together,
and especially seeing that the chiefest of them all is yet at Constantinople.

They write from Prague, that there are put in prison three men of them which
robbed the Duke of Saxon Lawenborg when he was riding toward this City of
Vienna.

This week was a Postillion or Messenger slain, when he had taken the 9. post
horse betwixt Prague and Vienna, the lttters being found by a husband man, he
carried them to the next post, but we cannot learn as yet in what. manner
this happenned, nor who was the author.

We understand by Letters written from Linty, that the Protestant States of
Austria have promised to pay the wages to the protestant Preachers which are
banished, for two years, and that they gave to every one of them 1000.
Rix-Dollers before their departure, and that moreover the Protestant Burgurs
gave them when they took their leave of them 1.2. yea. 3. Rix-Dollers, and
some of the richer sorts whole hand fulls of Rix-Dollers, and Ducats.

They write out of Hungaria, that the Lord Bosniach has surprised the small
Town of Waith, which was in the bounds fo the Tu ke, and having slain there
2000. Turks, took moreover 70. of them as prisoners, and got there 970.
Turkish horse, besides many other rich boties: He rescued likewise all those
Christians which the Turks, as we mentioned heretofore had taken at Ferrels.

The Lord Esterhasi who is Governor rf Newhensed, having sinck fortified
Ferrele, the Grand Signiour has sent him word, that he should dismantle the
place again, seeing it was against the treaty of Peace, to make any new
fortifications upon the frontiers. But he the Lord Esterhasi returned this
answer, namely, that seeing he had suffered his cousin, and diverse other
Christians to be taken thence as prisoners, after his Trukish Soldiers had
pillaged the place, which was directly against the treaty of Peace, he had
fortified the fame place, that the Christians might live there securle, and out
of danger to be surprised at the pleasure of the Turks.

From Vienna the 30. of October.
The Ambassadors of Bethlem Gabor are not as yet dispacht, nor have understood
the Emperors resolution upon their propositions which they have made in the
name of Bethlem Gabor. In the mean time they are daily feasted by several
Lords, and amongst others the Count of Meggaw feasted them few days ago in
great Pomp and State, not sparing any cost upon Players and Musicians. It is
thought that for this time (seeing they brought some presents to the Emperor)
that they shall likewise be sent home with some presents.

There is yet small likelihood of the treaty of peace, seeing that the Basha of
Ossen has declared himselte, that he will not suffer the Lord Curty the
Ambassador of his Imperial Majesty, to go thence before the Peace be
concluded. And the Emperor on the other side will not suffer this treaty to
begin, unless he the Lord Curty be at liberty; and may come to it.

From Vienna the 31. of October.
We received here to day tidings, how that 12000. Turks which have lain a
while about Osten, were marched up to meet again an inrode either in Hungaria
or Styria: And his Imperial Majesty has thereupon given order that 12000.
foot shall with great speed march toward Hungaria.

From Prague the 2 of November.
Although the Emperor has now many times given order, that the soldiers
should be sent out of this Kingdom into the Empire, they will not obey his
order: by reason of their want of payment which they expect from the Empeour,
and if they continue here any longer, we are likely to have a general dearth
in this Kingdom; for they have already in many places of this Kingdom
consumed the Victuals.

One who came lately from Olmits in Morauia brought here tiding, how that the
most part of the Cossacks which have layne in Selesia, and Morauia, (when they
were in the pay of the Emperor) are now entered into the service of Bethlem
Gabor; and many are therefore of opinion that he ( Bethlem Gabor) is not to be
trusted.

The Elector of Saxony is with 500 horse gone to Berlin to assist there at the
Christning of a child of the Elector of Brandenburgh. But there are some which
hold that they are to treat there moreover of some matters of great importance.

From Civil the 20. of October.
We have received tidings that the Hollanders have taken the Admirant which is
one of the Ships of our silver fleet.

From Amsterdam the 9 of November.
The tyding is confirmed again out of Spain how that the General le Hermit
has taken and pillaged the Town of Lima, and gotten there rich booties. And
they write likewise thence that there is no hope that the silver fleet shall
this year come out of the West Indies, and that the King of Spain his Factors
can therefore hardly take any money up for the service of his Majesty.

Moreover they advise us thence that the fleet which is to be sent against the
Hollanders to recover the Bay of Todos los Sanctos out of their hands, cannot
soon be made ready for want of money, ships, munition, and men, although there
walk daily many Spanish Signiors by the steetes, with their feathers upon
their Hats, and threaten the Hollanders mightily.

Likewise we understand by several letters written from Civil, how that by
thunder and lightning the golden Crown was stroaken from the head of the Image
or statua of the King of Spain, that was erected there to honor him upon his
arrival, without doing any other hurt, so that there are made many strange
Prognostications, and that the rather seeing that the Confessor of the Queen,
who was a very learned man, said before his death, that he was very happy to
leave this world before such miseries, as were to fall upon Spain happened.

They write from Liuorno, that on the 11 of October there arrived the Archduke
Charles, the brother of the Emperor, who was to go with the Gallyes of Gemia
into Spain; he was every where very stately entertained, and it is thought
that he shall be made Viceroy of Portingall, amongst his folowers is one of
the Dukes of Saxon-Weymar who is released out of his imprisonment.

Four Gallyes of the great Duke of Toscana with 3 Galleys of the Popes, and 8
Gallyes of Naples, having assaulted the Famous Pyrat of Algire, Calefare,
Aller, they set so hard upon him, that he was compelled to put the fire in his
gun-pouder.

But nevertheless they took the Captain and two other Pirates, besides 3
prises of French and Low-countrymen, which they thought to carry to Algires,
and some 150 Turks which were upon them are sent to the Gallyes.

The King of Denmark having been in Gotland and viewed his silver mines, is
(God be thanked) again safe arrived at Coppenhugen.

And we understand that the most part of the Soldiers which the Kings of
Sweden and Denmark have dismissed as well horse as foot, are entered in the
service of the High and Mighty Lords, the States of the united Provinces. The
horse are to come through the lands of Oldenborg, and Emden under the conduct
of young Count of Thurne, and the States have therefore sent provision in those
parts for them.

It is rumored that the Imperial Soldiers which lie yet in West-phalia, are
speedily to march up, and to go to the Marquis Spinola before Breda: But such
as come thence, reports that they have no mind to go to his Camp, by reason
of the great Death and bad payment which is there made, and have caused already
many Soldiers to forsake it, so that there came daily many of them out of
Westphalia to serve the States of these United Provinces.

They of the Bishoppricke of Osnaburg have this year slain many Soldier of
Monsieur Tilly, and the Baron of Anholt, which pillaged the Country.

And the Baron before mentioned, has thereuppon having received order from
Monsieur Tilly, written to them of the Town, and urged that they should
receive some Imperial Soldiers within their Walls. But they have refused it
flatly, and are not afraid for him.

The Cardinal of Hohensolleren would likewise sine as Bishop of Osnaburg make
his entry in the same Town.

In the County of Rauensberg, are now many Soldiers leauied for the King of
Spain, and are to be sent to the siedge of the Marquis Spinola before Breda.

From Rome the 29 of October.
We have received now more particular tidings from the Sea Fight that was
lately betwixt 16 gallyes of the Christians, and 6 pirates, in the Sea about
Sardigna, not far from the Isle called St. Peter, for they write from
Liuorno; that there were three Galleys of the Pope, eight of Naples, and five
of Toscanus that fight with them, and that they had two Pinasses, and two other
great Ships with them, which they had taken from some Low-Country-men.

And they relate how that the greatest Ship of the Turks, which was provided
with 50. pieces of Ordinance, and 300. men, having lost her maine Maste,
through the shot of the Ordinance of our Galleys, the Pirates put the fire in
the gun-dowder, and blew it up, that they might not be taken a live: This ship
being thereupon presently sunk, the rest fled to save themselves.

From Venice the 25. of October.
They write from Thurin that the Duke of Sauoy, and the Signiory of Gennu are
yet both leauiyng more Soldiers, and that the Duke (a fore mentioned,) granted
yet lately a Patent to leauie 2000. men: As likewise that his Highness is
resolved to purchase yet more lands and Lordships to the Marquisate of
Succarello.

On the last Twesday arrived here two ships with soldiers of Albania, which
are to be sent into our Fronter Towns in Terra ferma.

This week sailed the two great Gallions hence being appointed to conduct our
Merchants Ships going and coming in, and from diverse several places.

The Coronells Obertront, and Schibilischy are here arrived, and are entered
into the pay of this Signiory, which is resolved to leauy 2000. Albeneses,
2000. Swissers, and 2000. Italian horse.

We understand by letters written from Millane how that the Governor of that
Duke-dome has sent many soldiers without any sound of Drum toward Come; and
that the Paragor or Pay-maister General, has furnished 5000. Veltoliners with
arms and other necessaries to defend it.

Letters from Emerick.
We have intelligence by letters from the town of Emrick, that the Captain of
the horse Surnamed Quait, the Lord of Sippenbrook having made passag into the
Land of Mark, with a 100 horse and 500 foot, which were under the command of
John Whitelme of Schorteneere, surprised and took the the Knight Marshall out
of the Town of Haltingen; where out of the walls of the City, he forced him
to shake hands and take his farewell of this life shooting him to death against
a Tree: the which punishment his bad usage of many of our soldiers moved him
to inflict upon him.

But as yet here was not a period of their power nor an end of their conquest,
for they proceeded in the acquiring of a farther victory, laying siedge to the
Town of Vima: where having encamped, they sent some shot to the Town, as an
Ambassador to tell them thundering in their ears, the scope of their approach,
notwithstanding the Town made some small resistance; but to small purpose: for
it did but procrastinate, not mittigate their misery, in fine it was taken,
from whence they carried 5 pieces of Ordinance, by the assistance of which they
went on yet further, and they besiedged the town of Lunnen, and that not
without as hapy success, as they had formerly done the other: for haueing
discharged some Cannons upon it, the town not very well likeing of such
language as the Cannon noise, nor approouing of such messengers as deadly
bullots, submitted themselves unto them, and yield their persons and their
purses, their goods and themselves into their hands, which being accomplished
with without further delay (which allures great danger in martial matters)
they posted letters to Emerick, the contents of which were to this effect viz.

That they would send them more aid to the intent they might scour away the
spaniards which like rust hung about the countries, and constrayne them to fly
out of that corner.

I doubt not but this will be a Habeas corpus for Spinola, from the siedge of
Breda: for me thinks it stands with reason that when he sees his own house on
fire, he should look to the quenching of that rather then fircing of others,
he sees a certainty of loss in the parting with those Towns, but as yet no
assurance of gain in the possession of others, for he has not as yet
attained it.

But to return to our former discourse, Fame which is more swift then Pegasus,
certifieth the Spanish Commanders, which lies in the Town of Wesell of these
proceeedings who immediately, selected of their and the other adjoining Garrison
of Sterelen, Gelder, Rhyneberg, and marched afterward with them up into the
Land of Mark, taking with them, certain number of pieces of ordinance: with
an intent to make resistance against the before mentioned Captain Quait, and to
enter into battle with him.

But on the contrary side the States of the United Provinces, together with the
Counsel of Marquis Brandenburg, sent multituds of soldiers to defend and
mayntaine the Towns which were surprised by them.

Of late there arrived in our Camp eight companyes of Freizland, each of them
being some 150 men strong: and they had a further expectation of other 8
companies which were coming out of the Bishoppricke, and the Land of Greuinger.

The Prince of Orange having received intelligence of Count Mansfields approach
to Seuernbergen sent his own Coach accompaned with four others, 30 wagons, 2
Troops of horse to feth him in pomp, with no less honor then magnificence.

On the 4 day o this month the Count of Stirum, and the Count of Hellaine,
being departed out of our Camp, and intending their course to Bergen up Zoome,
in the interim Count Mansfild ioyd our camp with his arrival, having in his
Society, the as good as old Count of Thinna the Count Ernest of Nassaw, with
many other Lords, Commanders, and Genelemen, who rod abroad to meet, salute,
and congratulate his coming in the name of the Prince of Orange, who received
him with Pomp and State, beeseeming the welcome of such a noble, virtuous,
and vallient, personage.

The Prince of Orange likewise made no long stay after them, but being
accompaned with many Earls, Barrons, and Nobles, very Princely, and Nobley
showed him much countenance, and Entertained him with much courtesy: long may
they be so hounoured, which have so nobly fought it.

Our Camp is very fortunately, and daily enricht, with multitudes of Prisoners,
and prizes, taken from the Enemies: to the no less augmentation of our joy,
then the demunition of their solace; for as meat does feed the body, so money
does flesh and encourage the heart: but the most memorable booty that blessed our
Camp, was Lieutenant Roland Vanos, who was a Captain of the company of their
enemies foot, who was taken with seven horses, and three mules, laden with
Truncks of a great Spanish Commanders, was carried into Bergen up Zoom where as
yet he lies in the Town.

All the Trenches, Ditches, Batteryes, and Fortifications, in our Camp, are now
fully finished, and absolutely complete.

The Prince of Orang likewise, has recalled his sauegards, granted to the
villages, situated in the Kempen: and has also given very strickt and
straight probition in Proclamations, or fixed Bills at Bergen up Zoom,
Seuernbergen, and other adjoining places: that they shall neither make sale, or
carryage of any kind of Grain to the Camp.

Through which means the dearth and famine in the Spanish Camp does daily
increase; for a pound of Butter is vallued, and sold there for ten and twelve
Stiuers, a pound of Cheese is at the same price, and a quart of Beer for eight
pence.

Moreover they have as little store of money, as of meat stirring in their
Army, in so much that men in general have conceived a hope, and are strongly
opinionated that Marquis Spinoloa has more will then power to continue the
siedge of Breda; and it is thought that if not the Wars and spoil done in
other places, yet the hunger at home in his own Camp, will force him to
forsake the siedge, for if he has not money to get meat, nor meat to stay
his Soldiers stomachs, it is easy to be coniectured that they will follow
their appetites; and if he leave not the siedge, his Companies will forsake
him; Et sic famem non famam habent, they have more hunger then honor, and
report has given us to understand, that they have stomachs like Lions, but it
is Magis ad passendum quam pugnandum, rather to feed then to fight, but to
leave the siedge and to come to the besidged.

This week were five Soldiers which made an escape by night out of Breda, by
whose relation we understood that the Town is as yet reasonable well provided
for victuals, and sufficiently furnished with other sustinance and
necessaries, for it is their assertion that howsoever they be destitute, and
have want of Butter, yet they are fully furnished with Corn, and have great
store of Cattle, abundance of salt, bread, Cheese, Honey, Oil, Syrrop, and
other provision requisite for the sustenance and mayntenance of this our weak
and frail life: And we learn by particular Letters sent Breda, that some
three weeks since, there being a survey made of the sustenance, and provision
in the Town, they found and understood that there was yet remaining 40000.
quarters of Corn unspent or untouched, which does still add to the former
expectation of Spinolaes relinquiching the siedge, for if the Town be so well
furnished with men, meat, and munition, it is probable that Spinola being so
defective in purse and provision does but littus arare, as they say, or
Aethiopem lauare, labor in vain, as the sowing on the shore, or the washing
of a Blackamore; but to leave this to the censure of sound judgments, I
proceed in my discourse.

Count Henry of Nassaw has lately likewise fully finished all his Quarters,
with all the works appertayning and belonging to them: He has also provided,
and taken order that none of our victuals or any other of our adherents shall
transport or carry any sustinance to any of our enemies or foes forces.

Count Mansfield and the old Count of Thieru having had long conference, and
large consultation with his Excellence, the Prince of Orange, took their leave
and farewell of him, who as fame tells us, are after the expiration of a small
time, are to meet the English at the places by them appointed, although from
us concealed, and here of late have been great sums of money gathered, and
sent over into these provinces out of France.

Neither is it buried in concealment, that the French King has received into
his pay 2800 Horse, the which have formerly served Mounsier Tilly, who became
humble and carnest suitors to serve under Count Mansfield, and there are yet
expected 1000 Horse more which will come to offer their service very speedely,
and to enter into the pay of the King of France, who is still increasing his
Forces, whose power as it is not yet in the full, so yet it is not in the
Wayne: For every day there be more additions to it.

We have likewise intelligence, and understand further more by letters, that
the Constable Longuiare has with no less speed then success arrived amongst
the Grisons, for he is not only already there, but he has subjected to the
yoke of his obedience many places and passages, the which he has effected,
wrought and brought to pass, as well by his own proper forces as by the
assistance of the Duke of Sauoy, moreover the French king has sent over also
three regiments to aid him.

From Bergen up Zoame.
Our ears of late have been the woeful objects of vnsortunate news from
Bargain up Zoame, viz. that the Earl of Southampton falling sick, according
to somes false relation, of the plague, but according to truth, of the bloody
flux at Roscindale, from whence he was carried to the Town of Bergen up
Zoame, where his soul forsook that earthly mansion place, and departed out of
this wretched world: but as who should say, death had an intent to make a
second part of our sorrow, with his impartial axe he cut down both tree and
fruit together: for the Earl of Southamptons hopeful son followed his
father in the shadie paths of death, who had also in the same place, and at the
same time a period imposed unto his life.

FINIS.

