THE CVRES OF the Diseased, in remote Regions.

PREVENTING Mortality, incident in Foreign Attempts, of the English Nation.

La honra mas vale,
merecerla que tenerla.
BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY printer's device of F. Kingston: clasped
hands emerging from clouds holding a caduceus and two cornucopias

At London Printed by F.K. for H. L. 1598.

TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
SAcred Sovereign,
in my iniust imprisonment in Spain, it pleased God to afflict me with the
Tabardilla Pestilence: whereof being in cure, by an especial Physician of that
King, J observed his method for the same, and such other Diseases, as have
perished your Majesty's people in the Southern parts. Which Remedies have
since, by my direction, taken the like good effects. And of perfect zeal to
your Majesty's service, and Countries weal, J therewith acquaint your Highness
subjects. Jnuocating God to preserve your Majesty, enable them in your
services, protect your Kingdoms, and suppress your Enemies.

Your Majesty's loyal Subject George Wateson.

The Writers intent.
MAn that is borne, not for himself is borne,
But for his Prince, his Country, and his friends.
To help the sick, distressed, and forlorn,
Are works of mercy, men to men extends.
Who has the power, and means, and will not cherish,
Shall with the hider of his Tallent perish.
Transgression first did sin in man beget,
Sin, sickness, death, and mischiefs many more:
For as men's minds on wickedness were set,
So plagues increast, which were not known before.
But God, whose mercy, justice does exceed,
Sends helps for hurts, and salues for sores at need.
The Books Content.
The burning Fever, calde the Calenture,
The aching Tabardilla pestilent,
The Espinlas prickings, which men do endure,
Cameras de Sangre, Fluxes violent,
The Erizipila, swelling the Pacient,
The Tin^oso, which we the Scuruey call,
Are truly here described, and cured all.
Si Dios no es adorado,
nunca seras bien curado.

The Cures of the Diseased, in remote Regions.
THE CALENTVRE.
THe Calenture (or burning Fever) called by the Spaniards, La Calentura, is the
most usual Disease, happening to our Nation in intemperate Climats, by
inflammation of blood, and often proceeding of immoderate drinking of wine, and
eating of pleasant Fruits, which are such nourishers thereof, as they prevent
the convenient means, that are used in curing the same.

To know the Calenture.
THe Calenture at the first apprehension afflicts the Pacient with great pain
in the head, and heat in the body; which is continual or increasing, and
does not diminish and augment as other Fevers do: and is an introduction to
the Tabardilla, or Pestilence; whereof next is entreated: but then the body
will seem very yellow.

To cure the Calenture.
SO soon as the Pacient is perceived to be possessed of the Calenture; except
the Surgeon defer it for danger of the Sign (I have seen the time of the
day not respected) to open the Median vein of the right arm, and take such
quantity of blood, as agrees to the ability of the body, which not
asswaging the heat, by the next day; to open the same Vein in the left arm,
and take so much more blood at his like discretion. And the body being Costiue
(for so commonly the Pacients are) to give him some meet Purgation; and not to
permit him to drink other then water coolde, wherein Barley and Anniseedes
have been sodden with bruised Licorice. And if within four days the party do
not amend, or being recovered do take it again; then open the Sephalica
vein, in one or both hands, bathing them in warm water, until there comes so
much more blood as cause requires. And not to suffer the Pacient to drink,
seven days after he is perfectly recovered, any other drink, then such water
as herein is directed.

THE TABARDILLA.
THe Disease called by the Spaniards, La Tabardilla, and by the Mexicans,
Cocalista, is named by other Jndians, Taberdet: and is so exceeding Pestilent
and infectious, as by the same, whole Kingdoms in both the Jndias have been
depopulated: which seems to ensue of the ignorance of the savage people, to
minister redress to themselves. For the Spaniards and Portugals there
inhabiting, and in their native Countries, where it is also contagious, before
they had this knowledge, did abundantly die thereof. But now by applying the
means here described, they are recovered of the same.

To know the Tabardilla.
THe Tabardilla first assaults the Pacient very vehemently, with pain in the
head and back: and the body seeming yellow, is some sign thereof, and within
24. hours it is so torturous, that he that is possessed thereof, cannot sleep or
rest, turning himself on either side, back and belly; burning in his back
most extremely. And when it grows to perfection, there will appear red and
blew spots upon the Pacients breast and wrists. And such persons as have not
presently applied unto them, means requisite to prevent it, will be by the
incomparable torment thereof, deprived of their wits. And multitudes have
desparingly slain and drowned themselves, that by loss of their lives, they
might finish their terrestrial pain.

To cure the Tabardilla.
WHen the Tabardilla is perceived to afflict the Pacient, permit him not to lie
very warm, nor upon Feathers (for of what quality soever he is in Spain,
having this sickness, he is laid upon Wheat straw:) Then immediately open the
Median vein, first in one arm, and the next day in the other, taking a good
quantity of blood: And let him have water cold, wherein Barley and Anniseedes
have been sodden, without Licorice (for I have heard the opinion of good
Physicians of Spain, that Licorice is hurtful unto them) so much as he will
desire, which will be every moment: but no other drink, nor any rawfruits: and
so soon as the spots appear, give him some Cordial potion: and laying him
upon his belly, set six Ventoses together in his back, between and beneath
the shoulders. And scarifying them, draw out (if it be a body of strong
constitution) 18. ounces of blood. After which, and that he has slept, he will
feel ease within 24. hours, and find such alteration in himself, as he will
think that he is delivered of a most strange torment. Then giving him
nourishing meats moderatly (for he will desire to eat much) the fourth day
give him some convenient Purgation. And if in the mean while he is Costiue,
provoke him every day by Clisters: and admonish him to forbear fifteen days
all other drink, then that is ordained. And to be careful of his diet: for
if this Tabardilla, which we call here in England, Gods Tokens, come again
unto the Pacient, he can hardly escape it. And it is no less infectious, then
the usual English Plague.

THE ESPINLAS.
THe Espinlas is a very strange sickness, and usual in those parts, to such as
take cold in their breasts, after great heat or travel. And most times it
comes to those that lie with their breasts upon the ground (especially) in the
night.

To know the Espinlas.
THe party having the Espinlas, will be giddie in the head, and have pain and
pricking at his breast, as with many thorns: wherefore I think it is so
called of Spina and Espina, the Latin and Spanish words for a Thorn. And
there will be upon Huesso radio, or Focell, being the upper bone of his arm, a
hand breadth above the wrist, a little kernel, by which it is certainly
known. And he that has this Disease, will not have appetite to meat or
drink; nor cannot digest meat, although he be procured to take it.

To cure the Espinlas.
THe Espinlas, appearing by the former signs: Take Olive oil presently, and
therewith chafe the kernel upon the Pacients arm, using so to do twice every
day, until it be dissolved: and laying Oil likewise upon his breast, stroke
it upward somewhat hard with the hand: then spread fine Flax upon it and the
kernel, making it fast with a rowler: and within two or three days, the
diseased thereof will be recovered. Whereas else it is very dangerous to deprive
them of life.

LAS CAMERAS, OR Cameras de Sangre.
THAT is Laxatiuenes, or Bloody Flux, which in those parts proceeds of
diverse causes. As by eating of Grapes, Orringes, Limonds, Mellons, Plantans,
and especially a great Fruit that grows in the West Jndia, called Pina, like
a Pineapple, but bigger then four of the greatest that I have seen; which
the Spaniards do repute to be the most delicate Fruit that is there, and many
other Fruits. Also by sudden cold, or sitting (being very hot) upon a cold
stone, or, being hot, by drinking Water abundantly. And also eating of Butter,
Oil, and Fish, is so hurtful to the parties that have it, that they must
refrain to eat thereof: and whatsouer else, that defiles the entrails, with
any slimie substance.

To cure Las Cameras, or Cameras de Sangre, which is the Bloody Flux.
With the more expedition, that medicine is ministered to the diseased of
Cameras de Sangre, Laxatiuenes, or Bloody Flux, there is the more possibility
it should prevail. And detracting it, the Pacients often die suddenly, without
feeling much grief. For speedy and assured remedy thereof, the Pacients
body must be cleansed of the slimines, engendered in the passages of the
nutriments, before any sustinance can remain in his body. And for that
purpose, give to purge him in the morning, half a pint of white Wine coold,
wherein. ounce of Rubarb has been sodden, being small cut; putting in some
Sugar Candy to sweeten it. And immediately after he has so purged, keep at
his navel Rosemarie sodden in strong Vinegar, applied in the morning and
evening very hot, until it be stayed: giving him often Quinces bruised and
rolled in Marmelet like Pills, which he should swallowe whole, and none of the
Fruits, or meats before recited, nor any more white wine, but red wine of any
sort. And if it be on Land, the livers of Goats (especially) Sheep, or
Bullocks roasted: not willingly permitting the Pacient to eat any other meat.
And if at Sea, Rice only sodden in water, rather then any thing else usual
there, until the infirmity is perfectly assuaged.

THE ERIZIPILA.
THe Erizipila is a Disease very much reigning in those Countries, the rather
proceeding of the unwholesome aires and vapors, that hot Climates do yield,
whereof many people do perish. And it is found incurable, except it be
prevented by Medicines, presently ministered to the Pacients vexed therewith.

To know the Erizipila.
HE that has the Erizipila, will be swollen in the face, or some part of him,
and it will be of yellow color mixed with red. And when it is thrust with the
finger, there will remain a sign or dint of the same: and then by degrees it
will fill again to the former proportion. And it speedily infecteth the
inward parts, because such swellings comes sooner to perfection in hot places,
then in temperate Countries. And therefore the diseased thereof, must be
immediately provided of remedy.

To cure the Erizipila.
SOme savage people have first found perfectly to cure this Erizipila, although
it is the Spanish name of the Malady; by brusing so much Tobaco, as will yield
four spoonfuls of juice, and to drink it presently after they are infected
therewith. And to lance the places swollen; thereunto putting Casada wet, and
made in paste. Continuing in cold places and shadie, near Rivers: and not to
travel or labor, until they are recovered. But the Spaniards in Jndia,
recover themselves by taking the same juice of Tobaco, and setting so many
Ventoses upon the swollen places, as they can contain, scarrifying them, and
drawing out the corrupted Humor so congealed. And doing the like in two or
three other parts of the body, where the Disease does not appear.

The juice of Tobaco, is very excellent to expel Poison, and is the ordinary
remedy used by the Indians, and many other savage people, when they are
poisoned, and bit with Scorpions, or other venomous creatures. But they
presently make some kind of incision, where they are bit or stung, and wash it
with the juice of Tobaco: then applying the same bruised thereunto, two or three
days, they heal it up with dried Tobaco.

THE TINOSO.
THe Tin^oso, or Sceruey is an infecting Disease, sufficiently known unto
Seafaring men: who by putrified meats, and corrupted drinks, eating Biscuit
flowrie, or foul crusted, wearing wet apparel (especially sleeping in it) and
slothful demeanor, or by gross humors contained in their bodies, obtain
the same.

To know the Scuruey.
ALthough most Chirurgions, and chiefly those that frequent the Sea, do
understand how to discern when their Pacients have the Scuruey; because it is
so ordinary at Sea, as it has been seldom seen, any Ship or Pinnice, to be
four months upon any Voyage, to any part of the world, not ariuing where they
have been supplied and relieved with the benefits of the Land: but some of the
Company have had this Disease. Yet it is not impertinent here to insert the
signs thereof: the rather, because I have known some so destitute of
knowledge, to discern and cure the same, as the loss of men lost thereby,
has diuerted determined purposes to proceed on Voyages: and others to perish,
when they returned out of hot Regions into cold Climates, where they have had
the lineaments of their bodies, that with heat are nimble and tractable to
every motion of the spirits, dulled and benumbed with cold: which is a token
that this disease is engendring in their ioints: and soonest appears by
swelling of their anckles and knees, and blacknes of their gummes, or loosenes
of their teeth, which will sometimes come forth, when there is not redress
ministered in season.

Preseruatines against the Scuruey.
TO preserve men from the Scuruie, there must be care to prepare those things
before rehearsed, well conditioned: the badnes whereof does partly breed the
inconvenience. And men themselves must have a discreet endeavor to avoid their
own ruin, by using exercise of their bodies. And such as are exempted from
being commanded to do labor, to hang by the arms twice or thrice every day.
And not to have scarcity of drink in hot Climates: and coming into the cold,
to be daily relieved with Aqua vitae, or wine. Also it is a certain and
assured medicine against this Disease, to have such quantity of Beer brewed
with Graynes and Long pepper, as in the morning twice every week there may be
given a good draught to a man, proportioning three quarters of a pound of
Grains, and three quarters of a pound of Pepper to a hogshead of Beer. But
white Wine or Syder, boiled and brewed with Graynes and Long pepper, in like
quantity, is very singular good. And it is not fit to suffer the gums to
abound with flesh: and therefore sometimes let them bleed, and clear them with
strong Vinegar.

To cure the Scuruey.
THe party that has the Scuruey settled in his mouth, must have the corrupted
and black flesh taken away, washing his mouth with strong Vinegar, wherein
Grains and Long pepper have been infused and brewed: and give him the drink
daily that is before prescribed. And as well such as have it in their mouths,
as those that are swollen in their limbs, must have some meet Purgation
presently. But those so swollen or stiff (for so some will be without
swelling) to scarifie the parts infected, and to apply thereunto a Pultis or
Cataplasme of Barley meal, more hot then the Pacient will willingly suffer it.
So doing every morning, permit him not to rest two hours after, although he
being nummed or faint, be supported to walk: and not to suffer him to eat any
salt meats, if other may be had.

My self having 80. men, 800. leagues forth of England, sick of the Scuruey,
J caused this means of scarifying to be used, and to the places scarified,
Pulteses (being destitute of the helps mentioned) to be applied of Biscuit,
beaten in a mortar, and sodden in water: which with the comfort of some fresh
meats (obtained) recovered them all, except one person, and they arrived in
England perfectly sound.

Conclusion.
Let no man boast of beauty, strength, or youth:
For like to flowers we bud, we spread, we fade:
Nothing is certain, but the certain truth,
To day a man, to morrow but a shade.
His last apparel, cut out with a spade,
Of Natures coursest stuff (I mean) her molde,
Must shroud the corpse, that living shone in gold.
Quando tengas, mas fortuna,
mira que es, como la Luna.

To the Reader.
THE cause that induces me, publicly to express the Cures of Diseases of
such consequence, as every judicial conceit may perceive, to have been the
only prejudice to our Nation, in the expeditions of our time to the Southern
parts: from whence in this and former ages, the English have returned with
renowned Victory; yet exceedingly oppressed with extreme and penurious
sickness, that has much more prevented the proceeding and performing of their
pretentions, than the power of Enemies: is not that J purpose,
practitioner-like in Physic or Chirurgerie, to assume unto me any knowledge
in those Sciences and Faculties: but to possess all men of remedy for such
infirmities, as in my own experience, have infinitely impaired English Forces
in intemperate Clymates. Which J publish, for the good of those, whom cause
may compel to have use thereof, and would be so censured of all.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kingston, for Humfrey Lownes. 1598.


