A POSIE OF SPIRITVALL FLOWERS, TAKEN OVT OF THE Garden of the holy Scriptures,
consisting of these six sorts: Hearts ease, True delight, The Worlds wonders,
The Souls solace, Times complaint, The doom of Sinners.
Gathered for the Encouragement of beginners, Direction of proceeders,
Meditation of good hearers, Consolation of true believers, Expectation of Sions
mourners, Confusion of irrepentant sinners.
By George Web, Minister of the Word.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for William Leake. 1610.

Hearts ease.



A TASTE OF Happiness: Or BRIEF DESCRIPTION of that sweetness which Gods
children do find in his service.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Henry Baynton, Knight, and his worshipful Lady
the Lady Lucie.
RIght Worshipful,
I should think my self exceeding happy, if whiles the skillful Bezaleels and
Aholiabs Exodus 36.1.
of our age do adorn and beautify the Sanctuary of the Lord with their
curious, rich, and worthy works, I might but bring one stick or stone to the
building of the same. But how great soever my desire is, I am too well privy
to my self, quam sit mihi curta supellex, how insufficient all my sufficiency
is. Whiles others lanch forth into the deep, it is fittest for me to sit and
mend my nets at home: Matthew. 4.21. Luke 21.1.
whiles the rich men cast their gifts (as well they may) into the treasury, I
have but two mites (yea those but small ones also) to cast in: One I have
already cast into the treasury, and it has found acceptance; the other I am
now to cast in, (it is all that I have) God grant it may obtain the like
favorable countenance. A smaller mite there could not be, for I cannot call it
a Work, nor a Treatise, nor so much as words, for they are but Thoughts, even
those my meditating thoughts, which (according to David's counsel) at leisure
times, Psalm. 4.4.
I have communed with mine own heart in silence. That I have co^mumicated them
abroad and made the^ public, it was neither for any excellency I deemed in
them, nor for any vain glory I hunt after by the publishing of them. If any
man otherwise conceive of me and it, this is mine apology, Romans 14.4.
I stand or fall to mine own master. I was induced to the publishing of them,
partly because I have perceived by experience how much people are now delighted
with this kind of writings, and how great good has been received from them,
and partly that I might leave some public testimony of my thankful mind to
such as in ample manner had deserved the same at my hands. Wherein give me
leave (right Worshipful) in the first place to salute you both, by presenting
unto you the first of these my selected flowers: your kind acceptance of my
other simple treatise dedicated to another, makes me presume of your favor
unto this which is dedicated to your selves. I present you here with a taste of
Happiness, an Enchiridion to make you more and more in love with godliness,
Heb. 6.5.
that you may taste how sweet the Lord is, and having tasted of that sweetness,
may repose therein your chiefest pleasures. Had I the tongue of men and Angels,
I could not speak one half of that which they who taste hereof enjoy. Take a
taste then of this little taste which here I have provided for you: expect not
in it conceited cookerie, I seek to profit rather then to please; if you come
with an appetite unto it, though it want the sauourie sauce of eloquence, yet
will it relish well enough unto you. The Lord God evermore prepare your hearts
to receive it, and grant a good digestion to you in it.

Your Worships ever to command in Christ Jesus, G. W.

A TASTE OF Happiness.
PSALM. 34.8. Taste and see how good the Lord is: Blessed is the man that
trusts in him.


WHEN Nathaniel, though otherwise an Israelite indeed, A man in whom there was
no guile, John 1.47.
yet herein had sauored of a spice of incredulity, 45.
in that when Philip had brought him news of our sweet Savior, 46.
whom long they had expected, and now found at Nazareth, it could not sink into
his mind upon the sudden, that so fair a jewel should be found in so foul
a place; Philip, to take away that scruple, wills him to make his eyes the
witnesses of that which had bin related to his ears, that both his eyes and
ears giving joint testimony hereof unto his heart, he might not be
incredulous, but believe: Come (says he) and see. O that our scarce half
Nathaniels, who come far short of him, and content themselves only with a
civil carriage of themselves, not seasoned with religion, thinking that
superfluous, and obiecting; Can there any good thing come of godliness? O that
they would follow Philips counsel; would they would come and see. O that our
earth-turmoiling Nabals, who no whit savor of Nathaniels spirit, 1. Sam. 25.10.
but doting upon these unprofitable profits of the world, blush not to pollute
the air with such blasphemous speeches: Job. 21.15.
Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we
have if we should pray unto him? which count it but a vain thing to serve
God, and demand of us, Malach. 3 14.
What profit we have by keeping his commandments? and what pleasure it is
that we walk humbly before the Lord? O that they would take a little of
Nathaniels pains to come and see: Psalm. 34 8.
or hearken unto David's counsel; Oh that they would taste and see how gracious
and sweet the Lord is; what a good master he is whom the godly do serve,
what a good Prince he is whom the righteous do obey, what a sure card he is
on whom the faithful trust, how sweet he is to them that love him, what a
rewarder he is to the^ that fear him, what a comforter he is to them that
depend upon him. The unexperienced rusticke that never tasted Candies Sugar,
perceives no more sweetness in it, then there is in Alum; and Aesops cock
thinks better far his grain of barlie in the dunghill, then he does
estimate the richest pearl; and Baalams Ass that never tasted the sweet
fruit of Bees, supposes there is much more sweetness in his thistle: and
wretched souls, whose souls are out of taste, and never made trial of the
sweetness of the Lord, do think, that plus Aloes quam mellis habet, that it
has much bitterness, and but little sweetness: Then, silly they, think nothing
in heaven worth the having: the reason is, By groueling so much here on earth,
they are so far off, that all there is out of their kenning. The diet of a
Christian conversation, thinks the ordinary and common Christian, is but
ordinary and common fare; why should we affect it? It is too strait, says
the Libertine, we cannot well endure it: It is too bitter, says the wanton,
we cannot well digest it: It is too sour, says the Epicure, and has no
pleasure in it.

Alas poor souls, how are they all deceived? and therefore deceived, because
they never tasted it. For did they make a taste hereof, they would then quickly
prove it not a bondage, but a freedom; not bitter, but pleasant; not sour but
sweet, Psalm. 19.10.
yea sweeter then the honey and the honey comb: Did they once but take a
perfect view hereof, with the wisest Solomon, they would subscribe and say,
that neither the gold of Ophir, Proverb. 8.12.
nor the mines of India, nor all the pleasures in the world were in any sort to
be compared to it. Yea they would say with him that here commends this
taste unto them, Psalm. 84.4, 5.
Blessed are they which dwell in Gods house, for they will ever praise him:
Blessed is the man whose strength is the Lord; One day in Gods house is better
then a thousand elsewhere: 10.
It is better to be a doore-keeper in the house of our God, then to dwell in the
tabernacles of wickedness: 11.
for the Lord God is the Sun and shield unto them, he will give grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that have tasted of him.
His mercies to them are endless, his favors numberless, his comforts
infinite; he is glass to their eyes, music to their ears, Honey to their
mouth, Balm to their smell, contentation to their will, continuation to their
happiness.

When a man has once taken a full taste of him, No comfort in the world to the
comfort of Gods children. Philip. 3.7. Eccles 1.1. Eccles 2.2. Philip. 3.8.
all worldly dainties will seem but vanities, all worldly gains will seem
but losses, all worldly pleasures will seem but toys, all worldly delights
will seem but madness, all worldly treasures will seem but dungie trash. 1.
Sam. 18.27.
The very taste of this is like unto Ionathans tasting of the honey comb,
whereof when he had put but a drop into his mouth, his dim eyes were
clarified to a quicker sight: The taste hereof is like unto the Poets river
Lethe, Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 6.
whereof whosoever had a taste, did soon forget all other delights and
pleasures. The taste hereof made Peter to confess that Bonum est esse hic:
Matthew. 17.4.
It is good abiding here. 2. Cor. 12.3.
It made Paul in an ecstasie to forget whether he were in the body, or no: The
very taste hereof is enough to ravish the soul, and to cause it to say with
Jacob, I have enough, Genesis 45 26.
I have tasted of this, all other pleasures seem sour, to relish bitter, to
be out of taste.

O that I had now but Ananias his gift, Act. 9.17.
that to give a glimse of the eye-dazeling luster of this so glorious light, I
could but touch the moleblind Saul's, the earthworme scoffers of this our age,
and make ye scales fall from their eyes; how clearly should they see, D. Eedes
Sermon of heavenly connersation. Philip. 3.20. 2. Cor. 1.12. Galat. 6.15. 1.
Tim. 6.6. 1. Cor. 1.9. Revel. 7. Psalm. 34.8.
and seeing taste, and tasting testify, that there is no estate like to a
Christian conversation, no joy to the solace of a religious heart, no peace to
the peace of conscience, no glory to the cross of Christ, no riches to
godliness, no wisdom to that of the spirit, no pleasures to the soul
delights, no sweetness to the sweetness of the Lord.

My soul, Greater sweetness in the Lord, then at the first before the feeling
of it can be imagined.
thou must needs confess, had thou been put to thy choice before thou did
feel a taste hereof, thou could not have asked or desired the tenth part
thereof; the Lord has given more then I could ask or think, more then, had I
all the tongues of men and Angels, I were able to express, yea more then any
heart, but that which feels it, can believe. So that thou (my soul:) and
what do I speak of mine? every believing soul can say no less: as Shebaes
Queen said of Salomons wisdom, 1. King. 6.6, 7, 8, 9.
so may thou say of this sweet taste of heaven: It was a true word which I
heard related to me of the most sweet dainties of Gods children, when I was in
mine own corruptions, fed with draffe, with fancies, and dreams and
deceitful pleasures; howbeit I believed not this report, till I came and saw
it with mine eyes, and had a feeling and a taste thereof: but lo now I see,
the one half was not told me: for the sweetness I feel in the taste hereof,
does far surpass all that ever mine ears did hear reported of it, or mine
heart could possibly imagine to be in it.

And whereas in other delicates satietie may breed lothsomnesse, The longer it
is enioied, the sweeter it is proved.
and the continual use of one sort of meat may glut the stomach, in this
taste of the sweetness of the Lord, the longer I enjoy it, the better I know it;
the sweeter I feel it, the more delight I perceive in it, and receive from it.
The longer I taste it, the more I am enamoured on it, and still more and more
comfortable I prove it, like to Ezechiels river which he saw issuing from
under the threshold of the temple, Ezech. 47.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
which at the first arose but to the ancles, then to the knees, afterward to
the loins, and at the last became a river which did ouerflow: Here in this
life we can have but a taste.
And yet (my soul) here in this life whiles thou art soiourning in this vale
of tears, thou can have but a taste; 1. Cor. 13.9.12 (...).
here thou can only know in part, and feel in part, and taste in part, and
see it but darkly as through a glass: The full fruition thou shall enjoy when
thou shall come to sing Haleluiahs in heaven with the quire of heaven unto the
King of heaven, Revel. 19.4.
at whose right hand are fulness of joy for evermore. Psalm.
O sweet Lord, if the taste of thee be so excellent, how superexcellent shall
that sweetness be, Psalm. 36.5. Augustine.
when I shall be satisfied with the fatnes of thine house, and drink out of the
rivers of thy pleasures? If the glimmering light of our happiness be so
glorious, how full of glory shall the full prospect be? If there be so great
solaces for thy children in these days of tears, what shall there be in their
day of marriage? If our iaile contain such joys, what shall our country and
kingdom do?

O my Lord and God thou art a good God, The infinite sweetness of the Lord.
How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
and done to them that put their trust in thee, Psalm. 31.9.
even before the sons of men. Psalm. 40.5.
O Lord my God thy comforts are so many that none can count them, I would
declare and speak of them, but they are more then I am able to express.

An unwise man knows it not, Wicked me^ think it otherwise. Psalm. 92.6.
and a fool does not understand this: An unregenerate man cannot feel it, and
a child of Belial, though he had eyes as clear as Crystal, cannot behold it:
Such as make sin their solace, and rejoice only in the pleasures of
iniquity, have thy beloved ones, Lord, Wisd. 5.4.
in derision, and count their life madness, their conversation dumpish, their
profession grievous: Cantic. 5.9.
They say unto us, What is your well-beloved more then another well-beloved? Verse.
10.
what is your well-beloved more then another Lover? Will they needs know it;
Verse. 11.
why, Our well-beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousand, Verse.
12. Verse. 13.
his head is as fine gold, his locks curled and black as a raven, his eyes are
like doves upon the rivers of waters, Verse. 14.
his cheeks are as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers, his lips like
lilies dropping down pure myrrh, Ver. 15.
his hands as rings of gold set with the Chrysolite, Verse. 16.
his hollie like white Iuorie covered with Saphires, his legs as marble set
upon sockets of fine gold, his countenance as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars;
his mouth is as sweet things, and he is totus delectabilis, wholly, wholly
delectable.

Yea thou our God art delectable all together, Nothing in God but full of
sweetness.
sweet art thou in thy word, sweet in thy promises, sweet in thine inward
consolations, sweet in thy mercies, sweet in thy judgments. How perfect is
the law of the Lord, Psalm. 19.7.
connerring the soul! Verse. 8.
The statutes of uerting the soul! The statutes of the Lord are right and
rejoice the heart: Verse. 9.
The commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes: Verse. 10.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: The judgments of the
Lord are truth and righteous altogether, and more to be desired the^ gold, yea
the^ much fine gold, sweeter also then the honey and the honey comb. Psalm.
109.21.
How sweet are the mercies of the Lord! and that my soul knows right well,
which forgineth all mine iniquities, and heals all mine infirmities, which
redeemed my life from the grave, Psalm. 103.3, 4.
and crowns me with mercies and compassio^s. And what shall I say of his
judgments? May we not see Sampsons riddle herein expounded without the help
of any Sphinx, Judge. 14.14:
Out of the strong comes sweetness, and out of the lion the honey comb? O how
sweet are his corrections! as the precious balm of Gilead, as cauterismes in
physic, and not as punishments in hostility. O sweet Savior, thou have well
said it, and we find it true, Matthew. 11.29. Cant. 9.16.
Thy yoke is easy, and thy burden is light; yea thou art wholly delectable.

O they be blessed whose God is the Lord Iehoua: The security of those which
have tasted the Lord. Psalm. 84.5. Isai. 48.21.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, and in whose heart are thy
ways: His soul shall dwell at ease, when the wicked shall be afraid of their
own shadow, and tremble like an Aspin leaf at every little blast of wind or
thunderclap: Psalm. 91.1.
He that dwells under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 46.2.3.
his soul shall dwell at ease, though the earth be moved, and the waters of
the sea rage, and the mountains shake at the surges of the same, their minds
are void of fear. And why? Verse 4.
There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God: Psalm. 91.4.
He covers them under his wings, and they are safe under his feathers. They
know and are assured that all things shall work together for the best to them,
Romans 8.28.
that they are beloved of God, Revel. 21.27. Isai. 1.18.
their names written in heaven, and their (though crimson) sins washed in the
blood of ye Lamb, Revel. 7.14.
and that neither height, nor depth, nor death, nor life, nor any thing shall
be able to separate the^ from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus their
Lord. Romans 8.38.
The full assurance whereof, when they hold in better tenor then they can hold
any thing in this life by seal, lease, writing, witness, or any other way
that law can devise; O how it glads their hearts and cheereth up their vital
spirits! What an heavenly comfort is it for them to meditate thus often with
themselves, Psalm.
that they shall see the good pleasures of the Lord in the land of the living,
2. Cor. 5.1.
and have an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens!

Stoop down to this all comfort of wealth, Wicked men often desire his comfort,
and would give a world for it.
pleasure, or delight in the world (in what account or price soever they be
with worldly fools:) there is never a Balaam (were he well advised) but would
give them all for one quarter of an hours feeling of Gods loving kindness and
sweet countenance toward him. Numb. 23.10.
Silly wretches, albeit they would seem to spend their days in mirth, and
with a light heart to pass away the time, Job 21.13.
yet (God he knows) with weary sighs and groans that cannot be expressed,
many a time their souls thus reason with themselves: O how happy are they
whose names are written in the book of life! O that they might die the death
of the righteous, and that their latter end might be like his! O what an
unspeakable treasure is the peace of conscience! yea and what they would give
for a taste thereof? how many thousand worlds, if it were in their power, for a
part in Gods kingdom? But these pleasures are only for the Bridegromes
friends, Matthew. 25.10.
these dainties are for the children; such whelps shall not be suffered to
taste so much as of the crummes that fall from the childrens table. Mark. 7.27.


Behold (says God) my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry; Only the
godly feel and enjoy it.
my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty; my servants shall rejoice,
Isai. 65.13.14.
and ye shall be ashamed; my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of mind. John 4.32.
They have another meat to eat which the world knows not; they have another
drink to drink, which others dream not of, for their meat is of the tree of
life, Revel. 22.1.
and the Nectar which they sup out of the sweetness of their gracious God is as
a well of water springing up to everlasting life. John 4.14. Gods service not
grievous to his.
So that they feel that most delightful, which to the wicked and ungodly is
most irksome; they see and feel the service of the Lord to be the chiefest
freedom, Heb. 11.6.
because the Lord is a plentiful rewarder of them that seek him, they find
his yoke not cumbersome but easy, Matthew. 12.29.
and his burden not heavy but light, 2. Pet. 1.8.
so that they are neither idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord, 1.
Tim. 5.10.
but ready and prepared to every good work: when they have tasted once of the
good word of God, Heb. 6.5.
and of the powers of the world to come, John 4.34.
O then it is meat and drink to them to do their fathers will, Psalm. 119.110.
the precepts of the Lord are the very joy of their heart, Deuteronomy. 12.18.
so that they cannot choose but rejoice before the Lord in all that they set
their hands unto.

And albeit by reason of that remainder of sin and rebellion of nature, The
godly though much troubled with rebellion, yet with comfort proceed in the
course of godliness.
which still sticks to the ribs even of Gods dearest children, the flesh in
them is oftentimes rebellious against the spirit; so that the good things which
they would do, often times they leave undone, Romans 7.18.19.
and do the evil things which they would not do; so that for grief hereof
they break forth into this complaint; O wretched men that we are, Verse. 24.
who shall deliver us from this body of death! yet they shall have this word
of comfort from their God, 2. Cor. 12.9.
my grace is sufficient for you; though they sin, yet they have an advocate
with the Father, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
Jesus Christ the righteous, Ierem. 8.4.
who is the propitiatio^ for their sins; though they fall, yet they shall
rise again; Luke 22.31.32.
though that Satan desire to sift them like wheat, yet they shall not fail;
though all the infernal power seek their overthrow, Matthew. 16.18.
yet the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. Sweet helps for the
godly to grow in faith and godliness.


What should I here speak of the sweetness of those gracious helps which God
does give unto his children, to make them grow in faith and godliness; his
holy word to instruct them, his divine inspirations to illighten them, his
sweet Sacraments to nourish them, his often checks of conscience to recall
them, his fatherly chastisements to reclaim them, which though they be gall
and wormwood to the wicked, yet are sweet and gainful to those that fear
our Lord. What a benefit is it by prayer to come unto our God for whatsoever we
have need, that is good for us, and may obtain it? How comfortable is it to
read and to reuolue the book of comfort? Psalm. 1 2.3. Psalm. 1.9.
How heavenly a thing is it to be rapt up as it were into heaven with heavenly
meditations, to use Christian conference, Psalm. 119. part. 2
with our lips always to be declaring the judgments of the Lord, and to be
speaking of the testimonies of our God, when we sit in our house, or walk in
our way, when we lie down, Deuteronomy. 11.19.
and when we rise up: O what a pleasure passing pleasure is this, to have the
word of God dwell in us plenteously in all wisdom, Coloss. 3.16.
teaching and admonishing our selves mutually in Psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing, and making melody to the Lord in our hearts? and to
enjoy the blessed communion of Saints, which none but Saints do understand what
it means, none but the elect ca^ enjoy.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, The privileges of the faithful. Psalm.
87.3.
thou city of God: O how goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thine habitations,
O Israel! As the valleys are they stretched forth, as gardens by the rivers
side, as the Aloe trees which the Lord has planted, Numb. 24.5.6.
and as the cedars besides the waters. Why, The secret of the Lord is revealed
to them that fear him, Gods secrets revealed to his children. Psalm. 25.14.
and his covenant to give them understanding. Seems it a small thing unto
you, They are Gods servants.
O ye servants of the everliving God, to be admitted to the privy chamber of
the King of heaven, and to be of his counsel? To be the Chancellor, Treasurer,
or Secretary to an earthly prince, we see it a matter of great state and much
respected honor: but what is that to this honor (which the very poorest and
meanest of Gods servants are advanced unto) to be the servants unto the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the^ which title the Angels themselves have no
greater, Heb. 1.14.
and which the greatest part of the mightiest Kings and Emperors could never
attain unto? But what do I speak of servants? They are Christ's friends.
Christ himself sets forth your estate to be yet more glorious, when he
says, I have not called you servants, Ioh. 15.15.
but friends, to whom I have communicated my secrets and mind, unto which a
servant is not commonly admitted. Romans 8.17.
And if this be not yet enough, behold your God has adopted you to be his
sons and heirs, yea fellow heirs with Christ himself, then which, what
greater privilege, what greater prerogative can there be? Hear, I pray you, O
ye citizens of heaven; may it possibly seem a small thing to be a people
separated unto God himself from the multitude of men, Exodus 19.5.
to be the most precious of all the earth to him, though all the earth be his?
Is it a small thing to be a chosen generation, 1. Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people? See, and with
thankful hearts acknowledge this your privilege, That you are come to the
mount Sion, the city of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the
company of innumerable Angels, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
and to the congregation of the first borne which are written in heaven, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect me^, and to Jesus
the mediator of the new Testament, Heb. 12.24.
and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things then the blood of
Abel. Cheer up then your drooping spirits, and take heart at this your
happiness, howsoever the children of Belial speak evil of you, and ye are
esteemed as the filth of the world, 1. Cor. 4.13.
and as the offcouring of all things unto this day: For howsoever Ismael scoff
at Isaac; Genesis 21.9.
and the children of ye bondwoman persecute the children of the free woman,
Galat. 4.29. Jeremy. Psalm i.e.
smiting them with their tongue, and shooting out their arrows against them,
even bitter words, yet, well I wot, in the midst of their bitter agonies, when
the worm of conscience gnaweth on their souls, in those days shall ten men
take hold out of all languages of the nations, Zach 8.23.
even take hold of the skirt of him that is a Christian, and say, We would go
with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

Yea the Lord is with us indeed, God is always with his, and has a special
care of them. Psalm. 46.7. Psalm. 34.15. Verse. 18. Verse. 7. Psalm. 30.6.7.
The God of Jacob is our refuge: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and his ears are open to their cry: the Lord is near unto them that are of a
contrire heart: The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tents round about them that
fear him, and delivers the^: He is their shelter from tempests and storms
of troubles; he keeps them safe under his protection, as the hen does the
chickens under her wing, Luke 13.34. Deuteronomy. 32.10.
yea he keeps them as the apple of his eye. Psalm. 34.10.
The lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord shall
want nothing that is good: Psalm. 23.1. Romans 8.31.
God is their shepherd, what can they want? He is on their side, who can be
against them? 1. Sam. 2.30.
He honoreth them, whose disgracing of them can hurt the^? In every estate he
saves and vpholdeth them by his providence, 1. Pet. 5.7.
what misery can befall them? God is their God for ever and ever, Psalm. 48.14.
even their guide unto the death. Psalm. 149.9.
This honor shall be to all his Saints.

And albeit here it please the Lord for a while to try the^ with affliction,
Affliction takes away nothing of Gods sweetness.
and to chastize them with his correction, to mingle their wine with Aloes, and
to send much bitterness into their cup: Yet, howsoever it be, God is good to
Israel, Psalm. 73.1. Malach. 3.6. 1. Cor. 4.9.
even to those that are pure in heart: Ye sons of Jacob shall not be
consumed, though you are in distress, yet you shall not be forsaken: Psalm.
30.5.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning: Hosea 6.2.
After two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up
again. Thy chastisements, O Lord, are like the precious balm of Gilead,
Psalm.
which will not break but supple our heads: How many thousands of thy Saints
may say, It was good for us, Psalm. 119.71.
yea exceeding good that we were in troubles? Thou, O Lord, Proverb. 3.11.
do love those who^ thou chastenest: and albeit no chastising for the
present seems to be joyous, but grievous; yet afterward it brings the
quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are thereby exercised. Heb. 12.11.
Romans 8.18.
For the afflictions of this world are not worthy of the joys that succeed
them, Romans 8.28. Heb. 12.6.
and All things (even afflictions themselves) turn to the best to them that
fear God, and are signs that they are beloved of God. Behold the patient
child of God whose afflictions are the greatest, and mark and behold his end,
Psalm. 37.37.
for the end of that man is peace. And though God for a while do seem to hide
away his face, so that the godly soul goes heavy and mourning all the day
long; Psalm. 30.11.
yet God will turn their mourning into joy; Psalm. 56.8.
he will loose their sackcloth, and gird them with gladness; Romans 8.37.
he will put their tears into his bottle, and in all these things in the end
they shall be more then conquerors.

O Lord of hosts how amiable are thy tabernacles! The boldness of the faithful
in their prayers. Psalm. 84.1.
how full of sweetness! Why Lord, we see here upon earth how hard a matter it is
to have access to the great men of this world, which differ from our selves
not in stuff, but in use, and that for a while; and to an earthly Prince but
at sometime and for some one pleasure is few men's cases to obtain an entrance,
when as we may boldly press in to the portall of thy privy chamber, and with
confidence break our minds, lay open our grief, Mark. 11.24.
prefer our suite, and commune familiarly with thee, as with a friend, when
we will, as often as we will, thou never being weary of us, never taking
scorn nor rejecting us: yea thou do inuit us to come unto thee, and art
more near to hear then we to ask: and although in our prayers there are
manifold infirmities, and we know not how to pray as we ought, and are soon
weary and cold in praying, yet the spirit helps our infirmities, yea the
spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be expressed.
Romans 8.26.
O when was there any that could say he prayed in vain, if his prayer were it
self not vain? who can repent, or bethink any minute of time herein spent?
This is the assurance which we have of him, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And albeit
God does not presently grant our requests, and sometimes seems to defer the
hearing of the prayers of his servants; yet is his goodness herein exceeding
large to them that fear him. All this turns to the best for them; their
faith being exercised, their hungring after grace, more hereby strengthened
and increased, themselves stirred up the better to esteem of the graces of God
when they have the^, and to show themselves more thankful for them.

Whosoever is wise will observe these things, Psalm. 107.43.
that he may understand the loving kindness of the Lord: for his mercy is great
unto the heavens, Psalm. 108.4.
and his truth reaches unto the clouds. Psalm. 145.9. and 15.
The Lord is good to all, and his mercies are over all his works. The eyes of
all wait upon him, and he gives them their food: He makes the Sun to shine
upon the evil and the good, Matthew. 5.45.
and sends rain on the just and unjust. Luke 6.35.
He is kind even to the unkind; Psalm. 87.2.
yet the Lord loves the gates of Sion above all the inhabitants of Jacob. He
has liberally provided for them above all other, both here in this life, and
in the life to come: he has laid up for them his sweetest sweetes. A taste
whereof though they have here in this world, (and that so glorious as that it
is ineffable) yet the full fruition is reserved for them in a better world,
when they shall be replenished with the sweetness of his presence, and see him
face to face, at whose right hand are fullness of pleasures for evermore.

If in this life only we had hope in Christ, 1. Cor. 15.19.
we were of all men the most miserable (and yet in this life also our sweetness
we feel in God is incomprehensible) but there is reserved for us a better
life, and in that life a richer sweetness, by many thousand degrees more then
tongue can speak, 2. Cor. 5.1.
or heart can think. We know this that when this earthly house of our
tabernacle shall be destroyed, we have a building not made with hands, 2. Cor.
5.2.
but eternal in the heavens: therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with
our house from heaven: There we have in store laid up for us an inheritance
immortal and undefiled that fades not away, 1. Pet. 1.4. and 18.19.
but is reserved in heaven for us, bought and purchased not with gold and
silver, but with a far more excellent price, even with the precious blood of
Christ Jesus.

Had I the tongue of men and Angels, yet were I not able to express the least
glimmering light or taste of this reserved sweetness. Paul himself rapt up into
the third heaven, 2. Cor. 5.
and having heard things that were not to be uttered, and seen sights not to
be specified, passes them over with this preterition; The sweetness reserved
for Gods children in heaven is such, 1. Cor. 2.9.
as no eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither is the heart of man able to
conceive. O happy and thrice happy they that shall one day feel and see and
taste the same. Mine heart rejoices, my soul leapeth, my tongue and pen
exult, to think upon the sweetness of it, and to think upon mine own
happiness, who am right well assured that one day I shall enjoy the same: O
when shall I come to appear before the Lord in heaven? My soul longs, Psalm.
84.2.
yea and faints for these courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh rejoices
in the living Lord: for I am sure that my redeemer lives, and though after my
skin worms destroy this carcass of mine, yet shall I see God in my flesh,
Job 19.25.26.27.
whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
though my reins be consumed within me. O happy time (it joys my very heart
to think of it before it comes) where this poor soul of mine bidding a
farewell to my body for a while, shall be carried with no meaner attendants on
it, then a guard of angels into Abraham's bosom, there to take possession of a
kingdom, upon the receipt whereof it shall enter the fee simple of life, which
it shall never lose: O what a glorious welcome and meeting shall it have with all
the company of celestial ever blessed spirits, with Angels, and Archangels,
Cherubims and Seraphims, principalities, powers, thrones and dominations, with
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the holy Patriarks, with Isay, Jeremy, Hosea,
and all the famous Prophets, with Peter, James and John. and all the rest of
Christ's Apostles, yea with the whole company of Martyrs, Innocents, Confessors
and Saints of God, with them together, to enjoy the highest degree of the
communion of Saints for evermore! Why, my soul, there is wonderful sweetness
laid up in heaven for thee, the time is coming when thou shall enter into thy
glory; where is a city, and the gates of it are pearl, and the streets of
it gold, and the walls of it precious stones, and the Temple in it the
Almighty God, and the light of it the Lamb, and the vessels to it the Kings of
ye earth; where is a river, and the spring of it is the throne of God, and the
water of it Crystal, and the banks of it set about with the trees of life;
where there is a banquet, and the cheer is joy, the exercise singing, the
dittie Halleluiahs, Verse 4.
the Quire Angels, where all tears shall be wiped away from thine eyes, and
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain; where there is
infinite joy and mirth without sadness, health without sickness, light without
darkness, felicitic without abatement, all goodness without any evil; where
youth florisheth that never waxes old, life lasts that never ends, beauty
that never fades, love that never cools, health that never diminishes, joy
that never cease; where sorrow is never felt, complaint is never heard,
matter of sadness is never seen, where in the same instant I shall be ravished
with seeing; satisfied with enjoying, secured for retaining. O sweetest
happiness, how do I long for to be filled with thee! how do I hunger and
thirst after thee! But even here already I have more then either I could
desire or deserve: I will not leave my solace in this world for the worldlings
heaven, a dram of Christian comfort is better then a pound of earthly joy, I
had rather enjoy a taste of this, then to live at rack and manger in any other
happiness.

FINIS.
True delight: Or, THE WORLDS Farewell, and Christ's Welcome.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL Mr. GEORGE BAINARD, and Mistress BAINARD his Wife.
Having begun to make these my private Meditations public, and sending them
under the protection of many their best well-willers to see the world, I should
much forget my self (Worshipful and most especial benefactors) if I should
forget your names in these my multiplied dedicatio^s. There is no man living
who may claim that interest in me, or challenge my very best endeavors in
that measure as your selves, who may justly say to me, as Paul did to Philemon;
Philem. 19.
Thou owe unto us even thine own self. For besides that, your house has
been to me as the house of Onesiphorus was to Paul, 2. Tim. 1.16.
even this also that I my self have an house to dwell in, and a pastoral
charge to labor in, I may impute it unto your selves, as principal means,
raised up by God, to procure it for me. Job 31.20.
The loins of me and mine may bless you, because by your means we are
clothed with a fleece. I have nothing to return unto you for your so great
pains, but these few homely papers, the poor present of an ever remaining
debtor; I would they were as worthy of any respect with you, as in many
respects they do belong unto you. My soul persuades it self that you both
are of the number of those, Revel. 6.4.
who have received the seal of the lion of Judah, Galat. 6.16.
that long since the world has bin crucified unto you, and you unto the world,
and that you have proposed Christ Jesus to your selves the only gain: Philip
1.21.
I therefore send not unto you this farewell which I have sung unto the world
to persuade you, but rather to encourage you: Phil. 1.6.
He that has begun a good work in you, will perform it and increase it more
and more: Verse. 9.
And this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and
in all judgment, Verse. 10.
that ye may discern things that differ, and may be pure and without offense
until the day of Christ. Amen.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, G. W.

True delight.
PHILIP. 3.8. Yea doubtless I think al things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things
loss, and do judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ.


IN these desperate diseased times, wherein men are so universally drunken
with their own conceits, to see how fondly conceited the self pleasing humors
of Adams children are, I know not whether with Democritus I might laugh; or
with Heraclitus I should rather weep. One makes his heaven of the dross and
rubbish of the earth, The diverse vain delights of the most part.
his muckie wealth, and so becomes a slave unto his slave. Another makes his
belly his god, Philip. 3.19.
reposing his chiefest felicity in pampering of his guts. An other toadlike
swells with ambition, seeking after vainglorious honor, as children after
feathers flying in the air, tossed about hither and thither with the blast of
many mouths. Another like Narcissus becomes inamoured on Natures dowry his
beauty, Ovid Metam.
or Natures shame his clothes. An other seateth his chiefest pleasure in a
Dog, another in a Kite, another in a Horse, another in a smoke euaporating
weed: The better sort (at least wise to man's eyes the more ingenious) either
like Pharao glory in their wit, Exodus 1.10. 2. Sam. 16.23. Act. 24.1.2.3.
or like Achitophel in their policy, or like Tertullus in their eloquence, or
like Babels Monarch, Dan. 4.27.
proud Nebuchadnezzar, in their building, or like Zenacherib in their greatness,
1. King. 18. 1. Sam. 17.5. 1. King. 12.8.
or like Goliath in their strength, or like Rehoboam in their birth, John 7.48.
or like the Pharisees in their knowledge, Josh. 9.3.
or like the Gibeonites in their cunning, or else in some accidental gifts (as
we call them) of Nature, wit or fortune. Arist. Ethic. lib. 2


All these with a thousand more men pleasing pleasures and delights, A censure
upon the former delights.
(which worldlings value at so high a rate) were they ten thousand thousand
times better then they are, I see no reason why I should count them any better,
the^ apparent losses, bitter sweets, gliding shadows, gaudie toys, yea but
chips, dr^ffe, and dung, in comparison of those inestimable treasures and
delights which are to be had in Christ Jesus. For besides that, if we would
compare them together, they are past comparison, Psalm. 103.11.
and as high as the heaven is above the earth, so and much more excellent is
Christ Jesus unto the soul, then any earthly solace can be in the world: what
reason is there, if we had no hope at all of heaven, or expectation of greater
happiness in another world, why we should set our hearts or fix our
affections upon any thing here in this world? what gain can I make? what
contentment is it possible that I should find in any of these things, whose
goodness is but in show, Isai. 40.6.
whose pleasure is but in opinion, whose glory is but as a flower of the
field, with which the mind is never satisfied, the affection never quieted,
the appetite never contented? but if we had the experience of them all
together, we should prove his testimony of them all to be most true, who had
experience in them more then any, Eccles. 1.2.
They are vanities of vanities, vanity of vanities, nothing else but vanity.

I cannot choose but wonder at the Anakims of our age, Nobility.
that carry their heads aloft, and speak with a presumptuous mouth, Numb.
13.29. Psalm. 78.5.
because they stand upon their blood, and brag of their Nobility; when as I
see that Nobility it self (be it never so precious a pearl in the worlds
eye) is but a name without a nature, a shadow without a substance; make the
best of it, it is but the daughter of rottenness, Job 17.14.
and the sister of worms: the glory of it is but a nominall credit begged
from dead men, a trifling title raked from their graves, who are long since
dissolved into dust and ashes. Genesis 3.
No blood so noble but is attainted with Adams shame, and when the pedigree is
fet as far as possibly it may be, Luke 16.
poor Lazarus may shake hands with rich Dives, and call him cousin.

Me thinks it is but madness and a fretting frenzy which I see in many, whose
only mark they aim at is their honor; Hanor.
when as Honor what art thou, but a bubble quickly up, and on a sudde^ down? a
very blazing star dreading the mind with presaging ruin. O ye ambitious
aspiring spirits, what ca^ you see in Honor that you should affect it? when it
most frowneth upon her servants, and casts down those whom it lifts up?
The greatest honors are exposed to the most dangerous adventures and envying
censures: Dignities do but dig through the heart with cares; Offices are but
services, Psalm. 49.
and man being in the greatest honor may be compared to the beasts that perish;
yea you Demigods shall turn to dust as well as other. Psalm. 82.6.7


And as for Beauty, Beauty is but loss.
fools they are, in my conceit, which please themselves with it, when they see
it in themselves; or endanger their souls for it, when they behold it in
others: For, vain is beauty, Proverb. 31.
and deceivable is the favor of the countenance. The fairest face in the
world raze it over but with a little scratch, and the grace thereof is gone;
let an Ague visit it, the flower thereof is decayed; let the soul depart from
it but half an hour, and this lovely face is pale, grimme and ghastly to look
upon. O ye glittering Ladies and dainty Dames, whose glory is your beauty,
and whose labor is your vanitic; that face of yours, upon which the wind may
not blow, nor the Sun shine, nor the air breathe; those vermillion cheeks so
streaked either with natures sanguine blush, or else bedaubed with counterfeit
colors, borrowed from a dissembling art: That body so trimly adorned with
rich apparel and costly ornaments, what are they but the food of vermin and
ye crawling place of worms, the inheritrix of rottenness and subject of
putrefaction? The time is coming, yea the time comes on apace when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, Eccles. 12.3.4.5
and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease, because they
are few, and they wax dark that look out at the windows, and dust return
to dust again.

What madness then is it to glory in our carcass, Apparel.
or to take pride in our bodies vestments? as if a malefactor should be proud
of his halter, or a beggar brag of his rags, the very ensigns of his base
estate. The apparel that we wear, we are beholding to the dumb and
unreasonable creatures for it; worse then beasts we, if we take pride in that
which beasts have worn before us. For our Woollen we are beholding to the
silly Sheep; for our Linen, to a Weed; for our Silks, unto the very
excrements of Worms; our Gold is but the dregs of the earth, our precious
pearls we borrow from the fishes: and be our clothing never so costly,
Matthew. 6.29.
yet none, no not Solomon himself in all his royalty, is clothed like the
lilies of the field.

There is an evil sickness under the Sun, Riches.
and it is much amongst men; to compass sea and land for hoarding up of
wealth; Eccles. 6.1.
and it is reckoned now adays the only gain to fill their coffers with money
treasure, the only paradise to look upon these falsely termed goods: Sueton.
in vita Calig. cap. 42.
I see no such solace in it. Me thinks Caligula was but a fool when he so
delighted to touch and handle money, that laying great heaps of gold in a
spacious place, he might tread on it bare foot, and tumble it up and down:
and I pity their ridiculous practice and toiling life, who thirst so greedily,
and scrape together so eagerly, and lock up so carefully these so truly called
uncertain riches. 1. Tim. 6.17.
O you money masters and wealth admirers, your riches are not as the water of
life always flowing, but as ye brooks of Arabia, which are then most dry when
one should most need them for water! They be like unto the Spider webs, which
when they wax great, are swept away with a besome, either they perish from
you, or you from the^. Why then do you cast your eyes upon that which is
nothing? for riches betaketh her self to her wings like an Eagle: Prou. 23.5.
Psalm. 49.17.
The rich man shall take nothing away with him when he dies, Job 27.19.
neither shall his pomp follow him: The rich man sleeps, and when he opens
his eyes there is nothing: whiles worldly misers dream of multiplying their
wealth, Luke 12.20.
poor fools, death comes and makes a divorce between them and their goods,
Eccles. 4.15.
and they must return naked as they came, and what profit then has the rich
man that he has labored for the wind? And yet we see there is no end of the
desire of this, as riches are uncertain, so likewise are they insatiable.
There is one alone, Eccles. 4.8.
and there is not a second, which has neither son nor brother, yet is there
no end of all his travel, neither can his eye be satisfied with riches,
neither does he think, for whom do I travel, and defraud my soul of
pleasure? This also is vanity; a man may swear it is but vanity: mad Orestes
might well judge such a miserable man much more mad, that stands thus like
Tantalus in the stygean lake, Horat. sat. 1. lib. 1
and like the drudging Indians which toil in the golden mines, but enjoy none
of the Ore.

By how much the more may we still admire the folly or the frenzy rather of
those, Purchasings and possessions.
whose soul, as if it were made of earth, Isai. 5.8.
is ever plotting to join house to house and land to land? and though their
inheritance stretch to the plain of Jordan, Numb. 1.14.
yet are always with unquiet minds stirring and striving to enlarge their
demains: Doubtless it is but lost labor that they rise up early and so late
take rest, Psalm. 127.2.
whiles Gods beloved take their quiet sleep: for in the midst of all their
wealth, their souls shall be taken from them, Luke 12.20.
and then whose shall these things be? yea though like another Alexander a man
could stretch his Demaines from the East unto the West, and from the North unto
the South, yet within short space a seven foot of ground, or thereabouts, will
be the most that he can claim to be his own.

Yet they think their houses shall endure for ever, Buildings.
Psalm. 49.11.
even from generation to generation, and call their lands by their names: 2.
Sam. 18.18.
therefore like to Absalom they build Pyramides to keep their name in
remembrance, and glory not a little in their costly buildings, as if they
should remain for ever; This also is mere vanity and vexation of spirit.
Eccles. 2.26.
For what are all the sumptuous buildings in the world but heaps of stones
peeced and patched together with lime and mortar, which like to swallows nests
in winter do fall down of themselves, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Coloss.
and which all consuming time at last dissolueth, Luke 19.44.
leaving not so much as one stone upon another?

I come now to ye garden of Adonis, variety of pleasures, Pleasure.
which the world makes her garden of Eden: the flowers which therein grow are
the vain plants of pleasure and delight; which albeit they make a glorious
show to the eyes, yet is their root bitterness, their gloss vanity, and their
fruit poison. Beautiful objects which delight the eyes, sweet sounds that
please the ears, fragrant smells that affect the nose, any other accidents that
please the other senses, what they are, when they are even at the best, let
him, Eccles. 2.3. I sought, etc.
let him that drew the thread of delight, and stretched the web of pleasures
on the largest tenter of variety, come forth and speak.

I said in mine heart, Salomons probatum est. Eccles. 2.1.
(says he the wisest Sceptick) Go to now I will prove thee with joy,
therefore take thou pleasure in pleasant things. But what followed? I said of
laughter, Joy and laughter. Verse 2.
thou art mad, and of joy, what is it that thou do? laughter is mingled with
sorrow, Prou. 14.
and mourning ensues at the end of mirth. Verse. 4. Houses. Vineyarde. Gardens.
Orchards. Verse. 5. Cesternes. Verse. 6. Servants. Children. Demaines.
Well, he goes on: I have made my great works, I have built me houses, I have
planted me vineyards, I have made me gardens and orchards, and planted in them
trees of all fruit, I have made me cesternes of water, to water therewith the
woods that grow with trees, I have gotten servants and maids, Verse 7. Flocks.
Cattle.
and had children borne in the house also I had great possessions of Beoues and
Sheep above all that were before me in Jerusalem, Verse. 8. Silver. Gold.
Treasure. Music.
I have gathered unto me also silver and gold, and the chief treasure of kings
and provinces, I have provided me mensingers and womensingers; and the
delights of the sons of men: whatsoever mine eyes desired I withheld it not
from them, Verse. 10.
I withdrew not mine heart from any joy. Then I looked on all the works that
mine hands had wrought, and on the travel that I labored to do, Verse. 11.
and behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

If thou Solomon out of thy so dear bought experience do give no better
commendation of this world and these worldly treasures; surely, I see no cause
why I should affect them, or any of them, for my self, nor envy them in
others. No, no, I rather pity them, that dote so much on these, Heb. 11.
and to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, take more pains, alas, then
I can do for true delight. Well, well, I see that all things here are full of
vanity, man cannot utter it, Eccles. 1.8.
the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. A
fig then for the world, I have done with it, I see nothing worthy my love
about it, I will think of them as they be, and never set my affection to them
as the center of my hope.

Now am I in the prime of my youth, Youth.
neither have mine eyes as yet seen (by two degrees) three decades of years:
shall I rejoice in this my youth, Eccles. 11.9.
because I am but yet in my youth, in the flower and spring time of mine age?
No, no, 10.
I know that Childhood and youth are altogether vanity; I count this al but
loss, seeing that this age is prone to fill my bones with sin, Job 20.11.
and to carry the fire and fuel of iniquity in my bosom: and therefore with
David much more justly may I pray, Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions: Ierem. 31.19.
for I am ashamed and confounded because I do bear the reproach of my youth.
The strength, Strength and agilitie.
nimblenes and agilitie of youth (which some do glory in) I count likewise
but as loss: for the strong man may not glory in his strength, Ierem. 9.23.
Judge. 16.
and Sampsons strength pulled down the house on his own head; and let a man
be never so strong, yet the time will soon approach, Eccles. 12.3.
when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men bow
themselves: The Lord alone is my strength, Psalm. 27. Ephel. 6.
and my desire is that I may be strong in him, and in the power of his might.
Of all the temporal benefits in this life bestowed on us, Health. Menander.
(...).
there is none more excellent then Health; and this by the gracious goodness
of my good God toward me I do enjoy, as much, I think, as any; yet can I not
rejoice in this, I count it but a loss: for well I know, that when thou, Lord,
do begin to chastise man, Psalm. 39.11.
then health and all consume away like a moath fretting a garment. The Moon is
not more variable in his changing, nor the sea in her ebbing, then man in the
change of his estate. Long life I never look for, Long life. Genesis 47.9.
Few and evil have hitherto bin the days of my pilgrimage; and were I sure of
long life, I should be so much the more sorry for it: for what is length of
life, but as to a sick and pained man a long winters night? the longer I live
the more I increase the score of my sins. I know that whiles I am here at
home in the body, 2. Cor. 5.6. Philip. 1.23.
I am absent from the Lord; I desire therefore to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Prosperity, Prosperity.
if it shine upon me as well as others, I see no cause why I should much
esteem it: Matthew. 5.45.
for the just God makes his Sun to arise on the evil and the good, and
sends rain on the just and the unjust. Genesis 27.39.
And we see that Esau has the fatnes of the earth for his dwelling place,
watered with the dew of heaven as well as Jacob. As for frie^dship, Friends.
I could commend it, if I could know where to find a faithful friend: Ierem.
9.4.
But let every one take heed of his neighbor, and not trust in any brother:
for every brother will use deceit, and every friend will deal deceitfully.
How many be there who (as Augustine ingeniously does of himself confess) may
complain of friendship, O nimis inimica amicitia, August. Confess. lib. 2.
how dangerous a thing it is that they have bin linkt in friendship? Single
life I find uncomfortable, Single life. Marriage. Children. Psalm. 127.3.
and marriage full of trouble. Children indeed are the inheritance of the Lord,
and the fruit of the womb is his reward, and by experience I find it an
extraordinary favor to have them like olive branches about our table; Psalm.
128.3.
yet the gain of this I see it is but loss: for how can I tell whether my
Benjamin will prove Benonie, Genesis 35.18. Ruth. 1.20.
or my Naomi will be Mara unto me? If they prove towardly Impes, yet is the
future hope of them doubtful, the comfort variable, the continual care most
certain and infallible. Surely then all the world is vanity; lay all the
pleasures of it in the balance, and they shall be found lighter then vanity
it self. Psalm. 62.9.
And what joy can I have in any of these things, whiles I walk here in this
vale of tears?

Learning I reverence, Learning. 1. Cor. 8.1.
but not adore: for knowledge puffs up, making men to swell like a windy
bladder: Eccles. 1.18.
He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow: and well I know, that unless
it be sanctified, it is like Vriahs letter against himself, and be a man never
so well skild in all Arts and Sciences, yet must he needs confess (as one of
the learnedest in that kind does) Hoc vnum scio, Socrates.
me nihil scire: Only this I know, that I know nothing. Wit I like, Wit and
policy.
but not extol; policy I comme^d, but cannot deifie. For if we take the
weight of man's wit in civil things, Dan. 5.
it will be found like Balthazar too light: but lay his natural understanding
upon the balance with spiritual things, and it shall be found lighter then
vanity it self. Psalm. 26.
Does not wit many times beguile it self, and policies prove snares to entrap
themselves withal? There is one above that catches the wise in their own
craftines, Job 5.13. 1. Cor. 3.19.
and the Lord knows that the thoughts of the wisest are but vain. Psalm.
94.11.
I see some rejoice in their memory, Memory.
me thinks it proves but a faithles servant, retaining those things which she
should reject, and rejecting those things which she should retain; like the
sieue that holds fast the course bran, but lets the fine flower fall away.
They are without judgment, Judgment.
in my conceit, ye boast so much of their own judgment, when humane knowledge
is but opinion, and the judgment of the most expert proves many times but a
vain Idaea of idle speculations.

If I should reckon up all this worlds vanities, which notwithstanding by
worldlings are hunted after as the only treasures, I should take in hand an
endless task, seeing of the same there is no end: O wretched world, what art
thou, but an arc of travel, a school of vanities, a seat of deceit, a
labyrinth of errors? what is here in the world that should deserve mine heart
to be set upon it? If the Devil should carry me to the top of a mountain,
Matthew. 4.8.
and show me all the kingdoms of the earth, and all the glory of them, if he
should offer, or could perform the proffer of them all unto me; what could
from thence be presented to mine eyes, but false delights, true asperitie,
certain sorrow, uncertain pleasures, trauelsome labor, fearful rest? Shall
my soul stoop then to so vile a subject as the world? shall I be stayed from
the noble service of my God, for the love of any earthly vanities? No, no, all
these I will trample under feet, and reckon of them no better then they are.
And now my soul mount up aloft unto the place where all thy treasure lies: I
will lift up mine eyes to the hills from whence comes all my help: Psalm. 120.
Luke 17.37.
Eagle like will I soar aloft where my souls food is, and fix my thoughts on
none but Christ; he is the center from whence all my cogitations are drawn,
and the circle to which they tend; let the Marthaes of this world comber
themselves about many things, full well I know there is but vnum necessarium;
Luke 10.41.42
one necessary thing: God grant me with Mary to choose the better part. As
for other pleasures, I count them but bitter sweetes, in regard of the joys of
heaven, where is fulness of pleasures for evermore. As for other riches, Ephesians.
1.18.
I count them all trash, in respect of the glorious riches of the inheritance
of Saints: all other honor I esteem as base, in respect of my glorious
calling in Christ Jesus: all other nobility I count obscure, in respect of new
birth and regeneration by the holy Ghost: John 44.
all other beauty I esteem but foul, Psalm. 84.
in respect of the beauty of Bethel, which is made by Christ Jesus without
spot or wrinkle: all other buildings I deem as ruins, in respect of that
building which is not made with hands, 2. Cor. 5.1.
but eternal in the heavens: Matthew. 10.37.
Father and mother, sister and brother, son and daughter must needs give
place to the love of Jesus, or else I were not worthy of him my Savior. Let
others rejoice in their wit and policy, my rejoicing shall be the testimony
of a good conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God I have had my conversation in the
world: 2. Cor. 1.12.
Let others be puffed up with knowledge of humane Arts and Sciences, yet I
esteem no knowledge to the knowledge of Christ Jesus and him crucified, 2.
Cor. 2.2.
by which knowledge I may be able to comprehend with all Saints, Ephesians. 3.18.19.
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love
of Christ which passes knowledge. Stoop down all earthly happiness to this,
in regard whereof all other gains are but losses, all other privileges are but
trifles; yea doubtless I think all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, Philip. 3.8.
for who^ I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be dung, that
I may win Christ, and might be found in him.

O sweet Jesus, how great and innumerable be the gains which I find in thee!
Psalm. 42.1.
As the Heart braieth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O
Christ, my Lord, my God, my Savior and my Redeemer. Psalm.
Who^ have I in heaven but thee, and who is there on earth that I desire in
comparison of thee? Cantic. 1.2.
Thy name is as an ointment powered out, Isai. 9.6.
therefore the virgins love thee. Thy name is Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: Revel. 1.5.8.
Thou art that faithful witness, that Prince of the Kings of the earth, that
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, which have the key of David, Revel.
2.7.
and openest and no man shuts, Revel. 1.18.
and shuttest and no man opens, yea the very keys of hell and of death: Heb.
13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, the same for ever.

O thou whom my soul loves, Christ the true gain. Philip. 1.21.
my only gain Christ Jesus, thou art to me both in life and death advantage.
In life; for thus I live, and yet not I, but Christ lives in me: In this life.
and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the son of God,
Galat. 2.20,
who has loved me, and given himself for me. So that here what expert
Arithmetician can reckon up my gains even in this life received by him?
Remission of sins. Ephesians. 1.7.
By him I have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of my sins,
according to his rich grace. Imputation of his obedience for our justification.
He is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption; and his full, perfect and alsufficient obedience is made a gain to
me, silly, simple, vile, and sinful creature by imputation. By him we have
access through faith unto his grace, Access to God. Romans 5.2.
wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God: Adoption.
Romans 8.15.
By him I am adopted to be the child of God, yea heir of happiness and
eternal bliss: By him I do recover back again that right and title to his
creatures, Right unto the creatures. Ephesians. 2.15.
which was lost by Adam: By him the curses of this life are turned into
blessings; Afflictions good. Romans 8.26.
for all things work together for the best to them that are in him. And what
shall I say more? All that we have we have in him, who is made all in all unto
us; he has taken our pawn, and left us his seal; he has taken upon himself
our sins, Ephesians. 2.16. Revel. 1.6.
and invested us with his merits; he has made us Kings and Priests unto God,
and even in this life has given unto us the earnest of his spirit, Matthew. 28.
with a full assurance that he will never fail us.

But if in this life only we had hope in Christ, Christ is ourgain in death.
1. Cor. 15.19.
we were of al men the most miserable. Blessed be he the author of our
blessedness, who as he is our gain in life, so is he also our gain in death,
in as much as he has taken away the sting of death, and has changed the
condition of it, by making it of the gate of hell, the privy portall of
eternal life. O death, 1. Cor. 15.55.56.57.
where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory? the sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be unto God that has
given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea after death in him does
rest our chiefest gain: for then shall we find the virtue of his
resurrection, in raising up our dusty bodies into flesh again, which never
shall corrupt; who shall change our vile body, Philip. 3.21.
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. And even
then when all other gains shall prove men's losses, he to his will prove the
only gain: For what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, Matthew.
16.26.
and lose his own soul? or what shall he lose that forsakes all the world to
win Christ?

This is the treasury of infinite value; Iam. 1.17.
this is the fountain from whence al goodness flows; this is the hand that
stretches forth all what we want unto us. Do we desire riches? Ephesians. 1.18.
in him are all the treasures, and his inheritance is glorious. Do we desire
pleasures? At his right hand is fulness of pleasures for evermore. Psalm.
Do we desire honor? Behold what honor he does show unto us, that we should be
called the sons of God. 1. Ioh. 3.1. Ioh. 1.16.
Do we desire grace? Of his fulness we receive grace for grace. Do we desire
peace? Isai. 9.6.
he is the Prince of Peace, and brings that peace of conscience which passes
all understanding. Do we desire knowledge? In him all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid. Coloss. 2.3.
He is an eye unto the blind, a leg unto the lame, a hand unto the weak, a
gain unto the loser, he is, and so we ought to take him, all in all unto us.

A fig then for the imaginary treasury of the Popish Church, Against the
Papists merit gain.
wherein as in a chest, they say, are laid up, not only the overplus of the
merits of Christ, but also of Martyrs and Saints to be dispensed in pardons at
their unholy fathers pleasure. Is not Christ alone our full and perfect gain?
Is there not in him an alsufficient treasury for his Church? And are they not
in him complete? All other gain is but matter for the dunghill: None for me but
Christ. The woman in the Gospel that had the bloody issue desired to touch
the hemme of his garment: Matthew. 9.21.
I will press in further not only to touch him, but by a true faith as it
were with both hands to lay hold and hang on him. Thomas desired for his
contentation, but to put his finger into his side; John 20.25.
I will set before mine eyes Christ crucified, and diue both body and soul
into his blood: Show me, Cantic. 1.6.
O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone;
Cantic. 2.4.
I will seek him and take hold on him, and leave him not until I have gotten
him: I care not to lose all the world, to win him, I esteem not the finding
of any other thing, so I may be found in him.

There was a time when I was lost, To be found in Christ.
he was the good shepherd which found me the wandering sheep; there was a
time when I was dead, yea dead in trespasses and sins, he quickened me to
newnes of life; there was a time when I was a stranger, an alient from the
common wealth of Israel: Ephesians. 2.12.
he has made me free of the celestial incorporation, my desire only is to
be found in him, that I may be a member of that body whereof he is head, 1.
Cor. 6.15. John 15.1. John 6.56.
a branch of him the heavenly vine, that I may be in him and he in me, that by
him I might be reconciled to God, Ephesians. 2.14.15.
and accepted to his favor eternally: Not having mine own righteousness
which is of the law, Philip. 3.9.10.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which
is of God through faith, that I may know him, and grow more and more in holy
experience of the endless love of God, and unspeakable fellowship with Christ
my Savior; The virtue of his resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.7. Romans 8.34. Romans 4.25.
that I may find and feel in me the virtue of his resurrection, whereby as I
feel the full and perfect satisfaction of my sins by him that died for my
sins, and rose again for my justification, Coloss. 3.1.
so likewise I may feel that spiritual vivification, whereby I may be raised
up from the Ephesians. 5.14.
death of sin unto newnes of life. That I may also know the fellowship of his
afflictions, The fellowship of his afflictions.
and may learn to deny my self, and to take up my cross daily; Luke 9 23.
and may be made conformable unto his death, Conformable to his death.
that as he died, so I may die to sin, and may feel within me the
mortification of my flesh, Romans 6.3. Ephesians. 5.3. Galat 5.34. Attaining to the
resurrection of the dead.
by crucifying the affections and the lust thereof, If by any means I might
attain to the resurrection of the dead, that my sleepie soul might awake from
sin, and stand up from the dead, and might cast off concerning the conversation
in times past the old man which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts,
Ephesians. 5.14. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24.
and might be renewed in the spirit of my mind, and put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

But ah alas, Philip. 3.12.
I feel how rebellious my frail nature is, how short I come of this mark to
which all mine endeavors ought to aim; vile wretch that I am, Romans 7.14.
I am carnal, sold under sin, and sodden in iniquity: For I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh, Romans 7.18.
dwells no good thing: to will is present with me, but I find no means to
perform that which is good: for I do not the good thing which I would, Romans
7.19.
but the evil which I would not that do I. O wretched man that I am, Verse 24.
who shall deliver me from this body of sin? What way, what means shall I
take to find my Christ and to be found in him? This one thing will I do,
Philip. 3.13.14.
I will forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that which is
before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus: I will cast away every thing that presses down, Heb.
12.1.
and the sin that hangs on so fast, and run with patience the race that
is set before us. I will sing all worldly care away, and set my affections only
in heaven.

Farewell my former vain and transitory delights; all my delight now shall be
upon ye Saints, Psalm.
and such as excel in virtue: Farewell all other hope of gain and thirsting
after earthly pelf; Godliness I reckon still to be my greatest gain, 1.
Tim. 6.6.
which has the promises of this life and of the life to come: 1. Tim. 4.8.
Farewell desire of preferment and advancement in this world; for I esteem the
rebuke of Christ greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt: Heb. 11.26.
Farewell all ouerweening love of Parents, Matthew 23.9.
wife, or child, for there is one my father which is in heaven, into whose
hands I was cast even from my mothers womb: Psalm. 22.11. Cant. 6.2.
I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine; 1. Sam. 1.8.
mine Elkanah is better unto me then many sons: Farewell affected knowledge
and learnings lore; 1. Cor. 2.2.
for I esteem not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified:
Farewell humanists and artists studies; my study shall be in the Library of
the holy Ghost, Psalm. 1.1.
and therein will I meditate day and night: Fare well Philosophy and diuing
into Natural causes; I will erect my thoughts unto him that is the primum
mobile, Genesis 1.1.
the cause of causes: Farewell the knowledge of the Law and quirkes of earthly
statutes, the gleaning of Theology is better then the whole vintage of
Justinians faculty: Farewell Physic the lengthner of men's lives; Luke 5.31.
John 15.5.
my Physician is the same that is my life: Farewell Geometry and measuring of
the earth; Philip. 3.20.
I will now measure the celestial Globe of heaven in my thoughts: Farewell
Astronomy, acquaintance with the Stars, soar up I will above the starrie
sky, Revel. 1.16.
to know him that in his right hand holds the seven stars: Farewell
Arithmetique the Art of Numbering, Lord teach me to number my days, Psalm. 90.12.
that I may apply mine heart to wisdom: Music farewell; my music shall
be henceforth Halleluiahs to the King of Heaven: Revel. 19.4.
Farewell this world for a moment, and welcome Christ Jesus for ever.

THE WORLDS Wonder.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND Worshipful Lady, the Lady Mary Ley.
MAdame, Master Richard Greenham. Master Joseph Hall.
they which have proceeded Graduats in the Art of Meditation, do commend the
infinite objects in the Theater of the world, as the most fit subject of
Meditation. Reason shows this their position to be most true: for where may
we have either more variety of matter for our minds to work upon, or more
ready means to set the same on work, then in the great variety of the
worlds wonders, which are continually obuious to our eyes? The whole world is a
table, wherein is portraited forth unto us infinite wonders in the several
natures of all the creatures, not for us to view alone, but with a fruitful
use to meditate upon. All the creatures are made for Man, and shall not we be
led by the prospect of them to wonder at the merciful respect God has to so
poor a creature as Man? There is none of all the creatures but reads us a
lecture in this common school, and shall we be such idle truants, as to learn
nothing of so many masters? The works of the Lord are great, Psalm. 111.2.
and ought to be sought out of them that love him: Verse 4.
He has made his wonderful works to be had in remembrance. O that we using
the creatures so continually as we do, would make better use of them then
usually we do; I have here set down a little pattern of meditation in this
kind; had some skillful Apelles hand been in it, to draw and polish the lines
of it, it might peradventure bin worth the perasall. Now in this color as it
is, though I my self be silent in craving pardon for it, or excusing it, yet
you might justly say unto me as Apelles said to an unskillful Painter, Though
thou had said nothing, yet may I easily guess by the workmanshippe that it
was done in haste. As it is, (Madam) I make bold to consecrate this little
Treatise to your name, the rather, for that (besides all other respects of duty
which do oblige me unto your Ladyship) you vouchsafed such kind acceptance
unto the first fruits of my labors in this kind, which under your name was
sent to see the world: In hope of the like acceptance of these my poor
endeavors, and favorable pardon of my boldness, I commend this meditation
following to your better meditations, and your self with all your holy
meditations to the Almighties good blessing.

Your Ladyships in all Christian duties, G. W.

THE WORLDS Wonders.
PSALM. 8.9. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the world!


PAul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, disputing with the Athenians, the most wise
and learned amongst the Gentiles, Act 17.22.23.24.27.
when he saw their blind devotions in ignorantly giving worship unto God
unknown (as by ye inscriptio^ on one of their Altars he did perceive) wondered
much at this their ignorance, (...).
that this great God should be to the^ unknown, seeing that by groping after
him they could not choose but find him in the very works of wonder which he
had done. For albeit the heaven is his throne, Isai. 66.1. 1. King. 6.1.
and the earth his footstool, neither dwells he in Temples made with hands,
Act. 7.48. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.
and no man has seen any similitude or likeness of him at any time, Act. 14.17.
yet has he not left himself without sufficient witness, not only in his
word, but also in his works; yea, The invisible things of him, that is, Romans
1.20.
his eternal power and Godhead are seen by the creation of the world, being
considered in his works, that men might be without excuse. Which when I think
upon, I cannot choose but wonder at ye Buzzardlike Atheists soule-blinded
monsters of our age, Against Atheists.
who in their hearts do say, Psalm. 14.1.
There is no God, and whose understanding is so dark and dim, that they
cannot discern themselves, nor see a God, that is the fountain of all
Natures, in so clear a glass as the mirror of his creatures. They see an
Heaven abundant in variety of influences over them, an Earth so plentiful in all sorts of commodities under them, a Sea so full of wonders by the^, they see
a world which is a building infinitely admirable, for the firmenes, capacity,
use, order, and motion of it, and in themselves may see themselves a little
world, or abridgement of the greater world; and yet cannot surmise a God that
was the compactor of this Heaven, and the endower of this Earth, and the
controller of the Sea, the worlds both the greater and the lessers Creator.
Isay. 1.2.
O ye heavens be astonished at this, you bruit and senseless creatures convince
these reasonable creatures unreasonable and void of sense. Isay. 6.9. Romans 11.8.
They are possessed with the spirit of slumber, and wilfully they wink with
their eyes, like the Idols of the Heathen, Psalm. 133.15.16.17.
Eyes have they but see not, ears but hear not, hearts but cannot understand.
As for my part, I can no where fix mine eyes, but that I do behold a lively
Idoea of the incomprehensible Deity; the whole world being a book or large
volume, Du Bartus in oper. sex dierum.
and every kind of the so many kinds of creatures being a leaf or page,
wherein in grand characters and great capital letters are engraven the wonders
of our God most wonderful, so that he which runs by cannot choose but read
it.

For first, The Heavens wonders.
when I look up to the heavens, and fix mine eyes on those superior Orbs, me
thinks these very heavens abundantly declare the glory of God, Psalm. 8.3.
Psalm. 19.1.
and the firmament shows his handy work: whose huge proportion when I behold
like molten glass, Job 37.18.
and meditate upon the variety of influences in the same, managed by so
admirable a consort of diverse motions which thwart, and yet disturb not one
another, then says my soul within it self; O Lord my God, Psalm. 104.1.2.
thou art exceeding great, thou art clothed with glory and honor, Psalm.
104.1.2.
which couerest thy self with light as with a garment, and spreadest out the
heavens like a curtain. O how beautiful, Caelum beatoru^.
how glorious, how admirable must the heaven of heavens be, seeing there is so
glorious a luster in this lower heaven that is so obuious to our eyes!

Here he, The Sun. 1. John 1. Genesis 1.16.
who is all light himself, has placed his two glorious lights, the greater for
to rule the day, and the lesser to be a nightly Torch: Here has he set a
Tabernacle for the Sun, which comes forth as a bridegroom out of his
chamber, Psalm. 19.4.5.6.
and rejoices like a giant to run his race: His going out is from the end of
the heaven, and his compass is to the end of the same; nothing is bid from the
heat thereof. It rises and goes down, Eccles. 1.5.
and draws to his rising place again: who can express ye greatness of this
Planet, Plato in Epinar. Cicero. 2. de natura Deorum.
whose rays do illighten the whole globe of the earth, and therefore (though
it seem but small unto our eyes, yet) reason demo^strateth that it must needs
surmount in greatness all the earth? Plin. lib. 2. c. 11.
Who can describe his circular motion in his never wearied race? Basil. homil.
6. in Hexam.
who can track his yearly beaten path through the Zodiac, or the milke-white
way? what Eagle-sighted eye dares to confront his beams, and is not dazeled
at his luster? what tongue is able to describe his influence, or paint forth
his wonderful effects?

Come we from this Landlord of light the Sun unto his Freeholder, The Moon.
Heavens lesser light, the Moon, Genesis 1.16.
and who would think so full a body to our eyes should be so many degrees
inferior to the Sun in greatness, Plin. lib. 2. c. 11.
were it not for her neernes? who can record the influences of this palefaced
president of the night, or sufficiently admire her wainings, and encreasings,
her often changes and eclipses? who can but wonder at her more then strange
effects in the sad and silent time of night, Psalm. 104.20.21
when the beasts of the forest come abroad, and the hungry lions rore after
their pray? The more I fix mine eyes upon the firmament, the more mine eyes
are dazeled with the great variety of wonders in the same: The Stars.
when I behold the glorious glittering canopie of Heaven so decked with stars,
Genesis 1.17.
as with silver spangles or precious stones, Lord think I then, how great a
God art thou, which countest the number of these stars, Psalm. 147.4.
and call them all by their names? For, what man is able to discourse, of
their number, partition, order, or situation? Can we restrain the sweet
influences of the Pleiades? Job 38.31, 32, 33, 34.
or loose the bands of Orion? Can we bring forth Mazaroth in their times, or
guide Arcturus with his sons? No, no, it is the Almighty alone that knows
the course of heaven, and he that in his right hand holds the seven stars,
Revel. 1.16.
that can sufficiently declare the wonders of the stars.

He it is that shows his wonders in the Heaven; Meteors fiery. Inel 2.30.
The Bolides. Comets. Blasing Stars.
blood, fire and pillars of smoke, heart-dreading Comets, and doom presaging
blazing stars are flagges of his imperial standerd; and who can but admire
his diverse colored Bow the ensign of his covenant? The Rainbow. Genesis 9.16.
Behold our God is excellent and full of power, neither can his wonders be
sufficiently admired at. The earth trembles and quaketh when he is angry,
The Lightning.
the foundations also of the mountains shake at his displeasure, a smoke
goes out at his nostrils, Psalm. 18.7.8.9.14.
and a consuming fire out of his mouth, coals are kindled thereat: He sends
forth his arrows and scatters the^, his fierce lightnings flash from the
one end of the heaven to the other. The Thunder. Job 37.3.4.
After that a noise sounds, he thundreth with the voice of his Majesty, and
his Demicanons rore so terribly through the clouds, that the vndantedst
Caligula cannot choose but quake and tremble at the noise thereof. Sueton. in
vita Caligula.


Lo these are a part of the ways of God, Job 26.14. Meteors atrie.
but how little a portion have we heard of him, and who can record the one
half of his works of wonder? The winds. Psalm. 104. Eccles. 1.6.
It is our God that brings the winds out of his treasury, and walks upon
the wings thereof, even the wind which goes toward the South, and compasses
toward the North, and whirleth round about. The whirle winds and dreadful
blasts are the wings upon which he does fly: The whirlewind. Psalm. 18.20. The
Earthquakes. Ariff. metcor. lib. 2. Psalm. 18.17. and 19.6.
with the dry and cold vapors whereof passing through the cranies of the earth,
he makes the earth to tremble, and the foundations of the mountains to shake,
he makes the wilderness to tremble, and the Cedars of Lebanon to be rooted up.

Hearken unto this, Meteors watrie. The clouds. Job 37.37.25.
O man, and consider the wondrous works of God: Who can number the clouds by
wisdom? Job 26.8.
who can sufficiently admire these bottels of heaven? how the waters are bound
up in them, and the cloud not broken under them; The Dew.
how they are stuffed with watery vapors lift up into the air, Job 38.28.
and how the spouts thereof are divided to power down rain upon the earth; how
wonderful is the generation of the drops of dew, The Mists. Psalm. 77.
which arises out of the earth like a sweat! or of the dewdropping Mists,
which like an hoarie mantell ouershadeth the earth! What a wonderful thing it
is to consider the opening of the windows of heaven, The Rain. Genesis 7.11. Job
28.26. Psalm. 104.13.
and the distilling of the rain from above, whereby the earth is watered, and
the thirsty lands do quench their thirst! The Snow.
How admirable is ye snow which the Almighty scatters abroad like wool,
Psalm. 147.13.
and which like a sheet is spread upon the earth! Eccles. 47.18.
The eye maruelleth at the whitenes of it, it dazeleth the eye with the
glistering shining of it, Et quae me genuit matter mox gignitur ex me.
the senses stand astonished to see it beget again the mother of which it
self was begotten. No less wonderful is the Hail which ye Almighty casts
forth like morsels, The Hail. Psalm. 147.17. (...) properly signifies hail in
that place, though our tra^slations read it frosts. Exodus 9.23.
a liquid thing being made solid, and it self being naught but water, yet by
an Antiperistasis of heat and cold (a thing in Nature admirable) is
conglobated into a stone, deadly to the herbs, and noxious to the trees of the
field. What shall I here speak of the Frosts, Meteors partly earthy, partly
watrie.
or of the glassie wonder of the Ice; when the earth grows into hardness, and
the clods like iron are fast together? Frost.
The hoare frosts lie upon the earth like ashes, Job 38.29.38. Psalm. 147.16.17
Ice.
who can abide the cold of the ice? When the North wind blows, an ice is
frozen of the water, it abides upon the superficies thereof, Syracides, cap.
43 19.20.
and clotheth the waters as with a breastplate, the Sun arises and it
melts, and is dissolved as it was before. These and many more then these are
thy wonders, O Lord, from above: O Lord our God, how excellent is thy name in all these things! In wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm. 8.1.2.
and they declare thy mighty power. No less are thy wonders to be seen here
below, through the whole circumference of the earth and in the deep.

For first to begin with the very Earth it self, The Earths wonders.
which albeit in comparison of the Heaven, it be but as a prick or point; Job
38.18.
yet who can perceive the breadth of it, or reckon the circuit of the same? The
Earth is set upon a foundation immovable, Aristot. 2. de coe lo, ait
Mathematicos sui temporit attribuisse terrae 40. myriades stadiorum. Later
Astrologers describe the whole circuit of it to be 2000040 miles.
and yet the foundation thereof is a thing of naught, hanging in the middle of
the air: whose figure although it be sphaericall like a globe or bowl, yet
by the alprouident disposition of the Almighty Creator, is so interlined with
hills, and dales, and woods, and rivers; that in a wonderful excellency we
cannot but admire the infinite variety. Psalm. 104.5. Job 26.7.
Here we see the lofty mountains giving stately prospect from their
aspiring tops; here, Mountains. Psalm. 104.8. Valleys. Psalm. Rivers.
the humble Valleys to laugh and sing with corn and grassie profits; here, the
crystal springs and silver rivers sliding, sometimes more silently, sometimes
in a basser sort, sometimes in a shriller note making music amongst the
pepbles. And as we walk by the way, O what a glorious spectacle it is to view
the flagrant Meddowes clothed with grass, Meddowes.
and enameled with all sort of eye-pleasing flowers; Woods.
Thickets lined with most pleasant shade of diverse sorted Trees; Trees.
Trees richly decked forth with leaves, and swelling in variety with their
several kinds of fruits! Birds.
Oh what an heavenly consort out of the Wood-quire resounds unto our ears from
the cheerful chirping of the many well tuned Birds! How sweet a prospect it
is unto our eyes to look upon the great variety both in kind and quality of
the Beasts! Beasts.
To see the harmless Sheep feeding with sober security, Sheep. Lambs.
and their pretty Lambs skipping with bleating choragy! Oxen.
To see the strong necked Oxen laboring in the furrow and plowing the valleys
after us; and the stately Horse, Job 39.12. Horses.
for all his fearful neyings, to submit his back unto us! when I fee these
strong and sturdie beasts so ouerruled, to yield their backs to serving, and
their lives to feeding weak and feeble man, Lord think I then, of how
unmatchable power and unbounded wisdom art thou, which could subdue
without repining these so great to this so little?

But when I further think upon those greater and wilder beasts which God has
placed in the earth, in the majesty of the creature, how can I but admire the
incomparable majesty of the Creator? Behemoh. Job 40.10.11.12.13.
Behold Behemoh whom he has made to lick grass like the ox, whose tail is
like the Cedar, Verse. 17.
his bones like staves of brass, and his small bones like staves of iron; can
the trees cover him with shadow, or can the willowes of the river compass him
about? The Lions.
The great and princely Lions roaring after their pray, do seek their meat of
God, Job 39.1.2.
when they couch in their places, and remain in the covert to lie in wait: He
appoints the time when the wild goats bring forth young, Job 39.4.5.
and numbreth the months for the Hindes to calue: Verse. 12.
Who can tame the Unicorn and bring him to the crib? What pleasant wings has
God given to the Peacocks? Verse. 16.
what wings of brass unto the Ostrich? what length of days unto the Heart,
swiftnes unto the Hare, wiliness unto the Fox, and properties admirable even
in every sort of the beasts unreasonable? who can number their several kinds,
or describe the several natures of them?

But leave we these, Little beasts and creeping things.
and cast our eyes but on the lesser creatures, which one would think but
Natures excrements mere superfluities: and yet, good Lord, in them how many
works of wonders? The wisest of either Heathen or Christian Sages sends us
to little Pismires, Emmets.
Ants or Emmets to learn diligence, for they having no guide, Prou. 6.6.7.8.
governor, nor ruler, prepare their meat in summer, and gather their food in
harnest. What a sweet decorum in their order observe the silly Bees, Bees.
the fabric of whose celles or houses, and the glory of whose merchandise
cannot be matched by any wit or art of man? What Spinster can make a web like
the contemned Spider? Spider.
or Weauer frame upon his woofe so exquisite a forrell, Silkeworme.
as the little Silkworme weaueth out of his bowels? If I should reckon up all the mighty wonders in these little creatures, how endless would the subject
be? No, these are common and triuiall before our eyes, which every where on
earth below we see: Eccles. 3.11. Psalm. 111.3.
Lo God has made every thing beautiful in his time; and where may we cast
our eyes but we may behold his works of wonder?

Should I meditate of all the fruitful seeds, and trees, and buds, from the
Cedar unto the Hyssope that grows upon the wall; Virtues of herbs. 1. King.
4.33.
O how secret and hidden virtue may we behold in most of them? what especial
use in each of them? Yea diue we down into the bowels of the earth, what
store of proiects wonderful lie hidden there? There the Silver mineral has his
vein, Job 28.1.2.
and the burnished Gold his place; Iron is taken out of the dust, and Brass is
molten out of the stone; Verse. 5.
out of the same earth comes bread to strengthen man, Psalm. 104.15.
and wine to make glad his heart, and oil to make him a cheerful countenance.
Verse. 6. Verse. 17.
The stones thereof are a place of Saphirs, Pearls, Rubies, Topazes, and
precious Jewels are taken out of her rocks. And shall I the^ tread upon so rich
a Theater as the earth, and not acknowledge the wondrous Majesty of God the
founder? O, no, senseless and brutish creature were I then: Therefore this (my
soul) must ever be the burden of my song, O Lord, how manifold are thy
works? Psalm. 104.24.25
In wisdom have thou made them all: The earth is full of thy riches, so is
the sea also great and wide, wherein are things creeping innumerable both small
and great.

Which when I do behold, The Seas wonders.
and know that it is but water, (and that is an humor naturally spreading) and
yet see it higher then the earth, Genesis 1.10.
against its own nature without limit solid, Lord, think I then, how
wonderful are thy works, thou mighty controller of the Sea? How could this
be? How comes this to pass? Surely thou have set up the Sea with doors, and
environed it with bars, Job 38.8.10.11.
thou have said, hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thou
stay thy proud waves. They that go down into the sea in ships, Psalm.
106.23.24 25.26.27.28.29.
and occupy in the great waters, they see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep. For he commands and raises the stormy wind, and it
lifts up the waves thereof: They mount up to the heaven, and descend to the
deep, so that their soul melts for trouble: They are tossed to and fro, and
stagger like a drunken man, then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and
he brings them out of their distress: He turns the storm to calm; so
that the waves thereof are still. In this liquid region go the ships; there
play the infinite multitude of fishes both small and great; Psalm. 104.26.
there remains that Leuiathan, The Whale. Job 41.
whose skales are like strong shields, whose bones are like bars of iron, his
heart as strong as a stone, Verse. 6. Verse. 15.
and as hard as the nether millstone, his neisings make the light to shine, and
his eyes are like the eye lids of the morning, Verse. 9.10.11.
out of his mouth go lamps and sparks of fire, his breath makes coals to
burn, he makes the depth to boil like a pot, and the Sea like a pot of
ointment: He makes a path to shine after him, Verse. 22.23.24.
one would think the depth as an hoare head; in earth there is none like him:
no, neither so great riches, nor so many wonders as in the sea. How full of
wonders then both heaven and earth and sea! the eye of man beholds but a part
of them, neither can man's heart conceive the least part of Gods mighty power
in them. But for who^ were all these things made; All these wonders for man's
sake. Genesis 17.1.
and why did God ordain such wonders in the wonders in the world? Surely not
for himself, for he had no need of these things, Ast. 17.28.
being himself the alsufficient essence, from whom all things have their
being. Neither were these things created only for a show, but for the use of
man, whom God made in his own image according to his own likeness, to rule over
the fish of the Sea, Genesis 1.26.
and over the foul of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over every thing
that creeps and moves on the earth: which when I do consider, Lord, say I
then, what is man that thou art mindful of him, Psalm. 8.5.6.
and the son of man that thou visitest him? thou have made him here on earth
as a Demigod, etc rowned him with glory and worship. Thou have made him to
have dominion in the work of thine hands, thou have put all things under his
feet; yea thou have made him the chiefest of all thy works of wonder.

For man being the last of all the works created, The wonders in man. Sanctius
his animal mentisque capacius altae d^erat ad huc.
and the end for whose sake the rest of the creatures were created, could not
but be the chiefest and most perfect work of all these worldly creatures: and
therefore is made by the eternal God as an epitome of the whole world; (...).
and in regard of the perfect analogy and resemblance between him and the
great worlds frame, is not unfitly termed the lesser world; There being
nothing in the vast compass of the universal circumference, The resemblance
between man and the whole world.
whose likeness or lively representation is not summarily comprised in man, as
in a most perfect compendium or abridgement: whose reason, as the most
powerful mistress power of the soul, subdueth to her dominion and direction
the seruill vnderfaculties and sensual appetites, like as the first moved
sphere carries with his motion the subject inferior circles; The Souie
resembles the Primum mobile.
whose heart having the middle part of the body for his habitation, gives life
and heat unto all the rest of the parts of the body, The Heart.
whereby they be preserved and enabled to perform their natural and proper
functions; like as the Sun, The Sun.
which being situated in the midst of Heaven, illighteneth all things with
his rays, and cherishes the whole and all things therein contained with his
life preserving heat. The fabric of whose body does consist of that never
sufficiently admired temperature of all the four Elements, and no part of all
his body but so miraculously composed, that every part thereof may serve for a
work of wonder. Who can sufficiently express or wonder enough at the
excellency of man, so little a creature made but of the dust? That he by
contemplatio^ should soar up to the skies, and be able to discourse of the
motions, aspects, and effects of the celestial orb; that he should ride upon
the Seas, and search, and pass over the liquid floods; that he should
vendicate both earth and sea unto his profit, and domineere over the beasts,
and know the nature of all the creatures; that he should contriue the Arts and
Sciences to a method, and being absent to speak to men far distant by
letters written, that he should in this mortality seek after immortality,
and have a seat prepared for him in heaven, after life ended here on earth. O
God, how wonderful are thy works even in our selves! No tongue is able to
express: though I did nothing else but wonder, I cannot sufficiently admire
it. Psalm. 116. Psalm. 92. Psalm. 111.2.
Surely this is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. O Lord how
glorious are thy works! Verse. 4.
An unwise man does not understand it, and a fool takes no notice of it. But
well I wot, the gracious God has so made his marvelous works, that they
ought to be had in remembrance: O let me ever be meditating on them, and never
be unmindful of the Creator of them, whiles I can not sufficiently admire at
them; let my soul in silence ever beat upon this strain: Psalm. 8.9.
O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the world!

FINIS.
THE ANCHOR of the Soul: Or, THE ONLY SOLACE of a Christian here in this life.

TO THE Worshipful Mistress Gertrude Dantesie.
THe Lord (as Job witnesses) does visit man every morning, and try him every
moment. Job 7.18.
Many and sundry are the ways of these his trials, Gods children have
experience of them, you your self have had your share in them: I therefore
send unto you here an anchor, wherewith at all times you may take sure hold
fast, though the tempest arise, and the winaes blow, Matthew. 7.26.
and the waves dash never so violently against your ship. I commend this little
meditation following unto your reading, not for the worthiness of it, as it is
here contrived, but for the sweet comfort of that matter to which it aims. I
know you are better stored with richer meditations in your own breast, then my
barren garden can present unto you; yet I presume so much upon your wo^ted
kindness, that I doubt not of your acceptance of these my abortiue labors, who
have given me so great encouragement from time to time, by your attentive
presence at my implumed Lectures. The Lord has opened your heart (as he did
the heart of Lydia) to be atte^tiue to those things which are taught; Act.
16.14.
when the greatest part of your sex and rank, like Martha, encumber
themselves about many needles things, Luke 10.41.42.
like Mary you have chosen the better part. Go on in that good course which
you have begun; if this poor mite which I offer here unto you may in any sort
in this good course further you, I have all that my wishes aim at. And so I
commend the following meditation to your use and Gods blessing.

Yours both in heart and endeavors, G. W.

THE ANCHOR of the Soul.
1. TIM. 1.15. This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; whereof I am chief.


AVgustine (as Possidonius does record) for ye more deep impression of his
most serious meditation, was wont to choose out of David's heavenly Psalms
certain select sentences, which in his bedchamber walls he caused to be
engraven, that he might read and meditate thereon even in his bed. Of all the
golden sentences in the book of God, which I would chiefly choose to meditate
upon, this shall be my choicest motto; of all the flagrant flowers in the
garden of the Lord, this shall be the sweetest smelling posie to my soul,
whether I eat or drink, or sit, or walk, to muse and meditate upon this
worthy word of Truth, by all means worthy to be thought upon, That no less
then the Son of God and Prince of peace Christ Jesus my Lord my God, should
vouchsafe to come into the world, and take upon him our nature, to save sinners
his greatest enemies, in which predicament, I, G.W. humbly and ingenuouslie
acknowledge my self to be the chiefest.

This is the anchor on which my billow-beaten Bark does rest, whiles it is
sailing through the Ocean of temptations to the cape of never failing Hope;
this is my Quietus est, when my conscience is called unto her sins account;
this is my fortress against the enemies assault, my shield and buckler against
their fiery darts; the (...) of my faith, and full assurance of mine, yea mine
own salvation. Which although the Devil bids my soul despair of, and
Antichrist would feign persuade me at the least to make a doubt thereof, yet
(blessed be the Lord my God) I feel the full assurance of his love, neither
needs my soul to waver between hope and despair. For why, we have a most sure
word of the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19. (...).
and the Apostles, testifying the certificate thereof unto our souls, whereto
as to a stable pillar we may lean. Luke 6.48.
The fabric of my faith is not built upon the sand, whose foundation may
shake or flit away: but it is built upon the rock, which all the winds and
waves of Hell can never shake. If Hope-well only were the Cable of my ship,
and I were forced to cast Anchor at Adventure, the Straits of care would be too
deep for any hold, and waves of fear would quickly blow me to the rock
Despair. Liuius.
If like metius Suffetius his body, my soul were racked asunder between
hopes and fears, what comfort could I have of any worldly comfort? or if my
persuasion only herein were coniecturall grounded upon no better foundation
then on likelihoods, how could I choose but be dismayed with a mutiny of
doubts? Or were my certainty herein but the warrant of a mortal man, I might
be soon beguiled by trusting to so fickle ground. But this hope is more then
hope, my confidence is not coniecturall but infallible, my warrant is sealed
unto me more then by the bare word of a mortal man: For he that has the
words of truth, yea who himself is Truth it self, John 14.6.
does assure the truth of this unto my soul. 2. Pet. 1.21.
The Apostles which spoke not of themselves, but as they were inspired from the
holy Ghost, confirm the same unto me, John 21.24. Ephesians. 4.30.
and I know their testimony is true. The spirit of God whereby we are sealed
up to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 1.13.
has sealed the same unto me, and given the earnest of it unto my spirit. 2.
Cor. 1.22.
Things that pass to and fro amongst men, Perkins treatise of Conscience.
though they be in question, yet when the seal is put to, they are made out
of doubt; and the giving of earnest is an infallible sign and token unto him
that receives it, that the bargain is ratified, and that he shall receive the
things agreed upon. Why, go to then; what needs thou doubt, my soul, or make
any scruple of thy sure salvation, seeing thou have it already under hand and
seal, yea under far surer evidence then any writing, lease, seal, witness,
or any humane order can imagine? But more, my soul, God that has sealed it
unto thee, has already given thee the earnest herein of his own spirit, and
therefore return unto thy rest, thou need not fear, thou have a pledge
already.

But yet, To acknowledge certainty of salvation is no presumption.
me thinks, I dare not be so bold; to be thus confident, flesh and blood
doubts will come within the compass of presumption, unless the same be
certified by some special revelation. Hagar, Job 2.
thou talkest like a foolish woman; Is that presumption which of purpose
belongs to thine apprehension and application? August. de verb. Dei, sermon. 28.
To rest on the full assurance of the forgiveness of thy sins, is not
arrogancy, but faith; to acknowledge what thou have received, is not pride,
but devotion. Do thou not hear, the Apostle counselling thee never to rest
until thou have gotten the full assurance of this so great a benefit? 2. Pet.
1.10. 2. Cor. 13.5.
Do thou not hear thy blessed Savior persuading thee above all other
things to rejoice in this assurance? Luke 10.20.
And do thou not hear him checking thee for this thy doubting; O thou of
little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Remember Abraham, Romans 4.20.22
how he did not doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strengthened in faith, Romans 8.38.
being fully assured: and Paul, that went not by hope well, but by knowing
certainly; and James, Iam. 1.6.
that wills us to be constant in faith, and not to waver. Remember the
powerful promise of God himself, who to as many as believe in him has given
power to be the sons of God, namely, Ioh. 1.12.
to them that believe in his name.

O but the multitude of my sins stand up as a rampire or mount against me and
bids me fear, The multitude of our sins may not debar us from the truth
of this assurance. Romans 11.20.
and Satan tells me that this full persuasion, is but only a fantasy and
strong imagination of mine own head, and that my nature being thus rebellious,
I should not stand so much on mine assurance, Psalm. 42.11.
but fear. Why art thou so cast down, O my soul, and why art thou so
disquieted within me? Cheer up thy self: thou have not received the spirit
of bondage to fear again, Romans 8.15.16.
but the spirit of adoption, whereby thou criest, Abba, father, and this spirit
bears witness with thee that thou art the child of God. For know (wrangling
Satan) that I stand not upon weak terms or blind presumptions, Assurance of
salvation not easy to be had in all. Luke 12.32. Matthew. 7.14.
like many a carnal Gospeller, which notwithstanding he hears that Christ's
flock is small, and that in comparison few shall be saved, yet thinks this
assurance of salvation to be an easy and a triuiall thing. No, no, I take
notice of the full assurance of my salvation upon a surer foundation: I flatter
not my self in mine own conceit, but have the testimony of a twofold witness,
the spirit of God bears witness with my spirit, Romans 8.26.
that I am the child of God.

For lo, Tokens of the assurance of salvation. 1. Ioh. 4.13. Romans 8.16.
what pregnant testimonies to this purpose find I unto my self. By this I
know that I dwell in Christ, and he in me, because he has given me of his
spirit: which makes me with boldness to cry, Abba, father, unto him, and this
very spirit helps mine infirmities, Verse. 26.
that whereas I know not to pray as I ought, the spirit it self makes request
for me with sighs that cannot be expressed. 2. Cor. 7.10.
By this I know that my sins are undoubtedly pardoned, Galat. 5.17.
in regard that for sins past I feel a godly sorrow, for sins present I
find a fighting and striving of the mind against them, 1. Ioh. 5.18.
for sins to come I endeavor with religious care for to prevent them. By this
I know unto my self the assurance of life eternal, John 7.37.
because I believe in him that is the author of life eternal; I hunger and
thirst after him, and so highly do I value him, that all things else I esteem
but dung in regard of him. Philip. 3.4.
By this I know the assurance of my sins remission, because my desire is to
keep his commandments; 1. Ioh. 2.3.
not as if poor I in any sort could perform a perfect obedience unto them,
but because in his acceptance the will of the believer is taken for obedience.
The love to God and his children, is another testimony of our translation from
death to life: 1. Ioh. 3.14.19.21.
For hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall before him assure our
hearts: and if our hearts condemn us not, then may we have boldness toward
God. Away then, vile Satan, that feign would drive me to despair, and you
maleuolent Satanists, that would have me turn my assurance into doubting: For
this is a true saying, I have the sure testimony of the Prophets for it, and
the double witness Gods spirit and mine own to seal it, I have the pledge and
earnest of it already, therefore I will rejoice in it.

O let this worthy sentence be written in mine heart as in a book; And by all
means worthy to be received.
let it be graven with an iron pen, and printed ever in my mind with the
point of a Diamond. For what sweeter comfort can I find? Job 19.23.
what more joyful news can I muse upon? What can be more acceptable then the
wells of water to a thirsty soul? What more delightful then in war to
hear of peace, in misery to hear of mercy, in the midst of death to hear of
life? and yet all this and more then this we find here in this true saying,
most worthy by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners. No news like to this: no such joyful tidings ever was
heard of in the world. Well might the heavenly news carrier of the birth of
this unto the Bethlehemetish shepherds give this encomium of it to their
ears, Luke 2.10.
Behold I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all people. Well
might the Quire of Heaven chant forth their Christmas Carroll upon the
relation of it, Luke 2.13.14.
Gloria in excelsis, Glory be to God in the high heavens, peace in earth, and
toward men good will. Well might old Simeon for a lullabie unto his Savior,
sing his Nunc dimittis, Luke 2.28.
Lord now let thou, thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation: for there is no solace like to this, no joy to be compared to it.

The more I think upon it, the more I do admire it, That Christ Jesus.
and stand amazed in the meditation of it; especially when I call to mind the
author and finisher of this our comfort; Heb. 12.2.
Revel. 1.
who being no less then Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Prince of peace,
Isai. 9.6.
whose name is Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, and everlasting father;
whose being is from everlasting, Revel. 1.8.
the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was,
and which is to come, even the Almighty. Why: this rauisheth my soul beyond
all admiration, that he, who was the heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.3.
the brightness of his fathers glory, and engraven character of his own person,
Philip. 2.7.
should make himself of no reputation, and take upon him the form of a
servant, Galat. 4.
to make us that were children of the bondwoman to be heirs, Romans 8.17.
even the heirs of God, and fellow heirs with himself; that he, in whom was
the fulness of riches, Ephesians 2.7. 2. Cor. 8.9. Ioh. 6.35.
should become poor, that he might enrich us; that he, who was the bread of
life, should suffer hunger, to feed us; Luke 4.2. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
that he, who was the fountain of living waters, should suffer thirst to
satisfy us; that he, who was the light of the world, Ioh. 4.7. Ioh. 7.37.38.
John 8.12. John 11.9. 1. Cor. 1.22.
should live obscurely to illighten us; that he, who was the power of God,
should be tempted, that he might strengthen us; that he, who was the life of
the world, Matthew. 4.1. Job. 1.4.
should die, that he might quicke^ us; that he, who himself was innocent,
Galat. 3.13.
should sustain the curse of the law, that he might deliver us, Isai.
53.5.9.10.11.
and be wounded to heal us, and be broken for us to stop up our breach. Who
can here but acknowledge the infinitenes of his snspeakeable love? who can
choose but say with Paul; O the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom and
mercy of God, Romans 11.33.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Who can
choose but say with David; O Lord, Psalm. 8.4.
what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man that thou so
regardest him! Who can but with the Church in the Canticles confess that his
name is a precious ointment powered out, Cantic. 1.2.
because of the sweet savor whereof our hearts must needs be allured to
love him and admire him?

Especially if we but meditate upon that never sufficiently admired love of
his, Came into the world. Genesis 1.
who being the God of Nature, to free us from the corruption of our nature,
Romans 7.5.
took upon himself our nature, and came into the world to save us from the
destruction of the world; me thinks this one thing might be sufficient to woe
and win our love to him, when we consider that he who had his seat above
the Heaven of Heavens, Psalm. 148.4.
should vouchsafe to come down and dwell upon the earth his footstool; Isai.
66.1.
that he might draw us after him to heaven; that he who was equal to the
Father, Philip. 2.7.8.
should humble himself to be a servant, that he might purchase for us the
right of sons; that he which was God, John 1.1.2.
should not disdain to become that which we are, that he might make us
partaker of that place where he now is. The meditation of which in general,
though it be enough to add wings to the mind that is most dull, and work an
impression in the soul that is most void of sense; yet if we take a further
survey in the particulars thereof, and note the unkind entertainment of him so
kind a guest, unless our heart were an heart of flint it can not choose but
melt. For (ah alas) he was in the world, Ioh. 1.11.12.
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not: he came unto his
own, and his own received him not. The Bethlemits, Luke 2.7.
amongst whom he was borne, would not afford him houseroome, Luke 4.29.
but such as their oxen and asses were wont to lodge in: The Nazarites, his
countrymen by education, drive him out of their city to the top of an hill, to
throw him thence down headlong: And we, yea all of us, Isai. 53.
for whose sakes he came into the world, what gave we him but the heavy
burden of our sins for his welcome? His entrance into the world was obscure,
his being here dolorous, his departure hence ignominious. The place of his
birth little Bethleem, Mich. 5.2.
one of the least of the many thousands of Judah; Matthew. 2.6.
the chamber where he was borne, but a stable; the cradle in which he was
laid, but a manger; the swaddling bands wherein his sacred body was wrapped, Luke
2.16.
but homely rags; the parties that first came to greet him, but silly
shepherds: All things in the nativity of him, so great a one, even below the
lowest degree of means. Thus grew he up as a branch, and as a root out of a
dry ground, Isai. 53.2.3.
having neither form nor beauty, when men did see him, that they should desire
him. Despised was he and rejected of all men, a man full of sorrows, and one
that had experience of our infirmities: No sooner was he borne, Matthew. 2.16.
but Herod fought to destroy him; no sooner was he baptized, Matthew. 5.1.
but the Devil set upon him to tempt him; no sooner was he in his public
preaching, Matthew. 15.40. Matthew. 9.34. Luke 6.7.
but the Pharisees envy him, the Sadduces accuse him, the Scribes slander him,
the common people scorn him, Matthew. 13.55.
the high Priests send their officers to entrap him, Ioh. 7.45.
his own Disciple spares not to betray him, Marth. 26.48. Matthew. 26.60.
false witnesses are suborned to belie him, and tossed he is from Pilate to
Herod, Luke 23.7.8.
and from Herod back again to Pilate, to mock him and make sport of him:
Matthew. 27.28.32.35.
neither did they leave until that after much buffeting, torturing and
tormenting, by a cruel death they had made away with him. So cold an
entertainment found he in this world, to show that his kingdom was not of this
world: He had no legions of men or angels to be his guard, no chariots nor
horsemen to be his pomp, no palace to be his court: He wore no crown but
that of thorns, no Scepter but that of Reed, no throne but that of his cross:
In his life time not having so much as a foxes hole to couch in; at his death
not having a shroud, but what was left him, to be wrapped in; nor a tomb, but
what was borrowed, to be buried in.

What shall I here recount his grievous pains and direful maladies, which,
while he was in the world, he sustained here? My soul gush out with tears
of blood, whiles thou do call to mind the sorrow of his soul, when in
Gethsemane his soul was heavy even to the death, Matthew. 26.36.37 38.
when though an Angel from heaven appeared to comfort him, yet his agony was
so bitter, that his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the
ground: Luke 22.43.44.
O let mine head be full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, Ierem.
9.1.
that I may weep day and night for the afflictions which he endured who was
afflicted for my sins: Matthew. 26.49.
when I call to mind those dismal days, wherein my Saviors own servant did
betray him with a kiss, Verse. 55.
and the High Priests catchpoles came forth with clubs and staves and swords to
apprehend him like a thief; John 18.12.
when he that made us free was bound, and haled, and dragd, and brought as a
sheep to the slaughter, Isai. 53.7.
as a lamb dumb before his shearer, so he opened not his mouth. Bitter be
the remembrance of that gloomie night, Job 39.
and let the stars of the twilight be dim through the darkness of it, when
he that gave others often sight, Mark. 8.22. Mark. 10.46. Isai. 9.1.
and came to lighten those that sat in darkness, himself was blindfolded to
be made a scorn of; he that never offered wrong, Matthew. 4.15.
and when himself was wronged, opened not his mouth, Luke 22.64.
was buffeted and smitten on the cheek; that face, Isai. 53.7.
that glorious face of his which on mount Thabor shined as the Sun, was made
a loathsome Jewish spitting place, Matthew. 17.2. Mark. 14.65. Psalm. 45.6. 1.
Cor. 4.9. Job 3.6.
and himself, the head of men and angels, made a gazing stock to men and
angels. Let that day be darkness, and not be joined to the days of the year,
nor come into the accounts of the months, wherein with sighs and sobs I call
not to mind that doleful day; when he which one day shall come in the clouds
with glory and great majesty, Matthew. 24.30.
was brought before the tribunal of an earth petty Judge, Matthew. 27.1.
and stood at the bar with all disgrace and infamy; Isai. 53.7.
when he the innocent Lamb was arraigned, and though found not guilty was
condemned wrongfully; Matthew. 27.22.
he the prince of glory was placed as a grievous malefactor between two
thieues, Ioh. 19.18.
his sacred hands and feet being nailed to the cross; John 19.2.
his head scratched rent and torn with a thornie crown, and his sacred sides
pierced through with a ghastly soldiers spear, John 19.34.
with which there gushed forth both blood and water. Behold and see if there
were any sorrow like unto this sorrow which is done here unto my Savior,
Lament. 1.12.
wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the day of his fierce wrath: witness the
griestly, ghastly groan given by himself whiles he was hanging on the cross,
when that he bellowed forth his Eli, Eli, Matthew. 27.46.
lamasabachthani; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Witness the whole
face of Nature changed at his suffering, Verse. 51.
The Sun being clothed in black, Verse. 52.
the pillars of the earth rocking, Verse. 53.
the veil of the temple renting, the rocks shieuering, and the very graves
themselves opening their more then brazen gates.

But why was all this? To save.
and what was the end of Christ his coming into the world, and his suffering
of so many things here in the world? Surely he came for us, not for himself,
he came to save. Therefore did the Lord anoint him, therefore did he send him,
that he might preach good tidings to the poor, Isai. 61.1.
and bind up the broken hearted, and preach liberty to the captives, and to
them that are bound the opening of the prison: To preach the acceptable year
of the Lord, Verse. 2.
to comfort them that mourn, to give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, that they might
be called trees of righteousness, Verse. 8.
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. This was the good
shepherd that came to seek us lost and wandering sheep; John 10.
this is that mighty champion which came to deliver us from the jaws of the
lion and the wolf; 1. Sam. 17.34.
Numb. 21.9.
this is that brazen Serpent which cures us stung to the heart by that old
fiery Serpent Satan; John 3.14.
this is that good Surgeon, whose coming was to heal our sores: Luke 10.33.
The good Physician who came to save us from death. Matthew. 9.12. John 10.10.
He came to save: so says he himself, I am come that they might have life,
and have it in abundance. So says the Angel of him which brought news of his
coming into the world, Unto you this day is borne a Savior, Luke 2.11.
which is Christ the Lord. O sweet Jesus, Cantic. 1.2.
thy very name is as an ointment powered out to make the virgins love thee. Well
may thou be called Jesus, for there is no other name under heaven whereby we
may be saved, Matthew. 2.27.
but by thine, whose name agrees with thy nature, to save the people from
their sins.

The very savor of which so flagrant ointment of his precious name, Sinners.
Cantic. 1.2.3.
as it well may draw the love of all good hearts unto him, and make them run
after him: so when I further consider with my self our quality and condition
what we were when first he cast his love upon us, me thinks it carries me
beyond admiration, that so great a Savior should so much as respect such vile
and miserable wretches: for this so sweet a Savior came not to call the
righteous, Matthew. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance. Were we righteous? No, there was none righteous,
Psalm 14.2.3.
no not one: we were all gone out of the way, there is was none of us all that
did deserve his favor, no not one. Were we his friends that he did impart
such kindness unto us? Nay, we were his deadly enemies, we were sinners. Romans
5.8.9.
Doubtless one would scarce die for a righteous man: but God sets out his
love toward us, seeing yt whiles we were yet sinners Christ died for us. The
party offended came to help the offenders, the just to die for the unjust,
the innocent for the guilty, the king of peace for his enemies, Christ Jesus
to save sinners. We were dead in sins and trespasses, wherein we walked
according to the course of the world, and after the prince that rules in the
air; Ephesians. 2.2.3.4.
but he rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he loved us, was
content to die for us to quicken us. We were alients from the common wealth of
Israel strangers from the covenant, Ephesians. 2.12.14.19.
without hope, without God in the world: He is become our peace, who by
breaking down the stop of the partition wall, had made us of strangers and
forrenners, citizens with the Saints and of the household of God: Our
habitation and our kindred was of the land of Canaan, Ezech. 16. Verse. 3.
our father was an Amorite, and our mother an Hittite: in our nativity when we
were borne, Verse. 4.
our navel was not cut, we were not washed in water to soften us, Verse. 5.
nor salted with salt, nor swadled in clouts: Verse. 6.
None eye pitied us to do any of these things unto us, or to have compassion on
us: then did he pass by us, and saw us polluted in our own blood, he said unto
us even then when we were in our blood, Thou shall live: Verse. 8.
He spread his skirts over us and covered our filthiness, and made a league and
covenant with us: when we were sinners he came to save us, Romans 5.7.
when we were his enemies he came to seek us, when we were yet of no strength
he died for us.

Wherein as we cannot but acknowledge the riches of his unspeakable love, who
loved us before we were, and followed us with his love, when we were his
enemies; so may it well assure us of his perpetual love and favor toward us.
Romans 5.8.9.10.
For, seeing that whiles we were yet sinners Christ died for us, much more
then being now justified by his blood shall we be saved from wrath through him:
If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his son,
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by him. What then though the
bedroule of our sins reach up to the clouds, and vice attracting vapors do
ouershadow my soul as innumerable as Atoms? what though our rebellious nature
will not be kept in as we desire, and Satan plead full sore to bring our
hearts to desperation, here, here our endless comfort is, Isai. 1.18.
be our sins as crimson, they shall be made as white as snow, though they be
of a skarlet engrained die, they shall be made as white as wool. For this is
the Anchor on which assuredly we may repose our trust, This is a true saying,
and worthy by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners.

But if in general only this my comfort were, Whereof I am chief.
that there was a Jesus Christ, that he came into the world, and that his
coming was to save, and yet not feel the assurance of my part and portion in
it; cold comfort, God wot, would this be to my soul, small matter for me to
rejoice. Nay, blessed be ye author of my peace, I can apply it to my self:
Ephesians. 3.12.
for I have boldness and confidence by faith in him to put my finger into his
side with Thomas, Ioh. 20.28.
and to say, My God, my Lord, to call him my Jesus, my Christ; and to rely
wholly by faith upon this Son of God, who has loved me, Galat. 2.20.
and given himself for me; yea even for me, G.W. the meanest, poorest, vilest,
unworthiest of all Gods children, the greatest and most miserable sinner in the
world: Romans 7.18.
For I know that in me, in this my sinful wretched flesh, dwells no good
thing; from the sole of my foot unto my head, Isai. 1.6.
there is nothing whole but wounds, and swellings and sores full of corruption.
In sin was I conceived, Psalm. 51.4.
in sin was I borne, sin seized upon my childhood, and has lackied my life
unto this my youthful age, and the longer I live, the surer foothold gets
foul sin in my bosom, and setleth the contagion in my soul: How huge a mass
of sin lies in me, hidden from mine eyes, which take possession on me, and
I, poor I, never took notice of them? These, O these that I see before mine
eyes, by looking into the bottomless gulf of my sins, appear as many as the
stars in the sky, or drops of water in the Ocean sea. When I look upon my
self, I am ashamed of my self; me thinks the heavens over me cast a dire
aspect upon me, and the albearing earth groneth under the sinful burden of
me; me thinks the Sun is ashamed of me, and the palefaced Moon looks wanne
upon me, and the airie clouds do mourn for me. I cannot choose but wonder how
in so little a substance, as my soul, should be so great a sink of sin. Of
this sure I am, I know none so sinful as my self, neither have I any reason
to imagine how any can be a greater sinner then my self; yet why should I
despair? I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25.
and he lives to be my Redeemer. Though my sins were more, he could pardon
them: though they were a thousand times greater then they be, he has satisfied
for them. Be they black and ugly? his blood has washed them: Be they great and
many? he has paid the ransom for them: Be they heavy and weighty? he has
mercy in store for them. Here then will I cast my anchor, and pull down the
sails of fear, to harbor in this safest haven: let the flesh say, despair,
and the world say, relent, and the Devil seek to cut the cable of my hope; yet
my footing is sure, I know on whom I fix my hope, even on Christ Jesus,
yesterday, and to day, the same for evermore.

FINIS.
THE MOVRNERS Lamentation: Or, THE BEWAILING OF the miseries of our times, with
Gods fearful judgments to be expected for the same.

TO THE Worshipful, my Christian neighbor, and most religious hearer, Mistress
Amie Long.
WHen the Lord in a vision would show to the Prophet Ezechiel the destruction
of the City Jerusalem, he is brought in by the same Prophet speaking thus unto
one of his Agents herein; Go through the midst of the City, Ezech. 9.4.
even through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of
them that mourn, and cry for all the abominations that be done in the
midst thereof. Doubtless many such mourners are there in our Jerusalem,
whose tears are put in Gods bottle, and for whose sake the Lord yet spares
this our Israel: the Lord increase the number of them. For (God knows) we had
need call one an other to mourning, and take up continual lamentation: for who
sees not how rotten ripe the sins of this land are, Amos 5.16.
and how deep all estates of the same are settled upon the lees of their
transgressions? And who can choose but fear that there is a day of wrath,
Zephan. 1.15.
of trouble and heaviness, of woe and horror near approaching? For mine own
part, what deep impression the meditation hereof makes in mine heart, he
knows which knows the secrets of all men's hearts. One of my private
contemplations which I have communed with my own heart in silence, Psalm. 4.4.
I here make public, by communicating them to you and others: To you
especially, because I know you to be one of the mourners in Sion, as having had
experience of your zeal to Gods house, love to his word, and hatred to the
common corruptions ever since you came to be partaker of the unworthy labors
of my ministry. The Lord increase that good work which long since he has
begun in you. This little Enchiridion, if you please, you may bind up in the
volume of your daily meditatio^s. Thus to mourn, is neither hurtful to our
selves, nor offensive to our Church. We may be merry in the Lord, and yet
without lightness; sad and heavy in heart for our own sins and the corruptions
of our times, and yet without dumpishnes. If we forget Jerusalem, let our right
hand forget to play; Psalm. 137.5.6.
if we remember not the peace of this our Sion, let our tongue cleave to the
roof of our mouth, yea if we prefer not Jerusalem to all our mirth.

Yours entirely in Christ Jesus, G. W.

The Mourners Lamentation.
PSALM. 119.126. It is time for thee, O Lord, to work for they have destroyed
thy law.


TRue it is, Lord, that we are not to appoint thee thy times and limits, for
thou art the Ancient of days, Daniel 7.9. Genesis 1.15.
Times Creator and destinator. Neither do we presume to press in at the
portall of thy privy chamber, to know the times and seasons which thou our
Father have reserved in thine own power: yet, Lord, Act. 1.17.
thou have taught us, as to discern the face of the sky, Matthew. 16.3.
so to descrie the signs of times, and from the cause to expect the effect
which necessarily does ensue. Psalm. 103.8.
Thou art a God full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and thou do sustain many wrongs of the sons of men, being
crushed with their sins, as a cart is laden with sheaues: but if still they
continue to load thee, thou will ease thy self of that burden, and cast it on
the ground of confusion. Thou art slow to anger, Nahum 1.3.
but great in power, and wilt not surely clear the wicked. Thou do for a
long space hold thy peace at men's sins and art still, Isai. 42.14. Psalm. 7.12.
and do restrain thy self: but if men will not turn, thou will whet thy
sword, and bend thy bow, and make it ready. Patient thou art, and for a long
time do forbear thine hand: but when the forehead of sin begins to lose
the blush of shame, when the beadrole of transgressions do grow in skore from
East to West, when the cry of them pierces above the clouds, when the height
of wickedness is come unto the top, Genesis 15.16.
and the fruits thereof are ripe and full, then it is time for thee Lord to
take notice of it, to awake like a giant, Genesis 18.21.
Psalm.
and to put to thine alreuenging hand.

But our sins are already ripe, yea rotten ripe, the measure of our iniquities
is full up to the brimme. Doubtless our land is sunken deep in iniquity;
Isai. 3.8.
Our tongues and works have bin against the Lord to provoke the eyes of his
glory; Isai. 3.9.
the trial of our countenance does testify against us, yea we declare our
sins as Sodom, Genesis 18.20.
we hide them not, the cry of our sin is exceeding grievous, Iam. 5.4.
the clamors of them pierce the skies, and with a loud voice rore, saying: How
long Lord, holy and true? Revel. 6.10. Ierem. 9.9.
how long ere thou come to avenge thy self on such a nation as this is?

If there were but one unjust man amongst us, Sin in all sorts of people.
iniquity for this one man's sin were lamentable; Josh. 7.1.
much more now when whole families, nay whole streets, yea whole towns and
cities are such, the case is to be lamented, and the estate to be feared; when
like a Gangrene sin has eaten through every rank of people, and in a body
politic from the sole of the foot unto the head there is nothing whole
therein, Isai. 1.6.
but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruption: In Children. Psalm.
22.31.
when our young children which should be a sanctified seed to serve the Lord,
suck blasphemy from the dugge, and not learn to speak before they learn to
swear, filling each house, and street, and high way with their oaths: In young
men. Eccles. 12.1.
when our young men which should remember the Lord in the days of their youth,
have their heads full of drunkenness, their eyes full of adultery, their tungs
full of ribaldrie, their ears full of flattery, their hands full of blood,
their feet full of vanity, destruction only and calamity being in their
ways, Psalm. 14.3.
and no fear of God before their eyes. When our old men which should be sober,
In old men.
are given to drunkenness; which should be chaste, Tit. 2.2.
are given to wantonness; which should be discreet, are full of foolishness;
which should be sound in the faith, are as ignorant as horse and mule; which
should be in charity, are full of envy; which should take their farewell of
the earth, are the^ most greedy of the earth, when themselves are more then
half earth. In women. 1. Tim. 2.9.
When our women which should adorn themselves with shamefastnes and modesty,
strive who can most disguise themselves in clothes of vanity, Isai. 3.16.
and in stead of having the hidden man of their heart vncorrupt, 1. Pet. 3.4.
look only to their outside to paint that unto the world. In the Commons.
When our common and ordinary sort of people are murmurers, complainers, Jude
16.17.
walkers after their own lusts, makers of sects, fleshly minded, and full of
prophanenes. When the children shall presume against the ancient, Isai. 3.5.
and the vile against the honorable. When young and old shall thus openly,
without blush of shame, expose their sins to the sunshine of the world, when
every one hunteth his brother with a net, Mich. 7.8. Psalm. 12.2.
and in one body there is a double heart: Ierem. 9.9.
Shall not thou be avenged for these things, O Lord? shall not thy soul be
avenged on such a nation as this?

But be it that generally the common sort of men were so ill inclined; In
Ministers.
yet so long as ye watchmen of the Lords vineyard were unpolluted with blood,
Groenham in his common place of sin, cap. 62.
there were some hope the rest might be recovered: But when they which should
be eyes to others, themselves are blind as beetles; Matthew. 6.23.
when they which should be lamps to others, Matthew. 5.14.
have no oil within their lamps; when they which should be Pastors to feed
the flock of Christ, Matthew. 25.8. Ezech. 34.2.3.
clothe themselves with the fleece, and eat of the fat, but feed not the
sheep; Malach. 1.7.
when they at whose mouth the people should seek the knowledge of the law,
speak good of evil, Isai. 5.20.
and evil of good, put darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter for
sweet, and sweet for sower: when they that should be faithful stewards, Luke
12.42.
giving to Gods household their portion of meat in due season, 2. Cor. 2.17.
make merchandise of ye word of God, selling the cause of the Lord for handfuls
of barley and pieces of bread: Ezeth. 13.19.
when they which should show the people their transgressions, Isai. 58.1.
and the house of Jacob their sins, heal the hurt of the people with sweet
words, saying, Beace, peace, when there is no peace; Ierem. 6.13.
when they that live of the Altar, 1. Cor. 9.13.
live from the Altar, and working evil in the eyes of the people, cause men
through their prophanes to abhor the offering of the Lord: 1. Sam. 2.17.
Psalm. 119.126.
Is it not then high time for God to put to his hand, and to visit our coasts?

Yet all hope of remedy were not altogether cut off, In Magistrates.
if they which are in authority would put to their reforming hands in this
extremity. But when security shall lull asleep authority; Romans 13.4.
when they that bear the sword are afraid to strike; they that should plead
Gods cause, 1. King. 18.21.
halt between God and Baal; they that should be zealous for the Lord of hosts,
Numb. 29.9.
have no courage for the truth; Ierem. 9.3.
when they that should preserve equity and justice, turn judgment into
wormwood, Amos 5.2.
and leave off righteousness in ye earth; when gifts do blind the eyes of the
wise, Exodus 23.8.
and pervert the words of the righteous; when they do the greatest wrongs that
sit in highest rooms, when iniquity and authority shall kiss each other,
and the workers of iniquity will not be controlled, and cannot be corrected:
Is it not then high time for thee, Lord, Psalm. 82.
to put to thine hand? is it not time for thee, Judge of all the earth, to
arise to judgment?

The noble sons of Zion comparable to fine gold, In Nobles.
how are they become dim? Lament. 4.2.7.8.
our Nazarits that were purer then the snow, and whiter then the milk, now
their visage is blacker then a coal, that men cannot know the^ in the streets:
the greatest of many makes the^ forget the greatest, Amos 6.1.
honor and pleasure steal away their heart. They that are at ease in Zion,
trust in the mountain of Samaria: They put far from them the evil day,
Verse 3.
and approach to the seat of iniquity: Verse 4.
They lie upon their beds of Iuorie, and eat the lambs of the flock, and the
calves out of the stall: Verse 5.
They sing to the sound of the viole, and invent unto themselves the
instruments of music: They drink wine in bowls, Verse. 6.
and anoint themselves with the chief ointments; but no man is sorry for the
affliction of Joseph: They say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways: Job 21.14.15.
Who is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit should we
have, if we should pray unto him? If the Prophets in their days did bewail
these things, what should we do? we that live in these desperate diseased
times, wherein the deluge of wickedness has almost covered the highest
mountains of godliness, wherein the monuments of goodness are so
weatherbeaten, that impiety and impunitie has almost left no character
thereof undefaced, the rust of irreligiousnes has eaten into the most steely
tempers of our age.

Yet if these sins were few, (though, as we see, they be not to be found in
few) yet might some hope of pardon be, All sorts of sin in this land.
until they filled the measure, and came to the height of sin. But now
(alas) this measure is already full: As sin abounds in every sort of men, so
is there to be found amongst the^ every sort of sin. What town or village is
there but is polluted with some of David's fools, Atheism. Psalm. 14.1.
that say within their heart, There is no God, and therefore live as if there
were no heaven nor hell, Act. 23.8.
no Saint nor Devil, nor God at all? Papisme.
How many thousands of Manna-loathing Papists swarm every where within our
coasts, Exodus 16.3.
whose mouths are watring after the fleshpots of Egypt again, and whose hearts
are thirsting after the Circean dregs of the purple whore of Babylon? Revel. 17.
Think we that God does not see what is done in many houses of the land? The
children gather wood, Ierem. 7.18.
and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes
to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out drink offerings to other gods. These
thine adversaries, Psalm. 74.4.
O Lord, rore in the midst of thy congregation, and set up their banners for
tokens. They go to and fro, Psalm. 59.6.
and bark like dogs, and run about the city. These Cananites are as pricks
unto our sides, Josh. 23.13.
and as thorns in our eyes: They gnash their teeth at the prosperity of thy
Sanctuary, Psalm. 137.7.
and cry down with it, down with it even to the ground.

Yea, Irreligiousnes.
Lord, thy Sanctuary is already too much polluted, and the dwelling place of
thy name too much alas despised, Psalm. 74.7. Verse 6.
for they break down the carved work thereof with axes and hammers. Every
private man's garden is a paradise, Greenham.
and their fields a garden; but the Lords garden (whether for want of manuring,
or for the sleeping of the dressers) lies like the field of the sluggish man:
Proverbs.
when every house is curiously fieled, and every city aptly compacted, the
house of the Lord lies void in many places, so that they that pass by are
constrained to say, O Lord, Psalm.
why do thou behold us thus and suffer us to see so great vastation? If
thieves had come by night, Sacrilege.
would they not have stolle^ till they had enough? If the grape gatherers had
come, Obad. 5.6.
would they not have left some grapes? O, but how are the things of Esau sought
up, and his treasures searched? Joel 1.7.
Is not the bark pild off from every pleasant tree? how is it made bare? is
there one branch which the enemy has not made white? Verse. 4.
That which the Palmer worm has left, the Canker worm has eaten; that which
the Canker worm has left, the Caterpiller has eaten. Thus have they spoiled
the Church from hand to hand: O Lord, how long shall the adversary reproach
thee? Psalm. 74.10. Verse. 22.
shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Arise, O God, maintain thine
own cause, Verse. 22.
remember the daily reproach which is offered unto thy name. The contempt of the
word. Ierem. 6.10.
For why, thy word, O Lord, is unto them a reproach, they have no delight in it:
The children of thy people talk of thee by the walls, and in the doors of
their houses, and speak one to another, saying, Come and hear what is the
word that comes from the Lord: They come indeed unto thee as people use to
come, and they sit down before thee, Ezech. 33.30.31.32.
and hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with their mouths they
make jests, and their heart goes after covetousness, and lo, thy Prophets are
unto them as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant voice, they hear their
words but do them not. And which is worse, Light account of Gods benefits.
there is no balm at Gilead, no means of medicine whereby the health of the
daughter of this people might be recovered: for they will not be wrapped,
Ierem. 8.22. Isai. 1.6.
nor bound up, nor mollified with oil. This people has an unfaithful and
rebellious heart, they are departed and gone. Ierem. 5.23.24.25.
They say not in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives
rain both early and late in due season, and reserueth unto us the appointed
weeks of the harvest: yea our iniquities have sometimes turned away many of
these things, and our sins have hindered good things from us: Slight regard of
Gods judgments. Isai. 1.3.
The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, but our Israel will
not know, this people will not understand: Thou have stricken them, O Lord, but
they have not sorrowed: Thou have consumed them, Ierem. 5.3. Hardness of heart.
but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder
then a stone, and have refused to return: yea they have made a covenant with
death, and with hell are at agreement, saying, Isai. 28.15.
Though a scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come to us: for we
have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hid. This thou see,
O Lord, and can thou suffer it? or shall not thy soul be avenged on such a
nation as this? Ierem. 5 9.


When as for swearing and blaspheming, Swearing and blaspheming.
from the names of sins, they are now shrouded under the habit of ingenuitie
and valor, Exodus 20.5.
and he is counted a Precifian that makes a conscience of an oath, Iam. 2.6.
when the very air is polluted with blasphemous speeches, and every little
child, as if their tungs were set on fire of hell, can rent and tear thy
sacred body, Christ, and the whole land groan under oaths; Ierem. 23.10.
can thou see it, Lord, and suffer it, that what thou condemnest for so
capital a crime, men should count it for a glorious virtue? Sabbath breaking.
When thy Sabbaths, Lord, whose sanctification thou enioynest so straightly, Genesis
2.23. Exodus 20.11. Heb. 4.4.
and give us a memorandum so seriously to make it our delight, and to
consecrate it, Isai. 58.13.
as glorious unto thee, are not only now polluted with fearful profanation,
but also called into irreligious question, when there is almost no wickedness
which is not especially committed upon this day, Bucer. in Psalm. 92
it being perverted from the service of the Lord to the pleasures of the flesh,
Muscul. in praecept. 4.
and from the honor of the great and high God to the rites of Bacchus and
Venus, and so made the Devils high holiday with many: Wilt not thou for this
kindle a fire in the gates of our Zion? and shall it not devour the palaces of
Jerusalem?

When whoredom and adultery are esteemed as tricks of youth, and usury,
consenage, Adultery and whoredom.
and oppression as things indifferent; when the adulteries of men are written
in their foreheads, and the whoredom of women between their breasts, Ierem.
8.12.
when they are not ashamed that do commit these things, neither can be
brought to any shame: but though thou feedest them to the full, Ierem. 5.7.8.9.
yet they commit adultery, and assemble themselves by companies in the harlots
houses, and rise up in the morning like fed horses, every man neighing after
his neighbors wife. When whoredoms prodromus or pandar Pride does so taint
and infect all degrees, Pride.
and the vanity of all other nations is little enough to make up the measure
of an English folly: When the daughters of Zion are haughty, Isai. 3.19.
and walk with stretched out necks, and wandering eyes, Romans 1.27.
and men effeminate to fashion themselves according to the world only, Romans
12.1. Romans 13.4.
making it their only thought to fulfill the lusts of the flesh: When the
stone cries out of the wall, Covetousness. Hab. 2.11.
and the beam out of the timber answers it against the common practice of
those that join house to house, and lay field to field, Isai. 5.8.
till there be no place for the poor, that they may be placed by themselves
in the midst of the earth: when every one hunteth his brother with a net, Mich.
7.2. Hab. 1.16.
and sacrifice to their yearne, and to their net: and as a cage is full of
birds, Ierem. 5.27.
so are their houses full of deceit, by which they are become great and waxen
rich: When the fat bulls of Baashan gore the sheep of the flock, Oppression,
Psalm. 22.12.
and the rich men swallow up the poor, that they may make the needy of the
land to fail, and the sellers make the Ephah small, Amos 8.4.5.6.
and the Shekel great, and falsify the waights by deceit, that they may buy
the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes: Is it not then time for thee,
O God, to whom vengeance belongs, to show thy self? Psalm. 94.1.2.
Arise thou indge of the world, and reward the proud after their deserving,
Psalm. 10.16.
for the poor commits himself unto thee, who art the helper of the
fatherless and needy.

When Court and Country swarms with desperate hacksters braules, Cruelty and
quarrelling.
with whom rapine, envy, malice, and murder are but venial sins, which yet
like Abels blood from out of the earth do cry unto the Lord: Genesis 4.10.
When men rise up early to follow drunkenness, Drunkenness.
and continue till night, until the wine do inflame them, Isai. 5.11.
and reckon it a point of valor to be mighty to drink wine, and strong to
power in strong drink. Verse. 22.
And Sodoms trinity of master sins, pride, Ezech. 16.40. Idleness.
fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness, abound in us; there being so many
millions that live inordinately amongst us: 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.
and so many walking the sluggards pace, of whom the heavenly Apostle Paul has
told us often, Philip. 3.18.19.
yea and told us weeping, that they are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose
end is damnation, whose god is their belly, whose glory is their shame, which
mind earthly things. Unfaithfulness.
When there is no trust to be reposed in a friend, Mich. 7.5.
nor confidence in a counselor, and the doors of a man's mouth had need be
locked up from her that lies in his bosom; when the whole land like a bowl
is ouerswaied by the strong bias of iniquity, Nothing but sin.
and bends without opposition to black corruption: when there is no care of
truth, Hosea 4.1.2.
nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, but by lying, and swearing, and
killing, and stealing and whoring men break out, and blood touches blood: Can
there be a God, and he not see? can he see and not punish these so vile
abominations?

No, no, It agrees with the equity of Gods instice to punish these sins.
thou art a God of pure eyes, and can not endure the sight of evil: Thou art
jealous of thy glory, and will not hold him guiltless that shall profane thy
name; Hab. 1.13.
thou will not surely clear the innocent, but wilt visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, Deuteronomy. 5.11. Exodus 34.7.
and upon the childrens children unto the third and fourth generation. Art not
thou the same that whurledst down angels from the heaven because of their
sins, Ierem. 32.18.
and made Sodom and Gomorrha, God is no less bent to punish sin now then
heretofore.
which sometimes were as an other Eden, a breeding place for nettles, and a
lake of ashes? yea thou did not spare Jerusalem thine own selected city,
Jude 6. 2. Pet. 2.4. Genes. 13.10. Genes. 19.24. Ierem. 25.29. Matthew. 24.3.
Isai. 59.1. Heb. 1.11.
but have made it for sin an heap of stones: yea, Lord, thine hand is not
shortened that it cannot strike, nor thine ears heavy, that they cannot hear:
Thou art still the same, and thine hatred against sin now as great as ever it
has been.

Or have we a greater privilege to plead upon then other people had? We have
no more privilege to secure vi from Gods judgments, then other nations had.
Nahum 3.8.
Are we better then No which was full of people, that lay in the rivers, and
had the waters round about it, whose ditch was from the sea, and her wall from
Egypt to Ethiopia, yet she was carried away and went into captivity? Are we
in safer shelter then the people of other countries, who for their sins are
rooted up as though they had not been planted, as though their stock had taken
no root in the earth? Isai. 41.24.
the Lord has blown upon them, and they are withered, and the whirlewind like
stubble has taken them away: yea the Lord has not spared the city wherein his
own name was called upon; Ierem. 25.29.
and shall we go free? O no, it is impossible, it cannot be. The Lord has
sworn by his holiness, Amos 4.2.
that his eye shall not spare, neither will he have pity, but will power out
his wrath and fulfill his anger in us, Ezech. 7.8.9.
and pay us home according to our ways, and of the abominations that are in
the midst of us. Ierem. 7.16.
Bootlesse, ah I fear, is it to lift up cry or prayers against the same: for
though Moses and Samuel stood before him to entreat him, yet how could his
affection be toward this so sinful people? Ierem. 15.1.
Though hitherto he has for a long time held his peace, Isai. 42.14.
yet now he will destroy and devour at once.

Yea verily, What the reason is why these judgments have not already seized
on us.
it is the Lords mercy that we are not yet consumed: for we had long ere this
have bin as Sodom, and our country as Gomorrha, had not some zealous
Phineahses delaied his wrath, and some of his chosen Moseses stood in the
breach before him to turn away his wrath, Lament. 3.22. Zeph. 2.9. Numb. 25.11.
lest he should destroy them. But now, alas, these righteous men decay apace,
Psalm. 106.23.
and no man considers it in his heart; merciful men are taken away, and no man
understands that they are taken away from the evil to come. Isai 57.1.
What hope of health now, when there is scarce a godly man left, Psalm. 12.1.
and the faithful are diminished from among the children of men? Therefore now
the days of our visitatio^ must needs be near, The near approach of Gods
judgments.
the days of recompense are coming, Israel shall know it, our selves, Hosea
9.9.
our wives, our children, I fear shall shortly feel it. Me thinks I hear
already the noise of the whip, Nahum 2.2.
and the moving of the wheels, the axe is already lifted up and ready for the
stroke.

O would to God our Elders would sanctify a fast, What the way is to prevent
Gods judgments.
and our Priests the Ministers of the Lord would weep between the porch and
the altar, and cry, Spare, Lord, Joel 2.15.16.
spare thy people, and all the people from the highest to the lowest would
turn to the Lord with fasting, Verse. 12.
weeping and with mourning; Verse. 14.
who knows whether the Lord will return, and yet spare and leave a blessing
behind him? Doubtless our God is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness.

But, Lord, What to do when Gods judgments shall sease on us.
if the decree be already come forth and cannot be revoked, yet, Lord,
correct us, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest we be consumed and
brought to nothing. Ierem. 10.23.
Power out thy wrath rather upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the
families that call not upon thy name. Or if there be no remedy, yet well I
know, that in ye midst of these his judgments God is loving unto Israel,
Psalm.
to such as are true of heart: He will deliver them from six troubles, Job 5.19.
and in the seventh the evil shall not touch them: Psalm. 37.24.
they may have a fall, but they shall never be cast off. Al things even Gods
greatest earthly judgments work for ye best to Gods children: Romans 8.28.
for Sions sake I will not hold my tongue, but mourn for her desolations. As
for mine own part I will rest my self upon David's resolution; 2. Sam. 15.25.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and
show me both it, and the Tabernacle thereof: but if he thus say, I have no
delight in thee: Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his
eyes.

THE SINNERS Doom: Or, A SVRVEY OF THE wretched estate of the wicked both in
this life, and in the life to come.

TO MY WORTHY and much respected friend, Mistress Mary Prime.
I Began with a taste of happiness, and now I end with a taste of wretchedness.
Both of these are necessary to be known, that we may love the one, and fear
the other. I dedicate this my last theorem unto you, not as pertinent to your
condition, but as an Amulet for your consolation: For I bear you record that
you have already tasted how sweet the Lord is, Psalm. 34.8.
you have had a taste of the good word of God, Heb. 6.4.5.
and of the powers ofthe world to come, and have found them sweeter to your
soul then the honey and the honey comb. Psalm. 19 10. Luke. 10.6.
And I am well assured that you are a child of peace, far free from that
portion which here my following treatise describes to be the sinners legacy:
for I have had experience of your unfeigned faith in Christ, your love to his
word, Psalm. 16.3.
and delight in his Saints. I therefore commend this little Pamphlet to your
meditations, to stir you up more and more to thanksgiving unto God, Coloss.
1.13.
who has called you out of darkness into this marvelous light, John 15.19.
and has chosen you out of the world that you should not perish with the
world. Doubtless the peace of conscience, Philip. 4.7.
that peace which the godly do enjoy, is an inualuable treasure, it passes
all understanding: This peace shall ever be upon the Israel of God, though
there be no peace at al unto the wicked. As you therefore have begun in the
spirit, so I cease not to pray for you, Colos. 1.9.10.5.
that you may be fulfilled with the knowledge of the will of God in all wisdom
and understanding, that you may walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of
God, for the hopes sake which is laid up for you in heaven: whereof you have
heard before by the word of truth, which by me and others has bin preached
unto you. And here I leave with you these following meditations, as a testimony
of my thankful remembrance of many kindnesses which you have showed unto me,
and not to me alone, but to all those which come in the name of a Prophet
amongst you. Matthew. 10.41.
Read, meditate, and use it to your comfort, and the God of peace sanctify
you both in soul and body, and keep you with all yours blameles until the
coming of our Lord.

Yours ever in Jesus Christ, G. W.

THE SINNERS Doom.
ISAI. 57.21. There is no peace, says my God, unto the wicked.


FRet not thy self (says David) because of the ungodly, Psalm. 37.1.2.
neither be thou envious for the evil doers: for they shall soon be cut
down like grass, and wither as the green herb. Me thinks it should be an
easy matter to dissuade any man from envying them, who are rather to be pitied
because they are set in slipperie places, The seeming prosperity of the wicked.
rather to be lamented because their estate is so dangerous, fickle, and full
of woe. For albeit these are they that seem to prosper in the world, and to
increase in riches, Psalm. 73.12.5.7.
which are lusty and strong, and not in trouble like other men, their eyes
stand out for fatnes, and they have more then heart can wish. Though they live
and wax old, Job 21.7.8.9.10
and grow in wealth, their seed is established in their sight with them, and
their generation before their eyes. Their houses are peaceable and without
fear, and the rod of God is not upon them: Their bullock ingendreth and
fails not, their cow calueth and casts not her calfe. Psalm. 49.11.
Though they think their houses and their habitations shall continue for ever,
even from generation to generation, and call their lands by their names. Though
the people fall down unto them, and they be deemed the only happy men in the
world: The unmasking of the wicked. Psalm. 73.17.18.
yet let a man but go into the Sanctuary of the Lord, and seek to understand
their end, and he shall find that their wealth is not in their own hand, Job
21.16.17.18.
but they are set in slippery places, and their change is fearful. O how often
shall the candle of the wicked be put out, and their destruction come upon them
at unawares! he shall be as stubble before the wind, and as chafe that the
storm carries away. O how suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly
consumed! Psalm. 73.19.20.
as a dream when one awaketh, so shall the Lord make their image despised. For
why? Job 21.30.
the wicked is kept but as a stalled ox unto the day of destruction, and he
shall be brought forth unto the day of wrath: In the hand of the Lord there is
a cup, and the wine is red, it is full mixed, Psalm. 75.8.
and he powers out of the same; surely the wicked of the earth shall wring
out and drink the dregs thereof. This is Gods just doom upon them, they shall be
like the raging of the sea, that cannot rest, Isai. 57.20.21.
whose waters cast up dirt and mire. There is no peace, says my God, to the
wicked.

And surely how true this restless doom of wicked wretches is, The restless
and wretched estate of the wicked even in this life.
who sees not, that has but an eye to see, and an heart to understand? whose
mouths though they be set against heaven; Psalm. 73.9.6.
and their tongue walks through the earth, though pride be a chain unto the^
and cruelty covers them like a garment: Job 21.9.
Though the houses of their hearts seem peaceable and without fear: yet, God
he knows, their doleful minds are tossed up and down with many a blast of
anguish, and blown about with many a gale of terror, like surging waves which
rage upon the seas, Pompon. Mel. lib. 2.
and like Euripus which ever boyleth and is in continual agitation. The wicked
man is continually as one that trauelleth with child, Job 15.20.21.
oppressed with inward throbs and gripes of heart; A sound of fear is ever in
his ears, terrors shall take him as waters, Job 27.20.21.
and tempest shall carry him away by night, the cast wind shall take him
away, Prou. 28.1.
and he shall fly when none pursues him.

And why? The worm of conscience.
there is a worm that never dies, which is always nibling at their hearts,
and, like the Poets furies, lashing their guilty conscience with accusing
horror. Mark 9.44.
In the midst of all their hearts delights and pleasing mirth, there appears
an hand writing before their eyes which troubles their thoughts within them,
and makes the joints of their loins loose, Dan. 5.6.
and their knees to smite the one against the other. Whiles they seem to enjoy
their chiefest iollitie, there hangs over their head a weighty sword by a
small twine of thread; when they full feign would put God out of their minds,
Amos 6.3.
and put the evil day far from their thoughts, and would rejoice in their
youth, and cheer up their heart in their delights; will they, nill they, an
heavy hammer knocks this memento into their hearts, Eccles. 11.9.
Know that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment. Yea, his eye
shall fail with fearful looking for the dreadful judgment and violent fire
which shall devour the adversary. Heb. 10.27.


But say some senseless soul and cauterised conscience should be so fast
asleep as not to feel this smart, Want of feeling this horror of conscience
in the wicked most desperate.
as doubtless many sinners are, yet shall we think their case as void of
fear? No, no, a deadly lethargy possesses such men's souls, whose pangs may
well be thought most grievous then, when least they are felt, and whose estate
is most terrible when they are most insensible; 1. Tim. 4.2.
whose consciences are seared with an hot iron. O take heed of such, for well
we know that such a one is perverted, Tit. 3.11.
and sins being damned of his own self, and being senseless of his sin,
is given over to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.24.
and being past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
give themselves over to work all uncleanness even with greediness: being
already within the jaws of hell before they be awares. And well I wot, that
when such sleepie souls shall awake, (and wake they shall, securely now
although they sleep) that then their horror shall be the greater far: like
wild beasts, which though so long as they lie asleep, seem tame and gentle,
yet being roused up, are fierce and wrathful.

In the mean, Sinners Gods enemies.
albeit in outward show they may seem joyful, yet let them know their case is
fearful: for if the wrath of an earthly King be raging, how dreadful then
must needs be their estate who are professed enemies to the King of Heaven?
Isai. 26.11.
Surely he hates all those that work iniquity, Psalm. 5.6.
and both the wicked man and his wickedness are in hatred with him. Psalm. 14.
Prou. 15.9.
The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: Isai. 1. Psalm. 50.
He cannot abide nor permit the sinner to praise him, to pray unto him, or to
take his covenant in his mouth: no marvel then if at the last day he show
such rigor unto them, who in this life are so extremely hated and detested of
him. Gods threatenings against sinners.
What peace then can they have that have the Lord of hosts to be their enemy?
Psalm. 10.
God shall rain snares of fire upon sinners, brimstone with tempestuous winds
shall be the portion of their cup: the Lord shall break their teeth in their
mouths, Psalm. 57.6.9.10.
and shoot forth his arrows and destroy them: He shall carry them away as
a whirle wind in his wrath, and wash his feet in the blood of the ungodly:
He will power out his wrath upon them, and fulfill all his anger in them:
Ezech. 7.8.9.10.
He will judge them according to their ways, and lay upon them all their
abominations, neither shall his eye spare them, neither will he have pity on
them, and they shall know that he is the Lord that smites them. Cursed be
they in the town, and cursed in the field, cursed in the fruit of their
body, Deuteronomy. 28.16.17.18.
and cursed in the fruit of their land, the increase of their kine, and in the
flocks of their sheep: cursed when they come in, and cursed when they go out:
cursed in their bodies, and cursed in their souls.

Now then let them boast while they will of their prosperity, The beginning of
hell here in this life to the wicked.
and let such as are like unto them flatter them in their folly: though they
seem with Capernaum to be lifted up to heaven, Matthew. 11.23.
yet behold already they are in the confines of hell: though they have a name
of mightiness, yet indeed they are in the lowest estate of abiectnes: Though
they may seem the only men that live, yet they are but dead whiles here they
live: 1. Tim. 5.6.
Though worldlings do admire them, Romans 6.16.
yet are they but the Lords laughing stocks, Sins slaves, and Satan's
drudges. Poor woodcocks are they ensnared in Satan's springs, 2. Tim. 2.26.
Romans 9.22.
vessels of wrath ordained for the Devils black kitchen, already treading the
ways of darkness, Prou. 4.19. Exodus 3.
the prince of darkness task me^ in the works of wickedness: yea they dwell
already in the land of darkness, and in the shadow of death, Psalm. 107.10.
being fast bound in misery and iron: Psalm. 37.8.
when Gods children are satisfied with the dainties of his house, Luke 15.16.
they feed on husks of sin and draffe of beastly life: when the souls of the
Saints are temples of ye holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.15. Revel. 18.2.
their souls be nests of Scorpions and dungeons of Devils: Revel. 21.27.
when Gods children have their names registered in the book of life, their
names are engrossed in ye book of perdition, being already in the power of the
Devil and his angels, 1. Tim. 5.6.
subject to sin and all temptations, dead in trespasses and sins, whiles in
their bodies they be alive, and when they die, having this death the earnest
penie of the second death.

For certainly, The doleful estate of the wicked in the day of death.
The rejoicing of the wicked is but short, and the joy of hypocrites is but a
moment: though his excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto
the clouds, Job 20.5.6.7.8.9.
yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, and they which have seen him
shall say, Where is he? He shall flee away as a dream, and shall pass away as
a vision in the night: Go he shall, there is no remedy, Job 10.22.
into the land of darkness and shadow of death, into a land, I say, dark as
darkness it self, and into the shadow of death, where is none order, but the
light is there as darkness. Heb. 9. Eccles. 3.19.
And albeit this is the condition of the just as well as the unjust, and as the
one dies so must the other die and return unto the dust: yet (good Lord) how
great a difference is there between the righteous and the wicked at the day of
death? Mark the upright man, Psalm. 37.37.
and behold the just for the end of that man is peace: when ghastly death
approaches with her inexorable destiny, then do they lift up their heads,
Luke 21.28.
for that their redemptin^ draws nigh from the labors and toils of this
world. Psalm. 40.1.3.
Blessed then are they that fear the Lord, the Lord will strengthen them upon
their bed of sorrow, and make their bed in their sickness. So that with holy
Hilarion, they then begin to cheer up their soul: Hieron. in vita Hilarion.
Exito anima mea, exito etc.
Go out my soul, go out, thou need not fear, thus long thou have served
Christ, why shoul dest thou now be afraid to go to him? But for the wicked
and ungodly man, as there is no peace to him during the whole course of his
life; so shall he find least peace at the hour of death. O Death how bitter
is the remembrance Eccles. 41.
of thee to a man that lives at rest in his possessions? how irksome shall it
be to an unrepentant sinner, when he shall see Death it self standing before
his face to arrest him, and approaching unto him with this incultable doom;
Thou soul, Luke 12.19.
this night I must take away thy soul from thee, and then whose shall these
thy pleasures and thy profits be? A woeful anguish must the^ needs possess his
heart, when he must part from all his earthly joys, pleasures and commodities
which he has traveled for with the hazard of his soul, and find no profit
in them, but that he has traveled for the wind. Eccles. 5.15.
But what should I speak of the loss of these toys and trifles? they must
part with life it self: Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. But all
the wealth and riches in the world cannot purchase one hours lease of longer
life, Death will claim his due, an inexorable creditor: which when it cannot
choose but breed an horror in the heart of him that lies a dying; so will it
fill his soul with direful grief to call to mind the vain attempts of his
forepassed life, when they shall sigh for grief of mind, and say within
themselves; O senseless we and more then frantic fools, We have wearied our
selves in the way of wickedness, Syracides, 5.1.3.7.8.9.
and we have gone through dangerous ways, but we have not known the way of
the Lord. What has our pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of our
riches brought unto us? all those things do pass away like a shadow, 2. Cor.
5.
and as a post that passes by. At that day will God be known of them to be a
terrible God, and dreadful. He will then write bitter things against them,
Job 13.26.
and make them possess the sins of their youth. The conscience will come in
then with her bill of accounts, and show many old reckonings and arrerages of
sins, and Satan will shoot forth many millions of canons of desperation
against the sick besieged soul, and lay before his eyes the large bedrole of
their sins: which when the guilty conscience cannot deny, O how it fills
the heart with horror, and souseth the dreadful soul with fear! How bitter
and lamentable is that parting farewell which they make to their departing
soul? Aelius Adrianus. Animula, vagula, blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca,
pallidula, frigida, nudula, etc.
like that of Adrian the Roman Emperor, when he was now a dying; My darling
soul, poor soul, poor fleeting wandering soul, my bodies sometimes best
beloved ghest and equal, whither art thou now going, pale, wanne, and naked,
into places ugly, dismal, full of horror and tribulation?

Yet happy, yea thrice happy were it, The wicked have no peace after death.
if death were the Catastrophe of the sinners Tragedy, and the end of their
being might come with the end of their earthly living: Their souls posting to
hell.
happy were it for them if like to dogs and toads, and beasts, they might
perish and be no more, but lo their chiefest woe is yet to come: for when
they lie in the grave like sheep, Psalm. 49.14. Job 19.26.
death gnaweth upon the^; whiles worms destroy their carkase, hell fire
seaseth upon their souls, and vexes them with torments. What shall I here
recount the sudden dreadful passage of their souls from the body to their
doom, dragd down by furious fiends of hell, unto their place of torment, 2.
Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
where they shall be in everlasting chains under darkness unto damnation, and
to the final judgment of the great day. At which day (good Lord) what horror
and amazement will affright them? when the ungodly, whose bodies are rotten in
the dust of the earth, The horror of the wicked at the day of resurrection.
Matthew. 25.
shall on a sudden be roused from their deadly sleep by the Trumpet of an
Angel; and like guilty malefactors, they shall come forth of the filthy
dungeon of rottennes to appear at the tribunal for their trial. 2. Cor. 5.
What a dreadful day will that be for those that have passed their time
securely here in this world? how will they be amazed at the suddennes of this
their rousing up from the bed of death? What a sea of miseries and terrors
shall rush upon them, when on a sudden being raised up, Matthew.
24.30.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.
and apparelled with the same robes of their bodies, so long laid up in the
wardrope of the dust, they shall hear about their ears so hideous a noise of
Trumpets, sound of waters, motion of all the elements; when they shall see the
earth reeling and tottering, the hills and dales skipping, the Moon darkened, 2.
Pet. 3.12.
the Stars falling down from heaven, the firmament shiuered in pieces, and
all the world in a flaming fire? If Adam, Genesis 3.8.
after his eating of the forbidden fruit, would feign have hid himself from
God, walking in the garden at the cool of the day; how shall the desperate
forlorn sinner then abide the presence of the Judge, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
not walking in the cool of mercy, but coming in flaming fire, and sitting
in his throne of Majesty; Matthew. 25.31. Revel. 20.12.
when the books shall be opened, when not only they shall be called to account
for their gross and heinous sins, Matthew. 12.36.
but shall be compelled to give account for every idle word, Romans 2.16.
and their very secret thoughts shall be brought to judgment? 1. Cor. 1.
Alas, what will those wise people do then that now live in delights, and count
a christian conversation foolishness? What shift will they make in those
extremities? what will they answer for themselves? doubtless they shall not
be able to answer him one of a thousand: Job 9.3.
whither will they then turn themselves? Will they hope that the Bill of their
Indictment may be lost? Revel. 2.23.
They have small hope of that, for he, who is their Judge, searches the heart
and reins, yea all things are naked and open to his eyes. Hope they that their
greatness shall countenance them out? Behold he finds no stedfastnes in the
Angels; Job 4.18.19.
how much less then in them that dwell in houses of clay, and whose foundation
is in the dust? Do they persuade themselves that they can bribe the Judge?
Lo, Prou. 11.4. Matthew. 16.16.
riches avail not in the day of wrath; and what shall a man give for a
recompense of his soul? Do they hope upon a Psalm of mercy or a pardon?
There was a time indeed when that was offered unto them, if with repentant
minds they would have accepted of the same: but now there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10.26.27.
but a fearful looking for of judgment which shall devour the adversaries.
Good Lord, then what will the wretched sinner do at that most doleful day?
what shift will he make? He shall even dry up for very fear: Matthew. 24.
He shall seek death, and death shall fly from him: Revel. 6.15.16.
He shall cry to the hills to fall upon him, and to the mountains to cover
him. But all in vain, for there shall he stand a desperate, forlorn, caitise
wretch, until he receive that dreadful and irreuocable sentence, Matthew. 25.41.
Go thou cursed wretch into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels.

Which final sentence once pronounced, The endless misery of the wicked
after the day of judgment.
me thinks my heart does quake to think upon the horror presently rushing
upon these dammed wretches: what howling, crying, wailing, and yelling by them
will be made, Revel. 16.9.11.
when the infernal officers and fiends of hell with bitter skofes and taunts
will hale and dragge them unto torments? Revel. 16.9.11.
then shall they curse the day of their nativity, Job 3.9.10.
and wish that they never had been borne, and that they had perished as an
untimely birth: They shall be ready to rend and tear their souls, for that
they so neglected the time of grace offered unto them, There shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth with them, Luke 13.28.
when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Saints in the
kingdom, and themselves thrust out of doors: Psalm. 112.10.
The ungodly shall see the happiness which they have lost, and it shall grieve
him, He shall gnash with his teeth and consume away, and his hope shall
perish. For though like Dives they would give a thousand thousand worlds for a
drop of cold water to cool their tongue, Luke 16.25.
they may not have it. No, no, but whurled shall they be to hell, Isai. 66.24.
to be companions with Devils and damned spirits, in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Mark. 9.44.
where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out.

Who is able to dwell in this devouring fire? The pains of Hell. Isai. 33.14.
or who shall be able to dwell in these everlasting burnings? Matthew. 8.12. 1.
Pet. 3.19.
The place it self so loathsome into which they are cast, a dungeo^ far more
dark the^ pitch, worse then the Egyptian darkness which might be felt; Exodus
10.21.
A lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Matthew. 11. Matthew. 8.13.
where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. In that lake, it is wonderful
to think how wicked damned souls shall be tormented day and night: Revel.
10.14.
not only body, but soul and all with bitter hellish torments; to which all
plagues and torments man's heart can devise, are but like fleabitings and not to
be named: for as the joys of heaven are so exceeding great, 1. Cor. 2.9.
as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, or heart of man can possibly
conceive: so the pains of hell are such as ye tongue of men or Angels cannot
utter, nor any thought imagine. Happy be they that hear, and fear, but never
feel these fearful pains: Dan. 12.2.
for tribulation and anguish shall be upon their ever burning never dying
souls; the shame that shall cover their faces is perpetual, Jude 7.
the fire that shall devour them is eternal, the horrors that shall astonish
them are everlasting, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
the worm ye gnaweth upon their conscience never dies, Matthew. 25.46.
and the fire which shall devour them never goes out; the pains which they
shall feel shall never, never have an end.

How can I then but pity those many thousand silly souls, The application.
who prove themselves such fools, as to buy the pleasures of sin for a
season, Heb. 11.
at so high a price, as will cost the^ a dreadful setting on for ever? How can
I but admire their senseless madness, Prou. 14.9.
who though they hear and know this doom of sinners, Job 15.16.
yet make a jest of sin, and drink up iniquity like water? Why should men
be like Thomas, Ioh. 20.25.
that will not believe except they see? Exodus 10.7.
and so near of Pharaos mind, that will be destroyed before they leave their
sins? As for me, seeing this is the sinners portion, I will endeavor as near as
I can to keep my self from sin: Surely I shall never be able to endure the
pains of hell, and therefore as near as God will give me grace, I will keep
me far from them. Seeing there is no peace to ye wicked, I will not leave my
peace of conscience for a thousand worlds.

FINIS.

