A Discourse of English Poetry.

Together, with the Authors judgment, touching the reformation of our English
Verse.

By William VVebbe. Graduate.

Imprinted at London, by John Charlewood for Robert Walley. 1586.

To the right worshipful, learned, and most gentle Gentleman, my very good
Master, Ma. Edward Suliard, Esquire. VV. VV. wysheth his hearts desire.
MAy it please you Sir, this once more to bear with my rudenes, in presenting
unto your view, an other slender conceit, of my simple capacity: wherein
although I am not able to bring you any thing, which is meet to detain you
from your more serious matters: yet upon my knowledge of your former courtesy
and your favorable countenance toward all enterprises of Learning, I dare
make bold to crave your accustomed patience, in turning over some of these few
leaves, which I shall account a greater recompense, then the writing thereof
may deserve. The firm hope of your wonted gentleness, not any good lyking of
mine own labor, made me thus presumptuously to crave your worships patronage
for my poor book. A pretty answer is reported by some to be made by Apelles
to King Alexander, who (in disport) taking up one of his pensilles to draw a
line, and asking the Paynters judgment of his draught, It is done (quoth
Apelles) like a King: meaning indeed it was drawn as he pleased, but was
nothing less then good workmanshippe. My self in like sort, taking upon me,
to make a draught of English Poetry, and requesting your worshyps censure of
the same, you will perhaps give me this verdict, It was done like a Scholar,
meaning, as I could, but indeed more like to a learner, then one through
grounded in Poetical workmanship.

Alexander in drawing his line, leaned sometime too hard, otherwhyle too soft,
as never having been apprentice to the Art: I in drawing this Poetical
discourse, make it some where to straight (leaving out the chief colloures and
ornaments of Poetry) in an other place to wide (stuffing in pieces little
pertinent to true Poetry) as one never acquainted with the learned Muses. What
then? as he being a king, might meddle in what Science him listed, though
therein he had no skyll: so I being a learner, will try my cunning in some
parts of Learning, though never so simple.

Now, as for my saucie pressing upon your expected favor in craving your
judgment, I beseech you let me make this excuse: that whereas true Gentilitie
did never withdraw her loving affection from lovely Lady Learning, so I am
persuaded, that your worship cannot choose, but continue your wonted
favorable benignity toward all the indeuourers to learning, of which
corporation I do indeed profess my self one silly member.

For since the writers of all ages, have sought as an undoubted Bulwark and
steadfast sauegarde the patronage of Nobilitye, (a shield as sure as can be to
learning) wherein to shrowde and safelye place their several inventions: why
should not I seek some harbor for my poor travel to rest and stay upon,
being of it self unable to shyft the carping cauilles and biting scorns of
lewd controllers?

And in truth, where might I rather choose a sure defense and ready refuge
for the same, then where I see perfect Gentilitye, and nobleness of mind, to
be fast lyncked with excellency of learning and affable courtesye? Moreover,
add this to the end of mine excuse: that I send it into your sight, not as
any wyttie piece of work that may delight you: but being a slight somewhat
compyled for recreation, in the intermyssions of my daily business, even this
Summer Eueninges) as a token of that earnest and unquenchable desire I have to
show my self duetifull and welwylling toward you. Whereunto I am
continually enflamed more and more, when I consider either your favorable
freendshyppe used toward my self, or your gentle countenance showed to my
simple trauelles. The one I have tried in that homely translation I presented
unto you: the other I find true in your courteous putting to my trust, and
doing me so great honesty and credit, with the charge of these toward young
Gentlemen your sons.

To which pregnant ympes of right excellent hope, I would I were able, or you
might have occasion to make trial of my loving mind: who should well
perceive my self to remain unto them a faithful and trusty Achates, even so
far as my wealth my woe, my power or perrill, my pen or wit, my health or
life may serve to search mine ability.

Huge heaps of words I might pyle together to trouble you wythall: either of
my self or of my dooinges, (as some do) or of your worshyppes commendable
virtues (as the most do) But I purposely choose rather to let pass the
spreading of that worthy fame which you have ever deserved, then to run in
suspicion of fawning flattery which I ever abhorred.

Therefore once again craving your gentle pardon, and patience in your
ouerlooking this rude Epistle: and wyshing more happiness then my pen can
express to you and your whole retinewe, I rest.

Your worshippes faithful Servant. VV. VV.

A Preface to the noble Poets of England.
AMong the innumerable sorts of English Books, and infinite fardles of
printed pamphlets; wherewith this Country is pestered, all shoppes stuffed,
and every study furnished: the greatest part I think in any one kind, are
such as are either mere Poetical, or which tend in some respect (as either
in matter or form) to Poetry. Of such Books therefore, since I have been one,
that have had a desire to read not the fewest, and because it is an argument,
which men of great learning have no leisure to handle, or at the least having
to do with more serious matters do least regard: If I write something,
concerning what I think of our English Poets, or adventure to set down my
simple judgment of English Poetry, I trust the learned Poets will give me
leave, and vouchsafe my Book passage, as being for the rudeness thereof no
prejudice to their noble studies, but even (as my intent is) an instar cotis to
stir up some other of meet ability, to bestow travel in this matter:
whereby I think we may not only get the means which we yet want, to
discern between good writers and badde, but perhaps also challenge from the
rude multitude of rusticall Rymers, who will be called Poets, the right
practice and orderly course of true Poetry.

It is to be wondered at of all, and is lamented of many, that where as all
kind of good learning, have aspyred to royal dignity and stately grace in
our English tongue, being not only founded, defended, maintained, and
enlarged, but also purged from faults, weeded of errors, and pollished from
barbarousnes, by men of great authority and judgment: only Poetry has
found fewest friends to amend it, those that can, reserving their skyll to
themselves, those that cannot, running headlong upon it, thinking to garnish
it with their devises, but more corrupting it with fantastical errors. What
should be the cause, that our English speech in some of the wyfest men's
judgments, has never attained to any sufficient ripenes, nay not full avoided
the reproach of barbarousnes in Poetry? the rudenes of the Country, or
baseness of wytts: or the course Dialect of the speech? experience utterly
disproueth it to be any of these: what then? surely the canckred enmity of
curious custom: which as it never was great friend to any good learning, so in
this has it grounded in the most, such a negligent persuasion of an
impossibility in matching the best, that the finest wits and most divine
heads, have contented them selves with a base kind of fingering: rather
debasing their faculties, in setting forth their skyll in the coursest manner,
then for breaking custom, they would labor to adorn their Country and
advance their style with the highest and most learned top of true Poetry.
The rudenes or unaptness of our Country to be either none or no hinderaunce,
if reformation were made accordingly, the exquisite excellency in all kinds
of good learning now flourishing among us, inferior to none other nation, may
sufficiently declare.

That there be as sharp and quick wits in England, as ever were among the
peerless Grecians, or renowned Romans, it were a note of no wit at all in
me to deny. And is our speech so course, or our phrase so harshe, that Poetry
cannot therein find a vain whereby it may appear like it self? why should
we think so basely of this? rather then of her sister, I mean Rethoricall
Eloquution, which as they were by birth Twyns, by kind the same, by original
of one descent: so no doubt, as Eloquence has found such favorers, in the
English tongue, as she frequenteth not any more gladly so would Poetrye if
there were the like welcome and entertainment given her by our English Poets,
without question aspyre to wonderful perfection and appear far more
gorgeous and delectable among us. Thus much I am bold to say in behalf of
Poetry, not that I mean to call in question the reverend and learned works
of Poetry, written in our tongue by men of rare judgment, and most excellent
Poets: but even as it were by way of supplication to the famous and learned
Lawre^t Masters of England, that they would but consult one half hour with
their heavenly Muse, what credit they might win to their native speech,
what enormities they might wipe out of English Poetry, what a fit vain they
might frequent, wherein to show forth their worthy faculties: if English
Poetry were truly reformed, and some perfect platform or Prosodia of
versifying were by them ratifyed and set down: either in immitation of
Greeks and Latins, or where it would skant abide the touch of their Rules,
the like observations selected and established by the natural affectation of
the speech. Thus much I say, not to persuade you that are the favorers of
English Poetry but to move it to you: being not the first that have thought
upon this matter, but one that by consent of others, have taken upon me to lay
it once again in your ways, if perhaps you may stumble upon it, and chance to
look so low from your divine cogitations, when your Muse mounteth to the
stars, and ransacketh the Spheres of heaven: whereby perhaps you may take
compassion of noble Poetry, pitifully mangled and defaced, by rude smatterers
and barbarous immitatours of your worthy studies. If the motion be worthy your
regard it is enough to move it, if not, my words would sim, ply prevail in
persuading you, and therefore I rest upon this only request, that of your
courtesies, you will grant passage, under your favorable corrections, for
this my simple censure of English Poetry, wherein if you please to run it
over, you shall know breefely mine opinion of the most part of our accustomed
Poets, and particularly in his place, the little somewhat which I have sifted
out of my weak brain concerning this reformed verfifying.

VV: VV:

A Discourse of English Poetry.
INtending to write some discourse of English Poetry, I think it not amysse
if I speak something generally of Poetry, as, what it is, whence it had the
beginning, and of what estimation it has always been and ought to be among
al sorts of people. Poetry called in Greek (...), being derived from the
Uerbe (...), which signifies in Latin facere in English, to make, may
properly be defined, the art of making: which word as it has always been
especially used of the best of our English Poets, to express yt very faculty
of speaking or writing Poetically: so does it in deed contain most fitly the
whole grace and property of the same, ye more fullye and effectually then any
other English Uerbe. That Poetry is an Art, (or rather a more excellent thing
then can be contained within the compass of Art) though I need not stand
long to prove, both the witness of Horace, who wrote de art Poetica, and of
Terence, who calls it Artem Musicam, and the very natural property thereof
may sufficiently declare: The beginning of it as appears by Plato, was of a
virtuous and most devout purpose, who witnesses, that by occasion of meeting
of a great company of young men, to solemnize ye feasts which were called
Panegeryca, and were wont to be celebrated every fifth year, there, they that
were most pregnant in wytt, and endued with great gyfts of wisdom and
knowledge in Music above the rest did use commonly to make goodly verses,
measured according to the sweetest notes of Music, containing the praise of
some noble virtue, or of immortality, or of some such thing of greatest
estimation: which unto them seemed, so heavenly and joyous a thing, that,
thinking such men to be inspyrde with some divine instinct from heaven, they
called them Vates. So when other among them of the finest wits and aptest
capacities began in imitation of these to frame ditties of lighter matters,
and tuning them to the stroke of some of the pleasantest kind of Music, then
began there to grow a distinction and great diversity between makers and
makers. Whereby (I take it) began this difference: that they which handled in
the audience of the people, grave and necessary matters, were called wise men
or eloquent men, which they meant by Uates: and the rest which sange of love
matters, or other lighter devises alluring unto pleasure and delight, were
called Poetae or makers. Thus it appears, both Eloquence and Poetry to have
had their beginning and original from these exercises, being framed in such
sweet measure of sentences and pleasant harmonic called (...), which is an apt
composition of words or clauses, drawing as it were by force ye hearers ears
even whether soever it lysteth: that Plato affirms therein to be contained
(...) an inchauntment, as it were to persuade them any thing whether they
would or no. And heerehence is said, that men were first withdrawn from a
wild and sauadge kind of life, to ciuillity and gentleness, and ye right
knowledge of humanity by the force of this measurable or tunable speaking.

This opinion shall you find confirmed throughout the whole works of Plato
and Aristotle. And that such was the estimation of this Poetry at those times,
that they supposed all wisdom and knowledge to be included mystically in that
divine instinction, wherewith they thought their Uates to be inspyred.
Whereupon, throughout the noble works of those most excellent Philosophers
before named, are the authorities of Poets very often alleged* And Cicero in
his Tusculane questions is of that mind, that a Poet cannot express verses
abundantly, sufficiently, and fully, neither his eloquence can flow
pleasauntly, or his words sound well and plenteously, without celestial
instinction: which Poets themselves do very often and gladly witness of
themselves, as namely Ovid in 6. Fasto: Est deus in nobis Agitante callescimus
illo. etc. Whereunto I doubt not equally to adioyne the authority of our late
famous English Poet, who wrote the Sheepheards Calender, where lamenting the
decay of Poetry, at these days, says most sweetly to the same. Then make
thee wings of thine aspyring wytt,
And whence thou came fly back to heaven apace. etc.


Whose fine poetical wit, and most exquisite learning, as he showed
abundantly in that piece of work, in my judgment inferior to the works
neither of Theocritus in Greek, nor Virgill in Latin, whom he narrowly
immitateth: so I nothing doubt, but if his other works were common abroad,
which are as I think in ye close custody of certain his friends, we should
have of our own Poets, whom we might match in all respects with the best.
And among all other his works whatsoever, I would wysh to have the sight of
his English Poet, which his friend E. K. did once promise to publishe, which
whether he performed or not, I know not, if he did, my hap has not been so
good as yet to see it.

But to return to the estimation of Poetry. Besides ye great and profitable
fruits contained in Poetry, for the instruction of manners and precepts of
good life (for that was chiefly respected in the first age of Poetry) this is
also added to the eternal commendations of that noble faculty: that Kings and
Princes, great and famous men, did ever encourage, mayntaine, and reward Poets
in all ages: because they were thought only to have the whole power in their
hands, of making men either immortally famous for their valiant exploytes and
virtuous exercises, or perpetually infamous for their vicious lives. Whereupon
it is said of Achilles, that this only vantage he had of Hector, that it was
his fortune to be extolled and remowned by the heavenly verse of Homer. And as
Tully records to be written of Alexander, that with natural tears he wept
over Achilles Tomb, in joy that he conceived at the consideration, how it was
his hap to be honored with so divine a work, as Homers was. Aristotle, a
most prudent and learned Philosopher, being appointed Schoolmaster to the
young Prince Alexander, thought no work so meet to be read unto a King, as
the work of Homer: wherein the young Prince being by him instructed thoroughly,
sound such wonderful delight in the same when he came to maturity, that he
would not only have it with him in all his iourneyes, but in his bed also
under his pyllowe, to delight him and teach him both nights and days. The
same is reported of noble Scipio, who finding the two Books of Homer in the
spoil of King Darius, esteemed them as wonderful precious Iewelles, making
one of them his companion for the night, the other for the day. And not only
was he thus affected to ye one piece or part of Poetry, but so generally he
loved the professors thereof, that in his most serious affairs, and hottest
wars against Numantia and Carthage, he could no whitte be without that old
Poet Ennius in his company. But to speak of all those noble and wise Princes,
who bare special favor and countenance to Poets, were tedious, and would
require a rehearsal of all such, in whose time there grew any to credit and
estimation in that faculty. Thus far therefore may suffice for the estimation
of Poets. Now I think most meet, to speak somewhat, concerning what has
been the use of Poetry, and wherein it rightly consisted, and whereof
consequently it obtained such estimation.

To begin therefore with the first that was first worthelye memorable in the
excellent gift of Poetrye, the best writers agree that it was Orpheus, who by
the sweet gift of his heavenly Poetry, withdrew men from raungyng uncertainly,
and wandering brutishly about, and made them gather together, and keep company,
made houses, and kept fellowshippe together, who therefore is reported (as
Horace says) to assuage the fierceness of Tigers, and move the hard Flynts.
After him was Amphion, who was the first that caused Cities to be builded,
and men therein to live decently and orderly according to law and right. Next,
was Tyrtaeus, who began to practice warlike defenses, to keep back enemies,
and save themselves from invasion of foes. In this place I think were most
convenient to rehearse that ancient Poet Pyndarus: but of the certain time
wherein he flourished, I am not very certain: but of the place where he
continued most, it should seem to be the City of Thebes, by Pliny who
reports, that Alexander in sacking the same City, would not suffer the
house wherein he dwelt to be spoiled as all the rest were. After these was
Homer, who as it were in one sum comprehended all knowledge, wisdom,
learning, and policy, that was incident to the capacity of man. And who so
list to take view of his two Books, one of his Iliades, the other his
Odissea, shall thoroughly perceive what the right use of Poetry is: which
indeed is to mingle profit with pleasure, and so to delight the Reader with
pleasantnes of his Art, as in ye mean time, his mind may be well instructed
with knowledge and wisdom. For so did that worthy Poet frame those his two
works, that in reading the first, that is his Iliads, by declaring and setting
forth so lively the Grecians assembly against Troy, together with their
prowess and fortitude against their foes, a Prince shall learn not only
courage, and valiantness, but discretion also and policy to encounter with
his enemies, yea a perfect form of wise consultations, with his Captains, and
exhortations to the people, with other infinite commodities.

Again, in the other part, wherein are described the manifold and dangerous
adventures of Ulysses, may a man learn many noble virtues: and also learn to
escape and avoid the subtle practices, and perrilous entrappinges of naughty
persons: and not only this, but in what sort also he may deal to know and
perceive the affections of those which be near unto him, and most familiar
with him, the better to put them in trust with his matters of weight and
importance. Therefore I may boldly set down this to be the truest,
auncientest and best kind of Poetry, to direct ones endeavor always to that
mark, that with delight they may evermore adioyne commodity to their Readers:
which because I ground upon Homer the Prince of all Poets, therefore have I
alleged the order of his work, as an authority sufficiently proouing this
assertion.

Now what other Poets which followed him, and been of greatest fame, have
done for the most part in their several works, I will briefly, and as my
slender ability will serve me declare. But by my leave, I must content my self
to speak not of all, but of such as my self have seen, and been best
acquainted withal, and those not all nor the most part of the ancient
Grecians, of whom I know not how many there were, but these of the Latinists,
which are of greatest fame and most obuious among us.

Thus much I can say, that Aristotle reports none to have greatly flourished
in Greece, at least wise not left behynd them any notable memorial, before the
time of Homer. And Tully says as much, that there were none wrytt worth the
reading twyce in the Roman tongue, before ye Poet Ennius. And surely as the
very sum or cheifest essence of Poetry, did always for the most part consist
in delighting the readers or hearers with pleasure, so as the number of Poets
increased, they still inclyned this way rather then the other, so that most of
them had special regard, to the pleasantness of their fine conceytes,
whereby they might draw men's minds into admiration of their inventions, more
then they had to the profitte or commoditye that the Readers should reap by
their works. And thus as I suppose came it to pass among them, that for the
most part of them, they would not write one work contayuing some serious
matter: but for the same they would likewise power forth as much of some wanton
or laciuious invention. Yet some of the auncientest sort of Grecians, as it
seems were not so much disposed to vain delectation: as Aristotle says of
Empedocles, that in his judgment he was only a natural Philosopher, no Poet
at all, nor that he was like unto Homer in any thing but his meeter, or number
of feet, that is, that he wrote in verse. After the time of Homer, there
began the first Comedy writers, who compyled their works in a better style
which continued not long, before it was erpelled by penalty, for scoffing too
broad at men's manners, and the privy reuengements which the Poets used
against their ill wyllers. Among these was Eupolis, Cratinus, and Aristophenes,
but afterward the order of this writing Comedies was reformed and made more
plausible: then writ Plato, Comicus, Menander, and I know not who more.

There be many most profitable works, of like antiquity, or rather before
them, of the Tragedy writers: as of Euripides, and Sophocles, then was there
Phocitides and Theagines, with many other: which Tragedies had their invention
by one Thespis, and were pollished and amended by AEschitus. The profitte or
discommoditie which aryseth by the use of these Comedies and Tragedies, which
is most, has been long in controversy, and is sore urged among us at these
days: what I think of the same, perhaps I shall breefely declare anon.

Now concerning the Poets which wrote in homely manner, as they pretended, but
indeed, with great pythe and learned judgment, such as were the writers of
Sheepeheards talk and of husbandly precepts, who were among the Grecians that
excelled, besides Theocritus and Hesiodus I know not, of who^ the first, what
profitable works he left to posterity, besides his Idillia, or contentions of
Goteheards, tending most to delight, and pretty inventions, I can not tell. The
other, no doubt for his Argument he took in hand, dealt very learnedly and
profitably, that is, in precepts of Husbandry, but yet so as he myred much
wanton stuff among the rest.

The first writers of Poetry among the Latins, should seem to be those,
which excelled in the framing of Commedies, and that they continued a long time
without any notable memory of other Poets. Among whom, the cheifest that we may
see or hear tell of, were these. Ennins, Caecilius, Naeuius, Licinius,
Attilius, Turpitius, Trabea, Luscius, Plautus, and Terens, Of whom these two
last named, have been ever since their time most famous, and to these days
are esteemed, as great helps and furtheraunces to the obtaining of good
Letters. But here cannot I stay to speak of the most famous, renowned and
excellent, that ever writ among the Latin Poets, P. Virgill, who performed
the very same in that tongue, which Homer had done in Greek: or rather better
if better might as Sex. Propert. in his Elegies gallantly records in his
praise. Nescio quid magis nascitur Iliade. Under the person of AEneas he
expresses the valor of a worthy Captain and valiant Governor, together
with the perrilous adventures of war, and polliticke devises at all assayes.
And as he immitateth Homer in that work, so does he likewise follow the very
steps of Theocritus, in his most pythy inventions of his AEglogues: and
likewise Hesiodus in his Georgicks or books of Husbandry, but yet more
gravely, and in a more decent style. But not withstanding his sage gravity and
wonderful wisdom, did he not altogether restrain his vain, but that he
would have a rast at some wanton and skant comely an Argument, if indeed such
triflles as be fathered upon him were his own. There followed after him, very
many rare and excellent Poets, whereof the most part writ light matters, as
Epigrammes and Elegies, with much pleasant dalliance, among whom may be accoun
ted Propertius, Tibullus, Catullus, with diverse whom Ovid speaks of in diverse
places of his works. Then are there two Hystoricall Poets, no less profitable
then delightsome to be read: Silius and Lucanus: the one declaring the valiant
prowess of two noble Captains, one enemy to the other, that is, Scipio and
Hamball: the other likewise, the fortitude of two expert warriors (yet more
lamentably then the other because these wars were civil) Pompey and Caesar.
The next in time (but as most men do account, and so did he himself) the
second in dignity, we well adioyne Ovid, a most learned, and erquisite Poet.
The work of greatest profitte which he wrote, was his Book of Metamorphosis,
which though it consisted of feigned Fables for the most part, and poetical
inventions, yet being moralized according to his meaning, and the truth of
every tale being discovered, it is a work of exceeding wisdom and sound
judgment. If one list in like manner, to have knowledge and perfect
intelligence of those rytes and ceremonies which were observed after the
Religion of the Heathen, no more profitable work for that purpose, then his
bookess De fastis. The rest of his dooinges, though they tend to the vain
delights of love and dalliaunce (except his Tristibus, wherein he bewayleth his
exile) yet surely are mixed with much good counsel and prositable lessons if
they be wisely and narrowly read. After his time I know no work of any great
fame, till the time of Horace, a Poet not of the smoothest style, but in
sharpness of wytt inferior to none, and one to whom all the rest both before
his time and since, are very much beholding. About the same time were Iuuenall
and Persius, then Martial, Seneca a most excellent writer of Tragedies,
Boethius, Lucretius, Statius, Val: Fiaccus, Manilius, Ausonius, Claudian, and
many other, whose just times and several works to speak of in this place,
were neither much needful, nor altogether tolerable, because I purposed an
other argument. Only. I will add two of later times, yet not far inferior
to the most of them aforesaid, Pallengenius, and Bap: Man^uanus, and for a
singular gift in a sweet Heroical verse, match with them Chr. Oclan. the
Author of our Anglorum Praelia But now least I stray too far from my
puopose, I will come to our English Poets, to whom I would I were able to yield
their deserved commendations: and affoorde them that censure, which I know many
would, which can better, if they were now to write in my steed.

I know no memorable work written by any Poet in our English speech, until
twenty years past: where although Learning was not generally decade at any
time, especially since the Conquest of King William Duke of Normandy, as it may
appear by many famous works and learned books (though not of this kind)
written by Bishops and others: yet surely that Poetry was in small price
among them, it is very manifest, and no great maruayle, for even that light of
Grieke and Latin Poets which they had, they much contemned, as appears by
their rude versifying, which of long time was used (a barbarous use it was)
wherein they converted the natural property of the sweet Latin verse, to be a
balde kind of ryming, thinking nothing to be learnedly written in verse, which
fell not out in ryme, that is, in words whereof the middle word of each verse
should sound a like with the last, or of two verses, the end of both should
fall in the like letters, as thus. O male viuentes, versus audite sequentes.
And thus likewise. Propter haec et alia dogmata doctorum.
Reor esse melius et magis decorum:
Quisque suam habeat, et non proximorum.


This brutish Poetry, though it had not the beginning in this Country, yet so
has it been affected here, that the infection thereof would never (nor I
think ever will) be rooted up again: I mean this tynkerly verse which we
call ryme: Master Ascham says, that it first began to be followed and
maintained among the Hunnes and Gothians, and other barbarous Nations, who with
the decay of all good learning, brought it into Italy: from thence it came into
France, and so to Germany, at last conveyed into England, by men indeed of
great wisdom and learning, but not considerate nor circum spect in that
behalf. But of this I must entreat more hereafter.

Henry the first King of that name in England, is wonderfully ertolled, in all
ancient Records of memory, for his singular good learning, in all kind of
noble studies, in so much as he was named by his surname Beaucleark, as much to
say, as Fayreclerke (whereof perhaps came ye name of Fayreclowe) what
knowledge he attained in the skyll of Poetry, I am not able to say, I report
his name for proof, that learning in this Country was not little esteemed of
at that rude time, and that like it is, among other studies, a King would not
neglect the faculty of Poetry. The first of our English Poets that I have heard
of, was John Gower, about the time of king Rychard the second, as it should
seem by certain conjectures both a Knight, and questionless a singular well
learned man: whose works I could wysh they were all whole and perfect among
us, for no doubt they contained very much deep knowledge and delight: which
may be gathered by his friend Chawcer, who speaks of him oftentimes, in diuer
places of his works. Chawcer, who for that excellent fame which he obtained
in his Poetry, was always accounted the God of English Poets (such a title for
honors sake has been given him) was nert after, if not equal in time to
Gower: and has left many works, both for delight and profitable knowledge,
far exceeding any other that as yet ever s^^^e his time directed their
studies that way. Though the manner of his style may seem blunt and course to
many fine English ears at these days, yet in truth, if it be equally
pondered, and with good judgment advised, and confirmed with the time wherein
he wrote, a man shall perceive thereby even a true picture or perfect shape of
a right Poet. He by his delightsome vain, so gulled the ears of men with his
devises, that, although corruption bare such sway in most matters, that
learning and truth might skant be admitted to show it self, yet without
controllment, might he gyrde at the vices and abuses of all states, and gawle
with very sharp and eger inventions, which he did so learnedly and pleasantly,
that none therefore would call him into question. For such was his bold
spyrit, that what enormities he saw in any, he would not spare to pay them
home, either in plain words, or else in some pretty and pleasant covert, that
the simplest might espy him.

Near in time unto him was Lydgate a Poet, surely for good proportion of his
verse, and meetely current style, as the time affoorded comparable with
Chawcer, yet more occupied in supersticious and odd matters, then was
requesite in so good a wit: which, though he handled them commendably, yet
the matters themselves being not so commendable, his estimation has been the
less. The next of our ancient Poets, that I can tell of, I suppose to be
Pierce Ploughman, who in his dooinges is somewhat harshe and obscure, but
indeed a very pithy writer, and (to his commendation I speak it) was the
first that I have seen, that observed ye quantity of our verse without the
curiosity of Ryme.

Since these I know none other till the time of Skeleton, who writ in the time
of king Henry the eight, who as indeed he obtained the Lawrell-Garland, so may
I with good right yield him the title of a Poet: he was doubtless a pleasant
conceyted fellow, and of a very sharp wit, exceeding bold, and would nyppe
to the very quick where he once set hold. Next him I think I may place
master George Gaskoyne, as pain full a Soldier in the affairs of his Prince
and Country, as he was a wytty Poet in his writing: whose commendations,
because I found in one of better judgment then my self, I will set down his
words, and suppress mine own, of him thus writes E. K. upon the ninth
AEglogue of the new Poet.

Master George Gaskoyne a wytty Gentleman, and the very chief of our late
rymers, who and if some parts of learning wanted not (albeit is well known he
altogether wanted not learning) no doubt would have attained to the excellencye
of those famous Poets. For gyfts of wytt, and natural prompt nes appear in
him abundantly. I might next speak of the diverse works of the old Earl of
Surrey: of the L. Vaus, of Norton, of Bristow, Edwardes, Tusser, Churchyard.
Will: Hunnis: Haiwood: Sand: Hill: S. Y. M. D. and many others, but to speak
of their several gyfts, and abundant skyll showed forth by them in many
pretty and learned works, would make my discourse much more tedious.

I may not omit the deserved commendations of many honorable and noble
Lords, and Gentlemen, in her Majesty's Court, which in the rare devises of
Poetry, have been and yet are most excellent skylfull, among whom, the right
honorable Earl of Oxford may challenge to him self the title of ye most
excellent among the rest. I can no longer forget those learned Gentlemen which
took such profitable pains in translating the Latin Poets into our English
tongue, whose deserts in that behalf are more then I can utter. Among these,
I ever esteemed, and while I live, in my conceyt I shall account Master D.
Phaer: without doubt the best: who as indeed he had the best piece of Poetry
whereon to set a most gallant verse, so performed he it accordingly, and in
such sort, as in my conscience I think would scarcely be done again, if it
were to do again. Notwithstanding, I speak it but as mine own fancy, not
prejudicial to those that list to think otherwise. His work whereof I
speak, is the englishing of AEneidos of Virgill, so far forth as it pleased
God to spare him life, which was to the half part of the tenth Book, the rest
being since with no less commendations finished, by that worthy scholar and
famous Physician Master Thomas Twyne.

Equally with him may I well adioyne Master Arthur Golding, for his labor in
englishing Ouids Metamorphosis, for which Gentleman, surely our Country has
for many respects greatly to give God thanks: as for him which has taken
infinite pains without ceasing, trauelleth as yet indefatigably, and is
addicted without society, by his continual labor, to profit this nation and
speech in all kind of good learning. The next, very well deserves Master
Barnabe Googe to be placed, as a painful furtherer of learning: his help to
Poetry besides his own devises, as the translating of Pallengenius. Lodiac.
Abraham Flemming as in many pretty Poesis of his own, so in translating has
done to his commendations. To whom I would here adioyne one of his name, whom
I know to have excelled, as well in all kind of learning as in Poetry most
especially, and would appear so, if the dainty morselles, and fine poetical
inventions of his, were as common abroad as I know they be among some of his
friends. I will crave leave of the laudable Authors of Seneca in English, of
the other parts of Ovid, of Horace, of Mantuan, and diverse other, because I
would hasten to end this rehearsal, perhaps offensive to some, whom either
by forgetfulness, or want of knowledge, I must needs over pass.

And once again, I am humbly to desire pardon of the learned company of
Gentlemen Scholars, and students of the Uniuersities, and Innes of Court, if
I omit their several commendations in this place, which I know a great
number of them have worthily deserved, in many rare devises, and singular
inventions of Poetry: for neither has it been my good hap, to have seen
all which I have heard of, neither is my abiding in such place, where I can
with facility get knowledge of their works.

One Gentleman notwithstanding among them may I not over slyppe, so far
reaches his fame, and so worthy is he, if he have not already, to wear the
Laurel wreathe, Master George VVhetstone, a man singularly well skyld in this
facul ty of Poetry: To him I will join Anthony Monday, an earnost traveler
in this art, and in whose name I have seen very excellent works, among which
surely, the most exquisite vain of a witty poetical head is showed in the
sweet sobs of Sheepheardes and Nymphs: a work well worthy to be viewed, and
to be esteemed as very rare Poetry. With these I may place John Graunge,
Knight, VVylmott, Darrell, F. C. F. K. G. B. and many other, whose names come
not now to my remembrance.

This place have I purposely reserved for one, who if not only, yet in my
judgment principally deserves the title of the rightest English Poet, that
ever I read: that is, the Author of the Sheepeheardes Calendar, entitled to
the worthy Gentleman Master Phillip Sydney: whether it was Master Sp. or what
rare Scholar in Pembrooke Hall soever, because himself and his friends, for
what respect I know not, would not reveal it, I force not greatly to set
down: sorry I am that I can not find none other with whom I might couple him
in this Catalogue, in his rare gift of Poetry: although one there is, though
now long since, seriously occupied in grauer studies, (Master Gabriell Haruey)
yet, as he was once his most special freende and fellow Poet, so because he
has taken such pains, not only in his Latin Poetry (for which he enjoyed
great com mendations of the best both in judgment and dignity in this Realm)
but also to reform our English verse, and to beautify the same with brave
devises, o which I think the chief lie bid in hateful obscurity: therefore
will I adventure to set them together, as two of the rarest wits, and
learned masters of Poetry in England. Whose worthy and notable skyl in this
faculty, I would wysh if their high dignities and serious businesses would
permit, they would still grant to be a furtheraunce to that reformed kind of
Poetry, which Master Haruey did once begin to ratify: and surely in mine
opinion, if he had chosen some grauer matter, and handled but with half that
skyll, which I know he could have done, and not powered it forth at a
venture, as a thing between jest and earnest, it had taken greater effect
then it did.

As for the other Gentleman, if it would please him or his friends to let
those excellent Poemes, whereof I know he has plenty, come abroad, as his
Dreams, his Legends, his Court of Cupid, his English Poet with other: he
should not only stay the rude pens of my self and others, but-also satisfye
the thirsty desires of many which desire nothing more, then to see more of his
rare inventions. If I join to Master Haruey his two Brethren, I am assured,
though they be both busied with great and weighty callinges (the one a godly
and learned Divine, the other a famous and skylfull Physician) yet if they
lysted to set to their helping hands to Poetry, they would as much beautify
and adorn it as any others.

If I let pass the vncountable rabble of ryming Ballet makers, and compylers
of senseless sonets, who be most busy, to stuff every stall full of gross
devises and unlearned Pamphlets: I trust I shall with the best sort be held
excused. For though many such can frame an Alehouse song of five or six score
verses, hobbling upon some tune of a Northen Iygge, or Robyn hoode, or La
lubber etc. And perhaps observe just number of sillables, eight in one line,
six in an other, and there withal an A to make a iercke in the end: yet if
these might be accounted Poets (as it is said some of them make means to be
promoted to ye Laurel) surely we shall shortly have whole swarms of Poets:
and every one that can frame a Book in Ryme, though for want of matter, it be
but in commendations of Copper noses or Bottle Ale, will catch at the Garlande
due to Poets: whose potticall poetical (I should say) heads, I would wyshe,
at their worshipful comencements might in steed of Laurel; be gorgiously
garnished with fair green Barley, in token of their good affection to our
English Malt. One speaks thus homely of them, with whose words I will
content my self for this time, because I would not be too broad with them
in mine own speech.

In regard (he means of the learned framing the new Poets works which
writ the Sheepheardes Calender.) I scorn and spue out the rakehelly rout of
our ragged Kymers, (for so themselves use to hunt the Letter) which without
learning boaste, without judgment iangle, without reason rage and fume, as if
some instinct of poetical spyrite had newly ranished them, above the meanness
of common capacity. And being in the midst of all their bravery, suddenly for
want of matter or of Kyme, or having forgotten their former conceyt, they seem
to be so payned and traveled in their remembrance, as it were a woman in
Chyldbyrth, or as that same Pythia when the trance came upon her. Os rabidum
fera corda domans etc.

THus far forth have I adventured to set down part of my simple judgment
concerning those Poets, with whom for the most part I have been acquainted
through mine own reading: which though it may seem something impertinent to
the title of my Book, yet I trust the courteous Keaders will pardon me,
considering that poetry is not of that ground and antiquity in our English
tongue, but that speaking thereof only as it is English, would seem like unto
the drawing of ones pycture without a head.

Now therefore by your gentle patience, will I with like breuity make trial,
what I can say concerning our English Poetry, first in the matter thereof,
then in the form, that is, the manner of our verse: yet so as I must evermore
have recourse to those times and writers, whereon the English poetry takes as
it were the descent and proprietye. English Poetry therefore being considered
according to common custom and ancient use, is, where any work is learned ly
compiled in measurable speech, and framed in words containing number or
proportion of just syllables, delighting the readers or hearers as well by the
apt and decent framing of words in equal resemblance of quantity, commonly
called verse, as by the skyllfull handling of the matter whereof it is
entreated. I spoke somewhat of the beginning of this measuring of words in
just number, taken out of Plato: and indeed the regard of true quantity in
Letters and syllables, seems not to have been much urged before the time of
Homer in Greece, as Aristotle witnesses.

The matters whereof verses were first made, were either erhortations to
virtue, dehortations from vices, or the praises of some laudable thing. From
thence they began to use them in erercises of immitating some virtuous and
wise man at their feasts: where as some one should be appointed to represent
an other man's person of high estimation, and he sang fine ditties and witty
sentences, tunably to their Music notes. Of this sprang the first kind of
Comedyes, when they began to bring into these ercercises, more persons then
one, whose speeches were devised Dyalogue wise, in aunswering one another. And
of such like erercises, or as some will needs have it, long before the other,
began the first Tragedies, and were so called of (...), because the Ador when
he began to play his part, slew and offered a Goat to their Goddess: but
Commedies took their name of (...) comessatum ire; to go a feasting, because
they used to go in procession with their sport about the Cities and Villages,
mingling much pleasant mirth with their grave Religion, and feasting
cheerfully together with as great joy as might be devised. But not long after
(as one delight draws another) they began to invent new persons and new
matters for their Comedies, such as the deuisers thought meetest to please the
peoples vain: And from these, they began to present in shapes of men, the
natures of virtues and vices, and affections and quallities incident to men, as
Justice, Temperance, Poverty, Wrath, Uengeaunce, Sloth, Ualiantnes and such
like; as may appear by the ancient works of Aristophanes. There grew at
last to be a greater diuersitye between Tragedy writers and Comedy writers,
the one expressing only sorrowful and lamentable Hystories, bringing in the
persons of Gods and Goddesses, Kings and Queens, and great states, whose
parts were cheefely to express most miserable calamities, and dreadful
chances, which increased worse and worse, till they came to the most woeful
plight that might be devised.

The Comedies on the other side, were directed to a contrary end, which
beginning doubtfully, drew to some trouble or turmoyle, and by some lucky
chance always ended to the joy and appeasement of all parties. This
distinction grew as some hold opinion, by immitation of the works of Homer:
for out of his Iliads, the Tragedy writers found dreadful events, whereon to
frame their matters, and the other out of his Odyssea took arguments of
delight, and pleasant ^nding after dangerous and troublesome doubts. So that,
though there be many sorts of poetical wrytings, and Poetry is not debarred
from any matter, which may be expressed by pen or speech, yet for the better
understanding, and breefer method of this discourse, I may comprehend the same
in three sorts, which are, Comicall, Tragical, Historical. Under the first,
may be contained all such Epigrammes, Elegies and delectable ditties, which
Poets have devised respecting only the delight thereof: in the second, all
doleful complaynts, lamentable chances, and what soever is poetically
expressed in sorrow and heaviness. In the third, we may comprise, the rest of
all such matters, which as indifferent between the other two, do commonly
occupy the pens of Poets: such, are the poetical com pyling of Chronicles,
the freendly greetings between friends, and very many sorts besides, which
for the better destinction may be referred to one of these three kinds of
Poetry. But once again, least my discourse run too far awry, will I buckle
my self more nearer to English Poetry: the use whereof, because it is nothing
different from any other, I think best to confirm by the testimony of Horace,
a man worthy to bear authoin this matter: whose very opinion is this, that the
perfect perfection of poetry is this, to mingle delight with profitt in such
wise, that a Reader might by his reading be pertaker of both, which though I
touched in the beginning, yet I thought good to allege in this place for more
confirmation thereof some of his own words. In his treatise de art Poetica,
thus he says. Aut prodesse volunt aut delectare poetae,
Aut simul et iucunda et idonea dicere vitae.


As much to say: All Poets desire either by their works to profitt or delight
men, or else to join both profitable and pleasant lessons together for the
instruction of life. And again. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci,
Lectorum delectando pariterque monendo.


That is. He misseth nothing of his mark which joins profitt with delight,
as well delighting his Readers, as profiting them with counsel. And that whole
Epistle which he wryt of his Art of Poetry, among all the parts thereof,
runs chiefly upon this, that whether the argument which the Poet
handles, be of things done, or fained inventions, yet that they should bear
such an Image of truth, that as they delight they may likewise profitt. For
these are his words. Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris. Let things
that are feigned for pleasures sake, have a near resemblance of ye truth. This
precept may you perceive to be most duly observed of Chawcer: for who could
with more delight, prescribe such whole some counsel and sage advise, where he
seems only to respect the profitte of his lessons and instructions? or who
could with greater wisdom, or more pithie skill, unfold such pleasant and
delightsome matters of mirth, as though they respected nothing, but the telling
of a merry tale? so that this is the very ground of right poetry, to give
profitable counsel, yet so as it must be mingled with delight. For among all
the ancient works of poetry, though the most of them incline much to that
part of delighting men with pleasant matters of small importannce, yet even in
the vainest trifles among them, there is not forgotten some profitable
counsel, which a man may learn, either by flat precepts which therein are
prescribed, or by loathing such vile vices, the enormities whereof they
largely discover. For surely, I am of this opinion, that the wantonest Poets
of all, in their mest laciuious works wherein they busied themselves, sought
rather by that means to withdraw men's minds (especially the best natures)
from such foul vices, then to allure them to embrace such beastly follies as
they detected.

Horace speaking of the general duties of Poets, says, Os tenerum pueri
balbumque poeta fugitat, and many more words concerning the profitte to be
had out of Poets, which because I have some of them comprised into an English
translation of that learned and famous Knight, Sir Thomas Elyot, I will set
down his words. The Poet fashioneth by some pleasant mean,
The speech of children stable and unsure:
Gulling their ears from words and things unclean,
Giving to them precepts that are pure:
Rebuking envy and wrath if it dure:
Things well done he can by example commend,
To needy and sick he does also his cure
To recomfort if ought he can amend.


And many other like words are in that place of Horace to like effect.
Therefore poetry, as it is of it self, without abuse is not only not
unprofitable to the lives and studies of men, but wonderful commendable and
of great excellency. For nothing can be more acceptable to men, or rather to
be wished, the^ sweet allurements to virtues, and commodious caucates from
vices? of which Poetry is exceeding plentiful, pouring into gentle wits, not
roughly and tirannicallie, but as it were with a loving authority. Now if the
ill and indecent prouocations, whereof some unbridled wits take occasion by
the reading of laciuious Poemes, be objected: such as are Ouids love Books,
and Elegies, Tibullus, Catullus, and Martials works, with the Comedies for the
most part of Plautus and Terence: I think it easily answered. For though it
may not justly be denied, that these works are indeed very Poetry, yet that
Poetry in them is not the essential or formal matter or cause of the hurt
therein might be affirmed, and although that reason should come short, yet this
might be sufficient, that the works themselves do not corrupt, but the abuse
of the users, who vndamaging their own dispositions, by reading the
discoueries of vices, resemble foolish folk, who coming into a Garden without
any choice or circumspectio^ tread down the fairest flowers, and wilfully
thrust their fingers among the nettles.

And surely to speak what I verelie think, this is mine opinion: that one
having sufficient skyll, to read and understand those works, and yet no stay
of himself to avoid incon ueniences, which the remembrance of unlawful
things may stir up in his mind, he, in my judgment, is wholly to be
reputed a laciuious disposed person, whom the recital of sins whether it be
in a good work or a badde, or upon what occasion soever, will not stay him
but provoke him further unto them. Contrariwise, what good lessons the wary
and skillful Readers shall pick out of the very worst of them, if they list to
take any heed, and read them not of an intent to be made the worse by them,
you may see by these few sentences, which the foresaid Sir Thomas Elyott
gathered as he says at all auentures, entreating of the like argument. First
Plautus in commendations of virtue, has such like words. Verily virtue does
all things excel,
For if liberty, health living or substance,
Our Country our parents, and children do well,
It happens by virtue: she does all advance,
Virtue has all things under governance:
And in whom of virtue is found great plenty,
Any thing that is good may never be dainty.
Terence, in Eunucho has a profitable speech, in blasin^ forth the fashions
of harlots, before the eyes of young men. Thus says Parmeno. In this thing I
tryumphe in mine own conceit,
That I have found for all young men the way,
How they of Harlots shall know the deceit,
Their wits and manners: that thereby they may
Them perpetually hate, for so much as they
Out of their own houses be fresh and delicate,
Feeding curiously: at home all day
Living beggarly in most wretched estate.


And many more words of the same matter, but which may be gathered by these
few.

Ovid in his most wanton Books of love, and the remedies thereof, has very
many pithie and wise sentences, which a beedefull Reader may mark, and chose
out from ye other stuff. This is one. Time is a medicine if it shall profitt,
Wine given out of time may be annoyaunce.
A man shall irritat vice if he prohibitt,
When time is not meet unto his vtteraunce.
Therefore if thou yet by counsel art recuperable,
Fly thou from idleness and ever be stable.


Martial, a most dissolute writer among all other, yet not without many grave
and prudent speeches, as this is one worthy to be marked of these fond youths
which entangle their wytts in raging love, who stepping once over shoes in
their fancyes, never rest plunging till they be over head and ears in their
folly. If thou wylt-eschewe bitter adventure.
And avoid the annoyance of a pensifull hare,
Set in no one person all wholly thy pleasure,
The less may thou joy, but the less shall thou smart.


These are but few gathered out by hap, yet sufficient to show that the
wise and circumspect Readers may find very many profitable lessons, dispersed
in the ^orkes, neither take any harm by reading such Poemes, but good, if they
will themselves. Nevertheless, I would not be thought to hold opinion, that the
reading of them is so tolerable, as that there need no respect to be had in
making choice of readers or hearers: for if they be prohibited from the tender
and unconstant wits of children and young minds, I think it not without great
reason: neither am I of that deuillish opinion, of which some there are, and
have been in England, who having charge of youth to instruct them in learning,
have especially made choice of such un childish stuff, to read unto young
Scholars, as it should seem of some filthy purpose, wylfully to corrupt
their tender minds, and prepare them the more ready for their loathsome dyetts.

For as it is said of that impudent work of Luciane, a man were better to
read none of it then all of it, so think I that these works are rather to be
kept altogether from children, the^ they should have free liberty to read
them, before they be meet either of their own discretion or by heedefull
instruction, to make choice of the good from the badde. As-for our English
Poetry, I know no such perilous pieces (except a few balde ditties made over
the Beer potts, which are nothing less then Poetry) which any man may use
and read without damage or danger: which indeed is less to be meruailed at
among us, then among the old Latins and Greeks, Considering that
Christianity may be a state to such illecibrous works and inventions, as among
them (for their Art sake) might obtain passage.

Now will I speak some what, of that princely part of Poetry, wherein are
displaied the noble acts and valiant exploits of puissaunt Captains, expert
soldiers, wise men, with the famous reports of ancient times, such as are
the Heroycall works of Homer in Greek, and the heavenly verse of Virgils
AEneidos in Latin: which works, comprehending as it were the sum and
ground of all Poetry, are verelie and incon^parably the best of all other. To
these, though we have no English work aunswerable, in respect of the glorious
ornaments of gallant handling: yet our ancient Chroniclers and reporters of
our Country affairs, come most near them: and no doubt, if such regard of
our English speech, and curious handling of our verse, had been long since
thought upon, and from time to time been pollished and bettered by men of
learning, judgment, and authority, it would ere this, have matched them in all
respects. A manifest example thereof, may be the great good grace and sweet
vain, which Eloquence has attained in our speech, because it has had the
help of such rare and singular wits, as from time to time might still add
some amendment to the same. Among whom I think there is none that. will
gainsay, but Master John Lilly has deserved most high commendations, as he
which has stepped one step further therein then any either before or since he
first began the wyttie discourse of his Euphues. Whose works, surely in
respect of his singular eloquence and brave composition of apt words and
sentences, let the learned examine and make trial thereof thorough all the
parts of Rethoricke, in fit phrases, in pithy sentences, in gallant tropes,
in flowing speech, in plain sense, and surely in my judgment, I think he
will yield him that verdict, which Quintilian gives of both the best Drators
Demosthenes and Tully, that from the one, nothing may be taken away, to the
other, nothing may be added. But a more nearer example to prove my former
assertion true, (I mean ye meetnesse of our speech to receive the best form
of Poetry) may be taken by conference of that famous translation of Master D.
Phaer with the coppie it self, who soever please with courteous judgment but
a little to compare and mark them both together: and weigh with himself,
whether the English tongue might by little and little be brought to the very
majesty of a right Heroical verse. First you may mark, how Virgill always
^itteth his matter in hand with words agreeable unto the same affection,
which he expresses, as in his Tragical exclamations, what pathe^all speeches
he frames? in his com fortable consolations, how smoothely his verse runs?
in his dreadful battayles, and ^reery byckerments of warress, how bygge and
boystrous his words sound? and the like notes in all parts of his work may
be observed. Which excellent grace and comely kind of choice, if the
translatour has not hitte very near in our course English phrase judge
uprightly: we will confer some of the places, not picked out for the
purpose, but such as I took turning over the Book at randon. When the Troyans
were so tossed about in tempestious wether, caused by AEolus at AEunoes request,
and driven upon the coaste of Afric with a very near escape of their lives:
AEneas after he had gone a land and killed plenty of victuals for his company
of Soldiers, he divided the same among them, and thus lovingly and sweetly
he comforted them. AEn. Lib. 1. -et dictis moerentia pectora mulcet
O socij (neque ignari sumus ante malorum)
O pa^ grau^ora: dabit deus his quoque finem.
Uos et scyllaeam rabiem, penitusque sonantes,
Accestis scopulos: vos et cyclopea saxa
Experti, reuocate animos, maestumque timorem
Mittite. forsan et haec olim meminisse i^uabit.
Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum,
Tendimus in Latium: seeds vbi fata quietas
Ostendunt, illic fas regna resurgere troiae.
Durate, et vosmet rebus seruate secundis.
Talia v^ce refert, curisque ingentibus aeger
Spem vuliu simulat, premit altum cord dolor^m.


Translated thus. And then to cheer their heavy barts with these words he bim
bent.
O Mates (quoth he) that many a woe have bidden and borne ere thvs,
Worse have we seen, and this also shall end when Gods will is.
Through Sylla rage (ye wott) and through the roaring rocks we past,
Though Cyclops shore was full of fear, yet came we through at last.
Pluck up your hearts, and drive from thence both fear and care away
To think on this may pleasure be perhapps another day.
By pains and many a danger sore, by sundry chance we wend,
To come to Italy, where we trust to find our resting end:
And where the destnyes have decreed Troyes kingdom eft to rise.
Be bold and harden now your hearts, take ease while ease applies
Thus spoke he tho, but in his heart huge cares had him oppressed,
Dissembling hope with outward eyes full heavy was his breast.


Again, mark the wounding of Dido in love with AEneas, with how ^hoyse
words it is pithily described, both by the Poet and the translator in the
beginning of the fourth book. At Regina graui iamdudum saucia cura
Uulnus alit venis, et caeco carpitur igni, etc.
By this time perced satte the Queen so sore with loves desire,
Her wound in every vain she feeds, she fryes in secret fire.
The manhood of the manfull often, full often his famous line
She does reuolue, and from her thought his face cannot untwine.
His countnaunce deep she draws and fired fast she bears in breast,
His words also, nor to her careful heart can come no rest.


And in many places of the fourth book is the same matter so gallantly
prosecuted in sweet words, as in mine opinion the copy it self goes no
whit beyond it.

Compare them likewise in the woeful and lamentable cries of the Queen for
the departure of AEneas, toward the end of that Book. Terque quaterque manu
pectus percussa decorum,
Flauentesque abscissa comas, proh Jupiter, ibit?
Hic ait, ^t nostris illuserit aduena Regnis? etc.
Three times her hands she bet, and three times struck her comely breast,
Her golden hair she tare and frantiklike with mood oppressed,
She cryde, O Jupiter, O God, quoth she, and shall a go?
Indeed? and shall a flowte me thus within my kingdom so?
Shall not mine Armies out, and all my people them pursue?
Shall they not spoil their shyps and burn them up with vengance due?
Out people, out upon them, follow fast with fires and flames,
Set sails aloft, make out with oars, in ships, in boats, in frames.
What speak I? or where am I? what furies me do thus inchaunt?
O Dydo, woeful wretch, now destnyes fell thy head does haunt.


And a little after preparing to kill her own self. But Dydo quaking fierce
with frantike mood and griefly hew.
With trembling spotted cheeks, her huge attempting to pursue.
Besides her self for rage, and toward death with visage wanne,
Her eyes about she rolde, as red as blood they looked than.


At last ready to fall upon AEneas sword. O happy (welaway) and over happy
had I been,
If never Trojan shyps (ahlas) my Country shore had seen.
Thus said she wryde her head, and bereuenged must we die?
But let us boldly die (quoth she) thus, thus to death I ply.


Now likewise for the brave warlike phrase and bygge sounding kind of
thundering speech, in the hot skyrmyshes of battles, you may confer them in
any of the last five Books: for examples sake, this is one aabout the ninth
Book. It clamor totis per propugnacula muris,
Intendunt acries arcus, amentaque torquent.
Sternitur omne solum telis. tum scutae cauaeque
Dant sonitum ^^ctu galeae: pugna asper surgit? etc.
A clamarous noise vpmounts on fortress tops and bulwarks towers,
They strike, they bend their bows, they whirle from strings sharp shoting
showers.
All streets with fools are strowed, than helmets, skulles, with battrings
marro,
And shieldess dishyuering crack, vpriseth roughness byckring hard.
Look how the tempest storm when wind out wrestling blows at south,
Rain rattling beats the grownde, or clouds of hail from Winters mouth,
Down dashyng headlong drives, when God from skies with griesly steven,
His watery showers outwrings, and whirlwind clouds down breaks from heaven.
And so forth much more of the like effect.

Only one comparison more will I desire you to mark at your leysures, which
may serve for all the rest, that is, the description of Fame, as it is in the
4. book, toward the end, of which it follows thus. Monstrum horrendum
ingens cui quot sunt corpore plumae
Tot vigilos oculi etc.
A Monster ghastly great, for every plume her carcass bears,
Like number learing eyes she has, like number harkning ears.
Like number tongues, and mouths she wagges, a wondrous thing to speak,
At midnight forth she flies, and under shade her sound does squeake.
All night she wakes, nor slumber sweet does take nor never sleeps.
By days on houses tops she sits or gates of Towns she keeps.
On watching Towers she clymbes, and Cities great she makes aghast,
Both truth and falsehood forth she tells, and lies abroad does cast.


But what need I to repeat any more places? there is not one Book among the
twelve, which will not yield you most excellent pleasure in conferring the
translation with the Coppie, and marking the gallant grace which our English
speech affoordeth. And in truth the like comparisons, may you choose out
through the whole translations of the Metamorphosis by Master Golding who
(considering both their Coppyes) has equally deserved commendations for the
beautifying of the English speech. It would be tedious to stay to rehearse any
places out of him now: let the other suffice to prove, that the English
tongue lacks neither variety nor currantnesse of phrase for any matter.

I Will now spaake a little of an other kind of poetical writing, which might
notwithstanding for the variableness of the argument therein usually handled,
be comprehended in those kinds before declared: that is, the compyling of
Eglogues, as much to say as Goteheardes tales, because they be commonly
Dialogues or speeches framed or supposed between Sheepeheardes, Neteheardes,
Goteheardes, or such like simple men: in which kind of writing, many have
obtained as immor tall praise and commendation, as in any other.

The cheifest of these is Theocritus in Greek: next him, and almost the very
same, is Virgill in Latin. After Virgyl in like sort writ Titus Calphurnius and
Baptista Mantuan, with many other both in Latin and other languages very
learnedlye. Although the matter they take in hand seems commonly in
appearaunce rude and homely, as the usual talk of simple clownes: yet do
they indeed utter in the same much pleasant and profitable delight. For under
these persons, as it were in a cloak of simplicity, they would either set
forth the praises of their friends, without the note of flattery, or enueigh
grievously against abusess, without any token of bytternesse.

Somewhat like unto these works, are many pieces of Chawcer, but yet not
altogether so poetical. But now yet at ye last has England hatched up one
Poet of this sort, in my conscience comparable with the best in any respect:
even Master Sp: Author of the Sheepeheardes Calender, whose travel in that
piece of English Poetry, I think verily is so commendable, as none of equal
judgment can yield him less praise for his excellent skyll, and skylfull
excellency showed forth in the same, then they would to either Theocritus or
Virgill, who^ in mine opinion, if the coursenes of our speech (I mean the
course of custom which he would not infringe) had been no more let unto him,
then their pure native tongues were unto them, he would have (if it might be)
surpassed them. What one thing is there in them so worthy admiration, whereunto
we may not adioyne some thing of his, of equal desert? Take Virgil and make
some little comparison between them, and judge as ye shall see cause.

Virgill has a gallant report of Augustus covertly comprysed in the first
AEglogue: the like is in him, of her Majesty, under the name of Eliza. Virgill
makes a brave colored complaint of unsteadfast freendshyppe in the person of
Corydon: the like is him in his 5. AEglogue. Again behold the pretty Pastoral
contentions of Virgill in the third AEglogue: of him in ye eight Eglogue.
Finally, either in comparison with them, or respect of his own great learning,
he may well were the Garlande, and step before ye best of all English Poets
that I have seen or heard: for I think no less deserves (thus says E, K.
in his commendations) his wittiness in devising, his pithinesse in uttering,
his complaints of love so lovely, his discourses of pleasure so pleasantly,
his Pastrall rudenes, his Morrall wysenesse, his due observing of decorum every
where, in personages, in season, in matter, in speech, and generally in all
se^me ly simplicity, of handling his matter and framing his words. The
occasion of his work is a warning to other young men, who being entangled in
love and youthful vanities, may learn to look to themselves in time, and to
avoid inconveniences which may breed if they be not in time prevented. Many
good Morrall lessons are therein contained, as the reverence which young men
owe to the aged in the second Eglogue: the caueate o^ warning to beware a
subtle professor of freendshippe in the fifth Eglogue: the commendation of good
Pastors, and shame and disprayse of idle and ambitious Goteheardes in the
seventh, the loose and retchlesse living of Popish Prelates in the ninth. The
learned and sweet complaynt of the contempt of learning under the name of
Poetry in the tenth. There is also much matter uttered somewhat covertly,
especially ye abuses of some whom he would not be too plain withal: in which,
though it be not apparent to every one, what his special meaning was, yet so
skilfully is it handled, as any man may take much delight at his learned
conueyance, and pick out much good sense in the most obscurest of it. (...)
notable praise deserved in every parcel of that work, because I cannot
express as I would and as it should: I will cease to speak any more of, the
rather because I never heard as yet any that has read it, which has not
with much admiration commended it. One only thing therein have I heard some
curious heads call in question: viz: the motion of some unsavory love, such as
in the sit Eglogue he seems to deal with, (which say they) is skant
allowable to English ears, and might well have been left for the Italian
defenders of loathsome beastlines, of whom perhaps he learned it: to this
objection I have often answered and (I think truly) that their nyce opinion
over shoots the Poets meaning, who though he in that as in other things,
immitateth the ancient Poets, yet does not mean, no more did they before him,
any disordered love, or the filthy lust of the deuillish Pederastice taken in
the worse sense, but rather to show how the dissolute life of young men
entangled in love of women, do neglect the freendshyp and league with their
old friends and familiers. Why (say they) yet he should give no occasion of
suspicion, nor offer to the view of Christians, any token of such filthiness,
how good soever his meaning were: whereunto I oppose the simple conceyte they
have of matters which concern learning or wytt, wylling them to give Poets
leave to use their vain as they see good: it is their foolysh construction,
not his writing that is blameable. We must prescrybe to no writers, (much
less to Poets) in what sort they should utter their conceyts. But this will
be better discussed by some I hope of better abillity.

One other sort of Poetical writers remains yet to be remembered, that is,
The precepts of Husbandry, learnedly compiled in Heroycall verse. Such were the
works of Hesiodus in Greek, and Virgils Georgickes in Latin. What memorable
work has been handled in immitation of these by any English Poet, I know
not, (save only one work of M. Tusser, a piece surely of great wytt and
experience, and wythal very prettilye handled) And I think the cause why our
Poets have not trauayled in that behalf, is especially, for that there have
been always plenty of other writers that have handled the same argument very
largely. Among whom Master Barnabe Googe, in translating and enlarging the most
profitable work of Heresbachius, has deserved much commendation, as well for
his faithful compyling and learned increasing the noble work, as for his
wytty translation of a good part of the Georgickes of Virgill into English
verse.

Among all the translations, which has been my fortune to see, I could never
yet find that work of the Georgicks wholly performed. I remember once Abraham
Flemming in his conversion of the Eglogues, promised to translate and publishe
it: whether he did or not I know not, but as yet I heard not of it. I my self
wott well I bestowed some time in it two or three years since, turning it to
that same English verse, which other such works were in, though it were
rudely: how beit, I did it only for mine own use, and upon certain
respects toward a Gentleman mine especial freende, to whom I was desirous
to show some token of duetifull good will, and not minding it should go far
abroad, considering how slenderly I ran it over: yet since then, has one
got it in keeping, who as it is told me, either has or will unadvisedly
publishe it: which injury though he means to do me in mirth, yet I hope he
will make me some suffycient recompense, or else I shall go near to watch him
the like or a worse turn.

But concerning the matter of our Englysh writers, let this suffice: now
shall ye hear my simple skyl in what I am able to say concerning the form and
manner of our English verse.

The most usual and frequented kind of our English Poetry has always run
upon, and to this day is observed in such equal number of syllables, and
likeness of words, that in all places one verse either immediately, or by
mutual interpo^tion, may be aunswerable to an other both in proportion of
length, and ending of lines in the same Letters. Which rude kind of verse,
though (as I touched before) it rather discrediteth our speech, as borrowed
from the Barbarians, then furnishes the same with any comely ornament: yet
being so ingraffed by custom, and frequented by the most part, I may not
utterly dissalowe it, least I should seem to call in question the judgment of
all our famous writers, which have won eternal praise by their memorable
works compyled in that verse.

For my part therefore, I can be content to esteem it as a thing, the
perfection whereof is very commendable, yet so as with others I could wysh it
were by men of learning and ability bettered, and made more artificial,
according to the woorthines of our speech.

The falling out of verses together in one like sound, is commonly called in
English, Kyme, taken from the Greek word (...), which surely in my judgment
is very abusiuelye applied to such a sense: and by this, the unworthiness of
the thing may well appear, in that wanting a proper name, whereby to be called,
it borrows a word far exeeding the dignitye of it, and not appropriate to
so rude and base a thing. For Ryme is properly, the just proportion of a clause
or sentence, whether it be in prose or meeter, aptly comprised together: whereof
there is both an natural and an artificial composition, in any manner or
kind of speech, either French, Italian, Spanish, or English: and is propper
not only to Poets, but also to Readers, Orators, Pleaders, or any which are
to pronounce or speak any thing in public audience.

The first beginning of Ryme (as we now term it) though it be some what
ancient, yet nothing famous. In Greece (they say) one Symias Rhodias, because
he would be singular in something, wryt poetically of the Fable, containing how
Jupiter being in shape of a Swanne, begatte the Egg on Leda, whereof came
Castor, Pollux, and Helena, whereof every verse ended in this Ryme, and was
called therefore (...): but this foolyshe attempt was so contemned and
dispysed, that the people would neither admit the Author nor Book any place
in memory of learning. Since that it was not heard of, till yt time ye Hunnes
and Gothians renewed it again, and brought it into Italy. But howsoever or
wheresoever it began, certain it is, that in our English tongue it bears
as good grace, or rather better, then in any other: and is a faculty whereby
many may and do deserve great praise and commendation, though our speech be
capable of a far more learned manner of versifying, as I will partly declare
hereafter.

There be three special notes necessary to be observed in the framing of our
accustomed English Ryme: the first is, that one meeter or verse be aunswerable
to an other, in equal number of feet or syllables, or proportionable to the
tune whereby it is to be read or measured. The second, to place the words in
such sort, as none of them be wrested contrary to the natural inclination or
affectation of the same, or more truly ye true quantity thereof. The third, to
make them fall together mutually in Ryme, that is, in words of like sound,
but so as the words be not disordered for the Rymes sake, nor the sense hin
dered. These be the most pryncipall observations, which I think requisite in
an English verse: for as for the other ornaments which belong thereto, they be
more properly belonging to the several gyfts of skylfull Poets, then common
notes to be prescribed by me: but somewhat perhaps I shall have occasion to
speak hereafter.

Of the kinds of English verses which differ in number of syllables, there are
almost infinite: which every way alter according to his fancy, or to the
measure of that meeter, wherein it pleases him to frame his ditty. Of the best
and most frequented I will rehearse some. The longest verse in length, which I
have seen used in English consists of sixteen syllables, each two verses
ryming together, thus. Where virtue wants and vice abounds, there wealth is but
a bayted hook,
To make men swallow down their bane, before on danger deep they look.


This kind is not very much used at length thus, but is commonly divided, each
verse into two, whereof each shall contain eight syllables, and ryme cross
wise, the first to the third, and the second to the fourth, in this manner.
Great wealth is but a bayted hook,
Where virtue wants, and vice aboundes:
Which men devour before they look,
So them in dangers deep it drownes.


An other kind next in length to this, is, where each verse has fourteen
syllables, which is the most accustomed of all other, and especially used of
all the translatours of the Latin Poets for the most part thus. My mind with
furye fierce inflamde of late I know not how,
Does burn Pernassus hill to see, adornd with Laurel bow.


Which may likewise and so it often is divided, each verse into two, to first
having eight sillables, the second six, whereof the two sixes shall always
ryme, and sometimes the eyghtes, sometimes not, according to the will of the
maker. My mind with furye fierce inflamde,
Of late I know not how:
Does burn Pernassus hill to see,
Adornd with Laurel bow.


There are now within this compass, as many sorts of verses as may be
devised differences of numbers: whereof some consist of equal proportions, some
of long and short together, some of many rymes in one staff (as they call it)
some of cross ryme, some of counter ryme, some ryming with one word far
distant from another, some ryming every third or fourth word, and so likewise
all manner of dytties applyable to every tune that may be sung or said,
distinct from prose or continued speech. To avoid therefore tediousness and
confusion, I will repeat only the different sorts of verses out of the
Sheepeheardes Calender, which may well serve to bear authority in this matter.

There are in that work twelve or thirteen sundry sorts of verses, which
differ either in length, or ryme, of destinction of the staves: but of them
which differ in length or number of sillables not past six or seven. The
first of them is of ten sillables, or rather five feet in one verse, thus. A
Sheepheards boy no better do him call,
When Winters wastfull spite was almost spent.


This verse he uses commonly in his sweet complayntes, and mornefull ditties,
as very agreeable to such affections.

The second sort has naturally but nine syllables, and is a more rough or
clownish manner of verse, used most commonly of him if your mark him in his
satyricall reprehensions, this Sheepeheardes homelyest talk, such as the
second AEglogue is. Ah for pity will rank Winters rage,
These bitter blasts never gynne to assuage.


The number of nine sillables in this verse is very often altered, and so it
may without any disgrace to the same, especially where the speech should be
most clownish and simple, which is much observed of him.

The third kind is a pretty round verse, running currantly together, commonly
seven sillables or sometime eight in one verse, as many in the next, both
ryming together: every two having one the like verse after them, but of rounder
words, and two of them likewise ryming mutually. That verse expresses
notably, light and youthful talk, such as is the third AEglogue between two
Sheepheardes boys concerning love. Thomalin why sitten we so
As weren ouerwent with woe
Upon so fair a morrow?
The joyous time now nigheth fast
That will allay this bitter blast
And stake the Winter sorrow.


The fourth sort contains in each staff many unequal verses, but most
sweetly falling together: which the Poet call leth the tune of the waters
fall. Therein is his song in praise of Eliza. Ye dainty Nymphs which in this
blessed brook
do bathe your breast,
Forsake your watrie bowres and hither look,
at my request.
And eke ye Uirgins that on Parnass dwell,
Whence flows Helicon the learned Well,
help me to blaze
her worthy praise
That in her sex does all excel. etc.


The fifth, is a divided verse of twelve sillables into two verses, whereof I
spoke before, and seems most meet for ye hand ling of a Morrall matter, such
as is the praise of good Pastors, and the dispraise of ill in the seventh
AEglogue.

The sixth kind, is called a round, being mutuallie sung between two: one
sings one verse, the other the next, each rymeth with himself. Per. It fell
upon a holy eve,

Will. Hey ho holliday

Per. When holy fathers wont to shrieue,

Will. Thus ginneth our Kondelay. etc.



The seventh sort is a very tragical mournful measure, wherein he
bewayleth the death of some friend under the person of Dydo. Up then Melpomene
the mournfulst Muse of nine,
such cause of mourning never had before:
Up grie^y ghostes, and up my mournful ryme:
matter of mirth now stalt thou have no more.
Dydo my dear alas is dead,
Dead and lies wrapped in lead:
O heause hearse
Let streaming tears be powered out in store.
O careful vearse.


These sorts of verses for breuities sake have I chosen forth of him, whereby
I shall avoid the tedious rehearsal of all the kinds which are used: which I
think would have been impossible, seeing they may be altered to as many
forms as the Poets please: neither is there any tune or stroke which may be
sung or plaide on instruments, which has not some poetical ditties framed
according to the numbers thereof: some to Rogero, some to Trenchmore, to down
right Squire, to Galliardes, to Pauines, to Iygges, to Brawles, to all manner
of tunes which every Fiddler knows better then my self, and therefore I will
let them pass.

Again, the diversities of the staves (which are the number of verses
contained with the divisions or partitions of a ditty) do often times make
great differences in these verses. As when one staff contains but two
verses, or (if they be divided) four: the first or the first couple having
twelve sillables, the other fourteen, which versifyers call Powlters measure,
because so they talle their wares by dosens. Also, when one staff has many
verses, whereof each one rimeth to the next, or mutuallie cross, or distant by
three, or by four, or ended contrary to the beginning, and a hundred sorts,
whereof to show several examples, would be too troublesome: now for the
second point.

The natural course of most English verses seems to run upon the old
Iambicke stroke, and I may well think by all likelihoode, it had the beginning
thereof. For if you mark the right quantity of our usual verses, ye shall
perceive them to contain in sound ye very property of Iambick feet, as thus.
I that my slender oaten pipe in verse was wont to sound:


For transpose any of those feet in pronouncing, and make short either the
two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve syllable, and it will (do what you can)
fall out very absurdly.

Again, though our words can not well be forced to abide the touch of
Position and other rules of Prosodia, yet is there such a natural force or
quantity in each word, that it will not abide any place but one, without some
foul disgrace: as for example try any verse. as this.
Of shapes transformde to bodies strange I purpose to entreat.


Make the first syllable long, or the third, or the fifth and so forth: or
contrariwise make the other sillables to admit the shortness of one of them
places, and see what a wonderful defacing it will be to the words. as thus.
Of strange bodies transformd to shapes purpose I to entreat.


So that this is one especial thing to be taken heed of in making a good
English verse, that by displacing no word be wrested against his natural
propriety, whereunto you shall per ceyue each word to be affected, and may
easily discern it in words of two sillables or above, though some there be
of indifferency, that will stand in any place. Again, in chouching the whole
sentence, the like regard is to be had, that we exceed not too boldly in
placing the verb out of his order, and too far behind the nowne: which the
necessity of Ryme may oftentimes urge. For though it be tolerable in a verse
to set words so extraordinarily as other speech will not admit, yet heed
is to be taken, least by too much affecting that manner, we make both the verse
unpleasant and the sense obscure. And sure it is a wonder to see the folly of
many in this respect, that use not only too much of this overthwart placing,
or rather displacing of words, in their Poemes and verses, but also in their
prose or continued writings: where they think to roll most smoothly, and
flow most eloquently, there by this means, come forth their sentences dragging
at one Authors tail as they were tide together with points, where often you
shall tarry (scratching your head) a good space before you shall hear his
principal verb or special word, least his singing grace, which in his
sentence is contained should be less, and his speech seem nothing poetical.

The third observation is, the Ryme or like ending of verses: which though it
is of least importance, yet has won such credit among us, that of all other
it is most regarded of the greatest part of Readers. And surely as I am
persuaded, the regard of writers to this, has been the greatest decay of
that good order of versifying, which might ere this have been established in
our speech. In my judgment, if there be any ornament in the same, it is rather
to be attributed to the plentiful fullness of our speech, which can affoorde
ryming words sufficient for the handling of any matter, then to the thing it
self for any beautifying it brings to a work: which might be adorned with
far more excellent colors then ryming is. Not withstanding I cannot but
yield unto it (as custom requires) the deserved praises, especially where it
is with good indgement ordered. And I think them right worthy of admi ration,
for their readiness and plenty of wytt and capacity, who can with facility
entreat at large, and as we call it extempore, in good and sencible ryme,
upon some unacquainted matter.

The ready skyll of framing any thing in verse, besides the natural
promptness which many have thereunto, is much helped by Art, and erercise of
the memory: for as I remember, I read once among Gaskoynes works, a little
instruction to versifying, where is prescribed as I think this course of
learning to versifye in Ryme.

When ye have one verse well settled, and decently ordered which you may dispose
at your pleasure, to end it with what word you will: then what soever the word
is, you may speedily run over the other words which are aunswerable
thereunto, (for more readiness through all the letters Alphabetically) whereof
ro^ may choose that which will best fit the sense of your matter in that
place: as for example: if your last word end in Book, you may straightwayes
in your mind run them over thus. Brook, Cook, crook, hook, look, nooke,
pooke, rooke, forsook, took, awooke. etc. Now it is twenty to one, but
always one of these shall iumpe with your former word and matter in good
sense. If not, then alter the first.

And indeed I think, that next to the Art of memory, this is the readyest
way to attain to the faculty of ryming well Ertempore, especially if it be
helped with thus much pains. Gather together all manner of words especially
Monasillables, and place them Alphabetically in some note, and either have them
meetely perfectly by heart (which is no very laboursome matter) or but look
them dilligently over at some time, practicing to ryme indifferent often,
whereby I am persuaded it will soon be learned, so as the party have withal
any reasonable gift of knowledge and learning, whereby he want not both
matter and words altogether.

What the other circumstaunces of Ryming are, as what words may tollerably be
placed in Ryme, and what not: what words do best become a Ryme, and what not,
how many sorts of Ryme there is: and such like I will not stay now to
entreat. There be many more observations and notes to be prescribed, to the
exact knowledge of versifying, which I trust will be better and larger laid
forth by others, to whom I defer many considerations in this treatise:
hoping that some of greater skill will shortly handle this matter in better
sort.

Now the sundry kinds of rare devises, and pretty inventions which come from
ye fine poetical ^aine of many in strange and unaccustomed manner, if I could
report them, it were worthy my travel: such are the turning of verses: the
enfolding of words: the fine repititions: the clarklie conueying of
contraries, and many such like. Whereof though I could set down many: yet
because I want both many and the best kinds of them, I will ouerpasse:
only pointing you to one or two which may suffice for example.

Look upon the rufull song of Colin sung by Cuddie in the Sheepheardes
Calender, where you shall see a singular rare devise of a dittie framed upon
these six words VVoe, sound, cries, pact, sleep, augment, which are most
prettily turned and wound up mutually together, expressing wonderfully the
dolefulness of the song. A devise not much unlike unto the same, is used by
some, who taking the last words of a certain number of verses, as it were by
the rebound of an Echo, shall make them fall out in some pretty sense.

Of this sort there are some devised by John Graunge, which because they be
not long I will rehearse one. If fear oppress how then may hope me shield?
Denial says, vain hope has pleased well,
But as such hope thou would not be thine,
So would I not the like to rule my heart.
For if thou love it bidds thee grant forthwith
Which is the joy whereof I live in hope.


Here if you take the last word of every verse, and place them orderly
together, you shall have this sentence: Shield well thine heart with hope. But
of these Echoes I know in deed very dainty pieces of work, among some of
the finest Poets this day in London: who for the rareness of them (...) them
priuelie to themselves, and will not let them come abroad.

A like invention to the last rehearsed, or rather a better, have I seen often
practiced in framing a whole dittie to the Letters of ones name, or to the
words of some two or three verses which is very witty, as for example this is
one of W. Hunnis, which for the shortness I rather chusde then some yt are
better. If thou desire to live in quiet rest,
Give care and see, but say the best.


These two verses are now as it were resolved into diverse other, every two
words or sillables being the beginning of an other like verse, in this sort.
If thou delight in quietness of life,
Desire to shun from brawles, debate and strife:
To live in love with GOD, with friend and foe,
In rest shall sleep when other cannot so.
Give ear to all, yet do not all believe,
And see the end and then thy sentence give:
But say For truth of happy lives assignde
The best has he that quiet is in mind.


Thus are there infinite sorts of fine conueiances (as they may be termed) to
be used, and are much frequented by versifyers, as well in composition of their
verse, as the wittines of their matter: which all I will refer to the
consideration of every pleasant headded Poet in their proper gifts: only I
set ^ne these few sorts of their forms of versifying, which may stand in
steed to declare what many others may be devised in like sort.

(...) ^ne to proceed to the reformed kind of English verse which many have
before this, attempted to put in practice, and to establish for an accustomed
right among English Poets, you shall hear in like manner my simple judgment
concerning the same.

I am fully and certainly persuaded, that if the true kind of versifying in
immitation of Greeks and Latins, had been practiced in the English tongue,
and put in ure from time to time by our Poets, who might have continually been
mending and pollyshing the same, every one according to their several gifts:
it would long ere this have aspyred to as full perfection, as in any other
tongue whatsoever. For why may I not think so of our English, seeing that
among the Romans a long time, yea even till the days of Tully, they esteemed
not the Latin Poetry almost worth any thing, in respect of the Greek, as
appears in the Oration pro Archia Poeta: yet afterward it increased in
credit more and more, and that in short space: so that in Virgilles time,
wherein were they not comparable with the Greeks? So likewise, now it seems
not current for an English verse to run upon true quantity, and those feet
which the Latins use, because it is strange, and the other barbarous custom,
being within compass of every base wit, has worn it out of credit or
estimation. But if our wry ters, being of learning and judgment, would rather
infringe this curious custom, then omit the occasion of enlarging the
credit of their native speech, and their own praises, by practicing that
commendable kind of writing in true verse: then no doubt, as in other parts of
learning, so in Poetry, should not stoop to the best of them all in all manner
of ornament and comeliness. But some object that our words are nothing
resemblaunt in nature to theirs, and therefore not possible to be framed with
any good grace after their use: but cannot we the^ as well as the Latins did,
alter the cannon of the rule according to the quallity of our word, and where
our words and theyrs will agree, there to iumpe with them, where they w^l not
agree, there to establish a rule of our own to be directed by? Likewise, for
ye tenor of the verse might we not (as Horace did in the Latin) alter their
proportions to what sorts w^ li^ed, and to what we saw would best become the
nature of the thing bandled, or the quallity of the words? Surely it is to be
thought that if any one, of sound judgment and learning, should putt forth
some famous work, containing diverse forms of true verses, fitting the
measures, according to the matter: it would of it self be a sufficient
authority without any prescription of rules, to the most part of Poets, for
them to follow and by custom to ratify. For sure it is, that the rules and
principles of Poetry, were not precisly followed and observed of the first
beginners and writers of Poetry, but were selected and gathered severally out
of their works, for the direction and behoof of their followers. And indeed,
he that shall with heedefull judgment make trial of the English words, shall
not find them so gross or unapt, but that they will become any one of ye most
accustomed sorts of Latin or Greek verses meetely, and run thereon somewhat
currantly

I my self, with simple skyll I ^onfesse, and far unable judgment, have
^entured on a few, which notwithstanding the rudenes of them may serve to
show what better might be brought into our speech, if those which are of
meet abilitye would bestow some travel and endeavor thereuppon. But before
I set them down, I will speak somewhat of such abseruations as I could
gather necessary to the knowledge of these kind of verses, least I should
seem to run upon them rashly, without regard either of example or authority.

The special points of a true verse, are the due observations of the feet,
and place of the feet.

The foot of a verse, is a measure of two sillables, or of three,
distinguished by time which is either long or short. A foot of two sillables,
is either simple or mixed, that is, of like time or of diverse. A simple foot of
two sillables is likewise twofolde, either of two long sillables called
Spondaeus, as goodness, or of two short called Pyrrichius as hither. A myxt
foot of 2. sillables, is either of one short and one long called Iambus as
dying: or of one long and one short, called Choreus as gladly. A foot of 3.
sillables in like sort is either simple or myxt. The simple is either
Molossus, that is of three long, as forgiveness: or Trochaeus, that is of 3.
short, as merylie. The mixed is of 6. diverse sorts, 1. Dactylus, of one long,
and two short, as happily. 2. Anapaestus, of two short, and one long, as
tauelers. 3. Bacchius, of one short, and two long, as remembrers. 4.
Palimbachius, of two long, and one short, as accorded. 5. Creticus of a long, a
short, and a long, as dangerous. 6. Amphibrachus, of a short, a long, and a
short, as rejoiced.

Many more deuisions of feet are used by some, but these do more artificially
comprehend all quantities necessary to the skannning of any verse, according
to Tallaeus in his Kethorique. The place of the feet is the disposing of them
in their propper rooms, whereby may be discerned the difference of each verse
which is the right numbering of the same. Now as for the quantity of our words,
therein lies great difficultye, and the cheifest matter in this faculty. For
in truth there being such diversity betwixt our words and the Latin, it cannot
stand indeed with great reason that they should frame, we being only
directe^ by such rules as serve for only Latin words, yet notwithstanding one
may well perceive by these few, that these kind of verses would well become
the speech, if so ^ee there were such Rules prescribed, as would admit the
placing of our aptest and fullest words together. For indeed excepting a
few, if our Monasyllables, which naturally should most of them be long, we
have almost none, that will stand ^tlie in a short foot: and therefore if some
exception were made against the precise observation of Position, and certain
other of the rules, then might we have as great plenty and choice of good
words to furnish and set forth a verse, as in any other tongue.

Likewise if there were some derection in such words, as fall not within the
compass of Greek or Latin rules, it were a great help, and thereof I had
great miss in these few which I made. Such as is the last syllable in these
words, able, noble, or possible and such like: again for the nature and force
of our W. of our th, of our oo, and ee, of our words which admytte an e in the
end after one or two Consonantes, and many other. I for my part, though (I
must needs confess) many faults escaped me in these few, yet look I as
good heed as I could, and in truth did rather always omit the best words
and such as would naturally become the speech best, the^ I would commit any
thing, which should notoriously impugn the Latin rules, which herein I had
only for my direction. Indeed most of our Monasyllables I am forced to make
short, to supply the want of many short words requisite in these verses. The
Participle A, being but the English article adjoined to Nownes, I alway^ make
short, both alone and in ^o^position, and like wise the words of one syllable
ending in E. as the, when it is an article, he, she, ye, etc. we I think
should needs be always long because we pronounce continually We. I, being
alone standing for the Pronowne Ego, in my judgment might well be used common:
but because I never saw it used but short I so observed it. Words ending in y
I make short without doubt, saving that I have marked in others one difference
which they use in the same, that is to make it short in the end of an Aduerb,
as gladly, and long in the end of an Adjective as goodly: but the reason is as
I take it, because the Adjective is or should be most commonly written thus
goodly. O, being an Aduerbe is naturally long: in the end of words both
Monasyllables and other I think it may be used common. The first of
Pollisyllables I directed according to the nature of the word, as I thought
most aunswerable to Latin examples, saving that somewhere I am constrained to
strain curtesy with the preposition of a word compounded or such like, which
brea keth no great square: as in defense or depart, etc. The myddle sillables
which are not very many, come for the most part under the precinct of Position,
whereof some of them will not possibly abide the touch, and therefore must
needs be a little wrested: such are commonly ye Aduerbs of three sillables, as
mourn fully, spyghtfully and such like words, derived of this Adjective, full:
and therefore if there be great occasion to use them, they must be reformed by
detracting only (l) and then they stand meetely current, as mournfuly. The
last sillables I wholly directed so near as I could to the touch of common
rules.

The most famous verse of all the rest, is called Hexametrum Epicum, which
consists of six feet, whereof the first four are indifferently either
Spondaei or Dactyli, the fifth is evermore a dactyl, and the sixth a Spondae, as
thus.
Tyterus happily thou lie tumbling under a beetchtree.


This kind of verse I have only seen to be practiced in our English speech:
and indeed will stand somewhat more order lie therein then any of the other
kinds, until we have some tolleration of words made by special rule. The
first that attempted to practice this verse in English, should seem to be the
Earl of Surry, who translated some part of Virgill into verse indeed, but
without regard of true quantity of sillables. There is one famous Distichon,
which is common in the months of all men, that was made by one Master Watson,
fellow of S. John's College in Cambrydge about 40. years past, which for the
sweetness and gallantnes thereof in all respects does math and surpass the
Latin copy of Horace, which he made out of Homers words, qui mores hominum,
etc.
All travelers do gladly report great praise of Ulisses:

For that he knevve many men's manners, and savv many cities.


Which two verses if they be examined throughout all the rules and observations
of the best versifying, shall be found to attain the very perfection of them
all. There be two other not much inferior to these, which I found in ye
Gloss of E. K. upon the fifth AEglogue of the new Poet: which Tully
translated out of Greek into Latin, Haec habui quae edi etc. All that I eat
did I joy and all that I greedily gorged.

As for those many goodly matters left I for others.


Which though they will not abide the touch of Synalaepha in one or two places,
yet perhaps some English rule which might with good reason be established,
would make them current enough, and avoid that inconvenience which is very
obuious in our words. The great company of famous verses of this sort, which
Master Haruey made, is not unknown to any and are to be viewed at all times. I
for my part, so far as those examples would lead me, and mine own small
skyll affoorde me, have blundered upon these few, whereinto I have translated
the two first AEglogues of Virgill: because I thought no matter of mine own
invention, nor any other of antiquitye more fit for trial of this thing,
before there were some more special direction, which might lead to a less
troublesome manner of writing. The Argument of the first AEglogue.
Under the person of Tityrus Vyrgill being figured himself, declares to
Melibeus an another Neateheard, the great benefittes that he received at
Augustus hand, who in the spoil of Mantua gave him his goods and substance
again.

Melibaeus. and Tityrus. TItyrus, happily thou list tumbling under a beech
tree,
All in a fine oate pipe these sweet songs lustilie chaunting:
We, poor souls go to wrack, and from these coasts be removed,
And fro our pastures svveete: thou Tityr, at ease in a shade plott
Makst thick groves to resound with songs of brave Amarillis.

Tityrus. O Melibaeus, he was no man but a God who releeude me:
Ever he shall be my God: from this same Sheepcot his alters
Never, a tender Lamb shall want, with blood to bedevv them.
This good gift did he give, to my steeres thus freely to wander,
And to my self (thou see) on pipe to resound what I listed.

Melibaeus. Grutch thee sure I do not, but this thing makes me to vvonder,
Whence comes all this adoo: with grieeuous pain not a little
Can I remove my Goats: here, Tityre skant get I forvvard
Poor old crone, two tvvyns at a clappe ith boisterous hasilles
Left she behind, best hope i'my flock laid hard on a bare stone.
Had not a lucklesse lotte possessed our minds, I remember
Warnings often fro the blast burnt oak we savv to be sent us.
Often did a left hand crovv foretell these things in her hull tree,
But this God let us hear what he was, good Tityre tell me.

Tityrus. That same City so brave which Rome was wont to be called,
Fool did I think, to be like this of ours, where we to the pastures
Wonted were to remove from dammes our young pretty Cattle.
Thus did I think young vvhelpes, and Kids to be like to the mothers,
Thus did I wont compare many great things with many little.
But this above all towns as loftily mounteth her high head,
As by the low base shrubbes tall Cypress shoots above them.

Melibaeus. And what did thee move that needs thou^ must go to see Rome?

Tityrus. Freedom: which though late, yet once looked back to my pore state,
After time when hairs from my beard did ginne to be vvhitish:
Yet looked back at last and found me out after a long time.
When Amarill was once obtainde, Galatea departed:
For (for I will confess) whilst as Galatea did hold me,
Hope did I not for freedom, and care had I none to my cattle.
Though many fair young beasts our fold for the aulters aforded
And many cheeses good fro my press were sent to the City:
Seldom times did (...) bring any store of pence fro the markett.

Melibaeus. O Amarill, wherefore, to thy Gods (very much did I marvel)
Heavily thou did pray: ripe fruits ungathered all still:
Tityrus is not at home: these Pyne trees Tityre mist thee.
Fountains longd for thee: these hedgrovves wished thy return bome

Tityrus. VVh^t was then to be done? from bondage could not I vvind out:
Neither I could have found such gentle Gods any where else.
There did I see (Melibaee) that youth whose hestes I by course still
Fortnights whole to observe on the Alters sure will I not fail.
Thus did he gently grant to my suit when first I demanded.
Keep your heardes poor slaves as erst, let bulls to the makes still.

Melibaeus. Happy old man, then thou shall have thy farm to remain still,
Large and large to thy self, others naught but stony gravel:
And foul slymie rush where with their lees be besprinkled.
Here no unwonted food shall grieve young theaues who be laded,
Nor the infections foul of neighbors flock shall annoie them.
Happy old man. In shaddowy banks and cool pretty places,
Here by the quainted floodes and springs most holy remaining.
Here, these quicksets fresh which lands sever out fro thy neighbors
And green willow rows which Hiblae bees do rejoice in,
Often fine whistring noise, shall bring sweet sleep to thy senses.
Under a Rock side here will proyner chaunt merry ditties.
Neither on high Elm trees, thy beloude Doves loftilie sitting,
Nor pretty Turtles trim, will cease to crook with a good cheer.

Tityrus. First, therefore swift buckes shall fly for food to the skies ward,
And from fish with drawn broad seas themselves shall avoid hence:
First, (both borders broke) Araris shall run to the Parthanes,
And likewise Tygris shall again run back to the Germans:
Ere his countnaunce sweet shall slip once out from my heart root.

Melibaeus. UUe poor souls, must some to the land eald Africa pack hence.
Some to the far Scythia, and some must to the swift flood Oaxis.
Some to Britannia coasts quite parted far fro the whole world.
Oh these pastures pure shall I nere more chance to behold ye?
And our cottage poor with warm turues couerd about trim.
Oh these trim tilde lands, shall a rechlesse soldier have them?
And shall a Barbarian have this croppe? see what a mischief
Discord vile has araisde? for whom was our labor all took?
Now Melibaee ingraft pearie stocks, set vines in an order.
Now go (my brave flock once that were) O now go my kidlings.
Never again shall I now in a green bower sweetly reposed
See ye in queachie briers far a loofe clambring on a high hill.
Now shall I sing no Iygges, nor whilst I do fall to my iunkets.
Shall ye my Goats, cropping sweet flowers and leaves sit about me.

Tityrus. Yet thou may tarry here, and keep me company this night,
All on a leauie couch: good Aples ripe I do not lack,
Chestnutts sweet good store, and plenty of curddes will I set thee.
Mark in the Town how chimnie tops do begin to be smoking,
And fro the Mountains high how shadows grow to be larger.

The second AEglogue called Alexis.
The Argument.
Virgill in the person of Corydon as some think, complayneth that he is not
so gracious with Augustus as he would be: or else it is to be referred to a
youth Alexander, which was given him of Asinius Pollio, whom he blames for the
unsteadfastness of his wit and wandering appetite, in refusing the freendly
counsel which he used to give him.

THat Shepherd Corydon did burn in love with Alexis,
All his masters dear: and naught had he whereby to hope for.
Only in beechen groves, and dolesome shaddowy places.
Daily resorted he: there these rude disordered outcryes,
Hills and desert woods throughout thus mournfully tuned.
O hard hearted Alex, have thou no regard to my sweet song?
Pyttiest me not a whitt: yea makst me now that I shall dye.
Yet do the beasts find out fine shades and trim pretty cool plottes,
And fro the sun beams safe lie lyzardes under a bush^ufte:
And for workmen toughe with boiling heat so beparched,
Garlic sauery sweet and cool herbs plenty be dressed.
But, by the scorcht bank sides i'thy foot steps still I go plodding.
Hedgerowes hott do resound with Grashops mournfully squeaking.
O had I not ben better abyd Amarillis her anger?
And her proud disdain? yea better abide my Menalcas?
What though brown did he seem? yea what though thou be so gallant
O thou fine chery cheekt child trust not t'much to thy beauty.
Black violetts are took when dayses white be refused.
Me thou do despise unknown to thy self yet Alexis:
What be my riches great in neat, in milk what abundance.
In Sicill hills be my Lambs of which there wander a thousand.
All times, cold and hoteyet fresh milk never I wanted.
Such be my Music notes, as (when his flocks he recalling)
Amphion of Dirce did use on shore Aracynthus.
Much mishapt I am not, for late in a bancke I beheld me,
When still seas were calm, to thy Daphnis need not I give place
No, though thou be the judge, if pictures have any credit.
O were thou content to remain with me by the downs here,
In these lodgings small, and help me proppes to put under,
And trym kydling flock with me to drive to the green fields:
Pan in singing sweet with me should bravely resemble:
Pan, was first the inuenter, pypes to adioyne in an order:
Pan, poor flocks and Sheepheardes to most duly regards.
Those fine lips thou needst not fear to bruise with a sweet pype:
What did Amynt forsake i'this exercise to be cunning?
One pype with seauene sundry stops matched sweetly together.
Have I my self, Damaetas which ats death he bequeathd me,
And said, here, thou art now the second which ever has ought it.
So said Damaetas: but Amyntas spightfully scornde it.
Also, two pretty small wyld kyddes, most goodly bespotted
Have I, that here in the dales do run skant safe I do fear me.
Twyce in a day two teates they suck: for thee will I keep them.
Wondrous feign to have had them both was Thestylis of late:
And so she shall: for I see thou scornst whatso-euer I give thee.
Come hither O thou sweet face boy: see see, to thy self here
How fair Nymphs in baskets full do bring many Lillies:
White violets sweet Nais plucks and bloomes fro the Poppies,
Narcyss, and dyll flowers most sweet that sauoureth also.
Casia, broad mary Goldes, with pancyes, and Hyacinthus.
And I my self ripe peaches soft as silk will I gather.
And such Chestnutts as Amarill was wont to rejoice at.
Ploms will I bring likewise: that fruit shall be honored also.
And ye O Laurel twigs shall I croppe, and myrte thy self next.
For ye be wont, (bound both in a bunch) most sweetly to savor.
Thou art but a Clown Corydon: these gifts esteems not Alexis:
Nor by thy gifts to obtain art meet to encounter Iolas.
Wretch, (ahlas) what is this that I wish? south blasts to the young flowers
Or clear crystal streams with loath some swyne to be troubled?
Ah mad boy from whom do run? why Gods ithe woods dwelt:
And Paris erst of Troy: Pallas most gladly reioyseth,
In these bowres: and in trym groves we all chiefly delight us.
Grym Lioness does course cursed wolves, so wolves do the kydlinges.
And these wantou Kyddes likewise these fair Cytisus flowers.
Thee Corydon (O Alex) some pleasure every wight pulles.
See these yoked steeres fro the plough now seem to be let loose.
And these shadows large do declare this sun to depart hence
Still I do burn in love. What mean in love to be looked for?
Ah Corydon Corydon, what raging fury does haunt thee,
Half cropped down be thy vynes and broad brauncht elmes ouerhang them.
Rather about some needful work now busy thy self well,
Either on Osyers tuffe or bulrush weaue pretty basketts.
And if Alexis scorn thee still, may hope for another.
FINIS.


I durst not enterprise to go any further with this rude translation: being
for the respects aforesaid a troublesome and unpleasant piece of labor: And
therefore these shall suffice till further occasion shall serve to employ some
profitable pains in this behalf.

The next verse in dignity to the Hexameters, is ye Carmen Elegiacu^ which
consists of four feet and two od sillables: viz: the two first feet,
either Dactyli or Spondaei indifferent, the one long syllable: next two Dactyli
and an other long syllable some do measure it in this sort (and more truly
yet not so readily to all) accou^ting first two indifferently either Dactyli or
Spondaei, then one Spondaei and two Anapaesti. But it comes all to one
reckoning. This verse is always unseperably adjoined unto the Hexameter, and
serves especially to the handling of love and dalliances, whereof it takes
the name. It will not frame altogether so currantlye in our English as the
other, because the shortness of the second Penthimimer will hardly be framed
to fall together in good sense, after the Latin rules. I have not seen very
many of them made by any: and therefore one or two for example sake shall be
sufficient.

This Distichon out of Ovid. Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiosius auro,
At nunc barbaria est grandis habere nihil.


May thus be translated. Learning once was thought to be better then any gold
was,
Now he that has not wealth is but a barbarian.


And this. Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo:
Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
It Is but a slender thread, which all men's states do depend on:
And most goodly things quickly do fall to decay.


As for the verses Phalocium and Iambicum, I have not as yet made any trial in
them: but the Sapphic I assure you, in my judgment will do very pretty, if yt
wants which I speak were once supplied. For trial of which I have turned the
new Poets sweet song of Eliza into such homely Sapphick as I could.

This verse consists of these five feet, one Chore, one spondae, one dactyl,
and two Choreis, with this addition, that after every third verse be set one
Adonium verse, which consists of a dactyl and a spondae. It is more
troublesome and tedious to frame in our speech by reason they run without
difference, every verse being a like in quantity throughout, yet in my
judgment stands meetely well in the same. I pray look the Copy which I
have translated in the fourth AEglogue of the Sheepheardes Calender: yt song of
Colins making which Hobbinoll sings in praise of the Queens majesty, under
the name of Eliza. YE dainty Nymphcs that in this blessed brook,
do bathe your breast:
Forsake your watery bowres and hither look,
at my request:
And only you Uirgins that on Parnass dwell.
Whence flows Helicon the learned well,
help me to blase
her worthy praise
That in her ser does all excel.
Of fair Eliza be your silver song
that blessed wight:
The flower of Uirgins, may she flourish long,
in princely plight.
For she is Syrinx daughter without spott,
Which Pan the Sheepheards God on her begot:
so sprang her grace,
of heavenly race,
No mortal blemish may her blott.
See where she sittes. etc,


The Saphick verse.



O ye Nymphs most fine who resort to this brook,
For to baths there your pretty breasts at all times:
Leave the watrish bowres, hither and to me come
at my request now.
And ye Uirgins trymme who resort to Parnass,
Whence the learned well Helicon begins:
Help to blase her worthy deserts, that all else
mounteth above far.
Now the silver songs of Eliza sing ye,
Princely wight whose peer not among the virgins
Can be found: that long she may remain among us.
now let us all pray.
For Syrinx daughter she is, of her begotten
Of the great God pan, thus of heaven aryseth,
All her exlent race: any mortal hard hap
cannot aproche her.
See, she sittes most seemly in a grassy green plott,
Cl^thed in weeds meet for a princely maiden,
Boste with Ermines white, in a goodly scarlett
bravely beseeming.
Decked is that crown that upon her head stands
With the red Rose and many Daffadillies.
Bays, the Primrose and violetts, be set by: how
joyful a sight is it.
Say, behold did ye ever her Angelike face,
Like to Phaebe fair? or her heavenly hauour,
And the princelike grace that in her remains?
have ye the like seen?
Meddled is it red rose with a white together
Which in either cheek do depeinct a trymme cheer,
Her majesty and eye to behold so comely, her
like who remembers?
Phoebus once peept forth with a goodly guilt hew,
For to gaze: but when he saw the bright beams
Spread abroad fro'her face with a glorious grace,
it did amaze him.
When another sun he beheld below here,
Blushed he red for shame, nor again be durst look:
Would he durst bright beams of his own with hers match,
for to be vanquished.
Show thy self now Cynthia with thy clear rays,
And behold her: never abasht be thou so:
When she spreades those beams of her heavenly beauty, how
thou art in a dump dashed?
But I will take heed that I match not her grace,
With the Laton seed, Niobe that once did,
Now she does therefore in a stone repent: to all
other a warning.
Pan be may well boaste that he did begit her
Such a noble wight, to Syrinx is it joy,
That she found such lot with a bellibone trym
for to be laden.
When my younglinges first to the dammes do bleat out,
Shall a milk white Lamb to my Lady be offered:
For my Goddess shee-is yea I my self her Heardgrome
though but a rude Clown.
Unto that place Caliope does high her,
Where my Goddess shines: to the same the Muser
After her with sw^te ^iolincs about them
cheerfully tracing.
Is not it Bay branch that aloft in hands they have,
Eune to give them sure to my Lady Eliza:
D so sweet they play-and to the same do sing too
heaunly to hear is it.
See, the Graces trym to the stroke do foot it,
Deftly dancing, and meriment do make them,
Sing to the-instruments to rejoice the more. but
wants not a fourth grace?
Then the dance will be eune, to my Lady therefore
Shall Be geune that place, for a grace she shall be
For to fill that place that among them in heaune, ^e
may be received.
This beuy of bright Nymphs, whether is it go they now?
Raunged all thus fine in a row together?
They be Ladies all in the Lake behight so?
they thither all go.
One that is there chief that among the rest goes,
Called is Chores of Olyues she bears a
Goodly Crownett, meet for a Prince that in peace
ever abides.
All ye Sheepheardes maids that about the green dwell,
Speed ye there to her grace, but among ye take heed
All be Uirgins pure that aproche to deck her,
duty requires.
When ye shall present ye before her in place,
See ye not your selves do demean too rudely:
Bynd the ^llets: and to be fine the waste gyrt
fast with a tawdryne
Bring the Pinckes therewith many Gelliflowres sweet,
And the Cullambynes: let us have the Wlynesops,
With the Cornation that among the love laddes
wentes to be worn much.
Daffadowndillies all a long the ground strowe,
And the Cowslyppe with a pretty paunce let here lie.
Kyngcuppe and Lillies so beloude of all men.
And the deluce flower.


One verse there remains vntransilated as yet,-with some other of this sort,
which I meant to have finished, but by reason of some let which I had, I am
constrained to defer to some other time, when I hope to gratify the Readers
with more and better verses of this sort: for in truth I am persuaded a little
pain taking might furnish our speech with as much pleasant delight in this
kind of verse, as any other whatsoever.

Here follow the Cannons or general cautions of Poetry, prescribed by
Horace, first gathered by Georgius Frabricius Cremnicensis: which I thought
good to annex to this Trearise, as very necessary observations to be marked of
all Poets.
In his Epistle ad Pisones de art Poetica.
FIrst let the invention be meet for the matter, not differing, or strange,
or monstrous. For a woman's head, a horse neck, the body of a diverse colored
Byrd, and many members of sundry creatures compact together, whose legs
ending like a Fyshes tail: this in a picture is a wonderful deformity: but if
there be such diuersitye in the frame of a speech. what can be more uncomely
or ill-favored?

2. The ornaments or colors must not be too many, nor rashly adventured on,
neither must they be used every where and thrust into every place.

3. The propriety of speech must be duly observed, that wayghty and great
matters be not spoken slenderly, or matters of length too briefly: for it
belongs much both to the comeliness and nature of a matter: that in big
matters there be likewise used boisterous words.

4 In Poetical descriptions, the speech must not exceed all credit, nor any
thing fainedlie brought in, against all course of nature.

5 The disposing of the work must be such, that there be no offense committed,
as it were by too cxquisite diligence: for many things may be often committed,
and some thing by too curious handling be made offenciue. Neither is it in one
part to be well furnished, and in another to be neglected. Which is proved by
example of a Caruer, who expressed very artificially the head and upper part
of a body, but the rest he could not make an end of. A^aine, it is proved
thus, that a body should not be in other parts beautiful, and yet be
deformed in the crooked nose: for all the members in a well shapen body must
be aunswerable, sound, and well proportioned.

6. He that takes in hand to write any thing must first take heed that he be
sufficient for the same: for often unwary fools through their rashness are
ouertooke with great want of ability

7. The ornament of a work consists in words, and in the manner of the
words, are either simple or mixed, new or old, proppar or translated. In them
all good judgment must be used and ready wytt. The chiefest grace is in the
most frequented words, for the same reason holds in words, as does in
coins, that the most used and tried are best esteemed.

8. The kind of verse is to be considered and aptly applied to the argument,
in what measure is most meet for every sort. The most usual kinds are four,
the Heroic, Eelegiac, Iambick, and Lyric.

9. One must use one kind of speech alike in all wrytings. Sometime the Lyric
ryseth aloft, sometime the comicall. To the Tragical writers belong properly
the bygge and boisterous words. Cramples must be interplaced according fitly
to the time and place.

10. Regard is to be had of affections: one thing becomes pleasant persons,
an other sad, an other wrathful, an other gentle, which must all be
heedefully respected. Three things therefore are requisite in verses, beauty,
sweetness, and the affection. Theophrastus says that this beauty or
delectablenesse is a deceyt, and Aristotle calls it (...) a momentany
tyrrany. Sweetness retayneth a Reader, affection moves him.

11 Every person must be fitted accordingly. and the speech well ordered:
wherein are to be considered the dignity, age, sex, fortune, condition, place,
Country, etc, of each person.

12 The persons are either to be feigned by the Poets them selves, or borrowed
of others, if he borrow them, then must he observe (...), that is, that he
follow that Author exactly whom he purposes to immitate, and whereout he
brings his examples. But if he feign new persons, then must he keep his
(...), that is equally: so bringing them in each place, that it be always
agreeable, and the last like unto the first, and not make one person now a
bold boaster, and the same straightwaies a wise wary man, for that is passing
absurd. Again, every one must observe (...), which is interpreted
conuenientiam fitness: as it is meet and agreeable every where, a man to be
stout, a woman fearful, a servant crafty, a young man gentle.

13 Matters which are common may be handled by a Poet as they may be thought
propper to himself alone. All matters of themselves are open to be entreated
of by any man: but if a thing he handled of some one in such sort, as he
thereby obtain great praise, he makes it his own or propper to himself, as
many did write of the Troiane war, but yet Homer made matter which was common
to all, propper to himself.

14 Where many things are to be taken out of auncienter tongues, as the
Latins took much out of the Greeks, the words are not so preciselie to be
followed, but that they be altered according to the judgment and will of the
Immitator, which precept is borrowed of Tully, Non verbum verbo necesse est
reddere.

15. The beginning must not be foolishly hand^ed, that is, straungly or too
long.

16. The proposition or narration let it not be far fetched or un likely, and
in the same forget not the differences of ages and persons.

17. In a Comedy it is needful to exhibit all the actions openly, as such
as are cruel, dishonest, or ougly, but such things may better boe declared by
some meet and handsome words, after what sort they are supposed to be done.

18. If a Commedye have more Acts then five, it is tedious, if fewer, it is
not sufficient.

It fytteth not to bring in the persons of Gods, but in very great matters.
Cicero says, when the Tragedy writers cannot bring their matters to good
pass, they run to God. Let not more persons speak together then four for
anoyding confusion.

The Chori must be well garnished and set forth: wherein either men are
admonished, or reprehended, or counsayled unto virtue. Such matter must be
chosen for the Chorus, as may be meet and agreeable to that which is in hand.
As for instruments and singing, they are Relics of old simplicitye. For the
Music commonly used at Theaters and the licenciousnesse of their songs,
which together with their wealth increased among the Romans, is hurtful to
discipline and good manners.

19 In a Satyr the clownish company and rural Gods, are brought in to
temperate the Heaviness of Tragedies, with some mirth and pastyme. In jesting
it must be observed that it be not lacyuious or Rybaldlike, or slanderous,
which precept holds generally in all sorts of wrytynges.

In a (...) (...) heed is to be taken, of the place, of the day, and of the
persons: as of Bacchus, Silenus, or the Satyrs. Again of the vnmeetnesse or
inconvenience of the matter, and of the words that they be fitted according to
the persons: of Decorum, that he which represented some noble personage in the
Tragedy, be not some busy fool in the Satyr: finally of the hearers, least
they be offended by myxing filthy matters with iestes, wanton toys with
dishonest, or noisome with merry things.

20. The feet are to be applied propper to eucry kind of verse, and therein a
Poet must not use too much license or boldness. The ancient writers in Ia^bick
verses used at first pure Ia^bicks: Afterward Spondaeus was admitted into
Locos impares, but at last such was the licentious custom, that they would
both Spondaeus where they listed, and other feet without regard.

21. In compyling of verses great care and circumspection must be used.

Those verses which be made Extempore, are of no great estimation: those which
are vnartificiall, are utterly repelled as too foolish. Though many do
lightlic regard our verses, yet ought the Carelessness of the hearers to be no
cause in us of error and negligence. Who desires to make any thing worthy to
be heard of learned ears, let him read Greek Authors heedefullie and
continually.

22. Arts have their increasinges even as other things, being natural, so
have Tragedies which were first rudely inuen ted by Thespis, at last were much
adorned by AEschylus: at the first they were practiced in Uillages of the
Country, afterward brought to stages in great Cities.

23. Some Arts do increase, some do decay by a certain natural course. The
old manner of Commedies decade, by reason of slaundering which therein they
used against many, for which there was a penalty appointed, least their
bitterness should proceed too far: In place of which among the Latins came
the Satyrs.

The ancient Authors of Comedies, were Eupolis, Cratinus, and Aristophanes, of
the middle sort, Plato Comicus, of the last kind Menander, which continued
and was accounted the most famous.

24. A Poet should not content himself only with others inventions, but
himself also by ye example of old writers should bring something of his own
industry, which may be laudable. So did they which writ among the Latins
the Comedies called Togatae, whose arguments were taken from ye Greeks, and
the other which wrytt the Pretextatae, whereof the arguments were Latin.

25. Heedefulnesse and good composition makes a persecte verse, and that which
is not so may be reprehended. The faculty of a good wit exceeds Art.

26. A Poet that he may be perfect, has need to have know ledge of that part
of Philosophy which informs ye life to good manners. The other which
pertains to natural things, is less plausible, has fewer ornaments, and
is not so profitable.

27. A Poet to the knowledge of Philosophy should also add greater
experience, that he may know the fashions of men and dispositions of people.
This profit is got by tra^elling, that whatsoever he writes he may so
express (...) order it, that his narration may be formable.

28. The end of Poetry is to write pleasant things, and profitable. Pleasant
it is which delights by being not too long, or uneasy to be kept in memory,
and which is somewhat likely, and not altogether sorged. Profitable it is,
which (...) reth up the minds to learning and wisdom.

29. Certain escapes are to be pardoned in some Poets, specially in great
works. A fault may be committed either in respect of his propper Art, or in
some other Art: that a Poet should err in precepts of his own art, is a
shameful thing, to commit a fault in another Art is to be borne withal: as
in Virgill, who fayueth that AEneas coming into Africa sl^w with his darte
certain Stagges, whereas indeed Africa has in it none of those beasts.
Such errors do happen either by vn^defulnes, when one escapes them by
negligence: or by the common fragility of man, because none there is which can
know all things. Therefore this last kind of error is not to be stuck upon.

30. A good Poet should have respect to this, how to retain his Reader or
hearer. In a picture some thing delights being set far of, something
nearer, but a Poet should delight in all places as well in sun as shaddowe.

31. In a Poet is no mean to be admitted, which if he be not he of all is
the worst of all.

32 A Poem if it run not sweetly and smoothly is odious: which is proved by
a simile of the two senses, hearing and tasting, as in sweet and pleasant
meats. And the Poem must be of that sort, that for the sweetness of it may
be acceptable and continue like it self unto the end, least it wearye or
drive away a Reader.

33. He that would write any thing worthy the posteritye, let him not
enterprise any thing whereunto his nature is not agreeable. Mercury is not made
of wood (as they say) neither does Minerua favor all studies in every one. In
all Arts nature is the best help, and learned men use commonly to say that A
Poet is as well borne as made a Poet.

34 Let no man esteem himself so learned, but that he may submytte his
wrytinges to the judgments of others, and correct and thoroughly amend the same
himself.

35 The profitte of Poetry sprang thus, for that the ancient wise men set
down the best things that pertained to man's life, manners, or felicity, and
examining and proouing the same by long experience of time, when they were aged
they published them in wrytinges. The use of Poetry what it was at the first,
is manifest by the examples of the most learned men: as of Orpheus who first
builded houses: of Amphion who made Cities: of Tyrtaeus who first made war:
of Homer, who wryt most wisely.

36 In an artificial Poet three things are requisite, nature, Art, and
diligence.

37 A writer must learn of the learned, and he must not stick to confess
when he erreth: that the worse he may learn to avoid, and know how to
follow the better.

The confession of an error betoken a noble and a gentle mind. Celsus and
Quintillian do report of Hippocrates, that least he should deceive his
posterity, he confessed certain errors, as it well became an excellent minded
man, and one of great credit. For (as says Celsus) light wits because they
have nothing, will have nothing taken from them.

38. In making choice of such friends as should tell us the truth, and
correct our wrytinges, heedefull judgment must be used: least either we choose
unskillful folk, or flatterers, or dissemblers. The unskillful know not how to
judge, flatterers fear to offend, dissemblers in not praising do seem to
commend.

39 Let no man deceive himself, or suffer himself to be deceived, but take
some grave learned man to be judge of his doing, and let him according to his
counsel change and put out what he thinks good.

40. He which will not slatter and is of ability to judge, let him endeavor to
nothing so much, as to the correction of that which is written, and that let be
done with earnest and exquisite judgment. He which does not thus, but
offends wilfully in breaking his credit^ too rashly, may be counted for a
mad, furious, and frantic fool.

41. The faults commonly in verses are seven, as either they be destitute of
Art, of facility, or ornament: or else, they be superfluous, obscure,
ambicious, or needelesse.

Out of the Epistles ad Mecaenatem, Augustum, and Florum.
42 An immitation should not be too servile or superstitious, as though one
durst not varry one iotte from the example: neither should it be so senseless
or unskillful, as to immitate things which are absurd, and not to be followed.

43 One should not altogether tread in the steps of others, but sometime he
may enter into such waves as have not boene haunted or used of others. Horace
borrowed ye Iambick verse of Archilocus, expressing fully his numbers and
eleganty, but his unseemly words and prattling tauntes he most wyshlye
shunned.

44 In our verses we should not gape after the phrases of the simpler sort,
but striu^ to have our writings allowable in the judgments of learned men.

45. The common peoples judgments of Poets is seldom true, and therefore not
to be sought after. The vulgar sort in Rome judged Pacu^ious to be very
learned, Accius to be a grave writer, that Aff^ius followed Menander, Plautus,
Ep^charmus: that Terence excelled in Art Caecilius in gravity: but the learned
sort were not of this opinion. There is extant in Macrobius (I know not
whether Angellius) the like verdite concerning them which wryt Epigrammes. That
Catullus and Caluus wrytt few things that were good, Naeuius obscure,
Ho^^tensius uncomely, Cynna unpleasant, and Memmius rough.

46. The old writers are so far to be commended, as nothing be taken from
the new: neither may we think but that the way lies open still to others to
attain to as great matters. Full well said Sidonius to Eucherius, I reverence
the old writers, yet not so as though I less esteemed the virtues and
deserts of the writers in this age.

47. Newnes is grateful if it be learned: for certain it is, Arts are not
both begun and perfected at once, but are increased by time and study:
which notwithstanding when they are at the full perfection, do debate and
decrease again.

Cic. de orat. There is nothing in the world which bursteth out all at once,
and comes to light all wholly together.

48. No man should dare to practice an Art that is dangerous, especially
before he have learned the same perfectly: so do guyders of Ships: so do
Physicians: but so did not many Roman Poets (yea so do not too many English
writers) who in a certain corragious heat gaped after glory by writing
verses, but few of them obtained it.

49. A Poet should be no less skylfull in dealing with the affectes of the
mind, then a tumbler or a Juggler should be ready in his Art. And with such
pyth should he set forth his matters, that a Reader should seem not only
to hear the thing, but to see and be present at the doing thereof. Which
faculty Fabius calls (...), and Aristotle (...).

50. Poets are either such as desire to be liked of on stages, as Commedie and
Tragedy writers: or such as would be regestred in Libraries. Those on stages
have special respect to the motions of the mind, that they may stir both
the eyes and ears of their beholders. But the other which seek to please
privately with the walls, take good aduisement in their works, that they may
satisfy the exact judgments of learned men in their studies.

51 A Poet should not be too importunate, as to offend in unseasonable
speeches: or ungentle, as to contemn the admonitions of others: or ambicious,
as to think too well of his own dooinges: or too wayward, as to think,
reward enough cannot be given him for his deserte, or finally too proud, as to
desire to be honored above measure.

52 The emendations of Poemes be very necessary, that in the obscure points
many things may be enlightened, in the baser parts many things may be
thoroughly garnished. He may take away and put out all vnpropper and unseemly
words, he may with discretion immitate the ancient writers, he may abridge
things that are too lofty, mittigate things that are too rough, and may use
all remedies of speech throughout the whole work. The things which are
scarce seemly, he may amend by Art and method.

53 Let a Poet first take upon him, as though he were to play but an Actors
part, as he may be esteemed like one which writes without regard, neither
let him so pollish his works, but that every one for the baseness thereof, may
think to make as good. He may likewise exercise the part of gesturer, as
though he seemed to meddle in rude and common matters, and yet not so deal in
them, as it were for variety sake, nor as though he had labored them
thoroughly but tryfled with them, nor as though he had sweat for them, but
practiced a little. For so to hyde ones cunning, that nothing should seem to
be laborsome or exquisite, when notwithstanding, every part is pollished with
care and study, is a special gift which Aristotle calls (...).

54. It is only a point of wisdom, to use many and thoyse elegant words,
but to understand also and to set forth things which pertain to the happy
end of man's life. Whereupon the Poet Horace, calls the Art poetical,
without the knowledge of learning and philosophy, a prating vanity. Therefore a
good and allowable Poet, must be adorned with words, plcutious in sentences,
and if not equal to an Drator, yet very near him, and a special lover of
learned men.

FINIS.
Epilogus.
THis small travel (courteous Reader) I desire thee take in good worth: which
I have compyled, not as an exquisite censure concerning this matter, but (as
thou may well perceive, and) in truth to that only end that it might be an
occasion, to have the same thoroughly and with greater discretion, taken in
hand and labored by some other of greater ability: of whom I know there be
many among the famous Poets in London, who both for learning and ley sure,
may handle this Argument far more pythilie the my self. Which if any of them
will vouchsafe to do, I trust we shall have English Poetry at a higher price
in short space: and the rabble of balde Rymes shall be turned to famous works,
comparable (I suppose) with the best works of Poetry in other tongues. In the
mean time, if my poor skill, can set the same any thing forward, I will
not cease to practice the same toward the framing of some apt English
Prosodia: still hoping, and hartelie wishing to enjoy first the benefitte of
some others judgment, whose authority may bear greater credit, and whose
learning can better perform it.


