A MONVMENTAL COLVMNE, Erected to the living Memory of the euer-glorious HENRY,
late Prince of Wales.

Virgil. Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata By JOHN WEBSTER.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for William Welby, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Swan* 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT CARRE VISCOUNT Rochester, Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
MY Right Noble Lord: I present to your voidest leisure of Survey, these few
sparks, found out, in our most glorious Prince his ashes: I could not have
thought this worthy your view, but that it aims at the preservation of His
fame; then which, I know not any thing, (but the sacred lives of both their
Majesty's, and their sweet Issue) that can be dearer unto you. Were my whole
life turned into leisure, and that leisure acccompanied with all the Muses, it
were not able to draw a Map large enough of him: for his praise is an
high-going sea, that wants both shore and bottom. Neither do I (my Noble Lord)
present you with this night-peece, to make his deathbed still floate, in those
compassionate rivers of your eyes: you have already, (with much lead upon your
heart) sounded ^oth the sorrow Royal, and your Own: O that care should ever
attain to so ambitious a Title! Only here (though I dare not say) you shall
find him live: (for that assurance were worth many kingdoms,) yet you shall
perceive him draw a little breath, such as gives us comfort, His Critticall day
is past, and the glory of a new life risen, neither subject to Physic. nor
Fortune. For my defects in this undertaking, my wish presents it self with
that of Martials. O vtinam mores animumque effingere possem!
Pulcrior in terris nulla tabella foret.
Howsoever: your protection is able to give it noble lusture, and bind me by
that honor able courtesy to be ever

Your Honors truly devoted servant, JOHN WEBSTER.
A FUNERAL ELEGY.
THe greatest of the Kingly Race is gone,
Yet with so great a reputation,
Laid in the earth, we cannot say he is dead,
But as a perfect Diamond set in lead,
(Scorning our foil) his glories do break forth,
Worn by his Maker, who best knew his worth:
Yet to our fleshly eyes, there does belong
That which we think helps grief, a passionat tongue.
Me thinks I see men's hearts pant in their lips,
" We should not grieve at the bright Suns Ecclips
" But that we love his light. So travelers stray
Wanting both guide, and conduct of the day:
Nor let us strive to make this sorrow old,
" For wounds smart most, when that the blood grows cold.
If Princes think that Ceremony meet
To have their corpse imbalm'd to keep them sweet:
Much more they ought to have their Fame expressed
In Homer, though it want Darius Chest
To adorn which, in her deserved Throne,
I bring those colors, which Truth calls her own.
Nor gain, nor praise, by my weak lines are sought,
" Love that is borne free, cannot be hired nor bought.
Some great inquisitors in nature say,
Royal and Generous forms, sweetly display
Much of the heavenly virtue, as proceeding
From a pure essence, and elected breeding.
How ere, truth for him thus much does importune,
His form, and virtue, both deserved his fortune:
For it is a question, not decided yet,
Whether his Mind, or Fortune were more great.
Me thought I saw him in his right hand weild
A Caduceus; in the other Pallas shield:
His mind quite void of ostentation,
His high erected thoughts looked down upon
The smiling valley of his fruitful heart.
Honor and Courtesy in every part
Proclaimed him, and grew lovely in each lim,
He well became those virtues which graced him.
He spread his bounty with a provident hand;
And not like those that sow th'ingratefull sand.
His rewards followed reason, nere were placed
For ostentation, and to make them last,
He was not like the mad and thriftlesse Vine,
That spends all her blushes at one time: Simile.

But, like the Orange tree, his fruits he bore;
Some gathered, he had green* and blossoms store.
We hopt much of him, till death made hope err,
We stood as in some spacious Theater
Musing what would become of him; his flight,
Reached fuch a noble pitch above our sight.
Whilst he discretly wise, this rule had won,
Not to let fame know his intents, till done.
Men came to his Court as to bright Academies
Of virtue and of valor, all the eyes
That feasted at his Princely exercise:
Thought that by day Mars held his lance, by night
Minerua bore a torch to give him light.
As once one Rhodes Pindar reports of old,
Soldiers expected 'twould have reigned down gold:
Old husbandmen 1'th Country began to plant
Laurel in steed of Elm, and made their vaunt
Their sons and daughters should such Trophies wear
When as the Prince returned a Conqueror
From Foreign Nations: The Character of Edward the black Prince.
For men thought his star
Had marked him for a just and glorious war.
And sure his thoughts were ours, he could not read
Edward the black Princes life, but it must breed
A virtuous emulation to have his name
So lag behind him both in Time and Fame.
He that like lightning did his force advance,
And shook to the Center the whole Realm of France*
That of warm blood opened so many sluices,
To gather and bring thence six Flower de Luces.
Who never saw fear but in his enemies flight,
Who found weak numbers conquer armed with right,
Who knew his humble shadow spread no more
After a victory then it did before.
Who had his breast instated with the choice
Of virtues, though they made no ambitious noise:
Whose resolution was so fiery still,
It seemed he knew better to die then kill:
And yet drew Fortune, as the Adamant, Steel,
Seeming to have fixed a stay upon Her wheel.
Who iestingly, would say it was his trade
To fashion deathbeds, and has often made
Horror look lovely, when in the fields there lay
Arms and legs, so distracted, one would say
That the dead bodies had no bodies left:
He that of working pulce sick France bereft,
Who knew that battles, not the gaudy show
Of ceremonies, do on Kings bestow
Best Theaters, t'whom naught so tedious as Court ^port
That thought all faun's and ventoies of the Court
Ridiculous and loathsome to the shade
Which (in a March) his wauing Ensign made.
Him did He strive to imitate, and was sorry
He did not live before him, that his glory
Might have been his example; to these ends,
Those men that followed him were not by-friends:
Or letters preferred to him: he made choice
In action, not in complementall voice.
And as Marcellus did two Temples rear
To Honor and to Virtue, placed so near
They kissed; yet none to Honors got access,
But they that past through Virtues: So to express
His Worthiness, none got his Countenance
But those whom actual merit did advance.
Yet, alas! all his goodness lies full low.
O Greatness! what shall we compare thee to?
To Giants beasts, or Towers framed out of Snow,
Or like wax-guilded Tapers, more for show
Then durance? Thy foundation does betray
Thy frailty, being builded on such clay.
This shows the al-controuling power of Fate,
That all our Scepters and our Chaires of State;
Are but glasse-mettall that wear full of spots,
And that like new writ Copies, t'auoid blots,
Dust must be thrown upon us: for in him
Our comfort sunk and drowned learning to swim.
And though he died so late, he is no more near
To us, then they that died three thousand year
Before him; only memory does keep
Their Fame as fresh as his from death or sleep.
Why should the Stag or Raven live so long?
And that their age rather should not belong,
Unto a righteous Prince? whose lengthned years,
Might assist men's necessities and fears.
Let beasts live long, and wild, and still in fear,
The Turtle Dove never out-liues nine year.
" Both life and death have equally expressed
" Of all, the shortest madness is the best.
We ought not think that his great triumphs need,
Our withred taunts, Can our weak praise feed
His memory, which worthily contemnes,
Marble and Gold and Oriental Gemmes.
His merits pass our dull invention,
And now me-thinkes I see him smile upon
Our fruitless tears, bid's us dispeirce these showers,
And says his thoughts are far refined from ours.
As Rome of her beloved Titus said,
That from the body the bright soul was fled.
For his own good and their affliction,
On such a broken Column we lean on.
And for our selves, not him, let us lament,
Whose happiness is grown our punishment.
But surely God gave this, as an allay,
To the blessed union of that nuptial day
We hopt, for fear of surfeit, thought it meet
To mittigate, since we swell with what is sweet.
And for sad tales, suite grief, it is not amiss
To keep us waking, I remember this.
Jupiter one some business once sent down
Pleasure unto the world, that she might crown
Mortals with her bright beams, but (her long stay
Exceeding far the limite of her day.
Such feasts and gifts were numbered to present her,
That she forgot heaven and the God that sent her,)
He calls her thence in thunder, at whose lure,
She spreds her wings and to return more pure:
Leaves her eye-seeded roabe wherein she is suited,
Fearing that Mortal breath had it polluted.
Sorrow that long had lived in banishment,
Tug'd at the oar in Galleys, and had spent
Both money and her self in Court delays:
And sadly numbered many of her days,
By a prison Calendar, though (once she bragged
She had been in great men's bosoms:) now all raged
Crawled with a Tortoise pace or somewhat slower,
Nor found she any that desired to know her:
Till by good chance, (ill hap for us) she found,
Where Pleasure laid her garment from the ground:
She takes it, done's it, and to add a grace,
To the deformity of her wrinkled face.
An old Court Lady, out of mere compassion,
Now paints it over or puts it into fashion,
When straight from Country, City, and from Court,
Both without wit or number there resort,
Many to this imposter, all adore
Her haggish false-hood, Usurers from their store
Supply her and are cosened, Citizens buy
Her forged titles, riot and ruin fly,
Spreading their poison universally.
Nor are the bosoms of great Statesmen free
From her intelligence, who let us them see
Themselves and fortunes in false perspectiues,
Some landed Heirs consort her with there wives,
Who being a baud corrupts their all spent oaths
They have entertained the diuill in Pleasures clothes.
And since this cursed mask, which to our cost
Lasts day and night, we have entirely lost
Pleasure, who from heaven wills us be advised,
That our false Pleasure is but Care disguised.
Thus is our hope made frustrate, o sad ruth!
Death lay in ambush for His glorious Youth.
And finding him prepared was sternely bent,
To change his love into fell rauishment.
O cruel Tyrant, how can thou repair
This ruin? though hereafter thou should spare
All mankind; break thy Dart and Ebon Spade,
Thou can not cure, this wound, which thou have made.
Now view his deathbed; and from thence let us meet
In his example our own winding sheet.
There his humility, setting apart
All titles did retire into his heart.
O blessed solitariness that brings,
The best content, to mean men and to Kings.
Manna their fates, from heaven the Dove there flies
With Olive to the Arc (a sacrifice
Of Gods appeasement) Ravens in their beaks
Bring food from heaven, Gods preservation speaks
Comfort to Daniel in the Lions den,
Where contemplation leads us, happy men
To see God face to face: and such sweet peace
Did he enjoy, amongst the various press,
Of weeping visitants, it seemed he lay
As Kings at Revels sit; wished the crowd away,
The tedious sports done, and himself a sleep,
And in such joy did all his senses steep:
As great Accountants (troubled much in mind)
When they hear news of their Quietus signed.
Never found prayers, since they conuerst with death
A sweeter air to fly in then his breath.
They left in's eyes nothing but glory shining,
And though that sickness with her ouerpining
Look ghastly, yet in him it did not so,
He knew the place to which he was to go.
Had larger titles, more triumphant wreathes,
To instate him with; and forth his soul he breaths
Without a sigh; fixing his constant eye,
Upon his triumph, immortality.
He was reigned down to us out of heaven, and drew
Life to the spring, yet like a little dew
Quickly drawn thence; so many times miscarries
A Crystal glass whilst that the workman varries,
The shape in the furnace (fixed too much upon
The curiousness of the proporrion)
Yet breaks it ere't be finished, and yet then
Moulds it anew, and blows it up again,
Exceeds his workmanship and sends it thence,
To kiss the hand and lip of some great Prince.
Or like a dyall broke in wheel or screw,
That Is taken in pieces to be made go true.
So to eternity he now shall stand,
New formed and gloried by the All-working hand.
Slander which has a large and spacious tongue,
Far bigger then her mouth to publish wrong.
And yet does vtter't with so illagrace
Whilst she is a speaking no man sees her face.
That like dogs lick foul ulcers not to draw
Infection from them, butto keep them raw.
Though she often scrape up earth from good men's graus
And wast it in the standishes of slaves,
To throw upon their ink, shall never dare
To approach his Tomb, be she confined as far
From his sweet relics as is heaven from hell.
Not witchcraft shall instruct her how to spell
That barbarons language which shall sound him ill,
Fames lips shall bleed, yet nere her trumpet fill
With breath enough, but not in such sick air,
As make waste Elegies to his Tomb repair,
With scraps of commendation more base
Then are the rags they are writ on, o disgrace:
To nobler Poesy. This brings to light,
Not that they can, but that they cannot write,
Better, they had, nere troubled his sweet trance,
So, silence should have hid their ignorance:
For he is a reverend subject to be pend
Only by his sweet Homer and my friend.
Most sauadge Nations should his death deplore;
VVishing he had set his foot upon their shore,
Only to hane made them civil. This black night
Has fallen vpon's be Natures ouer-sight:
Or while the fatal sister sought to twine
His thread, and keep it eeuen, she drew it so fine,
It burst. O all composed of excellent parts,
Young, grave Me^anas of the noble Arts,
Whose beams shall break forth from thy hollow Tomb,
Stain the time past, and light the time to come.
O thou that in thy own praise still were mute,
Resembling trees, the more they are taken with fruit,
The more they strive to bow and kiss the ground.
Thou that in quest of man, have truly found,
That while men rotten vapors, do pursue,
They could not be thy friends, and flatterers too:
That despite all injustice would have proved
So just a Steward for this Land, and loved
Right for it own sake: now o woe the while,
Flet'est dead in tears, like to a moving lle.
Time was when Churches in the land were thought
Rich Iewel-houses, and this Age has bought
That time again, think not I feign, go view
Henry the seuenths Chapel, and you will find it true,
The dust of a rich Diamond's there inshrind
To buy which thence, would beggar the West-Inde.
What a dark night-peece of tempestious weather,
Have the enraged clouds summoned together,
As if our loftiest Palaces should grow
To ruin, since such Highness fell so low.
And angry Neptune makes his Palace groan,
That the deaf Rocks may Ecco the Lands moan.
Even senceles things seem to have lost their pride,
And look like that dead month wherein he died,
To clear which; soon arise that glorious day,
Which in her sacred Union shall display
Infinite blessings that we all may see,
The like to that of Virgils golden Tree.
A branch of which being slipped, there freshly grew
Another that did boast like form and hew.
And for these worthless lines, let it be said,
I hasted, till I had, this tribute paid
Unto his grave, so let the speed excuse,
The zealous error of my passionate Muse.
Yet though his praise here bear so short a wing,
Thames has more Swannes, that will his praises sing
In sweeter tunes, bee-pluming his sad Hearce,
And his three feathers, while men live, or verse.
And by these signs of love let great men know,
That sweet and generous favor they bestow
Upon the Muses, never can be lost:
For they shall live by them, when all the cost
Of gilded Monuments shall fall to dust,
" They grave in metle that sustaines no rust.
" Their wood yields honey and industrious Bees,
" Kills Spiders, and their webs like Irish Trees.
" A Poets pen like a bright Scepter swaies,
"And keeps in awe dead men's dispraise or praise.
Thus took He acquittance of all worldly strife,
" The evening shows the day, and death crowns life.
My Impresa to your Lordship, a Swan flying to a Laurel for shelter; the Mot.

Amor est mihi causa. FINIS.

