An inuectyue against Treason
Remember well, o mortal man, to whom god gives reason
How he truly most ryghtfully, does always punyshe treason.
COnsyderyng often the state of man, and of this mort all life
which is but short, and very full of mutabylyte
I called to remembrance, the hateful war and stryle
Which has been don within this realm through great iniquite
In clymyng to achyue the crown, and reyal dingnyte
Of this kingdom now called England, but sometime great bretain
And how by false and rank craycours, the kings they have been slain.
What moved the Duke of Gloucester, Edward the fourthes brother
Of his two natural Neuewes, by lyneall dissent.
Sekyng of them destruction, and also of the queen their mother,
But that he the ryghtfull rain of them, he falsely might prevent
Still workynge till he had brought to pass, his false and ill encent
by murtherynge the innocents, that he him self might raygne
Yet like a noughty false traitor, at Boseworth was he slain.
He never rested till he had, made away his own natural brother
George the good duke of clarence, that noble prince truly
Causyng the king to grant thereto, for it would be none other
For which wicked fact sone afterward, the king was right sorry
That in a but of Malmesey, the man was forced to dye
Within the tower as well was known, the story is right plain
Yet at the last this rank traitor, at bose worth was he slain.
He ekesle we with a short dagger, that mylde Henry the sext
Remaining in the tower until, his life he did there end
That he to were the crown thereby, might surely be the next
Thus to murder and false treason, he did him self extend
Until such time most ryghtfully, god brought him to his end
Leuyng him in tyranny, no longer for to raygne
But at the last for his desartes, at Boseworth was he slain.
Like treasone to our last Henry, was wrought by heinous spyghe
By old Hemson and by Dudley, as traitors most untrue
At Rychemond was their full intent. to have distroyd him quyght
That their malicious purpose, might there forthwith ensue
But god out of this present life, away them straight he drue
Taking their heads from their bodies, which thing is most certain
So not unlike to false traitors, they both were justly slain
Yet many treasons mo were done. against this noble king
By diverse men of wyckednes, as is most euydent
But god always of his goodness, reveled their dowynge
So that their evil devised things, he ever did prevent
That no myscheuous traitor could, obtain his own intent
But al their crafty false treasons, which deuelyshely they wrought
Were right sone serched out truly, and right sone brought to naught
But out alas the noughty sede, of traitors has increased
And spronge up very hastily, now in his sons days
Edward the syxt forsooth I mean, whom god has now displaced
Which sought and minded gods glory, entendyng virtuous ways
With him and his two uncles dear, they made diverse assayes
Until such time as they cought them, in their most crafty train
And so workyng most wyckedly, the ryghteous have they slain.
At last they did attempt against, their lyege Lady and Queen:
Mary by the grace of god, of England and of France
And also right heir of Irelande, most comely to be seen,
Whom the mighty lord preserve, from all hurt and myschaunce
For she to joyful godlynes. ledeth the parfect dance
Whom god at her great need does help, workynge nothing in vayyne
Subdueth to her, her enemies al, which wrought with dredful crayne:
When they forth went like men they were, most fearful to behold
Of force and eke of pusaunt power. they seemed very strong
In their attemptes also they were, both fearse and wonders bold
If god would have been helper to such, as stryueth in the wrong
But at the last he helped us, though we thought it right long
The Nobles here proclaimed her queen, in voydyng of all blame
Wherefore praise we the lord above, and mangnyfie his name.
Which thing was done the.xix. day, of this month of July
The year of God.xv. hundred fyfty adding three
In the City of glad London, proclaimed most joyfully
Where cappes and silver plenteously, about the streets did slye
The greatest joy and most gladness, that in this realm might be
The trumpetres blewe up all on hye, our Mary's royal fame
Let us therefore still gloryfy, and praise his holy name.
The nobles all consented than, together with one accord
To go to Paul's church every man, to give thanks unto the lord
Whereas they hard a song of praise, as custom it has been
To render thanks to god always, for the victory of our queen.
Such there was made in every street, as no man can express
In setting forth wine and plenty of meat: and fyers of much gladness
Such mirth was made in every place: as the like was never seen
That god had showed on us his grace: in geuyng a ryghtful queen
And where as he went forth full glad, as prince both stout and bold
He came a traytourin full sad, with heart that might be cold
The same whom al before did fear, and were in most subjection
The people would in pieces tear, if they might have election.
The same for whom before they prayde, reuyled was and curste
And he that long the swing has swayde, was now most vile and worst
We se therefore the overthrow, of al their wicked ways
How wicked might is brought furlowe, to gods great Laud and praise,
God save the Queen. quod. T. W.

Finis.
Imprynted at London by Roger Madeley, and are to besolde in Paul's Church
yearde at the sign of the Star.


