The Devils Law-case.

OR, When Women go to Law, the Devil is full of Business.

A new Tragecomaedy. The true and perfect Copy from the Original. As it was
approouedly well Acted by her Majesty's Servants.

Written by JOHN WEBSTER.

Non quam diu, sed quam been. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John Grismand, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1623.

The Scaene, NAPLES.
The Actors Names.
Romelio, a Merchant. Contarino, a Nobleman. Crispiano, a Ciuill-Lawer. Ercole,
a Knight of Malta. Ariosto, an Adnocate. Prosper 9. Iulio. A Capouchin.
Cantilupoe. Sanitonella. Leonora. Iolenta. A waiting Woman.
TO THE RIGHT WOR THIE, AND All-accomplisht Gentleman, Sir THOMAS FINCH,
Knight BARONET.
SIR, let it not appear strange, that I do aspire to your Patronage. Things
that taste of any goodness, love to be sheltered near Goodness: Nor do I
slatter in this (which I hate) only touch at the original Copy of your
virtues. Some of my other Works, as The white Devil, The Duchess of Malfi,
Guise, and others, you have formerly seen; I present this humbly to kiss your
hands, and to find your allowance. Nor do I much doubt it, knowing the
greatest of the Caesar's, have cheerfully entertained less Poems then this:
and had I thought it unworthy, I had not enquired after so worthy a Patronage.
Your self I understand, to be all courtesy. I doubt not therefore of your
acceptance, but resolve, that my election is happy. For which favor done me,
I shall ever rest

Your Worships humbly devoted, JOHN WEBSTER.

TO THE IVDITIOVS READER.
I Hold it, in these kind of Poems with that of Horace, Sap^^ntia prima,
stultitia caruisle; to be free from those vices, which proceed from ignorance;
of which I take it, this Play will ingeniously acquit it self. I do ch^^ly
therefore expose ^t to the Judicious: Locus est, and pluribus Vmb^is, oth^^^
have leave to sit down, and read it, who come unbidden. But to these, should
a man present them with the most excellent Music, it would delight them no
more, then Auriculas Citherae collecta sorde dolentes. I will not further
insist upon the approouement of it, for I am so far from praising my self,
that I have not given way to diverse of my Friends, whose vnbeg'd Commendatory
Verses offered themselves to do me service in the Front of this Poem. A great
part of the grace of this (I confess) lay in Action; yet can no Action ever be
gracious, where the decency of the Language, and Ingenious structure of the
Scaene, arrive not to make up a perfect Harmony. What I have fayl'd of this,
You that have approved my other Works, (when you have read this) tax me of.
For the rest, Non ego Ventosae Plebis, Suffragia venor.

The Deuil's Law Case. OR, When Women go to Law, the Devil is full of
Business.
Enter Romelio, and Prospero.
Prospero. YOu have shown a world of wealth;
I did not think there had been a Merchant
Lived in Italy of half your substance.

Romans I Will give the King of Spain
Ten thousand Ducats yearly, and discharge
My yearly Custom. The Hollanders scarce trade
More generally then I: my Factors wives
Wear Shaperoones of Velvet, and my Scriueners
Merely through my employment, grow so rich,
They build their Palaces and Belvidears
With musical Water-workes: Never in my life
Had I a loss at Sea. They call me on The Exchange,
The fortunate Youngman and make great suite
To venture with me: Shall I tell you Sir,
Of a strange confidence in my way of Trading,
I reckon it as certain as the gain
In erecting a Lotterie.

Pros. I pray Sir, what do you think
Of Signiour Baptisto's estate?

Rom A mere Beggar*
He Is worth some fifty thousand Ducats.

Pros. Is not that well?

Romans How well? for a man to be melted to snow water,
With toyling in the world from three and twenty,
Till threescore for poor fifty thousand Ducats.

Pros. To your estate it is little I confess:
You have the Springtide of Gold.

Romans Faith, and for Silver,
Should I not send it packing to The East Indies,
We should have a glut on it.
Enter Servant.
Ser. Here Is the great Lord Contarino.

Pro. Oh, I know his business, he is a suitor to your sister.

Romans Yes Sir, but to you,
As my most trusted friend, I utter it,
I will break the alliance.

Pros You are ill advised then;
There lives not a compleater Gentleman
In Italy, nor of a more ancient house.

Romans What tell you me of Gentry, it is naught else
But a superstitious relic of time past:
And sift it to the true worth, it is nothing
But ancient riches: and in him you know
They are pitifully in the wane; he makes his color
Of visiting us so often, to sell land,
And thinks if he can gain my sisters love,
To recover the treble value.

Pros. Sure he loves her entirely, and she deserves it.

Romans Faith, though she were
Crookt shoulderd, having such a portion,
She would have noble Suitors; but truth is,
I would wish my noble Venturer take heed,
It may be whiles he hopes to catch a Gilt head,
He may draw up a Gudgeon.
Enter Contarino.
Pros He Is come: Sir, I will leave you.

Con. I sent you the Evidence of the piece of land
I motioned to you for the Sale.

Romans Yes.

Con. Has your Counsel perused it?

Romans Not yet my Lord: Do you intend to travel?

Con. No.

Romans Oh then you loose
That which makes man most absolute.

Con. Yet I have heard of diverse, that in passing of the Alps, have but
exchanged their virtues at dear rate for other vices.


Romans Oh my Lord, lie not idle;
The chiefest action for a man of great spirit,
Is never to be out of action: we should think
The soul was never put into the body,
Which has so many rare and curious pieces
Of Mathematical motion, to stand still.
Virtue is ever sowing of her seeds:
In the Trenches for the Soldier; in the wakefull study
For the Scholar; in the sorrows of the sea
For men of our Profession, of all which
Arise and spring up Honor. Come, I know
You have some noble great Design in hand,
That you leuy so much money.

Cont. Sir, I Will tell you,
The greatest part of it I mean to employ
In payment of my Debts, and the remainder
Is like to bring me into greater bonds, as I aim it.

Romans How Sir?

Cont. I intend it for the charge of my Wedding.

Romans Are you to be married, my Lord?

Cont. Yes Sir; and I must now entreat your pardon,
That I have concealed from you a business,
Wherein you had at first been called to Counsel,
But that I thought it a less fault in Friendship,
To engage my self thus far without your knowledge,
Then to do it against your will: another reason
Was, that I would not publish to the world,
Nor have it whispered scarce, what wealthy Voyage
I went about, till I had got the Mine
In mine own possession.

Romans You are dark to me yet,

Com. I Will now remove the cloud. Sir, your sister and I
Are vowed each others, and there only wants
Her worthy mothers, and your fair consents
To style it marriage: this is a way,
Not only to make a friendship, but confirm it
For our posterities. How do you look upon it?

Rom Believe me Sir, as on the principal Colume
To advance our House: why you bring honor with you,
Which is the soul of Wealth. I shall be proud
To live to see my little Nephews ride
O'th upper hand of their Uncles; and the Daughters
Be ranckt by Heralds at Solemnities
Before the Mother: all this derived
From your Nobility. Do not blame me sir,
If I be taken with it exceedingly:
For this same honor with us Citizens,
Is a thing we are mainely fond of, especially
When it comes without money, which is very seldom,
But as you do perceive my present temper,
Be sure I am yours, fierd with scorn and laughter,
At your over confident purpose, and no doubt,
My mother will be of your mind.
Exit Romelio.
Cont. It Is my hope sir.
I do observe how this Romelio,
Has very worthy parts, were they not blasted
By insolent vain glory: there rests now
The mothers approbation to the match,
Who is a woman of that State and bearing,
Tho she be Citie-borne, both in her language,
Her Garments, and her Table, she excels
Our Ladies of the Court: she goes not gaudy,
Yet have I seen her wear one Diamond,
Would have bought twenty gay ones out of their clothes,
And some of them, without the greater grace,
Out of their honesties.
She comes, I will try
Enter Leonora. How she stands affected to me, without relating
My Contract with her Daughter.

Leon. Sir, you are nobly welcome, and presume
You are in a place that is wholly dedicated
To your service.

Con. I am ever bound to you for many special favors.

Leon. Sir, your fame renders you most worthy of it.

Cont. It could never have got a sweeter air to fly in,
Then your breath.

Leon. You have bin strange a long time, you are weary
Of our unseasonable time of feeding:
Indeed the Exchange Bell makes us dine so late;
I think the Ladies of the Court from us
Learn to lie so long a bed.

Cont. They have a kind, of Exchange among them too,
Marry unless, it be to hear of news, I take it,
Theirs, is like the New Burse, thinly furnished
With Tyers and new Fashions. I have a suite to you.

Leon. I would not have you value it the less,
If I say, It Is granted already.

Cont. You are all Bounty, it is to bestow your
Picture on me.

Leon. Oh sir, shadows, are coueted in Summer,
And with me, it is Fall o'th Leaf.

Cont. You enjoy the best of Time;
This latter Spring of yours, shows in my eye,
More fruitful and more temperate withal,
Then that whose date is only limited
By the music of the Cuckoo.

Leon. Indeed Sir, I dare tell you,
My Looking-glass is a true one, and as yet
It does not terrify me. Must you have my Picture?

Cont. So please you Lady, and I shall preserve it
As a most choice Object.

Leon. You will enjoin me to a strange punishment:
With what a compeld face a woman sits
While she is drawing? I have noted diverse,
Either to feign smiles, or suck in the lips,
To have a little mouth; ruffle the cheeks,
To have the dimple seen, and so disorder
The face with affectation, at next sitting
It has not been the same; I have known others
Have lost the entire fashion of their face,
In half an hours sitting.

Cont. How?

Leon. In hot weather,
The painting on their face has been so mellow,
They have left the poor man harder work by half,
To mend the Copy h^ wrought by* but indeed,
If ever I would have mine drawn to the life,
I would have a Paynter steal it, at such a time,
I were devoutly kneeling at my prayers,
There is then a heavenly beauty in it, the Soul
Moons in the Superficies.

Cont. Excellent Lady,
Now you teach Beauty a preservative,
More then against fading Colors; and your judgment
Is perfect in all things.

Leon. Indeed Sir, I am a Widow,
And want the addition to make it so:
For man's Experience has still been held
Woman's best eyesight. I pray sir tell me,
You are about to sell a piece of Land
To my son, I hear.

Cont. It Is truth.

Leon. Now I could rather wish,
That Noble men would ever live ith Country,
Rather then make their visit's up to the City
About such business: Oh Sir, Noble Houses
Have no such goodly Prospects any way,
As into their own Land: the decay of that,
Next to their begging Churchland, is a ruin
Worth all men's pity. Sir, I have forty thousand crowns
Sleep in my Chest, shall waken when you please,
And sly to your commands, Will you stay supper?

Cont. I cannot, worthy Lady.

Leon. I would not have you come hither sir, to sell,
But to settle your Estate. I hope you understand
Wherefore I make this proffer: so I leave you.

Cont. What a Treasury have I pearch'd.
Exit Leon. I hope you understand wherefore I make this proffer.
She has got some intelligence, how I intend to marry
Her daughter, and ingenuously perceived,
That by her Picture, which I begged of her,
I meant the fair Iolenta: here is a Letter,
Which gives express charge, not to visit her
Till midnight: fail not to come, for it is a business
That concerns both our honors.
Yours in danger to be lost, Iolenta.
It Is a strange In^unction; what should be the business?
She is not changed I hope. I Will thither straight:
For women's Resolutions in such deeds,
Like Bees, light often on flowers, and often on weeds.
Exit, Enter Ercole, Romelio, Iolenta.
Rom Oh sister come, the Tailor must to work,
To make your wedding Clothes.

Jol. The Tombe-maker, to take measure of my cossin.

Romans Tombe-maker? look you,
The king of Spain greets you.

Iol. What does this mean, do you serve Process on me?

Romans Process? come you would be witty now.

Iol. Why, what is this, I pray?

Romans Infinite grace to you* it is a Letter
From his Catholic Majesty, for the commends
Of this Gentleman for your Husband.

Iol. In good season: I hope he will not have my
Allegiance stretched to the undoing of my self.

Romans Undo your self? he does proclaim him here

Iol. Not for a Traitor, does he?

Romans You are not mad;
For one of the Noblest Gentlemen.

Iol. Yet Kings many times
Know merely but men's outsides, was this commendation
Voluntary, think you?

Romans Voluntary: what mean you by that?

Jol. Why I do not think but he begged it of the King,
And it may fortune to be out of's way:
Some better suite, that wooed have stood his Lordship
In far more stead: Letters of Commendations,
Why it is reported that they are grown stale,
When places fall in the University.
I pray you return his Pass: for to a Widow
That longs to be a Courtier, this Paper
May do Knights service.

Erco. Mistake not excellent Mistres, these commends
Express, his Majesty of Spain has given me
Both addition of honor, as you may perceive
By my habit, and a place here to command
Ore thirty Galleys; this your brother shows,
As wishing that you would be partner
In my good Fortune.

Romans I pray come hither, have I any interest in you?

Iol You are my Brother.

Romans I would have you then use me with that respect,
You may still keep me so, and to be swayed
In this maine business of life, which wants
Greatest consideration, your Marriage,
By my direction: Here Is a Gentleman --

Iol. Sir, I have often told you,
I am so little my own to dispose that way,
That I can never be his.

Romans Come, too much light
Makes you Moone-eyed, are you in love with title?
I will have a Herald, whose continual practice
Is all in pedigree, come a wooing to you,
Or an Antiquary in old Buskins.

Erco. Sir, you have done me
The maynest wrong that ere was offered
To a Gentleman of my breeding.

Romans Why sir?

Erco. You have led me
With a vain confidence, that I should marry
Your sister, have proclaimed it to my friends,
Employed the greatest Lawyers of our State
To settle her a ioynture, and the issue
Is, that I must become ridiculous
Both to my friends and enemies: I will leave you,
Till I call to you for a strict account
Of your unmanly dealing.

Romans Stay my Lord.
Do you long to have my throat cut? Good my Lord,
Stay but a little, till I have removed
This Court-mist from her eyes, till I wake her
From this dull sleep, wherein she will dream herself
To a deformed Beggar: you would marry
The great Lord Contarino.
Enter Leonoora.
Leon. Contarino
Were you talking of? he lost last night at Diee
Five thousand Ducats; and when that was gone,
Set at one throw a Lordship, that twice trebled
The former loss.

Romans And that flew after.

Leon. And most carefully
Carried the Gentleman in his Carroch
To a Lawyers Chamber, there most Legally
To put him in possession: was this wisdom?

Romans O yes, their credit in the way of gaming
Is the main thing they stand on, that must be paid,
Tho the Brewer bawle for's money; and this Lord
Does she prefer in the way of marriage,
Before our Choice. Here noble Ercole,

Leon. You Will be advised I hope: Know for your sakes
I married, that I might have children;
And for your sakes, if you will be ruled by me,
I will never marry again. Here Is a Gentleman
Is noble, rich, well featured, but above all,
He loves you entirely; his intents are aimed
For an Expedition against the Turk,
Which makes the Contract cannot be delayed.

Io. Contract? you must do this without my knowledge;
Give me some potion to make me mad,
And happily not knowing what I speak,
I may then consent to it.

Romans Come, you are mad already,
And I shall never hear you speak good sense,
Till you name him for Husband.

Erco. Lady, I will do a manly Office for you,
I will leave you, to the freedom of your own soul,
May it move whither heaven and you please.

Iol. Now you express your self most nobly.

Romans Stay sir, what do you mean to do?

Leon. Hear me, if thou do marry Contarino,
All the misfortune that did ever dwell.
In a parents curse, light on thee.

Erc. Oh rise Lady, certainly heaven never intended
Kneeling to this fearful purpose.

Iol. Your Imprecation has undone me for ever.

Erc. Give me your hand.

Iol. No sir.

Romans Giu't rue then:
Oh what rare workmanship have I seen this
To finish with your needle, what excellent music
Have these struck upon the Violl!
Now I Will teach a piece of Art.

Iol. Rather a damnable cunning,
To have me go about to giu't away,
Without consent of my soul.

Romans Kiss her my Lord, if crying had been regarded,
Maidenheads had nere been lost, at least some appearance
Of crying, as an April shower in the Sunshine.

Leon. She is yours.

Romans Nay, continue your station, and deal you in dumb show; kiss this
doggednesse out of her.


Leon. To be contracted in tears, is but fashionable.

Romans Yet suppose that they were hearty.

Leon. Virgins must seem unwilling.

Romans Oh what else; and you remember, we observe the
Like in greater Ceremonies then these Contracts,
At the Conseration of Prelates, they use ever
Twice to say nay, and take it.

Iolen. Oh Brother.

To. Keep your possession, you have the door bithring,
That Is Livery and Seasin in England; but my Lord,
Kiss that tear from her lip, you will find the Rose
The sweeter for the dew.

Iolen. Bitter as gall.

Romans I, I, all you women,
Although you be of never so low stature,
Have gall in you most abundant, it exceeds
Your brains by two ounces. I was saying somewhat;
Oh do but observe ith City, and you will find
The thriftiest bargains that were ever made,
What a deal of wrangling ere they could be brought
To an vpshot.

Leon. Great persons do not ever come together.

Romans With reuelling faces, nor is it necessary
They should; the strangeness and unwillingness
Wears the greater state, and gives occasion that
The people may buzz and talk often, tho the Bells
Be tongue-tide at the Wedding.

Leon. And truly I have heard say,
To be a little strange to one another,
Will keep your longing fresh.

Rom, I, and make you beget
More children when yare married: some Doctors
Are of that opinion. You see my Lord, we are merry
At the Contract, your sport is to come hereafter.

Ercol. I will leave you excellent Lady, and withal
Leave a heart with you so entirely yours,
That I protest, had I the least of hope
To enjoy you, tho I were to wayt the time
That Scholars do in taking their degree
In the noble Arts, 'twere nothing, howsoere
He parts from you, that will depart from life,
To do you any service, and so humbly
I take my leave.
Exit Ercole.
Jol. Sir, I will pray for you.

To. Why that's well, 'twill make your prayer complete,
To pray for your Husband.

Iol. Husband?

Leon. This is the happiest hour that I ever arrived at.

Romans Husband, I husband: come you peevish thing,
Smile me a thank for the pains I have taken.

Iol. I hate my self for being thus enforst,
You may soon judge then what I think of you
Which are the cause of it.
Enter Wayting-woman.
Romans You Lady of the Laundry, come hither.

Wayt. Sir?

Romans Look as you love your life, you have an eye
Upon your Mistress; I do henceforth bar her
All Visitants: I do hear there are Bawds abroad,
That bring Cut-works, and Man-toons, and convey Letters
To such young Gentlewomen, and there are others
That deal in Corne-cutting, and Fortune-telling,
Let none of these come at her on your life,
Nor Dewes ace the wafer woman, that prigs abroad
With Muskmeloons, and Malakatoones;
Nor the Scotchwoman with the Citterne, do you mark,
Nor a Dancer by any means, tho he ride on's foot-cloth,
Nor a Hackney Coachman, if he can speak French.

Wayt. Why sir?

Romans By no means: no more words;
Nor the woman with Maribone puddings. I have heard
Strange iugling tricks have been conveyed to a woman
In a pudding: you are apprehensiue?

Wayt. Oh good sir, I have traueld.

Romans When you had a Bastard, you traueld indeed:
But my precious Chaperoones,
I trust thee the better for that; for I have heard,
There is no warier Keeper of a Park,
To prevent Stalkers, or your Night-walkers,
Then such a man, as in his youth has been
A most notorious Deare-stealer.

Wayt. Very well sir,
You may use me at your pleasure.

Romans By no means Winifrid, that were the way
To make thee travel again: Come be not angry,
I do but jest, thou know, wit and a woman,
Are two very frail things, and so I leave you.
Exit.
Wayt. I could weep with you, but it is no matter,
I can do that at any time, I have now
A greater mind to rail a little: Plague of these
Unsanctified Matches; they make us loathe
The most natural desire our grandame Eve ever left us.
Force one to marry against their will; why it is
A more ungodly work, then enclosing the Commons.

Iolen. Prithee peace;
This is indeed an argument so common,
I cannot think of matter new enough,
To express it bad enough,

Wayt. Here Is one I hope will put you out often.
Enter Contarino.
Cont. How now sweet Mistress?
You have made sorrow look lovely of late,
You have wept.

Wait. She has done nothing else these three days; had you stood behind the
Arras, to have heard her shed so much salt water as I have done, you would have
thought she had been turned Fountain.


Con. I would feign know the cause can be worthy this
Thy sorrow.

Iol. Reach me the Caskanet, I am studying Sir,
To take an Inuentory of all that is mine.

Con. What to do with it Lady?

Iol. To make you a Deed of gift.

Con. That Is done already; you are all mine.

Wai. Yes, but the Devil would feign put in for's share,
In likeness of a Separation.

Iol. Oh sir, I am bewitched.

Con Ha?

Iol. Most certain, I am forespoken,
To be married to another: can you ever think
That I shall ever thrive in it? Am I not then bewitched?
All comfort I can teach my self is this,
There is a time left for me to dye nobly,
When I cannot live so?

Con. Give me in a word, to whom, or by whose means
Are you thus torn from me?

Iol. By Lord Ercole, my Mother, and by Brother.

Cont. I Will make his bravery fitter for a grave,
Then for a wedding.

Jolen. So you will beget
A far more dangerous and strange disease
Out of the cure; you must love him again
For my sake: for the noble Ercole
Had such a true compassion of my sorrow.
Hark in your ear, He show you his right worthy
Demeanor to me.

Wayt. Oh you pretty ones,
I have seen this Lord many a time and often
Set her in's lap, and talk to her of Love
So feelingly, I do protest it has made me
Run out of my self to think on it; oh sweet breathed
Monkey, how they grow together? well, it is my opinion,
He was no woman's friend that did invent
A punishment for kissing.

Cont. If he bear himself so nobly,
The manliest office I can do for him,
Is to afford him my pity, since h e's like
To fail of so dear a purchase: for your mother,
Your goodness quits her ill; for your brother,
He that vows friendship to a man, and proves
A traitor deserves rather to be hang d,
Then he that counterfets money; yet for your sake
I must sign his pardon too. Why do you tremble?
Be safe, you are now free from him.

Iolen. Oh but sir,
The intermission from a ^it of an ague
Is grievous: for indeed it does prepare us,
To entertain torment next morning.

Cont. Why he is gone to sea.

Iol. But he may return too soon.

Con. To avoid which, we will instantly be married.

Wa. To avoid which, get you instantly to bed together,
Do, and I think no Civil Lawyer for his fee
Can give you better Council.

Iol. Fie upon thee, prithee leave us.

Con. Be of comfort sweet Mistress.

Jol. On one condition we may have no quarrel about

Con. Upon my life none. (this.

Iol. None upon your honor?

Con. With whom? with Ercole?
You have delivered him guiltless.
With your Brother? He Is part of your self.
With your complementall Mother?
I use not sight with women
To morrow we will be married:
Let those that would oppose this union,
grow nere so subtle, and entangle themselves
In their own work like Spiders, while we two
Haste to our noble wishes, and presume,
The hindrance of it will breed more delight,
As black copartaments shows gold more bright.
Exeunt
Finis Actus primi.
ACTVS SECVNDVS, SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Crispiano, Sanitonella.
Crisp Am I well habited?

San. Exceeding well; any man would take you for a Merchant: but pray sir
resolve me, what should be the reason, that you being one of the most eminent
Civil Lawyers in Spain, and but newly arrived from the East Indies, should
take this habit of a Merchant upon you?


Crisp. Why my son lives here in Naples and in's riot
Does far exceed the exhibition I allowed him.

San. So then, and in this disguise you mean to trace him.

Cri. Partly for that, but there is other business
Of greater consequence.

San. Faith for his expense, it is nothing to your estate, What to Don Crispiano,
the famous Corrigidor of Civil, who by his mere practice of the Law, in less
time then half a Iubile, has gotten thirty thousand Ducats a year.


Crisp. Well, I will give him line,
Let him run on in's course of spending.

San. Freely?

Crisp. Freely:
For I protest, if that I could conceive
My son would take more pleasure or content,
By any course of riot, in the expense,
Then I took joy, nay souls felicity
In the getting of it, should all the wealth I have
Waste to as small an atomy as Flies
In The 'unne, I do protest on that condition,
It should not move me.

San. How Is this? Cannot he take more peasure in spending it ryotously, then
you have done by scraping it together: O ten thousand times more, and I make no
question, five hundred young gallants will be of my opinion.

Why all the time of your Collectionship,
Has been a perpetual Callender, begin first
With your melancholy study of the Law
Before you come to singer the Ruddocks, after that
The tyring importunity of Clyents,
To rise so early, and sit up so late,
You made your self half ready in a dream,
And never prayed but in your sleep: Can I think,
That you have half your lungs left with crying out
For Judgments, and days of Trial. Remember sir,
How often have I borne you on my shoulder,
Among a sh^ale or swarm of reeking Night-caps,
When that your Worship has bepist yourselfe,
Either with vehemence of Argument,
Or being out from the matter. I am merry.

Crisp. Be so.

San. You could eat like a Gentleman, at leisure;
But swallow it like ^lap-dragons, as if you had lived
With chewing the Cud after.

Crisp. No pleasure in the world was comparable to it.

San. Possible?

Crisp. He shall never taste the like, unless he study law.

San. What, not in wenching sir?
It Is a Court game, believe it,
As familiar as Gleeke, or any other.

Crisp Wenching? O fie, the Disease follows it:
Beside, can the fingring Taffaties, or Lawnes,
Or a painted hand, or a Breast be like the pleasure
In taking Clyents fees, and piling them
In several goodly rows before my Deske?
And according to the bigness of each heap,
Which I took by a leare: for Lawyers do not tell them,
I vayl'd my cap, and withal gave great hope
The Cause should go on their sides.

San. What think you then
Of a good cry of Hounds? It has been known
Dogs have hunted Lordships to a fault.

Crisp. Cry of Curres?
The noise of Clyents at my Chamber door,
Was sweeter Music far, in my conceit,
Then all the Hanting in Europe.

San. Pray stay sir,
Say he should spend it in good Housekeeping.

Crisp. I marry sir, to have him keep a good house,
And not sell't away, I Would find no fault with that:
But his Kitchen, I Would have no bigger then a Saw-pit;
For the smalnesse of a Kitchen without question,
Makes many Noblemen in France and Spain,
Build the rest of the house the bigger.

San. Yes, Mock-beggers.

Crisp. Some seuenscore Chimneyes,
But half of them have no Tonnels.

San. A pox upon them Cuckshawes that beget
Such monsters without fundaments.

Crisp. Come, come, leave citing other vanities;
For neither Wine, nor Lust, nor riotous feasts,
Rich clothes, nor all the pleasure that the Devil
Has ever practiced with, to raise a man
To a Devils likeness, ere brought man that pleasure
I took in getting my wealth: so I conclude.
If he can outvie me, let it fly to the Devil.
Yon's my son, what company keeps he?

San. The Gentleman he talks with,
Enter Romans Julio. Ariosto, Baptista Is Romelio the Merchant.

Crisp. I never saw him till now,
A has a brave sprightly look, I knew his father,
And soiourn'd in his house two years together,
Before this young man's birth; I have news to tell him
Of certain losses happened him at Sea,
That will not please him.

San What that dapper fellow
In the long stocking? I do think 'twas he
Came to your lodging this morning.

Crisp. It Is the same,
There he stands, but a little piece of flesh,
But he is the very miracle of a Lawyer,
One that persuades men to peace, and compounds quarrels
Among his neighbors, without going to law.

San. And is he a Lawyer?

Crisp. Yes, and will give counsel
In honest causes gratis, never in his life
Took fee, but he came and spoke for it, is a man
Of extreme practice, and yet all his longing,
Is to become a Judge.

San. Indeed that is a rare longing with men of his profession. I think heel
prove the miracle of a lawier indeed.


Romans Here Is the man brought word your father dyed in the Indies.


Iul. He died in perfect memory I hope,
And made me his heir.

Cri. Yes sir.

Iul. He Is gone the right way then without question:
Friend, in time of mourning, we must not use any action,
That is but accessory to the making men merry,
I do therefore give you nothing for your good tidings.

Cris. Nor do I look for it sir.

Iul. Honest fellow, give me thy hand, I do not think but thou have carried
New years gifts to the Court in thy days, and learndst there to be so free of
thy pains taking.


Romans Here Is an old Gentleman says he was chamberfellow to your father, when
they studied the Law together at Barcellona.


Iul Do you know him?

Romans Not I, he is newly come to Naples.

Iul. And what is his business?

Romans A says he is come to read you good counsel.

Crisp. To him, rate him soundly.
This is spoke aside,
Iul. And what is your counsel?

Ari. Why, I would have you leave your whoring.

Iul. He comes hotly upon me at first: whoring?

Ari. O young quat, incontinence is plagued
In all the creatures of the world.

Iul. When did you ever hear, that a Cockesparrow
Had the French pox?

Ari. When did you ever know any of them fat, but in the nest? ask all your
Cantaride-mongers that question; remember your self sir.


Iul. A very fine Naturallist, a Phisician, I ^a^e you by your round slop; for
it is just of the bigness, and no more, of the case for a Vrinall: it is concluded,
you are a Phisician. What do you mean sir, youl^ take cold.


Ari. It Is concluded, ^ou are a fool, a precious one, you are a mere stick of
Sugar Candy, a man may look quite through you


Jul. You are a very bold gamester.

Ar. I can play at chesse, and know how to handle a rook.

Iul. Pray preserve your velvet from the dust.

Ari. Keep your hat upon the block sir,
'Twill continue fashion the longer.

Iul. I was never so abused with the hat in the hand
In my life.

Ari. I will put on, why look you,
Those lands that were the Clyents, are now become
The Lawyers; and those tenements that were
The Country Gentleman's, are now grown
To be his Tailors.

Iul. Tailors?

Ario. Yes, Tailors in France, they grow to great
Abominable purchase, and become great officers.
How many Ducats think you he has spent
Within a tweluemonth, besides his fathers allowance?

Iul. Besides my fathers allowance?
Why Gentleman, do you think an Auditor begat me?
Would you have me make even at years end?

Romans A hundred ducats a month in breaking Venice glasses.


Ario. He learnt that of an English drunkard,
And a Knight too, as I take it.
This comes of your numerous Wardrobe.

Romans I, and wearing Cut-worke, a pound a Purle.

Ario Your dainty embroydered stockings,
With ouerblowne Roses, to hide your gowtie anckles.

To. And wearing more taffaty for a garter, then would serve the Gally
dung-boat for streamers. (strissimi.


Ari. Your switching up at the horse-race, with the Illu-

Romans And studying a pussing Arithmatick at the cockpit.


Ari. Shaking your elbow at the Taule-boord.

Romans And resorting to your whore in hired velvet,
With a spangled copper fringe at her netherlands.

Ari. Whereas if you had staid at Padua, and fed upon
Cow trotters, and fresh beef to Supper.

Iul. How I am bayted?

Ari. Nay, be not you so forward with him neither, for it is thought, you will prove
a maine part of his undoing.


Iul. I think this fellow is a witch

Romans Who I sir?

Ari. You have certain rich city Chuffes, that when they have no acres of
their own, they will go and plow up fools, and turn them into excellent
meadow; besides some Enclosures for the first Cherries in the Spring,

And Apricocks to pleasure a friend at Court with.

You have Potecaries deal in selling commodities to young Gallants, will put
four or five coxcombs into a sieue, and so drum with them upon their
Counter; they will searse them through like Ginny Pepper, they cannot endure to
find a man like a pair of Tarriers, they would undo him in a trice.


Romans May be there are such.

Ari. O terrible exactors, fellows with six hands,
And three heads.

Iul. I those are Hell hounds.

Ari. Take heed of them, they will rent thee like Tenterhookes. Hark in your
ear, there is intelligence upon you; the report goes, there has been gold
conveyed beyond the Sea in hollow Aneres. Farewell, you shall know me better, I
will do thee more good, then thou art aware of.


Iul. He Is a mad fellow.
Exit Ar.
San. He would have made an excellent Barber,
He does so curry it with his tongue.
Exit.
Crisp. Sir, I was directed to you.

Romans From whence?

Crisp. From the East Indies.

Romans You are very welcome.

Cri. Please you walk apart,
I shall acquaint you with particulars
Touching your Trading in the East Indies.

Romans Willingly, pray walk sir.
Ex. Cris. Romans Enter Ercole.
Erc. Oh my right worthy friends, you have staid me long, one health, and then
aboard; for all the Galleys are come about.

Enter Contarino.
Cont. Signior Ercol^,
The wind has stood my friend sir, to prevent
Your putting to Sea.

Erc. Pray why sit?

Cont. Only love sir,
That I might take my leave sir, and withal
Entreat from you a private recommends
To a friend in Malta, 'twould be delivered
To your bosom, for I had no time to write.

Erc. Pray leave us Gentlemen.
Exeunt. Wilt please you sit?
They sit down.
Con. Sir, my love to you has proclaimed you one,
Whose word was still led by a noble thought,
And that thought followed by as fair a died:
Deceive not that opinion, we were Students
At Padua together, and have long
To The worlds ^ye shown like friends,
Was it hearty on your part to me?

Erc. Unfeigned.

Con. You are false
To the good thought I held of you, and now
Join the worst part of man to you, your malice,
To uphold that falsehood, sacred innocence
Is fled your bosom. Signior, I must tell you,
To draw the picture of unkindness truly,
Is to express two that have dearly loved,
And fallen at variance; it is a wonder to me,
Knowing my interest in the fair Iolenta,
That you should love her.

Erc. Compare her beauty, and my youth together,
And you will find the fair effects of love
No miracle at all.

Con Yes, it will prove prodigious to you.
I must stay your Voyage.

Erc. Your Warrant must be mighty.

Con. 'Tas a Seal from heaven
To do it, since you would ravish from me
What Is there entitled mine: and yet I vow,
By the essential front of spotless Virtue,
I have compassion of both our youths:
To approve which, I have not taken the way,
Like an Italian, to cut your throat
By practice, that had given you now for dead,
And never frownd upon you.

Erc. You deal fair sir.

Con. Quit me of one doubt, pray sir.

Erc. Move it.

Con. It Is this,
Whether her Brother were a maine Instrument
In her design for Marriage.

Erc. If I tell truth, you will not credit me.

Con. Why?

Erc. I will tell you truth,
Yet show some reason you have not to believe me:
Her Brother had no hand in it, is it not hard
For you to credit this: for you may think,
I count it baseness to engage another
Into my quarrel; and for that take leave
To dissemble the truth. Sir, if you will fight
With any but my self, fight with her Mother,
She was the motive.

Con. I have no enemy in the world then, but your self;
You must fight with me.

Erc. I will sir.

Con. And instantly.

Erc. I will haste before you, point whither.

Con Why you speak nobly, and for this fair dealing,
Were the rich Jewel which we vary for,
A thing to be divided, by my life,
I would be well content to give you half:
But since it is vain to think we can be friends,
It Is needful one of us be taken away,
From being the others enemy.

Erc. Yet me thinks, this looks not like a quarrel.

Con. Not a quarrel?

Erc. You have not apparelled your sury well,
It goes too plain like a Scholar.

Con. It is an ornament makes it more terrible,
And you shall find it
A weighty injury, and attended on
By discreet valor; because I do not strike you,
Or give you the lie, such foul preparatiues
Would show like the stale injury of Wine.
I reserve my rage to sit on my swords point,
Which a great quantity of your best blood
Cannot satisfy.

Erc. You promise well to your self.
Shall's have no Seconds?

Con. None, for fear of prevention.

Erc. The length of our weapons.

Con. We Will sit them by the way:
So whether our time calls us to live or dye,
Let us do both like noble Gentlemen,
And true Italians.

Erc. For that let me embrace you:

Con. Me thinks, being an Italian, I trust you
To come somewhat too near me:
But your Jealousy gave that embrace to try
If I were armed, did it not.

Erc. No believe me,
I take your heart to be sufficient proof,
Without a privy coat; and for my part,
A Taffaty is all the shirt of Mayle
I am armed with.

Cont. You deal equally.
Exeunt. Enter Iulio, and Servant.
Iul. Where are these Gallants, the brave Ercole,
And noble Contarino?

Ser. They are newly gone sir,
And bade me tell you, that they will return
Within this half hour.
Enter Romelio.
Iul. Met you the Lord Ercole?

Rom No, but I met the devil in villainous tidings.

Iul. Why, what is the matter?

Romans Oh I am powered out like water, the greatest
Rivers in the world are lost in the Sea,
And so am I: pray leave me.
Where Is Lord Ercole?

Iu. You were scarce gone hence, but in came Contarino.

Romans Contarino?

Iu. And entreated some private conference with Ercole,
And on the sudden they have giu'ns the slip.

Romans One mischief never comes alone:
They are gone to fight.

Iul. To fight?

Romans And you be Gentlemen,
Do not talk, but make haste after them.

Iul. Let Us take several ways then,
And if it be possible for women's sakes,
For they are proper men, use our endeauours,
That the prick do not spoil them.
Exeunt. Enter Ercole, Contarino.
Con. You Will not forgo your interest in my Mistress?

Erc. My sword shall answer that; come, are you ready?

Con. Before you fight sir, think upon your cause,
It is a wondrous foul one, and I wish,
That all your exercise these four days past,
Had been employed in a most fervent prayer,
And the foul sin for which you are to fight
Chiefly remembered in it.

Erc. I Would as soon take
Your counsel in Divinity at this present,
As I would take a kind direction from you
For the managing my weapon; and indeed,
Both would show much alike.
Come are you ready?

Con Bethink your self,
How fair the object is that we contend for.

Erc. Oh, I cannot forget it.
They fight.
Con. You are hurt.

Erc. Did you come hither only to tell me so,
Or to do it? I mean well, but 'twill not thrive.

Con. Your cause, your cause sir:
Will you yet be a man of Conscience, and make
Restitution for your rage upon your deathbed?

Er. Never, till the grave gather one of us.
Fight.
Con. That was fair, and home I think.

Er. You prate as if you were in a Fence-schoole.

Con. Spare your youth, have compassion on your self.

Er. When I am all in pieces, I am now unfit
For any Ladies bed; take the rest with you.
Contarino wounded, falls upon Ercole.
Con. I am lost in too much daring: yield your sword.

Er. To the pangs of death I shall, but not to thee.

Con. You are now at my repayring, or confusion:
Beg your life.

Erc Oh most foolishly demanded,
To bid me beg that which thou can not give.
Enter Romelio, Prosp. Bapt. Ario Iulio.
Pro. See both of them are lost; we come too late.

Romans Take up the body, and convey it
To Saint Sebastians Monastery.

Con. I will not part with his sword, I have will not.

Iul. You shall not:
Take him up gently: so, and bow his body,
For fear of bleeding inward.
Well, these are perfect lovers.

Pros. Why, I pray?

Iul. It has been ever my opinion,
That there are none love perfectly indeed,
But those that hang or drown themselves for love:
Now these have chose a death next to Beheading,
They have cut one another throats,
Brave valiant Lads.

Pro. Come, you do ill, to set the name of valor
Upon a violent and mad despair.
Hence may all learn, that count such actions well,
The roots of fury shoot themselves to hell.
Exeunt. Enter Romelio, Ariosto.
Ario. Your losses I confess, are infinite,
Yet sir, you must have patience.

Romans Sir, my losses I know, but you I do not.

Ari. It Is most true, I am but a stranger to you, but am
Wished by some of your best friends, to visit you,
And out of my experience in the world,
To instruct you patience.

Romans Of what profession are you?

Ario. Sir, I am a Lawyer.

Romans Of all men living,
You Lawyers I account the only men
To confirm patience in us, your delays
Would make three parts of this little Christian world
Run out of their wits else.
Now I remember, you read Lectures to Iulio,
Are you such a Leech for patience?

Ari. Yes sir, I have had some crosses.

Romans You are married then I am certain.

Ari. That I am sir.

Romans And have you studied patience?

Ario. You shall find I have.

Romans Did you ever see your wife make you Cuckold?

Ario. Make me Cuckold?

Romans I ask it seriously, and you have not seen that,
Your patience has not taken the right degree
Of wearing Scarlet; I should rather take you
For a Bachelor in the Art, then for a Doctor.

Ari. You are merry. (angry.

Romans No sir, with leave of your patience, I am horrible

Ari. What should move you?
Put forth that harsh Interrogatory, if these eyes
Ever saw my wife do the thing you wot of.

Romans Why I Will tell you,
Most radically to try your patience,
And the mere question shows you but a Dunse in it.
It has made you angry; there is another Lawyers beard
In your forehead, you do brissle.

Ari. You are very conceited:
But come, this is not the right way to cure you.
I must talk to you like a Divine.

Rom I have heard some talk of it very much, and many
times to their Auditors impatience; but I pray,
What practice do they make often in their lives?
They are too full of choler with living honest,
And some of them not only impatient
Of their own sleightest injuries, but stark mad,
At one another preferment: now to you sir,
I have lost three goodly Carracks.

Ari. So I hear.

Romans The very Spice in them,
Had they been shipwrackt here upon our coast,
Would have made all our Sea a Drench.

Ario. All the sick horses in Italy
Would have been glad of your loss them.

Romans You are conceited too,

Ario. Come, come, come,
You gave those ships most strange, most dreadful,
And unfortunate names, I never looked they would prosper.

Romans Is there any ill Omen in giving names to ships?

Ario. Did you not call one, The Storms Defiance;
Another, The Scourge of the Sea; and the third, The great Leuiathan?

Romans Very right sir.

Ari. Very deuillish names
All three of them: and surely I think,
They were cursed in their very cradles, I do mean,
When they were upon their Stocks.

Romans Come, you are superstitious,
I Will give you my opinion, and it is serious:
I am persuaded there came not Cuckolds enough
To the first Launching of them,
And 'twas that made them thrive the worse for it.
Oh your Cuckolds hansell is praid for in the City.

Ari. I will hear no more,
Give me thy hand, my intent of coming hither,
Was to persuade you to patience; as I live,
If ever I do visit you again,
It shall be to entreat you to be angry, sure I will,
I Will be as good as my word, believe it.
Exit.
Romans So sir: how now?
Enter Leonora. Are the Scritch-owles abroad already?

Leon. What a dismal noise yon bell makes,
Sure some great person's dead.

Romans No such matter,
It is the common Bell-man goes about,
To publish the sale of goods.

Leon. Why do they ring before my gate thus?
Let them into'th Court, I cannot understand
What they say.
Enter two Belmen and a Capouchin.
Cap. For pities sake, you that have tears to shed,
Sigh a soft Requiem, and let fall a Bead,
For two unfortunate Nobles, whose sad fate
Leaves them both dead, and excommunicate:
No Churchmans prayer to comfort their last groans,
No sacred seed of earth to hide their bones;
But as their fury wrought them out of breath,
The Canon speaks them guilty of their own death.

Leon. What Noble men I pray sir?

Cap. The Lord Ercole, and the noble Contarino,
Both of them slain in single combat.

Leo. O, I am lost for ever.

Romans Denide Christian burial, I pray what does that,
Or the dead lazy march in the Funeral,
Or the flattery in the Epitaphs, which shows
More sluttish far then all the Spiders webs
Shall ever grow upon it: what do these
Add to our well being after death?

Capu. Not a scruple.

Romans Very well then,
I have a certain Meditation,
If I can think of somewhat to this purpose,
I Will say it to you, while my mother there
Numbers her Beads.
You that dwell near these graves and vaults,
Which often do hide Physicions faults,
Note what a small Room does suffice,
To express men's good, their vanities,
Would fill more volume in small hand,
Then all the Evidence of Church-land.
Funerals hide men in civil wearing,
And are to the Drapers a good hearing,
Make the Heralds laugh in their black Payment,
And all die Worthies die worth payment.
To the Altar Offerings, tho their fame,
And all the charity of their name,
'Tweene heaven and this yield no more light,
Then rotten trees, which shine in the night.
Oh look the last Act be the best in the Play,
And then rest gentle bones, yet pray,
That when by the precise you are vewed,
A Supersede as be not sued,
To remooub you to a place more ayrie,
That in your stead they may keep chary
Stockfish, or Seacole, for the abuses
Of sacrilege have turned graves to vilder uses.
How then can any Monument say,
Here rest these bones, till the last day,
When time swift both of foo^ and feather,
May bear them the Sexton ^ens not whither.
What care I then, tho my last sleep,
Be in the Desert, or in the deep,
No Lamp, nor Taper, day and night,
To give my Charnell chargeable light:
I have there like quantity of ground,
And at the last day I shall be found.
Now I pray leave me.

Capu. I am sorry for your losses.

Romans Vm sir the more spacious that the Tennis court is,
The more large is the Hazard.
I dare the spiteful Fortune do her worst,
I can now fear nothing.

Capu. Oh sir, yet consider,
He that is without fear, is without hope,
And sins from presumption; better thoughts attend you.

To. Poor Iolenta, should she hear of this?
Exit. Ca. She would not after the report keep fresh,
So long as flowers in graves.
Enter Prospero. How now Prospero.

Pro. Contarino has sent you here his Will,
Wherein a has made your sister his sole heir.

Rom Is he not dead?

Pro. He Is yet living.

Romans Living? the worse luck.

Leo. The worse: I do protest it is the best,
That ever came to disturb my prayers.

Romans How?

Leon. Yet I would have him live
To satisfy public Justice for the death
Of Ercole: oh go visit him for heavens sake.
I have within my Closet a choice Relicke,
Preservative against swounding, and some earth,
Brought from the Holy Land, right sovereign
To staunch blood: has he skillful Surgeons, think you?

Pro. The best in Naples?

Romans How often has he been dressed?

Pro. But once.

Leo. I have some skill this way:
The second or third dressing will show clearly,
Whether there be hope of life: I pray be near him,
If there be any soul can bring me word,
That there is hope of life.

Romans Do you prise his life so?

Leo. That he may live;
I mean to come to his try all, to satisfy the Law.

Romans Oh, is it nothing else?

Leo I shall be the happiest woman.
Exeunt Le. Pro.
Romans Here is cruelty appareled in kindness.
I am full of thoughts, strange ones, but they are no good ones.
I must visit Contarino, upon that
Depends an Engine shall weigh up my losses,
Were they sunk as low as hell; yet let me think,
How I am impaired in a hour, and the cause often,
Lost in security: oh how this wicked world bewitches,
Especially made insolent with riches:
So Sails with fore-winds stretched, do soonest break,
And Piramides ath top, are still most weak.
Exit. Enter Capuchin, Ercole led between two.
Cap. Look up sir, you are preserved beyond natural reason, you were brought
dead out a'th field, the Surgeons ready to have embalmed you.


Erc. I do look on my action with a thought of terror,
To do ill and dwell in it, is unmanly.

Cap. You are divinely informed sir.

Erc. I fought for one, in whom I have no more right,
Then false executors have in Orphans goods,
They cozen them of; yet tho my cause were naught,
I rather chose the hazard of my soul,
Then foregoe the complement of a chollerick man.
I pray continue the report of my death, and give out,
Cause the Church denied me Christian burial,
The Vice admiral of my Galleys took my body,
With purpose to commit it to the earth,
Either in Cicil, or Malta.

Cap. What aim you at by this rumor of your death?

Erc. There is hope of life
In Contarino; and he has my prayers,
That he may live to enjoy what is his own,
The fair Iolenta; where, should it be thought
That I were breathing, happily her friends
Would oppose it still.

Capu. But if you be supposed dead,
The Law will strictly prosecute his life
For your murder.

Erc. That Is prevented thus,
There does belong a noble Privilege
To all his Family, ever since his father,
Bore from the worthy Emperor Charles the fifth,
An answer to the French Kings challenge, at such time
The two noble Princes were engaged to fight.
Upon a frontier arm o'th sea in a flat-bottom'd Boat,
That if any of his Family should chance
To kill a man in the Field, in a noble cause,
He should have his Pardon; now sir, for his cause,
The world may judge if it were not honest.
Pray help me in speech, it is very painful to me.

Capu Sir I shall.

Erc. The guilt of this lies in Romelio,
And as I hear, to second this good Contract,
He has got a Nun with child.

Cap. These are crimes that either must make work
For speedy repentance, or for the Devil.

Erc. I have much compassion on him,
For sin and shame are ever tide together,
With Gordion knots, of such a strong thread spun,
They cannot without violence be undone.
Exeunt.
Explicit Actus secundi.
ACTVS TERTIVS, SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Ariosto, Crispiano.
Ariost. Well sir, now I must claim your promise,
To reveal to me the cause why you live thus clouded.

Crisp. Sir, the King of Spain
Suspects, that your Romelio here, the Merchant
Has discovered some Gold-myne to his own use,
In the West Indies, and for that employes me,
To discover in what part of Christendom
He vents this I reasure: Besides, he is informed
What mad tricks has bin played of late by Ladies.

Ari Most true, and I am glad the King has heard on it:
Why they use their Lords, as if they were their Wards;
And as your Dutchwomen in the Low Countries,
Take all and pay all, and do keep their Husbands
So silly all their lives of their own estates,
That when they are sick, and come to make their Will,
They know not precisely what to give away
From their wives, because they know not what they are
So hear should I repeat what factions, (worth:
What Bat-fowling for Offices,
As you must conceive their Game is all i'thnight,
What calling in question one another honesties
Withal what sway they bear in the Viceroyes Court,
You Would wonder at it:
Twill do well shortly, can we keep them off
From being of our Council of War.

Crisp. Well, I have vowed,
That I will never sit upon the Bench more,
Unless it be to curb the insolences.
Of these women.

Ario. Well, take it on my word then,
Your place will not long be empty.
Exeunt. Enter Romelio in the habit of a Jew.
Romans Excellently well habited, why me thinks,
That I could play with mine own shadow now,
And be a rare Italienated Jew;
To have as many several change of faces,
As I have seen carved upon on Cherrystone;
To wind about a man like rotten Iuie,
Eat into him like Quicksiluer, poison a friend
with pulling but a loose hair fro^'s beard, or give a dre^ch,
He should singer often nine years, and nere complain,
But in the Spring and Fall, and so the cause
Imputed to the disease natural, for slight villainies,
As to coin money, corrupt Ladies Honors,
Betray a Town to the Turk, or make a Bonefire
A'th Christian Navy, I could settle to it,
As if I had eat a Politician,
And disgested him to nothing but pure blood.
But stay, I loose my self, this is the house.
Within there.
Enter two Surgeons.
1 Sur. Now sir.

Romans You are the men of Art, that as I hear,
Have the Lord Contarino under cure.

2. Sur. Yes sir, we are his Surgeons,
But he is past all Cure.

Romans Why, is he dead?

1. Sur. He is speechless sir, and we do find his wound
So fester'd near the vitals, all our Art
By warm drinks, cannot clear th'impostumation,
And he is so weak, to make
By the Orifix were present death to him.

Rom He has made a Will I hear.

1. Sur. Yes sir.

Rom And deputed Iolenta his heir.

2. Sur. He has, we are witness to it.

Rom Has not Romelio been with you yet,
To give you thanks, and ample recompense
For the pains you have taken.

1. Sur. Not yet.

Romans Listen to me Gentlemen, so I protest,
If you will seriously mind your own good,
I am come about a business shall convey
I arge legacies from Contarino's Will
To both of you.

2 Sur. How sir?
Why Romans has the will, and in that he has given us nothing.

Romans I pray attend me: I am a Phisician.

2. Sur. A Phisician? where do you practice?

Romans In Rome.

1. Sur. O then you have store of Patients.

Romans Store? why look you, I can kill my ^o a month
And work but in the forenoones: you will give me leave
To jest and be merry with you, but as I said,
All my study has been Physic, I am sent
From a noble Roman that is near a kin
To Contarino, and that ought indeed,
By the Law of Iliance, be his only heir,
To practice his good and yours.

Both. How, I pray sir?

Romans I can by an Extraction which I have,
Tho he were speechless, his eyes set in's head,
His pulses without motion, restore to him
For half an hours space, the use of sense,
And perhaps a little speech: having done this,
If we can work him, as no doubt we shall,
To make another Will, and therein assign
This Gentleman his Heir, I will assure you,
Fore I depart this house, ten thousand Ducats,
And then we will pull the pillow from his head,
And let him ^^ne go whither the Religion sends him
That he died in.

1. Sur. Will you giue's ten thousand Ducats?

Rom Upon my Iewisme.
Contarino in a bed.
2. Sur. It Is a bargain sir, we are yours:
Here is the Subject you must work on.

Romans Well said, you are honest men,
And go to the business roundly: but Gentlemen,
I must use my Art singly.

1 Sur. Oh sir, you shall have all priuacy,

Romans And the doors locked to me.

2. Sur. At your best pleasure.
Yet for all this, I will not trust this Jew.

1. Sur. Faith, to say truth,
I do not like him neither, he looks like a rogue.
This is a fine toy fetch a man to life,
To make a new Will, there is some trick in it.
I Will be near you Jew.
Exeunt Surgeons.
Romans Excellent as I would wish: these credulous fools
Have given me freely what I would have bought
With a great deal of money. -Softly, here is breuth yet;
Now Ercole, for part of the Revenge,
Which I have vowed for thy untimely death:
Besides, this politic working of my own,
That scorns President, why should this great man live,
And not enjoy my sister, as I have vowed
He never shall? Oh, he may alters will
Every New Moon if he please; to prevent which,
I must put in a strong Caveat. Come forth then
My desperate Steeletto, that may be worn
In a woman's hair, and nere discovered,
And either would be taken for a Bodkin,
Or a curling iron at most; why it is an engine,
That Is only fit to put in execution Barmotho Pigs,
A most unmanly weapon,
That steals into a man's life he knows not how:
O great Caesar, he that past the shocke
Of so many armed Pikes, and poisoned Darts,
Swords, Slings, and Battleaxes, should at length
Sitting at ease on a cushion, come to dye
By such a Shoo-makers aule as this, his soul et forth
At a hole, no bigger then the incision
Made for a wheal^: vos foot, I am horribly angry,
That he should dye so scuruily: yet wherefore
Do I condemn thee thereof so cruelly?
Yet shake him by the hand, it is to express,
That I would never have such weapons used,
But in a plot like this, that is treacherous:
Yet this shall prove most merciful to thee,
For it shall preserve thee
From dying on a public Scaffold, and withal
Bring thee an absolute Cure, thus.
Stabs him. So, it is done: and now for my escape.
Enter Surgeons.
1. Sur. You Rogue Mountebanke,
I will try whether your inwards can endure
To be washed in scalding lead.

Romans Hold, I turn Christian.

2. Sur. Nay prithee be a Jew still;
I would not have a Christian be guilty
Of such a villainous act as this is.

Romans I am Romelio the Merchant.

1 Sur. Romelio! you have proved your self
A cunning Merchant indeed.

Romans You may read why I came hither.

2 Sur. Yes, in a bloody Roman Letter.

Romans I did hate this man, each minute of his breath
Was torture to me.

1 Sur. Had you forborne this act, he had not lived
This two hours.

Romans But he had died then,
And my revenge unsatisfied: here is gold;
Never did wealthy man purchase the silence
Of a terrible scolding wife at a dearer rate,
Then I will pay for yours: here is your earnest
In a bag of double Ducats.

2. Sur. Why look you sir, as I do weigh this business,
This cannot be counted murder in you by no means.
Why it is no more, then should I go and choke
An Irish man, that were three quarters drowned,
With pouring Vsquebath in's throat.

To. You will be secret

1. Su. As your soul. (then.

Romans The west Indies shall sooner want gold, then you

2. Su That protestation has the music of the Mint in it.

To. How unfortunately was I surpised, I have made my self a slave perpetually
to these two beggars.

Exit.
1. Su. Excellent; by this act he has made his estate ours.

2. Su. He presently grow a lazy Surgeon, and ride on my foot-cloth; He fetch
from him every eight days a policy for a hundred double Ducats; if he
grumble, I Will peach.


1. Sur. But let us take heed he do not poison us.

2 Sur. Oh, I will never eat nor drink with him,
Without Unicorns Horn in a hollow tooth.

Cont. Oh.

1. Sur. Did he not groan?

2. Sur. Is the wind in that door still?

1. Sur. Ha! come hither, note a strange accident:
His Steel has lighted in the former wound,
And made free passage for the congealed blood;
Observe in what abundance it delivers the putrefaction.

2. Sur. Me thinks he fetches his breath very lively.

1. Sur. The hand of heaven is in it,
That his intent to kill him should become
The very direct way to save his life

2 Sur. Why this is like one I have heard of in England,
Was cured a'th Gowt, by being rackt in the Tower.
Well, if we can recover him, here is reward
On both sides: howsoever we must be secret.

1 Sur. We are tide to it,
When we cure Gentlemen of foul diseases,
They give us so much for the cure, and twice as much,
That we do not blab on it. Come lets to work roundly,
Heat the Lotion, and bring the Searing.
Exeunt. A Table set forth with two Tapers, a Deaths head, a Book, Iolenta in
mourning, Romelio sits by her.
Rom Why do you grieve thus? take a Looking-glass,
And see if this sorrow become you; that pale face
Will make men think you used some Art before,
Some odious painting: Contarino's dead.

Iol. Oh that he should dye so soon.

Romans Why, I pray tell me,
Is not the shortest fever the best? and are not bad Plays
The worse for their length?

Iolen. Add not to the ill you have done
An odious slander; he stuck in the eyes a'th Court,
As the most choice jewel there.

Romans Oh be not angry;
Indeed the Court to well composed nature
Adds much to perfection: for it is or should be,
As a bright Crystal, Mirror to the world,
To dress it self; but I must tell you sister,
If the excellency of the place could have wroght salvation,
The Devil had nere fallen from heaven; he was proud,
Leave us, leave us?
Come, take your seat again, I have a plot,
If you will listen to it seriously,
That goes beyond example, it shall breed
Out of the death of these two Noble men,
The advancement of our House.

Iol. Oh take heed, a grave is a rotten foundation.

Romans Nay, nay, hear me.
It Is somewhat indirectly, I confess:
But there is much advancement in the world,
That comes in indirectly. I pray mind me:
You are already made by absolute Will,
Contarino's heir: now, if it can be proved,
That you have issue by Lord Ercole,
I will make you inherit his Land too.

Iol. How Is this? issue by him, he dead, and I a Virgin!

Romans I know you would wonder how it could be done,
But I have laid the case so radically,
Not all the Lawyers in Christendom,
Shall find any the least slaw in it: I have a Mistress
Of the Order of Saint Clare, a beauteous Nun,
Who being cloystred ere she knew the heat,
Her blood would arrive to, had only time enough
To repent, and idleness sufficient
To fall in love with me; and to be short,
I have so much disordered the holy Order,
I have got this Nun with child.

Jol. Excellent work made for a dumb Midwife.

Romans I am glad you grow thus pleasant.
Now will I have you presently give out,
That you are full two months quickened with child
By Ercole, which rumor can beget
No scandal to you, since we will affirm,
The Precontract was so exactly done,
By the same words used in the form of marriage,
That with a little Dispensation,
A money matter, it shall be registered
Absolute Matrimony.

Iol. So then I conceive you,
My conceived child must prove your Bastard.

Romans Right: for at such time
My Mistress falls in labor, you must feign the like.

Iol. It Is a pretty feat this, but I am not capable of it.

Romans Not capable?

Jol. No for the thing you would have me counterfeit,
Is most essentially put in practice: nay, it is done,
I am with child already.

Romans Ha by whom?

Iol. By Contarino, do not knit the brow,
The Precontract shall justify it, it shall:
Nay, I will get some singular fine Churchman,
Or tho he be a plural one, shall affirm,
He coupled us together

Romans Oh misfortune!
Your child must then be reputed Ercoles.

Iol. Your hopes are dashed then, since your Votaries issue
Must not inherit the land.

Romans No matter for that,
So I preserve her fame. I am strangely puzzled:
Why, suppose that she be brought abed before you,
And we conceal her issue till the time
Of your delivery, and then give out,
That you have two at a birth, ha, were not excellent?

Iol. And what resemblance think you, would they have
To one another? Twins are still alike:
But this is not your aim, you would have your child
Inherit Ercoles Land, -- Oh my sad soul,
Have you not made me yet wretched enough,
But after all this frostie age in youth,
Which you have witcht upon me, you will seek
To poison my Fame.

Romans That Is done already.

Iol No sir, I did but feign it,
To a fatal purpose, as I thought.

Romans What purpose?

Iol. If you had loved or tendered my dear honor,
You would have locked your poniard in my heart,
When I named I was with child; but I must live
To linger out, till the consumption of my own
Sorrow kill me.

Romans This will not do; the Devil has on the sudden furnished me with a rare
charm, yet a most unnatural falsehood: no matter so 'twill take.

Stay sister, I would utter to you a business,
But I am very loath: a thing indeed,
Nature would have compassionately concealed,
Till my mothers eyes be closed.

Iol. Pray what is that sir?

Romans You did observe,
With what a dear regard our mother tendered
The Lord Contarino, yet how passionately
She sought to cross the match: why this was merely
To blind the eye o'th world; for she did know
That you would marry him, and he was capable
My mother doated upon him, and it was plotted
Cunningly between them, after you were married,
Living all three together in one house,
A thing I cannot whisper without horror:
Why, the malice scarce of Devils would suggest,
Incontinence 'tweene them two.

Iol. I remember since his hurt,
She has been very passionately enquiring,
After his health.

Romans Upon my soul, this Jewel,
With a piece of the holy Cross in it, this relicke,
Vallewed at many thousand crowns, she would have sent him, lying upon his
death bed.


Iol. Professing as you say,
Love to my mother: wherefore did he make
Me his heir?

Romans His Will was made before he went to fight,
When he was first a Suitor to you.

Iol. To fight: oh well remembered,
If he loved my mother, wherefore did he loose
His life in my quarrel?

Romans For the affront sake, a word you understand not,
Because Ercole was pretended Rival to him,
To clear your suspicion; I was gulld in it too:
Should he not have fought upon it,
He had undergone the censure of a Coward.

Iol. How came you by this wretched knowledge?

Romans His Surgeon ouer-heard it,
As he did sigh it out to his Confessor,
Some half hour fore he died.

Jol. I would have the Surgeon hanged
For abusing Confession, and for making me
So wretched by the report. Can this be truth?

Romans No, but direct falsehood,
As ever was banished the Court: did you ever hear
Of a mother that has kept her daughters husband
For her own tooth? He fancied you in one kind,
For his lust, and he loved
Our mother in another kind, for her money,
The Gallants fashion right. But come, nere think on it,
Throw the foul to the Devil that hatched it, and let this
Bury all ill that is in it, she is our mother.

Iol. I never did find any thing ith world,
Turn my blood so much as this: here is such a conflict,
Between apparent presumption, and unbelief,
That I shall dye in it.
Oh, if there be another world in the Moon,
As some fantasticks dream, I could wish all men,
The whole race of them, for their inconstancy,
Sent thither to people that. Why, I protest,
I now affect the Lord Ercoles memory,
Better then the others.

Romans But were Contarino living.

Iol. I do call any thing to witness,
That the divine Law prescribed us
To strengthen an oath, were he living and in health,
I would never mary with him.
Nay, since I have found the world
So false to me, I Will be as false to it;
I will mother this child for you.

Romans Ha?

Iol. Most certainly it will be guile part of my sorrow.

Rom Oh most assuredly, make you smile to think,
How many times ith world Lordships descend
To diverse men, that might and truth were known
Be heir, for any thing belongs to the flesh,
As well to the Turks richest Eunuch.

Iol. But do you not think
I shall have a horrible strong breath now.

Romans Why?

Iol. Oh, with keeping your counsel, it is so terrible foul,

Romans Come, come, come,
You must leave these bitter flashes.

Iol. Must I dissemble dishonestie? you have diverse
Counterfeit honesty: but I hope here is none
Will take exceptions; I now must practice
The art of a great bellyed woman, and go feign
Their qualmes and swoundings.

Romans Eat unripe fruit, and Oatmeale, to take away your color.


Iol. Dine in my bed some two hours after noone.

Romans And when you are up,
Make to your petticoat a quilted preface,
To advance your belly.

Iol. I have a strange conceit now.
I have known some women when they were with child,
Have longed to beat their Husbands: what if I,
To keep decorum, exercise my longing
Upon my Tailor that way, and noddle him soundly,
Heel make the larger Bill for it.

Romans I Will get one shall be as tractable to it as Stockfish.

Iol. Oh my fantastical sorrow,
Cannot I now be miserable enough,
Unless I wear a pyde fools coat:
Nay worse, for when our passions
Such giddy and uncertain changes breed,
We are never well, till we are mad indeed.
Exit.
Romans So, nothing in the world could have done this,
But to beget in her a strong distaste
Of the Lord Contarino: oh Jealousy,
How violent, especially in women,
How often has it raisd the devil up in form of a law case!
My especial care must be, to nourish craftily this fiend,
Tweene the mother and the daughter, that the deceit
Be not perceived. My next task, that my sister,
After this suppofed childbirth, be persuaded
To enter into Religion: it is concluded,
She must never marry; so I am left guardian
To her estate: and lastly, that my two Surgeons
Be waged to the East Indies: let them prate,
When they are beyond the Line; the Callenture,
Or the Scuruy, or the Indian Pox, I hope,
Will take order for their coming back.
Enter Leon. Oh here is my mother: I ha strange news for you,
My sister is with child.

Leo I do look now for some great misfortunes
To follow: for indeed mischiefs,
Are like the Visits of Franciscan Friars,
They never come to pray upon us single.
In what estate left you Contarino?

Romans Strange, that you can skip
From the former sorrow to such a question!
I Will tell you, in the absence of his Surgeon,
My charity did that for him in a trice,
They would have done at leisure, and been paid for it.
I have killed him.

Leon. I am twenty years elder since you last opened your lips.


Romans Ha?

Leon. You have given him the wound you speak of,
Quite through your mothers heart.

Romans I will heal it presently mother: for this sorrow
Belongs to your error: you would have him live,
Because you think he is father of the child;
But Iolenta vows by all the rights of Truth,
It Is Ercole's: it makes me smile to think,
How cunningly my sister could be drawn
To the Contract, and yet how familiarly
To his bed. Doves never couple
Without a kind of murmur.

Leo. Oh, I am very sick.

Romans Your old disease, when you are grieved,
You are troubled with the Mother.

Leo. I am rapt with the Mother indeed,
That I ever bore such a son.

Romans Pray tend my sister,
I am infinitely full of business.

Leo Stay you will mourn for Contarino.

To. Oh by all means, it is fit, my sister is his heir.
Exit.
Leo. I will make you chief mourner, believe it.
Never was woe like mine: oh that my care,
And absolute study to preserve his life,
Should be his absolute ruin. Is he gone then?
There is no plague in the world can be compared
To impossible desire; for they are plagued
In the desire it self: never, oh never
'Shall I behold him living, in whose life
I lived far sweetlier then in mine own.
A precise curiosity has undone me; why, did I not
Make my love known directly? t'had not been
Beyond example, for a Matron
To affect in the honorable way of Marriage,
So youthfall a person: oh I shall run mad,
For as we love our youngest children best:
So the last fruit of our affection,
Where ever we bestow it, is most strong,
Most violent, most irresistable,
Since it is indeed our latest Hardest-home,
Last merryment Fore Winter; and we widows,
As men report, of our best Picture-makers,
We love the piece we are in hand with better,
Then all the excellent work we have done before,
And my son has deprived me of all this. Ha my son,
I Will be a fury to him, like an Amazon Lady,
I Would cut off his right pap, that gave him suck,
To shoot him dead. I Will no more tender him,
Then had a Wolf stolen to my tear in the night,
And robbed me of my milk: nay, such a creature
I should love better far. -Ha, ha, what say you?
I do talk to somewhat, me thinks; it may be
My evil Genius. Do not the Bells ring?
I have a strange noise in my head: oh, fly in pieces,
Come age, and wither me into the malice
Of those that have been happy, let me have
One property more then the Devil of Hell,
Let me envy the pleasure of youth heartily,
Let me in this life fear no kind of ill,
That have no good to hope for: let me dye
In the distraction of that worthy Princess,
Who loathed food, and sleep, and ceremony,
For thought of loosing that brave Gentleman,
She would feign have saved, had not a false countenance,
Let me sink, where neither man,
Nor memory may ever find me.
Falls down.
Cap. This is a private way which I command,
As her Confessor. I would not have you seen yet,
Till I prepare her. Peace to you Lady.

Leo. Ha?

Cap You are well imployd, I hope; the best pillow in the.
World for this your contemplation, is the earth,
And the best object heaven.

Leo. I am whispering to a dead friend.

Cap. And I am come
To bring you tidings of a friend not dead,
Reserved to life again.

Leo. Say sir.

Cap. One whom I dare presume, next to your children,
You tendered above life.

Leo. Heaven will not suffer me utterly to be lost.

Cap. For he should have been
Your son in Law, miraculously saved,
When Surgery gave him ore.

Leon. Oh, may you live
To win many souls to heaven, worthy sir,
That your crown may be the greater. Why my son
made me believe he stole into his chamber,
And ended that which Ercole began
By a deadly stabb in's heart.

Erco. Alas, she mistakes,
It Is Contarino she wishes living; but I must fasten
On her last words, for my own safety.

Leo. Where, oh where shall I meet this comfort?

Erco. Here in the vowed comfort of your daughter.

Leo. Oh I am dead again, instead of the man, you present me the grave swallowed
him.


Erco. Collect your self, good Lady,
Would you behold brave Contarino living?
There cannot be a nobler Chronicle
Of his good then my self: if you would view him dead,
I will present him to you bleeding fresh,
In my penitency.

Leo. Sir, you do only live,
To redeem another ill you have committed,
That my poor innocent daughter perish not,
By your vild sin, whom you have got with child.

Erco. Here begin a I my compassion: oh poor soul!
She is with child by Contarino, and he dead,
By whom should she preerue her fame to the world,
But by my self that loved her boue the world?
There never was a way more honorable,
To exercise my virtue, then to father it,
And preserve her credit, and to marry her.
I Will suppose her Contarino's widow, bequeathed to me
Upon his Death: for sure she was his wife,
But that the Ceremony a'th Church was wanting.
Report this to her, Madam, and withal,
That never father did conceive more joy
For the birth of an heir, then I to understand,
She had such confidence in me. I will not now
Press a Visit upon her, till you have prepared her:
For I do read in your distraction,
Should I be brought a'th sudden to her presence,
Either the hasty fright, or else the shame
May blast the fruit within her. I will leave you,
To commend as loyal faith and service to her,
As ere heart harbored; by my hope of bliss,
I never lived to do good act but this.

Cap. Withal and you be wise,
Remember what the mother has revealed
Of Romelio's treachery.
Exeunt Ercole, Capuchin.
Leon. A most noble fellow in his loyalty.
I read what worthy comforts I have lost
In my dear Contarino, and all adds
To my despair. -- Within there.
Enter Winifrid. Fetch the picture hangs in my inner closet. I remember,
I let a word slip of Romelio's practice
Exit Win. At the Surgeons: no matter I can salve it,
I have deeper vengeance that is preparing for him,
To let him live and kill him that is revenge
I meditate upon.
Enter Win and the Picture.
Leo. So, hang it up.
I was enjoined by thepartie ought that picture,
Forty years since, ever when I was vexed,
To look upon that: what was his meaning in it,
I know not, but me thinkesvpon the sudden,
It has furnished me with mischief such a plot,
As never mother dreamt of Here begines
My part in the play: my sons estate is sunk,
By loss at sea and he has nothing left,
But the Land his father left him. I is concluded,
The Law shall undo him Come hither,
I have a weighty secret to impart,
But I would have thee first confirm to me,
How I may trust, that thou can keep my counsel,
Beyond death.

Win. Why Mistress, it is your only way,
To enjoin me first that I reveal to you
The worst act I ere did in all my life:
So one secret shall bind one another.

Leo. Thou instru'st me
Most ingenuously, for indeed it is not fit,
Where any act is plotted, that is naught,
Any of counsel to it should be good,
And in a thousand ils have hapt in the world,
The intelligence of one another shame,
Have wrought far more effectually then the tie
Of Conscience, or Religion.

Win. But think not, Mistress,
That any sin which ever I committed,
Did concern you, for proouing false in one thing,
You were a fool, if ever you would trust me
In the least matter of weight.

Leo Thou have lived with me
Th^se forty years; we have grown old together,
As many Ladies and their women do,
With talking nothing, and with doing less:
We have spent our life in that which least concerns life,
Only in putting on our clothes: and now I think on it,
I have been a very courtly Mistress to thee, (time,
I have given thee good words, but no deeds, now is the
To requite all; my son has six Lordships left him.

Win. It Is truth.

Leo. But he cannot live four days to enjoy them.

Win. Have you poisoned him?

Leo. No, the poison is yet but brewing.

Win. You must minister it to him with all priuacie.

Leo. Priuacie? It shall be given him
In open Court, I Will make him swallow it
Before the Judges face: if he be Master
Of poor ten arpines of land forty hours longer,
Let the world repute me an honest woman.

Win. So 'twill I hope.

Leo. Oh thou can not conceive
My inimitable plot; let us to my ghostly Father,
Were first I will have thee make a promise
To keep my counsel, and then I will employ thee
In such a subtle combination,
Which will require to make the practice fit,
Four Devils, five Advocates to a woman's wit.
Extunt.
Explicit Acts Tertij.
ACTVS QVARTVS, SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Leoonora, Sanitonella at one door, Winifrid, Register: at the other
Ariosto
San. Take her into your Office sir, she has that in her
Belly, will dry up your ink I can tell you.
This is the man that is your learned Council,
A fellow that will trowle it off with tongue:
He never goes without Restoratiue powder
Of the lungs of Fox in's pocket, and Malligo Reasins
To make him long winded. Sir, this Gentlewoman
Entreats your Counsel in an honest cause,
Which please you sir, this Brief, my own poor labor
Will give you light of.

Ario. Do you call this a Brief?
Here Is as I weigh them, some fourscore sheets of paper.
What would they weigh if there were cheese
Wrapped in them, or Figdates.

San. Joy come to you, you are merry;
We call this but a Brief in our Office.
The scope of the business lies ith Margent sheet.

Ario. Me thinks you prate too much.
I never could endure an honest cause
With a long Prologue to it.

Leon You trouble him.

Ar. What Is here? oh strange; I have lived this 60 years,
Yet in all my practice never did shake hands
With a cause so odious. Sirrah, are you her knave?

San. No sir, I am a Clarke.

Ari. Why you whoreson fogging Rascal,
Are there not whores enough for Presentations,
Of Overseers, wrong the will o'th Dead,
Oppressions of Widows, or young Orphans,
Wicked Diuerses, or your vicious cause
Of Plus quam satis, to content a woman,
But you must find new stratagems, new pursuits,
Oh women, as the Ballet lives to tell you,
What will you shortly come to?

San. Your Fee is ready sir.

Ari. The Devil take such Fees,
And all such Suits i'thtayle of thee; see the slave
Has writ false Latin: sirrah Ignorance,
Were you ever at the University?

San Never sir:
It is well known to diverse I have Commenc't
In a Pewe of our Office.

Ari. Where, in a Pew of your Office?

San I have been dry-foundred with it this four years,
Seldom found Non resident from my deske.

Ari. Non resident Subsumner:
I Will tear your Libell for abusing that word,
By virtue of the Clergy.

San. What do you mean sir?
It cost me four nights labor.

Ario. Had thou been drunk so long,
T'hadst done our Court better Service.

Leo Sir, you do forget your gravity, me thinks.

Ario. Cry ye mercy, do I so?
And as I take it, you do very little remember,
Either womanhood, or Christianity: why do ye meddle
With that seducing knave, that is good for naught,
Unless 'the to fill the Office full of Fleas,
Or a Winter itch, wears that spacious Inkehorne
All a Vacation only to cure Tetters,
And his Penknife to weed Corns from the splay toes,
Of the right worshipful of the Office.

Leo. You make bold with me sir.

Ario. Woman, yare mad, I Will swear't, and have more need
Of a Physician then a Lawyer.
The melancholy humor flows in your face,
Your painting cannot hide it: such vildsuits
Disgrace our Courts, and these make honest Lawyers
Stop their own ears, whilst they p'ead and that's the reason
Your younger men that have good conscience,
wear such large Night-caps; go old woman, go pray,
For Lunacy, or else the Devil himself
Has taken possession of thee; may like cause
In any Christian Court never find name:
Bad Suits, and not the Law, bred the Laws shame.
Exit
Leon. Sure the old man's frantic.

San. Plague on's gowtie fingers,
Were all of his mind, to entertain no suits,
But such they thought were hotest, sure our Lawyers
Would not purchase half so fast:
But here is the man,
Enter Contilupo a spruce Lawyer. Learned Seignior Contilupo, here is a fellow
Of another piece beleeue't, I must make shift
With the foul Copy.

Con. Business to me?

San. To you sir, from this Lady.

Con. She is welcome.

San. It Is a foul Copy sir, you will hardly read it,
There Is twenty double ducats, can you read sir?

Con. Exceeding well, very, very exceeding well.

San. This man will be faued, he can read; Lord, Lord,
To see, what money can do, be the hand never so foul,
Somewhat will be picked out on it.

Con. Is not this Viuere honest?

San. No, that is struck out sir;
And where ever you find viuere honest in these papers,
Give it a dash sir.

Con. I shall be mindful of it:
In troth you write a pretty Secretary,
Your Secretary hand ever takes best in mine opinion.

San. Sir, I have been in France,
And there beleeue't your Court hand generally,
Takes beyond thought.

Con. Even as a man is traded in it.

Sa. That I could not think of this virtuous Gentleman
Before I went to the the other Hogg-rubber.
Why this was wont to give young Clerks half fees,
To help him to Clyents. Your opinion in the Case sir.

Con. I am struck with wonder almost extaside,
With this most goodly Suite.

Leon. It is the fruit of a most hearty penitence.

Con. It Is a Case shall leave a President to all the world,
In our succeeding Annals, and deserves
Rather a spacious public Theater,
Then a pent Court for Audence; it shall teach
All Ladies the right path to rectisie their issue.

San. Lo you, here is a man of comfort.

Con. And you shall go unto a peaceful grave,
Discharged of such a guilt, as would have layne
Howling for ever at your wounded heart,
And rose with you to Judgment. (of Judgment.

San. Oh give me such a Lawyer, as will think of the day

Leo. You must urge the business against him
As spightfully as may be.

Con. Doubt not. What is he summoned?

San. Yes, and the Court will sit within this half hour.
Peruse your Notes, you have very short warning.

Con. Never fear you that:
Follow me worthy Lady, and make account
This Suite is ended already.
Exeunt. Enter Officers preparing seats for the Judges, to them Ercole muffled.
1. Of. You would have a private seat sir.

Erc. Yes sir.

2 Of. Here Is a Closs^t belongs to the Court,
Where you may hear all unseen.
Enter Contarino, the Surgeons disguised.
Er. I thank you; there is money.

2 Of. I give you your thanks again sir.

Cont. Is It possible Romelio's persuaded,
You are gone to the East Indies.

1. Sur. Most confidently.

Con. But do you mean to go?

2. Su. How? go to the East Indies?
And so many Hollanders gone to fetch sauce for their pickeld Herrings; some
have been pepperd there too lately, but I pray, being thus well recouerd of
your wounds,

Why do you not reucale yourselfe?

Con. That my fair Iolenta should be rumor'd
To be with child by noble Ercole,
Makes me expect to what a violent issue
These passages will come. I hear her brother
Is marying the Infant she goes with, fore it be borne,
As if it be a Daughter,
To the Duke of Austrias Nephew; if a Son,
Into the Noble ancient Family
Of the Pala^afini: He Is a subtle Devil.
And I do wonder what strange Suite in Law,
Has hapt between him and's mother.

1. Sur. It Is whisperd' mong the Lawyers,
'Twill undo him for ever.
Enter Sanit. Win.
San. Do you hear Officers?
You must take special care, that you let in
No Brachigraphy men, to take notes.

1. Of. No sir?

San. By no means,
We cannot have a Cause of any fame,
But you must have scuruy pamphlets, and lewd Ballets
Engendered of it presently.

San. Have you broke fast yet?

Win. Not I sir.

San. 'Twas very ill done of you:
For this cause will be long a pleading; but not matter,
I have a modicum in my Buckram bagg,
To stop your stomach.

Win. What is it? Green ginger?

San. Green ginger, nor Pellitory of Spain neither,
Yet 'twill stop a hollow tooth better then either of them.

Win. Pray what is it?

San. Look you,
It is a very lovely Pudding-pye,
Which we Clerks find great relief in.

Win. I shall have no stomach.

San. No matter and you have not, I may pleasure
Some of our Learned Council with it; I have done it
Many a time and often, when a Cause
Has proved like an after-game at Irish.
Enter Crispiano like a Judge, with another Judge, Contilupo, and another
Lawyer at one Bar, Romelio, Ariosto, at another, Leonora with a black
vaile^ouer her, and Iulio.
Crisp. It Is a strange Suite, is Leonora come.

Conti. She Is here my Lord; make way there for the Lady.

Crisp. Take off her Veil: it seems she is ashamed
To look her cause in the face.

Contil. She Is sick, my Lord.

Ari. She Is mad my Lord, and would be kept more dark.
By your favor sir, I have now occasion to be at your elbow, and within this
half hour shall entreat you to be angry, very angry.


Crisp. Is Romelio come?

Rom I am here my Lord, and called I do protest,
To answer what I know not, for as yet
I am wholly ignorant, of what the Court
Will charge me with.

Crisp. I assure you, the proceeding
Is most unequal then, for I perceive,
The Council of the adverse party furnished
With full Instruction.

Romans Pray my Lord, who is my accuser?

Crisp. It Is your mother.

Romans She has discovered Contarino's murder:
If she prove so unnatural, to call
My life in question, I am armed to suffer
This to end all my losses.

Crisp. Sir, we will do you this favor,
You shall hear the Accusation,
Which being known, we will adiourne the Court,
Till a fortnight hence, you may provide your Counsel.

Ario. I advise you, take their proffer,
Or else the Lunacy runs in a blood,
You are more mad then she.

Romans What are you sir?

Ario. An angry fellow that would do thee good,
For goodness sake it self, I do protest,
Neither for love nor money.

Romans Prithee stand further, I shall gall your gowt else.

Ar. Come, come, I know you for an East Indy Merchant,
You have a spice of pride in you still.

Romans My Lord, I am so strengthened in my innocence,
For any the least shadow of a crime,
Committed against my mother, or the world,
That she can charge me with, here do I make it
My humble suite, only this hour and place,
May give it as full hearing, and as free,
And vnrestrain'd a Sentence.

Cri. Be not too confident you have cause to fear.

Romans Let fear dwell with Earthquakes,
Shipwracks at Sea, or Prodegies in heaven,
I cannot set my self so many fathom
Beneath the haight of my true heart, as fear.

Ari. Very fine words I assure you, if they were to any

Cri. Well, have your entreaty: (purpose,
And if your own credulity undo you,
Blame not the Court hereafter: fall to your Plea.

Con. May it please your Lordsh. and the reverend Court,
To give me leave to open to you a Case
So rare, so altogether void of President,
That I do challenge all the spacious Volumes,
Of the whole Civil Law to show the like.
We are of Council for this Gentlewoman,
We have received our Fee, yet the whole course
Of what we are to speak, is quite against her,
Yet we will deserve our fee too. There stands one,
Romelio the Merchant; I will name him to you,
Without either title or addition:
For those false beams of his supposed honor,
As void of true heat, as are all painted fires,
Or Glow-wormes in the dark, suite him all basely,
As if he had bought his Gentry from the Herald,
With money got by extortion: I will first
Produce this Aesops Crow, as he stands forfeit,
For the long use of his gay borrowed plumes,
And then let him hop naked: I come to the point,
T'as been a Dream in Naples, very near
This eight and thirty years, that this Romelio,
Was nobly descended, he has rankt himself
With the Nobility, shamefully usurped
Their place, and in a kind of lawcy pride,
Which like to Mushromes, ever grow most rank,
When they do spring from dung-hills, sought to oresway,
The Fliski, the Grimaldi, Dori,
And all the ancient pillars of our State;
View now what he is come to: this poor thing
Without a name, this Cuckoo hatched ith nest
Of a Hedge-sparrow.

Rom Speaks he all this to me?

Ari. Only to you sir.

Romans I do not ask thee, prithee hold thy prating.

Ari. Why very good, you will be presently
As angry as I could wish.

Contil What title shall I set to this base coin;
He has no name, and for's aspect he seems,
A Giant in a May Game, that within
Is nothing but a Porter'^ I Will undertake,
He had as good have traueld all his life
With Gypsies: I will sell him to any man
For an hundred Chickeens, and he that buys him of me,
Shall loose byth hand too.

Ari. Lo, what you are come too:
You that did scorn to trade in any thing;
But Gold or Spices, or your Cochineele,
He rates you now at poor John.

Romans Out upon thee, I would thou were of his fide,

Ari. Would you so?

Romans The devil and thee together on each hand,
To prompt the Lawyers memory when he founders.

Cris Signior Contilupo, the Court holds it fit,
You leave this stale declaiming against the person,
And come to the matter.

Cont. Now I shall my Lord.

Cris. It shows a poor malicious eloquence,
And it is strange, men of your gravity
Will not forgo it: verily, I presume,
If you but heard your self speaking with my ears,
Your phrase would be more modest.

Contil. Good my Lord, be assured,
I will leave all circumstance, and come toth purpose:
This Romelio is a Bastard.

Romans How, a Bastard? Oh mother,
Now the day begins grow hot on your side.

Contil. Why she is your accuser.

Romans I had forgot that; was my father married to any other woman, at the time
of my begetting?


Contil. That Is not the business.

Romans I turn me then to you that were my mother,
But by what name I am to call you now,
You must instruct me: were you ever married
To my father?

Leon. To my shame I speak it, never.

Crisp. Not to Franscisco Romelio?

Leo. May it please your Lordships,
To him I was, but he was not his father.

Cont. Good my Lord, give us leave in a few words,
To expound the Riddle, and to make it plain,
Without the least of scruple: for I take it,
There cannot be more lawful proof in the world,
Then the oath of the mother.

Cris. Well then, to your proofs, and be not tedious.

Contil. I Will conclude in a word:
Some nine and thirty years since, which was the time,
This woman was married, Francisco Romelio,
This Gentleman's putatiue father, and her husband
Being not married to her past a fortnight,
Would needs go travel; did so, and continued
In France and the Low Countries eleven months:
Take special note o'th time, I beseech your Lordship,
For it makes much to the business: in his absence
He left behind to soiourne at his house
A Spanish Gentleman, a fine spruce youth
By the Ladies confession, and you may be sure
He was no Eunuch neither; he was one
Romelio loved very dearly, as often haps,
No man alive more welcome to the husband
Then he that makes him Cuckold.
This Gentleman I say,
Breaking all Laws of Hospitality,
Got his friends wife with child, a full two months
Fore the husband returned.

San. Good sir, forget not the Lambskin.

Contil. I warrant thee.

Sa. I will pinch by the buttock, to put you in mind often.

Contil. Prithee hold thy prating.
What Is to be practiced now my Lord? Marry this,
Romelio being a young nouice, not acquainted
With this precedence, very innocently
Returning home from travel, finds his wife
Grown an excellent good Huswife, for she had set
Her women to spin Flax, and to that use,
Had in a study which was built of stone,
Stored up at least an hundredth weight of flax:
Marry such a thread as was to be spun from the flax,
I think the like was never heard of.

Crisp. What was that?

Contil. You may be certain, she would lose no time,
In braging that her Husband had got up
Her belly: to be short, at seven months end,
Which was the time of her delivery,
And when she felt her self to fall in travel,
She makes her Waiting woman, as by mischance,
Set fire to the flax, the flight whereof,
As they pretend, causes this Gentlewoman
To fall in pain, and be delivered
Eight weeks asore her reckoning.

San. Now sir, remember the Lambeskin.

Con. The Midwife strait howles out, there was no hope
Of th'infants life, swaddles it in a stead Lambeskin,
As a Bird hatched too early, makes it up
With three quarters of a face, that made it look
Like a Changeling, cries out to Romelio,
To have it Christened, least it should depart
Without that it came for: and thus are many served,
That take care to get Gossips for those children,
To which they might be Godfathers themselves,
And yet be no arch-Puritans neither.

Crisp. No more.

Ar. Pray my Lord give him way, you spoil his oratory else: thus would they
jest were they feed, to open their sisters cases.


Crisp. You have urged enough;
You first affirm, her husband was away from her
Eleven months.

Contil. Yes my Lord.

Crisp. And at seven months end,
After his return she was delivered
Of this Romelio, and had gone her full time.

Contil. True my Lord.

Crisp. So by this account this Gentleman was begot,
In his supposed fathers absence.

Contil. You have it fully.

Crisp. A most strange Suite this, it is beyond example,
Either time past, or present; for a woman,
To publish her own dishonor voluntarily,
Without being called in question, some forty years
After the sin committed, and her Council
To enlarge the offense with as much Oratory,
As ever I did hear them in my life,
Defend a guilty woman; it is most strange:
Or why with such a poisoned violence
Should she labor her soones undoing: we observe
Obedience of creatures to the Law of Nature,
Is the stay of the whole world; here that Law is broke,
For though our Civil Law makes difference
Tween the base, and the ligitimate; compassionat Nature
Makes them equal, nay, she many times preferres them.
I pray resolve me sir, have not you and your mother
Had some Suite in Law together lately?

Romans None my Lord.

Cris. No? no contention about parting your goods?

Romans Not any.

Cris. No flaw, no unkindness?

Romans None that ever arrived at my knowledge.

Cris. Bethink your self, this cannot choose but savor
Of a woman's malice deeply; and I fear,
You Are practiced upon most deuillishly.
How hapt Gentlewoman, you revealed this no sooner?

Leo. While my husband lived, my Lord, I durst not.

Cris. I should rather ask you, why you reveal it now?

Leo Because my Lord, I loathed that such a sin
Should lie smotherd with me in my grave; my penitence,
Though to my shame, preferres the revealing of it
Boue worldly reputation.

Cris. Your penitence?
Might not your penitence have been as hearty,
Though it had never summoned to the Court
Such a conflux of people.

Leon. Indeed I might have confessed it,
Privately toth Church, I grant; but you know repentance
Is nothing without satisfaction.

Crisp. Satisfaction? why your Husbands dead,
What satisfaction can you make him?

Leo The greatest satisfaction in the world, my Lord,
To restore the land toth right heir, and that's my daughter.

Crisp. Oh she is straight begot then.

Ario Very well, may it please this honorable Court,
If he be a bastard, and must forfeit his land for it,
She has proved her self a strumpet, and must loose
Her Dower, let them go a begging together.

San. Who shall pay us our Fees then?

Cris. Most just.

Ario You may see now what an old house
You are like to pull over your head, Dame.

Romans Could I conceive this Publication
Grew from a hearty penitence, I could bear
My undoing the more patiently; but my Lord,
There is no reason, as you said even now,
To satisfy me: but this suite of hers
Springs from a deuillish malice, and lier pretense,
Of a grieved Conscience, and Religion,
Like to the horrid Powder Treason in England,
Has a most bloody unnatural revenge
Hid under it: Oh the violencies of women!
Why they are creatures made up and compounded
Of all monsters, poisoned Myneralls,
And sorcerous Herbs that grows.

Ario. Are you angry yet?

Romans Would men express a bad one,
Let him forsake all natural example,
And compare one to another; they have no more mercy,
Then minous fires in great tempests.

Ario. Take heed you do not crack your voice sir.

Romans Hard hearted creatures good for nothing else,
But to wind dead bodies.

Ari. Yes, to weaue seaming lace with the bones of their
Husbands that were long since buried, and curse them when they tangle.


Romans Yet why do I
Take Bastardy so distastfully, when in the world,
A many things that are essential parts
Of greatness, are but by-slips, and are fathered
On the wrong parties.
Preferment in the world a many times,
Basely begotten: nay, I have observed
The immaculate Justice of a poor man's cause,
In such a Court as this, has not known whom
To call Father, which way to direct it self
For Compassion: but I forget my temper,
Only that I may stop that Lawyers throat,
I do beseech the Court, and the whole world,
They will not think the baselyer of me,
For the vice of a mother: for that woman's sin,
To which you all dare swear when it was done,
I would not give my consent.

Cris. Stay, here is an Accusation,
But here is no proof; what was the Spaniards name
You accuse of adultery?

Con. Don Crispiano, my Lord.

Crisp. What part of Spain was he borne in?

Contil. In Castile.

Jul. This may prove my father.

San. And my Master, my Clyent's spoiled then.

Cris. I knew that Spanyard well: if you be a Bastard,
Such a man being your father, I dare vouch you
A Gentleman, and in that Signiour Contilupo,
Your Oratory went a little too far.
When do we name Don John of Austria,
The Emperors son, but with reverence:
And I have known in diverse Families,
The Bastards the greater spirits; but to the purpose,
What time was this Gentleman begot?
And be sure you lay your time right.

Ario. Now the metal comes to the Touchstone.

Contil. In Anno seventy one, my Lord.

Crisp Very well, seventy one:
The Battle of Lepanto was fought in it,
A most remarkable time, 'twill lie for no man's pleasure*
And what proof is there more then the affirmation of the
Mother, of this corporal dealing?

Contil. The deposition of a Wayting-woman served her the same time.


Crisp. Where is she?

Con. Where is our Solicitor with the Waitingwoman?

Ario. Room for the bag and baggage.

San. Here my Lord, Oretenus.

Crisp. And what can you say Gentlewoman?

Win. Please your Lordship, I was the party that dealt
In the business and brought them together.

Crisp. Well.

Win And conveyed letters between them. (house?

Cr. What needed letters, when it is said he lodged in her

Win. A running Ballad now and then to her Violl,
For he was never well, but when he was fidling.

Crisp. Speak to the purpose, did you ever know them bed together?


Win. No my Lord,
But I have brought him to the bed side.

Crisp. That was somewhat near to the business;
And what, did you help him off with his shoes?

Win. He wore no shoes, an't please you my Lord.

Cris. No? what then, Pumpes?

Win. Neither.

Crisp. Boots were not fit for his journey.

Win. He wore Tennis-court woollen slippers,
For fear of creaking sir, and making a noise,
To wake the rest o'th house.

Crisp. Well, and what did he there,
In his Tennis-court woollen slippers?

Win. Please your Lordship, question me in Latin,
For the cause is very foul; the Examiner o'th Court
Was feign to get it out of me alone in the Counting House,
Cause he would not spoil the youth o'th Office.

Ari. Here Is a Latin spoone, and a long one,
To feed with the Devil.

Win. I Would be loath to be ignorant that way,
For I hope to marry a Proctor, and take my pleasure abroad
At the Commencements with him.

Ario. Come closer to the business.

Win. I will come as close as modesty will give me leave.
Truth is, every morning when he lay with her,
I made a Caudle for him, by the appointment
Of my Mistress, which he would still refuse,
And call for small drink.

Crisp. Small drink?

Ario. For a Iulipe.

Win. And said he was wondrous thirsty.

Crisp. What Is this to the purpose?

Win. Most effectual, my Lord.
I have heard them laugh together extremely,
And the Curtain rods fall from the tester of the bed,
And he nere came from her, but he thrust money in my
hand; and once in truth, he would have had some dealing
with me, which I took; he thought 'twould be the only
way ith world to make me keep counsel the better.

San. That Is a stinger, it is a good wench, be not daunted.

Cri. Did you ever find the print of two in the bed?

Win. What a questions that to be asked, may it please your
Lordsh* it is to be thought he lay nearer to her then so.

Crisp. What age are you of Gentlewoman?

Win. About six and forty, my Lord.

Crisp. Anno seventy one,
And Romelio is thirty eight: by that reckoning,
You were a Bawd at eight year old: now verily,
You fell to the Trade betimes.

San. There ya're from the Byas.

Win. I do not know my age directly; sure I am elder,
I can remember two great frosts, and three great plagues,
And the loss of Callis, and the first coming up
Of the Breeches with the great Codpiece,
And I pray what age do you take me of then?

San. Well come off again.

Ari. An old hunted Hare, she has all her doubles.

Romans For your own grauities,
And the reverence of the Court, I do beseech you,
Rip up the cause no further, but proceed to Sentence.

Crisp. One question more and I have done:
Might not this Crispiano, this Spanyard,
Lie with your Mistress at some other time,
Either before or after, then ith absence of her husband?

Leo. Never.

Cris. Are you certain of that?

Leo. On my soul, never.

Cris. That Is well he never lay with her,
But in anno seventy one, let that be remembered.
Stand you aside a while. Mistress, the truth is,
I knew this Crispiano, lived in Naples
At the same time, and loved the Gentleman
As my bosom friend; and as I do remember,
The Gentleman did leave his Picture with you,
If age or neglect have not in so long time ruined it.

Leo. I preserve it still my Lord.

Cris. I pray let me see it, let me see the face
I then loved so much to look on.

Leo. Fetch it.

Win I shall, my Lord.

Cris. No, no, Gentlewoman,
I have other business for you.

1. Sur. Now were the time to cut Romelio's throat,
And accuse him for your murder.

Contar. By no means.

2. Sur. Will you not let us be men of fashion,
And down with him now he is going?

Centar. Peace lets attend the sequel.

Cris I commend you Lady,
There was a maine matter of Conscience,
How many ills spring from Adultery!
First, the supreme Law that is violated,
Nobility often stained with bastardy,
Inheritance of Land falsely possessed,
The husband! corn'd, wife shamed, and babes unblessed,
So, hang it up in the Court; you have heard,
The Picture. What has been urged against Romelio.
Now my definitive sentence in this cause,
Is, I will give no sentence at all.

Ario. No?

Cris. No, I cannot, for I am made a party.

San. How a party? here are fine cross tricks,
What the devil will he do now?

Crisp. Signior Ariosto, his Majesty of Spain,
Conferres my Place upon you by this Patent,
Which till this urgent hour I have kept
From your knowledge: may you thrive in it, noble sir,
And do that which but few in our place do,
Go to their grave vncurst.

Ario. This Law business
Will leave me so small leisure to serve God,
I shall serve the King the worse.

San Is he a Judge?
We must then look for all Conscience, and no Law,
Heel beggar all his followers.

Cris. Sir, I am of your Counsel, for the cause in hand
Was begun at such a time, fore you could speak;
You had need therefore have one speak for you.

Ario. Stay, I do here first make protestation,
I nere took fee of this Romelio,
For being of his Council, which may free me,
Being now his Judge, for the imputation
Of taking a Bribe. Now sir, speak your mind.

Crisp. I do first intrear, that the eyes of all here present,
May be sixth upon this

Leo. Oh, I am confounded. this is Crispiano.

Iul This is my father, how the Judges have bleated him.

Win. You may see truth will out in spite of the Devil.

Cris. Behold, I am the shadow of this shadow,
Age has made me so; take from me forty years,
And I was such a Summer fruit as this,
At least the Paynter sayned so: for indeed,
Painting and Epitaphs are both alike,
They slatter us, and say we have been thus:
But I am the party here, that stands accused,
For Adultery with this woman, in the year
Seventy one: now I call you my Lord to witness,
Four years before that time, I went to the Indies,
And till this month, did never set my foot since
In Europe; and for any former incontinence,
She has vowed there was never any: what remains then,
But this is a mere practice against her son,
And I beseech the Court it may be sifted,
And most severely punished.

San Vds foot, we are spoiled,
Why my Clyent's proved an honest woman.

Win. What do you think will become of me now?

San. You Will be made dance ^achrimae I fear at a Carts

Ari. You Mistress, where are you now? (tail.
Your Tennis court slips, and your taken drink
In a morning for your hot liner; where is the man,
Would have had some dealing with you, that you might
Keep counsel the better.

Win. May it please the Court, I am but a young thing,
And was drawn a^sie, varsie into the business.

Ario. How young? of five and forty?

Win. Five and forty, and shall please you!
I am not five and twenty:
She made me color my hair with Bean-flower,
To seem older then I was; and then my rotten teeth,
With eating sweetmeats: why, should a Farrier
Look in my mouth, he might mistake my age.
Oh Mistress, Mistress, you are an honest woman,
And you may be ashamed on it, to abuse the Court thus.

Leo. Whatsoere I have attempted,
Against my own fame, or the reputation
Of that Gentleman my son, the Lord Contarino
Was cause of it.

Conta. Who I?

Ario. He that should have married your daughter?
It was a plot belike then to confer
The land on her that should have bin his wife.

Leo. More then I have said already, all the world
Shall nere extract from me; I entreat from both,
Your equal pardons.

Iul. And I from you sir.

Crisp. Sirrah, stand you aside,
I will talk with you hereafter.

Iul. I could never away with after reckonings.

Leo. And now my Lords, I do most voluntarily
Confine my self unto a stricter prison,
And a seuerer penance, then this Court can impose,
I am entered into Religion.

Con. I the cause of this practice; this ungodly woman,
Has sold her self to falsehood: I will now reveal my self.

Erco. Stay my Lord here is a window
To let in more light to the Court.

Cont. Mercy upon me! oh, that thou art living
Is mercy indeed!

1. Sur. Stay, keep in your shell a little longer?

Erco. I am Ercole.

Ario. A guard upon him for the death of Contarino.

Erco. I obey the arrest o'th Court.

Rom Oh sir, you are happily restored to life,
And to us your friends.

Erco. Away, thou art the Traitor:
I only live to challenge this former suite,
Touched but thy fame, this accusation
Reaches to thy fame and life: the brave Contarino
Is generally supposed slain by this hand.

Con. How knows he the contrary?

Erc. But truth is,
Having received from me some certain wounds,
Which were not mortal, this vild murderer,
Being by Will deputed Ouerseer
Of the Noblemans Estate, to his sisters use,
That he might make him sure from suruiuing,
To revoke that Will, stole to him in's bed, and killed him.

Romans Strange, unheard of, more practice yet!

Ari. What proof of this?

Erco. The report of his mother delivered to me,
In distraction for Contarino's death.

Con. For my death? I begin to apprehend,
That the violence of this woman's love to me,
Might practice the disinheriting of her son.

Ario. What say you to this Leonora?

Leo. Such a thing I did utter out of my distraction:
But how the Court will censure that report,
I leave to their wisdoms.

Ario. My opinion is,
That this late slander urged against her son,
Takes from her all manner of credit:
She that would not stick to deprive him of his living,
Will as little tender his life.

Leo. I beseech the Court,
I may retire my self to my place of penance,
I have vowed my self and my woman.

Ario. Go when you please: what should move you
Be thus forward in the accusation?

Erco. My love to Contarino.

Ari. Oh, it bore very bitter fruit at your last meeting.

Erco. It Is true: but I begun to love him,
When I had most cause to hate him, when our bloods
Embraced each other, then I pitied,
That so much valor should be hazarded
On the fortune of a single Rapier,
And not spent against the Turk.

Ario. Stay sir, be well advised,
There is no testimony but your own,
To approve you slew him, therefore no other way
To decide it, but by Duel.

Con. Yes my Lord, I dare affirm against all the world,
This Noble man speaks truth.

Ari. You will make your self a party in the Duel.

Romans Let him, I will fight with the^ both, sixteen of them.

Erco. Sir, I do not know you.

Cont Yes but you have forgot me, you and I have sweat
In the Breach together at Malta.

Erco. Cry you me^^^, I have known of your Nation
Brave Soldiers.

Iulio Now if my father
Have any true spirit in him, I Will recover
His good opinion Do you hear? do not swear sir,
For I dare swear, that you will swear a lie,
A very filthy, stinking. rotten lie:
And if the Lawyers think not this sufficient,
I Will give the lie in the stomach,
That Is somewhat deeper then the throat;
Both here, and all France over and over,
From Marselys, or Bayon, to Callis Sands,
And there draw my Sword upon thee,
And new scour it in the gravel of thy kidneys.

Ari You the Defendant charged with the murder,
And you Second there,
Must be committed to the custody
Of the Knight-Marshall; and the Court gives charge,
They be to morrow ready in the Listes
Before the Sun be rissen.

Romans I do entreat the Court, there be a guard
Placed ore my Sister, that she enter not
Into Religion: she is rich my Lords,
And the persuasions of Friars, to gain
All her possessions to their Monasteries,
May do much upon her.

Ario. We Will take order for her.

Crisp There Is a Nun too you have got with child,
How will you dispose of her?

Romans You question me, as if I were grau'd already,
When I have quenched this wild-sire
In Ercoles tame blood, I Will tell you.
Exit.
Erco. You have judged to day
A most confused practice, that takes end
In as bloody a trial, and we may observe
By these great persons, and their indirect
Proceedings, shaddowed in a veil of State.
Mountains are deformed heaps, sweld up alofts
Vales wholsomer, though lower, and trod on often.

San. Well, I will pu up my papers,
And send them to France for a President,
That they may not say yet, but for one strange
Law suite, we come somewhat near them.
Exeunt.
Explicit Acti quarti.
ACTVS QVINTVS, SCENA PRIMA.
Enter Iolenta, and Angiolella great bellied.
Iolen. How do thou friend? welcome, thou and I.
Were play-fellowes together, little children,
So small awhile ago, that I presume,
We are neither of us wise yet.

Angi. A most sad truth on my part.

Iolen. Why do you pluck your veil
Over your face?

Angio. If you will believe truth,
There Is naught more terrible to a guilty heart,
As the eye of a respected friend.

Iol. Say friend, are you quick with child?

Angi Too sure.

Iol. How could you know
Of your first child when you quic^ned?

Angio. How could you know friend?
It Is reported you are in the same taking.

Iolen. Ha, ha, ha, so it is given out:
But Ercoles coming to life again, has shrunk,
And made innisible my great belly; ves faith,
My being with child was merely in supposition,
Not practice.

Angio. You are happy, what would I give,
To be a Maid again?

Iolen Would you, to what purpose?
I would never give great purchase for that thing
Is in danger every hour to be lost: pray thee laugh.
A Boy or a Girl for a wager?

Angio. What heaven please.

Jolen. Nay, nay, will you venture
A chain of Pearl with me whether?

Angio. I Will lay nothing,
I have ventured too much for it already, my fame.
I make no question sister, you have heard
Of the intended combat.

Iolen. O what else?
I have a sweet heart in it, against a brother.

Angio. And I a dead friend, I fear; what good counsel
Can you minister unto me?

Iolen. Faith only this,
Since there is no means in the world to hinder it,
Let thou and I wench get as far as we can
From the noise of it.

Angio. Whither?

Iolen. No matter, any whither.

Angio. Any whither, so you go not by sea:
I cannot abide rough water.

Iolen Not endure to be tumbled? say no more then,
We Will be land-Souldiers for that trick: take heart,
Thy boy shall be borne a brave Roman.

Angio. O you mean to go to Rome then.

Iol. Within there. Bear this Letter
Enter a servant To the Lord Ercole. Now wench, I am for thee
All the world over.

Angio. I like your shade pursue you.
Exeunt. Enter Prospero, and Sanitonella.
Pros. Well, I do not think but to see you as pretty a
piece of Law-flesh.

San. In time I may,
Marry I am resolved to take a new way for it.
You have Lawyers take their Clients fees, and their backs are no sooner
turned, but they call them fools, and laugh at them.


Prosp. That Is ill done of them.

San. There Is one thing too that has a vild abuse in it.

Pro. What Is that?

San. Marry this,
That no Proctor in the Term time be tolerated to go to the Tavern above six
times in the forenoone.


Pros. Why man?

San. Oh sir, it makes their Clients overtaken,
And become friends sooner then they would be.
Enter Ercole with a letter, and Contarino coming in Friars habits, as having
bin at the Bathanites, a Ceremony used before these Combats.
Erco. Leave the Room, Gentlemen.

Con. Wherefore should I with such an obstinacy,
Conceal my self any longer. I am taught,
Con. speaks aside. That all the blood which will be shed to morrow,
Must fall upon my head; one question
Shall fix it or untie it: Noble brother,
I would feign know how it is possible,
When it appears you love the fair Iolenta
With such a height of feruor, you were ready
To father another child, and marry her,
You would so suddenly engage your self,
To kill her brother, one that ever stood,
Your loyal and firm friend?

Erco. Sir, I Will tell you,
My love, as I have formerly protested
To Contarino, whose unfortunate end,
The traitor wrought: and here is one thing more,
Deads all good thoughts of him, which I now received
From Iolenta.

Cont. In a Letter?

Erco. Yes, in this Letter:
For having sent to her to be resolved
Most truly, who was father of the child,
She writes back, that the shame she goes withal,
Was begot by her brother.

Cont. O most incestious villain.

Erc. I protest, before I thought 'twas Contarinos Issue,
And for that would have veiled her dishonor.

Cont. No more.
Has the Armorer brought the weapons?

Erco. Yes sir.

Cont. I will no more think of her.

Erco. Of whom?

Con. Of my mother, I was thinking of my mother.
Call the Armorer.
Exeunt. Enter Surgeon, and Winifrid.
Win. You do love me sir, you say?

Sur. O most entirely.

Win. And you will marry me?

Sur Nay, I Will do more then that.
The fashion of the world is many times,
To make a woman naught, and afterward
To marry her: but I a'th contrary,
Will make you honest first, and afterward Proceed to the wedlock.


Win. Honest, what mean you by that?

Sur. I mean, that your suborning the late Law-suite,
Has got you a filthy report: now there is no way,
But to do some excellent piece of honesty,
To recover your good name.

Win How sir?

Sur. You shall straight go, and reveal to your old
Mistress, for certain truth, Contarino is alive.

Win. How, living?

Sur. Yes, he is living.

Win. No, I must not tell her of it.

Sur. No, why?

Win. For she did bind me yesterday by oath,
Never more to speak of him.

Sur. You shall reveal it then to Ariosto the Judge.

Win. By no means, he has heard me
Tell so many lies ith Court, he will nere believe me.
What if I told it to the Capuchin?

Sur. You cannot think of a better; for as your young Mris.
Who as you told me, has persuaded you,
To run away with her: let her have her humor.
I have a suite Romelio left In The house,
The habit of a Jew, that I Will put on,
And pretending I am robbed, by break of day,
Procure all Passengers to be brought back,
And by the way reveal my self, and discover
The Commicall event. They say she is a little mad,
This will help to cure her: go, go presently,
And reveal it to the Capuchin.

Win. Sir, I shall
Exeunt. Enter Julio, Prospero, and Sanitonella.
Iul. A pox ont, I have undertaken the challenge very foolishly: what if I do
not appear to answer it?


Pro. It would be absolute conviction
Of Cowardice, and Perjury; and the Dane,
May to your public shame, reuerse your Arms,
Or have them ignomiously fastened
Under his horse tail.

Iul. I do not like that so well.
I see then I must fight whether I will or no.

Prosp. How does Romelio bear himself? They say,
He has almost brained one of our cunningst Fencers,
That practisd with him.

Iul. Very certain; and now you talk of fencing,
Do not you remember the Welsh Gentleman,
That was travailing to Rome upon return?

Pros. No, what of him?

Iul. There was a strange experiment of a Fencer.

Pras. What was that?

Jul The Welshman in's play, do what the Fencer could,
Hung still an arse; he could not for's life
Make him come on bravely: till one night at supper,
Observing what a deal of Parma cheese
His Scholar devoured, goes ingeniously
The next morning, and makes a spacious button
For his foil of tosted cheese, and as sure as you live,
That made him come on the braueliest.

Pros. Possible!

Iul. Marry it taught him an ill grace in's play,
It made him gape still, gape as he put in for it,
As I have seen some hungry Usher.

San. The tosting of it belike,
Was to make it more supple, had he chanced
To have hit him a'th chaps.

Iul. Not unlikely. Who can tell me,
If we may breath in the Duel?

Pro. By no means.

Iul. Nor drink?

Pros. Neither.

Iul. That Is scuruy, anger will make me very dry.

Pros. You mistake sir, it is sorrow that is very dry.

San. Not always sir, I have known sorrow very wet.

Iul. In rainy weather.

San. No, when a woman has come dropping wet
Out of a Cuckingstoole.

Iul. Then it was wet indeed sir.
Enter Romelio very melancholy, and the Capuchin.
Cap. Having from Leonoras Wayting-woman,
Delivered a most strange Intelligence
Of Contarino's recovery, I am come
To sound Romelio's penitence; that performed,
To end these errors by discovering,
What she related to me. Peace to you sir,
Pray Gentlemen, let the freedom of this Room
Be mine a little. Nay sir, you may stay.
Exeunt Pro. Sa^. Will you pray with me?

Romans No, no, the world and I
Have not made up our accounts yet.

Cap. Shall I pray for you?

Romans Whether you do or no, I care not.

Cap. O you have a dangerous voyage to take.

Romans No matter, I will be mine own Pilot:
Do not you trouble your head with the business.

Cap. Pray tell me, do not you meditate of death?

Romans Phew, I took out that Lesson,
When I once lay sick of an Ague: I do now
Labor for life, for life. Sir, can you tell me,
Whether your Tolledo, or your Millain Blade
Be best tempered?

Cap. These things you know, are out of my practice.

Romans But these are things you know,
I must practice with to morrow.

Cap. Were I in your case,
I should present to my self strange shadows.

Romans Turn you, were I in your case,
I should laugh at mine one shadow.
Who has hired you to make me Coward?

Cap. I would make you a good Christian.

Rom Withal, let me continue
An honest man, which I am very certain,
A coward can never be; you take upon you
A Phisicians place, rather then a Divines.
You go about to bring my body so low,
I should sight in the Lists to morrow like a Dormouse,
And be made away in a slumber.

Cap. Did you murder Contarino?

Romans That Is a scuruy question now.

Cap. Why sir?

Romans Did you ask it as a Confessor, or as a spy?

Cap. As one that feign would iustle the devil
Out of your way.

Romans Vm, you are but weakly made for it:
He Is a cunning wrastler, I can tell you, and has broke many a man's neck.


Cap. But to give him the foil, goes not by strength.

Romans Let it go by what it will,
Get me some good victuals to breakfast, I am hungry.

Cap. Here Is food for you.
Offering him a Book.
Romans Pew, I am not to commence Doctor:
For then the word, Devour that book, were proper.
I am to sight, to sight sir, and I Will do it,
As I would feed, with a good stomach.

Cap. Can you feed, and apprehend death?

Romans Why sir? Is not Death
A hungry companion? Say? is not the grave
Said to be a great deuourer? Get me some victuals.
I knew a man that was to loose his head,
Feed with an excellent good appetite,
To strengthen his heart, scarce half an hour before.
And if he did it, that only was to speak,
What should I, that am to do?

Cap. This confidence,
If it be grounded upon truth, it is well.

Romans You must understand, that Resolution
Should ever wayt upon a noble death,
As Captains bring their Soldiers out o'th field,
And come off last: for, I pray what is death?
The safest Trench in the world to keep man free
From Fortunes Gunshot; to be afraid of that,
Would prove me weaker then a teeming woman,
That does endure a thousand times more pain
In bearing of a child.

Cap O, I tremble for you:
For I do know you have a storm within you,
More terrible then a Sea Fight, and your soul
Being heretofore drowned in security,
You know not how to live, nor how to dye:
But I have an object that shall startle you,
And make you know whither you are going.

Romans I am armed for it.
Enter Leonora with two Coffins borne by her servants, and two Winding-sheets
stuck with flowers, presents one to her son, and the other to Iulio. It Is
very welcome, this is a decent garment
Will never be out of fashion. I will kiss it.
All the Flowers of the Spring,
Meet to perfume our burying:
These have but their growing prime,
And man does slourish but his time.
Survey our progress from our birth,
We are set, we grow, we turn to earth.
Courts adieu, and all delights,
Soft Music. All bewitching appetites;
Sweetest Breath, and clearest eye,
Like perfumes go out and dye;
And consequently this is done,
As shadows wait upon the Sun.
Vain the ambition of Kings,
Who seek by trophies and dead things,
To leave a living name behind
And weaue but nets to catch the wind:
O you have wrought a miracle, and melted
A heart of Adamant, you have comprised
In this dumb Pageant, a right excellent form
Of penitence.

Cap. I am glad you so receive it.

To. This object does persuade me to forgive
to his mother The wrong she has don me, which I count the way
To be forgiven yonder: and this Shroud
Shows me how rankly we do smell of earth,
When we are in all our glory. Will it please you
Enter that Closet, where I shall confer
Bout matters of most weighty consequence,
Before the Duel.
Exit Leonora.
Iul Now I am right in the Bandileere for the gallows.
What a scuruy fashion it is, to hang ones coffin in a scarf?

Cap. Why this is well:
And now that I have made you fit for death,
And brought you even as low as is the grave,
I will raise you up again speak comforts to you
Beyond your hopes, turn this intended Duel
To a triumph.

Romans More Divinity yet?
Good sir, do one thing first, there is in my Closet
A Prayer book that is covered with guilt Vellom,
Fetch it, and pray you certify my mother,
I Will presently come to her.
So now you are safe.
Locks him into a Closet.
Jul. What have you done?

Romans Why I have locked them up
Into a Turret of the Castle safe enough,
For troubling us this four hours; and he please,
He may open a Casement, and whistle out to the Sea,
Like a Boson, not any creature can hear him.
Wast not thou a weary of his preaching?

Iul. Yes, if he had had an houre-glasse by him,
I would have wished him he would have ioggd it a little.
But your mother, your mother's locked in to.

Romans So much the better,
I am rid of her howling at parting.

Iul. Hark, he knocks to be let out and he were mad.

Romans Let him knock till his Sandals fly in pieces.

Iul. Ha, what says he? Contarino living?

Romans I, I, he means he would have Contarino's living
Bestowed upon his Monastery, it is that
He only fishes for. So, it is break of day,
We shall be called to the combat presently.

Iul. I am sorry for one thing.

Romans What Is that?

Iul. That I made not mine own Ballad: I do fear
I shall be roguishly abused in Meeter,
If I miscarry. Well, if the young Capuchin
Do not talk a'th flesh as fast now to your mother,
As he did to us a'th spirit; if he do,
It Is not the first time that the prison royal
Has been guilty of close committing.

Romans Now to the Combat.
Enter Capuchin and Leonora above at a window.
Leon. Contarino living?

Cap. Yes Madam, he is living, and Ercoles Second.

Leo. Why has he locked us up thus?

Cap. Some evil Angel
Makes him deaf to his own safety, we are shut
Into a Turret, the most desolate prison
Of all the Castle, and his obstinacy,
Madness, or secret fate, has thus prevented,
The saving of his life.

Leo. Oh the saving Contarino's,
His is worth nothing: for heavens sake call louder.

Cap. To little purpose.

Leo. I will leap these Battlements,
And may I be found dead time enough,
To hinder the combat.

Cap. Oh look upwards rather,
Their deliverance must come thence: to see how heaven,
Can inuert man's firmest purpose: his intent
Of murdering Contarino, was a mean
To work his safety, and my coming hither
To save him, is his ruin: wretches turn
The tide of their good fortune, and being drencht
In some presumptuous and hidden sins,
While they aspire to do themselves most right,
The devil that rules ith ay re, hangs in their light.

Leo. Oh they must not be lost thus; some good christian come within our
hearing: open the other casement that looks into the city.


Cap. Madam, I shall.
Exeunt.
The Lists set up. Enter the Marshall, Crispiano, and Ariosto as Judges, they
sit.
Mar. Give the Appealant his Summons, do the like
To the Defendant.
Two Tuckets by several Trumpets. Enter at one door, Ercole and Contarino, at
the other, Romelio and Julio. Can any of you allege ought, why the Combat
Should not proceed?

Combatants. Nothing.

Ario Have the Knights weighed,
And measured their weapons?

Mar. They have.

Ario. Proceed then to the battle, and may heaven
Determine the right.

Herald. Soit le Battle, et Victory a ceux que droit.

Rom Stay, I do not well know whither I am going:
'Twere needful therefore, though at the last gasp,
To have some Church man's prayer. Run I pray thee,
To Castle Nouo; this key will release
A Capuchin and my mother, whom I shut
Into a Turret, bid them make have, and pray
I may be dead ere he comes. Now, Victory a ceux que droit.
All the Champ. Victory a ccux que droit. The Combat continued to a good
length, when enters Leonora, and the Capuchin.
Leon. Hold, hold, for heavens sake hold.

Ari. What are these that interrupt the combat?
Away to prison with them.

Cap. We have been prisoners too long:
Oh sir, what mean you? Contarino's living.

Erco. Living!

Cap. Behold him living.

Erco. You were but now my second, now I make you
My self for ever.

Leon. Oh here is one between,
Claims to be nearer.

Cont. And to you dear Lady,
I have entirely vowed my life.

Romans If I do not dream, I am happy to.

Ario. How insolently has this high Court of Honor
Been abused!

Enter Angiolella veiled, and Iolenta, her face colored like a Moore, the two
Surgeons, one of them like a Jew.
Ario. How now, who are these?

2. Sur. A couple of strange Foul, and I the Falconer,
That have sprung them. This is a white Nun,
Of the Order of Saint Clare; and this a black one,
You Will take my word for it.
Discouers Iolenta.
Ario. She Is a black one indeed.

Jolen. Like or dislike me, choose you whether,
The Down upon the Ravens feather,
Is as gentle and as sleeke,
As the Mole on Uenus cheek.
Hence vain show, I only care,
To preserve my Soul most fair.
Never mind the outward skin,
But the Jewel that is within:
And though I want the crimson blood,
Angels boast my Sister-hood.
Which of us now judge you whiter,
Her whose credit proves the lighter,
Or this black, and Ebon hew,
That unstained, keeps fresh and true:
For I proclaim't without control,
There Is no true beauty, but ith Soul.

Erco. Oh it is the fair Iolenta; to what purpose
Are you thus ecclipst?

Iol Sir, I was running away
From the rumor of this Combat: I fled likewise,
From the untrue report my brother spread
To his politic ends, that I was got with child.

Leon. Cease here all further scruteny, this paper
Shall give unto the Court each circumstance,
Of all these passages.

Ario. No more: attend the Sentence of the Court.
Rareness and difficulty give estimation
To all things are in the world: you have met both
In these several passages: now it does remain,
That these so Comicall events be blasted
With no severity of Sentence: You Romelio,
Shall first deliver to that Gentleman,
Who stood your Second, all those Obligations,
Wherein he stands engaged to you,
Receiving only the principal.

Romans I shall my Lord.

Iul. I thank you,
I have an humor now to go to Sea
Against the Pirates; and my only ambition,
Is to have my Ship furnished with a rare consort
Of Music; and when I am pleased to be mad,
They shall play me Orlando.

San. You muft lay wait for the Fiddlers,
They Will fly away from the press like Watermen.

Ario. Next, you shall marry that Nun.

Romans Most willingly.

Angio. Oh sir, you have been unkind;
But I do only wish, that this my shame,
May warn all honest Virgins, not to seek
The way to Heaven, that is so wondrous steep,
Through those vows they are too frail to keep.

Ario. Contarino, and Romelio, and your self,
Shall for seven years maintain against the Turk,
Six Galleys. Leonora, Iolenta,
And Angiolella there the beauteous Nun,
For their vows breach unto the Monastery,
Shall build a Monastery. Lastly, the two Surgeons,
For concealing Contarino s recovery,
Shall exercise their Art at their own charge,
For a tweluemonth in the Galleys: so we leave you,
Wishing your future life may make good use
Of these events, since that these passages,
Which threatened ruin, built on rotten ground,
Are with success beyond our wishes crowned.
Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.

