THE WHITE DEVIL, OR, The Tragedy of Paulo Giordano Ursini, Duke of Brachiano,
With The Life and Death of Vittoria Corombona the famous Venetian Curtizan.

Acted by the Queens Majesty's Servants.

Written by JOHN WEBSTER.

Non inferiora secutus. LONDON, Printed by N. O. for Thomas Archer, and are to
be sold at his Shop in Popes head Palace, near the Royal Exchange. 1612.

To the Reader.
IN publishing this Tragedy, I do but challenge to my self that liberty, which
other men have taken before me; not that I affect praise by it, for, nos haec
nouimus esse nihil, only since it was acted, in so dull a time of Winter,
presented in so open and black a Theater, that it wanted (that which is the
only grace and setting out of a Tragedy) a full and understanding Auditory:
and that since that time I have noted, most of the people that come to that
Playhouse, resemble those ignorant asses (who visiting Stationers shoppes
their use is not to inquire for good books, but new books) I present it to
the general view with this confidence. Nec Rhoncos metues, maligniorum,
Nec Scombris tunicas, dabis molestas.


If it be objected this is no true Drammaticke Poem, I shall easily confess
it, non potes in nugas dicere plura meas: Ipse ego quam dixi, willingly, and
not ignorantly, in this kind have I faulted: for should a man present to such
an Auditory, the most sententious Tragedy that ever was written, observing all
the critticall laws, as height of style; and grauety of person; enrich it
with the sententious Chorus, and as it were life'n Death, in the passionate and
weighty Nuntius: yet after all this divine rapture, O dura messorum ilia, the
breath that comes from the incapable multitude, is able to poison it, and ere
it be acted, let the Author resolve to fix to every scoene, this of Horace, --
Haec hodie Porcis comedenda relinques.


To those who report I was a long time in finishing this Tragedy, I confess I
do not write with a goose-quill, winged with two feathers, and if they will
needs make it my fault, I must answer them with that of Eurypides to
Alcestides, a Tragic Writer: Alcestides obiecting that Eurypides had only in
three days composed three verses, whereas himself had written three hundredth:
Thou telst truth, (quoth he) but here is the difference, thine shall only be
read for three days, whereas mine shall continue three ages.

Detraction is the sworn friend to ignorance: For mine own part I have ever
truly cherisht my good opinion of other men's worthy Labors, especially of that
full and haightned style of Master Chapman. The labored and understanding
works of Master Johnson: The no less worthy composures of the both worthily
excellent Master Beamont, and Master Fletcher: And lastly (without wrong last
to be named) the right happy and copious industry of M. Shake-speare, M.
Decker, and M. Heywood, wishing what I write may be read by their light:
Protesting, that, in the strength of mine own judgment, I know them so
worthy, that though I rest silent in my own work, yet to most of theirs I
dare (without flattery) fix that of Martial.

-- non norunt, Haec monumenta mori.

THE TRAGEDY OF PAVLO GIORDANO Vrsini Duke of Brachiano, and Vittoria Corombona.
Enter Count Lodouico, Antonelli and Gasparo.
LODOVICO. Banished?

ANTO. It grieved me much to hear the sentence.

LODO. Ha, Ha, o Democritus thy Gods
That govern the whole world! Courtly reward, and punishment. Fortun's a right
whore.
If she give ought, she deals it in small percels,
That she may take away all at one swope.
This it is to have great enemies, God quite them:
Your woolfe no longer seems to be a woolfe
Then when she is hungry.

GAS. You term those enemies
Are men of Princely rank.

LOD. Oh I pray for them.
The violent thunder is adored by those
Are pasht in pieces by it.

ANTO. Come my Lord,
You are justly dom'd, look but a little back
Into your former life: you have in three years
Ruined the noblest Earldome

GAS. Your followers
Have swallowed you like Mummia, and being sick
With such unnatural and horrid Physic
Vomit you up ith kennell

ANTO. All the damnable degrees
Of drinkings have you, you staggerd through one Citizen.
Is Lord of two fair Manors, called you master
Only for Cauiare.

GAS. Those noblemen
Which were invited to your prodigal feasts,
Wherein the Phaenix scarce could escape your throtes,
Laugh at your misery, as fore-deeminge you:
An idle Meteor which drawn forth the earth
Would be soon lost ith air.

ANTO. Jest upon you,
And say you were begotten in an Earthquake,
You have ruined such fair Lordships.

LODO. Very good,
This Well goes with two buckets, I must tend
The pouring out of eather.

GAS. Worse then these,
You have acted, certain Murders here in Rome,
Bloody and full of horror.

LOD. Las they were flea-bytinges?
Why took they not my head then?

GAS. O my Lord
The law does sometimes mediate, thinks it good
Not ever to steep violent sins in blood,
This gentle penance may both end your crimes,
And in the example better these bad times.

LOD. So, but I wonder then some great men (...)
This banishment, there is Paulo Giordano Or^^^,
The Duke of Brachiano, now lives in Rome,
And by close pandarisme seeks to prostitute
The honor of Uittoria Corombona,
Vittoria, she that might have got my pardon
For one kiss to the Duke.

ANTO. Have a full man within you,
We see that Trees bear no such pleasant fruit
There where they grew first, as where the are new set.
Perfumes the more they are chafed the more they render
Their pleasing sents, and so affliction
Expresses virtue, fully, whether true,
Or else adulterate.

LOD. Leave your painted comforts,
I Will make Italian cut-works in their guts
If ever I return.

GASP. O Sir.

LODO. I am patient,
I have seen some ready to be executed
Give pleasant looks, and money, and grown familiar
With the knave hangman, so do I, I thank them,
And would account them nobly merciful
Would they dispatch me quickly,

ANTO. Fare you well,
We shall find time I doubt not to repeal
Your banishment.

LOD. I am ever bound to you:
Enter This is the worlds alms; pray make use of it,
Senate Great men sell sheep, thus to be cut in pieces,
When first they have shorn them bare and sold their sleeces.
Exeunt. Enter Brachiano, Camillo, Flamineo, Uittoria Corombona.
BRA. Your best of rest.

VIT. Unto my Lord the Duke,
The best of well come, More lights, attend the Duke.

BRA. Flamineo.

FLA. My Lord.

BRA. Quite lost Flamineo.

FLA. Pursew your noble wishes, I am prompt
As lightning to your service, o my Lord!
The fair Vittoria, my happy sister
Shall give you present audience, gentlemen
(whisper Let the caroach go on, and it is his pleasure
You put out all your torches and depart.

BRA. Are we so happy.

FLA. Cannot be otherwise?
Observed you not to night my honored Lord
Which way so ere you went she threw her eyes,
I have dealt already with her chambermaid
Zanche the More, and she is wondrous proud
To be the agent for so high a spirit.

BRA. We are happy above thought, because boue merit.

FLA. above merit! we may now talk freely: above merit; what is it you doubt,
her coyness, that's but the superficies of lust most women have; yet why should
Ladies blush to hear that named, which they do not fear to handle? O they are
polliticke, They know our desire is increased by the difficulty of inioying;
where a satiety is a blunt, weary and drowsy passion, if the buttery hatch at
Court stood continually open their would be nothing so passionat crouding, nor
hot suit after the beuerage,


BRA. O but her jealous husband.

FLA. Hang him, a guilder that has his brains perished with quicke-siluer is
not more could in the liver. The great Barriers moulted not more feathers then
he has shed hairs, by the confession of his doctor. An Irish gamster that
will play himself naked, and then wage all downward, at ^^^ard, is not more
venterous. So vn-able to please a woman that like a dutch doublet all his back
is shrunk into his breeches.

Shroud you within this closet, good my Lord,

Some trick now must be thought on to deui^e

My brother in law from his fair bedfellow,


BRA. O should she fail to come,

FLA. I must not have your Lordship thus unwisely amorous,
I my self have loved a lady and peursued her with a great deal of vnder-age
protestation, whom some 3. or 4. gallants that have enjoyed would with all
their hearts have bin glad to have bin rid of It Is just like a summer bird-cage
in a garden, the birds that are without, despair to get in, and the birds that
are within despair and are in a consumption for fear they shall never get
out: away away my Lord,

Enter Camillo, See here he comes, this fellow by his apparel
Some men would judge a pollititian,
But call his wit in question you shall find it
Merely an Ass in's foot cloth,
How now brother what travailing to bed to your kind wise?

CAME. I assure you brother no, My voyage lies
More northerlie, in a far colder clime,
I do not well remember I protest when I last lay with her.

FLA. Strange you should loose your Count.

CAME. We never lay together but ear morning
Their grew a flaw between us.

FLA. T'had been your part
To have made up that flaw.

CAME. True, but she loathes I should be seen in it.

FLA. Why Sir, what is the matter?

CAME. The Duke your master visits me I thank him,
And I perceive how like an earnest bowler
He very passionatelie leanes that way,
He should have his boule run

FLA. I hope you do not think

CAME. That noble men boule booty, Faith his cheek
Has a most excellent Bias, it would feign iumpe with my mistress.

FLA. Will you be an ass.
Despite you Aristotle or a Cocould
Contrary to your Ephemerides
Which shows you under what a smiling planet
You were first swadled,

CAME: Pew wew, Sir tell not me
Of planets nor of Ephemeridas
A man may be made Cocould in the day time
When the Stars eyes are out.

FLA. Sir God boy you,
I do commit you to your pitiful pillow
Stuffed with horne-shauings.

CAME. Brother.

FLA. God refuse me
Might I advise you now your only course
Wear to lock up your wife.

CAME. T'weare very good.

FLA. Bar her the sight of revels.

CAME. Excellent.

FLA. Let her not go to Church, but like a hounde
In Leon atyour heels.

CAME. Tweare for her honor

FLA. And so you should be certain in one fortnight,
Despite her chastity or innocence
To be Cocoulded, which yet is in suspense:
This is my counsel and I ask no see for it.

CAME. Come you know not where my-night cap wringes me.

FLA. Wear it ath' old fashion, let your large ears come through, it will be
more easy, nay I will be bitter, bar your wife of her entertaynment: women
are more willingly and more gloriously chaste, when they are least restrained
of their liberty. It seems you would be a fine Capricious Mathematically
jealous Coxcombe, take the height of your own horns with a Jacobs staff
before they are up. These polliticke enclosures for paltry mutton, makes more
rebellion in the flesh then all the prouocatiue electuaries Doctors have
uttered sense last Iubilee.


CAME. This does not physic me,

FLA: It seems you are Jealous, i will show you the error of it by a familiar
example, I have seen a pair of spectacles fashiond with such perspectiue art,
that lay down but one twelve pence ath'bord twill appear as if there were
twenty, now should you wear a pair of these spectacles, and see your wife
tying her shoe, you would Imagine twenty hands were taking up of your wives
clothes, and this would put you into a horrible causlesse fury,


CAME. The fault there Sir is not in the eyesight

FLA. True, but they that have the yellow Iaundeise, think all objects they
look on to be yellow. Iealousy is worser, her fit's present to a man, like so
many bubles in a Basin of water, twenty several crabbed faces, many times
makes his own shadow his cocould-maker. * See she comes, what reason Enter
Corom^^^^.
have you to be jealous of this creature? what an ignorant ass or flattering
knave might he be counted, that should write sonnets to her eyes, or call her
brow the snow of Ida, or Iuorie of Corinth, or compare her hair to the black
birds bill, when it is liker the black birds feather. This is all: Be wise, I
will make you friends and you shall go to bed together, marry look you, it
shall not be your seeking, do you stand upon that by any means, walk you a
loofe, I would not have you seen in it, sister my Lord attends you in the
banqueting house, your husband is wondrous discontented.


VIT. I did nothing to displease him, I carved to him at supper-time


FLA. You need not have carved him infaith, they say he is a capon already, I
must now seemingly fall out with you. Shall a gentleman so well descended as
Camillo. -- a lousy slave that within this twenty years rode with the black
guard in the Dukes carriage among spits and dripping-pannes.


CAME. Now he begins to tickle her.

FLA. An excellent scholar, one that has a head filled with calves brains
without any sage in them, -- come crouching in the hams to you for a nights
lodging -- that has an itch in's hams, which like the fire at the glass house
has not gone out this seven years -- is he not a courtly gentleman, -- when
he wears white satin one would take him by his black mussel to be no other
creature then a maggot, you are a goodly Foil, I confess, well set out -- but
couerd with a false stone you conterfaite dyamond.


CAME. He will make her know what is in me.

FLA. Come, my Lord attends you, thou shall go to bed to my Lord.


CAME. Now he comes to it.

FLA. With a relish as curious as a vintner going to taste new wine, I am
opening your case hard.


CAME. A virtuous brother a my credit.

FLA. He will give thee a ringe with a philosophers stonein it.

CAME. Indeed I am studying Alcumye.

FLA. Thou shall lie in a bed stuffed with turtles feathers, swoone in perfumed
lynnen like the fellow was smothered in roses, so perfect shall be thy
happiness, that as men at Sea think land and trees and ships go that way
they go, so both heaven and earth shall seem to go your voyage. Shal't meet
him, it is fixed, with nails of dyamonds to inevitable necessity.


VITTO. How shals rid him hence?

FLA. I will put brees in's tail, set him gadding presently, I have almost
wrought her to it, I find her coming, but might I advise you now for this
night I would not lie with her, I would cross her humor to make her more
humble.


CAMIL. Shall I, shall I?

FLA: It will show in you a supremacy of Judgment.

CAMIL. True, and a mind differing from the tumultuary opinion, for quae negata
great.


FLA. Right you are the Adamant shall draw her to you, though you keep
distance of:


CAMIL. A philosophical reason.

FLA. Walk by her a'the noble man's fashion, and tell her you will lie with her
at the end of the Progress


CAMIL. Vittoria, I cannot be induced, or as a man would say incited.


VITTO. To do what Sir?

CAMIL. To lie with you to night; your silkeworme uses to fast every third
day, and the next following spinnes the better. Tomorrow at night I am for you.


VITTO. You Will spinne a fair thread, trust to it.

FLA. But do you hear I shall have you steal to her chamber about midnight.


CAMIL. Do you think so, why look you brother, because you shall not think
i will gull you, take the key, lock me into the chamber, and say you shall be
sure of me.


FLA. In Troth I will, i will be your iaylor once,
But have you nere a false door.

CAME. A pox on it, as I am a Christian tell me to morrow how scuruelie she
takes my unkind parting


FLA. I will.

CAME. Did thou not make the jest of the silke-worme? good night in faith I
will use this trick often,


FLA. Do, do, do.
Exit Camillo. So now you are safe. Ha ha ha, thou intanglest thy self in
thine own work like a silke-worme

Enter Brachiano. Come sister, darkness hides your blush, women are like
cursed dogs, civility keeps them tied all day time, but they are let loose
at midnight, then they do most good or most mischief, my Lord, my Lord


BRA. Give credit: I could wish time would stand still
And never end this enteruew this hour,
Za^che brings out a Carpet Spreads it and lays on it two fair Cushions Enter
Cornelia But all delight does it self soon'st dcuour.
Let me into your bosom happy Lady,
Power out in stead of eloquence my vows,
Loose me not Madam, for if you forcgo me I am lost eternally.

VIT. Sir in the way of pity I wish you hart-hole.

BRA. You are a sweet Physician.

VIT. Sure Sir a loathed cruelty in Ladies
Is as to Doctors many funerals: It takes away their credit.

BRA. Excellent Creature.
We call the cruel fair, what name for you
That are so merciful?

ZAN. See now they close.

FLA. Most happy union.

COR. My fears are fallen upon me, oh my heart!
My son the pandar: now I find our house
Sinking to ruin. Earthquakes leave behind,
Where they have tyrannised, iron, or lead, or stone,
But woe to ruin violent lust leaves none

BRA. What value is this Jewel

VIT. It Is the ornament Of a weak fortune.

BRA. In sooth i will have it; nay I will but change
My Jewel for your Jewel.

FLAM. Excellent,
His Jewel for her Jewel, well put in Duke.

BRAC. Nay let me see you wear it.

VIT. Hear sir.

BRAC. Nay lower, you shall wear my Jewel lower.

FLAM. That Is better she must wear his Jewel lower.

VIT. To pass away the time I Will tell your grace,
A dream I had last night.

BRAC. Most wishedly.

VIT. A foolish idle dream,
Me thought I walked about the mid of night,
Into a Churchyard, where a goodly Eu Tree
Spread her large root in ground, under that Eu,
As I sat sadly leaning on a grave,
Checkered with crosse-sticks, their came stealing in
Your Duchess and my husband, one of them
A picax bore, the other a Rusty spade,
And in rough terms they began to challenge me,
About this Eu.

BRAC. That Tree.

VIT. This harmless Eu:
They told me my intent was to root up
That well-growne Eu, and plant in the steed of it
A withered blacke-thorne, and for that they vowed
To bury me alive: my husband straight
With picax began to dig, and your fell Duchess
With shouell, like a fury, voyded out
The earth and scattered bones, Lord how me thought
I trembled, and yet for all this terror
I could not pray.

FLAM. No the devil was in your dream.

VIT. When to my rescue there arose me thought
A whirlewind, which let fall a massy arm
From that strong plant,
And both were struck dead by that sacred Eu
In that base shallow grave that was their due.

FLAM. Excellent Devil.
She has taught him in a dream
To make away his Duchess and her husband.

BRAC. Sweetly shall I enterpret this your dream,
You are lodged within his arms who shall protect you,
From all the feauers of a jealous husband,
From the poor envy of our flegmaticke Duchess,
I Will seat you above law and above scandal,
Give to your thoughts the invention of delight
And the fruition, nor shall government
Divide me from you longer then a care
To keep you great: you shall to me at once,
Be Dukedom, health, wife, children, friends and all.

COR. Woe to light hearts they still forerun our fall.

FLAM. What fury raised thee up? away, away
Exit Zanche.
COR. What make you hear my Lord this dead of night?
Never dropped meldew on a flower here, tell now.

FLAM. I pray will you go to bed then,
Least you be blasted.

COR. O that this fair garden,
Had all poisoned herbs of Thessaly,
At first been planted, made a nursery
For witchcraft; rather a burial plot,
For both your Honors.

VIT. Dearest mother hear me.

COR. O thou do make my brow bend to the earth,
Sooner then nature, see the curse of children
In life they keep us freqeuently in tears,
And in the cold grave leaves us in pale fears.

BRAC. Come, come, I will not hear you.

VIT. Dear my Lord.

COR. Where is thy Duchess now adulterous Duke?
Thou little dreamd'st this night she is come to Rome.

FLAM. How? come to Rome,

VIT. The Duchess,

BRAC. She had been better,

COR. The lives of Princes should like dyals move,
Whose regular example is so strong,
They make the times by them go right or wrong.

FLAM. So, have you done?

COR. Unfortunate Camillo.

VIT. I do protest if any chaste denial,
If any thing but blood could have alayed,
His long suite to me.

COR. I will join with thee,
To the most woeful end ere mother kneeled,
If thou dishonor thus thy husbands bed,
Be thy life short as are the funeral tears
In great men's.

BRAC. Fie, fie, the woman's mad.

COR. Be thy act Iudas-like betray in kissing,
May thou be envied during his short breath,
And pitied like a wretch after this death.

VIT. O me accursed.
Exit Uictoria
FLAM. Are you out of your wits, my Lord
I Will fetch her back again?

BRAC. No I Will to bed.
Send Doctor Iulio to me presently,
Uncharitable woman thy rash tongue
Has raised a fearful and prodigious storm,
Be thou the cause of all ensuing harm.
Exit Brachiano.
FLAM. Now, you that stand so much upon your honor,
Is this a fitting time a night think you,
To send a Duke home without ere a man:
I would feign know where lies the mass of wealth
Which you have whoorded for my maintenance,
That I may bear my beard out of the level
Of my Lords Stirop.

COR. What? because we are poor,
Shall we be vicious?

FLAM. Pray what means have you
To keep me from the galleys, or the gallows?
My father proved himself a Gentleman,
Sold all is land, and like a fortunate fellow,
Died ere the money was spent. You brought me up,
At Padua I confess, where I protest
For want of means, the University judge me,
I have been feign to heel my Tutors stockings
At least seven years: Conspiring with a beard
Made me a Graduate, then to this Dukes service,
I visited the Court, whence I returned:
More courteous, more letcherous by far,
But not a suite the richer, and shall I,
Having a path so open and so free
To my preferment, still retain your milk
In my pale forehead, no this face of mine
I Will arm and fortefie with lusty wine,
Against shame and blushing.

COR. O that I never had borne thee,

FLAM. So would I.
I would the common'st Courtezan in Rome,
Had been my mother rather then thy self.
Nature is very pittfull to whoores
To give them but few children, yet those children
Plurality of fathers, they are sure
They shall not want. Go, go,
Complain unto my great Lord Cardinal,
Yet may be he will justify the act.
Lycurgus wondered much men would provide
Good stalions for their Mares, and yet would suffer
Their fair wives to be barren,

COR. Misery of miseries.
Exit Cornelia.
FLAM. The Duchess come to Court, I like not that,
We are engaged to mischief and must on.
As Rivers to find out the Ocean
Flow with crook bendings beneath forced banks,
Or as we see to aspire some mountains top,
The way ascends not straight, but Imitates
The subtle fouldings of a Winters snake,
So who knows policy and her true aspect,
Shall find her ways winding and indirect.
Exit. Enter Francisco de Medicis, Cardinal Mountcelso, Marcello, Isabella,
young Giouanni, with little Jacques the Moore.
FRAN. Have you not seen your husband since you arrived?

ISAB. Not yet sir.

FRAN. Surely he is wondrous kind,
If I had a such Doue-house as Camillo's
I would set fire on it, were but to destroy
The Pole-cats that haunt to it, -- my sweet cossin.

GIO. Lord uncle you did promise me a horse
And armor.

FRAN. That I did my pretty cossin,
Marcello see it fitted.

MAR. My Lord the Duke is here.

FRAN. Sister away you must not yet be seen.

ISAB. I do beseech you entreat him mildely,
Let not your rough tongue
Set us at louder variance, all my wrongs
Are freely pardoned, and I do not doubt
As men to try the precious Unicorns horn
Make of the powder a preservative Circle
And in it put a spider, so these arms
Shall charm his poison, force it to obeying
And keep him chaste from an infected straying

FRAN. I wish it may. Be gone.
Exit. Enter Brachiano, and Flamineo. Void the chamber,
You are welcome, will you sit, I pray my Lord
Be you my Orator, my hearts too full,
I Will second you anon.

MONT. E're I begin
Let me entreat your grace forgo all passion
Which may be raised by my free discourse:

BRAC. As silent as in the Church you may proceed.

MONT. It is a wonder to your noble friends,
That you have as 'twere entered the world,
With a free Scepter in your able hand,
And have to the use of nature well applied
High gifts of learning, should in your prime-age
Neglect your awful throne, for the soft down
Of an insatiate bed. oh my Lord,
The Drunkard after all his lavish cups,
Is dry, and then is sober, so at length,
When you awake from this lascivious dream,
Repentance then will follow; like the sting
Placed in the Adders tail: wretched are Princes
When fortune blasteth but a petty flower
Of their unwieldy crowns; or rauesheth
But one pearl from their Scepter: but alas!
When they to wilful shipwrake loose good Fame
All Princely titles perish with their name.

BRAC. You have said my Lord,

MON. Enough to give you taste
How far I am from flattering your greatness?

BRAC. Now you that are his second, what say you?
Do not like young hawks fetch a course about
Your game flies fair and for you,

FRAN. Do not fear it:
I Will answer you in your own hawking phrase,
Some Eagles that should gaze upon the Sun
Seldom soar high, but take their lustful ease,
Since they from dunghill birds their pery can ceaze,
You know Uittoria,

BRA. Yes.

FRAN. You shift your shirt there
When you retire from Tennis.

BRAC. Happily.

FRAN. Her husband is Lord of a poor fortune
Yet she wears cloth of Tissue,

BRAC. What of this?
Will you urge that my good Lord Cardinal
As part of her confession at next Shrift,
And know from whence it sails.

FRAN. She is your Strumpet,

BRAC. Uncivil sir there is Hemlocke in thy breath
And that black slander, were she a whore of mine
All thy loud Cannons, and thy borrowed Switzers
Thy Galleys, nor thy sworn confederates,
Durst not supplant her.

FRAN. Let Us not talk on thunder,
Thou have a wife, our sister, would I had given
Both her whitehands to death, bound and locked fast
In her last winding sheere, when I gave thee
But one.

BRAC. Thou had given a soul to God then.

FRAN. True,
Thy ghostly father with all is absolution,
Shall never do so by thee.

BRAC. Spit thy poison,

FRAN. I shall not need, lust carries her sharp whippe
At her own girdle, look to it for our anger
Is making thunderbolts.

BRAC. Thunder? in faith,
They are but crackers.

FRAN. We Will end this with the Cannon.

BRAC. Thou Wilt get naught by it but iron in thy wounds,
And gunpowder in thy nostrels.

FRAN. Better that
Then change perfumes for plasters,

BRAC. Pity on thee,
'Twere good you would show your slaves or men condemned
Your new plowed forehead defiance, and I Will meet thee,
Even in a thicket of thy ablest men.

MON. My Lords, you shall not word it any further
Without a milder limit.

FRAN. Willingly.

BRAC. Have you proclaimed a Triumph that you bait a
Lion thus.

MON. My Lord.

BRAC. I am tame, I am tame sir.

FLAN. We send, unto the Duke for conference
Bout leauyes' against the Pirates, my Lord Duke
Is not at home, we come our self in person,
Still my Lord Duke is busied, but we fear
When Tyber to each proling passenger
Discouers flocks of wild-duckes, then my Lord
'Bout moulting time, I mean we shall be certain
To find you sure enough and speak with you.

BRAC. Ha?

FLAN. A mere tale of a tub, my words are idle,
But to express the Sonnet by natural reason,
Enter Giouanni When Stagges grow melancholic you will find the season

MON. No more my Lord, hear comes a Champion,
Shall end the difference between you both,
Your son the Prince Giouanni, see my Lords
What hopes you store in him, this is a casket
For both your Crowns, and should be held like dear:
Now is he apt for knowledge, therefore know
It is a more direct and even way
To train to virtue those of Princely blood,
By examples then by precepts: if by examples
Whom should he rather strive to imitate
Then his own father: be his pattern then,
Leave him a stock of virtue that may last,
Should fortune rend his sails, and split his mast.

BRA. Your hand boy growing to soldier.

GIO. Give me a pike.

FRAN. What practicing your pike so young, fair cous.

GIO. Suppose me one of Homers frogs, my Lord,
Tossing my bul-rush thus, pray sir tell me
Might not a child of good descretion
Be leader to an army:

FRAN. Yes cousin a young Prince
Of good descretion might.

GIO. Say you so,
Indeed I have heard it is fit a General
Should not endanger his own person often,
So that he make a noise, when he is a horseback
Like a danske drummer, o it is excellent.
He need not fight, me thinks his horse as well
Might lead an army for him; if I live
I Will charge the French foe, in the very front
Of all my troops, the foremost man.

FRA. What, what,

GIO. And will not bid my Soldiers up and follow
But bid them follow me.

BRAC. Forward Lap-wing.
He flies with the shell on's head.

FRAN. Pretty cousin,

GIO. The first year uncle that I go to war,
All prisoners that I take I will set free
Without their ransom.

FRAN. Ha, without their ransom,
How then will you reward your soldiers
That took those prisoners for you.

GIO. Thus my Lord,
I Will marry them to all the wealthy widows
That falls that year.

FRAN. Why then the next year following
You Will have no men to go with you to war.

GIO. Why then I Will press the women to the war,
And then the men will follow.

MON. Witty Prince.

FRAN. See a good habit makes a child a man,
Whereas a bad one makes a man a beast:
Come you and I are friends.

BRAC. Most wishedly,
Like bones which broke in sunder and well set
Knit the more strongly.

FRAN. Call Camillo hither
You have received the rumor, how Count Lodowicke
Is turned a Pyrate.

BRAC. Yes.

FRA. We are now preparing,
Some ships to fetch him in: behold your Duchess,
Exeunt Fr. Mon. Giou. We now will leave you and expect from you
Nothing but kind entreaty.

BRAC. You have charmed me.
You are in health we see.

ISA. And above health
To see my Lord well,

BRAC. So I wonder much,
What amorous whirlewind hurryed you to Rome

ISA. Devotion my Lord.

BRAC. Devotion?
Is your soul charged with any grievous sin

ISA. It Is burdened with too many, and I think
The oftener that we cast our reckonings up,
Our sleeps will be the sounder.

BRAC. Take your chamber?

ISA. Nay my dear Lord I will not have you angry,
Does not my absence from you two months,
Merit one kiss?

BRAC. I do not use to kiss,
If that will dispossess your iealousy,
I Will swear it to you.

ISA. O my loved Lord,
I do not come to chide; my iealousy,
I am to learn what that Italian means,
You are as welcome to these longing arms,
As I to you a Virgin.

BRAC. O your breath,
Out upon sweet meats, and continued Physic.
The plague is in them.

ISA. You have often for these two lips
Neglected Cassia or the natural sweetes
Of the Spring-violet, they are not yet much whithered,
My Lord I should be merry, these your frowns
Show in a Helmet, lovely but on me,
In such a peaceful enterueiw me thinks
They are to too roughly knit.

BRA. O dissemblance.
Do you bandy factions against me? have you learned,
The trick of impudent baseness to complain
Unto your kindred?

ISA. Never my dear Lord.

BRAC. Must I be haunted out, or wast your trick
To meet some amorous gallant here in Rome
That must supply our discontinuance?

ISA. I pray sir burst my heart, and in my death
Turn to your ancient pity, though not love.

BRA. Because your brother is the corpulent Duke,
That is the great Duke, God's Death I shall not shortly
Rackit away five hundredth Crowns at Tenis,
But it shall rest upon record: I scorn him
Like a shau'd Pollake, all his reverent wit
Lies in his wardrope, he is a discret fellow
When he is made up in his roabes of state,
Your brother the great Duke, because h'as galleys,
And now and then ransackes a Turkish flye-boate,
(Now all the hellish furies take his soul,)
First made this match, accursed be the Priest
That sang the wedding Mass, and even my Issue.

ISA. O to too far you have cursed.

BRA. Your hand I Will kiss,
This is the latest ceremony of my love,
Henceforth I Will never lie with thee, by this,
This wedding-ring: I Will ne'remore lie with thee.
And this divorce shall be as truly kept,
As if the Judge had doomed it: fare you well,
Our sleeps are seuer'd.

ISA. Forbid it the sweet union
Of all things blessed; why the Saints in heaven
Will knit their brows at that.

BRA. Let not thy love,
Make thee an unbeliever, this my vow,
Shall never on my soul be satisfied
With my repentance: let thy brother rage
Beyond a horred tempest or sea fight,
My vow is fixed.

ISA. O my winding sheet,
Now shall I need thee shortly, dear my Lord,
Let me hear once more, what I would not hear,
Never.

BRA. Never?

ISA. O my unkind Lord may your sins find mercy,
As I upon a woeful widowed bed,
Shall pray for you, if not to turn your eyes,
Upon your wretched wife, and hopeful son,
Yet that in time you will fix them upon heaven.

BRAC. No more, go, go, complain to the great Duke.

ISA. No my dear Lord, you shall have present witness,
How I Will work peace between you, I will make
My self the author of your cursed vow
I have some cause to do it, you have none,
Conceal it I beseech you, for the weal
Of both your Dukedomes, that you wrought the means
Of such a separation, let the fault
Remain with my supposed iealousy,
And think with what a pitteous and rent hear,
I shall perform this sad ensuing part.
Enter Francisco, Flamineo, Montcello, Marcello, Camillo.
BRAC. Well, take your course my honorable brother.

FRAN. Sister, this is not well my Lord, why sister,
She merits not this welcome.

BRAC. Welcome say?
She has given a sharp welcome.

FRAN. Are you foolish?
Come dry your tears, is this a modest course.
To better what is naught, to rail and weep,
Grow to a reconcilement, or by heaven,
I Will nere more deal between you.

ISA. Sir you shall not,
No though Uittoria upon that condition
Would become honest.

FRAN. Was your husband loud.
Since we departed.

ISA. By my life sir no,
I swear by that I do not care to loose.
Are all these ruins of my former beauty,
Laid out for a whores triumph?

FRA. Do you hear
Look upon other women, with what patience
They suffer these slight wrongs, with what justice
They study to requite them, take that course.

ISA. O that I were a man, or that I had power
To execute my apprehended wishes,
I would whip some with scorpions.

FRAN. What? turned fury?

ISA. To dig the strumpets eyes out, let her lie
Some twenty months a dying, to cut off
Her nose and lips, pull out her rotten teeth,
Preserve her flesh like Mummia, for trophies
Of my just anger: Hell to my affliction
Is mere snow-water, by your favor sir,
Brother draw near, and my Lord Cardinal,
Sir let me borrow of you but one kiss,
Henceforth I Will never lie with you, by this,
This wedding ring.

FRA. How? nere more lie with him,

ISA. And this divorce shall be as truly kept,
As if in thronged Court, a thousand ears
Had heard it, and a thousand Lawyers hands,
Sealed to the separation.

BRAC. Nere lie with me?

ISA. Let not my former dotage,
Make thee an unbeliever, this my vow
Shall never on my soul be satisfied
With my repentance, manet alta mente repositum.

FRAN. Now by my birth you are a foolish, mad,
And jealous woman.

BRA. You see it is not my seeking.

FRAN. Was this your circle of pure Unicorns horn,
You said should charm your Lord; now horns upon thee,
For iealousy deserves them, keep your vow,
And take your chamber.

ISA. No sir I Will presently to Padua,
I will not stay a minute.

MONT. O good Madame.

BRAC. 'Twere best to let her have her humor.
Some half days journey will bring down her stomach,
And then she will turn in post.

FRAN. To see her come,
To my Lord Cardinal for a dispensation
Of her rash vow will beget excellent laughter.

ISA. "Unkindness do thy office, poor heart break,
"Those are the killing greifes which dare not speak.
Exit.
MAR. Camill's come my Lord.
Enter Camillo.
FRAN. Where Is the commission?

MAR. It Is here.

FRAN. Give me the Signet.

FLAM. My Lord do you mark their whispering, I will compound a medicine out of
their two heads, stronger then garlic, deadlier then stibium, the Cantarides
which are scarce seen to stick upon the flesh when they work to the heart,
shall not do it with more silence or invisible cunning.

Enter Doctor.
BRAC. About the murder.

FLAM. They are sending him to Naples, but I Will send him to Candy, here is
another property to.


BRAC. O the Doctor,

FLA. A poor quackesaluing knave, my Lord, one that should have been lasht
for's letchery, but that he confessed a judgment, had an execution laid upon
him, and so put the whip to a nonplus.


DOCT. And was consigned, my Lord, by an arranter knave then my self, and made
pay all the coulourable execution.


FLAM. He will shoot pills into a man's guts, shall make them have more ventages
then a cornet or a lamprey, he will poison a kiss, and was once minded, for
his Masterpiece, because Ireland breeds no poison, to have prepared a deadly
vapor in a Spaniards fart that should have poisoned all Dublin.


BRAC. O Saint Anthony fire:

DOCT. Your Secretary is merry my Lord:

FLAM. O thou cursed antipathy to nature, look his eyes bloodshed like a
needle a Surgeon stitcheth a wound with, let me embrace thee toad, and love
thee o thou abominable loathsome gargarisme, that will fetch up lungs, lights,
heart, and liver by scruples.


BRAC. No more, I must employ thee honest Doctor,
You must to Padua and by the way, use some of your skill for us.

DOC. Sir I shall.

BRAC. But for Camillo?

FLAM. He dies this night by such a polliticke strain,
Men shall suppose him by's own engine slain.
But for your Duchess death.

DOCT. I Will make her sure

BRAC. Small mischiefs are by greater made secure.

FLAM. Remember this you slave, when knaves come to preferment they rise as
gallouses are raised in the low countries, one upon another shoulders.

Exeunt.
MONT. Here is an Emblem nephew pray peruse it.
'Twas thrown in at your window,

CAME. At my window,
Here is a Stag my Lord has shed his horns,
And for the loss of them the poor beast weeps
The word Inopem me copia fecit.

MON. That is.
Plenty of horns has made him poor of horns.

CAME. What should this mean.

MON. I Will tell you, it is given out
You are a Cocould.

CAME. Is it given out so.
I had rather such report as that my Lord.
Should keep within doors.

FRAN. Have you any children.

CAME. None my Lord.

FRA. You are the happier
I Will tell you a tale.

CAME. Pray my Lord.

FRAN. An old tale.
Upon a time Phoebus the God of light
Or him we call the Sun would need be married.
The Gods gave their consent, and Mercury
Was sent to voice it to the general world.
But what a pitious cry their straight arose
Amongst Smiths, and Felt-makers, Brewers and Cooks.
Reapers and Butter-women, amongst Fishmongers
And thousand other trades, which are annoyed
By his excessive heat; it was lamentable.
They came to Jupiter all in a sweat
And do forbid the banes; a great fat Cook
Was made their Speaker, who intreates of Jove
That Phoebus might be guelded, for if now
When there was but one, Sun so many men,
Wear like to perish by his violent heat.
What should they do if he were married
And should be get more, and those children
Make fier-workes like their father, so say I,
Only I will apply it to your wife,
Her issue should not providence prevent it
Would make both nature, time, and man repent it.

MON. Look you cossin.
Go change the air for shame see if your absence,
Will blast your Cornucopia, Marcello
Is chosen with you joint commissioner
For the relieuing our Italian coast
From pirates.

MAR. I am much honored int.

CAME. But sir
Ere I return the Stagges horns may be sprouted,
Greater then these are shed.

MONT. Do not fear it,
I Will be your ranger.

CAME. You must watch i'ch nights,
Then Is the most danger.

FRAN. Farewell good Marcello.
All the best fortunes of a Soldiers wish,
Bring you a shipboard.

CAME. Were I not best now I am turned Soldier,
E're that I leave my wife, sell all she has,
And then take leave of her.

MONT. I expect good from you,
Your parting is so merry.

CAME. Merry my Lord, a'th Captains humor right
I am resolved to be drunk this night.
Exit.
FRA. So, 'twas well fitted, now shall we descerne,
How his wished absence will give violent way,
To Duke Brachiano's lust,

MONT. Why that was it;
To what scorned purpose else should we make choice
Of him for a sea Captain, and besides,
Count Lodowicke which was rumor'd for a pirate.
Is now in Padua.

FRAN. Is It true?

MONT. Most certain.
I have letters from him, which are suppliant
To work his quick repeal from banishment,
He means to adresse himself for pention,
Unto our sister Duchess.

FRAN. O 'twas well.
We shall not want his absence past six days,
I feign would have the Duke Brachiano run
Into notorious scandale, for their's naught
In such cursed dotage, to repair his name,
Only the deep sense of some deathlesse shame:

MON. It may be objected I am dishonorable,
To play thus with my kinsman, but I answer.
For my revenge I Would stake a brothers life,
That being wronged durst not avenge himself.

FRA. Come to observe this Stru^per.

MON. Curse of greatness,
Sure he will not leave her.

FRAN. There Is small pity in it
Like mistle-tow on sear Elmes spent by weather,
Let him cleave to her and both rot together.
Exeunt. Enter Brachiano with one in the habit of a Coniurer.
BRAC. Now sir I claim your promise, it is dead midnight,
The time prefixed to show me by your Art,
How the intended murder of Camillo,
And our loathed Duchess grow to action.

CON. You have won me by your bounty to a deed,
I do not often practice, some there are,
Which by Sophisticke tricks, aspire that name
Which I would gladly loose, of Nigromancer:
As some that use to iuggle upon cards,
Seeming to conjure, when indeed they cheat.
Others that raise up their confederate spirits,
'Bout wind-mils, and endanger their own necks,
For making of a squib, and some their are
Will keep a curtall to show iuggling tricks
And give out it is a spirit: besides these
Such a whole reame of Almanacke-makers, figure-flingers.
Fellows indeed that only live by stealth,
Since they do merely lie about stolen goods,
Thei'd make men think the devil were fast and loose,
With speaking fustian Lattine: pray sit down,
Put on this nightcap sir, it is charmed, and now
I Will show you by my strong-commanding Art
The circumstance that breaks your Dutchsse heart.
A DVMBE SHOW. Enter suspiciously, Iulio and Christophero, they draw a
ourtains where Brachian's picture is, they put on spectacles of glass, which
cover their eyes and noses, and then burn perfumnes before the picture, and
wash the lips of the picture, that done, quenching the fire, and putting off
their pectacles they depart laughing. Enter Isabella in her night-gowne as to
did-ward, with lights after her, Count Lodouico, Giouanni, Guid-antonio and
others waighting on her, she kneeles down as to prayers, then draws the
curtain of the picture, does three reuerences to it, and kisses it thrice,
she faints and will not suffer them to come nere it, dies, sorrow expressed in
Giouanni and in Count Lodouico, she is conueid out solemnly.
BRAC. Excellent, then she is dead,

CON. She Is poisoned,
By the fumed picture, 'twas her custom nightly,
Before she went to bed, to go and visit
Your picture, and to feed her eyes and lips
On the dead shadow, Doctor Iulio
Observing this, infects it with an oil
And other poisoned stuff, which presently
Did suffocate her spirits.

BRAC. Me thought I saw,
Count Lodowicke there.

CON. He was, and by my art
I find he did most passionately doat
Upon your Duchess, now turn another way,
And view Camillo's far more polliticke face,
Strike louder music from this charmed ground,
To yield, as fits the act, a Tragic sound.
THE SECOND DVMBE SHOW. Enter Flamineo, Marcello, Camillo, with four more as
Captains, they drink healths and dance, a vauting horse is brought into the
room, Marcello and two more whispered out of the room, while Flamineo and
Camillo strip themselves into their shirts, as to vault, complement who shall
begin, as Camillo it about to vault, Flamineo pitcheth him upon his neck,
and with the help of the rest, wriths his neck about, seeme's to see if it be
broke, and lays him foulded double as 'twere under the hearse, makes (...) to
call for help. Marcello comes in, laments, sends for the Cardinal and Duke,
who comes forth with armed men, wonder at the act, commands the body to be
carried home, apprehends Flamineo, Marcello, and the rest, and go as 'twere to
apprehend Vittoria.
BRAC. 'Twas quaintly done, but yet each circumstance,
I taste not fully.

CON. O 'twas most apparent,
You saw them enter charged with their deep helthes
To their boon voyage, and to second that,
Flamineo calls to have a vaulting horse
Maintain their sport. The virtuous Marcello,
Is innocently plotted forth the room,
Whilst your eye saw the rest, and can inform you
The engine of all.

MAR. It seems Marcello, and Flamineo
Are both committed.

CON. Yes, you saw them guarded,
And now they are come with purpose to apprehend
Your Mistress, fair Uittoria; we are now
Beneath her roof: 'twere fit we instantly
Make out by some back posterne:

BRAC. Noble friend,
You bind me ever to you, this shall stand
As the firm seal annexed to my hand.
Exit Brac. It shall enforce a payment.

CON. Sir I thank you.
Both flowers and weeds, spring when the Sun is warm,
And great men do great good, or else great harm.
Exit Con. Enter Francisco, and Monticelso, their Chancellor and Register.
FRAN. You have dealt discreetly to obtain the presence,
Of all the grave Leiger Ambassadors
To hear Vittorias trial.

MON. 'Twas not ill,
For sir you know we have naught but circumstances
To charge her with, about her husbands death,
Their approbation therefore to the proofs
Of her black lust, shall make her infamous
To all our neighboring Kingdoms, I wonder (pable
If Brachiano will be here.

FRA. O fie 'twere impudence too pal-
Enter Flamineo and Marcello guarded, and a Lawyer.
LAW. What are you in by the week, so I will try now whether thy wit be close
prisoner, me thinke's none should sit upon thy sister but old whoore-maisters,


FLAM. Or cocoulds, for your cocould is your most terrible tickler of letchery:
whoore-maisters would serve, for none are judges at tilting, but those that
have been old Tilters.


LAW. My Lord Duke and she have been very private:

FLAM. You are a dull ass, it is threatened they have been very public.


LAW. If it can be proved they have but kissed one another.

FLAM. What then?

LAW. My Lord Cardinal will ferit them,

FLAM. A Cardinal I hope will not catch conyes.

LAW. For to sow kisses (mark what I say) to sow kisses, is to reap
letchery, and I am sure a woman that will endure kissing is half won.


FLAM. True, her upper part by that rule, if you will win her nether part to,
you know what follows.


LAW. Hark the Ambassadors are lighted,

FLAM. I do put on this feigned Garb of mirth,
To gull suspicion.

MAR. O my unfortunate sister!
I would my daggers point had cleft her heart
When she first saw Brachiano: You it is said,
Were made his engine, and his stauking horse
To undo my sister.

FLAM. I made a kind of path
To her and mine own preferment.

MAR. Your ruin,

FLAM. Hum! thou art a soldier,
Followest the great Duke, feedest his victories,
As witches do their serviceable spirits,
Even with thy prodigal blood, what have got?
But like the wealth of Captains, a poor handful,
Which in thy palm thou bear, as men hold water
Seeking to gripe it fast, the frail reward
Steals through thy fingers.

MAR. Sir,

FLAM. Thou have scarce maintenance
To keep thee in fresh shamoyes.

MAR. Brother.

FLAM. Hear me,
And thus when we have even powered ourselves,
Into great fights, for their ambition
Or idle spleen, how shall we find reward,
But as we seldom find the mistle-towe
Sacred to physic: Or the builder Oak,
Without a Mandrake by it, so in our quest of gain.
Alas the poorest of their forced dislikes
At a limb proffers, but at heart it strikes:
This is lamented doctrine.

MAR. Come, come.

FLAM. When age shall turn thee,
White as a blooming hauthorne.

MAR. I Will interrupt you.
For love of virtue bear an honest heart,
And stride over every polliticke respect,
Which where they most advance they most infect.
Were I your father, as I am your brother,
I should not be ambitious to leave you
Enter Sauoy. A better patrimony.

FLA. I Will think on it, The Lord Ambassadors.
Here there is a passage of the Lieger Ambassadors over the Stage severally.
Enter French Ambassadors.
LAW. O my sprightly Frenchman, do you know him, he is an admirable Tilter.


FLAM. I saw him at last Tilting, he showed like a peuter candlestick
fashioned like a man in armor, houlding a Tilting staff in his hand, little
bigger then a candle of twelve in the pound.


LAW. O but he is an excellent horseman.

FLAM. A lame one in his lofty tricks, he sleeps a horseback like a poulter,

Enter English and Spanish
LAW. Lo you my Spaniard.

FLAM. He carries his face in's ruff, as I have seen a seruingman carry
glasses in a cipres hat-band, monstrous steady for fear of breaking, He looks
like the claw of a blacke-bird, first salted and then broyled in a candle.

Exeunt. THE ARAIGNEMENT OF VITTORIA. Enter Francisco, Montcelso, the six
lieger Ambassadors, Brachiano, Uittoria, Isabella, Lawyer, and a guard.
MONT. Forbear my Lord, here is no place assing'd you,
This business by his holiness is left
To our examination.

BRA. May it thrive with you.
Lays a rich gown under him,
FRAN. A Chair there for his Lordship.

BRA. Forbear your kindness, an unbidden guest
Should travail as dutch-women go to Church:
Bear their stools with them.

MON. At your pleasure Sir.
Stand to the table gentlewomen: now Signior
Fall to your plea.
Domine Iudex convert oculos in hanc p^stem mulierum corruptissimam.
VIT. What Is he?

FRAN. A Lawyer, that pleades against you.

VIT. Pray my Lord, Let him speak his usual tongue
I Will make no answer else.

FRAN. Why you understand lattin.

VIT. I do Sir, but amongst this auditory
Which come to hear my cause, the half or more
May be ignorant int'.

MON. Go on Sir:

VIT. By your favor,
I will not have my accusation clouded,
In a strange tongue: All this assembly
Shall hear what you can charge me with.

FRAN. Signior.
You need not stand on it much; pray change your language,

MON. Oh for God sake: gentlewoman, your credit
Shall be more famous by it.

LAW. Well then have at you.

VIT. I am at the mark Sir, I Will give aim to you,
And tell you how near you shoot.

LAW. Most literated Judges, please your Lordships,
So to conniue your Judgments to the view
Of this debausht and diuersiuolent woman
Who such a black concatenation
Of mischief has effected, that to exterpe
The memory often, must be the consummation
Ofher and her proiections

VIT. What Is all this

LAW. Hold your peace.
Exorbitant sins must have exulceration.

VIT. Surely my Lords this lawier here has swallowed
Some Poticaryes bills, or proclamations.
And now the hard and vndegestable words,
Come up like stones we use give Hawks for physic.
Why this is welsh to Lattin.

LAW. My Lords, the woman
Know's not her tropes nor figures, nor is perfect
In the accademick deriuation
Of Grammatical elocution.

FRAN. Sir your pains
Shall be well spared, and your deep eloquence
Be worthily applauded amongst those
Which understand you.

LAW. My good Lord.

FRAN. Sir,
Put up your papers in your fustian bag,
Francisco speaks this as in scorn. Cry mercy Sir, it is buckeram, and accept
My notion of your learned verbosity.

LAW. I most graduatically thank your Lordship.
I shall have use for them elsewhere.

MON. I shall be playner with you, and paint out
Your folies in more natural red and white.
Then that upon your cheek.

VIT. O you mistake.
You raise a blood as noble in this cheek
As ever was your mothers.

MON. I must spare you till proof cry whore to that,
Observe this creature here my honored Lords,
A woman of a most prodigious spirit
In her effected.

VIT. Honorable my Lord,
It does not suit a reverend Cardinal
To play the Lawier thus

MON. Oh your trade instructs your language!
You see my Lords what goodly fruict she seems,
Yet like those apples travelers report
To grow where Sodom and Gomora stood.
I will but touch her and you straight shall see
She Will fall to soote and ashes.

VIT. Your inuenom'd Poticary should do it

MON. I am resolved.
Were there a second Paradise to loose
This Deuell would betray it.

VIT. O poor charity!
Thou art seldom found in scarlet.

MON. Who knows not how, when several night by night
Her gates were choked with coaches, and her rooms.
Out-brau'd the stars with several kind of lights,
When she did counterfeit a Princes Court.
In music banquets and most ryotous surfets
This whore, forsooth, was holy.

VIT. Ha? whore what is that?

MON. Shall I expound whore to you? sure I shall;
I Will give their perfect character. They are first,
Sweet meats which rot the eater: In man's nostrill
Poisoned perfumes. They are coosning Alcumy,
Shipwrackes in Calmest weather? What are whores?
Cold Russian winters, that appear so barren,
As if that nature had forgot the spring.
They are the true matteriall fire of hell,
Worse then those tributes ith low countries paid,
Exactions upon meat, drink, garments sleep.
I even on man's perdition, his sin.
They are those brittle evidences of law
Which forfait all a wretched man's estate
For leaving out one syllable. What are whores?
They are those flattering bells have all one tune:
At weddings, and at funerals, your rich whores
Are only treasuries by extortion filled,
And empted by cursed riot. They are worse,
Worse then dead bodies, which are begged at gallows
And wrought upon by surgeons, to teach man
Wherein he is imperfect. What Is a whore?
She Is like the guilty conterfetted coin
Which who so ear first stampes it bring in trouble
All that receive it

VIT. This carracter scapes me.

MON. You gentlewoman;
Take from all beasts, and from all mineralls
Their deadly poison.

VIT. Well what then?

MON. I Will tell thee
I Will find in thee a Poticaries shop
To sample them all.

FR. EMB. She has lived ill.

ENG. and EMB. True, but the Cardinals too bitter.

MON. You know what Whore is next the deuell; Adultry.
Enters the deuell, murder.

FRAN. Your unhappy husband
Is dead.

VIT. O he is a happy husband
Now he owes Nature nothing.

FRAN. And by a vaulting engine.

MON. An active plot
He iumpt into his grave.

FRAN. what a prodigy wast,
That from some two yardes height a slender man (more,
Should break his neck?

MON. In The rushes.

FRA. And what is.
Upon the instant loose all use of speech,
All vital motion, like a man had lain
Wound up three days. Now mark each circumstance.

MON. And look upon this creature was his wife.
She comes not like a widow: she comes armed
With scorn and impudence: Is this a mourning habit.

VIT. Had I forknowne his death as you suggest,
I would have bespoke my mourning.

MON. O you are conning.

VIT. You shame your wit and Judgment
To call it so; What is my just defense
By him that is my Judge called impudence?
Let me appeal then from this Christian Court
To the uncivil Tartar.

MON. See my Lords.
She scandals our proceedings.

VIT. Humbly thus.
Thus low, to the most worthy and respected
Leigier Ambassadors, my modesty
And womanhood I tender; but withal
So entangled in a cursed accusation
That my defense of force like Perseus.
Must personate masculine virtue to the point.
Find me but guilty, sever head from body:
We Will part good frindes: I scorn to hold my life.
at yours or any man's entreaty, Sir,

ENG. EMB. She has a brave spirit

MON. Well, well, such counterfeit Jewels
Make true on's often suspected.

VIT. You are deceived.
For know that all your strickt combined heads,
Which strike against this mine of diamondes,
Shall prove but glassen hammers, they shall break,
These are but feigned shadows of my euels.
Terrify babes, my Lord, with painted devils,
I am past such needless palsy, for your names,
Of Whore and Murdresse they proceed from you,
As if a man should spit against the wind,
The filth returne's in's face.

MON. Pray you Mistress satisfy me one question:
Who lodged beneath your roof that fatal night
Your husband brake his neck?

BRA. That question
Inforceth me break silence, I was there.

MONT. Your business?

BRAC. Why I came to comfort her,
And take some course for settling her estate,
Because I heard her husband was in debt
To you my Lord.

MONT. He was.

BRAC. And 'twas strangely feared,
That you would cosen her.

MONT. Who made you ouer-seer?

BRAC. Why my charity, my charity, which should flow
From every generous and noble spirit,
To orphans and to widows.

MONT. Your lust.

BRA. Cowardly dogs bark loudest. Sirrah Priest,
I Will talk with you hereafter, -- Do you hear?
The sword you frame of such an excellent temper,
I Will sheath in your own bowels:
There are a number of thy coat resemble
Your common post-boyes.

MONT. Ha?

BRAC. Your mercinary post-boyes,
Your letters carry truth, but it is your guise
To fill your mouth's with gross and impudent lies.

SER. My Lord your gown.

BRAC. Thou lie 'twas my stool.
Bestow't upon thy master that will challenge
The rest a'th household stuff for Brachiano
Was nere so beggarly, to take a stool
Out of another lodging: let him make
Valence for his bed on it, or a demi foote-cloth,
For his most reverent moile, Monticelso,
Nemo me Impune lacescit.
Exit Brachiano.
MONT. Your Champions gone.

VIT. The wolf may prey the better.

FRA. My Lord there is great suspicion of the murder,
But no sound proof who did it: for my part
I do not think she has a soul so black
To act a deed so bloody, if she have,
As in cold countries husbandmen plant Vines,
And with warm blood manure them, even so
One summer she will bear unsavory fruit,
And ere next spring wither both branch and root.
The act of blood let pass, only descend,
To matter of incontinence.

VIT. I decerne poison,
Under your gilded pills.

MON. Now the Duke's gone, I will produce a letter,
Wherein 'twas plotted, her and you should meet,
At an Appoticaries summer house.
Down by the river Tiber: veiw't my Lords:
Where after wanton bathing and the heat
Of a lascivious banquet. -- I pray read it,
I shame to speak the rest.

VIT. Grant I was tempted,
Temptation to lust proves not the act,
Cast a est quam nemo rogauit,
You read his hot love to me, but you want
My frosty answer.

MON. Frost in the dog-daies! strange!

VIT. Condemn you me for that the Duke did love me,
So may you blame so me fair and crystal river
For that some melancholic distracted man,
Has drowned himself in it.

MON. Truly drowned indeed.

VIT. Sum up my faults I pray, and you shall find,
That beauty and gay clothes, a merry heart,
And a good stomach to feast, are all,
All the poor crimes that you can charge me with:
Infaith my Lord you might go pistol flies,
The sport would be more noble.

MON. Very good.

VIT. But take you your course, it seems you have beggerd me
And now would feign undo me, I have houses, (first
Jewels, and a poor remnant of Crusado's,
Would those would make you charitable.

MON. If the devil
Did ever take good shape behold his picture.

VIT. You have one virtue left,
You will not flatter me.

FRA. Who brought this letter?

VIT. I am not compelled to tell you.

MON. My Lord Duke sent to you a thousand ducats,
The twelfth of August.

VIT. 'Twas to keep your cosen
From prison, I paid use for it.

MON. I rather think
'Twas Interest for his lust.

VIT. Who says so but your self? if you be my accuser
Pray cease to be my Judge, come from the Bench,
Give in your evidence against me, and let these
Be moderators: my Lord Cardinal,
Were your intelligencing ears as loving
As to my thoughts, had you an honest tongue
I would not care though you proclaimed them all.

MONT. Go to, go to.
After your goodly and vainglorious banquet,
I Will give you a choke pear.

VIT. A'your own grafting?

MON. You were borne in Uenice, honorably descended,
From the Vittelli, 'twas my cossins fate,
Ill may I name the hour to marry you,
He bought you of your father.

VIT. Ha?

MON. He spent there in six months
Twelve thousand Dukets, and to my acquaintance
Received in dowry with you not one Iulio:
'Twas a hard peny-worth, the ware being so light,
I yet but draw the curtain now to your picture,
You came from thence a most notorious strumpet,
And so you have continued.

VIT. My Lord.

MON. Nay hear me,
You shall have time to prate my Lord Brachiano,
Alas I make but repetition,
Of what is ordinary and Ryalto talk,
And ballated, and would be played a'th stage,
But that vice many times finds such loud friends.
That Preachers are charmed filent.
You Gentlemen Flamineo and Marcello,
The Court has nothing now to charge you with,
Only you must remain upon your suerties,
For your appearance.

FRA. I stand for Marcello.

FLA. And my Lord Duke for me.

MON. For you Vittoria, your public fault,
Joined to the condition of the present time,
Takes from you all the fruits of noble pity.
Such a corrupted trial have you made
Both of your life and beauty, and been styled
No less in ominous fate then blasing stars
To Princes hears; your sentence, you are confined,

VIT. Unto a house of conuertites and your baud.

FLA. Who I?

MON. The Moore.

FLA. O I am a sound man again.

VIT. A house of conuertites, what is that?

MON. A house of penitent whoores.

VIT. Do the Noblemen in Rome,
Erect it for their wives, that I am sent
To lodge there?

FRAN. You must have patience.

VIT. I must first have vengeance.
I feign would know if you have your salvation
By patent, that you proceed thus.

MON. Away with her?
Take her hence.

VIT. A rape, a rape.

MON. How?

VIT. Yes you have ravished justice,
Forced her to do your pleasure.

MON. fie she is mad

VIT. Dye with these pills in your most cursed mawes,
Should bring you: health, or while you sit a'th Bench,
Let your own spittle choke you.

MON. She Is turned fury.

VIT. That the last day of judgment may so find you,
And leave you the same devil you were before,
Instruct me some good horse-lech to speak Treason,
For since you cannot take my life for deeds,
Take it for words, o woman's poor revenge
Which dwells but in the tongue, I will not weep,
No I do scorn to call up one poor tear
To fawn one your injustice, bear me hence,
Unto this house of what is your mittigating Title?

MON. Of conuertites.

VIT. It shall not be a house of conuertites
My mind shall make it honester to me
Then the Popes Palace, and more peaceable
Then thy soul, though thou art a Cardinal,
Know this, and let it some what raise your spite,
Through darkness Diamonds spread their ritchest light.
Enter Brachiano. Exit Uittoria.
BRA. Now you and I are friends sir, we will shake hands,
In a friends grave, together, a fit place,
Being the emblem of soft peace t'attone our hatred.

FRA. Sir, what is the matter?

BRA. I will not chase more blood from that loved check,
You have lost too much already, fare-you-well.

FRA. How strange these words sound? what is the interpretation?

FLA. Good, this is a preface to the discovery of the Duchess death: He
carries it well: because now I cannot counterfeit a whining passion for the
death of my Lady, I will feign a mad humor for the disgrace of my sister, and
that will keep off idle questions, Treasons tongue has a villainous palsy
in it, I will talk to any man, hear no man, and for a time appear a polliticke
madman.

Enter Giouanni, Count Lodouico.
FRA. How now my Noble cossin, what in black?

GIO. Yes Uncle, I was taught to imitate you
In virtue, and you must imitate me
In couloures for your garments, my sweet mother
Is,

FRA. How? Where?

GIO. Is there, no yonder, indeed sir I Will not tell you,
For I shall make you weep.

FRA. Is dead.

GIO. Do not blame me now,
I did not tell you so.

LOD. She Is dead my Lord.

FRA. Dead?

MON. Blessed Lady;
Thou art now above thy woes,
Wilt please your Lordships to withdraw a little.

GIO. What do the dead do, uncle? do they eat,
Hear music, go a hunting, and be merry, as we that live?

FRAN. No cose; they sleep.

GIO. Lord, Lord, that I were dead,
I have not slept these six nights. When do they wake?

FRAN. When God shall please.
Good God let her sleep ever.

GIO. For I have known her wake an hundredth nights,
When all the pillow, where she laid her head,
Was brine-wet with her tears. I am to complain to you Sir.
I Will tell you how they have used her now she is dead:
They wrapped her in a cruel fould of lead,
And would not let me kiss her.

FRAN. Thou did love her.

GIO. I have often heard her say she gave me suck,
And it should seem by that she dearly loved me,
Since Princes seldom do it.

FRAN. O, all of my poor sister that remains!
Take him away for Gods sake.

MON. How now my Lord?

FRAN. Believe me I am nothing but her grave,
And I shall keep her blessed memory,
Longer then thousand Epitaphs.
Enter Flamineo as distracted.
FLA. We endure the strokes like anuiles or hard steel,
Till pain it self make us no pain to feel.
Who shall do me right now? Is this the end of service? I Would rather go weed
garlic; travail through France, and be mine own ostler; wear sheepe-skin
lininges; or shoos that stink of blacking; be entered into the list of the
forty thousand pedlars in Poland.

Enter Sauoy. Would I had rotted in some Surgeons house at Venice, built upon
the Pox as well as on piles, ere I had served Brachiano.


SAV. You must have comfort.

FLA. Your comfortable words are like honey. They relish well in your mouth
that is whole; but in mine that is wounded they go down as if the sting of the
Be were in them. Oh they have wrought their purpose cunningly, as if they
would not seem to do it of malice. In this a Politician imitates the devil,
as the devil imitates a Canon. Wheresoever he comes to do mischief, he comes
with his backside toward you.

Enter the French.
FRE. The proofs are evident.

FLA. Proof! it was corruption. O Gold, what a God art thou! and o man, what a
devil art thou to be tempted by that cursed Mineral! You diuersiuolent
Lawyer; mark him, knaves turn informers, as maggots turn to flies, you may
catch gudgions with either. A Cardinal; I would he would hear me, there is
nothing so holy but money will corrupt and putrify it, like vittell under the
live. You are happy in England, my Lord; here they sell justice with those
weights they press men to death with. O horrible salarie!

Enter English Ambassador.
ENG. Fie, fie, Flamineo.

FLA. Bells nere ring well, till they are at their full pitch, And I hope yon
Cardinal shall never have the grace to pray well, till he come to the scaffold.

If they were rackt now to know the confederacy! But your Noblemen are
privileged from the rack; and well may. For a little thing would pull some of
them a pieces before they came to their arraignement. Religion; oh how it is
commeddled with policy. The first bloodshed in the world happened about
religion. Would I were a Jew.


MAR. O, there are too many.

FLA. You are deceived. There are not Jews enough;
Priests enough, nor gentlemen enough.

MAR. How?

FLA. I Will prove it. For if there were Jews enough, so many Christians would
not turn usurers; if Priests enough, one should not have six Benefices; and
if gentlemen enough, so many early mushromes, whose best growth sprang from a
dunghill, should not aspire to gentilitie. Farewell. Let others live by
begging. Be thou one of them; practice the art of Wol^or in England to swallow
all is given thee; and yet let one purgation make thee as hungry again as
fellows that work in saw-pit. I Will go hear the scritch-owle.

Exit.
LOD. This was Brachiano's Pandar, and it is strange
That in such open and apparent guilt
Of his adulterous sister, he dare utter
So scandalous a passion. I must wind him.
Enter Flamineo.
FLA. How dares this banished Count return to Rome,
His pardon not yet purchased? I have heard
The deceast Duchess gave him pension,
And that he came along from Padua
In The train of the young Prince. There Is somewhat in 't.
Physicians, that cure poisons, still do work
With counterpoisons.

MAR. Mark this strange encounter.

FLA. The God of Melancholy turn thy gall to poison,
And let the stigmaticke wrincles in thy face,
Like to the boisterous waves in a rough tide
One still overtake an other.

LOD. I do thank thee
And I do wish ingeniously for thy sake
The dog-daies all year long.

FLA. How crokes the raven?
Is our good Duchess dead?

LOD. Dead

FLA. O fate!
Misfortune comes like the Crowners business,
Huddle upon huddle.

LOD. Shall thou and I join housekeeping?

FLA. Yes, content.
Let Us be vnsociably sociable.

LOD. Sit some three days together, and discourse.

FLA. Only with making faces;
Lie in our clothes.

LOD. With faggots for our pillowes.

FLA. And be lousy.

LOD. In taffeta lininges; that is gentile melancholy,
Sleep all day.

FLA. Yes: and like your melancholic hare
Feed after midnight.
We are observed: see how yon couple grieve.

LOD. What a strange creature is a laughing fool,
As if man were created to no use
But only to show his teeth.

FLA. I Will tell thee what,
It would do well in stead of looking glasses
To set ones face each morning by a sawcer
Of a witches congealed blood.

LOD. Precious gue.
Weel never part.

FLA. Never: till the beggerie of Courtiers,
The discontent of churchmen, want of soldiers,
And all the creatures that hang manacled,
Worse then strappado'd, on the lowest fellie
Of fortunes wheel be taught in our two lives.
Enter Antonelli. To scorn that world which life of means depriues.

AN. My Lord, I bring good news. The Pope on's deathbed,
At the earnest suit of the great Duke of Florence,
Has signed your pardon, and restored unto you --

LOD. I thank you for your news. Look up again
Flamineo, see my pardon.

FLAM. Why do you laugh?
There was no such condition in our covenant.

LOD. Why?

FLAM. You shall not seem a happier man then I,
You know our vow sir, if you will be merry,
Do it in the like posture, as if some great man
Sat while his enemy were executed:
Though it be very letchery unto thee,
Do It with a crabbed Politicians face.

LOD. Your sister is a damnable whore.

FLAM. Ha?

LOD. Look you; I spoke that laughing.

FLAM. Do ever think to speak again?

LOD: Do you hear?
Will It sell me forty ounces of her blood,
To water a mandrake?

FL. Poor Lord; you did vow
To live a lowzy creature.

LOD. Yes;

FLA. Like one
That had for ever forfaited, the daylight,
By being in debt,

LOD. Ha, ha?

FLAM. I do not greatly wonder you do break:
Your Lordship learned long since. But I Will tell you,

LOD. What?

FLA. And't shall stick by you.

LOD. I long for it.

FLAM. This laughter scuruily becomes your face,
If you will not be melancholy, be angry.
Strikes him. See now I laugh too.

MAR. You are to blame, I Will force you hence.

LOD. Vnhand me:
Exit Mar. and Flam. That ere I should be forced to right my self,
Upon a Pandar.

ANT. My Lord.

LOD. He Had been as good met with his fist a thunderbolt.

GAS. How this shows!

LOD. Vds' death, how did my sword miss him?
These rogues that are most weary of their lives,
Still escape the greatest dangers,
A pox upon him: all his reputation;
Nay all the goodness of his family;
Is not worth half this earthquake.
I learnt it of no fencer to shake thus;
Come, I Will forget him, and go drink some wine.
Exeunt. Enter Franciso and Monticelso.
MON. Come, come my Lord, untie your foulded thoughts,
And let them dangle loose as a brid's hair.
Your sister's poisoned.

FRA. Far be it from my thoughts
To seek revenge.

MON. What, are you turned all marble?

FRA. Shall I defye him, and impose a war
Most burdensome on my poor subjects necks,
Which at my will I have not power to end?
You know; for all the murders, rapes, and thefts,
Committed in the horred lust of war,
He that unjustly caused it first proceed,
Shall find it in his grave and in his seed.

MON. That Is not the course I Would wish you: pray, observe me,
We see that undermining more preuailes
Then does the Canon, Bear your wrongs concealed,
And, patient as the Tortoise, let this Cammell
Stalk over your back vnbruis'd: sleep with the Lion,
And let this brood of secure foolish mice
Play with your nosthrils, till the time be ripe
For th'bloudy audit, and the fatal gripe:
Aim like a cunning fowler, close one eye,
That you the better may your game espy.

FRA. Free me my innocence; from treacherous acts:
I know there is thunder yonder: and I Will stand,
Like a safe vallie, which low bends the knee
To some aspiring mountain: since I know
Treason, like spiders weauing nets for flies,
By her foul work is found, and in it dies.
To pass away these thoughts, my honored Lord,
It is reported you possess a book
Wherein you have quoted, by intelligence,
The names of all notorious offenders
Lurking about the City,

MON. Sir I do
And some there are which call it my black book:
Well may the title hold: for though it teach not
The Art of coniuring, yet in it lurk,
The names of many devils.

FRAN. Pray let us see it.

MON. I Will fetch it to your Lordship.

FRA. Monticelso,
Exit Monticelso. I will not trust thee, but in all my plots
I Will rest as jealous as a Town besieged.
Thou can not reach what I intend to act.
Your flax soon kindles, soon is out again,
But gold slow heat's, and long will hot remain.

MON. It Is here my Lord.
Enter Mont.
FRA. First your Intelligencers pray let us see.
Fran. with
MON. Their number rises strangely,
And some of them
You Would Take for honest men.
Next are Pandars.
These are your Pirates: and these following leaves,
For base rogues that undo young Gentlemen,
By taking up commodities: for pollitick bankroupts:
For fellows that are bawdes to their own wives,
Only to put off horses and slight jewels,
Clockes, defaced plate, and such commodities,
At birth of their first children.

FRA. Are there such?

MON. These are for Impudent baudes,
That go in men's apparel: for usurers
That share with scriueners for their good reportage:
For Lawyers that will antedate their writtes:
And some Divines you might find foulded there;
But that I slip them over for conscience sake.
Here is a general catalogue of knaves.
A man might study all the prisons over,
Yet never attain this knowledge.

FRA. Murderers.
Fould down the leaf I pray,
Good my Lord let me borrow this strange doctrine.

MON. Pray vse't my Lord.

FRAN. I do assure your Lordship,
You are a worthy member of the State,
And have done infinite good in your discovery
Of these offenders.

MON. Somewhat Sir.

FRA. O God!
Better then tribute of wolves paid in England.
'Twill hang their skins o'th hedge.

MON. I must make bold
To leave your Lord-ship.

FRA. Dearly sir, I thank you,
If any ask for me at Court, report
You have left me in the company of knaves.
Exit Mont. I gather now by this, some cunning fellow
That Is my Lords Officer, one that lately skipt
From a Clerks deske up to a Justice chair,
Has made this knauish summons; and intendes,
As th'Irish rebels wont were to sell heads,
So to make prize of these. And thus it happens,
Your poor rogues pay for it, which have not the means
To present bribe in fist: the rest o'th'band
Are razed out of the knaves record; or else
My Lord he winkes at them with easy will,
His man grows rich, the knaves are the knaves still.
But to the use I Will make of it; it shall serve
To point me out a list of murderers,
Agents for any villainy. Did I want
Ten leash of Curtisans, it would furnish me;
Nay lawndresse three Armies. That so in little paper
Should lie th'vndoing of so many men!
It Is not so big as twenty declarations.
See the corrupted use some make of books:
Divinity, wrested by some factious blood,
Draws swords, swelsbattels, and orethrowes all good.
To fashion my revenge more seriously,
Let me remember my dead sisters face:
Call for her picture: no; I Will close mine eyes,
And in a melancholicke thought I Will frame
Enter Isabola's Ghost. Her figure before me. Now I -- ha'te how strong
Imagination works! how she can frame
Things which are not! me thinks she stands before me*
And by the quick Idea of my mind,
Were my skill pregnant, I could draw her picture.
Thought, as a subtle Iugler, makes us deem
Things, supernatural, which have cause
Common as sickness. It Is my melancholy,
How came thou by thy death? -- how idle am I
To question mine own idleness? -- did ever
Man dream awake till now? -- remove this object
Out of my brain with it: what have I to do
With tombs, or deathbeds, funerals, or tears,
That have to meditate upon revenge?
So now it is ended, like an old wives story.
Statesmen think often they see stranger sights
Then madmen, Come, to this weighty business.
My Tragedy must have some idle mirth in it,
Else it will never pass. I am in love,
In love with Corombona; and my suite
Thus haltes to her in verse. --
I have done it rarely: o the fate of Princes!
I am so used to frequent flattery,
he writes That being alone I now flatter my self;
But it will serve, it is sealed; bear this
Enter servant To the house of Conuertites; and watch your leisure
To give it to the hands of Corombona,
Or to the Matron, when some followers
Of Brachiano may be by. Away
Exit servant. He that deals all by strength, his wit is shallow:
When a man's head goes through each limb will follow.
The engine for my business, bold Count Lodowicke:
It Is gold must such an instrument procure,
With empty fist no man does falcons lure.
Brachiano, I am now fit for thy encounter.
Like the wild Irish I Will nere think thee dead,
Till I can play at footeball with thy head.
Flectere sinequeo Superes, Acher^nta mouebo.
Exit Mon.
Enter the Matron, and Flamineo.
MAT. Should it be known the Duke has such recourse.
To your imprisoned sister, I were like
T'incur much damage by it.

FLA. Not a scruple.
The Pope lies on his deathbed, and their heads
Are troubled now with other business
Than guarding of a Lady.
Enter servant.
SER. Yonder Is Flamineo in conference
With the Matrona. Let me speak with you.
I would entreat you to deliver for me
This letter to the fair Uittoria.

MAT. I shall Sir.
Enter Brachiano.
SER. With all care and secrecy,
Hereafter you shall know me, and receive
Thanks for this courtesy.

FLA. How now? what is that?

MAT. A letter.

FLA. To my sister: I Will see it delivered.

BRA. What Is that you read Flamineo?

FLA. Look.

BRA. Ha? To the most unfortunate his best respected Uittoria.
Who was the messenger?

FLA. I know not.

BRA. No! Who sent it?

FLA. Vd's foot you speak, as if a man
Should know what foul is coffind in a baked meat
Before you cut it up.

BRA. I Will open't, were it her heart. What Is here subscribed
This iugling is gross and palpable. (Florence?
I have found out the conueyance; read it, read, it.

FLA. Your tears I Will turn to triumphs, be but mine.
Reads the letter, Your propis fallen; I pity that a vine
Which Princes heretofore have longed to gather,
Wanting suppperters, now should fade and wither.
Wine in faith, my Lord, with lees would serve his turn.
Your sadimprisonement lle soon vncharme,
And with a princely uncontrolled arm
Lead you to Florence, where my love and care
Shall hang your wishes in my silver hair.
A halter on his strange aequiuocation.
Nor for ^y years return me the sad willow,
Who prefer blossoms before fruit that is mellow.
Rotten on my knowledge with lying too long in the bed-straw.
And all the lines of age this line conuinces:
The Gods never wax old, no more do Princes.
Apox on it tear it, let us have no more Atheists for Gods sake.

BRA. Vdsdeath, I Will cut her into Atomies
And let th'irregular North-winde sweep her up
And blow her int' his nosthrils. Where Is this whore?

FLA. That? what do you call her?

BRA. Oh, I could be mad,
Prevent the cursed disease she will bring me to;
And tear my hair off. Where Is this changeable stuff?

FLA. Ore head and ears in water, I assure you,
She is not for your wearing.

BRA. In you Pandar?

FLA. What me, my Lord, am I your dog?

BRA. A bloud-hound: do you brave? do you stand me?

FLA. Stand you? let those that have diseases run;
I need no plasters.

BRA. Would you be kicked?

FLA. Would you have your neck broke?
I tell you Duke, I am not in Russia;
My shinnes must be kept whole.

BRA. Do you know me?

FLA. O my Lord! methodically.
As in this world there are degrees of evils:
So in this world there are degrees of devils.
You Are a great Duke; I your poor secretary.
I do look now for a Spanish fig, or an Italian sallet daily.

BRA. Pandar, plie your conuoy, and leave your prating.

FLA. All your kindness to me is like that miserable courtesy of Polyphemus
to Ulisses, you reserve me to be devoured last, you would dig turues out of my
grave to feed your Larkes: that would be music to you. Come, I Will lead you to
her.


BRA. Do you face me?

FLA. O Sir I would not go before a Pollitique enemy with my back toward
him, though there were behind me a whirlepoole.

Enter Vittoria to Brachiano and Flamineo.
BRA. Can you read Mistress? look upon that letter;
There are no characters nor Hieroglyphics.
You need no comment, I am grown your receiver,
Gods precious you shall be a brave great Lady,
A stately and advanced whore.

VIT. Say Sir.

BRA. Come, come, let us see your Cabinet, discover
Your treasury of loue-letters. Death and furies,
I Will see them all.

VIT. Sir, upon my soul,
I have not any. Whence was this directed?

BRA. Confusion on your politic ignorance.
You are reclaimed; are you? I Will give you the bells
And let you fly to the devil.

FLA. Ware hawke, my Lord.

VIT. Florence! This is some treacherous plot, my Lord,
To me, he nere was lovely I protest,
So much as in my sleep.

BRA. Right: they are plots.
Your beauty! o, ten thousand curses on it.
How long have I beheld the devil in crystal?
Thou have lead me, like an heathen sacrifice,
With music, and with fatal! yokes of flowers
To my eternal ruin. Woman to man
Is either a God or a wolf.

VIT. My Lord.

BRA. Away.
We Will be as differing as two Adamants;
The one shall shun the other. What? do weep?
Procure but ten of thy dissembling trade,
Yee'ld furnish all the Irish funerals
With howling, past wild Irish.

FLA. Fie, my Lord.

BRA. That hand, that cursed hand, which I have wearied
With doting kisses! O my sweetest Duchess
How lovely art thou now! Thy loose thoughts
Scatter like quicke-siluer, I was bewitched;
For all the world speaks ill of thee.

VIT. No matter.
I Will live so now I Will make that world recant
And change her speeches. You did name your Duchess.

BRA. Whose death God pardon.

VIT. Whose death God revenge
On thee most godless Duke.

FLA. Now for tow whirle winds.

VIT. What have I gained by thee but infamy?
Thou have stained the spotless honor of my house,
And frighted thence noble society:
Like those, which sicke' oth' Palsy, and retain
Ill-senting foxes 'bout them, are still shunned
By those of choicer nosthrills. What do you call this house?
Is this your palace? did not the Judge style it
A house of penitent whores? who sent me to it?
Who has the honor to advance Uittoria
To this incontinent college? is 't not you?
Is 't not your high preferment? Go, go brag
How many Ladies you have undone, like me.
Fare you well Sir; let me hear no more ofy ou.
I had a limb corrupted to an ulcer,
But I have cut it off: and now I Will go
Weeping to heaven on crutches. For your gifts,
I will return them all; and I do wish
That I could make you full Executor
To all my sins, o that I could toss my self
Into a grave as quickly: for all thou art worth
I Will not shed one tear more; -- I Will burst first.
She throws her self upon a bed.
BRA. I have drunk Lethe.
Uittoria? My dearest happiness? Vittoria?
What do you aile my Love? why do you weep?

VIT. Yes, I now weep poniardes, do you see.

BRA. Are not those matchless eyes mine?

VIT. I had rather.
They were not matches.

BRA. Is not this lip mine?

VIT. Yes: thus to bite it off, rather than giu e it thee.

FLA. Turn to my Lord, good sister.

VIT. Hence you Pandar.

FLA. Pandar! Am I the author of your sin?

VIT. Yes: He Is a base theif that a theif lets in.

FLA. Wee're blown up, my Lord,

BRA. Will thou hear me?
Once to be jealous of thee is to express
That I will love thee everlastingly,
And never more be jealous.

VIT. O thou fool,
Whose greatness has by much oregrowne thy wit!
What dare thou do, that I not dare to suffer,
Excepting to be still thy whore? for that;
In the seas bottom sooner thou shall make
A bonefire.

FLA. O, no oaths for gods sake.

BRA. Will you hear me?

VIT. Never.

FLA. What a damned impostume is a woman's will?
Can nothing break it? fie, fie, my Lord.
Women are caught as you take Tortoises,
She must be turned on her back. Sister, by this hand
I am on your side. Come, come, you have wronged her.
What a strange credulous man were you, my Lord,
To think the Duke of Florence could love her?
Will any Mercer take an others ware
When once 't is tows'd and sullied? And, yet sister,
How scuruily this frowardness becomes you?
Young Leuerets stand not long; and women's anger
Should, like their flight, procure a little sport;
A full cry for a quarter of an hour;
And then be put to the dead quat.

BRA. Shall these eyes,
Which have so long time dwelt upon your face,
Be now put out?

FLA. No cruel Land-ladie 'ith' world,
Which lend's forth grotes to broome-men, and takes use for the^,
Would do it.
Hand her, my Lord, and kiss her: be not like
A ferret to let go your hold with blowing.

BRA. Let us renew right hands.

VIT. Hence.

BRA. Never shall rage, or the forgetful wine,
Make me commit like fault.

FLA. Now you are in the way out, follow 'thard.

BRA. Be thou at peace with me; let all the world
Threaten the Cannon.

FLA. Mark his penitence.
Best natures do commit the grossest faults,
When they are given ore to iealosie; as best wine
Dying makes strongest vinneger. I Will tell you;
The Sea's more rough and raging than calm rivers,
But nor so sweet nor wholesome. A quiet woman
Is a still water under a great bridge.
A man may shoot her safely.

VIT. O ye dissembling men!

FLA. We sucked that, sister, from women's breasts, in our first infancy.


VIT. To ad misery to misery.

BRA. Sweetest.

VIT. Am I not low enough?
I, I, your good heart gathers like a snow-ball
Now your affection's cold.

FLA. Vd'foot, it shall melt,
To a heart again, or all the wine in Rome
Shall run o'th lees for it.

VIT. Your dog or hawke should be rewarded better
Then I have bin. I Will speak not one word more.

FLA. Stop her mouth,
With a sweet kiss, my Lord.
So now the tide's turne'd the vessel's come about
He Is a sweet armefull. O we curl'd-haird men
Are still most kind to women. This is well.

BRA. That you should chide thus!

FLA. O, sir, your little chimnies
Do ever cast most smoke. I swet for you.
Couple together with as deep a silence,
As did the Grecians in their wodden horse.
My Lord supply your promises with deeds.
You know that painted meat no hunger feeds.

BRA. Stay ungrateful Rome. (usage.

FLA. Rome! it deserves to be called Barbary, for our villainous

BRA. Soft; the same project which the Duke of Florence,
(Whether in love or gullerie I know not)
Laid down for her escape, will I pursue.

FLA. And no time fitter than this night, my Lord;
The Pope being dead; and all the Cardinals entered
The Conclaue for the electing a new Pope;
The City in a great confusion;
We may attire her in a Pages suit,
Lay her post-horse, take shipping, and amain
For Padua.

BRA. I Will instantly steal forth the Prince Giouanni,
And make for Padua. You two with your old Mother
And young Marcello that attendes on Florence,
If you can work him to it, follow me.
I will advance you all: for you Vittoria,
Think of a Duchess title.

FLA. Lo you sister.
Stay, my Lord; I Will tell you a tale. The crocodile, which lives in the river
Nilus, has a worm breds in the teeth often, which puts it to extreme anguish: a
little bird, no bigger then a wren, is barbor-surgeon to this crocodile; flies
into the jaws often; pickes out the worm; and brings present remedy. The fish,
glad of ease but ungrateful to her that did it, that the bird may not talk
largely of her abroad for non payment, closes her chaps intending to swallow
her, and so put her to perpetual silence. But nature loathing such in
gratitude, has armed this bird with a quill or prick on the head, top o'th
which wounds the crocodile in the mouth; forces her open her bloody prison; and
away flies the pretty tooth-picker from her cruel patient.


BRAC. Your application is, I have not rewarded
The service you have done me.

FLAM. No, my Lord;
You sister are the crocodile: you are blemished in your fame, My Lord cures it.
And though the comparison hold not in every particle; yet observe, remember,
what good the bird with the prick in the head has done you; and scorn
ingratitude.

It may appear to some ridiculous
Thus to talk knave and madman; and sometimes
Come in with a dried sentence, stuffed with sage.
But this allows my varying of shapes,
Knaves do grow great by being great men's apes.
Exeunt. Enter Francisco, Lodouico, Gasper, and six Ambassadors. At another
door the Duke of Florence.
FRA. So, my Lord, I commend your diligence
Guard well the conclaue, and, as the order is,
Let none have conference with the Cardinals.

LOD. I shall, my Lord: room for the Ambassadors,

GAS. They Are wondrous brave to day: why do they wear
These several habits?

LOD, O sir, they are Knights
Of several Orders.
That Lord in the black cloak with the silver cross
Is Knight of Rhodes; the next Knight of S. Michael*
That of the golden fleece; the Frenchman there
Knight of the Holy Ghost; my Lord of Sauoy
Knight of th'Annuntiation; the Englishman
Is Knight of th'honoured Garter, dedicated
Unto their Saint, S. George. I could describe to you
Their several institutions, with the laws
Annexed to their Orders, but that time
Permits not such discovery.

FRAN. Where Is Count Lodowicke?

LOD. Here my Lord.

FRA. It Is o'th point of dinnertime,
Marshall the Cardinals service,

LOD. Sir I shall.
Enter servants with several dishes covered. Stand, let me search your dish,
who is this for?

SER. For my Lord Cardinal Monticelso,

LOD. Whose this?

SER. For my Lord Cardinal of Burbon.

FRE. Why does he search the dishes, to observe
What meat is dressed?

ENG. No Sir, but to prevent.
Least any letters should be conuei'd in
To bribe or to solicit the advancement
Of any Cardinal, when first they enter
It Is lawful for the Ambassadors of Princes
To enter with them, and to make their suit
For any man their Prince affects best;
But after, till a general election,
No man may speak with them.

LOD. You that attend on the Lord Cardinals
Open the window, and receive their viands.

A CAR. You must return the service; the L. Cardinals
Are busied 'bout electing of the Pope,
They have given over scrutinie, and are fallen
To admiration.

LOD. Away, away.

FRAN. I Will lay a thousand Ducats you here news
A Cardinal on the Tarras Of a Pope presently, Hark; sure he is elected,
Behold! my Lord of Arragon appears,
On the Church battlements.

ARRAGON. Denuntio vobis gaudium magnum. Reuerendissimus Cardinalis Lorenso de
Monticelso electus est in sedem Apostoli^am, and elegit sibinomen Paulum
quartum.


OMNES. Uiuat sanctus Pater Paulus Quartus.

SER. Vittoria my Lord.

FRAN. Well: what of her?

SER. Is fled the City,

FRA. Ha?

SER. With Duke Brachiano.

FRA. Fled? Where Is the Prince

SER. Gone with his father. (Giouanni

FRAN. Let the Matrona of the Conuertites
Be apprehended: fled o damnable!
How fortunate are my wishes. Why? 'twas this
I only labored. I did send the letter
T'instruct him what to do. Thy fame, fond Duke,
I first have poisoned; directed thee the way
To marry a whore; what can be worse? This follows*
The hand must act to drown the passionate tongue,
I scorn to wear a sword and prate of wrong.
Enter Monticelso in state.
MON. My Lord reports Vittoria Corombona
Is stol'ne from forth the house of Conuertites
By Brachiano, and they are fled the City.
Now, though this be the first day of our state,
We cannot better please the divine power,
Than to sequester from the holy Church
These cursed persons. Make it therefore known,
We do denounce excommunication
Against them both: all that are theirs in Rome
We likewise banish. Set on.
Exeunt.
FRAN. Come dear Lodouico.
You have taken the sacrament to prosecute
The intended murder.

LOD. With all constancy.
But, Sir, I wonder you will engage your self,
In person, being a great Prince.

FRAN. Divert me not.
Most of his Court are of my faction,
And some are of my council. Noble friend,
Our danger shall be 'like in this design,
Give leave, part of the glory may be mine.
Why did the Duke of Florence with such care
Labor your pardon? say.

LOD. Italian beggars will resolve you that
Who, begging of an alms, bid those they beg of
Enter Monticelso. Do good for their own sakes; or't may be
He spreades his bounty with a sowing hand,
Like Kings, who many times give out of measure;
Not for desert so much as for their pleasure.

MON. I know you're cunning. Come, what devil was that
That you were raising?

LOD. Devil, my Lord?
I ask you.

MONT. How does the Duke employ you, that his bonnet
Fell with such complement unto his knee,
When he departed from you?

LOD. Why, my Lord,
He told me of a restie Barbary horse
Which he would feign have brought to the carreere,
The 'sault, and the ring galliard. Now, my Lord,
I have a rare French Rider.

MONT. Take you heed:
Least the Jade break your neck. Do you put me off
With your wild horse-trickes? Sir you do lie.
O, you are a foul black cloud, and thou do threat
A violent storm.

LOD. Storms are 'ith air, my Lord;
I am too low to storm.

MONT. Wretched creature!
I know that thou art fashioned for all ill,
Like dogs, that once get blood, they will ever kill.
About some murder? wa'st not?

LOD. I Will not tell you;
And yet I care not greatly if I do;
Marry with this preparation. Holy father,
I come not to you as an Intelligencer,
But as a penitent sinner. What I utter
Is in confession merely; which you know
Must never be revealed.

MONT. You have oretane me.

LOD. Sir I did love Brachiano's Duchess dearly;
Or rather I pursued her with hot lust,
Though she nere knew on it. She was poisoned;
Upon my soul she was: for which I have sworn
T'auenge her murder.

MONT. To the Duke of Florence?

LOD. To him I have.

MON. Miserable Creature!
If thou persist in this, it is damnable.
Do thou imagine thou can slide on blood
And not be tainted with a shameful fall?
Or like the black, and melancholicke Eugh-tree,
Do think to root thy self in dead men's graves,
And yet to prosper? Instruction to thee
Comes like sweet shewers to ouer-hardned ground:
They wet, but pierce not deep. And so I leave thee
Withal the Furies hanging bout thy neck,
Till by thy penitence thou remove this evil,
In coniuring from thy breast that cruel Devil.

LOD. I Will give it over. He says it is damable:
Exit Mon. Besides I did expect his suffrage,
By reason of Camillo's death.
Enter servant
FRA. Do you know that Count?

SER. Yes, my Lord, and Francisco,

FRA. Bear him these thousand Ducke^s to his lodging;
Tell him the Pope has sent them. Happily
That will confirm more then all the rest.

SER. Sir.

LOD. To me sir?

SER. His holiness has sent you a thousand Crowns,
And will you if you travail, to make him (commanded.
Your Patron for intelligence.

LOD. His creature ever to be
Why now it is come about. He rai'ld upon me;
And yet these Crowns were told out and laid ready,
Before he knew my voyage. O the Art
The modest form of greatness! that do sit
Like Brides at wedding dinners, with their look's turned
From the least wanton jests, their puling stomach
Sick of the modesty, when their thoughts are loose.
Even acting of those hot and lustful sports
Are to ensue about midnight: such his cunning!
He soundes my depth thus with a golden plummet,
I am doubly armed now. Now to the act of blood,
There Is but three furies found in spacious hell;
But in a great man's breast three thousand dwell.
A passage over the stage of Brachiano, Flamineo, Marcello, Hortensio,
Corombona, Cornelia, Zanche and others.
FLA. In all the weary minutes of my life,
Day nere broke up till now. This marriage.
Confirms me happy.

HOR. It Is a good assurance.
Saw you not yet the Moore that is come to Court?

FLA. Yes, and conferred with him in the Dukes closet,
I have not seen a goodlier personage,
Nor ever talked with man better experienced
In State-affares or rudiments of war.
He has by report, served the Venetian
In Candy these twice seven years, and been chief
In many a bold design.

HOR. What are those two,
That bear him company?

FLA. Two Noblemen of Hungary, that living in the Emperors service as
commanders, eight years since, contrary to the expectation of all the Court
entered into religion, into the strickt order of Capuchins: but being not well
settled in their undertaking they left their Order and returned to Court: for
which being after troubled in conscience, they vowed their service against the
enemies of Christ; went to Malta; were there knighted; and in their return
back, at this great solemnity, they are resolved for ever to forsake the
world, and settle themselves here in a house of Capuchines in Padua.


HOR. It Is strange.

FLA. One thing makes it so. They have vowed for ever to wear next their bare
bodies those coats of maile they served in.


HOR. Hard penance.
Is the Moore a Christian?

FLA. He is.

HOR. Why proffers he his service to our Duke?

FLV. Because he understands there is like to grow
Some wars between us and the Duke of Florence,
In which he hopes employment.
Enter Duke Brachiano. I never saw one in a stern bold look
Wear more command, nor in a lofty phrase
Express more knowing, or more deep contempt
Of our slight airy Courtiers. He talks
As if he had trauail'd all the Princes Courts
Of Christendom; in all things strives to express,
That all that should dispute with him may know,
Glories, like glow-wormes, a far off shine bright
But looked to near, have neither heat norlight.
The Duke.
Enter Brachiano, Florence disguised like Mulinassar; Lodouico, Antonelli,
Gaspar, Far^ese bearing their swords and helmets.
BRA. You'are nobly welcome. We have heard at full
Your honorable seruice'gainst the Turk.
To you, brave Mulinassar, we assign
A competent pension: and are inly sorrow,
The vows of those two worthy gentlemen,
Make them incapable of our proffered bounty.
Your wish is you may leave your warlike swords
For Monuments i n our Chapel. I accept it
As a great honor done me, and must crave
Your leave to furnish out our Duchess reuells.
Only one thing, as the last vanity
You ere shall view, deny me not to stay
To see a Barriers prepared to night;
You shall have private standings: It has pleased
The great Ambassadors of several Princes
In their return from Rome to their own Countries
To grace our marriage, and to honor me
With such a kind of sport.

FRAN. I shall persuade them
To stay, my Lord.
Exeunt Brachiano, Flamineo? and Marcello. Set on there to the presence

CAR. Noble my Lord, most fortunately welcome,
The Conspirators here embrace. You have our vows sealed with the sacrament
To second your attempts.

PED. And all things ready.
He could not have invented his own ruin,
Had he despaired with more propriety.

LOD. You would not take my way.

FRA. It Is better ordered.

LOD. 'T'haue poisoned his prayer book, or a pair of beads,
The pummell of his saddle, his looking-glass,
Or th'handle of his racket, o that, that!
That while he had bin bandying at Tennis,
He might have sworn himself to hell, and struck
His soul into the hazard! O my Lord!
I would have our plot be ingenious,
And have it hereafter recorded for example
Rather than borrow example.

FRAN. There Is no way
More speeding than this thought on.

LOD. On then.

FRAN. And yet me thinks that this revenge is poor,
Because it steals upon him like a theif,
To have taken him by the Caske in a pitched field,
Led him to Florence!

LOD. It had bin rare. -- And there
Have crowned him with a wreath of stinking garlic.
To Have shown the sharpness of his government;
Exeunt Lodouico Antonelli. And rancknesse of his lust.
Flamineo comes.
Enter Flamineo, Marcello, and Zanche.
MAR. Why does this devil haunt you? say.

FLA. I know not.
For by this light I do not conjure for her.
It Is not so great a cunning as men think
To raise the devil: for heeres one up allreadie,
The greatest cunning were to lay him down

MAR. She is your shame.

FLA. I prithee pardon her.
In faith you see, women are like to burres;
Where their affection throws them, there they will stick.

ZAN. That is my Countryman, a goodly person;
When he is at leisure I Will discourse with him
Exit Zanche In our own language.

FLA. I beseech you do,
How is 't' brave soldier; o that I had seen
Some of your iron days! I pray relate
Some of your service to us.

FRAN. It Is a ridiculous thing for a man to be his own Chronicle, I did never
wash my mouth with mine own praise for fear of getting a stinking breath.


MAR. You 're too Stoicall. The Duke will expect other discourse from you


FRAN. I shall never flatter him, I have studied man to much to do that: What
difference is between the Duke and I? no more than between two brickes; all
made of one clay. Onely't may be one is placed on the top of a turret; the
other in the bottom of a well by mere chance; if I were placed as high as the
Duke, I should stick as fast; make as fair a show; and bear out weather
equally.


FLA. If this soldier had a patent to beg in Churches, then he would tell
them stories,


MAR. I have bin a soldier too.

FRAN. How have you thriu'd?

MAR. Faith poorly.

FRAN. That Is the misery of peace. Only outsides are then respected: As
ships seem very great upon the river, which show very little upon the
Seas: So some men in the Court seem Colossusses in a chamber, who if they came
into the field would appear pitiful. Pigmies.


FLA. Give me a fair room yet hung with Arras, and some great Cardinal to
lug me by the ears as his endeared Minion.


FRA. And thou may do, the devil knows what vilanie.

FLA. And safely.

FRA. Right; you shall see in the Country in harvest time, pigeons, though
they destroy never so much corn, the farmer dare not present the fowling piece
to them! why? because they belong to the Lord of the Manor; whilst your poor
sparrowes that belong to the Lord of heaven, they go to the pot for it.


FLA. I will now give you some polliticke instruction. The Duke says he will
give you pension; that is but bare promise: get it under his hand. For I have
known men that have come from serving against the Turk; for three or four
months they have had pension to buy them new wooden legs and fresh
plasters; but after 'twas not to be had. And this miserable courtesy shows,
as if a Tormenter should give hot cordial drinks to one three quarters dead
of the rack, only to fetch the miserable soul again to endure more dogdaies.

Enter Hortensio, a young Lord, Zanche, and two more. How now, Gallants; what
are they ready for the Barriers?

Y. LORD. Yes: the Lords are putting on their armor.

HOR. What Is he?

FLA. A new vp-start: one that swears like a Falckner, and will lie in the
Dukes ear day by day like a maker of Almanacks; And yet I knew him since he
came to the Court smell worse of sweat than an vnder-tennis-court keeper.


HOR. Look you, yonder is your sweet Mistress.

FLA. Thou art my sworn brother, I Will tell thee, I do love that Moore, that
Witch very constrainedly: she knows some of my villanny; I do love her, just
as a man holds a wolf by the ears. But for fear of turning upon me, and
pulling out my throat, I would let her go to the Devil.


HOR. I hear she claims marriage of thee.

FLA. 'Faith, I made to her some such dark promise, and in seeking to fly
from't I run on, like a frighted dog with a bottle at' staile, that feign would
bite it off and yet dares not look behind him. Now my precious Gypsy!


ZAN. I your love to me rather cooles then heates.

FLA. Marry, I am the sounder, lover, we have many wenches about the Town
heat too fast.


HOR. What do you think of these perfumed Gallants then?

FLAM. Their satin cannot save them. I am confident
They have a certain spice of the disease,
For they that sleep with dogs; shall rise with fleas.

ZAN. Believe it! A little painting and gay clothes,
Make you loath me.

FLA. How? love a Lady for painting or gay apparel? I Will vnkennell one example
more for thee. Esop had a foolish dog that let go the flesh to catch the
shadow. I would have Courtiers be better Diverse.


ZAN. You remember your oaths.

FLA. Lovers oaths are like Mariners prayers, uttered in extremity; but when
the tempest is over, and that the vessel leaves tumbling, they fall from
protesting to drinking. And yet amongst Gentlemen protesting and drinking go
together, and agree as well as Shooemakers and West-phalia bacon. They are both
drawers on: for drink draws on protestation; and protestation draws on more
drink. Is not this discourse better now then the mortality of your sunburned
Gentleman.

Enter Cornelia.
COR. Is this your perch, you haggard? fly to the stews.

FLA. You should be clapped by th'heeles now: strike in the Court.

ZAN. She Is good for nothing but to make her maids,
Catch cold a nights; they dare not use a bedstaffe,
For fear of her light fingers.

MAR. Your'e a strumpet.
An impudent one.

FLA. Why do you kick her? say,
Do you think that she is like a walnut-tree?
Must she be cudgel'd ere she bear good fruit?
She brags that you shall marry her.

FLA. What then?

MAR. I had rather she were pitched upon a stake
In some new-seeded garden, to affright
Her fellow crows thence.

FLA. Your a boy, a fool,
Be guardian to your hound, I am of age.

MAR. If I take her near you I Will cut her throat.

FLA. With a fan of feathers?

MAR. And for you; I Will whip
This folly from you.

FLAM. Are you choleric?
I Will purg't with Rubarbe.

HOR. O your brother.

FLA. Hang him.
He wrongs me most that ought to offend me least,
I do suspect my mother played soul play,
When she conceived thee.

MAR. Now by all my hopes.
Like the two slaughtred sons of Oedipus,
The very flames of our affection,
Shall turn 10 ways. Those words I Will make thee answer
With thy heart blood.

FLA. Do like the geesse in the progress,
You know where you shall find me,

MAR. Very good,
And thou be a noble, friend, bear him my sword,
And bid him fit the length on it.

Y. LORD. Sir I shall.

ZAN. He comes. Hence petty thought of my disgrace,
I near loved my complexion till now,
Enter Francisco the Duke of Florence. Cause I may boldly say without a blush,
I love you.

FLA. Your love is untimely sown,
There Is a Spring at Michaelmas, but it is but a faint one, I am sunck
In years, and I have vowed never to marry.

ZAN. Alas! poor maids get more lovers then husbands,
Yet you may mistake my wealth. For, as when Ambassadors are sent to
congratulate Princes, there is commonly sent along with them a rich present; so
that though the Prince like not the Ambassadors person nor words, yet he likes
well of the presentment. So I may come to you in the same manner, and be better
loved for my dowry then my virtue.


FLA. I Will think on the motion.

ZAN. Do, I Will now detain you no longer. At your better leisure I Will tell you
things shall startle your blood.

Nor blame me that this passion I reveal;
Lovers dye inward that their flames conceal.

FLA. Of all intelligence this may prove the best,
Sure I shall draw strange foul, from this foul nest.
Exeunt. Enter Marcello and Cornelia.
COR. I hear a whispering all about the Court,
Your are to fight, who is your opposite?
What is the quarrel?

MRA. It Is an idle ^umour.

COR. Will you dissemble? sure you do not well
To fright me thus, you never look thus pale,
But when you are most angry. I do charge you
Upon my blessing; nay I Will call the Duke,
And he shall school you.

MAR. Publish not a fear
Which would convert to laughter; it is not so,
Was not this Crucifix my fathers?

COR. Yes.

MAR. I have heard you say, giving my brother suck,
He took the Crucifix between his hands,
Enter Flamineo, And broke a limb off.

COR. Yes: but it is mended.

FLA. I have brought your weapon back.
Flamineo runs
COR. Ha, O my horror!
Marcello through.
MAR. You have brought it home indeed.

COR. Help, oh he is murdered.

FLA. Do you turn your gaul up? I Will to sanctuary,
And send a surgeon to you.

HOR. How? o'th ground?

MAR. O mother now remember what I told,
Of breaking off the Crucifix: farewell
Enter Car. Hort. Pedro. There are some sins which heaven does duly punish,
In a whole family. This it is to rise
By all dishonest means. Let all men know
That tree shall long time keep a steady foot
Whose branches spread no wilder then the root.

COR. O my perpetual sorrow!

HOR. Virtuous Marcello.
He Is dead: pray leave him Lady; come, you shall.

COR. Alas he is not dead: he is in a trance.
Why here is no body shall get any thing by his death. Let me call him again
for Gods sake.


CAR. I would you were deceived.

COR. O you abuse me, you abuse me, you abuse me. How many have gone away thus
for lack of tendance; rear vp's head, rear vp's head; His bleeding inward
will kill him.


HOR. You see he is departed.

COR. Let me come to him; give me him as he is, if he be turned to earth;
let me but give him one hearty kiss, and you shall put us both into one
coffin: fetch a looking glass, see if his breath will not stain it; or pull
out some feathers from my pillow, and lay them to his lips, will you loose
him for a little pains taking?


HOR. Your kindest office is to pray for him.

COR. Alas! I would not pray for him yet. He may live to lay me in the ground,
and pray for me, if you will let me come to him.

Enter Brachiano all armed, save the beauer, with Flamineo.
BRA. Was this your handy-worke?

FLA. It was my misfortune.

COR. He lies, he lies, he did not kill him: these have killed him, that
would not let him be better looked to.


BRA. Have comfort my greiu'd Mother.

COR. O you scritch-owle.

HOR. Forbear, good Madam.

COR. Let me go, let me go.
She runes to Flamineo with her knif drawn and coming to him lets it fall.
The God of heaven forgive thee. Do not wonder
I pray for thee? I Will tell thee what is the reason,
I have scarce breath to number twenty minutes;
I Would not spend that in cursing. Fare thee well
Half of thy self lies there: and may thou live
To fill an howre-glasse with his mouldred ashes,
To tell how thou should spend the time to come
In blessed repentance.

BRA. Mother, pray tell me
How came he by his death? what was the quarrel?

COR. Indeed my younger boy presumed too much
Upon his manhood; gave him bitter words;
Drew his sword first; and so I know not how,
For I was out of my wits, he fell with his head
Just in my bosom.

PAGE. This is not true Madam.

COR. I pray thee peace.
One arrow's grazed already; it were vain
T'lose this: for that will nere be found again.

BRA. Go, bear the body to Cornelia; lodging:
And we command that none acquaint our Duchess:
With this sad accident: for you Flamineo,
Hark you, I will not grant your pardon.

FLA. No?

BRA. Only a lease of your life. And that shall last
But for one day. Thou shall be forced each evening to renew it, or be hanged.


FLA. At your pleasure.
Lodouico sprinckles Brachiano's beuer with a poison. Your will is law now, I Will
not meddle with it.

BRA. You once did brave me in your sisters lodging;
I Will now keep you in awe for it. Where Is our beauer?

FRAN. He calls for his destruction. Noble youth,
I pity thy sad fate. Now to the barriers.
This shall his passage to the black lake further,
The last good deed he did, he pardoned murder.
Exeunt. Charges and shoutes, They fight at Barriers; first single paires, then
three to three. Enter Brachiano and Flamineo with others.
BRA. An Armorer? vds death an Armorer?

FLA. Armorer; where is the Armorer?

BRA. Tear off my beauer.

FLA. Are you hurt, my Lord?

BRA. O my braine's on fire,
Enter Armorer. The helmet is poisoned.

ARM. My Lord upon my soul.

BRA. Away with him to torture.
There are some great ones that have hand in this,
And near about me.

VIT. O my loved Lord, poisoned?

FLA. Remove the bar: here is unfortunate reuls,
Call the Physicians; a plague upon you;
Ent. 2 Physician: We have to much of your cunning here already.
I fear the Ambassadors are likewise poisoned.

BRA. Oh I am gone already: the infection
Flies to the brain and heart. O thou strong heart!
There Is such a covenant 'tweene the world and it,
They Are loath to break.

GIO. O my most loved father!

BRA. Remove the boy away,
Where Is this good woman? had I infinite worlds
They were too little for thee. Must I leave thee?
What say you scritch-owles, is the venomne mortal?

PHYS. Most deadly.

BRA. Most corrupted pollitick hangma^!
You kill without book; but your art to save
Fails you as often, as great men's needy friends.
I that have given life to offending slaves
And wretched murderers, have I not power
To lengthen mine own a twelue-month?
Do not kiss me, for I shall poison thee.
This unction is sent from the great Duke of Florence.

FRA. Sir be of comforts

BRA. O thou soft natural death, that art ioint-twin,
To sweetest slumber: no rough-bearded Comet,
Stares on thy mild departure: the dull Owl
Beats not against thy casement: the hoarse wolf
Sents not thy carrion. Pity winds thy coarse,
Whilst horror waights on Princes.

VIT. I am lost for ever.

BRAC. How miserable a thing it is to die,
Amongst women howling! What are those.

FLA. Franciscant.
They have brought the extreme unction.

BRA. On pain of death, let no man name death to me,
It is a word infinitely terrible,
Withdraw into our Cabinet
Exeunt but Francisco and Flamineo.
FLA. To see what solitariness is about dying Princes. As heretofore they have
unpeopled Towns; diuorst friends, and made great houses vnhospitable: so now,
o justice! where are their flatterers now? Flatterers are but the shadows of
Princes bodies the least thick cloud makes them invisible.


FRA. There Is great moan made for him.

FLA. 'Faith, for some few hours salt water will run most plentifully in
every Office o'th Court. But believe it; most of them do but weep over their
step-mothers graves.


FRA. How mean you?

FLA. Why? They dissemble, as some men do that live within compass o'th verge.


FRA. Come you have thriu'd well under him.

FLA. 'Faith, like a wolf in a woman's breast; I have been fed with poultry;
but for money, understand me, I had as good a will to cosen him, as e're an
Officer of them all. But I had not cunning enough to do it.


FRAN. What did thou think of him; 'faith speak freely.

FLA. He was a kind of Statesman, that would sooner have reckond how many
Cannon bullets he had discharged against a Town, to count his expense that
way, than how many of his valiant and deserving subjects he lost before it.


FRAN. O, speak well of the Duke.

FLA. I have done.
Will It hear some of my Court wisdom?
Enter Lodouico. To reprehend Princes is dangerous: and to ouer-commend some
of them is palpable lying.

FRAN. How is it with the Duke?

LOD. Most deadly ill.
He Is fallen into a strange distraction.
He talks of Battles and Monopolies,
Leuying of taxes, and from that descends
To the most brain-sicke language. His mind fastens
On twenty several objects, which confound
Deep Sense with folly. Such a fearful end
May teach some men that bear too lofty crest,
Though they live happiest, yet they dye not best.
He has conferred the whole State of the Dukedom
Upon your sister, till the Prince arrive
At mature age.

FLA. There Is some good luck in that yet.

FRAN. See here he comes.
Enter Brachiano, presented in a bed Uittoria and others. There Is death in's
face already.

VIT. O my good Lord!

BRA. Away, you have abused me.
You have conuayd coin forth our territories;
Bought and sold offices; oppres'd the poor,
These speches are several kinds of distractions and in the action should
appear so. And I nere dreampt on it. Make up your accountes;
I Will now be mine own Steward.

FLA. Sir, have patience.

BRA. Indeed I am too blame.
For did you ever hear the duskie raven
Chide blackness? or wast ever known, the devil
Raild against cloven Creatures.

VIT. O my Lord!

BRA. Let me have some quails to supper.

FLA. Sir, you shall.

BRA. No: some fried dog-fish. Your Quails feed on poison,
That old dog-fox, that Politician Florence,
I Will forswear hunting and turn dog-killer;
Rare! I Will be frindes with him. for mark you, sir, one dog
Still sets another a barking: peace, peace,
Yonder Is a fine slave come in now.

FLA. Where?

BRA. Why there.
In a blew bonnet, and a pair of breeches
With a great codpeece. Ha, ha, ha,
Look you his codpeece is stuck full of pinnes
With pearls o'th head of them. Do not you know him?

FLA. No, my Lord.

BRA. Why it is the Devil.
I know him by a great rose he wears on's shoe
To hide his cloven foot. I Will dispute with him.
He Is a rare linguist.

VIT. My Lord here is nothing.

BRA. Nothing? rare! nothing! when I want money,
Our treasury is empty; there is nothing,
I Will not be used thus.

VIT. O! 'ly still, my Lord

BRA. See, see, Flamineo that killed his brother
Is dancing on the ropes there: and he carries
A monie-bag in each hand, to keep him even,
For fear of breaking's neck. And there is a Lawyer
In a gown whipped with velvet, stares and gapes
When the money will fall. How the rogue cuts capers!
It should have bin in a halter.
It Is there; what is she?

FLA. Uittoria, my Lord.

BRA. Ha, ha, ha. Her hair is sprinkled with Arras powder, that makes her
look as if she had sinned in the Pastrie. What Is he?


FLA. A Divine my Lord.

BRA. He will be drunk: Avoid him: the argument is fearful when Churchmen
stagger in it.

Brachiano seems hear near his end. Lodouico and Gasparo in the habit of
Capuchins present him in his bed with a Crucifix and hallowed candle. Look
you; six gray rats that have lost their tails, crall up the pillow, send for a
Rat-cather.

I Will do a miracle: I Will free the Court

From all foul vermin. Where Is Flamineo?


FLA. I do not like that he names me so often,
Especially on's deathbed: it is a sign
I shall not live long: see he is near his end.

LOD. Pray give us leave; Attend Domine Brachiane,

FLA. See, see, how firmly he does fix his eye
Upon the Crucifix.

VIT. O hold it constant.
It settles his wild spirits; and so his eyes
Melt into tears.

LOD. Domine Brachiane, solebas in bello tutus esse tuo clypeo, nunc hunc
clypeum hostituo opponas infernali.

(...) the Cru(...) Ex.
GAS. Olim hasta valuisti in bello; nunc hanc sacram hastam vibrabis contra
hostem animarum.

(...)y the Ho(...)wed taper.
LOD. Attend Domine Brachiane si nunc quoque probas ea quae acta sunt inter
nos, flecte Caput in dex^rum.


GAS. Esto securus Domine Brachiane: cogita quantum habeas meritorum denique
memineris meam animam pro tua oppignoratem si quid esset periculi.


LOD. Si nunc quoque probas ea quae acta sunt inter nos, flecte caput in leuum.

He is departing: pray stand all apart,
And let us only whisper in his ears
Some private meditations, which our order
Hear therest being departed Lodouico and Gasparo discover themselves. Permits
you not to hear.

GAS. Brachiano.

LOD. Devil Brachiano.
Thou art damned.

GAS. Perpetually.

LOD. A slave condemned, and given up to the gallows
Is thy great Lord and Master.

GAS. True: for thou
Art given up to the devil.

LOD. O you slave!
You that were held the famous Pollititian;
Whose art was poison.

GAS. And whose conscience murder.

LOD. That would have broke your wives neck down the stairs ere she was
poisoned.


GAS. That had your villainous

LOD. And fine imbrodered bottles, (sallets
And perfumes
Equally mortal with a winter plague

GAS. Now there is Mercarie.

LOD. And copperesse

GAS. And quicke-siluer.

LOD. With other deuelish potticarie stuff
A melting in your polliticke brains: do hear.

GAS. This is Count Lodouico.

LOD. This Gasparo.
And thou shall die like a poor rogue.

GAS. And stink
Like a dead flie-blowne dog.

LOD. And be forgotten before thy sunerall sermon.

BRA. Uittoria? Uittoria!

LOD. O the cursed devil,
Come to himself a gain. We are undone.
Enter Vittoria and the attend. (again

GAS. Strangle him in private. What? will you call him
To live in treble torments? for charity,
For Christian charity, avoid the chamber.

LOD. You would prate, Sir. This is a true-loue knot
Sent from the Duke of Florence.
Brachiano is strangled
GAS. What is it done?

LOD. The snuff is out. No woman-keeper i'ch world,
Though she had practiced seven year at the Pesthouse,
Could have done't quaintlyer. My Lords he is dead.

OMN. Rest to his soul.

VIT. O me! this place is hell.
Exit Vittoria.
FLO. How heavily she takes it.

FLA. O yes, yes;
Had women nauigable rivers in their eyes
They would dispend them all; surely I wonder
Why we should wish more rivers to the City,
When they sell water so good cheap. I Will tell thee,
These are but Moonish shades of greifes or fears,
There Is nothing sooner dry than womens-teares.
Why here is an end of all my harvest, he has given me nothing
Court promises! Let wisemen count them cursed
For while you live he that scores best paies worst.

FLO. Sure, this was Florence doing.

FLA. Very likely.
Those are found weighty strokes which come from the hand,
But those are killing strokes which come from the head.
O the rare tricks of a Machiuillian!
He does not come like a gross plodding slave
And buffet you to death: No, my quaint knave,
He tickles you to death; makes you die laughing;
As if you had swallowed down a pound of saffron
You see the seat, it is practiced in a trice
To teach Court-honestie, it iumpes on Ice.

FLO. Now have the people liberty to talk
And descant on his vices.

FLA. Misery of Princes,
That must of force be censured by their slaves!
Not only blamed for doing things are ill,
But for not doing all that all men will.
One were better be a thresher.
Vds'death, I would feign speak with this Duke yet.

FLO. Now he is dead?

FLAM. I cannot conjure; but if prayers or oaths
Will get to th'speech of him: though forty devils
Weight on him in his livery of flames,
I Will speak to him, and shake him by the hand,
Though I be blasted.

FRA Excellent Lodouico!
What? did you terrify him at the last gasp?
Exit Flamineo.
LOD. Yes; and so idely, that the Duke had like
To Have terrified us.

FRA. How?
Enter the Moore.
LOD. You shall hear that heareafter,
See! yon's the infernal, that would make up sport.
Now to the revelation of that secret,
She promi'st when she fell in love with you.

FLO. You're passionately met in this sad world.

MOO. I would have you look up, Sir; these Court tears
Claim not your tribute to them. Let those weep
That guiltily partake in the sad cause.
I knew last night by a sad dream I had
Some mischief would ensue; yet to say truth
My dream most concerned you.

LOD. Shal's fall a dreaming?

FRA. Yes, and for fashion sake I Will dream with her.

MOO. Me thought sir, you came stealing to my bed.

FRA. VVilt thou believe me sweeting; by this light
I was a dreampt on thee too: for me thought
I saw thee naked

MOO. Fie sir! as I told you,
Me thought you lay down by me.

FRA. So drempt I;
And least thou should take cold, I covered thee
With this Irish mantle.

MOO. Verily I did dream,
You were some what bold with me; but to come to it.

LOD. How? how? I hope you will not go to there.

FRA. Nay: you must hear my dream out.

MOORE. Well, sir, forth.

FRA. When I threw the mantle ore thee, thou did laugh
Exceedingly me thought.

MOORE. Laugh?

FLA. And cridst out,
The hair did tickle thee.

MOO. There was a dream indeed.

LOD. Mark her I prithee, she simpers like the suddes
A Collier has been washed in.

MOO. Come, sir; good fortune tends you; I did tell you
I would reveal a secret, Isabella
The Duke of Florence sister was impoison'd,
By a 'fum'd picture: and Camillo's neck
Was broke by damned Flamineo; the mischance
Laid on a vaulting horse.

FRA. Most strange!

MOO. Most true.

LOD. The bed of snakes is broke.

MOO. I sadly do confess I had a hand
In the black deed.

FRA. Thou kepts their counsel,

MOO. Right,
For which, urged with contrition, I intend
This night to rob Vittoria.

LOD. Excellent penitence!
Usurers dream on it while they sleep out Sermons.

MOO. To further our escape, I have entreated
Leave to retire me, till the funeral,
Unto a friend in the country. That excuse
Will further our escape, In coin and jewels
I shall, at least, make good unto your use
An hundred thousand crowns.

FRA. O noble wench!

LOD. Those crowns we will share.

MOO. It is a dowry,
Me thinks, should make that sunburned proverb false,
And wash the Ethiop white.

FRA. It shall, away

MOO. Be ready for our flight.

FRA. An hour before day.
O strange discovery! why till now we knew not
Exit the Moore. The circumstance of either of their deaths.
Enter Moore.
MOO. You Will weight about midnight
In the Chapel.

FRA. There.

LOD. Why now our action's justified,

FRA. Tush for justice.
What harms it Justice? we now, like the partridge
Purge the disease with laurel: for the fame
Shall crown the enterprise and quit the shame.
Exeunt. Enter Flam. and Gasp. at one door, another way Giouanni attended.
GAS. The young Duke: Did you e're see a sweeter Prince?

FLA. I have known a poor woman's bastard better fauor'd, This is behind him:
Now, to his face all co^parisons were hateful: Wise was the Courtly Peacocke,
that being a great Minion, and being compared for beauty, by some dottrels that
stood by, to the Kingly Eagle, said the Eagle was a far fairer bird then
herself, not in respect of her feathers, but in respect of her long Tallants.
His will grow out in time,

My gracious Lord.


GIO. I pray leave me Sir.

FLA. Your Grace must be merry: it is I have cause to mourn, for wot you what
said the little boy that rode behind his father on horseback?


GIO. Why, what said he?

FLA. When you are dead father (said he) I hope then I shall ride in the
saddle, O it is a brave thing for a man to sit by himself: he may stretch
himself in the stirrops, look about, and see the whole compass of the
Hemisphere, you're now, my Lord, ith saddle.


GIO. Study your prayers, sir, and be penitent,
'Twere fit you would think on what has former bin,
I have heard grief named the eldest child of sin.
Exit Giou.
FLA. Study my prayers? he threatens me divinely,
I am falling to pieces already, I care not, though, like Anacharsis
I were pounded to death in a mortar. And yet that death were fitter for
Usurers gold and themselves to be beaten together, to make a most cordial
cullice for the devil.

He has his uncles villainous look already,
Enter Courtier. In dicimo sexto. Now sir, what are you?

COVR It is the pleasure sir, of the young Duke
That you forbear the Presence, and all room,
That owe him reverence.

FLAM. So, the wolf and the raven are very pretty fools when they are young. Is
it your office, sir, to keep me out?


COVR. So the Duke wills.

FLA. Verily, Master Courtier, extremity is not to be used in all offices:
Say that a gentlewoman were taken out of her bed about midnight, and committed
to Castle Angelo, to the Tower yonder, with nothing about her, but her smock:
would it not show a cruel part in the gentleman porter to lay clame to her
upper garment, pull it ore her head and ears; and put her in naked?


COVR. Very good: you are merry

FLA. Does he make a Court eiectment of me? A flaming firebrand casts more
smoke without a chimney, then withint. I Will smoore some of them.

Enter Florence. How now? Thou heart sad.

FRAN. I met even now with the most pitious sight.

FLA. Thou metst another hear a pitiful
Degraded Courtier.

FRAN. Your reverend mother
Is grown a very old woman in two hours.
I found them winding of Marcello's coarse;
And there is such a solemn melody
'Tweene doleful songs, tears, and sad elegies:
Such, as old grandames, watching by the dead,
Were wont t'out-weare the nights with; that believe me
I had no eyes to guide me forth the room,
They were so ore-charg'd with water.

FLA. I will see them.

FRAN. 'Twere much vncharety in you: for your sight
Will add unto their tears.

FLA. I will see them.
They are behind the trauers. I Will discover
Their superstitious howling.
Cornelia, the Moore and 3. other Ladies discovered, winding Marcello's Coarse.
A song.
COR. This rosemarie is withered, pray get fresh;
I would have these herbs grow up in his grave
When I am dead and rotten. Reach the bays,
I Will tie a garland here about his head:
'Twill keep my boy from lightning. This sheet
I have kept this twenty year, and every day
Hallowed it with my prayers, I did not think
He should have wore it.

MOO. Look you; who are yonder.

COR. O reach me the flowers.

MOO. Her Ladyships foolish.

WOM. Alas! her grief
Has turned her child again.

COR. You're very welcome.
There Is Rosemarie for you, and Rue for you,
to Flamineo. Hearts-ease for you. I pray make much of it.
I have left more for my self.

FRAN. Lady, who is this?

COR. You are, I take it, the graue-maker.

FLA. So.

MOO. It Is Flamineo.

COR. Will you make me such a fool? here is a white hand:
Can blood so soon be washed out? Let me see,
When scritch-howles croke upon the chimney tops,
And the strange Cricketith oven singes and hoppes,
When yellow spots do on your hands appear,
Be certain then you of a Course shall hear.
Out upon it, how it is speckled! h'as handled a toad sure.
Couslep-water is good for the memory: pray buy me 3. ounces often.

FLA. I would I were from hence.

COR. Do you here,
I Will give you a saying which my grandmother (sir?
Was wont, when she heard the bell toll, to sing ore unto her lute

FLA. Do and you will, do.

COR. Call for the Robin-Red-brest and the wren,
Since ore shadie groves they houer,
Cornelia does this in several forms of distraction. And with leaves and
flowers do cover
The friendlesse bodies of unburied men.
Call unto his funeral Dole
The Ante, the field-mouse, and the mole
To rear him hillockes, that shall keep him warm,
And (when gay tombs are robbed) sustain no harm,
But keep the wolf far thence: that is foe to men,
For with his nails hee'ldig them up again.
They would not bury him' cause he died in a quarrel
But I have an answer for them.
Let holy Church receive him duly
Since he paid the Church tithes truly.
His wealth is sum'd, and this is all his store:
This poor men get; and great men get no more.
Now the wares are gone, we may shut up shop.
Bless you all good people,
Exeunt Cornelia and Ladies.
FLA. I have a strange thing in me, to the which
I cannot give a name, without it be
Compassion, I pray leave me.
Exit Francisco. This night I Will know the vt most of my fate*
I Will be resolved what my rich sister means
T'assigne me for my service: I have lived
Riotously ill, like some that live in Court.
And sometimes, when my face was full of smiles*
Have felt the mase of conscience in my breast.
Often gay and honored robes those tortures try,
"We think cag'd birds sing, when indeed they cry.
Ha! I can stand thee. Nearer, nearer yet.
Enter Brachia. Ghost. In his leather Cassoc^ and breeches boots, acoo^ a pot
of lilly flowers wit^ a scullint. What a mockery has death made of thee? thou
look sad.
In what place art thou? in you starrie gallerie,
Or in the cursed dungeon? No? not speak?
Pray, Sir, resolve me, what religions best
For a man to die in? or is it in your knowledge
To answer me how long I have to live?
That Is the most necessary question.
Not answer? Are you still like some great men
That only walk like shadows up and down,
And to no purpose: say: --
The Ghost throws ear upon him a^^ shows him the scull. What Is that? O
fatal! he throws earth upon me*
A dead man's scull beneath the roots of flowers.
I pray speak Sir, our Italian Churchmen
Make us believe, dead men hold conference
With their familiars, and many times
Will come to bed to them, and eat with them.
Exit Ghost. He Is gone; and see, the scull and earth are vanished.
This is beyond melancholy. I do dare my fate
To do its worst. Now to my sisters lodging,
And sum up all these horrors; the disgrace
The Prince threw on me; next the pitious sight
Of my dead brother; and my Mothers dotage;
And last this terrible vision. All these
Shall with Vittoria's bounty turn to good,
Or I will drown this weapon in her blood.
Exit. Enter Francisco, Lodouico, and Hortensio.
LOD. My Lord upon my soul you shall no further:
You have most ridiculously engaged your self
Too far already. For my part, I have paid
All my debts, so if I should chance to fall
My Creditours fall not with me; and I vow
To quite all in this bold assembly
To the meanest follower. My Lord leave the City,
Or I Will forswear the murder.

FRAN. Farewell Lodouico.
If thou do perish in this glorious act,
I Will rear unto thy memory that fame
Shall in the ashes keep alive thy name.

HOR. There Is some black deed on foot. I Will presently
Down to the Citadell, and raise some force.
These strong Court factions that do brook no checks,
In the cariere often break the Riders necks.

FLA. What are you at your prayers? Give ^^e.
Enter Vittoria with a book in her hand. Zanke, Flamineo, following them.
VIT. How Ruffin?

FLA. I come to you 'bout worldly business:
Sit down, sit down: Nay stay blouze, you may hear it,
The doors are fast enough.

VIT. Ha, are you drunk?

FLA. Yes, yes, with wormwood water, you shall taste
Some of it presently.

VIT. What intends the fury?

FLA. You are my Lords Executrix, and I claim
Reward, for my long service.

VIT. For your service

FLA. Come therefore here is pen and Ink, set down
What you will give me.

VIT. There,

FLA. Ha! have you done already,
She writes. It Is a most short conueyance.

VIT. I will read it.
I give that portion to thee, and no other
Which Caine gron'd under having slain his brother.

FLA. A most courtly Pattent to beg by.

VIT. You are a villain.

FLA. Is It come to this? the say affrights cure agues:
Thou have a Devil in thee; I will try
If I can scarre him from thee: Nay sit still:
My Lord has left me yet two case of Jewels
Shall make me scorn your bounty; you shall see the^.

VIT. Sure he is distracted.

ZAN. O he is desperate
He enter with two of pistol^ For your own safety give him gentle language.

FLA. Look, these are better far at a dead list,
Then all your jewel house.

VIT. And yet me thinks,
These stones have no fair luster, they are ill set.

FLA. I Will turn the right side toward you: you shall see how the will sparkle.


VIT. Turn this horror from me:
What do you want? what would you have me do?
Is not all mine, yours? have I any children?

FLA. Pray theee good woman do not trouble me
With this vain wordly business; say your prayers,
I made a vow to my deceased Lord,
Neither your self, nor I should out-liue him,
The numbering of four hours.

VIT. Did he enjoin it.

FLA. He did, and 'twas a deadly iealousy,
Least any should enjoy thee after him;
That urged him vow me to it: For my death
I did propound it voluntarily, knowing
If he could not be safe in his own Court
Being a great Duke, what hope then for us?

VIT. This is your melancholy and despair.

FLA. Away,
Fool, thou art to think that Politicians
Do use to kill the effects of injuries
And let the cause live: shall we groan in irons,
Or be a shameful and a weighty burden
To a public scaffold: This is my resolve
I would not live at any man's entreaty
Nor dye at any's bidding.

VIT. Will you hear me?

FLA. My life has done service to other men,
My death shall serve mine own turn; make you ready

VIT. Do you mean to die indeed.

FLA. With as much pleasure
As e're my father gat me.

VIT. Are the doors locked?

ZAN. Yes Madame.

VIT. Are you grown an Atheist? will you turn your body,
Which is the goodly palace of the soul
To the souls slaughter house? o the cursed Devil
Which does present us with all other sins
Thrice candied ore; Despair with gaul and stibium,
Yet we carouse it off; Cry out for help,
Makes us forsake that which was made for Man,
The world, to sink to that was made for devils,
Eternal darkness.

ZAN. Help, help.

FLA. I Will stop your
With Winter plums,

VIT. I prithee yet remember, (throat
Millions are now in graves, which at last day
Like Mandrakes shall rise shreeking.

FLA. Leave your prating,
For these are but grammatical laments,
Feminine arguments, and they move me
As some in Pulpits move their Auditory
More with their exclamation then sense
Of reason, or sound Doctrine.

ZAN. Gentle Madam
Seem to consent, only persuade him teach
The way to death; let him dye first.

VIT. It Is good, I apprehend it,
To kill one's self is meat that we must take
Like pills, not chew't, but quickly swallow it,
The smart a'th wound, or weakness of the hand
May else bring trebble torments.

FLA. I have held it
A wretched and most miserable life,
Which is not able to dye.

VIT. O but frailty!
Yet I am now resolved, farewell affliction;
Behold Brachiano, I that while you lived
Did make a flaming Altar of my heart
To sacrifice unto you; Now am ready
To sacrifice heart and all. Farewell Zanche.

ZAN. How Madam! Do you think that I Will out-liue you?
Especially when my best self Flamineo
Goes the same voyage.

FLA. O most loved Moore!

ZAN. Only by all my love let me entreat you;
Since it is most necessary none of us
Do violence on our selves; let you or I
Be her sad taster, teach her how to dye.

FLA. Thou do instruct me nobly, take these pistols,
Because my hand is stained with blood already:
Two of these you shall level at my breast,
The Other against your own, and so we will dye,
Most equally contented: But first swear
Not to out-liue me.

VIT. and MOO. Most religiously.

FLA. Then here is an end of me: farewell daylight
And o contemtible Physike! that do take
So long a study, only to preserve
So short a life, I take my leave of thee.
These are two cupping-glasses, that shall draw
Showing pistols. All my infected blood out,
Are you ready?

BOTH. Ready.

FLA. Whither shall I go now? O Lucian thy ridiculous Purgatory to find
Alexander the great cobling shoes, Pompey tagging points, and Julius Caesar;
making hair buttons, Haniball selling blacking, and Augustus crying garlike,
Charlemaigne selling lists by the dozen, and King Pippin crying Apples in a
cart drawn with one horse.

Whether I resolve to Fire, Earth, water, Air,
Or all the Elements by scruples; I know not
Nor greatly care, -- Shoot, shoot,
Of all deaths the violent death is best,
For from our selves it steals our selves so fast
They shoot and run to him and tr^^ upon him. The pain once apprehended is
quite past.

VIT. What are you dropped.

FLA. I am mixed with Earth already: As you are Noble Perform your vows, and
bravely follow me.


VIT. Whither to hell,

ZAN. To most assured damnation.

VIT. O thou most cursed devil.

ZAN. Thou art caught

VIT. In thine own Engine, I tread the fire out
That would have been my ruin.

FLA. Will you be perjured? what a religious oath was Stix that the Gods never
durst swear by and violate? o that we had such an oath to minister, and to be
so well kept in our Courts of Justice.


VIT. Think whither thou art going.

ZAN. And remember
What villainies thou have acted.

VIT. This thy death,
Shall make me like a blazing ominous star,
Look up and tremble.

FLA. O I am caught with a spring!

VIT. You see the Fox comes many times short ho me,
It Is here proved true.

FLA. Killed with a couple of braches.

VIT. No fitter offering for the infernal furies
Then one in whom they reigned while he was living.

FLA. O the ways dark and horrid! I cannot see,
Shall I have no company?

VIT. O yes thy sins,
Do run before thee to fetch fire from hell,
To light thee thither.

FLA. O I smell soote, most sinking soote, the chimneis a fire,
My livers purboil'd like scotch holly-bread;
There Is a plumber, laying pipes in my guts, it scalds;
Will thou out-liue me?

ZAN. Yes, and drive a stake
Through thy body; for we will give it out,
Thou did this violence upon thy self.

FLA. O cunning Devils! now I have tried your love,
And doubled all your reaches. I am not wounded:
Flamineo rises. The pistols held no bullets: 'twas a plot
To prove your kindness to me; and I live
To punish your ingratitude, I knew
One time or other you would find a way
To give me a strong potion, o Men
That lie upon your deathbeds, and are haunted
With howling wives, near trust them, they will re-marry
Ere the worm pierce your winding sheet: ere the Spider
Make a thin curtain for your Epitaphes.
How cunning you were to discharge? Do you practice at the Artillery yard?
Trust a woman; never, never; Brachiano be my president: we lay our souls to
pawn to the Devil for a little pleasure, and a woman makes the bill of sale.
That ever man should marry! For one Hypermnestra that saved her Lord and
husband, forty nine of her sisters cut their husbands throats all in one
night. There was a shole of virtuous horse-leeches.

Here are two other Instruments.

Enter Lod. Gasp. Pedro, Carlo.
VIT. Help, help.

FLA. What noise is that? hah? falce keys in the Court.

LOD. We have brought you a Mask.

FLA. A matachine it
By your drawn swords. (seems,
Chuch-men turned reuellers.

CON. Isabella, Isabella,

LOD. Do you know us now?

FLA. Lodouico and Gasparo.

LOD. Yes and that Moore the Duke gave pention to
Was the great Duke of Florence.

VIT. O we are lost.

FLA. You shall not take Justice from forth my hands,
O let me kill her. -- I Will cut my safty
Through your coats of steel: Fate's a Spaniell,
We cannot beat it from us: what remains now?
Let all that do ill, take this president:
Man may his Fate foresce, but not prevent.
And of all Axioms this shall win the prise,
It Is better to be fortunate then wise.

GAS. Bind him to the pillar.

VIT. O your gentle pity:
I have seen a blackbird that would sooner fly
To a man's bosom, then to stay the gripe
Of the feirce Sparrow-hawke.

GAS. Your hope deceiues you.

VIT. If Florence be ith Court, would he would kill me.

GAS. Fool! Princes give rewards with their own hands,
But death or punishment by the hands of others.

LOD. Sirrah you once did strike me, I Will strike you
Into the Center.

FLA. Thou Wilt do it like a hangeman; a base hangman;
Not like a noble fellow, for thou see
I cannot strike again.

LOD. Do laugh?

FLA. Would have me dye, as I was borne, in whining.

GAS. Recommend your self to heaven.

FLA. Noe I will carry mine own commendations thither.

LOD. Oh could I kill you forty times a day
And vs't four year together; 'tweare to little:
Naught greeu's but that you are to few to feed
The famine of our vengeance. What do think on?

FLA. Nothing; of nothing: leave thy idle questions;
I am ith way to study a long silence,
To prate were idle, I remember nothing.
There Is nothing of so infinite vexation
As man's own thoughts.

LOD. O thou glorious strumpet,
Could I divide thy breath from this pure air*
When It leaves thy body, I would suck it up
And breath't upon some dunghill.

VIT. You, my Deaths man;
Me thinks thou do not look horrid enough,
Thou have to good a face to be a hangman,,
If thou be do thy office in right form;
Fall down upon thy knees and ask forgiveness.

LOD. O thou have bin a most prodigious comet,
But I Will cut of your train: kill the Moore first.

VIT. You shall not kill her first. behold my breast,
I will be waited on in death; my servant
Shall never go before me.

GAS. Are you so brave.

VIT. Yes I shall welcome death
As Princes do some great Ambassadors; I Will meet thy weapon half way.


LOD. Thou do tremble,
Me thinks fear should dissolve thee into air.

VIT. O thou art deceived, I am to true a woman:
Conceit can never kill me: I Will tell thee what,
I will not in my death shed one base tear,
Or if look pale, for want of blood, not fear.

CAR. Thou art my task, black fury.

ZAN. I have blood
As red as either of theirs; wilt drink some?
It Is good for the falling sickness: I am proud
Death cannot alter my complexion,
For I shall near look pale.

LOD. Strike, strike,
With a Joint motion.

VIT. 'Twas a manly blow
The next thou give, murder some sucking Infant,
And then thou will be famous.

FLA. O what blade is it?
A Toledo, or an English Fox.
I ever thought a Cutler should distinguish
The cause of my death, rather then a Doctor.
Search my wound deeper: tent it with the steel that made it.

VIT. O my greatest sin lay in my blood.
Now my blood paies for it.

FLA. Thou Art a noble sister
I love thee now; if woeman do breed man
She ought to teach him manhood: Fare thee well.
Know many glorious women that are famed
For masculine virtue, have bin vicious
Only a happier silence did betyde them
She has no faults, who has the art to hide them.

VIT. My soul, like to a ship in a black storm,
Is driven I know not whither.

FLA. Then cast ancor.
"Prosperity does bewitch men seeming clear,
"But seas do laugh, show white, when Rocks are near.
"We cease to greiue, cease to be fortunes slaves,
"Nay cease to dye by dying. Art thou gonne*
And thou so near the bottom: falce report
Which says that women vie with the nine Muses
For nine tough durable lives: I do not look
Who went before, nor who shall follow me;
Noe, at my self I will begin and end:
"While we look up to heaven we confound
"Knowledge with knowledge. o I am in a mist.

VIT. O happy they that never saw the Court,
"Nor ever knew great Man but by report.
Vittoria dies.
FLA, I recover like a spent taper, for a flash
And instantly go out.
Let all that belong to Great men remember the old wides tradition, to be like
the Lions ith Tower on Candlemas day, to mourn if the Sun shine, for fear
of the pitiful remainder of winter to come.

It Is well yet there is some goodness in my death,
My life was a black charnell: I have cought
An everlasting could. I have lost my voice
Most irrecouerably: Farewell glorious villains,
"This busy trade of life appears most vain,
"Since rest breeds rest, where all seek pain by pain.
Let no harsh flattering Bells resound my knell,
Strike thunder, and strike loud to my farewell.
Dies. Enter Embassad: and Giouanni.
ENG. and E. This way, this way, break open the doors, this way.

LOD. Ha, are we betrayed;
Why then lets constantly dye all together,
And having finished this most noble deed,
Defy the worst of fate; not fear to bleed.

ENG. Keep back the Prince, shoot, shoot,

LOD. O I am wounded.
I fear I shall be taken.

GIO. You bloody villains,
By what authority have you committed
This Massakre.

LOD. By thine.

GIO. Mine?

LOD. Yes, thy uncle, which is a part of thee enioyn'd us to it.
Thou know me I am sure, I am Cout Lodowicke,
And thy most noble uncle in disguise
Was last night in thy Court.

GIO. Ha!

CAR. Yes, that Moore thy father chose his pentioner.

GIO. He turned murderer;
Away with them to prison, and to torture;
All that have hands in this, shall taste our justice,
As I hope heaven.

LOD. I do glory yet,
That I can call this act mine own: For my part,
The rack, the gallows, and the torturing wheel
Shall be but sound sleeps to me, here is my rest
"I limbed this night-peece and it was my best.

GIO. Remove the bodies, see my honored Lord,
what use you ought make of their punishment.
Let guilty men remember their black deeds,
Do lean on cruthes, made of slender reeds.

In stead of an Epilogue only this of Martial supplies me.

Haec fuerint nobis praemia si placui.

For the action of the play, it was generally well, and I dare affirm, with the
Joint testimony of some of their own quality, (for the true imitation of life,
without striving to make nature a monster) the best that ever became them:
whereof as I make a general acknowledgement, so in particular I must remember
the well approved industry of my friend Master Perkins, and confess the worth
of his action did Crown both the beginning and end.

FINIS.

