THE ARAIGNEMENT of an unruly Tongue.

WHEREIN The Faults of an evil Tongue are opened, the danger discovered, the
Remedies prescribed, FOR The taming of a bad Tongue, the right ordering of the
Tongue, and the pacifying of a troubled mind against the wrongs of an evil
Tongue.

By GEORGE WEB, Preacher of Gods word at Stepleashton in Wiltshire.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the green Dragon. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir GABRIEL DOVSE Knight, and the right virtuous and
worthy Lady, the Lady IOANE his wife, Increase of Grace, and all true
Happiness.
Right Worshipful,
THIS petty Pamphlet (for so I may better style it, then a Treatise) being so
bold against the abuses of the tongue, cannot but expect the critical censure
of many a Tongue. The Malicious tongue will defame it, the Scorners Tongue
deride it, the Slanderous Tongue back-bite it, the Censorious Tongue will whip
it, the Curious tongue will hang, draw, and quarter it: Therefore it needs a
protecting Patronage, to give some countenance unto it, against those
oppressions which it is likely to incur by coming under the Press. And what
fitter Patronage could it find then your two names? both which, for the Tongue,
the one in witty speech, the other in discreet silence, not my self alone, but
diverse others also have held in admiration. Besides that, the near affinity,
wherewith, of late, by marriage, I am linked unto your Family, and the many
favors upon the same by you both vouchsafed unto me, do require this as a
testimony of my grateful remembrance of the same. I have therefore presumed
to Dedicate unto you both, a as monument of my duty which I owe unto you both,
this poor present, humbly desiring a favorable acceptance. Though it enrich
not your coffers, yet it may your conscience: for herein you shall find
(although unpolished) both an Antidote against a bad Tongue, and an Amulet for
a good Tongue; how we may bridle our own, how we may tame others Toungs. In
many things we sin all: And many times we all sin with this little member,
our unruly Tongue. And what man lives but is wronged by the tongue? Happy is
that man who can avoid the strife of Tongues; happier he that can set a watch
before his own tongue: A pattern for both these is here proposed. God bless
it, both to you both, and to all that read it. And so humbly craving pardon
for this my boldness, I commend you both to the Lord, and to the Word of his
Grace, who is able to perfect that good work which he has begun in you.

Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded, G. W.

The Contents of the Treatise.
CHAP. I. THe Tongues 1. Use, 2. the Excellency in the Creation, 3. Misery by
Deprauation. 4. The Abuses of it. 5. The proceeding against it. CHAP. II. The
Tongue, 1. Arraigned. 2. Indicted of 1. High Treason. 2. Petty Treason. 3.
Fellonie. 4. Murder. 5. Breach of the Peace. CHAP. III. The transgression of
the Tongue against all the ten Commandments. CHAP. IIII. The Hue and Cry sent
forth against a naughty Tongue: a description of it. 1. From the Haunt of it.
2. From the Habit thereof. 3. From the Companions. CHAP. V. The Examination of
an unruly Tongue. 2. His Plea for himself. 3. The Confutation of the Plea.
CHAP. VI. A deliberation for the punishment of an evil tongue. How impossible
it is to avoid it: How hard to endure it: How insufficient humane punishments
are to tame it. CHAP. VII. The Magistrates office for the punishment of an
evil tongue. The politic laws of Nations, for the punishment thereof. CHAP.
VIII. The judgments of God against an evil tongue. 1. In this life. 2. In the
life to come. CHAP. IX. The Doom, or Sentence denounced against an evil
tongue. CHAP. X. The binding of the tongue to the good behavior. Rules and
Directions for the same. CHAP. XI. How we are to put off an evil tongue, when
in our hearing it wrongeth others. CHAP. XII. How we are to endure the stroke
of an evil tongue, when it concerns our selves. CHAP. XIII. A Conclusion of
the whole Treatise.
THE ARAIGNMENT OF AN VNRVLY TONGVE.
CHAP. I.
The Tongues, 1. Use, 2. Creation, 3. Deprauation, 4. Abuse. 5. The proceeding
against it.

AMong all the members of Man's body there is none of greater use, none more
subject to abuse then the Tongue: The Tongue Iam. 3.5.
It is but a little member, yet a great stirrer in mortal affairs: of which it
may be said, as sometimes it was of Origin, Where it is well, Vbi been, Nemo
melius, Vbi male, Nemo peius.
there none is better, where evil, nothing worse. It is a Fountain, whence
waters flow both sweet and bitter, Iam. 3.16, 11, 10, 8, 6.
It is a Forge both of Blessing and Cursing, It is a Shop both of precious
Balm and deadly Poison, It is the Trouchman both of Truth and Error: Fire and
Water are enclosed in it, Life and Death are in the power of it; Pro. 18.21:
It is a necessary good, but an Unruly evil, very profitable, but exceeding
hurtful: we cannot well want it, nor want woe because of it.

Man had been created only for GOD, The use of it.
he should not have needed a tongue, for the Lord knows the Minds meaning
without the tongues narration; If he had been made for himself alone, the
motions of his mind had been sufficient for himself without a tongue to be his
Informer; but God made Man a sociable living creature, one Man to be a comfort
unto the other, and therefore he had need of such an Organ as the tongue to be
his intelligencer and Interpreter: without a tongue we should have been all
Mutes; the palate would have wanted a taster, the Mind a speaker, and Man, the
World of the World, (...).
would have stood in the World but as a Cipher.

The Creation of it.
in the Creation did create this necessary member; and placed it within the
head the principal watch-towre of the Body. And within this Body, of our Body
has appointed it a threefold Office, to be Taster, Interpreter, Mat. 19.8. Iam.
1.17.
and Controwler. God (as he is absolutely good, and the fountain of all
goodness) in the Creation made all things good, Genesis 1.27.
and Man most good, and the tongue of Man for a special good: He saweuery
thing that He had made, and behold it was good, very good. Zanc. de oper. Dei.
Lib. 2.
The tongue was then a goodly member, full of grace, full of goodness; A
member wherein Man did most resemble Angels exercise, and Gods Image; A sweet
Organ or Organon of delightful speech, 1. Pet. 3.4.
a glorious Trumpet to sound Psalm. 45.1.
out the praises of the Creator, a faithful Interpreter of the hidden Man, a
fair Secretary of a most fair Heart; The Heart did then indite a good
matter, and the Tongue was the Pen of a ready Writer. Speech was then rare and
precious, and the Tongue could well discern how to be silent without
sullenness, modest without wantonness, simple without ignorance, witty
without wickedness, conceited without offense. And in a word, the use and
exercise of the Tongue at that time was so good, that of it the encomium might
be truly given, which was given of the rest, Genesis 1.27.
when they were at the best, It was good, very good.

Man continued not long in his Innocence, The deprauation of it.
so neither the Tongue in his Integrity. As in the Apostacy of Adam, the
poison of sin like a fretting canker ran through the whole Nature of Man,
so among the rest of the members it did corrupt the Tongue. And (if my
conjecture be not much deceived) the tongue was one of first of the bodily
members in this corruption; sure I am, the first corrupting instrument was the
tongue: By the tongue of the Serpent was Eve seduced, Genesis 3.1, 2, 3.
and her tongue did seduce Adam; and since that time the tongue among our
members has been the most vnruliest, Iam. 3.6.
defiling the whole body, and setting on fire the whole course of Nature.

When sin had made a division between Man and GOD, Isay 59.2.
it did divide between the tongue and good, so that there is no greater
division of tongues, then there are vices of the Tongue: And though the
substance of the Tongue be not taken away by sin, yet the quality of it is now
perverted and depraved, so that of a necessary good, it is become an unruly
evil, and so much the more evil, because it is incorrigible. The fiercest
Beasts, the wildest Birds, the wiliest Serpents are and have been tamed by the
Art of Man, but the tongue (witness an Apostle) can no Man tame. Iam. 3.7, 8.


If we well consider with our selves the dangerous abuses, hurts, and
inconveniences occasioned by the tongue since this estate of his deprauation,
it may justly grow to a disputable question, whether we gain or lose more by
it? Whether there be a greater benefit of Nature, or hazard of Grace in it? For
if we observe the testimony of Scripture and the occurrents of times, we shall
meet with more mischief caused by the tongue, and more prayers and precepts
bent against the abuse of it, then against any other of the members severally,
or all of them jointly.

Our great Creator has in the fabric of our bodies for the most part, fitted
us with paires of parts, two Eyes, two Hands, two Ears, two Feet, only this
one is but one, one Tongue, and yet this one Tongue is more troublesome then all
the rest. No Creature has so excellent an use of the Tongue as Man, no
Creature does more abuse, or is more abused by the Tongue, then Man; Half the
sins of our life (according to Nazianzen his account) are committed by the
tongue. Nazianz. in deplor. cala^. animae. Basil. in Psalm 32.
Basil goes farther, saying, that our whole life is full fraught with the
Tongues offenses. Farther yet another Father (and yet no farther then the
truth) that there is no wrong or injury done in the world, Ambr. offic. lib. 1.
but first or last the tongue has a share in the same.

The proceeding a against it.
because so many and so grievous complaints have been made in all ages, both by
Christians and by the Heathens, by Divines, Philosophers, Poets, and all sort
of people; This present Treatise does intend a judicial proceeding, that so
the misdemeanors thereof being discovered, it may at the least be bound to the
good behavior, for the better quiet of the good, and terror of the bad, when
they shall see what hurt comes by, and what danger happens unto a wicked
tongue.

CHAP. II.
The Tongue Araigned and indicted of, 1. Treason, 2. Fellonie, 3. Murder, 4.
Riot and Routs.

FIrst therefore we will call the malefactor to the bar, The Tongue araigned.
that it may be examined of his abuses, and upon inquisition it may appear,
what the cause is why so many, and that so often, have been moved to be his
accusers, and to put in their bills of complaint against the same, and
accordingly it may either clear his Innocence, or else be found guilty.

And because general accusations (as Lawyers teach us) will bear no Actions,
The Tongue indicted.
unless they be confirmed by particular informations; we will frame
particular Indictments against this unruly member the Tongue, and lay open (as
near as we may) his particular misdemeanors. Neither shall we need to seek
far for matters criminal to object against it, seeing there is no crime so
capital, no offense so heinous, but the. Tongue is either principal in it, or
accessory unto it.

Of High Treason against God.
We may indite it for High Treason both against God and the King. Against GOD
the Tongue is a Traitor in the highest degree. By Blasphemy.
1. By Blasphemy; for so it is objected against the railing tongue of
Rabshakeh: Isay 37.23.
Whom have thou reproched and blasphemed? Against whom have thou exalted thy
voice? even against the holy one of Israel. And of Antichrists tongue it is
said, Reu. 13.6.
He opens his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell therein: And of the tongue of the son of
Shelomith, (whose blasphemy is recorded Leuit. 24.) Leuit. 24.
it is said that it pierced or smote through the name of GOD. Idolatry; By
Idolatry.
for there is no Idolatry, but the tongue is a chief Actor in it, Exo. 32.4.
Hab. 2.8. Isay 42.17.
either as an Herald to proclaim it, or as a Doctor to teach it, or as a
Proctor to plead for it, or as a Priest to sacrifice unto it? It is the tongue
that names the work of men's hands, 1. Kin. 18.21.
Baali, It is the tongue which pleads for Baal, It is the tongue which with
Micha cries out for the loss of his Idol, Judge. 18.24.
Ye have taken away my gods. 3. By Perjury.
By Perjury likewise the tongue is a Traitor unto GOD, Henry. 8. anno 33.
cap. 1.
for if it be Treason in the Common Law to counterfeit the Kings Seal, and to
abuse his name to the prejudice of his Laws, then can it be no less then
Treason to counterfeit the Privy Seal of the King of kings, to abuse his name
to the countenancing of a lie, and to make him, as much as in it lies,
accessarie unto evil; yet all this (and what not?) does a perjured tongue,
Leuit. 19.12.
and therefore it is said to pollute the name of GOD, and it is threatened with
this curse, Deuteronomy. 5.11.
that it shall not escape unpunished.

Now if the Tongue be guilty of such capital Treason against God, Against the
King.
no wonder if it prove a Traitor against the King: If it be not the Plotter,
yet it is the Broker of every kind of Treason; next to the heart, the first
practice of Treason is from the tongue; 2. Sam. 20.1.
Sheba his tongue was the Trumpet to Isreal's rebellion. And Shinicies Treason
was the Treason of the Tongue; 2. Sam. 16.5.
Judas did first betray his Master with his Tongue, Math. 26.14, 15.
before he arrested him with his hands. And a better Jude notes this as a
badge of a Traitor, Jude 8.11.
to speak evil of dignities. And Korah his Treason is called by the same
Author, The gainesaying of Korah; therefore the Wiseman, to keep us from the
very beginnings of Treasons, gives this caveat to the Tongue, Curse not the
King, Eccles. 10.20.
no not in thy thoughts: For a bird of the air will carry the voice, and that
which has wing shall diuulge it.

As the Tongue has been indicted for High Treason, Of Petty Treason.
so in the next place we may indite it for pettie-treason; By Concealment.
not only by way of concealeme^t against the King of Heaven, Romans 1.18.
in keeping back the truth in unrighteousness: Clipping.
And by clipping the coin of Truth, Psalm. 4.2. Psalm. 52.2, 3.
by loving vanity and seeking after leasing, by loving evil more then good,
and lying rather then to speak righteousness: And by forging and
counterfetting false coin, Counterfetting. Psalm. 36.4.
Lingua concinuat dolos, It deuiseth (or only frames) mischiefs, It works
deceitfully; but also by Witchcraft and secret poisonings, Witchcraft.
both which in the censure of our Law are no less then pettie-treasons.

The tongue is a Witch, for so the Apostle Paul complayneth of the Galathians,
Gal. 3.1.
that they were bewitched with the glosing toungs of their false teachers, and
for a practiser by poysonings, Poisoning.
Saint James testifies of an evil Tongue that it is full of deadly poison;
Iam. 3.8.
and the Psalmist, Psalm. 58.4.
The poison of it is like the poison of a Serpent, and in another place, Psalm.
140.3.
Adders poison is under their lips.

The next Indictment against the Tongue may be for Fellonie, Of Fellonie.
wherein this wretched member may evidently be convicted for a most notorious
malefactor; for to omit those petty Fellonies and Burglaries daily committed
by the in-breaking up the closet of men's secrets, and prying into all men's
actions: the Tongue is a common pickpurse, a notorious Robber, it will not
stick to rob a man before his face, behind his back, in the Highway, and
in private corners, all is fish with it which comes to the net: but
especially is it guilty of a threefold Fellonie. In taking away.


A man's good name. Eccles. 7.3. Pro. 22.7.
which is more precious then cyntments, and more to be desired then treasures.

His goods. 2. Sam. 16.4.
as Ziba his Tongue did Mephibosheth of his lands.

His life.
as Doegs slanderous accusation against David did put David's life often times in
hazard, and those false Tongues which Iezabel had suborned to raise up false
witness against Naboth, 1. Sam. 22. 1. King. 21.
robbed him both of his Vineyard and life in one day.

tongue for murder (manslaughter is too light a term to be given unto it)
There is no murder like unto the murder of the Tongue; Of Murder.
of such tongues the Prophet Ezechiel testifies; Ezekiel. 22.9
They carry tales to shed blood. Psalm. 55.2.
And the Psalmist says; Psalm. 55.2.
They cut like a Rasor, yea, Ier. 18.18.
They are very swords: Therefore Ieremies adversaries did this way wreake their
malice upon the Prophet, Come and let us smite him with the tongue. An evil
tongue does murder three at once: 1. The party whom he does defame. 2. The
party unto whom he does defame him. 3. Himself that is the defamer. And
therefore does describe this bloody tongue to be always armed with a
threefold weapon, Pro. 25.18.
an Arrow, an Hammer, and a Sword; an Arrow to wound the party whom he would
defame in his absence whiles he is far off; an Hammer to knock him on the
head with a false report unto whom he does make the report: a Sword to stab
his own Soul in committing that evil which God does hate.

tongue may further be indicted for all manner of Riots, Routes, Of Riots and
Routes.
excesses and misdemeanors. 1. Quarrelling.
For a quarreller and makebate; For whence come wars and iarres, contentions
and strifes? do they not commonly proceed from the tongue? It defiles (says
S. James) the whole Body, Iam. 3.6.
and sets on fire the whole course of Nature. It is the tongue which
breaks the peace betweeue neighbors, gives shrewd wives sharp weapons to
fight against their husbands, breeds quarrels among servants, and sets men
together by the ears: Associatio^.
It may be indicted for association and confederacy with an evil heart: They
encourage themselves (says the Psalmist) in an evil matter, Psalm. 64.5.
they commune of laying snares privately: They say, Who shall see them? It may
be indicted for a Knight of the Post. Knight of the Post.
It is ready to call evil good, and good evil, Esaias 5.10.
to put darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter: Drunkenness. Pro. 35.31
we could convince it for a drunkard also, for the tongue is the first taster
of a drunken cup, and the first that will bewray it self in a drunken fit. And
for incontinency it has long since bin presented at the Spiritual Court, for
there is no such common a whore as is the tongue: It will suffer any whosoever
will, to lie with her. It is both Pander, Incontinency.
Bawd and Leacher, It has the very attire of an Harlot, mentioned by Solomon,
Prou. Pro. 7.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
7. She is lewd and stubborn: Her feet abide not in her house, with an
impudent face she is provoking to uncleanness: come, let us take our fill of
love. Moreover the tongue has long agone been whipped for a vagabond or a
wandering rogue: A Vagabond.
It goes (says the Psalmist) through the earth, Psalm. 59.14 15.
it roueth up and down evening and morning, and makes a noise like a dog,
and wandreth up and down grudging, if it be not satisfied. It has been taxed
for a Talebearer, A Talebearer. Leu. 19.16
wandering like a Peddler of tales among the people, Idle and yet a busie-body,
1. Tim. 3.13.
tattling and prattling of that which it has nothing to do withal. It has
stood on the Pillory for a Cheator. A Cheator. Psalm. 52.2.
It deuiseth mischief, and works deceit; In a word (that we draw not this
indictment too much beyond the ordinary length) It is both a common Barreter,
A common Barreter. Pro. 6.19. An incorrigible member. Psalm. 12.4.
Sowing discord among brethren, And an incorrigible member; A Tongue that
speaks proud things, saying, With our tongues we will prevail, our lips are
our own, who is Lord over us?

CHAP. III.
The transgression of the tongue against all the ten Commandments.

WE shall not need production of witnesses for confirmation of the premises, The
Tongues transgression of all the Commandments.
the crimes objected are so common, the misdemeanors so notorious, that they
cannot be denied. If now the Tongue shall go about to trauerse this
Indictment, and stand to the trial of the Law, we may as easily convict it by
the very letter of the Law; for if we examine it by the Law of Laws, the Law
of God, we shall find it guilty of the breach of every Statute in the Law,
and if we go through the whole Decalogue; we shall evidently perceive that
there is none of all the ten Commandments, but is many ways transgressed by
the Tongue.

Against the 1. Against the first Commandment.
Commandment the Tongue is a transgressor, not only in becoming it self an
Idol (for many a man's Tongue is his God, whiles he does more glory in it, and
is more confident on it, then in God) but also in being the common teacher and
maintainer of Idolatry, Atheism, Psalm. 14.1.
and impiety. Psalm. 115.4. Romans 1.15. Psalm. 94.7.
How many a time has the Tongue denied God? how often has it called upon a
false god? who but the Tongue is a blasphemer against God? what Errors or
Heresies have there ever been, but has been set abroach by the Tongue? how
often has it tempted God? how often has it dishonored him by distrustful
speeches? how often has it disgraced him with disdainefull speeches? It is the
complaint of GOD himself against it; Mal. 3.13.
Your words have been stout against me, Malach. 3.13. And Job sets out
this disdainefull dialect of the Tongue in this manner, They say unto God, Job.
22.14, 15
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; who is the Aimighty
that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we should pray
unto him?

Against the second Commandment the Tongue offends, Against the 2.
Commandment.
by being the ordinary factor for Superstition and Will Worship. What pleads
for Baal, 1. King. 18.21.
but the Tongue? What a crying did it keep for the loss of an Ephod,
Teraphim, and a molten Image, taken away by the Danites, Judge. 18.23
from one Micha, a man of Mount Ephraim? What an Hubbub did the tongue make at
Ephesus in defense of Diana, and her Idolatrous service? Act. 19.24, 28, 32, 34.
It made (says the Text) such a confused noise, that some cried one thing,
some another, and at last there was a clamor with one voice, about the space
of two hours, crying out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Neither has the
Tongue, as yet, lost its old wont, but is still a pertinacious corrupter of
Gods true worship, Deu. 12.32 Col. 2.23.
a maintainer of false worship, a binder of men to rash vows, Eccl. 5.4. Math.
15.7
and a dissembling hypocrite, in daring to pass into Gods presence many times,
without the priuity of the heart.

Against the third Commandment the Tongue offends, Against the third
Commanlement. Exodus 20.5
by taking the name of God in vain: for how often has it used the sacred name
of God, without a reverent respect unto Deu. 28 58
to it; upon the least toy, and trifle which does occur? Deu. 32.32
How vainly and idly has it often tattled of the great and weighty affairs of
Religion? How many scurrill jests has it forged upon the sacred Scripture
phrase? Esaias 66.2.
How forgetful has it been to give unto God his due deserved praise? Phil.
4.6.
How slightly has it made mention of Gods wondrous works? Zach. 5.4. Math.
5.33 Esaias 48.1. Leu. 24.16
To omit the fearful sin of swearing, forswearing, careless swearing,
common swearing, cursing and banning; wherein, who so notorious a delinquent as
is the Tongue?

Against the fourth commandment the Tongue offends; Against the fourth
Commandment. Psalm. 119.13. Eccles. 5.1.
sometimes by silence, when it should speak to the praise of God, sometimes by
speech, by rash uttering of prayers or praises unto God: How often has it
affoorded a lip-seruice unto God, Isay. 1.14, 15.
having God in the mouth, when he was not thought upon in the heart? A silly
Tongue that thinks it can deceive God with smooth words, crying, The Temple
of the Lord, Ier. 7.4, 8.
the Temple of the Lord: as if all Religion did but consist in words: Whereas
the Prophet Jeremy tells the Tongue, that in such a case it does but deceive,
Trusting in lying words that cannot profit. And if that be the true
sanctifying of the Sabbath which is described unto us by the Prophet Esaiah,
Esaias 58.13
To turn away our foot from the Sabbath, from doing our own pleasure upon
Gods holy day, to call the Sabbath a delight, not doing our own ways, nor
seeking our own pleasure, nor speaking our own words; Then how guilty must the
Tongue needs be of Sabbath profanation, which upon that day does commonly utter
more words of her own then of God, and is more voluble in words of course then
in words of grace. Col. 3.16.


And as the tongue is thus guilty of the breach of the commandments of the
first Table, Against the fifth Commandment.
so likewise of the second. Against the fifth Commandment it offends, by want
of reverence, in proud, disdainefull, and reproachful speaking unto, or of our
Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors. Thus there are Tongues (fit for Eagles
meat, and to be food for Ravens) which mock the father, Pro. 30.17.
and despise the instruction of the mother: So there are tongues of Parents,
Col. 3.21.
which provoke their children unto anger; Husbands tongues which are too bitter
against their wives; Ver. 19.
Wives tongues too sharp against their Husbands: Tongues of Inferiors, Exodus
4.25 Number. 16.3. Ephe. 6.9.
too maundy against their Superiors; Tongues of Superiors too insulting over
their Inferiors: To omit the many vnreuerent and unseemly speeches which fall
out many times among Equals.

Against the sixth Commandment the Tongue offends, Against the sixth
Commandment.
by chiding, brawling, quarrelling, skolding, reproaching, railing and bitter
speaking: Math. 5.22 Ephesians. 4.31. Ier. 18.18.
For there is a murder of the Tongue, as well as a murder of the Hands; there
is a smiting with the tongue, as well as with the hand: Pro. 12.18.
There is a Tongue (says Solomon) that speaks words like the pricking of a
sword. Nay, an evil Tongue does wound deeper then any sword; For a sword will
only wound those who come within the compass of his stroke: no distance of
place can defend from the stroke of an evil Tongue. A sword can hurt only the
body, but an evil Tongue, both body, goods, and name.

Against the seventh Commandment the Tongue offends, Against the 7.
commandment.
by being a Pandar or Bawd unto Uncleanness; Genesis 39.7. Ephesians. 5.4. 1. Cor.
15.33.
sometimes by soliciting to uncleanness; sometimes by obscoene and filthy
speeches: and we know, that evil words corrupt good manners; sometimes by
reading amorous books, sometimes by singing lustful songs: and ever, when it
does ouerflow with filthy, corrupt, and unseemly communication.

Against the eighth Commandment the Tongue offends; Against the eighth
Commandment.
by apparent stealth, stealing away men's hearts, 2. Sam. 15.2.3.
as Absalom did, by flattery and assentation; and their good name, Genesis 39.14.
as Joseph's Mistress did, by slandering and backbiting; and their goods, as
Gehazi did by lying: 2. King. 5.22.
and as many a crafty Merchant daily does, by forging, falsifying and
dissembling. Against the ninth Commandment. Ephe. 5.3.


Against the ninth Commandment the tongue offends, by prating, cogging,
lying, boasting, Leu. 19.16 1. Sam. 22.9. 1. King. 21.12.
flattering, fawning, accusing, slandering, tale-bearing, false witness
bearing, pronouncing unjust judgment, and diverse other such like practices,
prejudicial unto peace and truth.

Against the tenth Commandment the Tongue offends, Against the tenth
Commandment.
by venting forth the evil thoughts and concupiscences of the heart: For, Math.
15.19, 20.
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, blasphemies, etc. And these have the Tongue to be their Broker.

CHAP. IIII.
The Hue and Cry against a naughty tongue. A description of it. 1. From its
haunt. 2. From the Physiognomy or Habit of it. 3. From his companions.

THus have we seen the Indictment framed against the Tongue, and examining it
according to the Tenor of the Law, we find the Bill found by the grand
Inquest of the Prophets and Apostles. Now it remains that we call the
offender into Coram, to see what he can plead for himself; and if it be
found guilty, to receive his reward.

And to the end that our Hue and Cry may the more effectually proceed in the
search and inquisition of this so notorious a malefactor, we will describe him
by his proper notes and characters: as namely, by the places whither most
commonly he does resort, by his physiognomie and habit, and by the company
with who^ he does frequent.

And first, His Haunt
for the place or haunt of an evil tongue, it is most true that he is an
vbiquitary, here and there, and every where: This lewd tongue is a daily
traveler, Psalm. 73.9.
It walks through the earth: A mere Perepatetique, Psalm. 55.10
Day and Night he goes about City, Court, and Country: yet many times, Psa.
10.8, 9
He sits in the lurking places of the Villages, and lies in wait like a
Lion in his den. But the most proper places of his residence, are Alehouses,
Tauernes, Play Houses, Bakehouses, Wool losts, and Gossip meetings. And he is
seldom, if ever, absent thence, where are any either of the family of
Flattery, or Ill Will.

As for his gesture and Physiognomie, His gesture and Physiognomie.
he is but a little man, or rather member; not very large, but a great Reacher,
sullen and choleric in complexion; His Dialect is cursing, Iam. 3.9. Psalm.
73.9. Psalm. 10.7. Psalm. 55.21 Psalm. 52.2.
deceit, and fraud: The words of his mouth are smoother then butter, but war
is in his heart. A deep Plotter, and a great Boaster. We have a full
description of him, Pro. 6.12. Pro. 6.12, 13, 14.
A naughty person, a froward mouth: He winketh with his eyes, he speaks with
his feet, he teaches with his fingers, frowardness is in his heart, he
deuiseth mischief continually, he sows discord.

And for his habit, His Habit.
we shall ever find him suited with a Sword, a Rasor, with Bow and Arrows,
and with a Box of Poison. With a Sword; for this very Tongue is a sharp Sword:
Swords are in the lips of it, Psalm. 57.4. Psalm. 59.7. Pro. 12.18. Psalm. 52.2.
and it speaks words like the pricking of a Sword. A Rasor it has: for the
tongue deuiseth mischief like a sharp rasor, working deceitfully. And he is
an Archer also. Ier. 9.3.
The tongue is bent like a Bow for lies, and lo, the wicked bend their Bow;
Psalm. 11.2.
they make ready their Bow upon the string, that they may privily shoot at the
upright in heart. And there be four principal Arrows which it does shoot
forth.

The 1. Arrow is Envy, an arrow made in hell by that envious one the Devil:
The feathers of this Arrow are these two. 1. Sadness at others prosperity. 2.
Gladness at the adversity of other men. It is headed with the rustie iron of
Selfe-consuming emulation, Iam. 3.5.
and this is Sagitta venenata, an arrow full of deadly poison. But (as one well
taxes it) it is but a fools bolt soon shot, Basil. in Sermon de inuid a.
Pro. 14.30
a shaft which more hurts them who shoot with it, then those at whom it is
shot; for Ennuie is the rotting of the bones. And (as Job testifies, Job 5.2.
it kills the foolish, and slaieth the Idiot.

The second Arrow of an evil Tongue, is the Arrow of Hatred, an Arrow made in
hell by that old Serpent who is a murderer from the beginning. John 8.44.
The feathers of it are Ill will and Spite: It is headed with a desire to do
hurt. 1. Sam. 18.11.
And this is Sagitta occulta, the secret or hidden Arrow, like the Iauelin
which Saul darted against David, thinking therewith to have nailed him to the
wall; he that shoots it, 2. Ioh. 2.11 Iam. 3.16.
is a manslaier and a murderer. And where this Arrow is in request, there is
confusion and every evil work.

The third Arrow of an evil Tongue is Mocking, Psalm. 1.1. Ephesians. 5.4.
an Arrow framed in the shop of the Scornful, the feathers of it are
Morologie and Eutrapelie, (...).
scofs and Jests, it is headed with a desire to disgrace: and this Sagitta
volans, the slying Arrow, Psalm. 91.5.
drawn out of the quiver of the proud and vaineglorious, an Arrow ready upon
the string in the bow of Belials children, but it shall fall down upon their
own pate who are delighted in it. Psalm. 64.8.


The fourth Arrow of an evil Tongue is the Arrow of Backbiting, made by
Satan, and shot by Sathanists, Reu. 12.10
the feathers of it are Lies and Slanders, and it is headed with a desire to
defame. And this is Sagitta Parthica, the Parthian Arrow shot behind ones
back, a most pernicious Arrow to the prejudice of others credit and
reputation, an Arrow that wounds a far off, and which kills three men,
the slaunderer, the party slandered, and the receiver of the slander with one
stroke. And as this unruly Tongue does go with one of these four Arrows
always ready upon his string: Iam. 3.8. Psalm. 58.4.
So it carries with it a Vial full of deadly poison, the poison of it is like
the poison of a Serpent, and that not of an ordinary sort of Serpents, but
venenum Ptiudos: Psalm. 140.3 Deuteronomy. 32. Job. 20.16.
the poison of Aspes is under his lips, which kind of poison is elsewhere in
sacred Scripture noted to be most noxious and pernicious.

Lastly, His company.
the companions of an evil Tongue (for how shall one better be known then by
his company?) are these:

First, Idleness, a lazy, lowzie rascal, which will not betake him to any
labor, Pro. 20.4.
by reason of the cold, a disorderly liver, 2. These. 3 11.
no worker, yet a busie-body, and a great prater, his condition is beggary,
(...).
and his clothing, Rags.

The second companion of an evil Tongue, is Malice; a mad-brain'd Monster,
with a sullen look, Pro. 6.11. Pro. 23.21
and a fiery face, with superfluity of choler: He can never speak well, Iam.
1.21. 1. Pet. 2.1.
but is full of guile, dissimulation and evil speaking.

Another companion of an evil Tongue is Envy, whose description is this: A
withered body, Ovid. Metamor. l. 2.
feeding upon it self, having a pale face without blood, a lean body without
juice, squinteyes, black teeth, an heart full of gall, a tongue tipped with
poison, never laughing but when others weep, never sleeping, but musing upon
mischief. And this, above all other companions of an evil tongue is most
outrageous: Pro. 27.4.
For, Wrath is cruel, and anger raging, but who can stand before envy?

Another companion of an evil tongue is curiosity, a finicall fellow, of a
spruce gesture, having Eagles eyes and large ears, desirous ever to be
acquainted with other men's evils; a busy prier into other men's behavior,
Plutarch. de curiosnate.
which with Plutarchs Lamia does put on his eyes when he goes abroad, and
lays them aside when he is at home. This curiosity and an evil tongue are
linked together by the Apostle as inseperable companions: 1. Tim. 5.13. (...).
Pratlers and busybodies, speaking things which are not comely.

Another companion of an evil tongue is Subtilty, an old fox, with a wary
and dissembling gate, His throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 5.9. Psalm. 55.2.
he flattereth with his tongue, the words of his mouth are softer then butter,
yet war is in his heart: Luther in Psalm. 15.3.
Whose usual practice (as Martin Luther notes) is to transform himself into
an Angel of Light, and under fine prefaces and glorious terms to back-bite.
The cunning hypocrisy of it, and the Tongue together, is elegantly, by eloquent
Bernard represented unto us. Bern. in Cant. ser. 24.
Some there be (says he) whose stomakes being glutted with the faults and
infirmities of their brethren, when they mean to disgorge the same, do shroud
their malice and hatred under the cloak of feigned respect, after an enforced
sigh, with great gravity, and with a well composed countenance, they will
mutter forth their slanderous speeches. And such backbitings and slanders
(says he) are so much the more dangerous, because the Hearers are thereby
occasioned to imagine and conceive, that the same proceeds, neither of envy,
nor ill will, but out of mere sorrow and compassion.

Another companion of an evil Tongue is, Detraction; an hungry companion with
a biting tooth, a privy thief from another good name, one that labors to
hide the good graces that are in others, and to suborne contrary surmises, as
the devil did to our first parents concerning God, Genesis 3.9. Job 1.9.
and unto God concerning Job. And this Detraction does work sometimes upon
bare suspicion, as the children of Ammon slandered David in the ears of their
Lord Hanun, as if he had sent Ambassadors, under pretense of love and honor,
2. Sam. 10.3.
to spy out the Land, and to take his City and destroy it: Sometimes without
any ground at all, or shadow of just suspicion, as Korah, Dathan and Abiram did
detract from Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.
accusing them that they went about to exalt themselves above the whole
Congregation, and did take too much upon them: Sometimes by relating false
reports, as Ziba did of his Master Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 16.3.
as if he had affected the Kingdom of Israel, and therefore remained behind
at Jerusalem: Sometimes by mis-reporting speeches, or actions, in themselves
warrantable, yet wrested to another sense then they were done or spoken, as the
false Witnesses did the words of our blessed Savior, Ioh. 2.19.
concerning the dissolution and reparation of the Temple of his Body; 1. Sam.
21. and 22.9.
and Doeg the dealings of David and his company with Abimelech. 1. Sam. 21.

Another companion of an evil Tongue is Impudency; a brazen-faced shameless
companion. The Psalmist compares him to a mad dog, Psa. 59.3, 6
which runs up and down from place to place, rauing and raging, and is never
satisfied: He has learned of the Sycophant in Plautus, Plutarch. in lib. de
discernend. amic. ab adulat.
to swear, forswear, face and outface any thing: and with Mede the Parasite
of Alexander the Great, has proposed unto himself this Maxim both in
flattery and in infamy, to do it audacter, boldly and impudently.

These are the seven hellish spirits which an evil Tongue does take unto
himself, Luke 11.26.
as his choicest Companions, and with who^ most commonly and familiarly he
does converse: And these are the most proper Characters and marks, whereby we
may know him and find him out.

CHAP. V.
The tongues examination. 2. Plea for it self. 3. Confutation of this plea.

BY this time having thoroughly pursued our Malefactor, The examination of the
Tongue.
we have found him out, and brought him Coram, we should now proceed to his
punishment, and to denounce the sentence against him; but that (as Nichodemus
sometime said to the Sanhedrim of the Jews) it might be thus excepted against
our procedings. Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what
he has done? Therefore that we proceed iudiciously, and according unto law: Let
us call the Malefactor to the Bar, and hear him plead for himself, if so
be he have any thing to say for himself, why sentence should not be
denounced against him.

Wherein we can expect no less then a cunning Apology: The Tongues first
Plea. The necessary use and serviceable office of it.
for this subtle Tongue is not now to learn to tell his tale; he will plead
his necessary use, and the good service that he has done, that he has been
always an Officer in the body corporal; least idle of all the members, more
serviceable then all the senses, and has been employed in most adue^tures, as
the only Ambassador, Interpreter, and Orator for the Heart; But this will not
serve his turn, for his profitable use cannot privilege his abuse; Necessary
servants escape not due corrections when they offend in their service, no more
may this: has he been an Officer in the body? yet he has not bin good in his
office; has he not been Idle? It had better many times that he had been
less busied; has he been serviceable to the other members? he has also many
times wrought them much unquietness? has he bin the hearts Ambassador, Orator
and Interpreter? yet has he not bin so faithful in his employments, many a
time he has gone before he was sent; many a time gone a wrong way, looking
Westward, when he should have gone by East; many a time has he proved a
subtle Orator, a fraudulent Ambassador, and a false Interpretour: and therefore
does deserve to be punished.

He will further plead the excellency of his skill, His second Plea: The
skill thereof.
that He is the only Linguist and most expert Artist, the Master of
Eloquntio^, and Schoolmaster of Pronunciation, tuner of Music, and teacher of
the Liberal Sciences: and besides all this, the only Disputant in the world
for the trial of Controversies. But what of all this? Is the Tongue a
Linguist? Many times it speaks more Languages then is fit. Pleads he his
faculty for Eloquence? And may he not be censured for all the Solaecismes,
Traulismes, Tantologies, and all other Barbarismes in the Speech? And for the
Arts, it may be wondered how the Tongue dares to claim the sanctuary thereof,
seeing, that besides the Sophismes, errors and absurdities which he has
foisted into them; he has invented new Arts and Sciences, scarce honest, full
of craft and subtilties, to deceive the world: And therefore this cannot
privilege him from the doom of justice.

He will reply, Plea: the cunning thereof.
and show the misery which would happen unto many without his help, as that
forsooth; Wit would want a Broker, Innocence a Defender, Error an Excuser,
were it not for the Tongue: Mirth would be Mute, Boldness Blanke, and
Traffic a Banckrout, without the Tongue: without which also, poor people
would be ever put to the worst, and Women, the weaker Sex, would want a weapon
to defend themselves. But this serves rather to aggrauate, then any way to
extenuate the offense: for it is true indeed, thou naughty Tongue lendest
shrewd wives a mischievous weapon to offend their husbands; Thou armest
servants against their Masters, and set neighbors together by the ears;
Thou art an Abbetter of all quarrels, thou art that same Dauus which troublest
all things: And therefore thou deseruest no favor, but the very rigor of the
Law.

But here the Tongue is ready with another excuse; What, would you have a man
stand still like a block, to put up all wrongs and injuries which are offered
unto him, and to be silent upon a disgrace? A silly worm when it is trod upon
will erect it self: I am a tongue, I cannot choose but speak. But, sirrah
Tongue, who gave you that authority? must you needs avenge your self? A poor
revenge, God wot, is the revenge of the Tongue; yet seeing you are so eager,
and will needs be meddling, it is fit you should be held in with bit and
bridle.

But, Plea; by posting of the fault.
Why should I be punished (says the Tongue) who, if I do offend, the fault is
not mine, but theirs who do abuse me, I am but an organon or instrument; if
there be a fault in me, their fault is the greater who make me faulty. True
indeed; but yet in matters of offense the accessarie is liable to offense as
well as the principal: The Serpent was but the instrument abused by Satan to
deceive man, yet in the punishment the Serpent has his doom as well as Satan.

Here the convicted Tongue has no more to say, Plea; by entreatie.
but from Apology falls to Entreatie: He has often pleaded for others, and
begged their pardon, hops to obtain favor now for himself, especially
promising reformation for the time to come. But it is well known, that this
delinquent has been often in this offense; Besides that, it can equivocate,
dissemble, lie, promise much, but perform little; and therefore there is no
mercyto be showed, where no amendment can be expected.

What now can this unruly Tongue plead for it self, The excluding of the tongu
from all benefit of the Law.
unless (which is the last refuge of convicted Felons) it claim the benefit
of his Clergy? But as for that he can have no hope; for besides that the Law
does exempt such notorious and capital offenders from the benefit of their
book, it is welknown, that the Tongue has most offended against the Clergy,
to whom, albeit the Tongue is most beholding, yet none are more then they
traduced and abused by the Tongue.

Wherefore, seeing this unruly member has no just Apology, by which it may
plead for it self, nor can allege any reasonable exception, why the censure
of justice should not pass upon it, let it stand by and hear his Doom.

CHAP. VI.
A deliberation for the punishment of an evil tongue. How impossible it is to
avoid it. How grievous to endure it How insufficient all earthly punishments
are to tame it. The proper punishment by the lawof God allotted unto it.

WHat shall be given unto thee? A deliberation for the punishment of a false
Tongue.
what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? Harsh it is to endure, hard to
tame, impossible to avoid thee: Nor man, nor means can prevent thee, for let a
man be as faithful as Abraham, Ge^. 18.19. Genesis 26. Genesis 27. 1. Sam. 12.2.
John 1.47.
as simple as Isaac, as subtle as Iaacob, as innocent as Samuel, as upright as
David, as sincere as Nathaniel: yet he cannot possible avoid the lash of an
evil Tongue; though a man use all the policy in the world, he cannot prevent
it. Though he should resolve with David, Psalm. 55.6, 7, 8. How impossible to
avoid it.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then I would flee away and be at rest,
lo, then I would flee away and be at rest, I would wander far off and
remain in the wilderness, yet could he not escape from this storm, wind,
Psalm. 139.9
and tempest: Though a man take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
utmost parts of the sea, yet thither would an evil Tongue fly after him, even
so far off would it reach him. There is no poison so venomous but there may
be some Antidot against it. But there is no Antidot against the venim of the
Tongue; There is no fire so raging, but that some kind of moisture may
extinguish it. The fire of an evil Tongue is like the fire of hell which goes
never out.

The Arrow which is shot out of the strongest Bow, and sent forth with the
greatest force, can hurt no farther then it can reach. But let a man be never
so far off, let him be beyond the Seas, let him be in never so far remote
Regions, and distant Countries, the Arrow of an evil Tongue will reach him and
wound his good name; other weapons only hurt the present, this hurts those
also who are absent; there is none that can be privileged from its stroke.

As none can avoid it, How hard it is to endure it.
so who can well bear it? flesh and blood can hardly brook it; If a man had
the meekness of Moses, Number. 12.3 Job. 1.21. Iam. 5.11. Iud. 15.15. Psalm. 69.20
1. King. 3.
the patience of Job, the strength of Samson, the experience of David, and the
wisdom of Solomon: yet of himself were he never able to endure the incessant
wrongs by an evil Tongue; for a good name is better then a precious ointment,
Eccles. 7.1. Pro. 22.1.
and more to be desired then great riches, yea, then silver and gold; who can
brook the impeachment of this? Other wounds may be cured, other losses may be
recouerd, but this is a wou^d which can never be healed, a loss which can
never be recovered. And therefore there is no smart like to the smart of the
Tongue: the words of it are devouring words, Psalm. 52.4. Pro. 11.18. Pro. 26.22.
They are like to the pricking of swords, yea, They are wounds, and they go
down to the innermost Chambers of the belly.

Yet what remedy can there be devised against it? The difficulty of taming of
it.
what penalty to inflict upon it? what Art to tame it? let a man have the
courage of Caleb, the policy of Achitophel, Number. 14.8
the severity of Iehu, 2. Sam. 16.20. 2. King. 10.17. Exodus 1.10
the cunning of Pharaoh, the cruelty of Phalaris the invention of Perillus, yet
he shall not be able to tame an unruly Tongue, or reform this incorrigible
monster: Pro. 14.4.
for the words of a man's mouth are as deep waters, who can sound the bottom of
the^? who can hope to exhaust them? A Tongue enraged is harder to be tamed; Pro.
18.19.
than a strong City is to be conquered. The contentions of it, are like the
bars of a Castle. How plainley and pregnantly does the Apostle James
demonstrate this! first he shows that it is easier to tame a wild horse then
a wild Tongue. We put bits (says he) in horses mouths that they may obey us;
James 3.3.
and we turn about their whole body: verse 4.
but the Tongue can no man tame. Then he does instance in the Ships, which
although they are great bulks, and are driven with fierce winds, verse 7, 8.
yet can be ruled and turned about with a little rudder or helm: But the
Tongue, a little member, can no man rule or order. Then he instanceth in
Beasts, Birds, and Serpents, which although they be fierce, and wild and
subtle, yet they are, and have been tamed by the Art of man: but the tongue
can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. And therefore
the very Heathen did acknowledge, that contra Sycophanti morsum nullum est
remedium: There is no remedy or cure, against the biting of an evil Tongue.

What then shall be given unto thee? The stubbornness of it.
what shall be done unto thee, thou false Tongue? There is no Balm will supple
it, for an evil tongue will reward evil for good, Psalm. 35.11
and like a nettle, the more gently it is touched, the more sharply it will
sting. There is no charm can charm it, for what is commonly said of the
Belly, Venture non habet aures; The belly has none ears, may be as truly
verified of the Tongue, Lingua non habet aures, the tongue has no ears. And
although they who have this evil tongue, have ears as well as tongue; yet, as
they imitate the poison of the Adder in their Tongue, so they have the
deafness of the Adder in the Ear: Psa. 58.4, 5
They are like the deaf Adder which stops her ear, and will not hearken to
the voice of the Charmer, charming never so expertly.

What then shall we do to tame this unruly member? The insufficiency of
earthly punishments against it.
Shall we bind it to the good behavior? It never had it, and is out of hope
now to be brought unto it. Shall we make his Mittimus and send him to the
Iayle, to see whether imprisonment will reclaim it? There are no locks able
enough to keep him in, no setters strong enough to ensnare it. The Head, the
Hands, the Feet, may be imprisoned, but the Tongue cannot be imprisoned; no,
though it be put in Herod's prison, and watched with four Quaternions of
Soldiers, Act. 12.4.
it will break prison, and walk at liberty: For, it is well known, that
although it be kept in with a double door of lips, and within that has two
perculleises of Teethen grates to enuiron it, yet it will escape and range
abroad. Shall we doom it to the whip? It will reuerberate lash for lash, and
be sure to put him to the worst that shall adventure to meddle with it. Shall
we burn him in the hand, and sear him with the letter Tau? Iam. 3.6.
It will set on fire the whole course of nature, it self being set on fire of
hell. Shall we drown him? All the water in the Sea will not wash away its
pollution. Shall we hang, draw and quarter him? So it has done many an ones
good name. But where shall we find a Gallows or Gibbet high enough for the
same? Shall we behead him? So long as it is able to wagge, it will never cease
to speak.

What then shall be given unto thee? What shall be don unto thee, thou false
tongue? Surely, no other thing then that which David upon the like deliberation
does deliver, Psalm. 120.
Sharp Arrows of the Mighty with coals of Juniper. Where by the Mighty we
may either understand the Lord of Hosts, Wolphius.
who is the Lord strong and mighty, Psalm. 24.8.
the Lord mighty in battle, the Magistrates, who is the Lords; Molerus.
Deputy? a man of might: And by the sharp Arrows and Juniper coals, we are
to understand the sharp punishments and dreadful judgments, which either the
Magistrate in the course of Law, or God Almighty in his most just judgment
does inflict upon an evil Tongue. Here then we are to take notice; first, of the
law of Nations against an evil Tongue. Secondly, of Gods secret judgments.
First, of the temporal. Secondly, of the eternal punishments which do belong
unto the same.

CHAP. VII.
The Magistrates Office for the punishment of a naughty tongue. 2. The politic
laws of Nations for the taming of the same.

THAT the Magistrate by his authority is to take order against an evil Tou^g,
The Magistrates Office for to punish a naughty Tongue.
and with severity to punish the same, it is as apparent as the Sun; for he
is a man of might, he sits in the Seat of God to execute Psalm. 82.1.
the judgments of God, 2. Chro. 19.6. Romans 13.4.
he bears not the sword in vain, but is to execute vengeance upon evil
dooers: Neither only upon evil dooers, but upon evil speakers also, as upon
liars, raylers, backbiters and slanderers: for so David does profess of his
practice in such an Office, Psalm. 101.5
whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off. He intends not
a punishment only for the perjured tongue, and public defamer, but also for
the secret calumniator and privy slanderer, neither is it a check or petty
punishment which he does threaten against it, (...). significat exterminare,
seu constringendo and coarctando disperdere.
as to banish it his Court, to punish it by the purse, or to inflict a slight
punishment upon it; but he would even cut it off, root it out and utterly
destroy it.

The laws of Nations have been diverse, Politic Laws of Nations for the
punishment thereof.
yet all dreadful for the punishment of an evil Tongue. The Judicial law
given by God himself unto the Jews, (and therefore the best pattern for all
humane laws) did thus proceed against it: Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
If a false witness rise up against any man, to testify against him that
which is wrong, then both the men between whom the controversy was, were to
stand before the Lord, before the Priests, and the Judges which were in those
days: And the Judges were to make diligent inquisition. And if the witness
were proved false, that his tongue had testified falsely against his Brother,
then the mischief which he had thought to have done against his brother, was
to light upon his own head, and he was severely to be punished ad terrorem
aliorum, for the fear and terror of others.

And lest we should think this Judicial course to be limited only to a
false Witness, and to a perjured Tongue, the Wiseman, Pro. 19.5, 9
Prou. 19.5, 9. does extend it to all manner of injuries committed by the
Tongue. A false witness (says he) shall not be unpunished, and he that
speaks lies, shall not escape. And to this Iudiciarie course of proceeding
against an evil tongue, our blessed Savior does seem to allude, Math. 5.22.
Math. 5.22. when he says; Whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of judgment, and whosoever shall say unto his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council. Where, under that one word
(Racha) he does understand all manner of opprobrious speeches, and disdainefull
gestures: and by the terms of Judgment, Council, and Hell fire there
mentioned, he does glaunse at the three Courts of judgment in Jerusalem.
Betram. de Polit. Iud. c. 13.
The first whereof was for the determining of matters litigious about wealth
and possessions, and in that were three Judges. The second for matters
criminal, which were judged by a Council of three and twenty. The third, for
matters of more serious weight and importance, to be determined by the
Sanhedrim, or great Council of seventy and one. And in these Courts the Jews
(as Drusius relates) did thus proceed against such as offend with the tongue:
first, they had private, and after that more public admonitions to refrain
from that wicked course: if this could not prevail, they were excommunicate
from the Synagogue: if this would not serve to reform them, they were further
excommunicated from all society and company of other men: if this would not
restrain them, the great Anathema Maranatha was denounced against them: If yet
they proceeded in their evil, they were judged worthy to be stoned to death.

Leaving the Judicial Law of the Jews, come we to the Laws of Nations, and
we shall find, how in all Ages, and among all Nations, there have ever been
sharp punishments provided against shrewd Tongues. The Grecians (as Thucidides
reports) were wont to punish the lavish Tattling of the Tongue with lashes of
rods, whipping the whole body. The Egyptians (as Polybius records) did
boar an hole through an unruly tongue. The Persians (says Strabo) made them
slaves, who could not be Masters over their Tongues. The Indians (as Acosta
notes) did exclude such as had unruly Tongues, Acosta lib. 6. c. 9.
from all companies. Suidas in Canopo. Ruffin. hist. eccl. lib. 2.
The Chaldeans (as Suidas observes) did condemn them to perpetual
darkness. Eusebius l. 5 c. 21.
The Romans (as Eusebius testifies) had a Law to break the legs of him who
had a naughty tongue; which custom was put in execution (as Nicephorus
relates) in the time of the reign of the Emperor Commodus, Niceph. l. 4.26.
upon a profane wretch who had slandered Apollonius a godly Professor, and
afterward a blessed Martyr; The ill tongued accuser, not being able to prove
his allegations, was judged to have his legs broken, because he had accused,
and defamed a man without a cause. Herodotus makes mention of a Lieutenant of
King Darius, Herodot. in Clio.
who caused one of his Soldiers to be put to death, for that his tongue had
been too lavish against Alexander, though an enemy. And he relates another
History of Antigonus, who imprisoned a foule-mouthed Peasant in a Cage,
depriving the whole body of liberty, because of the too much liberty of the
Tongue. Leontius the Emperor (as Sir Martin Cognet in his Politic discourses
does deliver) after he had put Justinian to flight, Politic discourse of Sir
Martin Cognet. c. 37.
caused two of his Tale-bearers to be trailed by the heels and to be burned.
The Emperor Pertinax caused the skins of slanderers to be flaied from their
Bodies: and Maximinus another Emperor took order to have the Tongues of
unruly railers to be pulled out of their mouths.

Excellent were those Laws, which Titus, Nerua, and Traian (as Suetonius
writes) made against tattling Tongues, the least mulct wherein was whipping
cheer. Domitian, Anthony, and Macrinus banished them the Confines of the
Empire, yielding this for their reason, that they who did not punish them, L.
praeuar. de verb. Leg. tit. ad Segnat.
did encourage them. The Civil Law in like manner does inflict banishment to an
evil Tongue: The Canon Law does debar it from the receiving of the Sacraments:
The Common Law of this our Land does adiudge the false tongue to the Pillory,
Westminster. 1. ca 23. Kech. 2. c. 5. Eliz. 1. c. 7.
the skolding Tongue to the Tumbrell, or Cuckingstoole; the railing Tongue to
the good behavior; the slanderous Tongue, if it be Scandalum Magnatum, to the
loss of an ear; if against a private person, to the censure of the
Magistrate, according to the quality of the offense.

Thus we see how odious among all Nations an evil Tongue has always been,
and what strict Laws from time to time, have been enacted against the same.
But because these good Laws are not always put in execution, and the
Magistrate may prove many times remiss, let us proceed further to behold a
more dismal doom from a greater Judge, the judgment of almighty God, and the
fearful punishments which he does inflict upon an evil Tongue.

CHAP. VIII.
The Judgments of God against an evil Tongue. 1. In this life. 2. In the life
to come.

WHO is so mighty as the Lord? God will surely punish an evil tongue. Ex.
15.12. Psalm. 75.7. Iam. 4.2. Psalm. 9.16.
Who is like unto him? glorious in holiness, fearful in his works, doing
wonders? He is the Judge: yea that great Judge, which can save and can
destroy: yea, He is known by the judgment which he executes: And among the
rest of his judgments this is one of the most remarkable, his punishments
against an evil Tongue: For he himself has undertaken the censure of it;
He has protested that he will come a swift witness against it; Mal. 3.5.
He has sworn that vengeance is his, Heb. 10.30
and He will repay it.

The judgments of almighty God against an evil Tongue, are of two sorts
(according to that which before was noted out of the Psalmist) Sharp Arrows,
and coals of Juniper: The first sort Temporal punishments; the second sort
eternal: The first for this life; the second for the life to come.

Even in this world the Lord will not suffer a naughty tongue to go unpunished:
For, Gods judgments in this life against an evil tongue. Psalm. 11.2.
as wicked tongued people do bend their Bow, and make ready their Arrow upon
the string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart; Psalm. 7.12,
13.
So God above does bend his Bow and make it ready: He prepares for them the
instruments of death: He ordains his Arrows against such kind of
persecutors. Let us take a view of some of those Arrows, which God even in
this world, does shoot against wicked and malicious Tongues.

Gods Arrows against evil Tongues.
is their own Arrow, Disgrace.
the Arrow of Disgrace: Their own tongue (says the Psalmist) shall fall upon
themselves. Psalm. 64.8.
Ps. 7.15, 16
And again, He has made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch
which he made: his mischief shall return upon his own head, and his viclent
dealing shall come upon his own pate. And again, These wicked people are
ensnared in the work of their own hands. Psalm. 9.16.


Poverty.
is Poverty; Pro. 14.23.
In all labor (says Solomon) there is profit, but the talk of the lips
tends to poverty. And who sees not that this curse sticks close to those
that have evil Tongues; Psalm. 59.15
That they wander up and down begging their bread; Ps. 109.10.
their children also prove vagabonds and beggars, and seek their bread out of
desolate places?

the Lord shoots against an evil Tongue is Misery: for the Psalmist plainly
tells those who abuse their Tongue, Misery.
that GOD does hear them and will afflict them. Psalm. 55.19
Psalm. 55.19. And Solomon shows them, what must be their sole expectation.
He that has a perverse tongue, falls into mischief. Pro. 17.20 and 14.
Prou. 17.20. he may never look for quietness and peace, for his Tongue of
strife will be like a continual waterbreach. Pro. 4.17.
Prou. 17.14. He can never take comfort in his food, for he eats the bread
of wickedness, and drinks the wine of violence. Prou. 4.17. He can never
hope to be established: Pro. 26.28
for a false tongue works ruin. He can never be in safety, for he carries
about with him always a guilty conscience. The flying Arrow of Gods judgment
is ever ready to fall upon his pate: Job. 15.21. Psalm. 11.6. Psalm. 52.5.
the Lord will reign snares, fire and brimstone, and horrible tempest, this
shall be the portion of their cup. God will destroy them for ever, he will
take them and pluck them out of their tabernacle, and root them out of the
Land of the living.

Infinite are the examples which we may read in histories both divine and
humane, Examples of Gods judgment upon evil Tongues.
of Gods dreadful judgments upon evil Tongues: for the lying Tongue, we
have in the Scriptures the example of Gehezi, 2. King. 5.27.
stricken with leprosy, both himself and all his posterity. Act. 5.5, 10
Ananias and Saphira his wife, for the same fault strucke^ with sudden death;
in humane Histories we read how worms did eat out the lying tongue of
Nestorius; Nicephorus.
and Popiel, Monstrelus.
King of Polonia, an accustomable liar, eaten out with Rats. For the swearing
and blasphemous Tongue, we have in sacred Scriptures a blasphemer stoned to
death with stones, Leuit. 24.23.
2. King. 19
Zenacheribs Army destroyed in one night by the pestilence, and himself
slain by his own sons in the Temple of his Idols for the same offense. In
Ecclesiastical Histories we read of an Arrow (sent as it is supposed,
Socrates Eccl. hist.
from Heaven) wounding to death blasphemous Julian: of Michael a Jewish Rabbin,
breaking his neck down a pair of stairs, even then whiles he was swearing
and blaspheming the name of Jesus. Fincilius de mirac. lib. 2.
And of a swearing Courtier at Mansfield, Spangeb. in elegantiis ve teris Adami.
in the midst of his blasphemous oaths taken up and carried away by the Devil.
To omit that which our own Chronicles do record of Alphred, Stow in vit.
Adelstan. Jdem in vita Alfredi. Jdem in vita Elizah. Act. and Monum. page 2101.
and 2105.
of Earl Godwin, of Anne Aueries, of the Gentleman of Cornwall, who being
used to swearing and blasphemous speeches, as he was riding over a bridge, his
horse sprang over with him on his back into the river where he was drowned,
having no other words in his mouth for his last farewell, but these, Horse and
man and all to the Devil. For the slanderous and backbiting Tongue we have
likewise many examples of Gods great and fearful judgments: In the sacred
Scriptures we read of wicked Iezabel, 2. King. 9.36.
for her false accusing of Naboth, devoured by dogs: Hest. 7.10.
of Haman hanged upon the Gallows, for his false accnsing of the Jews: Dan. 6.
of Daniels accusers devoured by Lions, because of their false suggestions. In
the Ecclesiastical Histories we read of fearful judgments of God upon three
slanderous traducers of Athanasius, Niceph. lib. 9
The one of whom was presently stricke^ dead, the others eyes fell out of his
head, the third perished with a fearful burning within his entrales. In our
own Chronicles we read of Thomas Arundel, Act. and Monum. page 700.
who having abused his Tongue to an unjust sentence against the Lord Cobham, was
stricken with so sore a pain and swelling in his Tongue, that he could neither
swallow nor speak. So of Justice Morgan, for his rash proceedings in speech
against the Lady Jane, Ibid. page 1912.
we read that he was stricken with madness, and a little before his death had
none other word but her name in his mouth. The like fearful judgment we read
to have befallen one William Fenning in Q. Mary's days, Jbid. 1907.
who, for greediness to gain the goods of one John Cooper, had slanderously
accused him of traitrous words by him spoken against his Prince: by which the
poor innocent man was condemned to death as in cases of treason: but the
judgment of God shortly seized upon his false accuser, striking him, even
whiles he was well and lusty, with a sudden disease in his belly, so that his
bowels gushed out.

Infinite are the like examples of Gods dreadful judgments upon evil
tongues, even in this life. But if any wretched tongue shall set light by these,
because they do not befall al them who offend in this kind, yet let them fear
and tremble at those fearful final torments which GOD has prepared for
these offensive Tongues after this life, from which it is impossible for any of
them to escape without repentance.

For as God has Arrows here to wound an evil Tongue: Gods judgments after
this life upon an evil tongue.
So has he Coals hereafter to burn an evil tongue. The Arrows indeed are
sharp; for they are the Arrows of the Mighty: But the Coals are more
terrible; for they be Juniper coals of long continuance, of perpetuity. These
coals are the fire of Hell, the assured portion of a wicked Tongue: for so S.
Iam. 3.6.
James says, that it is set on fire of hell, and therefore it shall to the
fire in Hell; It is the verdict of our Savior, that the railing tongue is in
danger of Hell fire, Mat. 5.22. Math. 5.22 Psalm. 9.17.
So says the Psalmist, They shall be turned into hell. So the Apostle Paul,
2. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9
These. 1.9. They shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord. And of them the Apostle Jude testifies, Jude 13. and 15.
That to these raging waves, foming out their own shame, is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever. And again, The Lord will come with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon them, and to punish them; not
only for their ungodly words, but also for their hard and hateful speeches.
And it is well worth the noting, that the Rich man in Hell Torments complained
most of the torments of his Tongue: Father Abraham, Luke 16.24.
have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger
in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in the flame; as if hell
flame were most fierce against an evil Tongue, and that most sure to endure
the same.

Now, The bitter pains of Hell.
as there is no coal so hot and raging as the Juniper coal, for so S. Jerome
testifies; Hieron. ad Fabiol. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8.
and Pliny alleges a natural reason of it, viz. the gummie matter of that
wood more then in any other tree: so (to prosecute the same Metaphor) Par nulla
figura Gehennae; Mat. 13.42 Reu. 21.8. Heb. 10.27 Math. 3.12
There is no pains like to the pains of hell. This fire is a furnace of fire,
a lake of brimstone, a devouring fire, an unquenchable fire. The furnace
whereinto the three children were cast, Dan. 3.19.
being made seven times hotter then it was wont to be, was exceeding violent.
But how much more infinitely shall this furnace of hell fry, whose fire is
infinitely hotter then that was? O! Who is able to dwell with this devouring
fire? Who can endure the fiery rage of these Coals? They are coals of Juniper.

Yet dwell in it they must who are doomed to it, The perpetuity of those pains.
and so must an evil tongue. As there is no escaping of it, so no coming out
of it. Juniper coals (as Pliny writes) do keep in fire for a long
continuance: yea, Plin. vt supra.
some maintain, Libri Sufflatorii vt citatur a M^iero, in Psalm. 120.
that the coals made of Juniper wood, being covered with ashes, keep in fire
for a whole year together. But what is this to the perpetuity of the pains of
hell? There the Worm dies not, Mark. 9.44
and the fire never goes out; the fire shall never be quenched: Luke 3.17.
Reu. 20.10
they shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. This is the portion,
and the endless affliction of an evil Tongue.

CHAP. IX.
Sentence of condemnation denounced against the naughty tongue.

Having thus heard the unruly tongue Indicted, A transition to the doom of a
false tongue.
Arraigned, Convicted and Condemned, what now remains, but that we apply it
to the terror of those who offend herein; and for our direction, both in the
use, and against the abuse of the Tongue? Sentence denounced against it.


And here first, the consideration of the premises may strike a terror into
the hearts of those who are guilty of the crimes of an evil Tongue, Liars,
Swearers, Railers, Backbiters, Slanderers, filthy Speakers, and all the rest of
that rabble of wicked-tongued creatures: Alas, in what a fearful estate are
they? How odious in the sight of God? How injurious unto men? What a scorn to
the Angels? How obsequious to the devils? And how liable are they unto the
dreadful curses of almighty God, both in the life present, and that which is to
come?

Thou lying tongue, The lying Tongue.
which, like a false clock, do run too fast, and either for pleasure, or
for profit, do coin untruth, consider what wrong thou do, and into what
misery thou do thrust thy self. Thou peruertest the use of speech; thou
abusest the sense of hearing; thou dissoluest, as much as in thee lies, humane
Societies; thou bear the image of the devil; thou art worse then a Thief;
for thus the Wise man speaks, Eccles. 1.20, 23, 24, 25.
A lie is a wicked shame in a man, yet it is often in the mouth of the unwise: A
thief is better then a man accustomed to lying, but they both shall have
destruction to their heritage: the condition of liers are dishonest, Pro. 6.17.
and their shame is ever with them. A lying Tongue is one of those sixthings
which God does hate, Pro. 12.22
and lying lips are abomination to the Lord. Pro. 19.5.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies, shall
not escape: the tongue that loves, or makes lies, Reu. 22.15 Reu. 21.8.
shall be excluded out of the heavenly Jerusalem, and shall have his part in
the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

And as for thee, thou Swearing tongue, which art swollen with oaths, as a
Toade with venime, Mal. 3.5.
The Lord will come as a swift witness against thee; And there is a Flying
book of curse and vengeance, Zach. 5.2.4
which does houer over thee: Thine oaths are registered in the book of
accounts, and when the great day of reckoning comes, they shall be set in
order before thee, and laid unto thy charge: Thou art reserved unto the day of
destruction, Job 21.30. Luke 16.24.
and the time will come when thou shall be miserably tormented in that flame.

Neither may thou hope to escape, The mocking Tongue.
thou mocking tongue who art tipped with flouts, scoffs, and skornes against thy
neighbor: Psalm. 2.4, 5.
he that sits in the heavens, shall laugh at thee: the Lord shall have thee
in derision, he shall speak unto thee in his wrath, and vex thee in his sore
displeasure. Why then do thou judge thy brother? Romans 14.10.
Why do thou set at naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the
tribunal seat of Christ. Then shall thou be depised, who did despise others.
Then shall thou be a scorn to Devils, which here did scorn thy betters. And
we know who has said it, and he will be sure to perform it, that both the
mocking tongue, and the railing tongue, Mat. 5.22.
and the wrathful tongue is in danger of hell fire. The slanderous Tongue.


Psalm. 64.3.
which tongue is bent like a Bow, and shoots out as Arrows bitter words.
Thou wretched tongue art a very murderer, and not a single manslaier, but thou
killest three men, as it were with one stroke: Pro. 25.18
In which respect Solomon the wise calls thee, Pro. 25.18
an Arrow, a maule, and a Sword. An Arrow, in respect of him that is absent,
whom thou woundest afar off in his good name, in his goods, in his friends: and
sometimes in his life. A Maule or Hammer to knock him, who receives thy
slander, in the head, eius enimaurem dum inficis, animam interficis, whiles
thou do infect his ear, thou do destroy his soul, casting thereinto
seeds of suspicion, hatred and contempt. Lastly, to thy self thou art a
Sword, in destroying thine own soul, by committing that sin which is most
odious unto God; for he which slaundreth his neighbor behind his back, Leu.
19.14
commits the same offense, with him that raileth on the deaf, Deuteronomy. 27.24.
and is like him that smites his neighbor secretly, both which are accursed;
and therefore no marvel though this be said to be that seventh sin which God
does abhor: Pro. 6.19.
for there is no sin which makes a man so like the Devil as this does, for
from slaundering and backbiting he has his name DIABOLOS, which is a common
name to him with slanderers: And as the Lord does greatly detest this sin, so
he has threatened grievously to punish it, Psalm. 50.20 Psalm. 52.5. Ezekiel. 22.9.
not only the tongue offending, but also the ear abetting, and the place
harboring, and that not in this life only, but also in the life to come: 1.
Cor. 6.10.
for if Railers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, much less shall
slanderers.

The filthy Tongue.
filthy Ribald tongue, which like a sink do run over with obsceane and
unseemly speech. 1. Cor. 15.33.
Evil words corrupt good manners; Mat. 12.36
And of every idle word which men do speak, they must give an account at the
Day of Judgment. If of every idle word, then what shall become of the tongue
that speaks wanton words, scurrilous words, and filthy speech? Better it is
to have no mouth, then to have it thus polluted; better to be without a tongue,
A caveat for the Tongue. Ephesians. 4.29.31.
then to have it thus defiled.

Wherefore the counsel of the Apostle is very profitable: Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good and edifying,
And again, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking be put away; Which lesson that we may the better learn, let us take
a brief notice, first how we may rule our own Tongue; secondly, how we may
bear the wrong of another unruly tongue.

CHAP. X.
The binding of the tongue to the good behavior, with certain rules and
directions for the same.

MAny and excellent are the Treatises which have been written, The right
government and well ordering of our own Tongues.
both by Philosophers and Divines concerning the well ordering and government
of the tongue, out of whose sauory writings I will only gather this little
handful of Directions.

That we keep our tongue in order, two things are principally requisite:
First, a good Heart: Secondly, a good Ear. A good Heart is necessary to a good
tongue, because the Heart is the fountain of speech; Pro. 4.23. Luke 6.45 Mat.
15.19
For, out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: And if the
Fountain be defiled, the streams that issue therehence cannot be clean:
for, Job 14.4.
who can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean?

A good Art likewise is necessary to the keeping of a good tongue, A good Art.
for it is a matter of no mean skill to learn the language of Canaan: Esaias
19.18
He (says Saint James) is a perfect man that can rule his tongue. Iam. 3.2.
And the Wiseman says: that A word spoken in his place, Pro. 25.11.
is like apples of gold, with pictures of silver. So that, Hic labor, hoc opus
est, This is a labourious labor, an Art of Arts, to rule the tongue.

To the better learning of which Art, Rules for it.
two rules are to be observed in all our speech. First, Meditation before we
speak: secondly, Moderation in speaking.

Meditation before speech is very necessary unto our speech; Meditation before
speech.
for the tongue is the messenger of the heart: therefore so often as we speak
without meditation, the messenger runs without his errand. This Meditation
in this kind is twofold: First, concerning the lawfulness; secondly,
concerning the expediencie of our speech. First, For the lawfulnes.
we must premeditate whether that which we would speak, be lawful to be
spoken: Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths: Psalm. 34.13
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Secondly,
For the fitness.
we must premeditate, whether that which we are about to speak, be fit to be
spoken in regard of time, place, Pro. 10.32
and person: For, the lip of the righteous will know what is acceptable. Pro.
12.23.
A wise man concealeth knowledge, and he that has knowledge, spares his
words; yea, Pro. 17.27.
even a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise.

The next thing required in the Art of Speaking, is Moderation; Moderation in
speech.
for this cause God has given man but one Tongue, with two Ears, to teach him
he should be more ready to hear then to speak; Lam. 1.19.
he has also placed it within, and guarded it with a double hedge, one of
flesh, another of bone, and moreover, has bound it with a bridle to the breast;
By all these, recommending unto us Moderation of speech: which Moderation does
require these three properties in our speech: 1. Truth: 2. Charity: 3. Modesty.

For the first; Truth of Speech.
that we speak nothing but the truth; A good tongue will speak the truth from
the heart, Psalm. 15.3. Pro. 3.5.
and a righteous man hates lying words: And, Pro. 12.19
the lip of truth shall be established for ever. Charity in Speaking. 1. Cor.
16.14. 1. Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.
Charity must guide our speech; Let all your things be done in love: And this
love, or charity, suffers long, is kind, enuieth not, vaunteth not her
self, bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things. Lastly, Modesty in speech.
A wholesome tongue is a tree of life, but perverseness therein is a breach in
Spirit, Pro. Pro. 15.4.
15.4. Therefore the Apostle requires, that our speech be gracious, Col. 4.16.
Tit. 3.2.
vncorrupt, and full of meekness.

These few caueats being well observed, The been fit of keeping a good tongue.
the Tongue more easily will be ordered, and he that can do this, shall reap
an incomparable benefit by it: Pro. 18.21.
For, Life and death are in the power of the tongue: And, Pro. 21.23. Psalm.
34.12 13. 1. Pet. 3.10
Whosoever keeps his mouth, keeps his soul from evil. And therefore we
are so often in the book of God, called to the practice of it: What man is he
that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good, keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

But what man is able of himself to observe this? None can do it without Gods
special help. Job 39.37.
A man may lay his hand upon his mouth, like Job, and steadfastly purpose, with
David, Psalm. 39.1.
that his tongue shall not offend, yet all in vain, without the special help
of God: for, Pro. 16.1.
the government of the tongue is of the Lord.

Therefore the Apostle Paul, Therefore we must pray to God for the
well-ordering of our tongues. Ephesians. 6.19.
although he had an excellent gift for the well-ordering of his tongue, yet
desires the Ephesians to pray for him, that utterance might be given unto him.
And so must we, if ever we hope to have comfort in the use of our Tongues,
pray unto God that he would guide our Tongues, that he would set a watch
before our mouth, Ps. 141.3.
and keep the door of our lips: Psalm. 51.15
And, that He would open our lips to show forth his praise; Psalm. 19.14
So shall the words of our mouth be always acceptable in the sight of the
Lord, who is our strength and our Redeemer.

CHAP. XI.
How we are to put off an evil Tongue, when it goes about in our hearing, to
traduce and scandalize others.

IF it be a matter of so great difficulty to temper our own Tongue, A caveat
for the taming other men's Tongues.
much more hard and difficult will it be to tame another man's Tongue,
especially where it claims a transcendent liberty unto it self. Psalm. 12.4.
With our tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us?
And yet this is a point of wisdom needful to be observed of us, how to
demean our selves unto an evil Tongue, and that in a twofold case. First,
when it concerns others. Secondly, when it comes more nearly home unto our
selves.

And first, No credit to be giden to an evil tongue where it traduceth others.
when in our hearing it goes about to traduce or slander others, we must be
careful not to give any credit, countenance, favor or respect unto it in such
a case: for there is an express prohibition in the Law of God against it,
Exodus 23.1. Exodus 23.1
Thou shall not receive a false report. And it is the advice of the Wiseman,
Eccles. 7.21. Eccl. 7.21.
Give not thine heart to hear all the words that are spoken, lest thou hear
thy servant curse thee. And in another place it is reckned as the property of a
wicked man, to listen to an evil tongue. Pro. 17.4.
A wicked man gives heed to false lips, and a liar gives ear to a naughty
tongue. And on the contrary the Psalmist does record it as a note of a good
man, and of a citizen of heaven, that he will not receive (or endure to hear)
a false report against his neighbor. Psalm. 15.3.


Besides which express testimonies of holy writ, Why we should not give any
countenance to an evil Tongue. 1. Cor. 13.4, 5, 6.
evidence of reason will euince as much. 1. The rule of charity will require
it: for charity suffers long and is kind, charity enuieth not, charity
thinks not evil; it rejoices not in iniquity, it bears all things,
belieueth all things, hops all things, endures all things. 2. The rule of
equity may enioine it, Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, so do ye unto them. Now
there is no man that willingly would have another to receive a false report in
prejudice of himself; and therefore Quod tibi fieri non vis, alterine feceris.
Dictu^ Alexandri Seueri.
Do not unto another, what thou would not have done unto thy self. 3. The
inconvenience which comes many times from the receiving of these sinister
reports, may deter us from hearing of them; for by this means many innocents
have bin brought into trouble and great disgrace. Potiphar, being so credulous
of his wives report concerning Joseph, cast him into prison, David, Genesis 39. 2.
Sam. 16.3.
giving too hasty an ear to Ziba his slander, wronged Mephibosheth in his
goods. Hest. 3.8.
Ahashuerosh, upon the hearing of Hamans false suggestions against the Jews,
caused a most cruel Edict to be proclaimed for their utter destruction.
Infinite are the examples of those, who by hearing of false tongues, have been
injurious unto others. 4. It is injurious to our own souls, to give any
credit or countenance to an evil tongue: for he whose ear is open to
loosetongu'd creatures, becomes accessory to their sin, Hieron. Si deesset
auditor, deest and detracta tor.
and guilty of the same offense with them; for it is a true position, as in
cases of felony, so of slander, If there were not a receiver, there would not
be a purloiner. Yea in this case of slander there is more danger then in cases
of felony: for a Thief by himself may steal, and without a receiver may rob
his neighbor of his goods, but a Talebearer cannot rob a man of his good name,
nor yet impair his credit, unless there be another to hear and to admit his
slanders: wherefore Bernard doubts not to affirm, that Talebearers and
Talehearers are guilty alike. Bernard. de inter. Dom. Jdem de confid. lib. 2.
in fine.
And the same Author is very vehement in this point, Whether (says he) a
Talebearer or a Tale-receiuer be more dangerous and damnable, it is hard to
judge: for the Talebearer has the Devil in his tongue, and the Talehearer
has the Diuelin his ear.

Now that we may the better keep off the slanderer, Remedies against the
bringing of evil reports unto us.
and Talebearer, and so keep our selves from being accessory to their sins
by receiving their evil reports, there are three principal remedies to be
observed of us, and to be opposed against them, who shall go about to trouble
our ears with false reports.

The first is a deaf ear: A deaf ear.
we must not afford an evil Tongue so much as the hearing, Eccles. 7.21. Eccl.
7.21.
Give no ear, neither take heed to their words. A notable example to this
purpose we have in Gedaliab, the son of Ahikam, Ierem. 40. Ier. 40.14, 15, 16.
unto whom when Iohanan, the son of Kareah had told in secret a conspiracy
of Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, that he was hired by BAALIS, King of the
Ammonites, to slay him; and oftentimes related this report unto him, and that
with great vehemence, Wherefore should he slay thee, and so the Jews which are
gathered unto thee shall be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?
Although the report indeed was true (as afterward it proved) and Iohanan spoke
in good will, and with an honest mind, yet Gedaliah, good man, not suspecting
any such attempt, hoping the best, and Ioth to entertain any hard conceit
against Ishmael, would by no means give ear to this report, but sharply
reproved Iohanan, and forbad him to speak any more of it: Thou shall not do
this thing (says he) for thou speak falsely of Ishmael. A notable example
for our imitation; although not for improuident simplicity, yet against
ouer-rash credulity, that we stop our ears against such encharmers, and shut
them against the reports of an evil tongue.

The second remedy against the receipt of an evil Tongue, A frowuing look.
is a Frowning look: for so says Solomon, Pro. Pro. 25.23
25.23. As the North wind drives away rain, so does an angry countenance the
slandering tongue. When the sky is full of clouds, and in all likelihood ready
to power down their rain upon the earth, if the wind change into the North,
that Northern wind will scatter abroad the clouds, and stop them from
breaking forth into a Tempest (and therefore it is called (...), the clearer of
the sky:) Even so, when a talebearer, Hesiod.
or slanderer does come unto us with a cloud of many idle words, which he
desires to power in, as rain into our ears, a frowning countenance, and an
angry look will put them off. To all euill-tongued creatures therefore, we
should show our selves stern, as unwilling to defile our ears with their
pollution: For (as Hierome well observes) if with a silent countenance we
give ear unto the Talebearer, Hieron. ad Fab.
we shall encourage him to slander; but if we hear him not with some show of
delight, he will learn not willingly to speak that, which he shall perceive
is not willingly heard.

The third Remedy against the reports of an evil tongue, A sharp reproof.
is a sharp reproof. It is the Apostles rule, Ephe. 5.11
that we should have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them: As our Savior sharply reproved Peter for his
flattery, bidding him, Mat. 16.25
Auant, Satan, for he was an offense unto him: So should we give a sharp
check to a slanderous Tongue, bidding it, Auant, Satan, for it is an offense
unto us. If we cannot by countenance put the slanderer to silence, we must by
speech curb his wicked tongue; and not that alone: but if they will not
desist, we are to complain of them; and if all this will not serve, we must
endeavor, according to our place and power, that real punishments be inflicted
on them, Psalm. 101.5
according to that of David, Psalm. 101.5. Him that privily slandereth his
neighbor, I will destroy.

And thus much briefly for our direction against the hearing of an evil
Tongue, when before us it is ready to traduce others. Now we are in the next
place to consider how we are to demean our selves, in case of evil reports
against our selves.

CHAP. XII.
How to endure the stroke of an evil Tongue, when it concerns our selves.

EVery one is a better Physicion to another then to himself: The difficulty of
enduring an evil report against our selves.
we can better endure the sight of other men's wounds, then feel them in our
own bodies. It is hard to carry our selves upright in the hearing of evil
reports against others; more hard to endure them when they light upon our
selves; yet both these are to be learned: and this latter the sooner, that we
may the better perform the former.

A good man must endeavor to endure an evil Tongue, The duty for it.
and to carry himself like a Christian in the bearing of the same: For thus
the Apostle does admonish us, 2. Cor. 6.4.5, 6, 7, 8.
2. Cor. 6. In all things approve your selves as the servants of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, inlabours, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness,
by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by love unfeigned, by the word
of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right
hand, and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report. An excellent lesson for our imitation, yet hard to be learned, by
reason of our inbred corruption: And therefore that we may the sooner be
brought to the practice of it, these four virtues are necessarily required:
first, Patience: secondly, Experience: thirdly, Meditation: fourthly,
Providence.

Patience is a principal Antidote against an evil tongue; Patience.
for so our blessed Savior does advise us, Math. Mat. 21.19
21.19. In patience possess your souls: And the Apostle James, Be ye
patient unto the coming of the Lord, Iam. 5.7.
Iam. 5.7. There is no such salve against the wound of a skolding tongue, a
railing tongue, a slanderous tongue, or any other kind of wicked tongues, as
Patience: He that is patient (says Solomon) is a man of great understanding.
Pro. 14.29.
And again, He that is slow to anger, Pro. 16.32
is better then the mighty: and he that rules his own spirit, is better then
he that conquereth a City. This Patience is like unto the Tree which Moses
cast into Marahs Spring, Ex. 25.25.
and it seasoned the bitterness of the waters: It is like Ionathans
Armor-bearer, 1. Sam. 14.
which helped him to vanquish all his enemies.

That Patience is an excellent virtue, The way to get patience.
and an absolute remedy against the poison of an evil tongue, no man can deny.
But some, peradventure, will reply, How shall we get this patience? How is it
possible to retain it, when a man is thus virulently smitten with the tongue?
I answer with Solomon; A sound spirit will bear this infirmity. Pro. 19.14.
And to the bearing of such an infirmity there had need be a sound spirit: It
is not for every meacocke, for every common man, to be endued with it, but (as
the Spirit says) This is the patience of Saints; Reu. 14.12
as if none but Saints could have it, and all they who are Saints on earth, and
would be Saints in heaven, may not be without it. To the procuring, and
retaining of which Patience, there are required these four properties: First,
A deaf Ear; secondly, A silent Tongue; thirdly, A quiet Heart; fourthly, a
good Conscience.

He who would have patience, A deaf Ear.
and therewith repel the blow of an evil tongue, must carry about him a Deaf
Ear, and not hear, at leastwise seem not to hear the words of a malicious
Tongue. An excellent president whereof we have in David, who from his own
practice does commend unto us this course, Psalm. 38.13, 14. Psalm. 38.13 15.
They that seek after my life (says he) laid snares for me, they that sought
mine hurt, spoke mischievous words against me; but I as a deaf man heard not.
And again in the next verse: Thus I was as a man that hears not. The like
example we have in the Heathen Aristides, Aristides.
who being reviled by a railing tongue, went his way as if he had taken no
notice of it; and being further provoked by his insulting enemy raging and
railing against him in this manner; Why do thou haste away? tarry, Aristides,
and hear me: made this answer unto him; Therefore I go away, because
howsoever thou have the power of speaking, yet I have not the power of hearing.
The like is reported of the Emperor Augustus, who to one that with bitter
words and reproaches did provoke him, turned away his ears from him, with this
reply: If thou can not be master over thy Tongue, yet will I be master over
mine Ears.

The next property of Patience is a silent tongue, A silent Tongue.
when we are evil spoken of, to make no reply. And this practice does holy
David commend unto us in the above quoted place, I was (says he) as a dumb
man that opened not his mouth, Psalm. 38.14.
as one in whose mouth are no reproves: which his patient silence and silent
patience did notably manifest himself in his mild behavior toward railing
Shimei, 2. Sam. 16.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
when most traitorously and trecherously that vile monster did revile him;
albeit he was egged on by Abishay to be avenged on him, yet we hear no other
reply of his but this: What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? let
him alone; let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

The like example of silence against an evil Tongue we may behold in Saul,
who when he was anointed over be King of Israel, and all the people whose heart
God had touched, did so acknowledge him, yet some children of Belial scoffed at
him, 1. Sam. 10.27.
and despised him, and spoke reproachful speeches of him. Against all which the
text notes this to his singular commendation. But Saul held his peace, or was
as one that took no notice of it.

A third thing required unto Patience is a quiet heart, A quiet heart. 1. Pet.
3.4.
which thing (as the Apostle Peter speaks) in the sight of God is much
esteemed; a property unto patience very necessary: for from whence come wars,
Iam. 4.1.
and fightings, and discontents? Come they not hence, even from the lusts which
fight in our members? Now although we crave not that Stoicall apathie to be
quite void of passions, yet we must labor to curb our passions, that they
be not too much stirred up to disdain or revenge. Say not in thy heart, Pro.
20.22
I will recompense evil for cuill: but imitate the Example of examples, Jesus
Christ the Savior of our souls, who when He was reviled, 1. Pet. 2.21
reviled not again, when He suffered, threatened not, but committed himself to
him who judges righteously.

Lastly, A good Conscience.
unto Patience there is required a good Conscience; for where the Conscience
can plead Innocence, there Patience will work most effectually. This was Paul's
Armor of proof against all evil Tongues. Our rejoicing 1. Cor. 1.12.
(says he) is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in the world: which is contrary to the common practice of the
world, where we daily hear these and such like speeches, If it were true, if
I were guilty of that whereof I am accused, it would never grieve me; but
because it is altogether false, therefore it grieueth me at the very heart:
whereas the Apostles rule is quite contrary: It is (says he) thanks-worthy, if
a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; what
glory is it, 1. Pet. 2.19 20.
if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if when ye
do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable to God.

The next Remedy (besides Patience) against the hurt of an evil tongue,
Experience.
is Experience, the very daughter (as the Apostle speaks) of Patience. Romans
5.4.
Now Experience in this case may be applied to a threefold object. First, to
the quality of an evil Tongue. Secondly, to the commonnesse of the erime.
Thirdly, to the commodity which we may reap thereof.

The quality, Of the quality of ill-toungd people. 2. Sam. 23.26. 1. Sam.
10.27. Ioh. 8.44. Psalm. 69.12 Psalm. 59.7.
or condition of those who smite us with the tongue, may teach us good
experience, and by consequence work within us patience: for, what are they for
the most part, that whet their tongues with slanders? Are they not wicked
people? sons of Belial, unthrifts, children of the devil, Drunkards, Dogs? Now
then consider thus with thy self. Shall I be offended with every dog that
barketh at me? Shall I respect a Drunkards tale? Shall I fret at an vnthrists
tongue? Let them go as they are, I will not care for them, nor for their words:
For, can a man expect Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles?

Again, Of the co^monnesse of this trial. 1. Cor. 10.13.
Experience may guide us to take notice of the commonnesse of this trial.
There does no temptation herein overtake us, but such as is common unto man:
yea, which is most common unto the best men; for the best are most smitten with
the tongue. And therefore our Savior gives this comfort and counsel unto us;
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, Math. 5.11.12.
rejoice and be glad, for great, is your rewand in heaven; for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you.

And this is another fruit of experience, Of the commodity thereof.
which may sweeten the bitterness of an evil tongue unto us, when we do
consider the good which from these kind of trials will redound unto us; Heb.
12.1.
For, Howsoever no trial for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous,
yet afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that
are exercised thereby. And we know who has said, that, 2. Tim. 3.12
All they who would live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And
this wrong which is offered by the Tongue, is a kind of persecution, witness
the Apostle, Gal. 4.29. Now then, thus consider with thy self when thou art
wronged by an evil tongue; Gal. 4.29.
What am I the worse? what is mine adversary the better for these
distastefull speeches: If it be true which he reports, I may reap a
benefit by his tongue, to see my fault and to amend it; if it be false, what
need I grieve at it? Good men will not believe it, evil men's censures I regard
not; my Witness is in heaven, He will defend mine innocence, He will cause
all this to turn to the best unto me.

And certainly this serious Meditation with our selves, Meditatition.
is a singular good remedy against the malady of an evil Tongue; wherein
remember this short direction: M. Grenham in his Sermon of a good name.
Do thou endure the smart of an evil tongue? First, consider with thy self,
whether that whereof thou art accused be good or evil: if good, then there is
cause to rejoice in it, and not to grieve; if evil, then go a degree further,
to find out whether it be for some evil work which thou have committed, or
for some occasion which thou have given: If it be for some evil done, then
see whether it has wrought in thee the true sorrow for that sin; whether
thou take this as a correction from God; and whether it leads thee to
repentance: If it be upon occasion only given upon suspicion; Then consider
with thy self thy frailty in offering the occasion, and the mercy of God who
has kept thee from that evil, and does by this means warn thee to beware of
giving the like occasion.

I will add to this purpose, that golden meditation of Seneca; Senec. de Jra.
c. 23. and 24.
Let every man (says he) when he is provoked by others evil words, thus say
within himself; Am I mightier then Philip, that mighty Macedonian? yet he was
wronged with the tongue of a Peasant, and would not take notice of it. Can I do
more in mine own defense then Augustus, who had the taxing of the whole world?
yet he was content to wink at the tongue that taxed him. Why should I so take
to heart a few evil or idle words? Who am I that I may not be spoken against?
Many have pardoned their enemies; shall not I forgive a few foolish speeches?
If he be a youth who does thus traduce me? his age may excuse him; If a
woman? her sex; If a stranger? his liberty; If a familiar? his acquaintance
may seem to privilege him. Is this the first time that he has thus
offended? it may be he has often pleased. Has he used this liberty of a lewd
tongue a long time? we may the better endure that, to which we have becne long
inured. Is he a friend? he did what he would not. Is he an enemy? he has
done no more then we might well expect. If he be wise, let me yield to him;
if a fool, let me pardon him. The very best are not without their blemishes:
There is no man so circumspect, but may sometimes be tript; none so
faultlesse, but may fail.

The last remedy against an evil tongue is Providence, Providence.
and that two ways: first, for the getting: secondly, for the keeping of a
good name. The right provident course to get a good name is, first, To get a
good name.
to be careful to avoid all evil, both outward and inward, secret and open,
great and small: for, as dead flies cause to stink and putrify the ointment
of the Apothecary, so does sin, seem it never so small, crack the credit of
a man, Eccl. 10.5.
and expose him to the talk of tongues: therefore he who would not be evil
spoken of, must be jealous of his own doings, and not only refrain from
evil, but also abstain from the very appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
2. He who would avoid the hurt of an evil Tongue, must not only abstain
from evil, but also be plentiful in well-doing: for there is no way more
ready for a good name then good works, according to that of our Savior, Math.
5.16
Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your heavenly Father. And to this purpose the Apostle does
advise us, 1. Pet. 2.12
to have our conuersations honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against us as evil doers, they may by our good works, which they behold,
glorify God in our behalf. Now because it is a matter of as great importance
to keep a good name, as to get it, therefore he who would stop the tongue of
the slanderer, must be careful to use the best means to preserve his credit
and reputation. To keep a good name.
are in effect the same whereby a good name is gotten; and therefore I will
shut up this caveat in a word, with that heavenly counsel of holy David: What
man is he that desires life, Psalm. 34.12, 13.
and loves many days, that he may see good, keep thy tongue from evil, and
thy lips that they speak no guile; depart from evil, and do good; seek
peace, and ensue it.

CHAP. XIII.
The Conclusion of the whole Treatise.

THus have we heard this unruly member of our Body, A brief repetition of all
the Premises.
the Tongue, Arraigned, Indicted, Examined, and found guilty; Sentence of
judgment has passed against it, and order has been taken for the execution
of the same: what now remains, but that every one who does wish well unto
himself, should well look unto himself, that this naughty Tongue be not
found within himself. David's care, should be every good man's caveat; Psalm.
39.1.
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. A
lesson which Pambo was many years a learning, and yet, as himself professes,
he could never thoroughly learn. And indeed, who can so well observe it as he
should? Iam. 3.2.
S. James says, that if any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man, able to
bridle all the body. O let us labor and strive for this perfection: And
because it is a matter exceeding the power and skill of man, so well as he
ought to guide and rule his Tongue, therefore we are earnestly to beg it at
the hands of God; Psalm. 141.3. Psalm. 51.15.
that He would set a watch before our lips, and keep the door of our mouth;
That he would open our lips when they should be open, and shut them when they
should be shut; that he would give the right utterance unto us, that so both
the thoughts of our heart, Ephe. 6.19
and the words of our mouth might always be acceptable in his sight, Psalm.
19.14
who is our Strength and our Redeemer. The like course we likewise are to take
against the injury of other men's tongues; that seeing it is so difficult a
thing to tame an evil Tongue, so grievous to endure it, and so impossible to
avoid it, we should therefore have recourse unto almighty God, by hearty
prayer, that he would preserve us against it, and teach us true wisdom to
bear and endure it. Yea, O Lord, vouchsafe unto us both sanctified Tongues and
Ears, that our Tongues may evermore sound thy praises, our Ears ever be
attentive to thy will: make us zealous for thy glory, patient in our own
cause, and keep us from the strife of Tongues; So we thy people, Psalm. 79.13
and the sheep of thy pasture shall praise thee for ever, and from generation
to generation set forth thy Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

