A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A SECVLAR PRIEST, AND A LAY GENTLEMAN.

Concerning some points objected by the Jesuitical faction against such
Secular Priests, as have showed their dislike of M. Blackwell and the Jesuits
proceedings.

Printed at Rhemes. MDCI.

The Preface to the Reader.
AMongst many Letters and Treatises that have come unto my hands concerning the
matters in question betwixt the Secular Priests and the Jesuits: one of most
moment, pyth, and substance (in mine opinion) is this ensuing Dialogates
discourse. Which by so much the more meriteth my poor commendation in gracing
it with a general Preface: by how much as it is in a sort an Abstract,
Compendium, or a Brief of all, and the most important matters that are in
controversy betwixt us and the said Span. or Jesuitical faction. For
(omitting other perticulars) you have here exquisitely handled, The great
contention about superiority arrogated to the Jesuits over the Secular
Priests: you have here discussed, The question about Schism; and the
unlearned, but very malicious libels of Fa. Lyster the Jesuit, covertly
confuted. You have here decided, The case of obedience and disobedience; and,
what ignorant obloquie the common sort of Catholics have the Secular Priests
in, for they know not what themselves, but a forgery filed with Jesuitical
lying lips, which has given it a glass of a stainlesse die, in a senseless
conceit of infallable truth, to rest in the bare words of a wretch unworthy the
naming, for the honor of Priesthood mightily prejudiced by him. You have here
set down, The causes of the Jesuits double diligence in defending the
Archpriest; together with their many dishonest, uncharitable, irreligious,
vnpriestly practices for a supremacy. You have here insinuated unto you, The
Jesuitical unspeakable pride, ambition, envy, malice, extortion, cruelty,
and above all, their more intolerable backebiting tongues for inuectiues
against whom they hate, than ever had Ovid, Horace, or any other malignant
detractor, scold, or Cinicall slaunderer. In few, you have here explaned, The
grounds of all the Jesuitical calumnies, defamations, and injuries, wherewith
their apparators, sumners, and brokers have and do still vex, torment, and
crucify Christ his servants with their tongues, in as merciless a pursuit as
the common people of the Jews (at the Scribes and Pharisees instigation,
suggestion, and egging forward) pursued our Lord and master Jesus Christ
himself, on earth amongst them. These with many the like points of importance
are here very learnedly treated of: whereby to give all Catholics (as well
priests that are not of the deepest reach: as also and most especially the
laity, both men and women, marvellously seduced, blinded, and led into error
by the Jesuitical faction) to understand, what may do them good, if they list
to accept of it in these dangerous times of our common calamities: how and
wherein they are to censure or suspend their judgment, until they hear the
case decided: and who they are, scil. the secular priests or the Jesuits, that
have most offended the state, prejudiced both Pope and Prince, given greatest
scandale, and incurred the highest displeasure, with desert of sharpest
punishment to be inflicted upon them at the hands of God and man. And for to
give the devout Catholic reader a little taste for an antepast of this ensuing
discourse, I desire nothing more than that which the noble Senator desired of
king Auener his sovereign, to wit, that all passion, affection, and partial
doom set aside, choler, hastiness, and the fury of that part and third
portion of and in man, called pars irascibilis, shut up in prison, committed to
close keeping, in silence for the time; and reason set on the throne of
justice, in the court of a good conscience, to judge of all things as they are
in their own proper kind, uprightly weighed in the balance of equity and
justice, without collusion in the matter, sophistication in the worth or
falsehood in the weights, unequally proportioned: to consider with me these few
points following, even for Gods love, for the reverend regard all true
Catholics have or ought to have to every anointed priest, and for their own
virtuous intents sake, as desirous not wittingly and willingly to be led away
with error, nor to conceive amiss of well meant endeavors.

The first calumniation here handled, is Disobedience, laid to the secular
priests charge, by the seditious Jesuits: wherein these points are to be
considered: first, how that these two disjunctive consorts, Obedience, and
Disobedience, do the one of them follow the other by as necessary a sequel as
the shadow does the body, when either the objects they both respect, or else
the subiests wherein they are inherent, stand in opposition by contrary
qualities, properties, or motions: verbi gratia: A man serving two masters at
once, the one as Emperor of the sea in the field of war; the other as high
Constable, Seneshall, or Lord Chauncelor of the Realm, etc. in the land of
peace: If these two command simul and semel, an act to be acted by their said
servant, agreeing to their place, office, and calling; the obedience to the one
must needs infer a disobedience to the other, in that same action. But if
withal these two great commanders be adversaries: then is the case most
clear. And this was the cause why our Savior said that Nemo potest duobus
dominis servire, etc. And by consequent then it may be inferd by an argument
made by way of comparison, That it is impossible to be obedient to the Sea
Apostolic, but that by necessary sequel, the same obseruant must disobey
Master Blackwell the Archpriest: And the reason is: for that our disobedience
in the case proposed as in controversy betwixt us and him together, with his
great masters the Jesuits, consists in this, scil. That we would admit of no
innovation, or new institution, or authority, which is not conformable to holy
Apostolical, Ecclesiastical, Canonical custom decree and order in
elections, without his Holiness special Bull and Breue, for allowing,
ratifying, and confirming of the same. But Master Blackwels authority was in
that degree of opposition, in many points contrary to the churches Cannons and
Apostolical order: Ergo, the obedience to the Sea Apostolic in resistance of
him as an Archp. at the first: must needs be an act of disobedience to him, in
not acceptance of him as our lawful superior. Again, in another sense, our
obedience in the foresaid case in controversy, consists in this, scil. That we
would not admit of any such authority as might impeach us of any disloyalty
by act, word, or thought, in things wherein our dutiful obeisance was
requisite, or whereby we might be justly said to have stained our religion
with treason, or entangled our priestly function with princes affairs: but
this authority of Master Blackwels, has drawn him and the Jesuits together,
with all the confederates, conspirators, abettors, and aiders of him and them
in it, within the compass of treason, by reason of the platform which is for
invasion; and within the compass of a praemunire, by reason of his presumed
authority, to make laws and exercise jura regalia sieve in spirituliabus sieve
in temporalibus: Ergo, our obedience to her Majesty, in resistance of the
Jesuitical Archpriest, with detestation of all such unnatural plots, drifts,
and intendments, as were approved to lie close couched in his authority, being
so much the greater, by how much as the said traitorous pretenses were masked
with a seeming religious zeal; must needs be an act of disobedience to the
said Archpriest and his fellows (subjects of Father Parsons, as Garnet and
others) in the highest degree of contempt, that ambition frustrated of aspiring
hopes, can imagine to have possibly been offered unto them. Secondly, there
occurreth then also to be well weighed, the difference betwixt a subordinate
and a supreme authority to command, and therewith also the like difference
to obey. For although obedience be due in all inferiors to their superiors:
yet, with this prouiso by custom, practice, course, and order of all laws,
scil. That if the inferior subject be wronged by any subordinat official, or
magistrate, he may always appeal for justice from that subordinate court and
authority to a higher office and officer above the president incumbent: and so
in order from one to another, until he come to the highest supreme or
sovereign in chief. And so we say that in spiritualibus obedience is due in
every parishioner to his Pastor, but yet in order, under his Bishop: of every
Diocesean to the Bishop of that Diocaeces, etc. but yet in order, under the
Pope or universal Bishop. And again, in temporalibus obedience is due in
every inferior subject to the meanest officer placed in authority under his
sovereign, but yet in order, first, to all such as are subordinate one under
another to the ordinary Justices of the peace, but yet in order, to these
under the high Commissioners, and to these in order: to the Lords of the
Honorable privy Council: and to them all in order under the sovereign or
supreme Majesty: and then by consequent the Jesuits and their Archpresbiteran
or Spanish faction inueighing against the Secular Priests, for appealing to the Sea Apostolic for justice in spiritualibus and to the regal throne of sacred
Majesty in defense Apologiticall of their innocence in temporalibus, do
pervert all laws, customs, and orders, and arrogate to themselves a dignity,
preheminencie, and authority above both Pope and Prince: and are thereby
guilty of high treason, with many blasphemies breathed out by the ignorant
multitude upon this occasion against them both. Thirdly, there does here
occur to be considered, the nature, quality, and condition of those acts
which are to be enacted, executed, and performed under obedience to that
legifer, promulgator, or other commander over his subjects. For that, such may
the act be in it self, as no power on earth may lawfully command it: and if
there do, yet ought it not, neither may it (without incurring mortal sin)
be obeyed. For example, If either Pope or Prince do command their subjects or
subject to commit incest with their own mother, or to murder their parents,
or to commit any other act, which in it self is evil, and as we say,
intrinsice malum: no dispensation, pardon, nor placard, can ever make that act
to be justifiable and good, although it may be forgiven before God and man,
quia miserecordia ejus super omnia opera ejus. And seeing God can forgive more
than man can offends then a fortiori, man's offense to man, may and is more
easily forgiven. Conformablie then hereunto, for as much as the Pope himself
may be lawfully resisted and disobeyed in causes temporal: especially, when
the matter concerns the utter subversion of a whole Commonwealth: nay, of
many mighty kingdoms (as this platform laid by the Jesuits, does aim at no
less, in suggestion to his Holiness for the Spaniards invasion:) therefore
does it necessarily follow, that this act of obedience to our Sovereign, as
we are English subjects, in defense of her royal person and our native land,
does take away all the least sin or offense that can be imagined by our
disobedience to the same See Apostolic for so doing and actual resistance,
made against his Holiness, or any foreign power that should come with
hostile hand to pierce this Realm. Nay, seeing it was oracled from those
divine lips that were blasphemy to think they could either err, dissemble,
or possibly lie, scil. that Reddenda sunt Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, etc. And
seeing that Maxim holds irrefragably sure, that non est faciendum malum vt
inde eveniat bonum (positis ponendis inter bonum and malum:) I say then that it
were a sin, and a most great and grievous breach of the law of God, of
Nature, and of Nations; and he or she to be holden for traitors, that under
any pretense should occasionate the conquest of their native land, or (standing
as the State of England does this day) should not defend it, dentibus and
ensibus and vsque ad sanguinem, even while one drop of blood were left in his
body. This Hipocriticall show and vain vaunt of religion, together with the
Jesuits masked pretense of restoring the Catholic Roman faith, are as far
wide from the matter or any likelihood of the Churches flourish by that bloody
means, as the conversion of a soul is impossible, after it is once out of
this mortal life. Thus then you see what a vile, malicious, and most sottish,
cousening, and senseless slander it is, that the Jesuits and their seditious
brokers have raised of the Secular Priests and other Catholics, that will not
rub on their lofty bank of ambition and unnatural aspiring conspiracy:
every one, lad, and less, tag and rag; and as well the ignorant as those of
more wit, but no less malice, vpbraiding priests, with disobedience to their
Superior, when they neither know what obedience nor disobedience is, nor when,
to whom, or wherein it is, or is not due. Yea, so senseless they are herein,
That if either the Pope and the Church, or her Majesty and the State, would
take them at the worst: they might all be justly condemned for erroneous and
traiterous persons, by their own censure applied in the premises to these two
contraries.

The second Slander or calumniation here handled, is the infamies, obloquies,
and reproachful words in passages given out by the Jesuitical fastion against
the secular priests. And for that I verily think neither Zoilus, Aristarch,
Timon, or other Misanthropos, ever equaled, or else was to be compared with a
Jesuit in the damnable art of detraction or envy: therefore do these points
occur herein to be duly considered of every devout Catholic. First, what
great contempt these wicked men have brought Priesthood into, by this most
ungodly means: which I think there is no ancient Catholic in England this
day, of any compassionat religious mind, whose heart does not bleed to behold
and to think on the difference betwixt the reverend regard had in times past,
and at this present, as well by one priest of and toward another, as by the
Catholic Laity in general to all priests, without this newfangle
Pharisaicall most dangerous exception of persons, etc. For what Catholic,
before these Jesuits got footing in England, would not have trembled at the
heart to have called an anointed Catholic Priest (howsoever he had erst
lived) a Knave, a Villain, a Spy, a Southsayer, an Idolater, a Schismaticke,
a Libertine, an Apostata, an Atheist, with other the most odious terms that
the devil or malice is able to invent? And yet than this, nothing is more
common now every where amongst this leaud brood of the Jesuitical faction: our
common adversaries even of their own humanity, and for ciuilities sake
showing a more reverend esteem and respect to be had of priests (at least for
their learning, scholarisme, moral virtues, and other good abilities noted in
most of those, had by that faction in disgrace) than any of these new
pestiferous Puritanean Jesuitical Sectaries will either acknowledge, or give
any sign to be had of them. All the wonted benedictions of priests now are
rejected, their prayers, their sacrifices, their hallowes, and their holies,
contemned; and whatsoever else they do, pertaining to priestly function and
authority (though in never so bad persons, yet to be reverenced, remaining in
the Catholic Church) despised, as of no valliditie, worth or efficacy, more
than if the said Priests were but lay persons. Lo what a ready way these
mischievous men have made for Antichrist, under pretense of their Pharisaicall
zeal. Secondly, it is to be considered, That the end these ungodly polliticke
set the ignorant multitude on gog for against Priesthood and the Secular
Clergy, is only and wholly to withdraw all Catholic hearts from them, to
themselves and their society; with more like devilish than humane malice in
them. And to make it seem more plausible and easilier seized on in weak idle
brains: they possess their inconstant, flexible, wandering thoughts with
follies, scruples, and fears; as, That the Secular Priests are become profane
Publicanes and gross sinners, unlearned, ignorant, infirm and weak men, of
no reach, judgment, nor conscience in things; that they run on without
making any account or reckoning of sin: that they have no authority, but all
is lost they had, by their bad demcanure: that they remain Catholics only
in show for the time, but are indeed very Atheists (for so the speech will
never out of my mind which one used of Doctor Bagshaw in the Gate House, after
his departure to Wisbich, tending wholly to this infamous kind of malignant
backbiting) that they are dangerous men to be received into any man's house,
etc. All these, with many the like most impious speeches and slanders are here
touched, as raised by that faction against innocent men, blessed Martyrs, and
reverend Priests, even from the beginning (of envy in a Jesuits heart, to see
any do well that followed not them) to this present hour. And now they heave
at all in general, whereas before they maligned but some certain priests in
special: whereof my poor self have tasted so great and heavy an
ouer-weight, as even envy, malice, and themselves might seem with shame to
keep silent hereafter, and horror of their account appaule them for the wrong
they have done me. But yet I live, and so I must a while, maugre the devils
malice and all the Jesuits that hate me. Thirdly, it is furthermore to be well
weighed, That their envious proceedings herein, is most pernicious to all those
Catholics, even whom they bear most in hand of all good meant on their party
unto them. For who does not see it, that the only cause of this their infeoft
emulation at the Seculars good hap, rises upon this, That God sweetly so
disposing, as their innocence being known to her Majesty and Honorable
Council, together with the Jesuits traiterous hearts, they finding more favor
than the Jesuits do, and thereby less danger incurred by those that do
receive them: the Jesuits very pollitickely (but most impiously, maliciously,
and vnpriestly) imagining that in the end, this course taken, would occasionate
all the Catholics in England to side with the Secular Priests, and utterly
renounce the said Jesuits: for their most safety, they have no other shift nor
means in the world to avoid this eminent danger of perpetual exile out of
England (as their like practices caused their odious banishment out of France)
than to bear the people in hand, That her Majesty and the State means no
favor nor good to be extended to the innocent more than to the guilty; that
the Secular Priests are but used as spies; that the State intends to get out
of them what they can, and then to cut both them and those they converse with
all off together. And for those and like reasons are the Secular Priests (say
they) very dangerous persons, and ought not of any Catholic to be trusted.
Which most vile, uncharitable, and wicked speech of theirs, is so much the more
senseless, by how much as it implicats a contradiction; as in this ensuing
discourse will appear at large. Mean while it is to be considered, Whether
Daniell, or Esdras, or Zorobabell, or Tobias, or Esther in the time of the
Jews captivity, or the sweet Paranimph or Joseph of Aramathia, or the
mournful Magdalen, or the choice vessel of election in the sorrowful
prime-birth of the Church her infancy: or yet Saint Sebastian, Saint Martyn,
S. Bernard, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Clare, or any other, in time of the
like heavy calamities in the Catholic Church to these of ours, finding
extraordinary favor with God, and grace with men more than others, yea
perhaps far before them, or at least their equals in virtue and true
Catholic religious zeal, could find, that were in the same predicament with
them of disgrace; were they (I say) to be condemned by other Catholic
Christians in these days, for that they found more friendship at the civil
Magistrates hands, than others could? Was Daniel thought to be a rebel, or
Esdras a spy, or Zorobabell an Atheist? Or good Tobias an Idiot, or Queen
Esther a makebate: for that the first was made General of those Emperors
forces, under whom (as captive) he lived: the second in special esteem,
trust, and affiance with the same princes: the third sent home with great
treasure, to build up the ruinated Temple and City: the fourth often spared,
being taken in the exercise of his countries rites, ceremonies, religious acts,
and other works of charity, which most of his fellows if they had been taken
tripping in, had been sure to have died for: and the fifth and last of these,
obtaining mercy, grace, and pardon, not only for herself, but also for her
whole country, people, and Nation, proscribed all to death irreuocable, by
false suggestion of Haman the traitor? Again, Was blessed S. John ever the
worse, for being not only admitted into the judgment hall by permission of
the highest Priest: when all the rest of our Saviors Apostles were forced to
fly away (or else had been sure by all moral conjecture to have in the
Jewish fury, tasted of their Lord and master his cup of torments at least, if
not of death:) but also being then free, and never once examined what he
thought of his master Jesus, he was able of his bare word to bring in his
fellow S. Peter: who, if an unhappy girl had not been, might have stayed
there still, without any sin or offense committed by that action. And yet in
and by a Jesuitical censure, they had been certainly condemned as spies, if
they had escaped scotfree as S. John did, and S. Peter might, if no worse
matter had happened unto him than that his personal presence there. Was good
old Joseph thought to be a Statist, or should our blessed Lady, or Nicodemus
(as timorous as most of our English schismatickes are) have had a scruple or
doubt of being betrayed in going to take down and entombe the body of God,
her only Jesus, because the said Aramathian found more than ordinary favor
at the high priests hands, in obtaining of him, to bury it where he thought
good? Was the blessed Magdalen suspected to be a worse woman, for that, that
she was permitted of the soldiers to pass and repasse to and from the
sepulcher untouched of them? Was Saint Paul condemned of any one, for having
leave (being prisoner) to go where he lift, for any to come to him that would,
and for that Festus, that Felix, that king Agrippa, and others, used him
kindly, often sent for him, and would not permit his countrymen the Jews to
have their bloody will satiated when and as they desired. In few, were any of
these that found more favor than their fellows in any time of persecoution,
over heard of to be judged, censured, and condemned as spies, as dangerous
persons, as reprobates, or fallen from their faith, before this day? No
certainly. The Jesuits amongst many innovations in the Church of God, have
brought this in first of any other for one, scillicet, That all men fortunes,
graces, favors, and actions whatsoever, should be evil thought of, which
were either beneficial to any, without a commodity to their soeietie; or not
squared, agreeing to their treacherous proceedings, or but only done without
their consent, ratibition, allowance, and liking. Well, as their pride, their
envy, and their malice has been unspeakable herein: so their tears, their
blood, and all their lives (if they were given and bestowed in recompense and
way of satisfaction) will never be able to rince out that stain of their good
names, which they have charactered in their torn consciencelesse heart, and
credit, which they have lost thereby in the hearts of all other virtuous,
wise, and sound Catholics, natural Englishmen and women of all degrees.

As for their other general slanders: That the matter in contention was once
already decided at Rome, and therefore would they make the world believe, That
the Secular Priests were seditious, turbulent, and factious persons: and also,
That they (the said Priests) are the only Statesmen and meddlers, statizing
more daungerously than they (the said Jesuits) do Hispanize or Spanifie, etc.
the one and the other, are both most false, mere calumniations, forgeries, and
slanders, without any truth in the report or broachers of them abroad: and
very sensibly, prudently, and learnedly are they here confuted, and their
shameful dealing, trecheries, and impiety, covertly discovered thereby;
together with the foysting in of that poor simple man, Master Blackwell, into
an office and authority, he little knew (God wot) what it meant, or what
treasonable practices were intended to be wrought by him. Finally, there do
here occur to be well considered (as a point in my mind of as great a drift,
moment, and consequence, as any we yet touched) the panigeries of the Jesuits
praises, the causes moving them to send forth their spirits to course both
sea and land with bugle blasts of bloody Bellonaes menaces, to all that dare
presume to contradict a Jesuit: and the extreme folly, madness, lunacie, or
what to term it (I know not) in sundry of the Catholic Laity, yea, and of
the more unlearned and less experienced sort of Priests, that will believe
every word to be an Oracle that falls from a Jesuits lips, (in so much as
once one said: That if such a Priest, a follower and factor of the Jesuits
faction, should bid him hang himself, he would do it) that cannot be
otherwise persuaded, but that all the whole Church and Commonwealth of
Christendom depends upon these impotent aspirers: that stand stiffely in it as
a thing impossible, how ever the Secular Priests should prevail against such
rare peerless Sance-peres: that think it no way agreeing to Catholic
Christian doctrine, how ever such pure illuminats (who have, as they say of
themselves, a more near familiarity with God, than any other priests) should
ever fail in points of faith, good life, government, and order in all things:
that their lives, words, and acts have been touched to the quick, and ever
hitherto have been found faultlesse, spotless, and (as a man might say)
immaculate without crime, for to the same end does one Father Holtbies speech
in a railing letter tend, (as written to a Catholic lady, of no less
nobleness for her virtue, than for her blood) against all the Apellants in
general, but against a reverend Priest (master Mush by name, whose books
Holthie is unworthy to carry) in special: that they are the most learned,
the most prudent, the most virtuous, the most religious, the most what not
perfection on earth is in a Jesuit; with the contraries in all others to be
found. These strange paradoxes, as they presage a high mark, which the
Jesuits aim at, and therewithal a heavy ruin, so do they demonstrate a
senseless, witless, and idle brain in those that do believe them, that
cannot see into them, that will not be informed of their dangers by following
their unnatural faction, and therewithal prognosticate a sorer, absurder, and
a more mischeeuous heresy (if not Antichrist himself) to be brought in by
them, than ever yet was heard of in the Christian world, to this hour. For how
is it possible (unless the dolorous date of man's miseries be well nigh spent,
and we the miserable wretches, reserved to live in these heavy days of the
Churches last calamities) that ever any issuing out of Adams loins, should be
so ignorant of Natures frailetie in man, as these Jesuit fautors seem to be by
this senseless attributing unto them a state of innocence in a sort above
that wherein our Plasmist created our protaplast in terrestrial Paradise?

Man's wit, though it have suffered a great diminution by our protoparents fall,
as all the rest of the parts and powers in humane nature have, (yea, even
synderisis is not exempted, but seems in many to be extinguished, rather than
to have any being at all) yet these sparks of Natures light are left in our
souls, scil. First, to be of so high capacity, insatiable longing, and
touring reach in search after divine knowledge, as nothing can content the
understanding or intellectual part of man, save only summum bonum, ens
entium, eternal felicity, beatitude, God himself and no more: which even
Heathen Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and others, have
acknowledged, sought for, and died insatiable, because they wanted faith to
find it by. Secondly, the Devil by natural knowledge, perceiving well in the
law of kind, that covert barren could not make a band, thought it in vain for
him to tempt our protomother Eve, with eating of the forbidden tree, unless
Father Adam could have been drawn (as he was) to have tasted of the same: and
thereupon hoped the fiend (as it came to pass) to cut the entaile of his
heavenly inheritance, caused our parents to make a conueighance by fine and
recovery to the devil, a forfeiture of his tenure, a breach of the conditions
with his maker, a defeature of the heirs male of his body for ever, and put
the heirs general to a desperate forme-downe. Thirdly, notwithstanding all
this, That the original writ of privilege was revoked, and humane nature left
to it self naked and unarmed amongst so many enemies and allurements to
impiety, as that thereby it came to that impotent degree wherein now it is:
yet a light spark of Synderesis, breaking out in the pure naturals of proper
kind, moved even Philosophers, and such as were only conversant in natural
affairs, (proving by lamentable experience the still continuance and uncured
scars of that combat; which were, and so they are, Ignorance, Error,
Concupiscence, Sin, Sorrow, Hunger, Calamity, Sickness, Death it self,
and other afflictions found in themselves, and unacquainted with what they had
lost in their first auncestor) to deplore the state of man so much, that they
were not afraid to affirm, That Nature only in the preduction of man behaved
her self as a stepmother, and not as a natural parent.

If Heathen Naturians could diue so deep in finding even by Natures instinct,
the miseries, infortunities, fraileties, imperfections, and impurities of man:
if Plutarch in his Naturals, Plato in his Commonwealth, Cicero in his Orator,
Aristotle in his Happy Man, Pliny in his Proaeme, Lactantius in his Epistles,
Homer in his Odes, Empedocles, Democritus, Heraclitus, and other Sages in their
writings do complain of Natures unkindness in this point of imperfection
left in man: if Saint Augustine against Julian, Clemens Alexandrinus in his
Stromateus, and diverse other Doctors, Legifers, and Hystoriors do note this
acknowledgement of humane imbecilitie to be in these Heathen Wisards, ignorant
of the chief point which we Christians do know and firmly believe to have
occasionated these our downefals, imperfections, and ignorance in all things:
then what conceit should Christians have of man's state, constancy, and
sickerness, in any, or all his actions: compared by holy writ in one place to a
reed shaken with every wind: in another, to a dangerous conflict in set
battle: (for so said Job, militia est hominis vita super terram) and in
another, to a withered flower, to day fresh, to morrow in the furnace; and
always like a weathercocke, chaungeable, wandering, and uncertain.

True it is, and cannot be denied, That the Heathens complaint was unjust, and
proceeded of looseness, ignorance, and malice; especially the blockish and
beastly Epicures, to whom, Natures infirmity was such a stumbling block, as
they thereupon denied the providence divine of God toward man, and all
religion and reverence of man to him again. Yet the scope of my speech tending
only to this, To bewray the Catholics extreme folly, in conceiting the
Jesuits to be such men of such rareness, such excellency, such worthiness
and perfestion, as (excepting our Savior Christ, as man, our blessed Lady,
perhaps S. John Baptist, if the Jesuits will give me leave) their like neither
was, neither is, neither ever will be found in rerum natura, from Adams fall to
the worlds end. There cannot be a sounder argument taken, to confirm, That the
Jesuits are but miserable wretches, and as impotent, weak, frail, imperfect,
and sinful men, as we poor Publicanes (so esteemed of by them) are. Then this
deducted out of the principles of Natures own laws, customs, and traditions
in our bowels: for Cat will to her kind: Bunten to his bay: Fry to his hole,
and Man to his misery. And all this, by reason that the wound which was
inflicted in the state of innocence, has so festered in the whole posterity
of Adam, as no hope of cure, during the time of man's mortality. And the
transgression of the first law-breaker, was so venomous a seed to bring forth
wickedness in the race of man: that never any Legifer, spiritual or
temporal, either by example in themselves (as a president to subjects,) or by
any decree, ordinance, reward, or preferment for virtue, or penalty and
punishment for vice, or any other engine or instrument, cold root it out. Read
the book of Kings, of Job, of Saint John, of Saint Paul to the Romans, of
David in his fiftieth Psalm: of Philip Bergan in his History, of Josephus in
his Antiquities, of Polydor in his inventions, of Virgil in his Aeneides, of
Pliny in his works, of Stow, Grafton, Fabian, Fox, and other Hystorians in
our English Chronicles: and you shall find all this I speak to be true. No
Bohemus amongst the Bohemians, no Tuball amongst the Spaniards, no Belus
amongst the Assyrians, no Ceres or Rhadamanthus, no Draco, Solon, or other
Legifer amongst the Athenians, no Mercurius amongst the Egyptians, no Minos,
Lycurgus, Charandos, Phorondus, Romulus, Pythagoras, or Apollo, amongst the
Cretensians, Lacedaemonians, Tyrians, Grecians, Romans, Italians, Archadians;
no Druides amongst the Gauls, no Martia, Mulmutius, Gildas, Alfrede, Edward,
or any other virtuous king, polliticke prince, prudent regent, or exquisite
Legifer amongst the Britons or Englishmen: at a word, no Lawmakers of, to, or
for any nation, could ever utterly take it away. Neither any Abraham, Lot, Job,
Moses, Samuel, Solomon, or Adam himself (that had tasted the difference of
both estates, of innocence and sin, of original justice and original
offenses, of syndericall prudence and sottish ignorance; and had preached of
all these to the primitive world) could by any exemplar, altogether root it up.
Neither yet Christ Jesus, the wisdom of God his father, and coequall God with
him, the most perfect Lawmakers, President, and Examplar, without exception,
our Priest, Sacrifice, and Redeemer, that tendered, offered, and paid so
rigorous a ransom for man's redemption, delivery, and demerites, that the
least part, parcel, and portion of his tres-sacred, immaculate, and infinitely
valuable oblation; was both able, effectual, and worthy not only to have
cleansed all malice, rancour, and venom of sin, but the whole infection of
all other infirmities and defects in any creature: would not for all that
wholly take them from the world, but left them as a perpetual penitential
memorial of a former evil desert, to tontinue in this state of pilgrimage:
and as they were contracted by Adam in our first fall from innocence in
Paradise, so perfectly to be renewed by Christ in our last resurrection to
endless happiness. The law delivered to Angels, was transgressed in Heaven,
before ever Adam came within a ken of Paradise, (if we follow the common
opinion, That the Angels were created in that imperial palace) the law given
to man in the state of innocence, was broken in Paradise terrestrial; the
unwritten law under the Patriarchs, the written law of Moses, the Evangelical
and most perfect law of Christ, all have been broken, and too often violated
on earth. Of this, all ages, all times, all places, all persons of note and
common sense have complained: God and Angels from Heaven complained: Prophets
and prudent Princes, wise and polliticke Regents, careful and vetuous
Governors on earth complain: the Patriarckes and ancient first Fathers,
before the Law; Priests; Princes, and Prophets under the Law; Christ his
Apostles, Disciples, and all holy men in the Law of grace have complained: the
first man complained: the last man will complain: our Elders before (says
Seneca) hereof complained: we our selves complain: and those that shall live
after us, will complain of man's miseries, infirmities, fraileties,
imperfections, and weakness in all things. And shall any Catholic then be
so blinded with an erroneous conceit of an extraordinary perfection of
pieties, of religion, of devotion, of familiarity with God, of freedom from
sin, of peculiar indowments with grace, for soul points, government and
instruction in all things, to rest in a Jesuit, above all other men on live?
Phy, Catholics phy: let never so vncatholicke a thought take a momentarie
repose upon the buttresse of your breasts; or once sincke into the center of
your hearts, least you sink down into hell without redemption in so
blasphemous a thought as this were; and as too many of you have been infected,
though not as yet I hope so perverted as that you are remediless impossible to
be cured. If the Jesuits will be Puritanes, and esteem better of themselves
than all their neighbors do besides; yet puritanize not you with them: least
they take encouragement by your ignorant applauses, to prosecute their impious
courses, and so draw you on to attempt their own and your destruction; yea,
and I pray God, not perdition also of body and soul, by running into some
desperate heresy, with, or after them.

What should I say more? I am still too tedious: for such are the Meandrian
passages in discourse of the Jesuitical platformes, drifts, and devices, as
days, months, and years, would fail to set down all the errors, calumnies,
and pragmatickes used by them and their correspondent consorts, on their own
behalf, against the Secular priests, and all that aim not at the period of
their fatal course: From which I beseech God to bless, preserve, and keep
all innocent, sincere, harmless, well meaning hearts; and to recall, revoke,
and deliver all those out of their snares, that are already infected with
their flattery, falsehood, and folly. And so craving pardon, if I have
exceeded too far the limits of an Epistle, or any way otherwise offended any
person that is not Iesuited in affection or faction, I now in a general congie
to all gentle censurers of my well meant (how mean soever) endeavors, as
heartily, as hastily being called away, do take my leave.

Yours all (gentle Readers) in all good wishes of health, honor, and happiness
unto you. W. W.

Rectorem te posuerunt, noli extolli, esto in illis quasi vnus ex ipsis, Eccle.
32.

Non efficiamini inanis gloriae cupidi: inuicem prouocantes inuicem inuidentes.
Gal. 5, 6.


RIght Worshipful Sir, my heartiest salutations and Gods blessing to your
self and your Catholic family. After my departure from you, I could not but
upon the remembrance of our long and intricate communication, think it very
needful to set you down in writing the principal points which had passed
between us in the said conference. For I finding you to be of a virtuous and of
a just disposition, by reason whereof you were inclined to judge charitably of
all sorts; and had not suffered your self lightly and without proof of things
to be carried away with such reports as might be disgraceful and injurious to
good men, and your old friends: I thought it my part to let you have from mine
own pen the same in substance, which you received from my mouth, that hereby
in the relation of my answers, you might be kept from error, and my speeches
be free from mistaking. These times wherein we are fallen, do afford us
plenty of humourous men; and those no less void of sincerity, than of other
Christian virtues. And very hardly are they to be found, which in matters of
controversy tread uprightly, and be disposed to censure other men's words and
actions, as they be in truth, or as justly they deserve: but all rather value
men and matters according, as either blind affections lead them, or as by
passion or private lucre they be drawn to judge or report. Which ill
disposition, as it has infected the most, so does it not any where more
apparently show it self, than in this controversy fallen out between the
Jesuits with the Archpriest and their adherents of the one party, and us
secular priests on the other; wherein you see many run violently, and are
carried headlong as a forceable stream against us, ouerbearing us with infamies
and slanderous reports, upon uncharitable surmises, unlikely presumptions, and
untrue suggestions, without respect of just and due examination of our cause;
or, as may be feared in many, without regard of truth. Now men's judgments are
ruled wholly by fantasies and conceits of persons, by present tastes of gain,
or future hopes of preferment, or like temporal respects, to condemn us
before they know our cause: indifferency is abandoned, equity excluded,
passion, partiality, and a pleasing humor bears all the sway: false reports
are received as certain verities, and they are reputed for the best, which in
renting asunder our good names, and in the office of defaming, do show
themselves most eagre and vehement. It is a woeful thing indeed (as you often
said) to behold so great a breach of concord, and this scandalous division and
strife to be among Ecclesiastical persons: but it is most horrible to see,
what violent and unjust courses are taken by men professing singular piety,
virtue, and perfection above others, for the oppression of many innocent
priests, and utter subversion of their good names. No rumors that may disgrace
us, are left vncast abroad; no slanderous reports which may tend to our
discredit, are vnuttered; no false surmise that may defile or distaine our
good names, is kept from the peoples hearing. And finally, there is no man, no
woman (as well of schismatickes and common enemies, as of Catholics) which
our adversaries do not entertain, as fit instruments to be employed in this
uncharitable work of defaming us: yea, to be officious and hot-spirited in
this business, causes such admirable alteration, that admit heretofore one
had been reputed and shunned as a bad companion, or holden for a dangerous
spy and traitor by our adversaries and their favorites; admit he were such a
one, as had publickely renounced his Catholic religion, and in open court
renied the Pope, and authority of the sea Apostolic; admit he were such a
one, as by his whole life had given monstrance of Atheism, yet his exquisit
diligence, his intemperate stickling, and his furious zeal in blazing every
where our undeserved infamies, graceth him afresh, and makes him worthy the
name of a good fellow, and to be reckoned by our brethren persecutors, in the
rank of a reasonable honest man, though perhaps this good conceit and fame must
stand no longer, than this piece of their vilest service shall endure. Your
self good Sir, with all your Catholic neighbors can witness with us, how
hitherto we have concealed from you and kept secret all the matter of these
contentions, being most unwilling, and in troth very scrupulous, (though in our
own just defense) to impart unto you any little portion of the cause or
controversy, the notice whereof might certainly trouble your minds and breed
you scandale, but could not benefit you in the smallest degree. Neither the
matter only was thus carefully kept from you, but the parties also with whom
we had this lamentable conflict; least upon the long trial you have had of
our painful travels, and sincere conversation among you (nothing agreeable to
these slanders) you might take the smallest aversion, or any hard conceit
against the persons of our adversaries, that bear the name of religious men
and Catholic priests. But now that you are already made acquainted with this
contention, and with the parties also; and this not by us, but by the Jesuits,
the Archpriest, and the double industry of their Agents; and that again,
contrary to the very law of God and Nature, they heap upon us daily new
infamies before our cause be heard, or by any form of just trial and
proceeding, we be found guilty, and convicted in the least crime of hundreds,
wherewith they unconscionably charge us. It is needful that we repel so
notable injuries, that we stand in orderly defense of our good names and
innocence, and that we let you know the truth of our cause; to the end, that
this present disturbance of your peace, and the grievous scandale given
throughout the realm by these contentions, may redound to them or us, as
either they or we shall be found by just examination and indifferent judgment
to have been the authors and causers thereof. And truly Sir, we would have
been unwilling and very loath to have defended our own good names in any
public manner, because we could not possibly do it, without touching the
imperfections of our own dear brethren, which in these hard times of
persecution, and in this lamentable affliction of our Church for the Catholic
faith, we earnestly desire to spare and not to touch, though with any
reasonable loss to us; if our brethren would have taken up themselves in any
time, or have kept any measure in afflicting us. But you see our silence has
been so long, our patience so great, that thereby we have not only suffered
much detriment in our credits and estimation throughout the realm, but
moreover we have lost many friends; which through ignorance of our cause, the
violencie of religious men and seminary priests with their adherents, noted to
run against us, are fallen from us. This patience of ours also has made (which
is the worst) our adversaries more audacious and violent in their unjust
courses. In all which proceedings of theirs, we could never hope for stay or
stint, till they had utterly overwhelmed our good names, unless in time we
should make some lawful resistance and encounter: which though perhaps we have
undertaken it too late, yet we doubt not, but in time we shall recover some
part of our losses, and at the least in the judgments of honest, virtuous, and
indifferent persons, be freed from the infamies, after they shall have once
examined and advisedly waighed the cause on both sides, without partial and
blinding affections. In this only our adversaries have the advantage of us,
that they can easily cover the wrongs they do us with a plausible cloak, and
name of their religion and authority, and with inuectiues against us, as
against enemies to their order, and disobedient to our own superiors: which
two bad dispositions, if through their slanders they be once believed, or
conceived to reign in us, they must procure of necessity unto us the
auersions and hatred of all Catholic people and honest natures. We be
Catholic priests, and albeit our carriage in Gods work has been heretofore
never so good and irreprehensible, yet the very bare name or coat of religion,
and the very remembrance of authority, swaieth much in men's opinions, to the
discredit of any that contend with religious persons and superiors, although
their cause be never so just, and the actions of the religious or superiors
be most injurious. But yet who is he, that experienced but a little in the
affairs of both former and present ages, can be ignorant, that the religious
by too much seeking themselves, may swerve from the perfection of charity,
which they profess to run at: and that men placed in authority, may also
transgress the laws of equity in the execution of their office, and then
they are accustomed in the worst sort to oppress their subjects, when they
most pretend justice, and in strongest manner sound forth the cries of their
authority, for better coloring thereby their unjust violence. And surely the
abuse of authority is not to be feared, nor suspected more at any time, than
when in controversies, refusing or hindering all just, all indifferent, all
ordinary trial by laws or comprimise, they lean wholly to their authority,
and strive alone by it to ouerbeare and subdue their subjects. And in like
manner also, the religious are then to be doubted most of sincere dealing, when
only by a vainglorious conceit or vaunt of their religious estate and
perfection, they justify themselves before the world, and would bear out all
they do against their neighbors. Thus far in part we talked, besides the
answers I made to every particular report you told me of; which I will here
set down: and to avoid the tedious repetition of quoth you, quoth I, will
deliver the same under the names we have by our several callings, both of us
true Catholics, I a secular priest, and you a Wor. lay Gentleman. We began,
and did proceed as follows.

Gent. The Jesuits with the Archpriest and all their followers, report, that
you and your adherents were schismatickes, and rebellious to the sea
Apostolic, and that still you are disobedient persons to lawful authority
and your superiors placed over you.


Pr. They report thus indeed, but unless they can prove us guilty of these
crimes, their reports ought by all good men to be judged no other than mere
calumnies and untrue slanders, and the reporters to deserve the like names.


Gent. I think so to, but it is to be supposed, that men of their state and
profession would never touch any Catholic priest with these disgraceful
terms, unless they could manifestly prove him to be guilty of the crimes,
much less would they never bring these foulest infamies upon so many Priests,
before they certainly know you guilty thereof.


Pr. If we look what men of their place and vocation ought to do, or again
what good opinion is due unto them in regard of their state, I also am of your
mind, we should suppose the best of them. For neither religious men, nor a
priest chosen to be superior over his brethren, nor such as are directed and
guided by them, should work the infamy of Catholic priests upon any
uncertainetie or feigned crime. But if on the other side you enter into the
controversy between them and us, and examine truly, and sincerely weigh what
we have done, and what they report, you shall find our actions much contrary to
their slanders, and no cause to think all they say to be Gospel: but you
will judge it necessary rather to fear the worst, than to suppose the best of
them. Let us see then how these religious men, with the Archpriest and their
favorites prove us to be schismatickes, disobedient, and rebellious: object
for them I pray you, what you have heard them allege against us.


Genesis With a good will; and this the rather, because, as I should greatly
dislike you if you were guilty of these sins, so again, much should I joy in
you, if you be free. They say you were schismatics, because you refused for a
whole years space to accept of the authority instituted by the Pope, and to
submit your selves to master Blackwell ordained Archpriest over you. And as
in that refusal you were schismatics, disobedient, and rebellious at the
first, so are ye now guilty of great disobedience to your Archpriest for not
observing his degrees and precepts.


Pr. Here be two things, our forbearing to accept of the new authority, or to
submit our selves to the Archpriest; and our disobeying the Archp. decrees and
precepts. Touching the first, the Jesuits and Archp. have so vehemently
thirsted our disgrace and infamy, that for our delay, they censure us to be
schismatickes, and as such vile persons to be used, and shunned of all
Catholics. And albeit the decision of this question belonged nothing at all
to them, but was to be had from the sea Apostolic and supreme pastor of Gods
church, before whose sentence pronounced, no man was to be condemned of so
foul a fault, or punished for the same with public infamy, and the loss of
his good name; yet could not the good men so long contain themselves, nor
repress the violence of their spirit, as to spare our credites, and to
forbear the subversion of our honest fame, till they had informed his Hol. of
the case, and had received a firm sentence from him, what he judged of the
case, and how he would have them to proceed against us. This temperance, this
modesty, this charity they would not use, but taking hold of our delay and
themselves judging it as a fit occasion, and a cause sufficient enough whereby
they might work our disgrace and ignominy, they prevented the
see-Apostolicke, and gave sentence of us, that we were Schismatickes. And that
this rash and uncharitable judgment of theirs might run with more credit
every where, they set on work one of their principal men, Father Thomas
Lister, Doctor of Divinity, to write a Treatise against us, wherein he went
about to prove us to be schismatickes in the highest degree. Now this rude and
infamous libell, as void of learning as it swarued from truth and modesty,
being once divulged, it was approved by Fa. Garnet their Provincial and by
the Archp. and forthwith confirmed by the practice of them and their adherents;
we and our people were borne down with slanders, shunned as you know in all
conversation, and the infamy was current every where. Thus then they proved us
to be schismatickes by a ridiculous pamphlet, and by the practice of their own
erroneous opinion.


Gent. Had they no better proofs than these? nor surer grounds for the matter,
before they spread abroad so grievous an infamy against you, and put it in
practice in the sight of the world, as we see they did?


Pr. No other truly.


Genesis It seems to have been very great presumption for a company of private
religious men, and an Archpriest, whose authority also was as yet uncertain,
to take upon them the office of the supreme and Apostolic Bishop, and upon
their own heads to condemn you for schismatickes. And again, it seems no
less uncharitable audacitie, that not expecting his Ho. sentence, themselves
would put in execution their own opinion, to your extreme infamy, and the
scandale of our whole Nation.


Pr. Let it seem to have been, or be it what it shall, this they did, and thus
they dealt with us.


Gent. But I hear, notwithstanding all their heat then, and the heaps of
injuries they cast upon you by this slander of schism, that both the Jesuits
and Archp. in England, and also Fa. Parson in Rome, are now half ashamed of
the matter, and say it was but one private man's opinion, and that hereby they
never defamed you to be schismatickes.


Pr. I hear also, that now, when they perceive the matter is like to come to
trial before the highest Tribunal on earth, and to be made known unto the
Christian world how they have iniuried us, they would step back again, and
with any smooth and cunning shift make men believe, they had not so foulely
erred, and broken the bonds of all Christian charity. But the case is clear
enough, their actions were manifest to all our nation, and will convince them
of too intolerable impudency, if they deny that which all men know them to
have done. We have also their own hands to testify against them: but in
such men, if the testimony of their own consciences will not suffice to make
the^ confess a truth, though it be to their own temporal confusion,
especially when their fact is known to a whole nation, as this is, they may
keep themselves content with the bare name of Religion; and for humility, for
mortification, for charity, for sincerity, and true simplicity, let them not
boast themselves above the meanest Christians, nor glory in these virtues at
all. And if the Archp. say or write (as I hear he does) that he never called
us schismatickes; I cannot but lament his case, considering we have his own
letters and decrees to the contrary, whereby he does charge us with that crime,
and forbids us in any sort to defend our good names; not we, but they shall
reprove him. And for both the Jesuits and him, if they be now come to this,
That it was but a private man's opinion, never uttered to the discredit of any;
they give the world, which knows the contrary, over great and manifest
presumptions to fear their bad dealing in all the rest. And moreover, I
demand of them, Who it was that wrote their infamous libell of schism? Was
it not the Jesuit Fa. Lister? Who set him on work? was not this his superior
Jesuit Fa. Garnet, as Fa. Lister himself confessed? Who approoved it, and
sent it abroad to some of our priests? Who but Fa. Garnet and the Archpriest?
who said it should be defended, if we would bring it to trial? Who but Fa.
Garnet? Whence came the copies thereof to be scattered among the Assistants,
and in all corners of the realm, but from the Jesuits and Archpriests? Who
finally were the authors and ringleaders to the rest in the scandalous
practice against us, and our children? Who but Fa. Garnet and the Archpriest?
Moreover, if they say it was but one private man's opinion, this makes their
fault more inexcuseable: For we that held the contrary, were many, and not
altogether ignorant. The case then in practice should have been ruled for us,
and we ought not to have been defamed upon one private man's opinion.


Gent. I think it must needs be granted, that the superior Jesuit and the
Archp. were acquainted with the libell. For the Archp. approved it: and for the
Jesuits, considering that their cheifest vaunt and glory of their religion
does consist in a singular perfection of obedience, wherein they would he
thought to excel all other religious orders, it cannot be imagined, that any
of them, but especially not Fa. Lister, a Doctor of Divinity, famous among
them for learning, a man for tenderness of conscience, much inclined to
scrupulositie, and for humility and other religious virtues, accounted of
extraordinary perfection amongst his fellows it cannot be imagined (I say)
that this Jesuit of all other should so forget himself, and stain the
splendour of his obedience by such wilful rashness and indiscretion, that he
would ever enterprise a matter of so great moment and sequel as this, before
he had acquainted his superior Father Garnet therewith, and had consulted also
with him in every particular, or finally, would divulge the same without his
command and license.


Pr. If we suppose that this one good Father had in this gross manner
forgotten every point of his religious obedience; can yet any man think, but
that his superior Fa. Garnet (if Fa. Lister had not taken it in hand, and
finished it with his license and liking, or if it had not been sent abroad and
practiced according to Fa. Garnets own will and pleasure) would forthwith have
espied the error and disobedience of his subject, and have recalled the tract,
and hindered the practice thereof? But if Father Lister forgot to acquaint his
superior with it at the first, can we think he did so after, when he wrote the
second time a reply against master Champneies answer to his libell, and
divulged it also? Or can we persuade our selves, that in so great a matter and
cause of tumult, the superior Jesuit Father Garnet slept all the while, and let
his subjects say, write, and do what they lifted: If this be so, where then
was his vigilancie and solicitude? Where was their obedience, their relation,
their dependence, which a Gentleman their dear friend and themselves so much
brag upon? But the libell pleased them all, and much glorious vaunting they
made of it, to be learned and substantial; yea, happy was he that could show
himself most zealous in practicing it against us, and in persuading other
Catholics to do the same.


Gent. I know not what learning or substance that unfortunate Treatise
contained, but I heard a good priest, who is said also to be a singular divine,
to wit, master Wright, I heard him (I say) affirm, that it was an unlearned
pamphlet, written without any show at all of judgment, or discretion, or
schollership, and empty of learning and good substance, making much ado about
the nature of Schism and penalties incurred thereby, which were not in
controversy, and childishly failing in the proof of that point, which he had
undertaken to prove, and concerned the chief point in the question, namely,
that your delay in particular was schism. And the same man commended master
Champneies brief answer to it, to be more judicial, and scholler-like, than
master Licters was.


Pr. Well, they have gone far in this bad course, whether they will relent,
and humbly confess their error, or stand obstinatly to defend it, I cannot
guess; and if they were not the men they be, I would of twain expect the
former. But do they thus or so, I hope their uncharitable devise in this case
will turn, when truth shall appear to their own confusion, and our innocence
be made clear to all men of upright judgment.


Gent. I pray God that truth may prevail, innocent men may be defended, and
they that have thus injuried their brethren, may repent, and make satisfaction.
But yet I pray you deliver me in few words for my better satisfaction, some
reason, why through your delay you incurred not the crime of schism.


Pr. I will do it with a good will, and breefely. It is a doctrine generally
received by all Divines and Canonists without contradiction, that the crime of
Schism requires necessarily an intended separation and rebellion from the
head of the church, as he is head and superior thereof, or from the members, as
they be the members under that head. 2. 2. q. 39.
Schisma est (says S. Thomas) quo quis Summo Pontifici subesse renuit, cum
quadam rebellione, intellige in quantum est summus Pontifex, and membris eius
communicare recusat, intellige in quantum ei subiecta sunt. Schism is that
(says he) whereby one refuses to be subject to the supreme Bishop, with a
certain rebellion, (understand this) as he is the supreme Bishop, and
refuses to communicate with the members subject to him, (understand) for that
they are subject to him. And again, Schismatici sunt, quisubesse renuunt summo
Pontifici, and membris Ecclesiae ei subiectis communicare recusant. They are
schismatickes which refuse to be under the Pope, and to communicate with the
members of the church subject to him. With this limitation still, as
Archidiaconus says, Per recusationem eius iudicialis sententiae, non
recognoscendo ipsum vt Caput Ecclesiae, By refusing his judicial sentence, not
recognizing him for head of the church. And Siluester also upon S. Thomas, Ver.
Schisma.
Notanter dixit, in quantum est summus Pontisex, id est, non recognoscendo eum
vt Caput Ecclesiae. S. Thomas said purposely (in that he is Pope (that is) not
acknowledging him for head of the church, Secus autem, in quantum singularis
persona. For it is not so, if one do it in respect the Pope is a single
person; as if a man should be offended with him for some particular fact. Ver.
Schisma.
And Caietane the Divine, Peccatum Schismatis tendit contra vnitatem, sieve
Ecclesiae, sieve Capitis formaliter. The crime of Schism tends against the
unity either of the church or head formally (that is) as it is the church
under that head, or the head of that church. And therefore, if one doubt
reasonably whether this particular person be the Pope or no; and thereupon do
not acknowledge himfully for the Pope, he incurreth not thereby the crime of
Schism, no though he err in judgment, because there wants the formalitie
of Schism, which is this, to refuse him, as he is undoubtedly the Pope. C. 27.
And finally, the famous Lawyer Nauar, Schisma peccatum est, quo quis se
seperat ab vnitate Ecclesiae nolendo subesse ei, vel membris eius, quatenus
sunt eius. Schism is a sin, whereby one seperateth himself from the unity
of the Church, by refusing to be under it, or the members thereof, in regard
they are the members thereof. So that by the judgment of all the learned, this
is an undoubted verity, That a man cannot be a schismaticke, unless he have
a voluntary or intended rebellion against the Pope and the Church; with this
formalitie, as he is the Pope or head; and the church a body, or members under
him, (that is in one word) unless he refuse to acknowledge him for his head,
and to communicate with the members, because they be under him: perceive you
this?


Gent. Yea very well.


Priest. Hereupon it is manifest, that we could not possibly be Scismaticks by
our delay.


Gent. I see no such consequence.


Priest. Do you not? you know that our delay to accept of the authority, and
to submit our selves to the Archpr. was not because we denied the Pope to be
Pope, and our head; nor that we refused to obey him as our head; nor for that
we would not admit the authority, and Man said to be instituted by him,
formally, because they were said to be instituted by him. Upon these respects,
and formalities we delaied not, and yet without these we could not possibly be
Schismatics. But the whole controversy stood in this, That the authority was
inconvenient for our Church; and that it was doubtful, Whether in truth the
authority was instituted by the Pope, or not. This was uncertain (I say) the
Jesuits and Archpriest on the one side had no Bull, no Breue, no Apostolic
letters, no authentical Instrument (as is usual in all matters, both of great
and lesser moment, proceeding from that See, and which in graunts of
extraordinary Jurisdiction and Prelacie is absolutely necessary, before any
be bound in conscience to obey them) they had no such thing to show for
proof of that they claimed, and would violently enforce upon us, as his Ho.
fact: and we on the other side, partly for want of this Apostolic Writ and
Testimony; partly upon other great reasons, had good cause to doubt, that his
Hol. was not acquainted with it: yea the particulars of the authority implied
in them so many, and so great inconveniences, that we thought it needful to
delay the acceptance thereof, till his Ho. should have better information of
our Churches estate, and thereupon either recall the authority, if it were his
deed, or in time reform and change it into some other more commodious to our
afflicted Church. So that their propounding or promulgating this authority
being insufficient, and no way binding us in conscience, we bare off to receive
it, because it was uncertain, and very likely not to have been instituted by
the Pope. The inconveniences also which it brought with it were no little cause
of our delay; and we bare not off because we refused to be subject to the Pope,
as Pope, or head of Christ's Church, or to this, or any superiority he should
ordain over us, as our supreme Pastor, which yet we must have done before we
had incurred the crime of Schism. Perceive you now how the case stands, and
how far off we were from being Schismatics?


Gent. Very well.


Pr. Nay further we were so free from that crime, and all the least
disobedience to the Sea Apostolic in that delay of ours, (and of this neither
the Jesuits nor Archpr. could be ignorant, for they were privy to our whole
course, and actions in that matter, and they had also our own word and
handwriting for submission in all things which were certainly notified unto us
to be his Ho. his deed) that for men of their profession, learning, modesty,
and experience, to condemn us, yea in the secrecic of their own conscience to
be guilty of schism, or the least disobedience, cannot be defended by any
reason from the grievous sin of temeritie, and rash judgment. But for them by
their toungs, penns, and practice to display and cast abroad in the world, the
turpitude of this infamy for crimes feigned against us by themselves, and
never once committed in thought by us; and this also before the Church had
examined, and censured our case, this, this fact of the Jesuits and Archpriest,
as it cannot possibly be excused, nor escape the note of uncharitable
audacitie, and extreme cruelty in them, so of necessity must it bring
wonder to all posterity, and be horrible in the sight of all honest men.
When they urged the admittance of the authority, with so many threats and in
so violent a manner, as they did all that year before the coming of the Popes
Breue, we always told them this, and we delivered it them in writing. First,
that we admitted of whatsouer the Pope had done already, or would do in time
to come in our Church. Again, that we would presently and without delay
receive the new authority, and submit our selves unto the Archpriest, if they
could show unto us the Popes letters, and certainly make it known by any
Apostolical writ or authentical instrument, that the authority was
instituted by him. Thirdly, we would in fact also do the same without the show
of any Apostolical letter, if the Archp. and two of the Jesuits would swear
unto us, and avow it upon their priesthood, that this authority was ordained
over us by the Pope, or that his Ho. was acquainted with every particular
thereof. Again, if they refused all these, we offered further, presently to
obey the authority, upon condition they would agree with us to send one or two
of either side to Rome, which might inform his Ho. of the state of all, and
bring us certain word what his will was we should do in every thing. These
proceedings and offers of ours will for ever yield a firm and irrefragable
testimony of our sincerity, priest-like comportment, and innocence in this
cause; and moreover, protect and keep safe our good names from the slanders
of our adversaries, in all degrees of schism or disobedience, wherewith their
ill affected minds by many sleightie shifts and deceitful pretenses so
earnestly labor to stain them, and to bereave us of our credit, a treasure
without which we desire not to live on earth.


Gent. Made you then these offers?


Priest. Yea truly, neither can they deny it.


Gent. What answer did they return to this?


Priest. Marry they rejected them with much disdain, and answered that we
should absolutely subscribe to the authority without any conditions at all or
further delay, or else we should have the censures of the Church laid upon us
for our refusal; and the word was confirmed by the effect: for presently after
the Archp. without scruple or blushing to execute any act of jurisdiction,
whiles his authority, as yet not confirmed by his Ho. stood doubtful;
solemnly in writing with complements of a new seal, and all his titles,
suspended M. Coll. M. Heb. and M. Mu.


Gent. It is possible these men should thus foulely forget their profession and
the rules of moral honesty? for it seems, if this relation be true, that
their principal drift and endeavor, was to harm and discredit you, without
respect of your good, or ill deserving.


Priest. For my relation, our adversaries themselves cannot deny it to be very
true. For the articles were written and delivered them, and tossed in the hands
of all Catholics about London; they and their adherents condemning them, we
and ours defending them to be just and indifferent. Touching their disposition
in this doing, I shall need to say no more but this; It had more be seemed
religious men, not unwilling perhaps to be esteemed singular among others for
good zeal, charity, mortification, and wisdom; and it had more graced an
Archp. newly chosen to be a Superior, a Father, and a Pattern of virtues to us
all (suppose his authority had been confirmed firmed by the Pope) to have had
patience with us a while, and to have expected the censure and judgment of his
Ho. to whom only it belongs to decide the controversy, before they had
disgraced and defamed us for schismatics and rebels against the See-Apostolick
throughout the realm, and many parts of Christendom also. And this (I say)
they should have done for preventing scandal, in case we had undoubtedly been
guilty of those crimes, and that our fault could not have been covered by any
handsome excuse, or diminished by some favorable interpretation. But for them
to faigne and forge these crimes against us; for them to be the first authors
and divulgers of these horrible infamies, which we never deserved in the least
sort, that a sincere mind can devise; for them to be the cheifest authors in
the practice of their own erroneous paradox; and this also before the Church
had heard our cause, and condemned us, (as I said even now) I cannot perceive
how this could become them, or how it may be justified by any means; it
arguing a spirit as far differing from charity and discretion, as vices are
opposite unto virtues. They are not ignorant neither (which greatly augmenteth
their fault, and clears us from all disobedience) that it is an usual thing
observed in all the particular churches and countries of Christendom, and by
the light of natural reason thought necessary for the good government of Gods
people, that when any grace, benefit, office, or dignity is granted by the
people to any man; or when any authority is instituted by him, which either
was obtained by surreption and wrong information, or contains in it things
prejudicial and inconvenient to their church and people; the Pastors,
Clergy, and people do defer the admittance thereof, until they have
better informed his Ho. of all matters, and none think themselves bound in
such a case to receive it, though it should come, as instituted and confirmed
by his Hol. authentical Breues or Bulls, before he had understood their
difficulties, and the reasons of their fact.


Gent. Did they not know this to be usual in Catholic Churches?


Priest. Yea, and more than this; for they knew that many princes in
Christendom have made laws, and decreed, that nothing shall be admitted or
put in execution within their States, that comes from the Pope (we speak not
now of matters of faith, or manners generally propounded, and commanded by his
Ho. to be observed in the Church) before it be seen and approved by men
appointed for that purpose, as well to have been rightly obtained, and to be
authentical, as to be without injury or prejudice to any. Variar. resol. c.
This is observed (to let go the rest) in France and Spain, as Couarruuias
notes in his book.


Gent. Me thinks it is very necessary it should so be; for otherwise one
badly disposed man might by collusion and wrong information obtain that of the Sea Apostolic, which would disturb and annoy a whole Nation.


Priest. In such cases their laws are not thought unlawful, nor they which
make or execute them, any way rebellious or disobedient. The Jesuits and
Archpriest in a far less case have condemned us of schism and disobedience,
when they could show us for this authority neither Breue nor Bull, nor any
authentical writ from the Sea Apostolic.


Gent. And for my part also, it drives strange conceits into my head, and
among the rest this is one, that I think the world will shortly have an end.
But now I clearly perceive these reports, that you were schismatickes and
disobedient to the Sea Apostolic by your delay to accept the authority, to
have been merely untrue slanders and calumnies; and these the more
intolerable and injurious, in that they were invented, cast abroad,
maintained, and put in execution by the Jesuits and Archpriest, whose fame and
bare name of religion and authority, would induce almost all men to believe
them, and to condemn you.


Priest. So it is indeed, but yet if an Angel should proclaim a true man to
be a thief, and upon the Angels word all men should believe him so to be;
the just man were no thief for all the multitude of believers, and the Angels
proclamation were no less than an untrue slander and infamy. The like is in
our case: yet with this notable disparitie, that the inuentors and setters
abroad and defenders of this infamy against us, be but Jesuits and an
Archpriest, which we know to be no Angels. But to conclude this part; our
appealing at that time, and our sending to Rome to know his Ho. his good
pleasure, least in any thing we might offend through ignorance in these
uncertainties, manifestly shows us to have been free from all spot of
schism, and disobedience to the Sea Apostolic. For schismatickes, not
acknowledging the Pope to be their head, make no recourse nor refuge to him,
as to their superior: and rebellious and disobedient persons to the Pope,
seek not with so great pains and charges (as we did) to know his will, that
they may conform themselves thereunto. Wherefore this part of their report
deserves no better name nor place, than the title and predicament of an untrue
slander. Now, if yet you rest unsatisfied with this that I have said, touching
schism and disobedience, I refer you to our reasons, and to the letter which
master Champney writ to his friend concerning this matter, and to M. Doctor
Bishops answer to the letter of Fa. Parson: and for a firmer rock whereon you
or any may safely stay their judgment, and resolve what you will adhere unto,
till the contrary be defined by gods Church, to the grave censure of the
Divines of Paris: For the sentence of that famous University does acquit us of
schism and sin in our action of delay; repelleth the untrue flaunders cast
against us by our adversaries, and should cause all men of wisdom and
government both to temper their tongues in this case, and to suspend their
judgments. For who is he that is wise and has the fear of God before him,
that will adventure, either to condemn us in his own heart, or to report us
in the world to be guilty of schism or sin for our delay, now after so many
learned and famous Divines of that University, upon mature deliberation and
discussion of our case, have pronounced us to be free from these objected
slanders?


Gent. I have not seen as yet the reasons you speak of, but I expect daily to
have them. And for the sentence of the Sorbonistes in Paris, I have seen it,
and me thinks it justifies your actions very greatly. But against it I have
heard objected by your adversaries: First, that the information was not truly
set down: And again, that their sentence is not to be respected in this case,
considering they be known adversaries to the Jesuits, and would be glad by any
occasion, to displeasure and discredit them.


Pr. Where they except against the censure of the Sorbonists, that the case
was wrongfully proposed, it is a silly shift, so fond and childish also, that
even the Jesuits own friends are much ashamed thereof; and all indifferent men
hold it too too gross and ridiculous. For the case was propounded in such
manifest and express terms, and so truly and directly set down, that even
our adversaries themselves can hardly find any way to make it seem
insufficient; but shift have they none at all to make it seem untruly
delivered. And in this it is more favorably set down for them than for us, in
that sundry of the cheifest reasons for which we bare off to accept of that
authority, are passed over and omitted, without any mention at all.


Genesis In troth, me thinks the case is very plainly and fully, and with great
indifferency put down; and this shift of reproving the information always
seemed to me and to many others, a mere cavil or frivolous wrangling; which
is an usual thing to men that want substantial matter to allege for excuse
of their fault; and when through lack of humility they had rather stand to
defend their own error, than acknowledge it. And in this case, verily nothing
more moved my self and diverse others to conceive very well of you and your
dealing in this controversy, and to fear some great defect of sincerity in
your adversaries, than the prohibition which the Jesuits and Archp. made
against this censure of the Sorbonists; that none should defend it, no, albeit
it proceeded upon true information of the cause. For what other thing could men
conceive hereby, but that the Archp. and Jesuits, by whose advise and direction
he made and published that decree, intended to suppress the truth by their
power and authority; to bear you down by strong hand, and to overrule our
Church by their own wills only, without regard of equity, reason, or
conscience.


Pr. What should they do, but frame their building answerable to their
foundation which they had laid at the first, and make the progres of their
work conformable with their beginning? They had set upon us with great zeal,
and in the feruency of their spirit defamed us of schism; they had made a most
scandalous separation from us, themselves, and their adherents, shunning us in
all conversation and communion, as well in humane things, as divine; this once
done, what remained, but to prosecute the matter with the same fervor and
vehemency of spirit, as they had attempted it at the first? They were in
credit, authority was on their side, the world swayed with them, were it
right or wrong they did, it should be borne out by the cloak of religion,
authority, disobedience, and friends. And what? durst a few poor disgraced
priests make resistance? durst they examine the actions of religious persons,
men of so rare perfection, or mutter against the command and decrees of so
extraordinary a superior? It was not likely; but in case they should give the
attempt, no doubt, but they should be discredited, and most severely punished
to their eternal shame and confusion. No marvel therefore, if with this
advantage, and upon this hope they were so earnest and so bold, as to
prohibit in that sort the defense of that sentence, albeit the case were
rightly propounded unto these learned men.


Gent. Supposing the information to have been true, the prohibition must of
necessity be very gross and far out of square. For besides that in the
judgment of wise men, it were to patronise erroneous doctrine, and bolster up
injurious dealing in them that untruly defamed you of schism, it touches also
the Divines of that famous University with no small discredit, as having right
information of the case, to be men either so very ignorant and doltish, that
they could not judge and decide it rightly; or else so void of grace and
honesty, that they would wittingly impugn a known truth.


Pr. So it is, and certainly the second part of our adversaries answer
implies a conceit of no less vile disposition to be in those divines, than
this latter you spoke of. For when they reject their censure, and judge it
worthy of no credit, because (as they say) the Sorbonists are enemies to the
Jesuits, it implies, that they judge them to be men of that bad disposition,
that they will pronounce an erroneous sentence contrary to their own knowledge
and conscience.


Gent. By my faith, I think it implies little less than so, if a man may
speak in plain English.


Pr. Judge you then, how our adversaries through their zeal in self-love are
carried headlong beyond all the limits of modesty, and how they blush not to
defend their erroneous paradoxes with injuring any; nor fear to cast disgrace
upon whosoever, that for defense of truth shall stand in their way.


Gent. Who would have imagined, that so dangerous an humor had reigned in
men that pretend singular perfection in their state, and would be thought
mortified of their inordinat affections above al other either secular or
religious?


Pr. Not I truly, unless too much experience had proved it so to be.


Gent. But the Jesuits seem not to do any thing, nor at all to intermeddle
with the affairs of you seminary priests, but they refer all to the
Archpriest: and therefore not they, but he and his Assistants only deserve the
blame, if any thing be done amiss.


Pr. Would to God it were so, that they were not intermeddlers, for then
things would not have come to this woeful plight in which they be now. But
assure your self, it was not for nothing that the Jesuits procured this
authority, and made choice of this man to be Archpriest, and others to be
assistants, all without the consent and knowledge of our Clergy; and moreover
provided by a special caveat in the instructions, that in all matters of
importance the Archp. should take th'aduise and direction of the superior
Jesuit in England. Again, that the whole authority with the Archpriest and
Assistants, should not be absolute of themselves, or depend of the liking or
disliking of our Church next unto his Ho. but always be depending of the will
of Fa. Parson, as it should please him to move the Cardinal Protector to alter
or dispose of all: for thus the Archpriest, the Assistants, and all our Church
are surely curbed. And lastly, that the Jesuits by such violent means enforced
upon our Clergy this authority, before it was confirmed by his Ho. or they
had obtained any Apostolical letters, authentical writ, or commission to
ascertaine us of the validity thereof: assure your self (I say) that all this
was not done in vain by these men of so rare providence, but all their
diligence and endeauours tended principally to this, at this mark they aimed,
That not only they might be exempted from al subordination to any superior in
our Church, but also have the greatest stroke in ruling our Clergy, and
sitting closely at the helm, steer the whole ship, turn, and dispose of all
as they listed, and yet be not easily perceived to have any motion or meddling
at all. And in truth so it is; the Jesuits doing whatsoever pleases
themselves, and cunningly using the Archp. his name, voice, hand, and
ministry to any intendement or plot of theirs; they will not be seen authors
or agents in any thing, but persuade us all to be obedient to our superior the
Archp. The Archp. indeed and the Assistants are culpable, in that either they
will not see the polliticke drifts of the Jesuits, which tend to the
inestimable disadvantage and detriment of our Church; (for there was never the
like misery and division among our clergy and people at home, and abroad in
the seminaries, as has been since the death of the blessed Cardinal Alane,
when the Jesuits began pollitickly to stir, contend, and rule) or perceiving
them, they either will not, or dare not to oppose themselves, stay the ruin,
or seek for redress: but contrariwise, either for pleasing the Jesuits, and
gratifying their aduancers; or through fear to forgo their roumes; or upon
some particular respect and motive, let all go to wrack, and be as forward to
execute blindly and without discussion and judgment, any thing, be it never so
unjust and harmefull against their brethren as the Jesuits are ready to devise,
and dilligent to set them on against any whomsoever they list to work
displeasure.


Gent. Me thinks it is very inconvenient, that there being these great
contentions between the Jesuits and priests, they should have any stroke at
all either in the government of our Church of England, or of our seminaries
beyond the seas. For thus they may easily displeasure both the students abroad,
and the priests at home, against which they have taken conceits, or with who^
they have had quarrel at any time.


Pr. It is so indeed, and this is the very bane of all our Churches peace. For
many of our towardliest students being made made contents in the colleges,
and having had contentions with the Jesuits there; as they on the one side
return home possessed with humors of coffeehouse and auersions; so find
they here the like disposition in our Jesuits to that their brethren had
beyond; and their entertainment in England by these Fathers is usually worse
and more intolerable than that which they suffered by those in Rome or Spain.
But this is besides our matter. Let us return to the second part of the report
(to wit) That we disobey the Archpriest. VVherin I pray you is this
disobedience of ours, deserving in the opinion of our adversaries, and their
too credulous adherents, all these infamous outcries? name for them some
particular, if you can.


Gent. Nay in troth, I can name no particular more, only than that you disobey
his precepts and decrees; and being suspended and deprived of your faculties by
him, you celebrate notwithstanding and use your faculties, as though he had no
authority over you in these cases.


Pr. We will take all these for particulars, and answer them. But before we
proceed any further, I pray you let me ask you one question or twain.


Gent. Agreed, I will answer them if I can.


Priest. Is there no difference of superiors in the world?


Gent. Yes doubtless there is, and that very great.


Pr. Have they all equal authority and jurisdiction over their subjects?


Genesis No, God only is absolute Lord, and independing, having supreme power
and soueraignetie in every respect over all his creatures; all superiors under
him have their authority and power limited, every one in his degree and order.


Pr. Then every superior under God, is not to be obeyed in all respects, or in
every thing he may command, but in such things only, as fall under his
authority, and within the compass of his jurisdiction.


Gent. It must needs be so. For if a superiors will only were the measure of
his power and authority in such manner, that he must be obeyed in whatsoever
he will command; there could be no difference among superiors, but all should
be alike; and in this, all equal with God himself, who may command what he
will, and must be obeyed in all he commands.


Pr. It is evident then that our Archpriest is not so absolute a superior over
our clergy, that he may command what he will; or that we are bound to obey
him in whatsoever he commands.


Gent. No man is bound to obey him in any thing he commands beyond the
authority granted him: for he has no more power nor jurisdiction over any,
than is expressly given him by the words of his commission.


Pr. All is well; then are we not disobedient to him, if we refuse to obey him
in his decrees and precepts, which he has no authority to make, by any thing
appearing in his commission.


Gent. True, but it is to be supposed, that he will not in his decrees exceed
the bounds of his commission and authority.


Pr. We know he should not exceed them, but we may easily suppose an untruth,
if we suppose him or a greater superior than he, to contain himself within
his limits, when the case stands as this does in a matter of controversy,
wherein himself is a principal party: and when in all his proceedings
hitherto he has showed a vehement desire to ouerbeare all only by strong hand
and authority. It is no rare thing for superiors, which list not to forgo
their roumes, but delight to see themselves aloft, and perhaps would ever be
mounting higher, to challenge more than their due; and where their own interest
may enter, to encroach also what they may. The subjects sufferance, and
yielding to the force and injury, is often taken by the superior for title
good enough, for whatsoever he lists by iniquity to obtrude and claim.


Gent. Daily experience proves this to be ouertrue in many superiors; give
them an inch, and usually they will take an ell, unless they be all the better
disposed, and seek in their prelacie more the glory of God and the good of
their subjects, than their own interest.


Priest. Now therefore let all supposals pass, and let us come to the facts
themselves, and by them judge what he and we have done.

First it does not appear by the words of his commission, That the Archp. has
any authority at all to make new laws and decrees at his own pleasure, which
may bind us to obey them; or for breaking whereof he may justly inflict upon us
any penalty at all. By his commission he is placed over the seminary priests
in England and Scotland in the degree and authority of an Archpriest; but
absolutely to make laws and decrees with the seuerest penalties for such as
violate them, was never heard of in Gods church to belong to the office of an
Archpriest: only by virtue of his commission he may Dirigere, admonere,
reprehendere, vel etiam castigare, cum opus crit. Direct, admonish, reprehend,
or chastise also when need shall be: but there is no word of making new laws
and decrees, and therefore it is to be supposed, that in all these points of
his authority, he is exactly to observe the laws of Gods church, to which we
yielded our selves, when we undertook our Ecclesiastical estate, and not to
his will: and that he ought to proceed according to the ordinary course of
Ecclesiastical Canon, already set down to his hand, and not he to lay upon us
at his pleasure new burdens and bonds more rigorous and intolerable than are
used in any part of the Christian world besides. If he make laws and decrees,
not having authority so to do, they are of no force to bind us to obey, and
consequently it is no disobedience to resist them.


Gent. This must needs be thus, if he have no authority to make new laws, and
decrees.


Pr. Surely as far as we can perceive by the words of his Commission, he has
none at all.


Gent. Then are you freed from the slanderous report of disobedience, for not
observing his decrees, and precepts.


Pr. I hope we be. But yet further, let us suppose he had full authority to
make decrees; does this prove, that we are disobedient, if we refuse to obey,
and resist them?


Gent. Me think it does.


Priest. Does it so? what? will you say that unjust decrees are to be obeyed?
or perhaps think you that this Archp. is so infallibly assisted by Gods
spirit, that he can make no decrees but just and good?


Gent. No, I will neither affirm nor think either of these twain. For it is
manifest, that injust and hurtful laws, as they are not to be accounted
laws, so are they not to be obeyed. And again, the Archp. is a man subject to
errors, as others be; and then especially an error is to be feared, when being
a party in controversies, he goes about to decree any thing prejudicial to
his adversaries: for in these cases above all the rest, self-loue draws him
from indifferency, and enclineth him to respect cheefely his own particular.
And on the other side, a mind auersed from his adversaries, spurneth him
forward to devise against them partial and grievous decrees.


Pr. The Archpr. cannot with any show or color of reason charge us with
disobedience to him, except only in that we obey not his decrees: we
acknowledge him for our Archpriest, and to have as ample jurisdiction over us,
as by his commission he can claim. In all things we are ready to obey him,
wherein he has authority to command. This one thing (through his own, and
the Jesuits renewing it after it was once forgiven and ended) rests in
controversy between him, them, and us, (to wit) Whether by reason of our
delay to accept the authority before it was confirmed by the Popes Breue, we
incurred the crimes of enormious disobedience, rebellion, and schism against
the Sea Apostolic or no. He and they auerre we did; we deny it: he and they
have slaundered, and do continually defame us, as guilty of those sins
feigned by themselves. We have stood, and stand in defense of our assured
innocence; and think it most violent iniquity to bereave us of our good
names upon a private opinion of their own, before our cause either at home or
abroad be orderly heard and tried, and we also condemned by Gods Church. He
and they forbid us under most grievous penalties, to defend our selves from
their calumnies, or our good names from their undeserved slanders: in which
prohibition, because it is very injust, we know our selves no way bound in
conscience to obey them. He and they cease not to wrong us, they keep no
measure nor mean in doing us injuries, but daily oppress us with the
heauiest, and plainly intolerable afflictions: we being denied all hearing
and trial of our cause at home, fly by appeal to his Holiness. He and they
exclaiming against this our fact, heap upon us all disgrace and punishments: we
arm our selves with patience against the worst. Now you see all our
disobedience to the Archpriest is in these two points. First, in that we
defend our good names against his and the Jesuits manifest slanders. Again, in
that we appeal to his Ho. for ending the controversy, wherein the Archp. is a
principal party, and our violent adversary. Both these I confess are
directly against the Archp. his will and decrees: (for his decrees are (as I
said) that we should not defend the schism and rebellion, wherewith he and
the Jesuits have defamed us, and that we shall not appeal without his
license.) But to defend ones own good name injustly taken away, is lawful by
the law of Nature it self: and to appeal to the Sea Apostolic from the
injust oppressions of any superior in the world, yea without his license and
against his will, has ever been and will be always lawful in the Church of
God; and consequently, it cannot be truly judged in us any disobedience to the
Archp. when we resist him and his decrees in those cases. For as he can make no
law to subvert the law of Nature touching the defense of a man's own good name;
so can he make no decree to prohibit or to hinder appeals from himself to
the Pope: and whatsoever he decrees in these cases, are of their own nature
frustrate, and not to be obeyed by any.


Gent. It is evident, that this report of your disobedience and rebellion
against the Archpr. is a mere calumny, if you disobey him in no other decrees
but these, wherein if you should obey him, you should show your selves very
foolish, yea, very culpable, and disobedient to God the author of Natures law,
and to the constitutions of holy Church.


Pr. It is so indeed; but yet the very word, and sin of disobedience imputed
to us by men of their calling, enters far, and even at the first hearing
takes deep root in the hearts of the most virtuously disposed, moving them
to great aversions, and zealous invectiues against us, albeit they know little
or nothing how the case stands. And our adversaries play upon this advantage
to stir up all sorts of people against us: For who is he that will not utterly
mislike a disobedient priest?


Gent. Disobedience truly is a foul crime, discommendable, and very odious in
a Catholic priest, if he be infected therewith and this almost in the eyes of
all persons, as well bad as good. But yet if a Catholic priest shall be falsely
charged or slaundered with this sin, the calumny cannot disgrace him, when
the truth shall come to light.


Pr. I grant all this, yet in the mean season, whiles truth is by violence
suppressed, the best that is may sustain great loss in his good name. For
there be few which either know or consider how far a superior is to be obeyed;
and the most take every opposition and repugnance to a known Superiors will
or precept, to be the sin of disobedience, without further discussion of
things; and this the rather, in cases where the Superior and his Adherents are
holden to be good men, and the mark they shoot at, is pretended to be some
special good thing, as the glory of God, peace, and the like.


Gent. For pretenses of good ends, no superior will fail to have great store,
no not in the worst things he commands: and therefore me thinks it
necessary, that before any man be defamed (especially by priests and religious
men) of disobedience and rebellion to his superior, because he resists his
commandment; first the thing commanded be looked into, and tried whether it
be good or evil; if good, then again it be considered, whether the superior
have authority or eommission to command that thing or no. For if a superior
command an ill thing, as to kill; or defame an innocent; to steal; or any
thing against the law of God, of Nature, or of holy Church, he is not to be
obeyed, neither is his repugnance to be condemned for disobedience. And again,
if he command a good thing, the which yet exceeds the limits of his
authority, a man is no way bound to obey; and his refusal cannot justly be
called disobedience. For otherwise I know not how our refusal to obey our
temporal princes commandment for going to Church, and for practice of our
religion, or any other magistrates injust commandment, may be excused or
defended from the crime of disobedience and rebellion in the Jesuits and
Archpriest themselves.


Pr. If men had considered and observed this, we had not been slaundered, nor
generally condemned for disobedient persons, as we are, for refusing to obey
the Archpriest in his decrees; some of which were against the law of God and
Nature, and others against the laws and liberties of holy Church, as I said
before. But the authors of these infamies, and the leaders of this ungracious
dance to the headie and ignorant Laity, Maius peccatum habent, have the
greater sin.


Gent. I will not judge these men to have any spice of that disease, which our
Savior noted to be in some men, That could spy a mote in their neighbors
eye, but not discern a beam in their own: or that in censuring other men's
actions, could excolare culicem, make bones of a Gnat; and Camclum deglutire,
and in their own case easily swallow up a Cammell. I will not condemn them
for such (I say.) But I remember that once a Jesuit told me, how the Pope
(upon some great cause and consideration, doubtless) sent a precept or a
decree to the religious houses in Rome, thereby prohibiting under great
penalties, That any should use the knowledge gotten of a man's estate in the
Sacrament of confession, to any polliticke end, or matter in any external
affair whatsoever. Thus much I remember he told me, for the rest contained in
the Apostolical writ, let it pass. When it was brought to the Jesuits, they
singularly among all other orders would not presently accept thereof, but
required, that their general might have access and license to deal with his
Ho. before they received it: the answer being brought to the Pope, forthwith
he commanded his decree or precept to be received by them without further
delay, under pain of excommunication, ipso facto to be incurred. In this case
lo, when the matter concerned their own particular, they thought it no
disobedience to refuse for the time to accept and to submit themselves to this
commandment or decree of his Ho. in a matter of so great importance. No, it
was no fault neither (in their conceits) for them only to show singularity in
thadmittance of this decree of their superior, and to make delays in receiving
that which all other orders willingly admitted at the first. But in this case
controuersied between them and you, the good men I perceive are more zealous
and forward, and would be loath to let escape any show of disobedience in you,
against which they should not exclaim and write to your greatest discredit
that may be.


Pr. I also have heard of some thing like to this, which you relate from the
mouth of a Jesuit, be it true or false; but this which I will tell you, is
known to all Christendom to be true. About eight years ago it happened, that
the Jesuits had some discontentments with their General, and were desirous to
have some things reformed in their order, for which causes they of Spain
labored to have general congregation. The General with the Italian Jesuits
resisted their endeavors, and did what they might to hinder it, for such a
capitulo or congregation had never been used among them, but at the election of
a new General. This strife was great, and continued long. And at the last the
Spaniards, assisted by the old king of Spain, prevailed: and thereupon a
general congregation was holden at Rome by commandment of the Pope. Now this
contention was between the Jesuits and their Superior, and they enforced him
against his will (no doubt but upon sufficient cause) to have this unusual
conuention. They had vowed obedience in the strictest manner; their Superiors
will should have been an Oracle, yet notwithstanding they proceeded against
him, and procured the thing they thought convenient for their society, whether
he would or no: by which practice of the best of their order it is manifest,
that even where obedience is vowed, the subjects may resist their Superior his
will and commandment, upon a just and reasonable cause; much more when there
is no such vow to bind: but if some of our English Jesuits, or their whole
society, for our disgrace will condemn us of disobedience for resisting the
Archpriest in any sort, or for refusing to obey his decrees, of what quality
soever they shall be, we must return upon themselves the same reproach (but in a
higher degree) for contending with their Fa. General in any sort, or for any
cause. Or if again for credit of their society they list to excuse their
brethren, and free them from disobedience in that contention, because in many
cases the subjects may resist their Superiors will or commandment: if they
do this for love to their own credit, we may entreat them for Christian
charities sake to excuse our fact, or to clear us of this horrible crime and
slander of disobedience for our refusing to obey the Archp. in his decrees
opposite to the laws of nature and holy church.


Gent. It were good reason they should so do in this matter of his unjust
decrees. But how can you excuse your selves from disobedience, when you use
your faculties after he has deprived you of them; and ye celebrate,
notwithstanding he has suspended you? Do you not acknowledge him to have
jurisdiction over you in these cases?


Priest. Yes we do, but yet in such wise prescribed unto him and limited, as
if he attempt to do any thing beyond his commission, it is of no effect nor
validity.


Gent. This must needs be true, for it were an unreasonable and disorderly
authority, if it left all at his liberty, especially to inflict punishments
at his pleasure without more.


Priest. His authority is to punish priests for crimes committed, either by
suspending the use of their faculties, or by depriving them altogether: as for
suspending from the altar, we think he wants authority. But where there
is no crime committed, where no crime is proved against a priest, nor he
manifestly convicted thereof, the Archp. has no authority in any sort to
punish him. Now touching our case, he has suspended some, others he has quite
bereaved of their faculties: but for what crimes has he done it, and in what
manner? He has not conuented nor co^victed any of our priests of those faults
which he and the Jesuits have feigned against them: without proof of the
crime, without hearing the accused, without citing them to answer; upon mere
fictions and uncharitable surmises of his own and theirs, he has proceeded
against some, as men guilty of schism, rebellion, enormious disobedience to
the Sea Apostolic and his own authority; against others, for defending
their good name in this slander; against others, for asking satisfaction;
others he afflicts for setting their hand to the appeal without his license;
others, for persuading both parts to send two priests to Rome quietly with the
state of the controversy, that so it might be ended by his Holiness; others,
for that they will not recall their appeal, and yield to his opinion, no less
injurious to them, than erroneous in divinity and learning: yea, if any defend
the censure of the University of Paris, he also tastes of his whip.


Gent. These proceedings are the most disorderly and injust that ever I have
heard.


Priest. They are no better than I tell you.


Gent. Surely it were impiety to think, that his Ho. would give him
authority to afflict and punish innocent priests in this manner.


Priest. So it were. And therefore proceeding against us without authority, all
his suspentions and deprivations are of no valliditie, but to be contemned as
frivolous, proceeding from an uncharitable disposition in him, and the Jesuits
his counselors. Thus you see, that in truth we are not justly to be touched
with any note of schism, rebellion, or disobedience against either the Sea
Apostolic or the Archpriest: and that these reports are manifest calumnies
and untrue slanders, purposely devised by our emulous adversaries to delude
men's eyes, and to stir up the world against us, to our discredit. Now if you
be satisfied in these points of schism, rebellion, and disobedience, let us
go to another report.


Gent. For these things me think you have said sufficiently, and I know not
what to reply more than I have done.


Pr. Well, go to then, what is the next slander?


The second Slander.
Gent. They give it out all over that you be dangerous men, because you are
extraordinarily favored by the privy Counsel and State, by whom they say you
are maintained, and diverse of you have free accsse and familiarity with them
and the Bishop of London, M. Waid, and others: which are great presumptions
that you be scarce honest men, or to be trusted by Catholics. For (say they)
these with whom you deal, and of whom you find these singular favors, are
professed adversaries to Gods holy Church and to all Catholics, and therefore
it cannot but yield probable and very pregnant suspicion of bad dealing, and of
treason to the common cause, that you only should have friendly entertainment,
conference, and access at your pleasures.


Pr. They be our adversaries, no marvel then if they speak the worst of us
they can, and upon their evil affection take hold of every occasion to surmise
and report the evil we never did nor thought. You see how upon their own
private opinion only, against all right and conscionable proceeding, where many
as learned and judicial as they, held the contrary, they condemned and
defamed us of schism, rebellion, and disobedience (all Divines and Canonists
reprove their fact, and all posterity will admire their impudency, their want
of charity, or skill, or both) and in the rest also their zeal, spurneth them
forward to devise and vomit out any thing that may defile our credites. Indeed
their slanders carry a great show of probability, because they are in an
odious matter, and seem to proceed from an honest mind, zealous and sincere:
but let the particulars be once discussed, and the vizard of deceit taken
away, and then forthwith the surmise and report will appear in it own
likeness to be a mere calumny and untrue slander. First therefore, where
they say that we be men of danger; it is the slander of an enemy, deserving
no more credit, than their reason is of force to prove. What is their reason
then? Because we are singularly favored by the privy Counsel and state? Admit
it be so, is this sufficient to prove us dangerous? If it be not, then is it
a pernicious calumny, to account us dangerous for a cause which is not
sufficient to convince us to be dangerous. If it be, then must it follow, that
not only some of themselves, but many also of their best lay friends in England
have been and are in the same predicament with us. Had not Fa. Hawood Jesuit
such extraordinary favor of the lord of Leicester, that (besides the secret
plottings and conferences which were between them before the Jesuits
apprehension) when the Father was in durance in the tower, he only had there
more liberty, and found more friendly usage than all the priests in the other
prisons throughout England: yea when many Catholic priests were closely shut
up, rigorously used, and cruelly executed; Fa. Hawood lay at ease and safety
in the tower, and at the time of his banishment all men reported him to have
found singular favors above the rest touching his provision. This Fa. also had
many conferences with Sir Christopher Hatton, and received favors of him
before he was apprehended? What should we say hereupon, that Fa. Hawood was a
dangerous Jesuit? Or rather, that these extraordinary favors are not
sufficient to prove a Jesuit or a priest to be dangerous. Father Bosgraue
another Jesuit, found not he also extraordinary favors in prison and
banishment, whiles many a good seminary priest was straightly handled and put
to death? I hope we may truly say, That neither master Bluet nor master Clarke,
nor any other of us whom the Jesuits and Archp. would discredit by access and
familiarity with the magistrates, have as yet condescended so far unto them,
as that Fa. Hawood did; and yet was he not defamed thereby to be a dangerous
man. We let pass the two ancient and famous Jesuits, Fa. Langdale, and
another, either of which had remained in the society above twenty years
before their Apostacy, (which argues that al Jesuits be not Saints before
they break out of their order) we let these pass (I say) and come to Fa.
John Gerard, who is said to have found more favorable entreatie by our common
adversary, during the time of his indurance, than any of our priests imprisoned
in those time, or than those which now they so much exclaim against; he is said
to have been absent from his prison, and this by license 2, 3, 4. or mo nights
and days together.


Gent. Thus much I also have heard of him, and that he had more favor and
liberty than all his fellow prisoners besides. But this was procured, as I
heard, by great bribes, for he had always greater store of money than all the
rest.


Pr. I condemn not the man, nor think him dangerous for so doing. He found
favor among our enemies to have liberty: if he be to be excused, or not to be
judged dangerous, because he procured it by his money; then, to find
extraordinary favor among the heretics, is no true cause why a Jesuit or a
Priest should be thought dangerous. And why should not our priests in this
case be as free from slander and infamy (if they can procure to themselves by
other honest means without money the same or more liberty) as a Jesuit that
bought it with his money? I will not now rehearse what some magistrates in high
place have said of secret meetings and conferences between some of the privy
counsel and some Jesuits; nor what some of the Jesuits entirest fauourits have
whispered to their friends, concerning strange plots and devises for no
trifles (I wisse) between the Jesuits and some of high room and dignity in
the State. Be it true as they reported, or be it false, (as spoken but for a
brag to win the Jesuits mo friends and credit, as men able to dispose of all)
it much forces not, all finally comes to this issue, That we be not
dangerous men, because we receive extraordinary favor of the state. For if
they also had conference, and withal hold this principle, themselves also
should be dangerous men with us, which they will not grant: if they had not,
yet in their conceits, and by these reports that they had, when the case is
their own, they think it no sufficient cause to account them dangerous for
finding favors and conferring with the privy Counsel: and so they acquit us
also of the same slander. For there can be showed no disparitie nor reason,
why this may not be as free for a Catholic priest, as for a Jesuit.


Gent. You seem to conclude this rightly, unless they will say, that their
dealing with the privy Counsel, or the favors they find of the State, cannot
bring them into suspicion or obloquie to be dangerous men, as it must do
priests; because they are religious mortified men, fast and sure from
corrupting or deprauing by the magistrates, as priests be not, which are
passionate men, looser of life, and more inconstant, and therefore this danger
is more to be feared in them, and less in the Jesuits.


Pr. It may well be that they carry no worse conceit of themselves, nor better
of us than this: and I dare undertake for them, that howsoever their charity
extends to us, their own good word shall never be wanting to themselves. But
these chimericall conceits and fictions do not alter the nature of the thing we
speak of. And for seminary priests in England, it is manifest, that they have
labored in Christ's vineyard with no less fruit, and consummated their courses
in prisons and death, with no less courage and zeal, than any Jesuit has
done hitherto; yea, even such priests as these perfect Jesuits, reputed to be
most imperfect (and with whom they have had great contentions in the colleges
beyond) have matched them in the performance of all Christian duties when the
trial was made, by enduring prisons, miseries, and death. But as the huswiues
proverb goes, All these fathers geese must be swans: They be Jesuits, ergo
peerless.


Gent. I perceive you, but what were you about to say of their friends?


Pr. No more but this, that by slaundering us to be dangerous men, by reason of
some favors we are said to find at the privy counsels hands, they bring the
same slander upon their best friends.


Gent. How may this follow?


Priest. Marry thus; who knows not that diverse of the principal Catholics
in England for temporal estate are their best friends? And who is ignorant
again, that they have found and receive still very extraordinary and singular
favors from sundry of the privy Counsel, such as no other Catholics in
England besides themselves can have? If these great ones be not dangerous
persons, by reason of their extraordinary favors, why should they think us
and our friends to be, if at any time we reap the benefit.


Gent. I know no reason why they should, unless perhaps the Jesuits affection
and conceit of the perfection of all such as they deal with, make this
difference, where in truth there is none. But yet they say that some of you go
voluntarily to the Bishop of London, and have daily conferences with him, and
other our adversaries; which thing is very suspicious, and has not been used
by any Jesuit, or any of their side.


Priest. Indeed the Jesuits carry a higher conceit of themselves than they do
of our priests, and the same must others also carry of them, how small ground
or cause soever there be thereof, or else farewell friendship, and you are
their adversary. Correspondent also hereunto, is the opinion and estimation
which the Jesuits and their people have of such every where, as depend upon
them, and have yielded themselves into their guidance, in respect of all such
Catholics as deal only with the seminary priests. For only this dependence
on them is cause enough why they should be thought mortified, zealous,
perfect, and saints: and the rest for want of this, passionate, dull,
imperfect, and but ordinary Catholics, though in truth they exceed and
excel theirs in the performance of any Christian duty, excepting this only,
that they are guided by the priests, and have not resigned themselves and all
they have to the wills and directions of the Jesuits. And this foolish
difference and frivolous distinction to be between the Jesuits and their
dependents, and the seminary priests with their Catholic people, is not
obscurely insinuated, if it be not the principal scope aimed at in the
Treatise of Three fairwels, written by a chief favorite of Jesuits, but not
without their priuitie, their perusing, and their consent in publishing it
abroad; for otherwise the Gentleman followed little of that resignation and
perfection he talked so much on in that book, where he will have a man in all
things depend of the Jesuits, and to be guided by them. As then no doubt he
was himself in most absolute sort, both in making and diuulging that gallant
Treatise. But now that some of ours usually resort to the Bishop of London, and
have secret conference with him, I know not how far the religious charity
and perfection of a Jesuit, occupied in the custody of Evangelical counsels,
will adventure to suspect, judge, or report thereof; sure I am they should not
have proceeded thus far as they have done already, if they had observed the
rules and limits but of ordinary precepts and Christian charity. We will not
speak now of such priests as have been most officious for the Jesuits and
Archpriest, in furthering their hard attempts against us, and yet are known to
come to the Bishop of Londons house, no less than these of ours which they so
rattle with infamies. Let us deal only with these two of ours, M. Bluet and
M. Clarke, upon which the slanders cheefely run. Have they not both been
known for virtuous and good Catholic priests, the one having endured a
longer imprisonment for defense of Christ's faith, than any Jesuit has spent
years in England, yea, before any of that order entered the realm? Has he
not waxen old under that heavy yoke, preferring the ignominy and affliction
of Christ's cross, above the glory and pleasures of the world? Has he not
lived with great credit and honor among both Catholics and Heretics, which
he purchased by his Catholic zeal in defense of Gods cause, and by his
sincere, discreet, and virtuous comportment in his conversation? Has he now
perhaps revolted from his faith, or professed himself an enemy, or that in any
the least degree, he will be rebellious or disobedient to the Sea Apostolic?
Does he not still lie in prison for his Catholic religion? Or can they say
perhaps that he wants ability, and the talents of wit or learning, by reason
whereof he may be thought incapable of promotion, or so insufficient to
undertake roumes of dignity and livings among heretics, that being fallen
from his faith, or become a traitor to Gods cause, or what else soever the
slaunderer will have him. For those defects of his they judge him unfit for
preferments, and worthy no better than this little liberty he has in
prison? Meaner men than M. Bluet or M. Clarke if they fall to the protestants,
are friendly entreated, are set at liberty, and preferred to benefices in
their ministry, as is manifest in Dawson, Mayor, Bell, Tedder, and the rest;
what ill hap then have these two to lie still in prison, and miss all
advancement? For M. Clarke also, it is well known how he has long and
zealously traveled for the saving of souls, with no less pains and fruit
than the Jesuits about him. He has made a more glorious profession of his
faith, and sustained harder trial by affliction than many of them. Is he
deuoid also of all sufficiency and good talents, that if he be gone from God,
and all goodness, he cannot yet (if he would) step out of prison to some
fatter benefice among the ministers? They that value their own actions, how
slender and trifling soever they be, above all that their fellows do, are
very easily carried away, what by peevish emulation, what by selfe-liking, into
rash judgments and disgraceful reports, to misconstrue the words and deeds of
them they fancy not; to interpret all sinisterly; and to take and censure all
they see or hear in the worst part they can devise: affirming against both the
manifest rule of charity, and the express commandment of God, forbidding
all rash and temerarious judgments in these words: Matthew. 7.
Nolite iudicare and non indicabimini, nolite condemnare and non
condemnabimini, affirming uncertain things, I say, for certain; or taking
upon the^ to judge another servant, when that office belongs not to them.
Domino enim suo stat, aut cadit; Romans 14.
or (if it concern them) judging secret things for manifest evils: or finally
(if they be manifest) persecuting them, as to be done badly, without knowledge
of mind, intention, and disposition of him that did them. A good conceit or
opinion, by the law of Nature is due to every man; and this ought all
Christians to carry in the secrecy of their own hearts, each one toward
other, until by some manifest and certain fault one have deserved the
contrary. By the same law also, a man's credit, honor, and good name should
rest entire and safe without loss or detriment, until by some inexcusable bad
fact or fault, or by some assuredly known crime, they be impeached: no less
than this, was due unto our Catholic priests in prison, to M. Bluet, to M.
Clarke, to M. Doctor Bag. whom more than any, these religious fathers with the
Archpriest and their accomplices, have disgraced with slanders, and to all the
rest of us in durance, or abroad. It was due unto them (I say) from all sorts
of Catholic people, from all priests, from the Archpriest, from the Jesuits:
nevertheless they have bereaved us of this treasure and due. By what crimes
manifest and certain have we lost our right herein? How can they defend
themselves from cruel and injust rapine? We were schismatickes say they: we
deny it; and say it is no more but their own damnable calumny and slanderous
fiction. We were rebellious and disobedient to the Sea Apostolic: we deny
it; and say this to be an undeserved infamy, we never having the least
intention or thought (without which these horrible crimes cannot be committed)
to separate our selves from the Sea Apostolic, or to disobey in any thing
Clement the eight: or any superior certainly known to be constituted by him
over us, so far forth as his authority might appear to be extended. And for
this point, our innocence is so clear, that the Jesuits and Archp. with all
their adherents, shall never be able either by wit, or learning, or honest
dealing, to prove us guilty of these crimes, or to defend themselves from the
foul note of uncharitable contumelious slander. Were we known to be men of
that bad life, evil demeanure, and corrupt conscience, (for it could not be
imputed to our ignorance) that without good reason, and all probability of
sufficient cause, we were likely to forbear the acceptance of the new
authority till the coming of the Breue, and wittingly to cast our selves into
a damnable state? If our former labors and conuersations had deserved this
conceit, our adversaries might have had some pretense to justify their doings,
and perhaps saved themselves from the ignominy of detractors and calumniators.
But if not, as I hope the world will testify for us, then surely they should
have taken another course, contrary to this they took, as well for saving
themselves from grievous sins, as for preserving us from these horrible
infamies, into which they have cast both themselves and us, by their headie and
rash judgments. For truly, if any one reason of ours, or all together, be
found a sufficient cause of our delay, a heap of sins and infamies will
redound upon their own heads, and we shall be freed. And now touching M.
Bluet, M. Clarke, and others of ours, that are said to have access and
conference daily with the Bishop of London, or some other of the Counsel. Have
their former conversation in the world, and their long sufferings, cast that
evil sent? or do they yield such certain proofs of a graceless
disposition, that this fact of theirs can deserve no defense nor excuse? or is
it so manifestly ill in it self, that it will admit no cause as reasonable to
salve it? or is there no mean nor way, whereby their fact (indifferent
doubtless in it own nature) may be, if not altogether justified and defended,
yet at the least excused, or left vnjudged, to be already of the vilest
quality, and they accordingly demeaned? Answer for the Jesuits. Is it a
manifest and an undoubted sin, that a Catholic priest and prisoner haunt an
adversaries house, and have conference with him?


Gent. Now truly, I am persuaded it is not, for I have read of many good Saints
that have haunted the company of evil persons with great zeal and merit, and
our Savior Christ himself and his Apostles used the company of scribes,
pharisees, publicans, and the worst sinners.


Priest. If this be indifferent, and may be done with merit, what can make it
a sinful action in M. Bluet and M. Clarke?


Gent. Their intention and business only, or perhaps the scandale they give
thereby.


Priest. For the scandale, in respect of all the learned Catholics of England,
the Priests and religious men especially it is Scandalum acceptum, and not
datum. For they knowing it to be an indifferent action of it own kind, and to
be justifiable and made good by many circumstances, if they take scandale,
before they see some ill effect to be intended, or necessarily to issue
thereupon; it must be only Scandalum acceptum. And for the simpler sort of
Catholics, they also with their leaders are bound in conscience to suspect or
judge no ill, of the indifferent actions of their Catholic fathers and
prisoners, until some sinful intention or effect appear. And in this case
much more ought the constancy of these Catholic priests imprisoned, as long
as they persevere constant, to stay at the least all good Christians from
temerarious or rash judgments (which is ever a grievous sin) and in this
case is greatly increased by the state and dignity of these men, and by their
former good deserts and sufferings; than they should be moved by their access
and conference only, to suspect or judge the worst, or to utter any thing
derogatorie to their good names. The Jesuits and Priests which are willing to
set this scandale on foot, and labor what lies in them, to make our priests
actions seem heinous and horrible, and never cease to persuade the people to
judge the worst, and to exclaim against them; these Jesuits and Priests have
the more sin, and as they be the authors and continuers of the scandale, so
have they to answer for the sins of their disciples.


Gent. By my faith it is dangerous to be too forward in imitating the Jesuits
zeal in this point, and great safety it is to suspend ones judgment, and to
temper ones tongue till more be known.


Pr. I think that the securest way: for as S. James (fourth) says: Qui
detrahit fratri, aut qui iudicat fratrem suum, detrahit legi, and iudicat
legem. Si autem iudicas legem, non es factor legis sed Iudex. He that
detracteth his brother, or judges his brother, detracteth the law, and judges
the law; but if thou judge the law, thou art not the obseruer of the law, but
the judge. A Pharisaicall vice it is, rashly to judge and condemn other men;
and I wish the Jesuits, the Archpriest with their accomplices in slaundering us,
were free from all note and contagion of this turpitude. But if we thoroughly
examine the causes which we have given them on our part, and with
indifferency weigh the nature of these actions and their circumstances in
every respect, whereupon the Jesuits and their adherents have judged and
defamed us of most horrible crimes, we shall easily perceive the^ to have
transgressed the bounds of all Christian charity. A religious man is bound to
tend and aim at Evangelical perfection. This consists not in the name of an
order, nor in the three essential vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience,
to a Superior: For hereby only the principal lets and impediments which may
hinder their attaining to perfection, are removed. But perfection indeed, Tho.
2.2.
which by their profession they are bound to endeavor unto, does consist in a
full mortification of themselves in all respects, and in a perfect charity
toward God and man. Now I demand of the Jesuits, what degree of charity they
have showed and exercised in this controversy? was ever any bad companions so
dissolute and impudent, and desperate railers so void of conscience and
charity, which upon so slender causes and grounds, (first of our delay to
receive the authority, and now of having conference with the Bishop of London
or others of the Counsel) could ever have run a more intemperate, headie, and
uncharitable course of rash suspicion and judgment, to the overthrow of our
good names, than the Jesuits have done? Could they more have exceeded the
limits of grace, of temperance, of modesty, of humanity, than the religious
Fathers have? Who in matters belonging only to the supreme Pastor to decide,
have taken upon them to determine the cause: who with their own particular
fantasy have prevented the sentence and judgment of the Sea Apostolic? and
who finally upon a private opinion of their own (thought yet erroneous by men,
not their inferiors for learning, judgment, sincerity, and other virtues)
have earnestly labored for ever to disgrace and utterly defame so many
Catholic priests? Could any lost or forlorn caitife have made more vile and
detestable inferences, or gathered more loathsome poison, or raised a more
pestiferous stinch, by stirring in these matters, and freely spending their
mouths in condemning and defaming priests for their conferences with the
Counsel and Bishop, than these religious men have done and their disciples by
their example and onsetting? What then avails a name and boast of religious
perfection, when in observing this ordinary precept of not judging or not
condemning rashly, they are so far short of matching the most of our
imperfect priests, that they have scarsely gotten one step before the baddest
Christians? Could not their charity find any one cause or reason for excuse of
M. Bluet and M. Clerks indifferent action, till some worse effect appeared?
Was it needful for their charity, to prevent their ill doing which perhaps
will never fall out with most reproachful slanders. Infamies in the conceits
of humble and charitable men, come timely enough upon Catholic priests after
they have certainly done the fault, and in no wise ought to be cast upon them
before the crime be committed. It is no heinous trespass in these extremities
and wants of necessary relief in prison, which by the Jesuits and the Archpr.
their means, is uncharitably brought upon them, to solicit the Counsel or
Bishop for more enlargement, or for continuance of the liberty they have
already, or to procure the like to their afflicted brethren. If in this only
they have found a little favor, why then might not a Jesuits charity have
pretended or imagined this to be the cause of their going and conference?
Again, it is no crime to sue for their own and their brethrens banishment: if
the^ in these great and most grievous miseries inflicted upon them by the
Jesuits and Archpriest, as slanders, penury, loss of faculties,
suspensions, and the like undeserved cruelties, above the common persecution by
their adversaries in faith, they seek for their own deliverance by
banishment: might not the religious Jesuits and Archp. by this reason justify,
or at least excuse their going to the Bishop? YVhat if their intentions be to
work some good of these magistrates, either for their conversion, or to make
them more favorable to afflicted Catholics, and better conceited of
Catholic courses, yea, or to procure some tolleration or other good to our
church? All these be lawful ends, and might be more easily and with less
danger of sin supposed by charitable men to be their business, till some
worse matter appeared, than the baddest disposition and affair that emulous
heads can devise. These and many more causes of their conferences and access
may be without much labor thought upon; all, or any one of which might be
sufficient enough to induce a timorous conscience to deem the best, or at
least, to stay it from the downfall of rash suspicion, judgment, and
defamation. And to tell what I think, I should not marvel any whit, if her
Majesty and her Counsel should do M. Bluet, M. Doctor Bag. M. Clarke, and
many of our seminary priests, more singular favors and good turns than these
they have done, or they do to the Jesuits; considering they know we hope in
the end, our priests simply to deal in matters of religion only, and no whit
to entermeddle in state affairs, nor to concur with Fa. Parsons and his
associates in their plotting about titles, successors, invasions, and disposing
of the crown and realm either in her Majesty's time, or after her decease. An
odious and unfit occupation for religious men, which by profession should have
left the world.


Gent. Left the world? Nay Gods pity, I fear me rather that Saint Barnard
touches them not a little, when speaking of religious men, he says: Itane
mundum sibi, and semundo crucifixerunt, vt qui antea vix in suo vico aut oppido
cogniti suera^t, modo circumeuntes provincias and curias frequentantes regum
noticias, principumque familiaritates assecuti sunt. Have they so crucified the
world to themselves, and themselves to the world, that they which before were
known scarsely in their own street or town, now wandering about provinces,
haunting courts, they have gotten the acquaintance of kings, and the
familiarity of princes. And again, Video post spretam seculi pompam nonnullos
in schola humilitatis superbiam magis addiscere, ac sub alis mitis, humilisque
magistri grauius insolescere, and impatientes amplius fieri in claustro, quam
fuissent in seculo: quodque magis peruersum est, plerumque in domo Dei non
patiuntur habere contemptui, qui in sua non nisi contemptibiles esse potuerunt.
I see some after they have despised the pomp of the world, to learn rather
pride in the school of humility, and under the wings of a mild and humble
master to wax more proud, and to become more impatient in the cloister, than
they had been in the world: and which is most perverse of all, for the most
part they disdain to be had in contempt in Gods house, which in their own
estates could not be but contemptible.

If this concern them, let them look to it, and if it do, he tells them
from whence their evil springs, saying: Nec aliunde haec omnia mala
contingunt, nisi quod illam, qua seculum deseruerunt, descrentes humilitatem,
dum per hoc cognitur inepta denuo sectari studia secularium, canes efficiuntur
reuertentes ad vomitum. Neither proceed these evils from any other, but that
forsaking that humility wherewith they left the world, whiles hereby they are
enforced to follow again the unfit studies of secular persons, they become
dogs, returning again to their vomit.


Pr. For these sayings of S. Barnard, how it touches the Jesuits I will not
trouble my self, but as I said, our not intermedling in matters of Estate may
be a very great motive to her Majesty, and her Counsel, why they should do us
more pleasures, and show us greater favors than the Jesuits, and such as run
their courses: which cause being no fault in us, but a laudable thing and
conformable to our function, if we should reap favors therefore, they ought
not in conscience to be turned to our reproach and infamy, as though we were
favored by them for some lewd demeanor; and the Jesuits ought to blame
themselves, if for their dangerous tampering in things which belong them not,
they should find some extraordinary affliction, or not the like favors that
three or four semenarie Priests have done.


Gent. Indeed there is no reason to the contrary, the jelousie of our
magistrates, and the State of our Country considered.


Pr. But now what benefits and favors be these, which any of ours receive so
extraordinarily above the Jesuits, and their adherents?


Gent. The report flies, That besides this liberty and favor which M. Bluet,
and M. Clarke find, that you all are maintained by the Lords of the Counsel,
that you want nothing, and therefore are not to have allowance, or a part out
of any common alms, or money given for relief of poor Catholic Priests, and
prisoners?


Pr. What think you of this report?


Gent. I think it very false.


Pr. I assure you upon my soul it is so, yet is not this fiction contrived
simply to discredit us, but framed also for a quarrel and colorable pretense,
whereby our adversaries may seem as it were upon just occasion to deprive us
of our portion in all charitable gifts. And so by debarring us of necessary
relief, this way they may effect that which Fa. Parsons writes in a letter of
his, and his associates in England earnestly labor to bring us unto, that is,
By poverty and extreme want of necessaries, to enforce us to yield in all
things to their wills. The two pricks they shoot at, is their own credit or
advancement above the whole clergy of England, and that they may have the
command and managing of the purse and all. To effect these, it is necessary,
all that stand in their way, or may seem to look into or mislike their
doings, be brought low and disabled with discredit and poverty. See you not
how they (having the Archp. and the assistants at their beck, to do against
the priests whatsoever they will set them on) use his authority to afflict and
injury us as they list? Have they left any thing undone by untrue slanders and
calumnies of schism, rebellion, enormious disobedience, etc. to defame us all
over the Christian world, and to discredit us for ever. Our credits gone, and
our good names taken thus unjustly from us, what remained safe to preserve us
from utter undoing? Was there any thing left us to live upon, but only the use
of our faculties, and our ministry at Gods altar? By these two we were
relieved in our wants, and we were harbored among good people.

Behold now and admire the rare perfection and charity of these men, when they
had most wrongfully defamed us, that this wound might remain incurable, and
this damage might rest unrecoverable, unless we should adventure the loss of
our lives therefore, they have taken from us our faculties also, and suspended
us, the only means wherewith we lived. And for what crimes did they this?
for peaceably defending our good names; for desiring that the controversy
might be referred to the hearing and judgment of the Sea Apostolic; for
appealing to his Ho. without the Archp. his license. They threaten us all most
disgracefully, unless we recall our names from the appeal. Some they have
thrust from their places, where they had harbor and maintenance, to shift at
randon in the world; prohibiting their Catholic benefactors and ghostly
children to have any dealing with them: as Fa. Holtby the Jesuit, and M.
Singleton the assistant have done with M. Steuenson; the Archpriest and Jesuits
with M. Drurie, etc. Others they endeavor in what they can to displace, as the
Archp. has done against M. Neadam, M. Collington, M. Mush, etc. who also with
like charity have withdrawn and auerted all relief (to speak of) from all
the priests in prisons, which stand against them. And that with more pretense
of reason they may debar us of maintenance, they give out, That diverse of us
gave great store of money, and hoords of treasure, which may sufficiently
relieve the rest. Finally, that the infamy may run more smoothly among
Catholics, and our poverty be less pitied by charitable people; rumors are
spread euerywhere, that forsooth twelve of us were at once in conference with a
chief Counselor, who after their departure, exclaimed against them, saying,
That they were the most impudent men that ever he had seen, for they would
boldly teach and direct him what he was to do. And again, answered it with
a vehement oath (say they) that these priests would beggar him, for he had
given them already five hundred pound, and yet they would have more.


Gent. I remember, that two years ago I saw a letter of Father Parsons, sent
by him from Rome into England, wherein he signified, That the Pope and
Cardinals were informed of Master Doctor Bagsha, that he was singularly
favored and entreated by the Queen and Counsel, and that he had a yearly
pension or annuitie of them: which it was not likely they would grant to any,
without doing them some piece of service, answerable to their desires.


Pr. I also had a sight of the letter, wherein the good man was much injuried
diverse ways by slanderous reports. But this same letter bewraied Fa. Parsons
stomach to be ouerloaden with gaul and bitterness against the Doctor; who
notwithstanding all their improbable and uncharitable slanders, has carried
himself with that constancy and good zeal, as well upon the rack, where he
was severely dealt with, as also in prisons these many years, that the
malignitie of his adversaries will ever turn to their own shame, and make to
him a brighter crown of glory and renown. It is well known, that the
Jesuits have and do mightily stomach him: who then are likely to be these
informers to the Pope and Cardinals? not Fa. Parsons (forsooth) and his
Jesuits, they are Saint-like men, and running to perfection, they have no
leisure nor lust to revenge reddere malum pro malo, they be untrue surmises,
wrongfully conceived experiments, and fantastical feelings, that Fa. Parsons
and the Jesuits be implacable men, when they take auersions, that they seek
revenge, that they persecute their adversaries, give maledictum pro maledicto,
or be impatient when they are contradicted. Such as have had bickering with
them in any matter, can best witness what themselves have found. If they be
such perfect patient and mild spirited men, it were sin to suspect so foul a
crime of them, as this is. But if their adversaries have always found them to
use as sharp teeth, and as hurtful tongues, to the renting asunder their good
names, and wounding them otherwise (yet all in secret manner) as any other men,
they have had occasions to deal with; the co^jecture will not be much wide, if
they repute them to be informers of these slanderous reports in Rome against
their conceived enemy Doctor Bag. And this judgment is more freer from all
danger of temeritie, the more assuredly we have known and seen these
religious Fathers to employ themselves very fervently to defame us here at home
without any just cause given them on our part.


Gent. These proceedings of theirs seem strange to me, and make me quake
through fear: for I cannot see how they can be defended.


Pr. Nor I neither in troth, except perhaps they will salve all by their common
medicine, and the end of all they do; that is, propter maiorem Dei gloriam,
and so they cannot do amiss, as long as they intend and refer all to this.


Gent. Ad maioram Dei gloriam?


Pr. Yea, and is not this an end or an intention of highest merit?


Gent. I grant it is. For not only the intentions and end of men's actions
must be good, but also the means used to it. For as Christ's Apostle says: Non
est faciendum malum, vt inde veniat bonum. But I cannot perceive how disgracing
and defaming Catholic Priests can be drawn by the Jesuits to be a mean ad
maiorem Dei gloriam.


Priest. You know nothing. Is it not ad maiorem dei gloriam, that religious men
which have forsaken the world and all preferments for gaining of souls, should
be advanced in estimation and credit before secular priests, which are
entangled in worldly affairs, and by reason of their combersome estate, cannot
attain to the perfection of virtue, nor work so great good among Christian
souls as the religious?


Gent. This seems to be no better than an absurd paradox. For it is fittest
in my opinion, that greatest respect and reputation be made of the secular
priests and pastors, which have charge over souls, and which by their state
and vocation are bound not only to instruct well their people by Catholic
and wholesome doctrine, but more over by their virtuous life and conversation
to give their people exterior examples of well doing. A Jesuit, or any
religious man, after he has preached his sermon, after he has catechized the
people, or heard confessions, or red his lecture, or ministered any Sacrament,
etc. is not by his profession bound to remain still among the people, and
himself to practice in open show what he had taught, and to be ready at all
occasions to help and counsel his auditors: but he may and is by his state
tied to retire himself into his cloister or college, where he may be thus, or
so; good, or bad, as he is disposed: if good, to little edification in the
world; if bad, to small scandale, because he is hid and shut up from the eyes
of the people. He is not to look or hunt for credit, it is enough for him to
be a religious man, to observe the rules and discipline of his order, to preach
good doctrine, and sufficiently to minister the Sacraments he takes in hand.
But a pastor, besides his diligent endeavors in teaching and dispensing of the
mysteries of God, must also at all times and in all occasions, by his virtuous
carriage give a light unto his flock, what they are to do and imitate, or else
he fails in the performance of his duty. And again, unless he have good
credit, and be well esteemed among his people, neither his doctrine nor example
shall much profit; men being naturally inclined rather to imitate and frame
themselves to a meaner person, of whom they carry an high conceit, than to a
better, whom yet they value not so much. And surely in my fantasy the church
is happy, and that people cannot but do well, where the Pastors and Prelates
teaching and living well, are best beloved, honored, and esteemed of above all
others. Religious men are good condjutors, and deserve praise, honor, and
love, if they tender the Pastors credit among the people more than their own;
if they draw the people more to reverence and obey their Priests; and if they
endeavor to make a strict bond of love, honor, and union, between the sheep
and their ordinary sheepeheards. But if once they hunt after a singular name
and credit, and within another man's fould, and aspire to an estimation above
the Pastor, this breeds dislike, division, and contempt of the people
toward their Prelate, and it cannot be but culpable before God and man, as
perverting al good order in the government of Gods church, and robbing secular
Pastors of their due. The religious at no time more deservedly win credit to
themselves, than when they seek the honor and credit of secular Priests
which have charge of souls, and with humility of heart fly temporal
estimation, and desire to be reputed abject or inferiors to all.


Pr. You say well, but now in England the case stands not so, for the secular
priests be no pastors, nor have more charge of souls than the Jesuits, and
therefore your reason holds not.


Gent. I know it is in England, as you have said; Jesuits and Priests have like
charge; but yet, if ever our country be reclaimed to the Catholic faith, and
united again to the church of God, they be secular priests, and not Jesuits,
which must be Pastors, and have the charge of souls: which happy change,
whether it will come in our days, or no, none knows but God. But come when
it shall, it is now before it come most expedient and necessary for that day,
that secular priests which must have the charge when it comes, be not
vndescruedly bereaved of their credits and good names, but be esteemed equally
with the Jesuits, in respect of the charge and toiles they undertake for saving
of souls, not inferior any way in man's eye, as now the game goes, to the
charity and travels of these religious men.


Pr. Well, for this point I will not stand with you, let your reasons have
what weight they shall, I will not discuss them, because we have digressed too
far. Let us suppose this principle of theirs to be true, That it is ad maiorem
Dei gloriam, that their religions have credit above ordinary Pastors, and
Priests may not they then seek to have it?


Gent. Upon that supposition perhaps there will follow no less, but I can
never yield to that supposition.


Pr. Let not the supposition trouble you for this time.


Gent. It shall pass then. But what then?


Pr. Marry, what if these religious men should have a conceit not only that
some secular priests of good fame and credit be their adversaries; but
moreover, that it were good by some odd devise to pull them down, and to
disgrace them; which things being cunningly brought to pass, all would redound
to the credit of their society, and thus all would go round with them: might
they not hereupon disgrace and defame them too upon any small show of offense?


Gent. In my conceit, no. Good men often fall at variance and dissension, and
to discredit or defame ones adversary unjustly, without observing the order of
justice, charity, and conscience, can never be taken as a lawful or as a good
means to work a man's own credit, or the greater glory of God, as I said in
the beginning.


Priest. If this be so, then let the Jesuits look to it, what means they use
and accomodat to this end of their actions proclaimed every where, ad maiorem
Dei gloriam. For me, I want wit to see how they can apply these disgraces and
slanders, wherewith they have oppressed us, to the greater glory of the true
God, though perhaps for a while this odd manner of proceeding may seem to
further their desired credit and advancement. But now to the slander, it is
so manifest an untruth, that I am persuaded surely the reporters themselves
know it so to be, and this the more, if they impose it upon us all. For they
cannot be ignorant, how that diverse of us, who now they persecute, never had to
do with the Counsel or magistrate, or received other benefit from them than
persecution. If they will charge any particular man that receives the fained
maintenance, let them name him, that the rest may be freed, and not deprived
of Catholic alms for another man's fault; if perhaps these good religious
Fathers judge it a fault, for any of us in these extreme wants of relief,
brought upon us by their uncharitable dealings, to receive alms at the hands
of our adversaries in Faith, when we are denied it of Catholics,


Gent. They name M. Doctor Bag. and the report runs generally of you all.


Pr. For us all it is needless to say more: now for Doctor Bagsha, of whom by
likelihood Father Parsons had informed the Pope and Cardinals to have yearly
anuitie of the Queen; it is no better than a malicious calumny, purposely
devised and cast abroad to make the good man odious to all honest minds. In the
tower indeed, while he was prisoner for his Faith, he had the Queens
ordinary allowance granted before to Fa. Campion, Fa. Hawood, after to Father
John Gerrard, Jesuits, and denied to no poor prisoner there. In the gate house
also, in his last troubles which were procured to him (as many probably
affirm, by some busy plotting Jesuits beyond, when they tampered with Squire
about doing violence to her Majesty's person) he had the Queens allowance
during his abode there (as they say:) and it may perhaps be, that finding him
guiltless of all those treasonable practices, the Counsel bestowed some thing
on him toward his charges in that trouble, or surely it had been a deed of
charity to have been done so. But what is all this to Fa. Parsons information
of an anuitie, or to the report that now flies current against him and all the
rest, of being maintained by the Counsel?


Gent. Nothing at all.


Priest. It is a worlds wonder therefore to behold how forward, and how eagre
these religious men be, to make all our friends and benefactours to forsake us,
both for entertainment and relief. And besides these reports, all untrue as
you see, they use another pretty mean to withdraw our Catholic friends, from
us.


Gent. What may this be I pray you?


Pr. Mary, when no other devise will serve to work this feat, the religious
Fathers turn themselves to terrify our friends and benefactors, from
releeuing us, by dreadful threats; as, that whosoever stands with us in
these controversies against them, shall have all confiscated before the twelve
months end, and be left not worth a groat.


Gent. Belike they have laid their plot, and think it sure, to have their
desired effect.


Priest. I know not what, nor how they have plotted, but this bugge flies all
over.


Gent. How know you that it proceedtth from the Jesuits?


Pr. I doubt not but the original is from them, because their intierest
friends and adherents prattle it every where. Again, it has been long the
fashion of the religious Fathers to put men into great expectation of favor
and advancement when their day shall come, and to ring every year fresh larums
of foreign preparations, and I know not what; that by these vain hopes, and
hurtful bables, they may retain their old friends and win new, and withal
drive fearful conceits into the minds of all such as run not their courses.


Gent. Truly I think this to be so; and my self have heard some priests
familiar with them, which yet exceedingly misliked their doings and busy
tampering, say, These Jesuits look one day to have the dealing of all
Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical livings, unless we flatter them and feed
their humors, we shall get nothing.


Pr. These were base-minded priests.


Gent. They be so indeed, yet they are highly esteemed of by the Jesuits, for
seeming forward men for them.


Pr. I abhor such collouging. But to put you out of doubt whence these
threats have their origin, I assure you it was a famous father of the Jesuits,
that in plain words said to a gentlewoman of good calling, which charitably
respected the disgraced priests, and was resolved to stand indifferent to all,
until the controversy were decided by the Church: Now (said he) is the time
of trial, they that are not with us, are against us (the good man would have
had her neither to relieve nor harbor any of us, but to shun us all, as
rebellious schismatickes) if you forsake them not now, you will overthrow your
self and all your posterity for ever. This he said to affright the charitable
gentlewoman, as though the state of her posterity should be utterly
overthrown, unless she adhered to the Jesuits (for who must not stand at
their devotion, when all comes to their sharing) and do bad offices against
us priests, her known Catholic and sincere friends. What more? was it not
another Jesuit with his assistant, which caused a Gentleman either to promise
or to swear, that he should stand fast unto them, and inform whatsoever he
saw or heard by priests and others, done against them and the Archp. his
proceedings? They made the lay gentleman their spy, (as they have every where
many such, as well lay men, as women and priests) upon promise on their side
again to him, that he should be restored to all his lands forfeited by his
ancestors in a commotion by an attainder, when the world should fall on their
side. The silly Gentleman moved with this hope, undertook the disgraceful
office, and said to his friends that he had wrought a very good days work
when he entered this covenant: yet coming among his old acquaintance, he would
now and then reveal the secret, and forewarne them to speak nothing which
they were not willing to have carried further: for he had undertaken and
promised to inform what he heard.


Gent. This was a very bad office for a Gentleman, surely he was some fool.


Pr. Nay, no fool for want of wit; but in truth the polliticke practices and
the cunning devises used by Jesuits in our nation these late years, have not
only much impeached the due estimation, honor, and reverent respect which the
laity carried toward Catholic priests before they entered among us, and
some while after; but it has more over exceedingly decayed the natural
sincere condition of our people; and there the most, where these fathers have
had most conversation and dealing: many of modest and temperat constitution are
become imperious, brazen faced, and furious men against priests; they that were
lowly and humble, peremptory, rash in their judgments and disdainefull; the
simple and sincere, are grown to be cunning and double dealers, full of
equivocations in their words, and dissembling in their behauior. But to come to
the slanderous report we have in hand, what say you? Have you any more to
object for them, or you rest satisfied?


Gent. I have no more to say, but am sorry that upon so slender grounds, the
Jesuits, with the Archp. and their adherents, raise up such slanderous
buildings.


Pr. Well then, shall we pass to some other points?


Gent. With a good will.


Priest. Go to then, what is the next?


The third slander.
Gent. They report that your cause has been tried already at Rome, and the two
messengers you sent heard, condemned, and punished, and all you in them. So
that it is nothing but your contentious spirits that move you without any
cause, to stir afresh in these matters; for you can never be at rest, because
you are full of emulation, and you cannot endure to obey your Archpriest,
because you are ambitious and desirous of authority your selves.


Pr. For our disobedience to the Archpriest, it is refuted before, I need to
say no more of that calumny. And touching the other, That we are ambitious,
and would have the authority our selves; this is also an improbable devised
slander by our adversaries. How know they that we are ambitious?


Gent. Mary they say that M. Coll. should have been Archbishop of Canterbury,
and M. Mush Archbishop of York, and the rest of you in like sort sought for
other dignities.


Priest. These truly be no other than malignant fictions of our adversaries,
which respect not how they do it, so they may detract us, and make us more
odious among priests and Catholics in our nation. But this only reason quite
confounds them, That none of them is able to charge any of us in particular
with any such attempt, that by word or deed we ever went about our own
preferment. For in all things concerning these matters of procuring bishops, or
suffraganes, or other prelates for governing our church, after the death of
Cardinal Allen, when very scandalous contentions grew between the Jesuits and
some seminary priests at Wisbech, our adversaries cannot say that we went
about it secretly, did any thing, or intended to do, but by the general
consents and concurrance of all our brethren priests and Jesuits, referring all
as well for the kind of government, as for the men to be preferred, to the
voices, good liking, and choice of every one. And only we propounded to our
brethren what we judged fittest, desiring every one to give their consent and
opinion also, that whatsoever should be propounded to his Holiness, might be
as from us all, or the most. This being true, as our adversaries cannot deny
it to be, what a wilful peruersitie is it in them, to charge us with
ambition? and this the rather, for that they are not ignorant how unlikely it
was, that these whom they most note with this slander, should be chosen to
these rooms, if the election should have passed by free voice and general
consent of our whole clergy. For emulation, it is a frivolous toy; for admit
any of us were of that ambitious humor they report us to be, yet is there no
such good or pleasure in the Archp. his authority, as any of us should emulate
him for it, or desire to have it from him: neither since the beginning has his
carriage been in that office so commendable for discretion, sincerity, upright
dealing among his brethren, moderation, prudence, compassion, and other
virtues requisite to be in a superior, especially in this afflicted state of
ours, that he has given any man occasion to envy his credit, or covet the
glory of his actions. But many he has stirred up to mislike him and his
government, and to lament the woeful state of our Church, managed by so unfit
a man. For surely, if I were deuoid of grace, and if I were his mortal enemy,
I could not have wished him to have governed and behaved himself in worse sort
than he has done.


Gent. I have heard of little good or none, that he has done since his first
entrance into the office: but sure I am, our Church was never so harmed by
contentions and scandals, as it has been in these three years of his
government.


Priest. No marvel, when he is wholly led by the Jesuits, the principal
authors and parties in these dissentions. But now concerning, that they say our
cause has been heard already, and judged at Rome against us, and thereupon
our two messengers punished, and we all in them; it is a manifest untruth, as
appears by M. Doctor Bishops answer to Fa. Parsons letter, and by the
censure of the same letter, all in print: for by Fa. Parsons wicked and false
information our two priests could never have access to his Ho.nor audience,
but were shortly after their arrival apprehended as notable malefactors, shut
up severally in very close prison under Fa Par. custody. Fa. P. was the
misinformer to his Ho. Fa. P. was the guide to the officers that apprehended
them. Fa. P. was their jailer, their examiner, the appointer of his brother
Jesuit to be the scribe and notarie. Fa. P. was the framer of libels against
them, the procurer and instructor of two English priests his deputies, to
prefer his libels against them. Fa. P. was the inuentor, whisperer, and
soother of all bad matters, which might bring them in hatred: the disposer of
the time and manner of their audience before two Cardinals, seven weeks after
their taking, the contriuer and moderator in all those actions, the ransacker
of all their writings and stuff. Fa. P. would never permit them to confer
together, nor the one to see the other, till they appeared before the
Cardinal. Fa. P. prohibited them to have a copy of the slanderous libels,
which he had caused to be read in the Cardinals presence for their disgrace,
or to answer to them. Fa. P. deprived them of all advise and helps of learned
counsel. Fa. P. shut the^ up again for other seven or eight weeks more, until
he had procured the Popes Breue for confirmation of the authority, which
himself had by collusion obtained a year before. And after (least they should
return to England, and tell tales of his cruelty and corrupt dealings) Fa.
Par. plotted and devised their miserable banishment, the one into Paris, the
other into Mussipont in Lorraine. It was Fa. P. that in Rome labored to
discredit them and all our Clergy, by carrying about and showing their linen
sockes, their handkerchifes, their nightcoyfes, very mean in respect of such
as himself and his Jesuits have worn in England, and their silk points of
12. pence the dozen. Fa. P. dismissed one many days after the other, least
traveling together, they should have too much comfort and help in so long a
journey. Fa. P. sent them away without viaticum, or any farthing of provision
and allowance to live upon, how long soever the time of their banishment should
last; and yet Fa. P. charitably provided that they should not for any cause
depart from those places, without incurring the greatest censures.


Gent. This man seems to have a violent, or rather a cruel spirit.


Priest. He has so no doubt, where he is offended, and can execute his will.


Gent. Why did these two Priests go to Rome.


Priest. First to know assuredly whether the Archp. authority was instituted
by his Holiness; for it was brought without any Apostolical writ. Again, to
declare unto his Ho. the difficulties and inconueniencies thereof, and the
harms probably like to ensue to our whole Church, unless it were altered.
Again, truly to inform his Ho. of the state of our Church in all things; and
lastly, to know his good pleasure what he would have us to do, and to bring us
word thereof.


Gent. These were good causes of going to Rome: if these were all, they
deserved neither imprisonment, nor banishment, nor in any sort should they have
been hardly used, or denied audience. Surely they had committed some other
fault.


Priest. None at all surely. Fa. Parson feared, least if they should have had
free audience, they would have detected his cunning dealing with the Pope, in
procuring the new authority; and with our Church, in imposing it so violently
upon our Clergy; and have finally overthrown all his plots laid for
oppressing our priests, and the advancement of his soietie in England. For this
cause having Cardinal Caiet. ready to inform, and effect whatsoever he
would move him to, he maliciously informed the Pope against our priests, shut
up all the ways of audience, and got them taken, and committed to close
prison, before ever they were heard, and at the last banished.


Gent. They were brought before the Cardinal Caietane, and another Cardinal
in the English College, and then heard what they could say.


Pr. After seven weeks close imprisonment, they were called before them
indeed, their examinations taken by Fa. P. of many impertinent matters, were
read, and after there was a shameful slanderous libell exhibited against
them, and read by M. Haddocke and M. Array, two English priests, suborned by Fa.
P. and ready for whatsoever he would bid them do to serve his turn: which
yet our priests could not be permitted to have a copy of, nor to answer
unto. And for their maine business, it was nothing at all to the purpose
spoken of.


Gent. Why did not your priests deliver their businesses to the Cardinals at
that time?


Priest. Because they were not called forth for that end, but as malefactors to
answer to whatsoever Fa. Par. had devised against them. And they saw neither
time nor place fit to deliver it, where the iniquity of Fa. P. so much
prevailed, and all justice and indifferency was abandoned, especially they
perceiving Fa. Parsons (without discontenting Cardinal Caietane by so doing)
disposed to deride and make to seem contemptible both the men, and whatsoever
they said in any thing that crossed his humor. They asked the Cardinal if he
condemned their coming to the Sea Apostolic about the affairs of their
Church. He said no, it was lawful. Why then are we thus punished said they?
Not for your coming, but because you have thereby and by your contentions,
scandalized many in England. And in the sentence of the Cardinals, the crimes
for which they were banished, are specified to be neither schism nor
rebellion, nor enormious disobedience to the Pope, or Archpriest: but because
they had had contentions in England with men of their own order, whether
justly or injustly they had these contentions, it is not declared; that so
untrue a calumny might go more current in those doubtful speeches, whereas
no bad or unjust dealings of theirs in England could be proved against them
before those Cardinals, but all matters were shuffled up, and done just as Fa.
P. would have them.


Gent. Whereby it seems that this controversy of yours was never at that
time discussed or mentioned at all in Rome.


Pr. They there never had it in question or speech whether we were
schismatics, or rebellious, or enormiously disobedient, for our bearing off to
accept the authority, before the coming of the Breue. And therefore you may
see by this, what little truth is in the Jesuits words, when they affirm that
our cause was heard, and sentence given against us in Rome.


Gent. Why have they tampered so much in these matters against you?


Pr. Oh, they be Jesuits, they must be stirring, and the true causes are these:
They would not be subordinat in any manner to ordinary prelates in England, as
to Bishops, Suffraganes, etc. but bear themselves the greatest sway in the
government of our Church, and disposing of all things. To exclude therefore all
ordinary prelates, which were to be chosen by voices and common consent of
our clergy, they prevented us secretly, by getting an Archp. to rule over
all, except themselves. This authority was of their own devising; the man
preferred thereto of their own election; in whose government also and actions,
they provided, that themselves should have a principal stroke; that forsooth
in every matter of importance the Archp. should have the advice and direction
of the head Jesuit in England. Thus their wills should be fulfilled without
check, in all they listed to attempt or desire. Now after they had by false
suggestion, by many ways procured this new authority, and brought us all into
their bondage, it behooued them to hold it by violence and strong hand, which
they had contrived by such cunning, for their own particular, without respect
of conscience or charity. The end I told you of admaiorem dei gloriam, which
is cheefely by the advancement of their society, salueth all odd dealings.


Gent. It were more time that we proceeded to some other matter, for I should
understand this more by reading the censure and letter you spoke of.


Pr. Let us so do; what is the next?


The fourth Slander.
Gent. The report is all over, That you be adversaries or enemies to the
Jesuits, which are known to be religious men of singular virtue and perfection,
and to whom above all men, our nation is most bound; and many things are said
of your hard dealing against them.


Pr. I pray you let us hear all, and I shall satisfy you in every point as
well as I can.


Gent. I shall speak all, as it comes to my remembrance.


Priest. Do so; but for this you have said, what ground have they to prove us
their enemies, or in what are we their enemies, say they? I know some have
said and written, That we are enemies to their religious perfection.


Gent. I also have heard the same of their dearest favorites.


Priest. This is a rash and uncharitable calumny: For no man can be an enemy
to religious perfection, but thereby he falls from Gods grace. For albeit no
man out of vow be bound under mortal sin, to observe the Evangelical
counsels, yet can no Christian hate the obseruers of them, or become their
enemy for that respect, but he offends mortally thereby. If therefore it be
certain, that we be their enemies, it is no less certain, that the cause is
not any part of religious perfection to be noted in them: for otherwise should
we be enemies also to the religious men of other orders, as to Dominicans,
Franciscans, Benedictines, Carthusians, and the rest; in all the which, no man
except a Jesuit, will deny as much religious perfection to be found, as is
among the Jesuits; yea, we should be more enemies to all them than to Jesuits,
if this were the cause that moves us in this case. For all these have the
essential vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, as well as Jesuits; and
it is to be supposed, that they observe them as perfectly. Besides, they have
their continual abstinence, their diverse Lents, and many extraordinary
fasts, their nightly risings and watchings to sing lauds to God, to meditate
and to pray, their great castigations, and usual afflictions of their bodies;
by disciplines, hard diet,, sharp attire, and other means of mortification.
(All which the Jesuits want, more than that now and then like good ordinary
secular priests, they will be doing something, but little to account of in
respect of the continued toils and mortifications of other holy religions men
of all sorts.) Now, if religious perfection were the cause of this feigned
hatred or emnitie, we should be most auersed from all these orders, in which we
know these means of perfections, or perfections most to abound; and most love
and embrace the Jesuits, in whom we know all these to be wanting. But neither
be we enemies to those holy orders, neither will those holy men impute unto us
this calumny, neither can the Jesuits themselves be ignorant, that we love and
honor those orders and men for their great virtues and mortification of life.
And therefore this slander is intolerable injury unto us all, to make the
world believe us so void of grace and godliness, that we are enemies to the
Jesuits for their virtue and perfection: thus putting us in the rank of the
vilest miscreants that are, or can be imagined. The truth therefore is, that
we love and honor the Jesuits order, and should both love and honor them
more, the more they and their order tends to perfection, and the lowlier
conceit they carried of themselves. And if we be their adversaries, it is for
some other cause than their virtues.


Gent. For what I pray you?


Pr. No other but the very same, for which the Jesuits have accounted many men
of great virtue and calling to be their adversaries.


Gent. Father Parsons in his VVardword to Sir Francis Hastings, seems to say,
that none but badly disposed men, and wretches given over to wickedness, are
adversaries to Jesuits. How then can it be, that good men are their
adversaries, as you say?


Priest. I say not that good men were their adversaries, but that they
accounted many virtuous men their adversaries. For albeit they reckon every one
to be their adversary that crosses their doings in any respect; yet in truth
a virtuous man in so doing is their friend: and if selfe-liking were abandoned,
would be so esteemed by them. They only, and some such like, as Fa. P. there
speaks of, are their true adversaries, which hate and mislike their virtue
and well doing, and go about to hinder this, be it in a Jesuit, or in any
other honest Catholic man.


Gent. Such wicked men be adversaries to all true Christians; but yet Fa.
Parsons, with many beyond, and these Jesuits in England, account you, and all
your adherents here or abroad, to be adversaries to their society.


Pr. I grant they do. But this is because we contradict and resist the ill
actions and proceedings of some particular men of their society. For they must
have all approved and justified, whatsoever any of them does, otherwise you
cannot be thought their friend. This is a comfort, that we may be right good
men before God and the world, notwithstanding these Fathers account us their
adversaries, yea, and persecute us also, as they have, and do. For many
priests whom they have sought vehemently to discredit by this report of being
their adversaries, and therefore have disgraced them in what they could, as
well in England, as in our Colleges under their government beyond (which
almost never have been free from grievous contentions) are now glorious Martyrs
in heaven; which being rejected and persecuted by them, yet labored in Gods
vineyard here as painefully and as fruitfully (to say no more) as any Jesuit in
the realm: yea, and when it came to the trial of their virtue; their
resolution, and their constant charity, these outcasts the Jesuits adversaries
were always found no less patient in torments and prisons, and no less
courageous in shedding their blood for defense of Christ's cause, than any of
the Jesuits. This was manifest (to let all the rest of the Martyrs and
confessors pass) in the blessed priests, M. John Ingram, M. Thomas Pormort,
and M. Lanton, glorious Martyrs, yet reckoned in the number of the Jesuits
adversaries, yea, and not a little afflicted and disgraced by them for the
same. What will Fa. P. and the Jesuits say to the most gracious and peerless
jewel of our country, Cardinal Allen? Must he for company also be raunged
and thrust into that predicament of their adversaries, where Fa. P. affirms
to Sir Francis Hastings, that none be the Jesuits adversaries, except
Heretics, Apostataes, dissolute men, disobedient malcontents, and the like?
It were too too bad impudency and intolerable malice to say, that he was
not a right virtuous, a wise, and a gracious man.


Gent. Yea; but he was not the Jesuits adversary.


Pr. Then they foulely belie him. For I assure you, my self have often heard
some Jesuits earnestly affirm, that he was their adversary, and much auersed
from them before his death.


Gent. I marvel greatly, that any of them having wit, will report this: for
that must be a great discredit to them, to say, that a man of those graces,
which every way he was known to have, were their adversary, and auersed from
them; considering all men hearing this, would forthwith conceive some evil
desert to be in them, by reason whereof he was become their adversary.


Pr. The reporters were told no less; but what is to be expected, where
ouer-weening of themselves, blinds these Saints? Now then Cardinal Allen was
their adversary by their own confession; but Cardinal Allen was well known
in Christendom to be a good virtuous man: then it follows, that good men may
be the Jesuits adversaries: and again, that in truth it is no discredit for a
Catholic priest to be their adversary, to contradict or withstand them in
any ill attempt or action of theirs: and lastly, it follows, that the Jesuits
be no such Saints, as their good end of doing all ad maiorem dei gloriam can
justify and make current all they do.


Gent. But what? was Cardinal Allen their adversary indeed?


Priest. I know that he misliked and condemned many things the Jesuits did,
and in this sort he was their adversary, and so be we. For I have heard him
much condemn their government of our college in Rome; namely, for their want
of frugalitie, and using the houses living to the most benefit of our nation;
for their palpable partiality to some of the students above the rest; for
their continual enticing and drawing by an hundred cunning means, our most
towardly youths to be of their society: for keeping such many times as they
had allured and won unto them, under the names of our scholars, till they had
ended their courses of study; by which policy, the Jesuits nouices occupied
the rooms provided for our students, and by them, more were entised to become
Jesuits. Again he condemned their government, in that for very trifles they
would discontent and afflict the students, yea, and upon light occasions
disgrace them, dismiss them before their time, and taking displeasure,
indaunger for a toy to break and overthrow men of many good parts and
expectation. He was wont to say, that the governors of that College, and
their fellows in England, had a greater respect to their own interest or
benefit in both places, than to the common good of our country.


Gent. If he had thus mistiked them, why being in authority, made he not
redress thereof?


Priest. Without peradventure he misliked no less than I have told you, but
why he reformed not all, I know not certainly. He was of a mild and of a quiet
natural disposition, ever unwilling to take any rough or severe course, or to
give the Jesuits so great disgust, as he must have done, if he should have
reformed what was needful. These mislikes he had of their proceedings both in
England and in Rome, made known unto them by sweet and friendly admonition,
caused them to account and report him to be their adversary. What would they
have done (think you) if either he had removed them from the government of
the College, or recalled them out of England?


Gent. During his life, all was well in England, and in that College of Rome
also.


Pr. It was not so evil in either place then, as since his death it has been;
but yet he perceived well how in England the Jesuits little tendered the good
and credit of our priests, and how that the more they had dealing among the
ablest sort of Catholics, the more decayed the maintenance of our seminary at
Doway or Rhemes, the customary alms not coming from England to it, as before
there did when the secular priests had more doing. By reason of which want,
that seminary (the mother of all the rest, and then much better to our nation
than all the rest, with it, are at this day) decayed every year more and more
in the Cardinals time. And for the College at Rome, it was often in his time
also in great tumult and garboile, by reason of the contentions between the
Jesuits and scholars: which ever the gracious Cardinal pacified again and
suppressed, before it gave scandale abroad, by his quiet, wise, and moderat
dealing with both parties. Yet have I heard him much complain of the Jesuits
headie and indiscreet government, and say their government is naught, and they
will never amend it, for they will not hear advise: whilst I live, I shall
keep all down, but after I be dead, ye shall see the scholars and them at
woeful dissentions.


Gent. It is strange, the Jesuits being good men, they should rule so ill.


Priest. It is not strange, for it is usual in all estates, That the best men
are not the best rulers. If a man lack the gifts of prudence, of justice, and
discretion, of sincerity, and of compassion in his actions, be he otherwise
never so great a Saint, he shall never govern well. The general of the
Jesuits order that now lives, was often wont to say to our Cardinal, that he
could have store of learned and virtuous men, but he found very few good
governors among his subjects; which is a defect (as I said) common to all
orders and sorts of people. Cardinal Allen would say that Fa. Creswell the
Jesuit, and once a turbulent Rector in the English College at Rome, was a good
man, and fit to be a subject, but the unfittest to be a superior of any man
that ever he had known: For (said he) his delight was, to be afflicting the
scholars, and it was all one to be an orderly or disorderly man under him;
because if they were externally unruly, he would punish them, and if externally
they observed their rules, he would yet be ever displeased, and vexing them,
saying, That in their hearts they were ill disposed, and that they conspired
against him to observe the rules in outward show only, to the intent he should
not give them pennances.


Gent. This was very foolish proceeding in a government, and it argued an
indiscreet and busy head.


Priest. I tell it you as the Cardinal told it me: but let us go forward, to
show that they be not always in Fa. Parsons bad predicament, whom the Jesuits
account their adversaries. We have said of Cardinal Allen. Now let us come
to Cardinal Borromie, the late Archbishop of Millaine, famous for his virtue
and wisdom throughout all Christendom. The Jesuits reckoned him among their
adversaries, for I have heard a Jesuit say it.


Gent. Why should that blessed man be thought or reckoned their adversary?


Priest. Not surely for that he either hated or disliked any virtue in them,
but because they saw him to mislike, condemn, and resist their ordinary
disordered proceedings in the government of his seminaries. For perceiving
the^ ever to be diligently fishing among his scholars, to draw the best and
most towardly of them into their society, whereby in short time his Churches
were to lack sufficient Pastors, and to be greatly damnified; he took from
them the government of his seminaries, and committed them to discreet secular
priests. Which prudent fact of his, being (as they interpreted it) both to the
Jesuits some dscredit and detriment, how could they but reckon him their
adversary? Cardinal Toledo also, who had been one of their society from his
youth, the first Cardinal of their order, was not he in like manner reputed
their adversary, as well before his promotion, as after?


Gent. I have heard some Jesuits report hardly of that man, for crossing them
in many things, and amongst the rest, in the government of the English
College at Rome, when he put the^ all from thence, except four, and reformed
the government, to the great comfort and good of our students, as long as that
good Cardinal lived. Some also of them reported disgraceful things of his
death.


Pr. If they conceive a man to be their adversary, he shall be assured to want
their good word: but yet notwithstanding the disgraceful reports some here
have made of his death, I have heard one, in whose arms it is said he gave up
the ghost, testify, That he made a virtuous end. The Jesuits will not deny,
but that they have adversaries in France, yea Catholics, which concurred to
their expulsion thence, and still resist their bringing in again. What? will
they affirm all the French nation, which be their adversaries, the King, the
Cardinals, the Bishops, the inferior Clergy, the Divines, the Universities,
the Nobility, the Gentry, and all the people together, to be in Fa. Parsons
graceless predicament, and to be bad men? If they presume thus far, who will
believe them? But before the general banishments of the Jesuits out of
France, they ever accounted the University of Paris, and many Prelates and lay
men, to have been their adversaries or heavy friends, when there was no
suspicion of joining against them with an heretical or an evil prince. What
can they say to the Bishops and Pastors in the Low countries, and the
Universities of Doway, whom they reckon to be their adversaries, by reason of
the great contentions had between them about eight years ago? What to the
Universities of Louaine, with whom they have had bickering since? What to the
whole order of Dominicans (letting pass other religious) between whom and
them there has been of long, as is, continual bitter strifes in Spain, as
all the world knows? And all these included in Fa. Parsons ougly beadroll? If
all these be of bad disposition, and graceless, because they be the Jesuits
adversaries, then have we also good cause to dread: but if contrariwise these
be reported to be their adversaries, and are indeed no less than we, and yet
known to be good Catholic men, Universities, and orders; it is no true cause
of disgrace unto us, if we be reported also their adversaries, for defending
our selves against their violent injuries, and for resisting their other
courses, manifestly hurtful to our whole church.


Gent. What is the cause that they make these troubles, and give such
discontent almost in every place where they come?


Pr. Surely not any perfection of virtue that is in them above other religious
men, but their polliticke tampering, and their busy stirring both in temporal
states, and Ecclesiastical. For they being not tied to keep the quire with
divine offices, as other religious orders be, they have more leisure and
liberty than any other, to occupy themselves in matters impertinent unto
them. It is their glory to be ever stirring in the greatest affairs, and
with the greatest personages where they come: yea, they delight so much in the
active life, that their young men are no sooner out of their nouiceship or
course in learning, but if there be ought in them, they begin to tamper and to
become polliticke, and must be thought sufficient to manage any business. I
remember I have read in an Italian history, written by a gentleman of Genua,
touching the late king of Portugal Sebastian, and the competitors to that
crown after his death: how the Jesuits greatly favored by that king,
disturbed not a little the peace of that kingdom by their tampering in the
princes affairs: where the author notes, how with great indiscretion, as upon
a head and suddenly, they would have reformed the corrupt manners of the
country. Again, how by the Cardinals means they procured the displacing of
some ancient officers about the king, and brought in such as depended on
themselves, to no small coffeehouse of many. And lastly, how especially upon
the Jesuits motion and persuasion, the king entertained the Affricane affairs,
and resolved to undertake that fatal voyage, from which yet they could not
afterward dissuade him, when it was misliked and thought dangerous by all his
friends, This History is now in English: See page 9. 10. 11. etc.
because they had set him too far in liking therewith before. But at the last,
they wrought themselves out of favor with the king as he says, for they would
ouerrule all.


Gent. I would see that history.


Pr. I think you may have it in England, it is in Octauo, and printed in
Italy, as I remember.


Gent. By likelihood then this busy intermeddling of theirs in Universities,
in kingdoms, in the charges of Bishops and Pastors, etc. is the chief cause
why they work these troubles every where.


Pr. Verily I think it be. For among them he is most esteemed, that can show
himself most politic, most stirring, and undertaking, especially with
greatest estates and highest matters.


Gent. These humors are not in them all. For I know diverse of them very good,
simple, and virtuous men, which trouble their heads with nothing, except their
study and devotion.


Pr. There be some of them no doubt such as you say, continuing in the
simplicity and good zeal, wherewith they first entered, and increasing their
spiritual graces. These, though they must sooth the humors of the rest, and in
all things defend their actions, yet delight not to be busy and stickling in
others men's affairs: and indeed these be the glory of their society, and
deserve love and honor above the rest. But there be few of this sort,
considering it is a credit among themselves to be active and politic, and no
small contention who may be thought most to excel in these.


Gent. Yet many good men think much, and marvel what should be the cause why
you secular priests should be adversaries to the Jesuits, and have contentions
with them, and especially with Fa. Parsons, who is most esteemed of among the
Jesuits for his wisdom and other good parts; and who also has wrought great
good to our Nation, by his book of Resolution, which argues him to be a
virtuous man: and by erecting Semenaries for the education of our young men. And
generally the Jesuits seek not their own temporal benefit, but bestow
themselves only for the good of others: and many say, that without them our
Church had been in worse case than it is. Again, that it is but a slander,
that they entermeddle in the mattets of you secular priests, or that they have
any dealings in the affairs of temporal estates. It is no just cause given
you by them, but your own unmortified passions, and disobedient minds to your
lawful superiors, which make you to repine and mammer, and to exclaim against
them.


Priest. For the Jesuits in general, I never said nor thought other, but that
if they keep themselves only at these good exercises of preaching, of
ministering sacraments, without prejudice to the ordinary Pastors, of
catechizing, of teaching in schools, of visiting the sick; and living as
brethren and fellow laborers in Gods work, seek the estimation of the
secular clergy among their people: I never thought (I say) but that they be
very profitable coadjutors in Christ's church, and deserve love and reverence of
all sorts. But if withal they become officious sticklers in princes affairs,
Ecclesiastical or temporal, or busy themselves with entermedling in the
secular Cleargies matters, which belong not to them, and seek to advance
themselves in credit, and otherwise above the priests, as in England they have
done; I then think them very dangerous and noisome members in any church, for
the subversion of peace and good order; because upon that disposition forthwith
they bring in great deuisions, and draw both priests and people into lamentable
factions, as is manifest in this poor realm. At Wisbech you have heard how
they made very scandalous contentions about establishing a superiority in one
of theirs, above all the other prisoners. You have heard also how they hindered
the union of secular priests in a confraternitie: how they withstood our
endeavors touching Bishops or Suffraganes: how without our consents or priuitie
they procured an Archpriest to be ordained over all English priests in England
and Scotland: they only appointing what kind of superiority and government
our Church should have, and choosing the man which should be superior: notably
abusing his Hol. and our whole Clergy in that action, and very cunningly
hereby preventing, that no superior should be over them within the realm.
Who but they enforced the same authority, which themselves only had devised,
and fraudulently obtained? Who enforced it upon our Clergy with violence and
threats but they, and this before it was confirmed by his Holiness? Who
wrongfully defamed the priests, that bare off to receive it before the
confirmation came, to be schismatickes, rebels, etc. but the Jesuits and
others by their setting on? Who, after all was pacified, renewed the same
slander and infamy against the priests, that for charity sake had forgiven
it, but the Jesuits in England and at Rome, and the Archp. by their advise?
Who have continued the strife, by refusing all conferences, friendly
debatings, disputes, meetings, and so many most reasonable offers, and
indifferent conditions of peace, and ending all, as we have made? And who
sought to ouerbeare us all by strong hand, without respect of equity and
conscience, but the Jesuits, and the Archpriest directed by them? Who have
most uncharitably injuried our priests by suspensions, by deprivation of
faculties, by in just decrees, by hereauing them of their maintenance, of their
friends, and places of entertainment and harbor, and all this without trial
or proof of any crime at all, or admitting them to answer, or citing them to
appear, but Jesuits, abusing the Archp. his authority? For by his
instructions (as I have said before) he is to do nothing without the Jesuits
advise and direction in any matter of importance: the good men providing, that
not only they should be exempted from all subjection and subordination to him
and his authority; but also, that themselves should bear the greatest stroke
in the execution thereof. What belonged all these matters to them, if they had
been content to stand within their own bounds? They are religious men, by
their particular society and profession, separated from the secular clergy,
and making a distinct body of themselves. By the rule of their order, not to
take rooms of prelacie among the Clergy of the secular rank. What then did
it appertain to them, to choose the manner of our government, or to appoint
who should be superior to us? It cannot doubtless be defended from a
malapart and presumptuous attempt, which is an inseparable propriety of their
busy entermedling humor.


Gent. They were priests, laboring in this harvest with you: and seeing this
authority needful, they might procure it without blame.


Pr. They are priests indeed, but they be exceeding cunning pollitickes
withal. It was not the good nor peace of our church they aimed at, in
procuring this authority: (For then they would have wrought with our consent
and liking, and the matter should not have been shuffled up in darkness as it
was) but that by this mean they might domineere over us, and themselves be
freed from all subjection of our prelates. They are priests and our fellow
laborers, so be we to them also; this required at the most, that we might
admit them to join with us in advise about these elections, as we did in all
things; but it could never privilege them to enterprise and contriue these
matters against our wills, or without our consents and priuitie; a great many of
us having labored in the harvest as much as they, others having toiled far
above them, and as it were the whole burden and weight of the work lying upon
our shoulders, and not upon theirs, especially where painful travail and
poverty is to be sustained. They would scorn no doubt, yea, exceedingly
disdain, and bestirre themselves, if we priests, their fellows in this work,
should presume to ouer-reach as they have done, and put our sickle into their
harvest, to appoint without their consents or knowledge, what government and
superior they should have: and yet we with as much reason might do this, as
they have done the other. Thus you see there is overmuch cause given us by
them, of grief and coffeehouse. Moreover, in this point they showed another
policy.


Gent. What is that?


Pr. Marry, there be often in our Church, large sums of money given in alms,
ad pios vsus, we know they are granted and bequeathed, but few are better for
them: they pass God knows whither, but they are invisible to poor Priests,
and prisoners.


Gent. Perhaps they come not to the Jesuits hands.


Priest. I wish they did not, more than their equal share. But it is noted
that either all or the most great sums, come to the fingering of certain lay
men, most entirely devoted, and familiar with the Jesuits; the disposition of
which men is thought to be sincere and just, and not willing to disperse the
alms but as the Jesuits shall appoint or approve. We know the Jesuits to
abound in all things; the Priests and poor Catholics in many places, and the
prisoners generally to suffer penury more than ever they did. Now, if we had
in our Church Bishops or Suffraganes, chosen by the free voices of our
Clergy, can you think these sums should be permitted thus unprofitably to
vanish away? or that the exceutors should not be brought to their accounts? or
that the Jesuits should have all the stroke in the distributions? or that
their shares should exceed the poor men's in so great inequality as a pound is
to a penny? There was never greater alms given, than has been within these
four or five years, in which the Jesuits have borne the greatest sway: and
yet there has never been the like wants among poor Catholic priests, and
amongst poor Catholics in prison and abroad, and in the seminary at Doway
as has been in these years, and still remains. It is wonderful to consider
which way it goes. The Jesuits indeed abound in all things, but I will not
charge them with bad dealing: let the supposition plead thus, or so, as men
conceive of it.


Gent. I will not condemn them neither. But yet I have heard of one Jesuit
that has worn a girdle with hangers and rapier above ten pound, a jerken also
that cost no less, and also that had made him two suits of apparel in one
year, and all very costly; and whose horse and furniture, and his own
apparel on him was valued to an hundred pounds: one who for his part by the
report of his brother, dispendeth yearly 400 li: and yet has no patrimony. If
some few more of the^ be as wastful as this one, no marvel if great sums make
little relief among the poor.


Pr. In this point therefore they dealt politickely, when they hindered us of
ordinary pastors and prelates, that in all things themselves might run without
check or controuler. Thus they seek to benefit others and not their own.


Gent. Yea, but M. Blackwell the Archp. writ to Cardinal Caietane, That the
Jesuits sell their patrimonies, to maintain themselves and others.


Priest. This is a mere fiction, to set out the Jesuits with a vain glorious
commendation: For it is well known that the most of them are poor men's
children, and never had patrimony able to maintain themselves, much less
able to relieve the necessities of others.


Gent. I ever thought it to be a fiction.


Pr. Let this pass, and consider by the premises whether we have not good
cause to exclaim against the Jesuits As for their report of our disobedience,
it is reproved before: and for our unmortified passions, I will not much stand
with them, but think that neither ours nor theirs, are not so mortified I as
could wish. Now by this which we have already said, it is apparent enough,
that they have but overmuch dealing in the affairs of our secular Clergy:
and for their entermedling in state matters, it is needless that any accuse
them, or go about to prove it, seeing their own public actions give assured
testimony against them. If they would deny it, Fa. P. own handie work is
extant; the book of succession, wherein under the counterfeit name of Robert
Doleman, he rippeth up the titles of all competitors to the crown of England,
disgraceth and weakeneth in what he may the claims of some, extolleth and
highly aduaunceth others, renewing the mortal dissentions between the families
of York and Lancaster, laying perilous grounds for most cruel works and
bloudshead in time to come, and drawing all to some particular person whom he
affects above the rest. We will not speak of his bitter and disgraceful
libels against the deceased L. Treasurer, and L. of Leicester: nor of his
letters, and Fa. Creswels, intercepted as they were sent into the realm, and
yet in the Counsels hands for a testimony against him, touching invasions and
soliciting of men by these vain hopes to be in a readiness against his day,
and I know not what dangerous follies besides. But touch in few words some of
his other actions, that you may see whether he deal in state matters, or no.
Did he not earnestly move our young students in Spain to set their hands to a
schedule, that they would accept the Lady Infanta for Queen of England, after
the decease of her Majesty that now is: yea, and finding them altogether
unwilling to intermeddle with those greatest affairs, belonging nothing unto
them, and most hurtful to both their cause and persons; used he not this
cunning shift to draw on the innocent and simple youths, to pretend forsooth to
them of Valladolid, that the students in Seuill had done it already; no remedy
then but they must follow: and having thus craftily gotten their names, he
showed them to the students of Seuill, for an example of their fact and
forwardness, which he required them to imitate, that would be well taken,
that they all did thus show themselves desirous of the L. Infanta for their
Queen. Some more stout and better experienced than the rest, withstood the
dangerous attempts, and would not yield: but they felt Fa. P. heavy hand upon
them ever after. Was it not his usual persuasion to our students, when he
would have them to concur with him in matters of state, That by the laws of
England they were already traitors for their religion; then for tampering with
him about any other the greatest affairs, they could be no more. Go to then,
being once over shoes, be over boots also, step in as far as you can, and
spare not. When he had printed his book of Succession, and was come to Rome,
would he not have it publickely read in the Refectorie, at such times as the
students minds customarily were fed with spiritual lectures? Which
vainglorious and profane desire, when some of the scholars resisted,
because they thought it very inconvenient and hurtful unto them, to be
acquainted with his plots in princes titles and affairs: the good Fa. was
exceeding wroth with them, and they could never after have his favorable
countenance. Was it not Fa. Pa. and Fa. Creighton, Jesuits, that with such
vehemency and bitterness contended each against other in Spain about
disposing of the kingdom and crown of England, Fa. Par. striving to bring all
to the Lady Infanta, and Fa. Creighton to his king of Scotland? in which
controversy Fa. Parsons prevailed in that place, and frustrated and defeated
all the desires and plots which his brother Jesuit had laid in his suits.
Were they not Jesuits which laid the plot with the late deceased duke of
Parma, for surprising or stealing away the Lady Arbella, and sending her into
Flaunders? Who employed the messenger into England about that affair, but Fa.
Holt Jesuit? Who but the same Jesuit was consenting with Sir William Stanley
to the sending in of Richard Hesket, for soliciting Ferdinando, the late Earl
of Darbie, to rise against her Majesty, and to claim the crown? Was it not
the same Jesuit that entertained York and Young in the plot of firing her
Majesty's storehouses? That set on work M. Francis Dickonson and others, to
persuade watermen to fly with ships and all, into the service of the Spaniard?
Who but Jesuits feed the world daily with fresh news, and expectation of
wars and alteration of the State by forrainers? But what, is this peculiar
only to our English Jesuits, or have not the Scottish fathers also in like
manner bestirred themselves in that kingdom? VVhereupon were the three
Catholic Earls, Anguis, Arroll, and Huntley, convicted of high treason by
act of Parliament, about eight years ago, to the confiscation of their
liuelihoods, and their expulsion out of the kingdom, if not upon certain
plots laid them by father Creighton, father Gordon, and upon hopes given them
of succors from Spain? Why was the lard of Fentry executed, but by reason of
the same designs imparted to him by Fa. R^. Abercromie, a Jesuit? was it not
the principal cause of father Iam. Gordions travail to Rome about eight
years ago to solicit the Pope, and other princes, to assist the king of
Scots, if he would enterprise any thing either against England, or in his own
country? in which simple and indiscreet action of his, he both deceived the
Pope, prete^ding great matters to be in hand which were not, and was the quite
ouerthrower of those three earls, in their present estates. These politic
courses, and this busy and dangerous entermedling by the Scottish Jesuits in
Scotland, grew odious even to the best there, and ruinated thereby the good
estates of many, without hope of reaping benefit in any time to come. And yet
forsooth the Jesuits are falsely slaundered, when they are said to deal in
state matters. I know there be some of them which mislike these courses, and
either through their own virtuous disposition, or for respect of their own
quiet, safety, or disabilitie, or finally for their study or a religious
life, shun in what they can all this kind of profane intermedling: yet the
virtuous and temperat demeanor of these, can no more justify nor excuse the
dangerous stickling of their fellows, than the presumptions of these busy
heads can blemish or deface their virtuous and religious carriage. Neither have
I rehearsed thus much for any other end than to let you know how that the
report is to be verefied of them, and not of us secular priests: and how under
the profession of Jesuits, all be not mortified, but some have very politic
and stirring heads, yea in the waightiest matters that are. And for Father Pa
sons, that he more beats his brains about state matters than about the exercise
of a religious life, it is evident by this one thing I will now tell you,
besides all I have said before or may justly be said of him. VVhiles he was in
Spain, you see how he tossed over the Titles and Claims to the crown of
England; but besides this, he wrote two books of the Reformation of all the
states of England. There the devout Jesuit sets upon the Court. To rule in
it he makes orders for reformation of the prince and courtiers, and
appoints what they shall observe in their government and living. The court of
Parliament he will have brought to better form. Then prescribes he
reformations to the Bishops, prelates, and pastors: they must away with pomp
and superfluities, and be put to their pensions: there he sets down
obseruances to all the secular states, and takes upon him to reform the
Counselors, Noblemen, the gentry, Yeomanrie and all. Then he censureth the
Law, and appoints what reformations are to be made in it, and in the
Lawyers. He comes to the Universities and Colleges, and in them he will
have strange Metamorphoses. He deals with Cities also and Corporations,
Towns, Villages, Artisans escape not the Censurers rod. No religious orders
must be admitted within the realm, except Jesuits and reclused Carthusians. No
Abbey lands must be restored, except that of S. Ihones for erecting Colleges
and houses for the Jesuits. This and much more stir he makes, as diverse have
told me, tampering in all estates; and yet Fa. Par. and Jesuits entermeddle not
with profane matters of estate.


Gent. Surely, the Father has a great conceit of his own wit, that he can
rule a kingdom.


Priest. Doubt you not of that; and this conceit of his was much increased,
when he saw the Spaniards so to approve and commend his plot: and the Lady
Infanta promised him, that these books of Reformation should be put in
execution, when she should be Queen of England.


Gent. Have you these books?


Priest. No. They be in England, but imparted to none, except the Jesuits
trusty friends; by whom, the hearts of other men are disposed against the day
to come.


Gent. I perceive that Jesuits are the only statesmen of Christendom.


Priest. They delight to be tampering; but ever they do rather harm than
good thereby. As is manifest in Portugal, in England, and in Scotland: in
which country of Scotland truly I have heard, that a Catholic Earl has
many times bewailed the state and misfortune of their people above ours of
England: in that the Jesuits, Fa. Hawood, Fa. Creighton, Fa. Gordion, Father
Abercomie, which came first among them, endeavored not so much to plant
Catholic religion, nor to bring their people to the sincere and devout
profession thereof; as they plotted about state matters, how to disquiet and
subvert the temporal government. Whereas contrariwise, your English priests
(said he) brought in religion, and respected only to draw the people to unity
of the Catholic Church, and to virtuous life: whereby you have religion and
the sincere practice thereof, and our heads are still troubled with state
matters, and we know not what religion means.


Gent. What? did those grave Jesuits carry themselves no better in their
entrance into Scotland?


Pr. That good Earl reported so: And surely it was much-what as he said. For
the good charitable Fathers so greatly respected the temporal states of their
countrymen, that they took a sure course for their safeties, for as much as
concerned religion.


Gent. What mean you by this?


Pr. No more, but that they took order and provided, that no Catholic should
be damnified in their temporal estates, for cause of their religion.


Gent. How could they do this; unless there be not such strict laws against
Catholics in Scotland, as we in England have?


Priest. They have as sharp laws in this point as we; but thus the wise
Jesuits prevented all dangers: They freely permitted Catholics to go to
church with protestants, and made no sin nor scruple of this as we do. And
thus no law could take hold on them, for who could be known to be a Catholic?


Gent. Did they grant this liberty to all?


Pr. In this sort they did it: If one were a notorious known Catholic where
he came, then they taught it to be unlawful in that place to go to church,
by reason of scandale, and no otherwise. But if one were not certainly known
to be such a Catholic, he might go without offense; upon condition, that if
he heard any heretical doctrine preached, which moved him to doubt in any
point of faith, he should presently come to some of those Fathers to be
resolved.


Gent. This was pretty juggling, and they were like to have good Catholics by
this means.


Priest. This in truth they did: and their Catholics were as good for this
point, as they desire to have the^. For it was an intolerable misery to see
houses overthrown, and men to leese their lands and goods for a precise
course, when so small a matter as this would save all.


Gent. Save all? All had better have been lost, than saved in this sort. But
did they al agree in this course?


Priest. All these ancient and wife Fathers agreed upon it, and practiced as I
have told you. Two punie Jesuits, to wit, Fa. Holt at the beginning, and Father
Oglebie since, ever misliked, and in what they durst gainestood them in this
opinion and practice. But these two being young men, subject to the old, their
opposition was rejected, and they put to silence.


Gent. I wonder, those men being accounted grave, virtuous, and learned, would
take this course to reclaim their country from heresy and schism. They
seemed to make no other reckoning of going to church with protestants, than
that it was only scandalous and dangerous for infection: which two sins might
in some sort have been prevented or hindered by the means you say they took.
But did they never know nor call to mind, that it was sin of it own nature,
as being a manifest external profession of a false religion, as we account it?


Pr. They could not but know it; if the overmuch desire to save the temporal
estates of their Catholics, did not blind their understanding, or make them
to neglect the due examination of the case; which latter, I cannot think of
them, because Father Holt and Fa. Oglebie in open words and disputes condemned
the fact.


Gent. But our English Jesuits ever practiced and taught the contrary to those
Scottish Jesuits.


Pr. They have done so, for any thing that ever I heard to the contrary,
except once, that Fa. Bosgraue went to church, and Fa. Thomas Langdale, and as
some say, Fa. Kirkham, which fell farther tha^ to go to church with
protestants. The English Jesuits found our secular priests to have rightly
instructed and reformed our church in this point, and to have established both
the doctrine and the practice before their entrance; and therefore they could
not without great confusion and discredit run any other course than that
wherein they saw our priests to have led them the way. Marry, what they would
have done in this case, if they had first set upon the work, and begun in
England a form and practice of religion before secular priests, as their
brethren Jesuits did in Scotland; this I cannot certainly divine: but I doubt
me greatly, both by the proceedings of those ancient and learned Scottish
Jesuits, and by the pleasing humor of their fellows here, they would not have
been so strict in the matter, as both they and we be now, refusing with so
great detriment of goods, lands, liberty, and lives, the least participation
or resemblance of communion with protestants, in all points, practice, and
profession of religion. For I know a famous Jesuit now in England, who, I hear
has made offer of a scandalous, and in my conceit a very unlawful liberty:
If that a Gentleman will become Catholic, he should have license to eat
flesh in Lent, and in all fasting days, among Lollards and Protestants; that
by so doing, he might live without suspicion of being a Catholic, and escape
danger of the laws.


Gent. This were a pretty license, and not much unlike to that you rehearsed
of theirs in Scotland. And if this were permitted, we should have soon a fine
piece of iuggling in the exercise of our religion. In my opinion, the Catholic
that should eat flesh upon fasting days with protestants, thereby to induce
them to think him no Catholic, but agreeing with them in that point of
religious obseruancie, should commit a grievous mortal sin, by intending to
seem no Catholic, but a Lollard, or protestant. And this, albeit he had
another principal end of his action, as to keep himself thereby from
deciphering what he were, and from many temporal losses: For this seems to
be an ill mean to those lawful ends, and (as you said before) we must not do
ill that good may come upon it. Besides, in this case me thinks a Catholic
man should be bound to profess his faith and religion, by abstinence from
flesh among those protestants, they breaking the fast in contempt of Christ's
religion and church. In which end or action, a Catholic should not any way
participate with them, neither formally nor materially, when it cannot be done
without prejudice to the faith, nor without scandale, as here it hardly can:
especially the protestants own law commanding the due observance of such
fasts. And truly, admit in this case a Catholic man were not bound to
profess his religion by abstinence, especially, if there by some great loss
or harm should certainly befall him: yet I perceive no reason, why he may by
any act of his, bearing a show to be opposite to his religion and the precept
of Gods church, make any external resemblance of an heretical profession, as
he does by eating with them.


Pr. These reasons of yours have perhaps better grounds to uphold them, than
the Jesuits liberty has: and without peradventure it is the surer way for
any Catholic to take. It is the opinion of all the learned, that no man ought
to do any thing, either scandalous or prejudicial to the faith of the church,
for to save himself thereby from a temporal harm. Now this eating of flesh,
being always (morally speaking) scandalous and prejudicial to Catholic
religion in our country: it cannot be justified by this circumstance or end,
to wit, that thereby a Catholic shall not be noted to be a Catholic. For
if a Catholic should eat to be thought a protestant, his eating were damnable;
seeing that to be noted to be a Catholic, is in it self no temporal harm
to any: and the temporal detriments and losses which may ensue to any by this
discovery or note, may be either prevented before they fall, or they be no
more but ordinary in these times of persecution, and ought to be borne of
every Catholic with patience, rather than to be shunned with scandale, or
the least dishonor to God and his Church that may be devised. And in these
matters of action, and in the exercise of religious obseruandes, it is not fit
to take or teach a fashion, lying so near to dangerous sin (if it be not
sin of it self) as does this eating of flesh with protestants.


Gent. I think no less. I have also heard, that the Jesuits have granted
some extraordinary liberties lately, about conferences had by Catholic
prisoners with Protestants, for procuring their liberty thereby: also about
licensing or holding opinion, That a Catholic may lawfully marry with an
Heretic.


Pr. I have heard no certainetie of this matter. But let these be as they
shall, our English Church is happy by the course of our secular priests, and
theirs of Scotland is in bad terms, by the courses of the Jesuits. Now, where
you said, That our Church would not have been in so good case as it is, but for
the Jesuits: I am not to judge hereof. For on the one side, no doubt but they
have done good; because it is not to be thought, that so many of them as are in
the realm, have been idle and fruitless, but have helped forward Gods work;
though not to be compared with the secular priests in this point: no, not
setting man for man. For the great toil and burden of the work has ever lien
upon secular priests; and those cheefely which labored among the poor, not
able to relieve them with meat or money, or any other ordinary supply of
necessary apparel or convenient lodging, some of them suffering more misery
in one quarter of a year for gaining poor souls, than all the Jesuits in
England do in a whole year; who commonly keep richest houses, and sustain no
want of things necessary or convenient. And on the other side, they have
caused by their cunning plots and busy tampering, so great division among the
priests themselves, and raised so horrible dissension and dislike of both
priests and people, one with another; which was never heard of in our nation,
before they began their politic stirrings and brokings of factions; and
finally, so grievously deminished the credit, estimation, and reverence of
priests, due unto them from the laity, yea, brought them into contempt, that I
fear me much all the good they have done by their spiritual labors, will
not counteruaile the harms they have wrought by these polliticke and strange
endeavors of theirs. For it was better without comparison to have our Church,
Priests, and People united together in great love and reverence, both sincere,
simple, devout, and in peace, as it was before many of the Jesuits entered;
than to have among us emulations, contentions, policies, contempt of priests,
falsehoods in fellowship, a distrust or a fear each of other, slanders,
infamies, and a general decay of virtue and devotion, as now the matter is
brought unto, and had never ben likely to have entered, if they had not come
amongst us. And sure I am, that the chief noursey of our church, that is, the
Seminary of Doway, is exceedingly decayed, since the Jesuits had the mannaging
of things, especially of the alms purse in England. And for the Seminary also
in Rome, no man can reprove us of an untruth, if we say that it in like sort
has suffered no small detriment, since the death of Cardinal Allen.


Gent. But these losses are recompensed abundantly by the erection of new
Colleges in Spain by Father Parsons.


Priest. It is a vain glorious boast, and a fiction. The loss received in
those two Seminaries, is not recompensed in half by all that Fa. Parsons has
done, as by and by I shall declare. Touching that part of their report, where
it is marvelled why we should be adversaries to the Jesuits, I have answered
it sufficiently before. Now it remains that we speak of Fa. Parsons, What
say you of him?


Gent. Marry, many think it strange you should be at dissension with him, he
being a man so well thought of and esteemed both in his own order and by the
most that know him: his book of Resolution argues him to be a holy man, and
his endeavors in erecting Seminaries for our country, shows, that he is both
a good man, and most careful for the good of our country, and to be far from
doing any of you wrong in the least thing that may be, etc.


Pr. If Fa. Parsons have deeply wronged us, men need not to wonder, that there
should be contentions between him and us. It is no whit likely that we should
stomach the man, or contend with him, unless he had given us cause. We will
therefore discuss this point, and touch all the rest which you have mentioned
for his commendation: but let us take them in order as you spoke them. For the
credit and estimation he has among men of his own order; it is with some of
them good, and with others very mean; and they all generally repute him to be
very polliticke, and of a busy and stirring disposition, more desirous in all
things to draw all men to his own will, yea, and violently to enforce thereto
such as be weaker, than he is to follow any other man's advise or course. I
know some Jesuits his seniors in religion, men of better talent than he, who
looking into his peremptory and headie courses, have often censured thus upon
him: That he was too contentious and wilful, and that it were better for their
religion, and the world also, that he were shut up for ever in some religious
house, than to be stickling abroad, and tampering in all matters as he does,
which must of necessity in the end turn to the harm of many, and to the
discredit of their society, after his devises come to light. Also I have
credibly heard, that others should often complain and say of him, That their
society was more troubled and disquieted, yea, and discredited, by the devises
and importunity of one Englishman, Father Parsons, than by all the men of
other countries besides: for he never cease wrangling and contending with
one or other, and with many at once. I have my self heard a Scottish Jesuit
(far his ancient in the society, and of a good account) to inveigh greatly
against Father Parsons violent nature and courses, and to condemn his
polliticke and cunning entermedling in all matters, to the hurt of many, and to
the discredit of their order. Father Holts and Fa. Hawoods opinion of him was
(these Jesuits I name, because they be dead) that he was of a violent and
imperious disposition in most things, and with the most men he dealt with;
never quiet, unless he ouer-ruled all; exquisit cunning, with flattery and
fawning to bring others to his bend, and if this would not win them, then to be
most fierce and violent, utterly to break them that should stand in his way.
The religious Fa. has found many occasions, and devised many shifts these
twenty years and more, that he might live abroad out of his order, and be
employed to solicit affairs in princes courts, or to have rule and command
in Colleges. And the conceit he carries of his own wit and sufficiency,
makes him to attempt any thing, and ever to be unwilling to condescend to any
man's advise but his own. The men of his own society also note this in him,
That he has a special regard to have the whole managing of English affairs,
and that no other of his brethren, how ancient, wise, or learned soever,
shall communicate with him in these matters, or have any dealing, unless they
yield themselves in every point to follow his directions and courses, and be
wholly at his commandment. And they say this only to be the cause why he has
hindered all the grauest and most sufficient English Jesuits beyond the seas to
come into the realm, or to entermeddle in the wielding of our Churches
affairs; least (forsooth) they should refuse to follow his devises, and by a
more discreet and temperate course, both win from him the credit, and bear
away the principal stroke and command. Thus much for the estimation he has
among many good men of his own society.


Gent. There be very many yet which think well of him.


Priest. No doubt but diverse think better of him than he deserves, or than
they would do when they shall come to understand his uncharitable devises, and
what discredit he has brought both upon our English church, and upon his own
society, by his cunning and intemperat dealing. In the mean while they will
like him well, as long as he stands them in stead, either in England,
Spain, or elsewhere.


Gent. He is much esteemed in Spain, and in Rome by all the Spanish favorites.


Pr. He is so, and no marvel it is. For what prince would not much esteem a
man that can entitle him and his to the kingdom of England, raise up a broken
claim from before two hundred years, and so handle the matter with a cunning
flourish, that it must be made to seem the best and likeliest of all that
have been since. For not only he aduaunceth the surmised Spanish Title, but
disgraceth in what he may, and weakeneth all the rest. This his plotting about
the crown and kingdom of England, and sharing it to the Lady Infanta, with
devising probable means (as he persuadeth them) to effect his plot, made him
very famous and highly esteemed in that nation, and won to him such singular
grace of the old King, the Lady Infanta, and all their friends, that his word
might do much in any matter, either to pleasure his friend or displeasure his
adversary. Hence also does proceed the favor and credit he has with the
Ambassador of Spain, and all them of the Spanish faction in Rome: the hope
wherewith he daily feeds them of bringing this to pass by his own
policies, and the helps he can procure in England, causes them to admire the
man, and him to be most highly esteemed among them.


Gent. It is very ridiculous, if they should be so simple, as to think Fa.
Parson to be able when the day comes, to set the crown of England upon whose
head it pleases him, or that he should have so strong a party in England, as
are of power to bear the best game away, and dispose thereof at his pleasure.


Priest. They never heard that he was son to a blacke-smiths wife, but take
him perhaps to be some nobleman, and allied with many great ones. And indeed
for his imperious carriage, he may easily seem to strangers to be better
descended than in truth he is. For he is exceeding bold, of great
undertaking, and can set out all he has to the best show. Besides, a kingdom
is an object of that alluring quality, as the very simple-wishing of a man
thereto, procures liking, and favors, much more the entiteling a prince
thereto, and devising means to compass the same.


Gent. It is so, but Fa. Parsons is much esteemed of by most Catholics in
England: yea, and of many Protestants also, by reason of his book of
Resolution, and the Seminaries he has procured for our Nation.


Pr. As this book of Resolution was a good work, and won him all the credit
which was due to Granado, that laid the platform to Father Parsons hand, and
gave him the principal grounds and matter thereof, and which also was deserved
by master Brinckley for the penning (as diverse report:) so no doubt the libell
he writ against the Earl of Leicester, and the other against the old L.
Treasurer, and this work of Succession, whereby he entitleth the Lady Infanta
to the crown of England, with disgracing all other Titles and Competitors,
has got him much hatred and discredit in England and Scotland. If the book
were his, it was well done, and he deserved commendation for it; and surely, if
he had gone forward with the other two parts (as he promised) he had spent
these twenty years and more, both more to Gods honor and the good of his
country, and to his own greater merit, than he has done by all his other
polliticke stickling in matters of State, or by his cunning, his violent, his
contentious, and his unconscionable proceedings otherwise. But his head was too
busy, and overmuch profaned; and greatly it is to be feared, (his dealing
considered in Spain and in Rome also, against our students, and the two good
priests we sent thither about this authority: again, his deceiving the Pope by
false information, both in procuring the authority, and by incensing him
against the priests) that when he finished that book of Resolution, he made an
end also therewith of devotion, sincerity, and honest dealing. It is no
certain nor probable argument to prove a man to be a Saint, or a virtuous and
a good man, because in times past he has written a virtuous book; yea, or
because he writes one in the present. For this ability consists
principally in the power of a man's understanding: whereas virtue and goodness,
as well supernatural as natural, rests in the will, and affects the
operations thereof. Lucifer that damned fiend was a Cherubin of highest
intelligence, he and his wicked angels exceed all men in wit and knowledge,
and want no skill to contriue and make spiritual books of absolute
perfection: yet this great knowledge of theirs neithet makes them good, nor
can argue them to be virtuous spirits, as long as their will is perverted. The
like we may say of Adam, that neither his great graces wherein he was created,
nor his supernatural gifts, which remain after his fall, (in both which states
he had sufficient skill to deliver to the world as good doctrine, as Fa. Parson
has done) could prove him to be a good man, when he had cast himself out of
the state of grace, into sin: and the fame is true also in every learned man,
being in mortal sin; and in Fa. Parson himself, if at any time since he
has been in that damnable state: by their sin they are deprived of
justifying grace, and other supernatural virtues depending thereupon; but their
faith, their hope, and knowledge gotten before their fall, remains still; by
which they may teach and write as perfect doctrine as before they could. Yea, I
have heard Doctor Stapleton report of certain books written upon the holy
Scripture by John Calvin, that they contained excellent good moral doctrine;
and if the heresies entermingled therewith, were cancelled, that they might be
read with great profit and pleasure; and yet no Catholic will deny, but
that Calvin notwithstanding all this, was a great enemy to the Roman
religion. Did not Solomon write many divine volumnes, and yet afterward he
became a bad man? Now let Fa. Parsons book go with that deserved
commendations: what he was, good or bad, whiles he writ it (for he might be
either) I cannot judge, and I will suppose the best; but what he has been
since, his own bad actions yield presumptions ouer-pregnant and probable, that
sometimes he has been no Saint, nor sincere honest man.


Gent. In my conceit, it is a manifest sign of a defect in wisdom,
judgment, and discretion, for any so worthily to value a man for one or many
his good actions past, that when after the same he does evil, he will not
believe, or see it; or else in manifest faults stand to justify and defend
him, by reason he was once a good man, or had done well before. For men's
judgments should be conformable to the object, or otherwise they cannot be
true: and in this, though the precede^t good actions ought to stay a man from
rash judgment, and to make every one suspend his censure until he be assured
of the fact; yet when his evil doing is once apparent, a wise man should not
let his affection carry him away to judge black to be white, or a man fallen to
vice, to remain still a saint.


Priest. Well then, you see that Fa. Parsons book of Resolution made above
twenty years ago, cannot justify, nor ought not to patronize his naughty
actions committed since; no, nor in the judgment of any man, to prejudice our
cause and us in these contentions we have with him.


Gent. In reason it should be so: but yet the Seminaries in Spain, and saint
Omers, erected by his means, have gotten him much credit, and cause men to
think him the bestfriend our Country has.


Pr. If men would judicially consider what he has done in this point, perhaps
they would think worse of him and his actions than they do. For albeit there
be now by his means more Semenaries for our young studients, than before; yet
doublesse our Country reapeth much less benefit now by all, than it did of
old, by the two only of Rome and Doway. So that in truth his endeauours in
erecting new Colleges or Seminaries, have rather much diminished the
commodity, and decayed the good of our Country, than increased it: and then
consequently Fa. P. deserves small thanks for his labor.


Gent. How can this be possible?


Priest. Thus: First, you will grant me, that it is the greater benefit and
good of our Country, the more students we have brought up in the Seminaries,
which become priests, and yield themselves to labor in our English harvest.


Gent. I cannot deny this, for the greatest increase of our Clergy, is our
Countries greater good.


Pr. But before Fa. P. erected his, there were more good priests yearly sent
from Rome, and Rhemes or Doway, into England, than is or has been yearly
since from those two, and all the rest besides.


Gent. How happened this?


Pr. Marry, before Fa, Par. erected his, and before the Jesuits had the
greatest stroke in money matters in England, it is well known that in the
College at Rhemes, there were sometimes eight score, otherwhiles 200, or 220.
of our Countrie-men, old and young, students; now the number is diminished to
60. All that came were well-come, and friendly entertained, none rejected,
brought they money, or brought they none: now can none be received without a
gross sum of money, or else a yearly stipend, unless he be fit at the
first to study Divinity; and either not at all, or very hardly can any be
entertained, unless he be sent or commended by the Jesuits, and Archp-riest:
In those days sixteen priests or more were sent into England in one year, now
three, or four be many: then the renowned fame, and glory of the College,
drew unto it good scholars, and ancient men, from the Universities of Oxford,
and Cambridge; but now it has lost the ancient credit, and thought a meeter
school for boys, than for men: then, it was a famous Nurserie for the best
Literature; now the science of scholasticall Divinity, is not much respected,
if it be not altogether laid aside. I let pass to speak what difference there
is between those old, and these new governors.


Gent. This is a wonderful decay: of likelihood the ordinary stipends are
withdrawn, which came yearly from Spain and Rome.


Priest. No, they are still allowed.


Gent. What then is the cause of this ruin?


Pr. No other, but the diuerting away of the alms usually sent out of England
to supply the necessities of that College: for receiving these, the house
flourished, and could do much; and wanting them, all must of necessity decay.


Gent. Are the Jesuits to blame for this?


Priest. Would to God they were not. But thus much is certain; larger alms
were never given, than has been these late years; again, it has been
observed, That the more the Jesuits be in credit, and got into their hands the
disposing of things, especially the almes-purse, the less relief has been
sent to that College out of England; yea, not an hundred marks in three or
four years.


Gent. Which way think you these alms are implied?


Pr. I know not, but as I told you, the prisoners in England, the poor priests
and Catholics never suffered such great want of relief, as they have done
these late years; the Jesuits indeed have abundance, but so great sums cannot
be consumed upon themselves only, some other passage there is for it
doubtless: we will not speak what many surmise and mutter secretly of buying
annuities, of putting into bank beyond the seas, (for two thousand pound they
say was intercepted this year going over, from whence or whether, it is not
known to me, more than that generally it was reported to be sent by the
Jesuits) or of maintaining Jesuits in other countries. Let these pass, and be
they true or false, it is not to be thought other, but the Fathers here will
have a special eye to the Colleges which themselves have been a mean to erect.


Gent. It is very well if it go to them.


Priest. It is better so than worse. But mark now what damage ensues thereby
to our Church. The College of S. Omers is only for children; none (except
their parents be dear to the Jesuits) can have place there, unless he bring
with him forty pounds, or fifty pounds, or more, or have some good annuitie
to maintain him. Now the College of Doway or Rhemes, entertained
indifferently all that came, and upon the usual alms sent from England,
maintained them, albeit they brought nothing: but if this College at S. Omers
for children that come also well provided, intercept or receive the alms which
were accustomed to be sent to Doway or Rhemes, for the maintenance not of as
many children only, but also of at the least four times as many priests as be
there now, is it not manifest, that our country loses far more at Doway,
than it gains at S. Omers, by erecting of a College there?


Gent. It may be, that this notable defect is supplied by the two Colleges in
Spain.


Priest. I perceive not that it is so. For both they return not into England
yearly so many priests by far, as are wanting now in the number accustomed
yearly to be sent from Rhemes; and so the great damage remains still.
When Doctor Barret, president of the College at Rhemes, perceived this
hurtful effect to befall our country, by Fa. Parsons diligence in erecting
these new Colleges, he writ seriously to him about the matter, and assured
him, That it was much better to maintain the College of Rhemes, which was the
beginner of all our countries happiness, next to God, and was the greatest
glory and good of our Nation, than to build new ones to the decay of this: but
Fa. Parsons (after his fashion, impatient of any admonition) took his advise
in very ill part; and to correct the Presidents boldness, forslowed (as was
thought) to procure the Spanish pension, till the College was almost undone,
and dissolved.


Gent. This is a very great loss to our country, and yet noted by few or none.


Priest. Nay, the Jesuits bear you in hand of inestimable benefits received by
these new Colleges.


Gent. They do so indeed, but these benefits be only in conceit I see now.


Priest. You will see it better, if to this I have already told you, we add
the multitude of our scholars, which are consumed by the distemperat air of
Spain, and die there: for S. Omers is no more but to bring up children in
humanity, and after to send them to Spain; which loss also had been
prevented by the upholding of the College at Rhemes or Doway, regions more
agreeable with our English nature than Valle de Leith, or Civil. Again, if we
consider another exceeding great loss of our countrymen governed by the
Jesuits, and which was ever avoided at Rhemes and Doway, governed by our
secular priests; we have good cause to think our country to gain nothing by
these new Colleges for continully they entice and allure many of our finest
wits, and most towardly youth from the ordinary vocation of our Clergy and
of our secular Pastors, to be of their own society. Many also they make (for
trifles) malcontents, by their polliticke dealing; they drive others from
their natural simplicity, to become cunning headed; not a few they dismiss
the finishing of their studies, upon light discontentments; many they quite
break by indiscreet wrongs and incompassionate handling: and finally, those
Colleges are the principal fountains of contentions and deuisions among our
Clergy; some in matters of strife banding with the Jesuits, and some against
them, as now you see in England; which breaches of peace and concord were never
among the priests brought up at Rhemes or Doway, before the Jesuits and their
disciples entered the realm, and made factions against such as had contended
with them in their Colleges, or listed not to run their courses, and feed
their humors in England. Now for the College in Rome, how they have used the
matter, I know not; but every second or third year since it was founded, there
have been monstrous contentions and tumults between the students and them, to
the unspeakable damage of our Church. In times past, besides ten or twelve
known Jesuits, (for there was also many more secret brethren, running under the
name of our students, as I said before) besides also twelve, or fourteen, or
more servants, there was accustomed to be relieved above threescore and eight
students; but now the number is brought to forty or thereabouts: their
vineyard is sold and spent, and the students in no small coffeehouse,
notwithstanding all the fair weather Fa. Parsons blows of their peace and
happy estate. Thus you see what thanks Father Parsons deserves by erecting
Semenaries for our Country.


Gent. I cannot but exceedingly wonder at these things, and me thinks the
Jesuits cannot but perceive these inconveniences to follow upon these endeavors
of theirs, and take pity of the loss.


Priest. No, no, you are deceived, they more respect their own gain, than
they feel our countries loss.


Gent. What gain they, but much toil and labor in this world? they look
for their reward in the next life.


Pr. I nothing doubt but they look for both; and for ought I perceive, the
temporal commodity greatly moves them for the present, in the government of
our Colleges.


Gent. What temporal gain is this?


Priest. Whereby they have the choice of all our youths, and are in very great
possibility to draw into their society the flower of all our Catholic young
men. For being Superiors, Masters, Confessors, Familiars, and Governors unto
them, they have all desired opportunities to work their designs; which they
should not have had, if our students were from under them, as at Rhemes they
were: this they think will be the greatest glory, credit, and advancement of
their order above our Clergy in the English nation, if they can draw unto
them our finest wits, and best descended. For at these two kinds they most aim
and fish.


Gent. Yea, but if this be so, I perceive another benefit to redound unto them
by their government of our Colleges. For by having the whole sway in all our
Seminaries beyond the seas, as they have, (for they say that Doway also is
wholly at Fa. Parsons devotion and direction in every thing, especially since
he placed Doctor Worthington to be President there, who is a man known to be
the Jesuits entirest dependant:) it must follow hereupon, that they should
enforce all the Catholics in England to seek unto them to win their favors,
to pretend at least to be their friends, to depend wholly upon them, and to
run their courses; for otherwise their children shall be debarred of all
benefit that may be had in those Seminaries. And thus our whole Church at home
and abroad, must be drawn necessarily to rely on Father Parsons and the
Jesuits; feed their humors, and you shall have what they list to afford us;
displease the^, and nothing is to be had. But I pray you, are they diligent (as
you said) in fishing for our cheifest youths? and again, so indiscreet in
their government, as for toies to exasperate and discontent them?


Pr. For their earnest and diligent fishing, it is very true, they do it most
carefully, and they use the exercise, as a chief mean to catch the scholars;
besides mine own certain knowledge and experience of their great and daily
industry in this point, I have known some of their own society much condemn
them for it. Fa. Holt himself has told me, that their society delighted much
in this fishing; and to be most impatient of reproof or opposition therein: But
of our English Jesuits, especially Fa. Parsons and Fa. Creswell are most
zealous in this point. This point is so tenderly respected by our order (said
he) That whosoever deals to our contrary herein, is thought to tangere
pupilla^ oculi nostri, these were his very words. We have certain men amongst
us, which be noted for fishers, and are named, Piscatores Patris Generalis:
these employ their wits and labors to draw unto us the best they find every
where. Which thing (said he) I cannot much dislike, when they bring young men
out of the world to resolve upon a religious course, which otherwise perhaps
might have perished, or never applied themselves to virtuous life: but this
diligence to be used in the Seminaries among our English students, whom we have
undertaken to frame and make fit for our English harvest, which for this happy
end are committed to our education, and which by singular grace and vocation,
are already resolved to take an Apostolical kind of life peculiar only to our
countrymen among all heretical nations; to use this importune fishing among
them, was a thing that never liked me. He said moreover, That this fishing,
with the partiality they used to them, (they either had catched, or desired to
allure) was the principal root of discontentments and contentions between
them and the Jesuits in the Seminaries. Again, That himself being Rector of
our College in Rome, was put from the office, because he would not be so
forward in this fishing, as they would have had him.


Gent. Did Fa. Holt the Jesuit reveal this secret unto you?


Pr. Yea truly, and much more to the same effect; and how the indiscreet zeal
of some was such, that they would not stick to discontent and afflict for any
trifle, the towardliest young men we had, if they perceived them not to fancy
their baits. The good man himself stood indifferent, would entice none; yet
entertain any, that moved by the spirit of God, came freely of themselves,
toward which, he would yet use no partiality to draw them on by
extraordinary favors (as the manner is) but in all things sought to mortify
them above the rest: but complaint being made hereof, he was speedily thrust
out of the government. It was thought by the students, an unseemly and
disordered thing, That the Jesuits being no priests, and some, lay brethren,
should take place before our priests; but it was maintained by the Jesuits as a
point of good nurture, and due unto them; and they which seemed to dislike the
disorder, were accounted and used as adversaries.


Gent. Me thinks the Jesuits should give them rather examples of mortification
and humility, than to contend about these vanities.


Pr. It should be so; but thus it was. Fa. Creswell, who was in Rome for many
causes judged by Cardinal Allen to be the unfittest to govern that ever he
had known, after many troublesome garboiles he had made in the College,
whilst he was Rector there, at last by Cardinal Allens means was removed
from that government, and sent into Spain to Fa. Parsons. This stirring and
busie-headed Father, during the time he was Rector in Rome, delighted in
nothing so much, as to cross and over thwar^ the students in every thing. They
(...) their vineyard a pleasant little grove of trees, in which they much
delighted to sit and to recreate themselves, when they were permitted to go
thither, for it cast a goodly shade, and defended them from the piercing heats
of the Sun this comfort Fa. Cr^swell he like thought not fit for banished
scholars; for suddenly (without acquinting Cardinal Allen, or any therewith)
he cut it down, and sold the wood, and not long after the vineyard also was
alienated by sale, from the College. The fact mightily offended the good
Cardinal, and the students; but therein the good Jesuit took his joy. This
man's humor in that government, being (as he thought) something restrained by
the Cardinals presence and authority, of that full scope he desired to have;
he would in public exhortations show his coffeehouse, and vauntingly say
(as a Jesuit told it me) What? we respect not Cardinals in our dealing, we
fear them not, we are rather to make Cardinals, than to be ouer-ruled by them.
This same unfit Rector, by the judgment of Cardinal Allen coming into
Spain, was by and by esteemed the fittest to govern that might be, by Fa.
Parsons. There (as the priests which come from thence, report) he keeps no
less reuelling among the students, than he had done at Rome. This is he that
in open sermons exclaimeth against our secular clergy in England, saying,
There be many gone out of the Seminaries into England, well qualified with
learning and natural talents, but would to God we could sponge out of them,
yea, suck out of them with a sponge their learning, and their natural good
qualities; besides, they be contentious against us, and adversaries to our
society.


Gent. These be monstrous speeches, and argue a very intemperate spirit.


Priest. Oh, it is a goodly zeal, the man is fervent, and (as I hear)
according to his humor, they in Spain and Fa. Parsons in Rome have taken order,
That few of our students, especially such as are thought not greatly to affect
them and their proceedings, shall be ouer-learned hereafter: For almost all are
set to positive Divinity, and not suffered to be Philosophers, or
scholasticall Divines. And truly it seems incredible to hear, how many of
our finest wits and young men of great expectation, these two violent Fathers
(void as it seems of all compassion and humanity, against whom they carry
displeasure) have discredited and quite broken. Some for no other faults, but
for breaking their fast in a cooks house, when they had hard commons, and
great scarsitie of victuals in their College; as Fa. Parsons did a great
company at Rome: others, for eating a little milk, which they bought as they
walked in the fields: others for washing themselves in a river without the
city, and the like, as Fa. Creswell did to some in Spain. Where some also
were put to a penance of bread and water, be cause they would not ask
pennances: some for slipping with his tongue, and saying in stead of Patrem
Ministrum, Patrem ministerium: some violently pulled by the ears for calling a
lay Jesuit Harmannon, that is, brother, in Spanish; where he would have been
called Pater, Father; and a thousand such, which for breuities sake I now omit.


Gent. These religious men have much deceived me: For I thought they had been
very mild, and kept great moderation in their government, specially toward our
countrymen, which voluntarily have undertaken this hard course of life, for
serving God and gaining of souls, without any hope of temporal benefit, but
with assured miseries at their return home; as we see daily many of them to
suffer tortures, imprisonments, and death, besides many other afflictions
before they fall into the hands of their persecutors: in respect of which
difficulties, reason would they should be courteously entertained during their
time of studies, and much borne with, if they frame not themselves to the exact
observance of some strict orders.


Pr. Our gracious Cardinal Allen was of your opinion in this point, and so
sweetly demeaned himself in his government toward all, that he won the
hearts of every one; he was full of pity and compassion, and in his great
discretion could bear with the imperfections of young men. For he considered
their hard estate of voluntary banishment, where they wanted almost all
comforts and pleasures which their own country would have yielded them. And
therefore by all gentle and friendly usage he endeavored to encourage them,
and yield them all contentment and consolations, which the place and his
ability would permit; ever careful, that none should be discontented, or made
malecontent for trilles and matters of small importance. And truly my self
have heard him often say, That a good Governor, especially in these times with
our countrymen should have a great regard to save all that come under him, and
in no wise for some natural imperfections and transgressions of good orders,
which may be tolerated without sin, to discourage any, nor for trifling and
light faults to loose their other good talents.


Gent. This course is most agreeable without time and countrymen, which enter
voluntarily into this hard state of life, and as voluntarily remain therein.


Priest. That blessed man thought so, and during his life, practiced the same
with all sorts: for he withstood Fa. Creswels and the Jesuits attempts in the
English College at Rome, when they endeavored to bring upon the students
certain hard orders, which were no whit necessary to the good education of the
scholars, and yet could not but be exceeding disgustfull, and grievous unto
them, without any the least profit at all.


Gent. What orders were these?


Priest. The very same which were misliked and rejected also by Cardinal
Toledo, when (after Cardinal Allens death) the Jesuits attempted afresh to
establish them: and indeed effected their desire after Cardinal Toledo was
taken away. As, that no scholar shall write letters abroad, or receive any,
without license and the surview of the Jesuits their governors: again, that
none shall write to any of his fellows of the College, or receive letters
from him, without the same license and review. Item, That none shall come in
company, converse, or recreate with any other of his fellow students, but with
such only, as they shall be appointed unto. Item, That no two shall talk
together, unless they either call a third person to hear them, that may
witness what they speak, or else talk so loud that they may be heard of
other. These and such like they have induced to the great coffeehouse and
affliction of the students, which (as I said) Cardinal Toledo, after Cardinal
Allen, rejected as very foolish, and unfit for our countrymen; and they seem
devises, smelling rather to proceed from a barbarous, wili^, and tyrannical
spirit of some Machauelian, than from a discreet, mild, and religious zeal.
For (as Cardinal Toledo said) it were more necessary to find means to
procure the greatest love and familiarity among the scholars that might be
(they all going to fight against heretics in the same camp) than by such
burdenous and unprofitable orders as these, to afflict them in their tyranny,
and estrange them one from another.


Gent. This was wisely said of the old Cardinal Allen. But if it be true which
I have heard, there is another thing practiced by the Jesuits in the government
of our Colleges, of as great inconveniencie as these. For I have been often
told, how the Jesuits have in every company of scholars their spies, which
they call Angeli custodes, which always lie in wait, what they can hear said or
see done by any scholar, and forthwith carry it to the Superior: These
spies by their indiscreet diligence in this office, and to pick thanks by
their informations, usually cause great discontentments and unquietness in the
Colleges, incensing the Superiors against the students for very toies, and
making every hillocke a mountain. And besides the other evils these favored
make-bates do by their whispering tales, the very office it self considered in
its own nature in a Community, breeds much harm: for it causes every one
to distrust other, it is the bane of all mutual love and sincere friendship,
and cannot but bring forth much emulation and dislike.


Pr. It must of necessity have these bad effects, but this policy pleases
Fa. Parsons, Fa. Creswell, and other Jesuits; for thus they shall be
acquainted with all that is said or done, and more to. Thus they shall prevent
all treasons and conspiracies intended by the students against their
government, be it never so bad.


Gent. The Jesuits and their favorites give out, That the students have been
very disordered and dissolute, as going to eat and drink in the tauernes,
which could not be without the discredit both of themselves, and of the
Jesuits: some were taken by the officers in the manner, others confessed the
same.


Priest. If the Jesuits have thought themselves any way discredited by the
scholars, they may be relieved when they please by giving over that
government, which both the scholars and the wisest of our nation (that know
the state of things) wish they would: but this they will not do, for loosing
the commodity they get by their fishings in that place. Now for the
disposition of our countrymen which undertake that course of life, it is well
known, that before they come under the Jesuits government, they be generally
of the most virtuous and towardliest youths our nation yields; never noted
for drunkards, or enormiously disordered and dissolute, especially in those
vices, whereunto other countries wherein they live, are most subject. How this
lamentable alteration of then natures should be made under these religious men,
I cannot conjecture; but rather do I think it to be a false slander, raised
by the Jesuits for justifying their own discommendable actions, than to have
any ground of truth in our countrymen, especially in any matter of importance.
For as touching their going to the tauernes or cooks house, though in Rome it
may seem a great disorder, and perhaps give some little scandale; yet what
scholar is there in England, or in most places of the Christian world, that
can think it in own nature any enormious crime to break their fast in a
coolees ^ouse, especially when the fact is lad, with these circumstances, as
theirs was? First, that Father Parsons and the Jesuits gave them very hard fare
in the College, and such as would not suffice the natures of diverse of them to
preserve their health and life: again, that it was done very sildome, and but
with two or three at once in a company; and this also in the secretest manner
that might be: and lastly, with that moderation, that their appetites were not
hindered from taking their ordinary refection in the College.


Gent. Cardinal Allen, though sometimes he would sweetly reprove this among
his students, yet he never thought it any enormious crime or disorder,
deserving infamy, or expulsion, or disgraces; considering they wanted that
full diet in those countries, which they had been accustomed unto in England,
and were growing young men, whose natures required more than ordinarily they
were allowed in the Colleges* And surely, if Fa. Parsons and the Jesuits had
tendered the good and credit of our countrymen, as Christian charity,
compassion, and friendship required, they would never have disgraced and
discredited them for that fault before his Holinestly, the Cardinals; the whole
city, and Christendom, as they did; nor have sent after the^ into England
most infamous, libels, as we see they have done; not so much to the discredit
of so many good priests, as to the scandale of all the nation.


Pr. There be many great presumptions of the Jesuits uncharitable and bad
dealing in that action. For the students were exceedingly pinched in their
diet, some thought, upon purpose to cause them to seek for more abroad.
Again, Fa. Parsons admitted a married Irishman into the College, and put him
in the habit of a student; he could scarce say his Pater noster, yet that
favor he found, for what purpose God knows. This married Irishman earnestly
solicited now these, now others, of the students, to go with him to the
cooks house to break their fasts. Some perceiving diverse to be drawn by this
man's enticement, and fearing the Jesuits conniuence and patience in the matter
(for they could not but know its admit they set not the Irishman aworke, as
many greatly feared they did) would turn the students to some greater harm in
the end; they themselves admonish Fa. Parsons and the rest, of the disorder,
and desired them to be more careful, and to prevent the inconveniences which
might ensue to the College thereby: yea, and further told them, that their
negligence in the matter, yielded no small suspicion of some further advantage
and drift they intended against the students. The good Fathers seemed not to
believe, nor much to regard the thing. At the last, this Irishman with great
importunity enticed one of the priests to go with him. This priest was a good
virtuous man, of good example and edification to all the rest, and had been
with his fellows opposite to the Jesuits in all contentions with them: after
the decease of Cardinal Allen, his innocence and virtuous behavior bare him
out, that the Jesuits could have nothing to except against him in all those
tumults. After he, the Irishman, and another priest, had celebrated abroad, in
their return home they went to an English priests chamber in the city, called
Master Midleton, who had had much bickering with Fa. Parsons both in Spain and
Rome. In his chamber they intended to break their fast, but the Irishman would
have them in any case to take it in the cooks house, which was at the next
door, and at the last he prevailed: they had no sooner entered, and called for
some meat, but before they had tasted, behold the Isbeces or soldiers come
upon them, and apprehend them; a strange thing in that town, and the like not
heard of before. Fa. Parsons was sent for, he seeming unacquainted with the
stratagem, lamented their misfortune, and in the way of favor procured they
should be imprisoned in the College. He shut up every one apart in close
prison. The Irishman seeing his proceedings, exclaimed against him, but he was
charily kept and could never after be spoken with by the scholars, least he
should tell tales. Then began Fa. Parsons and the Jesuits to bestirre them, and
caused all the students to come each one before his friend Accrisio the
Fiscall, and himself, and to confess how often they had been at the cooks
house, or eaten abroad; and he assured them, that they were bound in conscience
every one to accuse himself. He was the examiner, his Jesuits the notaries,
and when he had gotten this advantage against the young men, he diuulged what
pleased himself; he incensed the Pope, the Cardinals, and all the city
against them, and wrought the utter discredit of our countrymen, which before
that day were honored and highly esteemed of (not without great cause) in that
town, and all the Christian world besides. Then brought he in the orders,
which the Jesuits had so much desired: he dismissed diverse of the disgraced
priests into England with ordinary faculties, and with friendship (as then he
pretended) but recalled their faculties before they arrived in Flaunders, and
sent infamous libels against them unto his Jesuits in England, containing most
vile crimes; whereof (as the priests protest upon their salvation) they were
altogether innocent, and not so much as once examined of, whiles they were in
Rome. The priests at their departure, fearing that Fa. Parsons bad dealing
would have no end nor measure, besought him to let their faults be known in
their presence, least that after they were gone, other things might be laid
unto them than they had either confessed or done. This he would not grant, but
willed them to depart in peace, and to assure themselves, that he had no great
matter against them, except that disorder of eating abroad: the greatest
offenders were left behind; yet after these were once gone, he cleared the rest
of the greatest crimes, and said they touched only them that were departed.
Thus this good Father jugled, and wrought the shame and discredit of our good
countrymen among strangers, and prosecuted the utter subversion of their good
names in England by his infamous libels.


Gent. These be woeful things to hear: but I, and others have noted one
wonderful work of Gods in this case, (that is) That many of these young
priests so disgraced by Fa. Parson and the Jesuits, have fallen since their
coming into England into the hands of our common enemies, yet they all have
stood constantly to their profession, and endured patiently both prisons, and
what else has been done against them: Which virtuous carriage could not have
proceeded from them, if they had been men of that dissolute disposition, as Fa.
Parson, and the Jesuits would make us believe.


Pr. This is admirable indeed, and their virtuous behavior in time will
recover them their credit, and bring confusion upon their slandering
adversaries, when the world, frustrate of I know not what, temporal hopes by
the Jesuits means, shall leave swaying with them. But I pray you, what other
slanderous reports do they and their dependants give out against us?


The fifth Slander.
Gent. They do say moreover, that you priests be the only Statesmen, and not
they. For you be Scotists in faction, laboring to set up the King of Scots, a
known heretic, to be king of England.


Pr. Thus they slander us throughout the realm, and these be Fa. P. words also
in his letters to his associats in England, the 18. of January 1599. under the
name of Martine Array, when he had the two priests we sent to his Ho. fast in
prison. But to refute the malicious slander, we need do no more but appeal to
his, and his associats own consciences, and to the indifferent judgments of
all honest men. For first, it is so certain and manifest, that Fa. P. with
diverse of his brethren have dealt in the greatest matters of State that may be,
concerning both the present alteration of all, and the future disposition of
the crown and kingdom; that with any show of truth or honesty, it cannot be
denied: and yet neither he nor all his adherents shall be ever able to prove,
or truly to affirm, that those two priests, Master Doctor Bishop, and M.
Charnock, or any of us (whom so vehemently they seek to overthrow in our good
names by their manifold untrue slanders, and by this shameless letter of his
to bring us in hatred with all Catholics in the world, and to stir up against
us our own prince and magistrates to bereave us of our lives) he shall never be
able to prove, that we have dealt in State matters, or liked of his dealings.
It has pleased him and his fellows presumptuously to tamper in these affairs,
which concerned them not. They have set up their rest upon the hopes of Spain,
procured the emnitie of the king of Scots, and of all other competitors to the
crown of England. Now of likelihood, Fa. Parsons is sorry we be not over
boots with him, and fearing the event, he waxes jealous of all men's actions,
and specially of ours, whom he knows to condemn his dangerous and harmefull
courses; and the zealous father finding us not to run with him as he would have
us for Spain, or the Lady Infanta, (as truly it becomes not us to meddle in
these great affairs, but to apply our function, and to commit the disposing
of kingdoms and princes businesses to Gods wisdom and providence, seeing our
intermedling in them may be offensive and hurtful many ways both to our
selves and our Catholic people, without any profit at all) he imagines that
we be his adversaries, and consequently to favor the king of Scots, whom he
has needlessely made his enemy: which king of Scots he affirms (for our
greater disgrace with all Catholics) to be a known heretic, and us to be
Scotists in faction; a thing most offensive to our present state, as he says.
In which uncharitable calumnies, how Fa. Parsons can acquit himself of too bad
dealing, both with the present State, and us, it goes beyond my capacity to
understand. For how knows he that it offends the present State, her
Majesty, her honorable Council, and other magistrates, that any should affect
the king of Scots, and prefer him before all others after her Majesty's
decease. The present State makes no show at all of any such auersion from the
king of Scots and his title. Fa. Parsons then upon his own surmise should not
affirm so odious a thing. Which if it be true, and so conceived upon his
assertion, it may very well be matter of disgust and quarrel between her
Majesty and that king, and perhaps touch the present State, with dissimulation
of kindness toward him. And if it be false, it must be very injurious to
the present State, and both their royal persons. And for us, what temeritie
and uncharitable dealing is this in a Jesuit, to write, That so many
Catholic priests are Scotists in faction, and that without any respect of
religion at all, they are about to set up the king of Scots, a known
heretic, and this to offend now the present State? If we should go about
such an enterprise, no doubt, but we should grievously offend the present
State, no less than the Jesuits have done, by their endeavors to set up a
Spaniard; it being prohibited by the laws of the realm, under a capital
penalty, That none shall meddle with the matter of succession, during her
Majesty's life that now is; much less, attempt the setting up of any, before
her Majesty be dead. And in this case, if it had been true, perhaps it had not
beseemed Father Parsons to have been the first bewrayer of us, and discouerer
of our fault, and thereby bring us all in mortal hatred with the State, and in
manifest danger of our lives, he knowing that it would so mightily offend
them. But it being altogether untrue on our parts, and no other than his own
jealous imagination, he has done us intolerable injury, thus to make us
odious to our own Prince and State, without our ill deserving. I can perceive
no other drift he should have in this calumny, than (all his other devises
failing) by this untrue fiction, to undo us, whom he reckons his
adversaries. He knew when he writ this letter, that we went about to procure a
prohibition, That no books or Treatises of State-matters should be published,
which might any way exasperate her Majesty and the present State against us,
which came only to plant Catholic religion among our countrymen, whosoever
they were that should govern the kingdom: this I say he knew very well. How
then in a charitable mind could he think it likely, that we our selves were
about to set up the king of Scots, which (as he confesses) would most of all
offend the present State? We desired to avoid all occasions of offense, and
this good Father will nevertheless accuse us to offend in the highest degree.
It is not convenient nor safe for us to follow Father Parsons designs in these
matters of princes and kingdoms, and therefore he and his associats must
pardon us, if we dislike their doings, and quite refuse to join with them.


Gent. It behooves you to do no less, especially in these dangerous times,
when a man shall hazard much, and loose all ere he be aware. But surely, Father
Parsons had some notable policy in his head about these State-affaires, when
he procured, That the Archpriest his authority should be extended over all
English priests in England and Scotland.


Priest. He had no other, than that by this absurd mean he might further the
Spanish title, and hinder the Scots. For when he procured this authority, the
Catholic Archbishop of Glasco was living, and relieved by the kings consent
and grant, out of the revenues of his Bishopric. And yet was this Archp.
authority stretched throughout all the kingdom of Scotland, without any
respect or subordination at all to that Archbishop; for no other end, but that
there should be no friendship, familiarity, conversation, nor communion
between our priests and the Catholics of Scotland, and thereby the people of
both nations be kept still at their ancient mortal enmity.


Gent. Me thinks this cannot be but very uncharitable, and absurd. For the
English priests having from his Holiness jurisdiction to minister Sacraments,
as well in Scotland as in England, why should they not as freely (if they be
so disposed) help to save the Scots, as the English? Or why should that people
for a controversy about Titles and Crowns, be debarred of their spiritual
relief by our priests, considering they have almost none of their own? The
work of God should not be hindered through these vain respects. And again,
it seems, that Father Parsons policies in temporal matters, blinded his
judgment in spiritual. For how unfitting and unseemly is it, That an
Archpriest in England should have his authority extended into the diocese of
an Archbishop in another kingdom, without any dependence, or subordination
unto him? What can be more injurious both to the Archbishop and to the
Priests, than this? The priests be free, and at their own choice it is,
Whether they will continue and labor in these dangerous works, or leave
them. If weary of England, they pass into France, Germany, Spain, or any
other part of Christendom, except Scotland, they are without the Archpriest
his jurisdiction; the Bishops of those countries may dispose of them: but if
for their own safeties, or for desire of saving souls, or for any other good
respect they depart into Scotland, the Catholic Archbishop there cannot
dispose of them, not employ them nor hold them, otherwise than the Archpriest
in London will give them leave; in his power it is, and not in the Archbishops
within his own See, what authority, and faculties they shall have; whether
they shall use any part of their function, or no; and finally, he may enforce
them either to leave that kingdom, how needful soever they be for Christian
souls, or else to remain unable to do them good, with many more like
inconveniences.


Priest. The disorder is exceeding preposterous, and shameful, but thus it
pleased Father Parsons to frame all to his own purpose, without regard either
of Priests, or Archbishops, or Christian souls, or Christ himself. But to end
this point of their slander, with a manifest confutation and show of their ill
dealing with us: I pray you confer this. That we be Scotists in faction, and
that we deal in matters of State, with their other slander, which we have
already touched before; that was, That we are highly favored by the State,
and maintained by the Council and Magistrates: we need no more, but for a
sufficient confutation to set the one against the other. For if it be true,
That we be Statesmen, and go about to set up the king of Scots; and withal,
that this most of all does offend the present State (as they say;) it cannot
surely be true, that we are highly favored and maintained by the State and
Council, as they report for our disgrace: Because the State and Council will
not favor nor relieve them, that so greatly offend them by their dealing in
state matters. Or again, if this latter be true, That the Council favor and
maintain us: it must of necessity be false, That we offend them by tampering
for the king of Scots. But whiles indiscreet zeal and uncharitable affections
move the Jesuits and their adherents to injury us by all means they can,
they run themselves headlong into these absurdities, to make one of their
slanders to confute another. For they all being untruths, uttered upon a
mighty stomach, and a vehement desire to discredit us, they hang together,
and agree like Sampsons Foxes: but our innocence and truth I hope will
prevail in the end against all malice, and iniquity, and cunning shifts.


FINIS.

