THE BRIDE ROYAL, OR The Spiritual Marriage between CHRIST and his CHVRCH.

Delivered By way of congratulation upon the happy and hopeful marriage
between the two imcomparable Princes, The PALSEGRAVE, and the Lady ELIZABETH.

IN A Sermon preached upon the 14. day of FEBRVARIE last past, the day of that
Royal Marriage triumphant solemnization.

At Steeple Ashton in Wiltshire by G. W. Master of Arts, and Pastor there.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for R. Mabbe. 1613,

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCES.
THE MOST NOBLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, LORD FREDERICK THE V. COUNT PALATINE
OF RHENE, ELECTOR OF THE SACRED EMPIRE, ARCHSEWER, AND VICAR GENERAL IN THE
VACANCIE OF THE EMPIRE, DVKE OF BAVARIA, KNIGHT OF THE MOST HONORABLE ORDER OF
THE GARTER. AND TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND ALL -- VIRTUOUS PRINCESS, THE LADY
ELIZABETH, ELDEST AND ONLY DAVGHTER OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, Our
gracious Sovereign, JAMES By the grace of GOD King of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE,
and IRELAND, etc.
All Grace, and Glory; Peace, and Piety; Prosperity, and Felicity, be
multiplied and continued, here, and ever.
VOVCHSAFE (Great Gracious, and Glorious PRINCES) amongst the many rare
Pageants, and rich Presents from Court, City, and University, exhibited to
your Excellencies, as tokens of the common rejoicing in your Royal Nuptials,
To accept this poor Country present of a Punie Divine, To Artaxerxes.
who like the Persian Peasant, is desirous to offer somewhat (though it be but
a handful of water) amongst the rest. In the memorable day of your Highness
happy espousals, when all true-hearted Christians, like Zerubbabels followers,
Zechar. 4.7.
with joyful acclamations did cry Grace, Grace unto it; I considered with my
self, like the Lepers of Samaria, 2. King 7.9.
that I should not do well to hold my peace, for it was a day of good tidings.
Therefore to the glory of God and honor of the day, I addressed my speech
unto my wonted Audience, as, in my judgment, was best befitting the present
occasions. What my Tongue did then adventure to deliver, my Pen shortly after
was bold to scrible over, and now being brought from the Pulpit into the
Press, it presumes to press into the Court, and to seek Sanctuary under
your Highness Protection.

Pardon (most excellent Princes) this my presumptuous boldness, in aspiring to
offer this so raw a subject to such Royalleies. It has nothing in it (with all
humility I acknowledge it) worthy of vulgar aspect, much less of gracious
acceptance; My sole Apology is, that in the uprightness of mine heart, out of
the excess of mine inward joy, to the manifestation of my most humble
observance toward your sacred Excellencies, I have adventured to cast my poor
mite into your abounding Treasury: Seeing with mine eyes, and hearing with mine
ears the triumphant acclamations, general congratulations, and religious
supplications of the people, amongst whom I live, at the admiration, and for
the benediction of your Princely marriage, or ever I was aware, Cant. 6.12.
my soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadab. And albeit when I had thus
set forth my self, I perceived that I was vnmatchably prevented in the
vnmatchably prevented in the same course, which I began to run, by a
reverend, learned, and religious Cushi, who had set forth before me, D. Willets
Treatise of Salomons marriage, dedicated to the same high and mighty Princess.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2.
and by many degrees had ouer-run me, yet I was of Ahimaaz forward spirit,
desirous (though like Ascanius, non passibus aequis) to run after. And albeit
a wise and well-experienced Ioab, might have said unto me, Wherefore will thou
run, 2. Sam. 18. v. 21.22, 23.
my Son, seeing that thou have no tidings ready? yet (such is the headlong
rashness of youthful disposition) I settled my self upon Ahimaaz resolution:
But howsoever, let me run. Wherein, as I can hope for no greater acceptance of
such simple service, then what was spoken to Ahimaaz, Verse. 30.
Turn a-side, stand by; yet I humbly crave of your gracious Excellencies, this
favorable censure, that like Ahimaaz, I may be deemed a wellmeaning man; Verse.
27.
My will was good, though great my weakness. The Prince of the Kings of the
earth, out of the riches of his mercy multiply his graces upon your Princely
Persons; That your Highness (right worthy Prince) may be as Abraham, Genesis
17.4.5.
a Father of many Nations, as Isaac a Father of mighty Kings, as Jacob, your
seed may be in many waters: Number. 24.7.
The eternal God multiply upon you the zeal of David; Psalm. 119.139. 1. King.
4.34.
The wisdom of Solomon; the courage of Joshua; The honor of Josiah; Josh. 1.6.
The riches of Hezekiah; 2. Chron. 35.25.
The strength of Beniah; 2. Chron. 32.27.
and the long life of Methuselah; 2. Sam. 23.20.
that you may so far in all Princely and Heroical virtues surpass all the
Genesis 5.27.
former, both Electorall and Imperial Fredericks, as you have exceeded them in
the happy lot of your blessed marriage choice. And as for your Highness (most
religious, excellent, and admired Princess) the King of heaven make your
Royal person like Sarah a Mother of many Kings; Genesis 17.16.
like Rebecka a Mother of thousands of millions, whose seed may possess the
Gates of their enemies; Genesis 24.60.
like Rahel and Leah, Ruth. 4.11.
which two did build up the house of Israel; The God of Peace increase more and
more in your sacred soul the devotion of Hannah, 1. Sam. 2.1. 2. Chron. 34.22.
the holiness of Hulda, 1. Sam. 25.33. Hest. 4.15.
the wisdom of Abigail, the charity of Hester, the magnanimity of Judith,
Judith. 2. Judge. 3.
and the dignity of Deborah; yea the Lord double upon your Grace, the long
life, admired virtue, and admirable prosperity of that now triumphant Saint our
late renowned Queen Elizabeth, whose sweet name your Highness bears. The
blessing of the most blessed GOD rest and remain with you both, to the glory
of his most holy name, the comfort of our dread Sovereign your Royal Father,
the solace of our gracious Queen your happy Mother, to the rejoicing of our
peerless Prince Charles your hopeful Brother, to the honor of Britannie, and
ornament of Germany, yea to the general happiness of all those that love and
fear the LORD JESUS, whose name be blessed now and for ever.

Your Excellent Highnesses humble Servant In all duty and service in the Lord,
ready to be commanded. GEORGE WEB.

THE BRIDE ROYAL.
PSALM. 45.13, 14, 15. Verse. 13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, Her
clothing is of wrought Gold.

Verse. 14. She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: The
Virgins her Companions that follow her, shall be brought unto thee.

Verse. 15. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, They shall enter
into the Kings Palace.


IN this Days common Festiuitie, because of the happy Royal Nuptials
solemnity, Having more then common cause, I could not choose, but make
digression from our ordinary and common Theme, and fit both Text and Speech
unto the Time. As therefore not long since, upon occasion of our public loss,
I called you to a public mourning; So now in this renewed occasion of our
general gain, I am to call you to a general rejoicing. For as the untimely
deaths of hopeful Princes, are ominous presages of ensuing miseries, and
therefore to be condoled; So the hopeful marriages of virtuous and religious
Princes, are Auspicious beginnings of future happiness, and therefore to be
congratulated. Wherefore let no man tax it as a matter either ridiculous, or
presumptuous, for us that live here in the Country, to participate in any sort
with this days triumph of the Court, seeing that not Court alone, but Country
also, and (if I not much mistake my self) whole Christendom is interessed in
this days business: yea, I doubt not, but in foreign countries, as well as
here in ours, the confederate Nations, and all true-hearted Christians, whose
hearts and minds are linked with the band of the same Religion together with
us, so many as hear of it, do greatly joy and rejoice in it. And shall not
we, whom this so nearely (how nearly we know not) does concern, rejoice
herein, and celebrate this a joyful Sabboath unto the Lord? Doubtless this is
the day, Psalm. 118.23.
the happy day, which the Lord has made, it is our duty to rejoice and to be
glad in it. Though our bodies be far absent from the pleastant spectacle of
these solemnities, yet may our souls keep a solemnity of thankfulness,
though our hands can add nothing to this days triumph by our outward service,
yet may our hearts wear inward Hymenaean Garlands of spiritual joys, and
strew the Bridal flowers of zealous prayers, for their good success.

My Text, The general Argument of this Psalm.
which to this end I have made choice of, does well befit this present purpose,
and parallel this occasion; for the whole Psalm is an (...), A Bridal Song,
or marriage Dittie, sung by the sweet Singer of Israel, in the behalf of a
marriage between a no mean or obscure couple, but a Kings daughter and a
King, between the greatest Bridegroom, and the happiest Bride. The Bride here
in my Text, I confess, far greater then Great Britains Daughter; The
Bridegroom far more glorious then any, either German Prince or earthly
Monarch. For the marriage here is spiritually to be understood, between the
Messiah and the Church; Christ being the Bridegroom, the Church the Bride; He
the Spouse, She the Spousesse; He the Husband, She the Wife. So that albeit I
may not wrest this Scripture, or retort it from the mystical marriage, at
which it aims unto the material marriage, at which I aim; yet, I hope,
without prejudice to the Text, in the inter-view of the one, I may have a
collateral aspect at the other; especially seeing that the holy Ghost has so
nearly combined them both together. For here in this Psalm is comprehended a
twofold marriage; The one Literal, the other Mystical; The one in the
Letter, the other in the Sense: The Literal Marriage is between Solomon, King
David's Son, and the Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt: The Mystical
marriage is between Christ Jesus the eternal Son of the everliving God,
and the Church collected out of Jews and Gentiles: The one is as the shadow;
the other is the substance: The one is the Type; the other the thing prefigured.

The whole Psalm does consist of two parts: The Division of the Psalm.
of a description; First, of the Bridegroom: Secondly, of the Bride. The
former, in the twelve first verses; the latter, from thence unto the end of the
Psalm.

The Bridgroome is described: The subdiuision of the first part.
first, from his Person, v. 2. Secondly, from his might and majesty, v. 3, 4,
5. Thirdly, from his wealth and dignity, v. 6, 7. Fourthly, from his Robes and
Vestments, v. 8. Fifthly, from his train or retinue, v. 9.10. Sixthly, from his
Favorites and Homagers, v. 11, 12. The division of the Text.


The Bride (of whom at this present I intend only to speak) is described:
first, from her Parentage, she is The Kings daughter: Secondly, from her
beauty, she is all glorious within: Thirdly, from her Ornaments or Bridal
attire, Her clothing is of wrought gold, her raiment of needle work:
Fourthly, from her train or company; The Virgins that be her Companions and
follow after her, shall be brought unto thee: Fifthly, from her pomp and
marriage-solemnitie, With joy and gladness shall they be brought, and shall
enter into the Kings Palace: Sixthly, from the fruits of this marriage, and
promise of posterity; In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children, whom
thou may make Princes in all Lands: Seventhly, from the memorial of it and
stabilitie; I will remember thy name from one Generation to an other, therefore
shall the people give thanks unto thee world without end.

The two last circumstances are out of the compass of my present text; the
particular branches whereof are so many, and the limited time so short, that I
shall be constrained to omit many worthy points of Doctrine, which from thence
I might collect: and that which I shall herein handle, I shall but point at,
because I endeavor to be brief. In the handling whereof, first and principally
I will touch the substance of the words, Christ's Spiritual marriage with the
Church, and then descend to make some shadow or resemblance of it in the Royal
marriage, which is this day so hopefully, and, I hope, so happily celebrated.

The Kings Daughter.
THe first thing which this sweet Singer of Israel does chant forth in the
commendation Circ. 1. Who is here meant by the Kings Daughter.
of this Spiritual Bride, is her parentage, that she is descended of the blood
Royal, Filia Regis, a Kings Daughter. Alluding literally unto Salomons Queen,
which was the King of Egypts daughter, but understanding mystically the Church
of Christ, which is the King of Heavens Daughter. For, as Solomon himself was
a lively type of Christ, so the wife of Solomon was in this respect a
resemblance of the Church, who is the wife of Christ. As that Egyptian Lady
before her marriage with Solomon, was altogether Heathenish: so this Lady
before her Spiritual marriage with Christ, was altogether Hellish. As her
father was an Egyptian, so the Churches natural parents, Infidels: Thy father
was an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite, Ezech. 16.3. As she, before this
marriage, was brought up in blindness and superstition. So the Church, before
Christ did spread over it the skirts of love, was overwhelmed with errors and
superstition. Again, as Salomons wife was a Kings Daughter, so the Spouse of
Christ is the King of Heavens Daughter. As she by marriage with Salomo^ was
made a Queen: so the Church by marriage with Christ is made a Royal Bride. As
she after marriage became the mother of a King: so the Church after her
Spiritual marriage with Christ, becomes a mother of Kings and Princes, whom
she brings forth, and nurseth up to Christ. So that what once was spoken to
the glory of Matild the Empress, that she was Regis filia, Sponsa, Nurus, a
Kings Daughter, a Kings wife, and a Kings mother, may much more gloriously be
spoken of the Church, she is Regis Filia, Sponsa, Nurus, the Daughter of the
King of Heaven, who begat her; the wife of the King of Glory, who redeemed
her; the mother of many Christian, Kings and Princes, borne of her and
nourished by her. The Church of Christ is this Kings Daughter.

The Churches excellency.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, says David, speaking
of the earthly Jerusalem, Psalm. 87.3.
Psalm. 87.3. We may well apply it to this heavenly Jerusalem, Glorious things
are spoken of thee, thou Church of Christ. It is called the Beauty of the
earth, Psalm. 12 2. Psalm. 122.
The light of the world, Matthew. 5.14. Matthew. 5.14.
The Standard of the Nations, Isa. Isai. 49.22.
49.22. The golden City, Reuelat. Revel. 21.2.
21.2. It is called the City of God, Ephesians. 2.19. The House of God, Ephesians. 2.19.
1. Tim. 3.15. The Temple of God, 1. Tim. 3.15. 1. Co. 3.16.
1. Cor. 3.16. The Body of Christ, Romans Romans 12.5.
12.5. The Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. Ephesians. 1.23. 1. Cor. 11:2. Revel. ^9.9.
1.23. The Spouse of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.2. The Lambs Bride, Revel. 19.9. She
is called A woman clothed with the Sun, Revel, 12.1.
Reu. 12.1. The Fairest amongst women, Cani. 1.8. Cant. 4.10. Gal. 4.26.
Can. 1.8. Christ's Sister, Cant. 4.10. The faithfuls Mother, Gal. 4.26. The
Prince his Daughter, Cant. Cant 7.1. Psalm. 45.13.
7.1. And here in my text, The Kings Daughter. I omit the many and almost
infinite similitudes and comparisons, by which this Church of Christ, for the
excellency thereof, is described: she is compared to the Valleys, Gardens,
Numb. 24.5.
and Cedar trees, Number. 24.5. To the Rose of the field, Cant. 2.2.
and the Lilly of the valleys. Cant. 4.13.
To an Orchard of Pomegranats, a fountain of gardens, Cant. 4.15.
and a well of springing waters, in the Song of Songs. All which testimonies
and comparisons (with many more, which to this purpose I might allege) do
plainly show unto us, that amongst all the Societies, amongst all the daughters
of the world, there is none so excellent, none so worthy, none so amiable, none
so lovely, none so beautiful, none so precious, as is the Church of God. So
that unto her we may apply that of Solomon, Prou. 31.29. Prou. 31.29.
Many daughters have done virtuously, but this surmounteth them all.

Filiae Terrae, From the Churches descent. Luke 16.9. 1. Sam. 2.12. Romans 9.22.
John 8.44.
Children of the Earth, Luke 16.9. Filij Belial, Sons of Belial, 1. Sam.
2.12. Filij irae, Children of wrath, Romans 9.22. Filij Diaboli, Children of the
Devil, Ioh. 8.44. The Church of Christ and every member thereof, is of an
heavenly race, and of the blood Royal, 1. Pet. 2.9. 1. Pet. 2.9.
Filij lucis, Children of the light, Ioh. 12.36. Filij promissionis, John
12.36. Romans 9.8.
Children of the promise, Romans 9.8. Filij regni, Children of the kingdom,
Matthew. 25.34. Matthew. 25.34.
Filij and Filiae Rogis, Sons and Daughters of the King of Heaven; as here in
my text: Psalm. 45.13.
God the Father does vouchsafe to be called their Father, Romans 8.15.
Romans 8.15. Christ, his only Son by Nature, does not disdain to be called
their brother, Hebr. Hebr. 2.11.
2.11. The Holy Ghost is their inspirer and preserver, Ephesians. 1.14.
Ephesians. 1.14. They are borne of God, and have his seed remaining in them, 1. John
3.9.
1. Ioh. 3.9. Reges nati, nati ad regnum, Kings by birth, borne to a kingdom.

Again, From the Churches privilege.
are but vassals and homagers unto the Church. Thus says the Lord, Isay. 55.4.
The labor of Egypt, the Merchandise of Aethiopia, and of the Sabeans, shall
come unto thee, and they shall be thine, they shall fall down before thee, and
say, Surely God is in thee, Isay 45.4. And in another place, Isay 49.23.
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens shall be thy nursing mothers,
they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and lick up the
dust of thy feet Isay 49.23.

Lastly, From her portion or dowry. Genesis 43.34.
this Princely Daughter has a Princely portion above all other, as Beniamins
mess was five times as much as his brethrens. So the Churches portion is
infinitely beyond the portion of the worldlings. Luke 22.32. 1. Pet. 1.4.
Her Portion is a kingdom, Luke 12.32. Her Ioynture is an inheritance, 1. Pet.
1.4. Her Dowry is an eternal weight of glory, 1. Peter 5.10. A Kingdom, 1.
Pet. 5.10.
which cannot be shaken, Hebr. 12.28. Hebr. 12.28. Titus 3.7.
An inheritance, which shall never fail the^, Tit. 3.7. A weight of glory,
which is ineffable, 1. Cor. 1. Cor. 2.9.
2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

many an excellent use. Of comfort to the faithful in their meditations.
As first, matter of comfort unspeakable to the Godly: for seeing the dignity
and excellency of the Church is so great and honorable, therefore they must
needs be blessed and most happy, who are members of it; 1. John 3.1.
Behold what love the Father has given unto us, that we should be called the
sons of God, 1. Ioh. 3.1. God is become our Father, The Son is become our
Redeemer, the Holy Ghost is become our Sanctifier, the Angels are become our
Attendants, the Scriptures are become our Evidences, the Sacraments are become
our Seals, the Creatures are become our Servants. 1. Co^. 3.21.22.23.
All things are ours, whether they be things present, or things to come, all
are ours, and we Christ's, and Christ Gods, 1. Cor. 3.21.22.23. Let this then
comfort thee (dear Christian) against all ignominy, and wrong, by any limb
of Satan offered unto thee. Does any child of Belial depise thee, or any way
reproach thee? Comfort thy self; thou art right dear and precious in the
sight of God, and in the account of Christ. Comfort against contempt.
Thou art a Kings son, or, a Kings daughter, thou art a darling of the King
of heaven; they are but peasants, slaves, villains, vassals in regard of thee.
Give senseless dogs leave to bark against the Moon? There is never a
Baalamitish curre amongst them all, Numb. 23.10.
but would wish that his latter end might be like thine: and that after this
life ended, he might go with thee, though but as thy dog, to heaven. Comfort
against fear of want.
Let this comfort thee against fear of want, and threate of foe. In time of
dearth thou shall have enough: thou art the Kings child. He that feeds the
fowls of the air, Matthew. 6, 26.
and cloatheth the grass of the field: He will much more provide both food and
cloth for his own child. Of foes.
And why should thou fear a mortal man, or the son of man, in whom there
is no strength? Fear not (says the Lord) I am he that created thee, I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name. Thou art mine; when thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee; when thou walk through the fire, the
flame shall not kindle upon thee, Isay 43.12. And what though Satan lay sore
siege at the castle of thy distressed soul? Of Satan.
Matthew. 16.18.
Yet the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee: for thou art the
daughter of the King of heaven: Revel. 12.7.8.
The great Michael shall fight for thee: The Red Dragon nor any of his Bitterns
shall never be able to overcome thee.

Of terror to the Churches persecutors.
who are persecutours of this Princely daughter, whether they persecute her, or
any member of her, whether with their tongue, as Shimei, 2. Sam. 16.7.
or with their gesture, as Ismael, Genesis 21.19. Act. 12.1.
or with their hands as Herod, whether cunningly, as Iezabel, or openly, 1.
King. 21.5. Exodus 5.14. 3. John 9.
as Pharaoh, whether by themselves, as Diotrephes, or by others, as the Scribes
and Pharisees. Matthew. 26.3.
That which was spoken to railing Rhabshekah out-brauing Hezechiah, may very
well be applied unto them, Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? Against
whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even
against the holy one of Israel, Isay 37.23. Base wretch, know thou whom thou
go about to disgrace, to wrong, or to reproach? Surely one that is far
better then thy self, a Kings son or daughter; even a child of the King of
heaven. Will a King see his child wronged, and not revenge it? Will a King put
up an indignity offered unto his royal blood, if he have power and ability
to redress it? But this our heavenly King is omni-scient, and therefore sees:
He is omnipotent, and therefore able to revenge the wrongs and injuries offered
unto any of his children: He has said, that Whosoever touches any of these,
touches the apple of his eye. Deuteronomy. 32.10. The wrongs done unto them he
reckons as done unto himself, Act. 9.4. The Lord will smite through thy
loins, O thou hater of his children, Deuteronomy. 33.11. It had been better for thee
that thou had been never borne, Better that a Millstone were hanged about
thy neck, and that thou were drowned in the midst of the sea, then that thou
should offend any of the King of heavens little ones, Matthew. 18.6.

Lastly, For direction.
let this serve for our direction. First, that for our own part we use all
diligence to make it sure to our souls, that we are members of it. In our
affections.
We see how careful men are to be enfranchised into privileged places, and
incorporations, Act. 22.28.
how they strive for it, and rather then they will forgo it, give a great
sum of money for it. How much more should we endeavor to be members of the
Church, whereby we are not only made free Denizens of heavens Kingdom, Revel.
1.5.
but also sons and heirs, yea Kings and Priests in this kingdom, One day in
Gods Court is better then a thousand elsewhere: It is better to be adore-keeper
in the house of God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness, Psalm.
84.2.10. In our childrens education.
And let this not only make our selves willing members of Gods Church, but let
it also incite us to bring our sons and daughters into the lap of this
heavenly Kings Isay 43.6. Isay 49.21.22.
daughter; to consecrate our children with Hannah to Gods service; 1. Sam. 1.11.
and to prepare them to be Brides unto the holy Lamb, Revel. 19.7. We all,
that are parents, do desire to prefer our children to good marriages, to
link them to honest families, and think it a great grace to us and them, if
they may be matched into great houses, or Noble bloods: But what is all the
nobility, greatness, wealth, or dignity of the world, to the dignity of the
Church: What a glory is this, to have our children linked into the blood
celestial, to have our sons, Sons of Zion, our daughters, daughters of
Abraham, to have them married to Christ Jesus, and to be sons and daughters to
the King of heaven? In our thankful recordation.
And finally (that I may conclude this point) if David, when Saul had
dissemblingly proffered unto him his daughter Merab to be his wife, as one
astonished, made answer, Who am I, and what is my life? Or what is my fathers
house in Israel, that I should be son in law to a King, 1. Sam. 18.17.18. How
much more justly may every Christian soul, when as the eternal God does, not
by seeming show alone, profer, but really and royally perform the profer; not
to be son in law alone, but to be his very son or daughter, by adoption: say
with holy admiration and thankful recordation; Who am I, or what is my fathers
house? or what is there in me, that I should be the son, or the daughter of
the King of heaven? We may well say, with the penitent Prodigal, O heavenly
Father, We have sinned against heaven and against thee, and are not worthy to
be called thy sons, make us as one of thine hired servants, Luke 15.18.19. For
us, who are but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27.
It were a great privilege to be the servants of his servants, to be his
vassals, his bondmen; to be but doore-keepers in the house, Psalm. 84.10.
were a great privilege and honorable service; Ephesians. 2.19.
but to be fellow citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God; John
15.15.
to be not servants, but sons, Romans 8.17.
to be not only sons, but heirs, yea heirs of God, yea fellow heirs with
Christ, What heart can sufficiently conceive of this so great a grace? What
affection can sufficiently admire it? What tongue can one half express it?
Think on it, and be thankful for it: thou being a member of the Church, art
a Kings child, Gods daughter, the Spouse of Christ. And thus much briefly of
the Churches excellency; proceed we now to the second circumstance, which is
the Churches Beauty: The Kings daughter is all glorious within.

All glorious within.
Encomium here spoken to the commendation of this royal Bride, is her glorious
beauty, wherein she does excel: she is (...), all heavenly, all glorious,
full of Beauty; For her beauty, she is glorious, for the Quantity of it,
All glorious, For the Quality of it, Inwardly glorious, All glorious within.
It would be too prolixe a Treatise for me to handle in order every one of
these particulars, and therefore I will contract the maine sum and principal
scope of them all, into one short doctrinall proposition.

The Churches beauty.
in this world not wholly free from some outward blemishes, yet inwardly is
most glorious, and in the sight of God, All glorious. That the Church of God
whiles it soiourneth here in these military Tents of this world, Not wholy
freed from out ward blackness.
is not altogether free from outward blemishes, may appear by her own
confession of her self, Cant. 1.4.5. I am black, but comely (O ye daughters
of Jerusalem) as the Tents of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon; Look not
upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me, The reason
of it.
my Mothers children were angry with me, where is declared the reason how and
whence it is that in this glorious church there appears sometimes this swart
hue of outward blackness: First, it lies subject to the scorching Sun of
affliction, The Vallie of Bacha, is their Camp, Psalm. 84 6. The Cross is
their Standert, Luke 9.23. Persequutions their colors, Ioh. 15.20. Trialls
their combatings, Psalm. 34.19. Sorrows their food, Psalm. 88.15. Tears their
drink, 119. Secondly, It is environed with false brethren within, and
infestuous enemies without; The state of it is like the Arc floating upon the
waters, Genesis 7.17. Like a Lilly amongst the Thorns, Cant. 2.2. Like a Lamb
amongst Lions, Psalm. 22.21. She is compared to a cornefield, wherein are some
Tares as well as Wheat, Mat. 13.25. To a Net where are some badde fish as well
as good, Mat. 13.47. To a threshing floor, wherein is chaf as well as corn,
Mat. 3.12. Unto a band of Men, in which there are some white-liuered, as well
as valiant Soldiers, Cant. 3.7. To a great house wherein are vessels of
dishonor, as well as vessels of honor, 2. Tim. 2.20. In regard whereof,
Sometimes this Kingly Daughter outwardly appears so black, that there can be
discerned no form of beauty in it, Isay 53.2. Sometimes so barren that there
appears little fruitfulness in it, Galat. 4.27. Sometimes so desolate, that
it is constrained to hide her self in the wilderness, Revel. 12.14.

Wherein then appears the Churches glory? Yet inwardly glorious. Psalm.
45.13.
She is (says my Text) glorious within: Inwardly glorious; Her glory is more
internal then external: There is a twofold state of the Church, Outward and
inward: The outward estate of the Church stands in visible assemblies, in the
public Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, in the external Discipline and
Government; And in this respect (as I have before touched) she may sometimes
seem by reason of the iniquity of the times, to be ouer-clouded with
blackness; The inward estate of the Church stands in the true knowledge of God
in Christ, Wherein this inward glory does consist.
in comfort touching remission of sins and life everlasting, in the gifts and
graces of the Spirit, and in Gods protection: And in this respect she is right
glorious, yea a most glorious Bride. Tomb gilded outward, but within full of
dead Men's bones, Mat. 23.27. My Son (says he) give me thine heart, Pro.
23.26. Thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou
shall make me to know wisdom, Psalm. 51,6. a meek and quiet Spirit in the
sight of God is of great price, 1. Pet. 3.4. This inward beauty of the Church
what tongue of man can sufficiently express? Seven degree of the Churches
inward glory.
For a glimpse hereof (for that is all that I can deliver of it) we may note in
it these seven degrees: first, The Possession of Gods word, Barthol. Westmerus,
in hunc locum.
and the acknowledgment of the true God, Deuteronomy. 4.7.8. What Nation is so great,
that has God so night unto them, as the Lord our God is unto us? What Nation
is so great and glorious, that has Statutes so righteous as all this Law?
Psalm. 147.19.20. He has showed his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel, He has not dealt so with any Nation: confidence in
prayer, and assurance of the hearing of her prayers, Romans 8.15. We have
received the Spirit of adoption, where by we cry Abba, Father; whatsoever we
ask we receive of him, 1. Ioh. 3.22. Thirdly, Perpetual preservation in the
midst of all affliction, Mat. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail
against it, Isay 43.2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with
thee, and when thou walk through the fire, the fire shall not hurt thee:
Fourthly, Conenant and the promise, Romans 9.4. They have a most sure word of the
Prophets. 2. Pet. 1.19. Fifthly, Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5.22. The world is not worthy of
them, Heb. 11.38. Sixthly, We will not fear, though the earth be moved, and
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, Psalm. 46.2. They
have the peace of conscience which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. Heirs
according to the hope of eternal life, Tit. 3.7. To them is reserved an
eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17. This is the Churches inward glory.

Now because of this inward glory, Therefore in Gods sight it is All glorious.
notwithstanding the outward defects and blemishes, it is esteemed wholly
glorious: All glorious, says my Text. So speaks our spiritual Solomon
himself, in this his glorious Brides co^mendatiue description, Cant. 4 verse.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art fair; Thou have
doves eyes within thy looks; Thy hair is as a flock of Goats that appear
from Gilead; Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep; Thy lips are like a thread
of scarlet; Thy speech is comely, etc. at last he concludes in the seventh
Verse, Tota es formosa, amica mea, Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no
spot in thee? No spot? How can that be? seeing the Church her self does
acknowledge her own blackness, Cant. 1.8. and her own drowsinesse, Cant.
She is all glorious: first, in regard of Christ's imputation; He gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by
the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without
blemish, Ephesians. 5.26.27. Secondly, Since thou wast precious in my sight thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee, Isay 43.4. full of glory, Revel. 21.23.

We have seen this point of the Churches beauty briefly discussed; Against
the Brownists.
Let us now see it for our farther use applied. And here, first, seeing the
Church, and, so by consequence a particular Church, is a glorious Church, if it
have inward soundness, albeit it be not wholly freed from outward blemishes;
then confounded be all Katharists, Donatists, Brownists, Separatists, or by
what name else soever they be called, who peremptorily take upon themselves to
condemn those Churches, which wholly fit not their humors, or have some
aspersion of outward blackness, to be base Churches, false Churches, no
Churches. Blind Bussards they are, not able to discern between the substance
and the circumstance, between Doctrine and Manners, between the outward hue,
and the inward beauty. August. contra Cres. Gram. lib. 2. c. 38.
It follows not (says learned Augustine against some furious Spirits of that
Schismatic sect) because of many evils, therefore no true Church, if that
blackness mar not the foundation, it may be a glorious Church in Gods
estimation. The Church of Corinth was a true Church, notwithstanding their
manifold disorders, 1. Cor. 11. The Church of Ephesus was a true Church
notwithstanding her declinings, Revel. 2.4. The Church of Pergamus was a true
Church, notwithstanding she was seated even in Satan's circuit, and pestred
with the deuillish Sect of Baalamites and Nicholaitans, Revel. 2.13.14.15. So
was Thyatyra, notwithstanding her Iesabelising, Revel. 2.20. So was Sardis,
notwithstanding her secure deadness, Revel. 3.1. So was Laodicea,
notwithstanding her luke-warmnesse, poverty and nakedness, Revel. 3.16.17.
Has not the brightest day his cloud? the finest Lawne his brack? the purest
gold his dross? And is there or was there ever any Church in the world, that
might not be tainted with some blemish, that may not be touched with some
imperfection? Deny as well they may that there is no Sun in the firmament,
because it is sometimes ouer-clowded, and no Soul within that Body which
outwardly is deformed.

Again, Against Papists.
then it is without? Is it her greatest glory to be all glorious within? why
then do seduced and seducing Souls who are bewitched with the Circean dregs of
the Babylonish Roman Strumpet, Revel. 17.4.
so much glory in the outward pomp and glory of their Bastard Church? Their
glorious Copes, Shrines, Miters, Crosses, Banners; Their garrish Processions,
Pardons, Beads, Candles, Chrismes; Their Eare-pleasing Organs, Bells, Quiers,
Descants; Their Eyecosening Exorcismes, Unctions, Censing, Sprinckling,
Miracles; Their Linsie-woolsie coat of Seculars, Jesuits, Friars, Monks,
Nuns, Capuchins, Anchorites; Their Comicall and Mimick actions, and the whole
rabble of their Pontifical Solemnities, wherein the glory of their church does
wholly consist; what are they (being separated from this inward glory) but at
the best a painted outside of an ill-fauoured Strumpet? mere toys to mock an
Ape, subjects of scorn rather then of admiration? The Kings Daughter is all
glorious within; This has no inward glory, therefore no Daughter of the King,
but a beggarly Bastard brat, begotten of Antichrist on the ragged Whore of
Heathenisme. What one inward note of glorious beauty can there be seen in
the Popish Church? The word of God out of it is barred; His Sacraments by it
are adulterated; His Discipline from it exiled; His Saints in it persequuted;
and for all the outward pomp and glory of it, It is ugly inward, being become
the habitation of Devils, Revel. 18.2.
and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird.

But leaving these, nearer unto our selves, Against carnal Protestants.
and from the consideration of particular Churches, let us descend to
particular Persons, that profess themselves members of this glorious Church;
Seeing this Kings Daughter, the Church of Christ, is inwardly glorious: with
what face can they claim their interest here, or profess themselves members of
the Church, who neither have, nor care to have any inward or outward glory?
Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, Worldlings, and the whole rabble of profane
persons, bewray themselves to be none of this Society, to be none of this
glorious Churches members; for were they so, they would endeavor to be more
glorious. Wretched Worldling, where is thy glory, whiles thine affections are
altogether earthly, and thou both sauourest, and seek the things of this
world, which are so base and transitory? Voluptuous Epicure, where is thy
glory, when thou wallowest in carnal pleasures, and worldly delights, like
the dirtie Swine, which lie tumbling in the mire? Is it a seemly thing for a
Princes Son, or a Kings Daughter, to spend their time and strength in servile
and slavish actions, serving Hogs, and playing the Skull, and running on
errands at the command of every one that will command them? how much more
uncomely and abiectly base is it for thee, who professest thy self a member of
the Church, a child of the King of heaven, to spend thy precious time in
seeking after contemptible vanities, and to be at the service and beck of Sin
and Satan, for the base hire of worldly trifles, never thinking of spiritual
preferments, and glorious privileges, but setting all to sale for the present
fruition of momentanie toies.

For our direction. Act. 17.28. Ioh. 2.12. Romans 8.17. Revel. 19.9.
if we would approve our selves of the generation of God, if his sons and
children in Christ Jesus, if heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ, if Brides
unto the Lamb; let us evermore seek after this inward glory; Let us be holy,
Leuit. 20.6.
because he our God is holy. Let us practice holiness, without which no man
shall see God. Heb. 12.14.
Let us endeavor to be sincere and without offense, Philip. 1.10.
till the day of Christ. Let us consider our selves, that we are a chosen
generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that we
should show forth the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into
his marvelous light. 1. Pet. 2.9

For consolation.
that albeit we are far from perfection in this life's Sanctification, in many
things all sinning, Iam. 3.7. Having the Flesh lusting against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh, Gal. 5.17. Though here we cannot wholly be free
from spot and blot; yet so long as we delight in the Law of God concerning the
inward man, Romans 7.12. and strive forward toward the mark for the price of
the high calling of God in Christ, Phil. 3.14. We have a gracious Father, who
will spare us as a man spares his own Son that serves him, Malach. 3.17.
We have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just, who is the
reconciliation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2. In him we are presented to God
without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27. and for his sake, in Gods sight we are
All gloricus, as it is here in my Text: The Kings Daughter is all glorious
within.

Her clothing is of wrought gold, she shall be brought unto the King in
raiment of needle work.
The sense of the words.
and in her inward beauty: now we are further to take view of her in her
Royal Ornaments and Bridal attire. Her apparel, for the groundwork, is
Gold, for the frame of it, it is Wrought-gold; for the curiousness of it, it
is Raiment of needle-worke. By Gold we are here to understand the Grace of
God: by Raiment of needle-worke, the gifts of his holy Spirit. The former for
the excellency thereof, termed Wrought-gold; the latter, for the variety
thereof, called a Raiment of needle-worke.

discourse upon each of these particulars; in general, The Churches Warderobe.
beer we may behold this heavenly Bride, the Churches wedding garment. Every
Christian soul being a member of the Church, and so married unto Christ Jesus,
is richly adorned with most glorious Royal Robes, Ezech. 16.10.11.12. They are
said to be clad with broydered-worke, with Badgers skins, fine linen and
silk, to be decked with ornaments, bracelets, and golden chains, to have
jewels in their foreheads, and earings in their ears, and beautiful crowns
upon their heads, Revel. 3.12. They are said to be clothed with White garments,
Revel. 6.9. with white roabes, Revel. 12.1. to be clothed with the Sun, and
to have the Moon under their feet, and upon their head to have a crown of
twelve Stars, Revel. 21.2. They are said to be prepared as a Bride adorned for
her husband, Psalm 45.13.
and here in my text, Her clothing is of wrought-gold, her raiment of
needle-worke.

That we may take a more lively notice of these Royal wedding Roabes: let us
take a brief view: first, of the matter of them: secondly, of the parts of
them: thirdly, of the fashion of them: fourthly, of the fitnes of them.

For the first, The matter of this wedding garment.
as concerning the matter of this garment, of what stuff it is; the Scripture
tells us, that it is Christ himself, with his imputed righteousness: They put
on the Lord Jesus, Romans 13.14. They have put on Christ, Galath. 3.27. He has
clothed me with the garments of salvation; He has covered me with the robe of
righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a
Bride adorneth her self with jewels, Isay 61.10. This is called the Wedding
garment, without which no man can feast with the Lord, Matthew. 22.10. It is
called the armor of God, because without it, no man is able to withstand the
wiles of the devil, Ephesians. 6.11. It is called the armor of light, Romans 13.12.
because it is the beauty and glory of them that wear it: it is called the
righteousness of Saints, Revel. 19.8. That is the matter of this wedding
garment.

Now for the parts of it (which is the second circumstance) the Apostle Paul
does unfold them all, and lay them open unto us, The parts of this wedding
garment.
Colos. 3.1.2. Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels
of mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekness, long-suffering,
forgiveness, charity. Here we see the wedding roabes brought forth and
sorted: Bowels of mercy for our minds clothing, and kindness, for our
speeches ornament and amiable conuersing, Humility for our outward carriage,
and our goings; Meekenes for our affections in our passions: Long-suffering for
a cloak to cover wrongs: Forgiving, as a badge of inward patience, and
Charity as the bond or combination of all other virtues. These be the parts of
this wedding garment, which that we may apply them to the several parts, for
which they serve, The Scripture calls in other terms, Revel. 6.11.
White robes of innocence for their inward garment: Hebr. 10.14.
Pure holiness for their upper garment: Ephesians. 6.14. Ephesians. 6.15.
Righteousness their breast plate: the Gospel of peace the shoe tyer: Job
29.12.
Verity the girdle: Justice their crown: Christ Jesus himself with all his
graces and merits, Romans 13.14.
their tunica talaris, their cloak or gown, wholly covering them.

These Royal robes, The fashion of the wedding garment.
for their fashion (which is the next point to be considered) are in
comparable; never out of fashion, meet for all seasons, fit for all persons;
It is like Elias mantle which divided the waters, 2. King. 2.8. So this will
divide our sins, and the punishments. It is like the garments of the
Israelites in the wilderness, which did not wear out, Deuteronomy. 26.5. So this
apparel of the righteousness of Christ does last for ever, and his mercies
are never worn out; It is like unto Jacobs garments, as the smell of a field
which the Lord has blessed, Gene. 27.27. It is like unto Christ himself, yea
the very Image and Idea of Christ, Colos. 3.10. in whom alone God is pleased
Mat. 3.17.

Therefore this Garment must needs be fit (which is the last thing I observe
in it.) The fitness of this wedding Garment.
It is not too short, like the curtailed Coats of David's Ambassadors, which
covered only their upper parts, 2. Sam. 10.4. nor too long, like Saul's Armor
which tired David when he should fight with it, 1. Sam. 17.29. but it is wholly
suitable, like Joseph's Coat which his father made him, Gene. 37.3. As therefore
Mordecai shined in the Kings robes before the people, Hest 6.11. So, and more
glorious are the faithful in the fight of God; being clothed in the robes of
Christ: As Christ's face at the time of his transfiguration did shine like the
Sun, and his Clothes were white as the light, Mat. 7.2. So the faithful
being transfigured to this Image of Christ, Shallshine as the brightness of
the firmament and as the stars for evermore. Dan. 12.3. Solomon in all his
Royalty was not so glorious, nor the Lillies of the field, which were more
glorious then Solomon, when he was most glorious, as is this heavenly Bride
clothed with Christ and his righteousness, which is far more precious then
all the worlds riches.

Seeing then that the Church of GOD and every particular member of the same,
Examination.
is arraied with such glorious robes: Let this serve, First, to stir us up to
a diligent search within our selves, whether we have on us these wedding
Clothes or no? Without this wedding garment we can have no countenance from
the Lord, nay there is not only an indignation against us, Friend how came
thou hither not having on a wedding garment? But also a condemnation, Bind him
hand and foot, take him away, cast him into utter darkness, Mat. 22.12. It
will be therefore our wisdom to search and try our Souls, whether they be
invested with these holy garments. And because by nature we are all of a
Laodicean temper, Revel. 3.17.
to persuade our selves, that we are richly clad, when we are naked; therefore
we are the more to mark the fashion of it, that we fashion not our selves
according to the fashion of this world, For the fashion of this world passes
away. 1. Cor. 7.31. But follow this heavenly fashion, and get this Bridal
garment: If we have found this garment, let it not lie by us, but wear it, not
a part of it, but the whole, not to put it off again, as we do our ordinary
Clothes, but as a perpetual habit to be worn of us.

Again, For our direction.
Let this make us more and more in love with it, and careful for to get it:
Which for to get, we must first seek it where it may be had: I counsel thee
to buy of me (says the Lord, Reave. 3.18) white raiments that thou may be
clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. Secondly, when we
have found it, We must sell all that we have and buy it, Mat. 13.46. We must
do away our own filthy and ragged clothes, The conversation in times, the
old man which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, Ephe. 4.22. For our
own garments will defile us, Job. 9.3. and change them for these robes which
will so richly cloth us. Thirdly, when we have put it on, we must wear it
cleanely, and comely from soyling and renting, that such a garment be not
taken away from us, Ezech. 16.39.

Lastly, For our pattern in our Attire.
the golden graces of Gods holy spirit wrought in a garment for her, by the
needle-worke of the Preaching of the word; Let this be a pattern as for our
inward attire, so for our outward habit: It is not the outward gorgeous attire,
or the wearing of Gold, 1. Pet. 3.3.4.
or the putting off apparel (as Saint Peter speaks.) But the hidden man of
the heart, the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which makes glorious, 1.
Pet. 3.3, 4. Would we then be gloriously attired? Let us follow that good and
grave Counsel of Tertullian, Tertul. lib. de cultu ^aem.
Vestite vos seric^ pietatis, bissino sanctitatis, purpura pudicitiae, Taliter
pigmentatae deum habebitis amatorem, Cloth your selves (says he) with the
Silk of piety, and the Satin of sanctity, and the Purple of modesty, thus
being attired, the eternal God will be your lover. And thus much of the
Churches glorious ornaments and Bridal attire. Her clothing is of wrought
Gold, her raiment of needle-worke.

The Virgins her companions that follow her, shall be brought unto thee.
of the Bride, The litterall sense of the words.
we are now to proceed to the order and company of the Bridefolke, to view
the train and company of the Bride; which here after the manner of Bridals and
Marriage solemnities, is thus described; The Virgins her companions that follow
her, shall be brought unto thee; The company are here Virgins, The reason,
because they are her Companions, The order, They follow her, The end, To be
brought unto thee; They are Virgins, there is their quality; They are
Companions; There is their dignity; They follow her, that is their duty;
They are brought in with her, there is their feliaitie. By The Virgins, we
must here understand all the faithful, who by reason of their Virgin souls,
are presented chaste Virgins unto Christ. 2. Cor. 11.2. The title of Companions
notes the mutual fellowship and society which every particular member of the
Church has with the whole, 1. Cor. 12.12. The order of following after her,
Act. 2.47.
implies the joining of them unto the Church, who are ordained to salvation.
The bringing of them with her, notes the means of the Churches increase and
discipline, Mat. 18.18.

I should be too tedious to insist upon each of these particulars, The Churches
Company.
And therefore I will draw the doctrinall sum of them into this short
compass. Every one which would be brought unto Christ, must become a Virgin
member, companion, and follower of the Church. When the daughters of the Church
demand of the Messiah, Salvation only in the Church.
Cant. 1.7. Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou
make to rest at none? It received this answer, verse 8. If thou know not, O
thou fairest amongst women, go thy way forth by the footesteps of the flock,
and feed thy Kids besides the Shepherds tents, Isay 45.14. It is said, that
the faithful shall be the Churches, They shall be thine, They shall come
after thee, saying, Surely God is in thee and there is none else, Act. 2.47.
The Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved; So then
there is no salvation out of the Church, But as all those which were not in the
Arc, perished in the general deluge, Gene. 7.23. So all that are out of this
Arc of Christ, which is his Church, shall be sure to perish eternally: Without
are Dogs, Enchanters, Whoremongers and Adulterers, Reave. 22.15. no salvation,
Act. 4.12. But out of the Church there is no Christ nor Faith in Christ, Ephe.
2.12. and therefore no salvation; Church there are no means of salvation,
Psalm. 147.19, 20. and therefore no salvation. Therefore every one which would
be brought to Christ, must join himself to some particular Church of Christ.

Neither is it sufficient to be corporally joined to the visible Church, The
members of the Church must be pure Virgins.
but we must be Virgin members of it, if truly we do belong unto it: where
by Virginity I do not understand that external Virginity of single life,
which the Papists so highly magnify and enjoin; Rhem. in 1. Cor. 7.32.
but that inward Virginity which is commended, Reave. 14.4. namely, holiness
and purity of the soul. The members of the Church are called an holy nation,
1. Pet. 2.9. It is called the Company of the spirit of just men, Heb. 12.23.
and 1. Ioh. 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even
as he is pure. And good reason is there of this: what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? Or what communion has light with
darkness, 2. Cor. 6.14.
or what concord has Christ with Belial? without spot or wrinkle, Ephe. 5.27.
therefore every one professing himself a member of the Church, must endeavor to
be sincere and blameless in the Church. Mat. 25.

Lastly, these pure Virgins, who are this royal Brides guests, They must
promote and proture the good of the Church.
as they are companions of the Church, and as they are admitted into her
society, so they must follow her, and to the utmost of their power seek to
promote and procure the good of her. Pray for the peace of Iernsalem, Psalm
122.6.
let them prosper that love thee: peace be within thy Walls, and prosperity
within thy Palaces, Verse 7.8.9.
for my Brethren and companions sake, I will now say, peace be within thee,
because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek to do thee good, Psalm.
They shall prosper that love thee. For my brethren and my neighbors sake I will
now say, peace be within thee. Thirdly, Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will seek to do thee good. Thus in brief we have seen this point of
Doctrine proved, that none can be brought to salvation, but by Christ; none
can be brought to Christ, but in the Church; none are in the Church, but such
as endeavor to have pure Virgins souls; none can have this, but they must do
their best service for the Churches good.

The use of this Doctrine may serve, For the reproof of those who are out of
the Church.
First to discover the miserable estate of those which either yet are not
brought within the Pale of the Church, as Infidels, Turks, and Ethnickes, or
who wilfully leap over this Pale, and separate themselves from the Church, as
Papists, Familistes, Brownists, and Anabaptists; The Papist of Pride, the
Familist of Hypocrisy, the Brownist of Singularity, have singled themselves
from the Churches company, 2. Tim. 2.17.
as Hymenaeus did. If they separate themselves as stones from the building, and
as members from the body, what hope is there of them? what a fearful doom is
that, which S. John does give concerning them? They went out from us, they were
not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us, 1.
Ioh. 2.19.

Secondly, Against the prophaneliues of those who live in the Church.
who living in the Church, and professing themselves members of the Church, do
by their profane and ungodly course of living, bewray themselves not to belong
unto the Church. To the wicked (says God) what have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou
hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee, Psalm. 50.16.17. Will ye
steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and then come and
stand before me, and say we are delivered, notwithstanding all these
abominations? Ier. 7.9.10. Gods house will not be a den for thieves; the
members of the Church must live by faith: If any draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him, Hebr. 10.38. The Brides followers must exhibit
themselves Chaste Virgins unto Christ, 2. Cor. 11.2. They must approve
themselves, as Virgins redeemed from amongst men, being the first fruits to God
and to the Lamb, Revel. 14.5. Otherwise they shall be rejected like those
foolish Virgins, with a Non nout vos, Verily I say unto you, I know you not,
Matthew. 25.12. Without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. And into the
Church triumphant shall enter no unclean thing, as it is, Revel. 21.27.

For our direction to all holy duties.
that we may walk worthy of that calling whereunto we are called; whatsoever
things are honest, Philip. 4.8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of a good report;
if there be any virtue, if any praise, let us think upon these things and do
them. Let us all set forward the good of the Church with all our power, and
bring such as belong unto us into the bosom of the Church, that they and we
may have fellowshippe with God, and one with another: so shall we have a
joyful communion in the kingdom of grace, and an happy entrance into the
kingdom of glory; which is the last circumstance to be noted in the text.

With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, they shall enter into the
Kings Palace.
The literal sense of the words.
the Brideguests and their duty. Now in the last place we are to behold the
marriage pomp and solemnity. THEY [the Bride and her companions, the Church
and her members] shall be brought [by the preaching of the word, and the working
of the holy Spirit] with joy and gladness [with inward joy and peace of
conscience, with outward comforts and encouragements.] They shall enter [here
by the kingdom of grace] into the Kings Palace [the kingdom of everlasting
glory.]

The manner and Majesty of the Churches marriage.
The Churches marriage with Christ her Lord, is to the joy and gladness of her
heart be gunne here in this life, but perfected and consummated to her
endless glory in the life to come. Here in this life it is begun; Here in
this life.
for so, Isay 54.5. He that made thee i^ thine husband, the Lord of Hoasts is
his name, and thy Redeemer the Holy one of Israel: and Isa. 62.4.5. Thou shall
be called Hephzi-bah (or my delight is in her) and thy land Beaulah (or
married) for the Lord delights in thee, and thy land shall be married, as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. The
mariagemaker.
The Author of this marriage or the marriage maker, is God the Father, who
joins his Son in marriage with the Church by his holy Spirit: I will marry
thee unto me for ever, yea I will marry thee unto me in righteousness, in
indgement, in mercy, and in compassion, Hosea 2.19. The means.
The instruments or means whereby God makes up this marriage here, are his
Prophets, Apostles, and faithful Ministers, whom he sends to persuade and
effect it: to espouse it, 2. Cor. 5.20. 2. Cor. 11.2. Psalm. 45.15.
to bring it in, as here in my text, The fruit or benefit of it is joy and
gladness to the Church: Cant. 1.4. The joy and comfort of it.
The King has brought me into his chambers, we will rejoice and be glad in
thee, we will remember thy love more then wine: joy and gladness shall be
found therein, thankesiuing, and the voice of melody: Isay 51.3.

But the consummation of this heavenly marriage shall be in the world to come,
In the life to come.
when this Royal Bride shall receive the Kingdom prepared for her, Mat.
25.34. and see her bridgroome face to face, 1. Cor. 13.11. and enter into his
glory, Mat. 25.21. and reign with him for ever, Revel. 22.5. who can express
the joy and gladness which then the Church shall have, when it shall be brought
into her Bridegroomes presence, and enter into this heavenly Palace? The Palace.
It is past the measures of Geometry to measure it, past the numbers of
Arithmetic to tell it, past the skill of Logic to define it, past the
eloquence of Rhetoric to express it; Renel. 21. and 22
Had I the tongue of Men and Angels, I could not utter the one half of it. The
Palace provided for this marriage is the Heaven of Heavens, which for the
co^tents thereof is a glorious City, whose Gates are of Pearl, and Streets of
gold, and walls of precious stones. Revel. 21. and for the situation thereof,
is said to be beset with a River, the water whereof is Crystal, and the
banks set about with the Tree of life, The Temple.
Revel. 22. The Temple for this marriage, The Lord God almighty, the glory of
God does illighten it, and the Lamb is the light of it, Revel. 21.21.23. The
Brides Chamber.
The Bride-chamber the new Jerusalem, a Seat of majesty, an House of
eternity, a Palace of Royalty, a Paradise of pleasures. The Guests.
The Bride guests, Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and the
Spirits of Men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Many shall come from the East, and the
West, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 8.11. The cheer, Bread of life, Ioh. 6.51. The Cheer.
Wine of gladness, Ephesians. 5.18. Angels food, Psalm. 78.25. Righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. Fullness of joy, and eternal
pleasures, Psalm. 16.11. The Attendants, Angels, The Attendants.
Archangels, Principalities, Dominions, Powers, Thrones, Col. 1.16. Cherubins
and Seraphins, Isay 6.2. The Music.
The Music Haleluia^s, Revel. 19.1. New Song, Revel. 5.9. Songs that no man
can learn, Revel. 14.3. sounding as the voice of thunder, as the voice of many
waters, and as harpers harping on their harps Revel. 14.2. The Continuance.
Lastly, the Continuance of it, not for a day, or a week, or a month, or a
year, not like Ahashueroths feast for an hundred and fourscore days, Hest.
1.4. But for a thousand years, Revel. 20.6. Yea for evermore, Revel 22.5. Thus
this Bride of Brides being married to the King of Kings, in the Heaven of
Heavens, shall time beyond time, with joy passing al joy, enjoy the presence of
the Holy of Holies, keep the Sabbath of Sabboths, and hear the Song of Songs.

Blessed then and thrice blessed are they, To show the plessed estate of the
faithful.
The holy Chost himself has sealed up the truth of this in his indelible
writ; Blessed are they which are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb,
Revel. 19.9. O they be blessed that dwell in Gods house (says David) they will
be still praising him, Psalm. 84.4. The Lord God is a Sun and shield unto
them. The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold
from them, Ps. 84.11.

Why then should any Christian soul go mourning all the day long? For the
comfort of the faithful.
and why should the service of God seem any way tedious? or any affliction
grievous? The Lord is a plentiful rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. 11.6.
One day in his Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84.10. The
sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. Let it therefore be meat and drink
unto us to do our Fathers will, Ioh. 4.34. Let the Lords Precepts be the very
joy of our heart, Psalm. 119.110. And let us be glad, and rejoice, and give
honor to him that sits in the Heavens, for the marriage of the Lamb,
Revel. 19.7.

Lastly, For our direction.
and make our selves ready as a Bride, for this our heavenly Bridegroom; Let
us cast off the old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.23.24. Let us put on the clean white linen of
righteousness, Revel. 19.8. And the bright shining Robes of holiness, Exo.
39.30. Let us wash our hands in innocence, Psalm. 26.6. And shoe our fecte
with verity, Ephesians. 16. Let us have Faith in our hearts, and good works in our
hands: So shall we, like wise Virgins and the Brides Companions, be admitted
with her into the chamber of Presence; for so the Spirit and the Bride say,
Come, and let him that hears say Come, and let him that is a thirst come, and
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, Revel. 22.17.

I have thus far kept touch with my Text, Application of this heavenly
marriage to the present roy all marriage.
and walked in the direct path thereof, I must now make a little digression
from the maine and principal scope thereof, to a collateral application of it
unto this days royal marriage, which gave me occasion to make principal
choice of the Text. We have seen the Text in the sense of it; Now behold it in
the letter of it: We have seen in the substance, now behold it in resemblance:
The Churches marriage with Christ her Lord is resembled (as we have heard) to
the marriage of a Kings Daughter with a King. Ecce Symbolum, Behold the shadow
of it in this days Royal Bridal.

I could trace my Text here (though I confess, from the Text) from point to
point; and for our Bride, if we go no further then the letter, I might
instance for the better: For was Salomons Bride Filia Regis, the Daughter of a
King? So is this days gracious Bride, Filia Regis, a Kings Daughter; not the
Daughter of a superstitious Pharaoh, or descended of an Egyptian King; but the
Daughter of a religious and a learned Christian King, a Defender of the
Christian faith; one who has been the glory of Schools, and uniter of
Kingdoms: Tanti Regis talis filia, of so great a King so gracious a daughter,
yea the eldest daughter, yea the only daughter, is this days Bride.

This our Kings Daughter is all glorious within, and not within only, but
wholly admirable: The God of Nature has in her body made her a mirror of
Natures Beauty, and in her soul a pattern of Graces piety: So that albeit
in her outward shape to the sight of men she be exceeding glorious, yet
inwardly to the sight of her God, she is most glorious: so graciously all holy
graces in her being so compact together, that it draws the eyes and hearts of
al men to admiration, to see so much piety in such comely beauty, so great
humility in such a Majesty.

Neither do her glorious Bridal robes, be they never so glittering with
wrought gold, or curiously embroydered by the art of man (as no doubt this day,
for the solemnity of it, and the honor of her estate, it is most glorious) so
much adorn her, as the more then golden graces of Gods holy Spirit in her.

The Virgins (companions she has none, being the only Jewel of this Northern
I Will, and the Non-parel of the reformed Christian world) the Virgin-daughters
that have seen her, have blessed her; foreign Queens and their Princely
daughters that have heard of her, have praised her; the ear that has heard
her has admired her, and the eye that has seen her, has given witness unto
her.

And therefore, no doubt, with joy and gladness both Court and City, Palace
and Country, does this day triumph in her, pray for her, and say of her,
Blessed be he that made her, happy is he that begat her, renowned is she that
bare her, but most happy, renowned and rich is he that has her.

How much are we, the inhabitants of this whole I Will, bound unto our good God,
that has lent us such a Princess, and in her has renewed and revived the name
and nature of our late deceased, ever to be remembered, happy Queen
Elizabeth, a name in this Land evermore to be beloved: for as much, as that
now thrice under that name it has been blessed. The first of that name, to
this Land so happy, being the great Grandmother to the father of our present
Elizabeth, happy in her marriage, and by her marriage, first uniting the two
Houses of Lancaster and York, whose dissentions did annoy this Kingdom with
bloody civil wars, and then by the fruit of her marriage, uniting these two
Kingdoms England and Scotland, which before were at continual wars. The
second of that sweet and happy name (whose remembrance is like that of Josias,
Eccles. 49.
like the perfume made by the art of the Apothecarie) sweet as honey in all
men's mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine) happy in her not marrying,
for being a Virgin-Queene (whom no King or Emperor of this world was worthy
of) she prepared her self a Spouse for Christ, and having found the walls of
this Realm of brass, turned it into marble, finding Religion in the sands,
she did set it on the rock: finding this a Land overwhelmed with ignorance and
superstition, she restored true Religion, and left it thoroughly seasoned with
the Gospel: our selves, our children, and their childrens children, when they
hear her name, shall call her Blessed. Our present Elizabeth, this days
Royal Bride, is of no less happy hopes: her Love unto her Name-sakes memory,
her imitation of her Virtues, her hatred of Popery and Superstition, her zeal
to Gods glory, and sincere profession of the Gospel, her religious education
from her infancy; Her reverent attention at the hearing of the word; Her
respect unto the Ministers of the Gospel; Her faith; Her zeal; Her charity
is admirable, and to every Christian heart most comfortable.

It was the desire and often wish of this Gracious Princess (if report of some
of her nearest obseruants may be credited) that in her Marriage match, she
might be linked to a Prince professing the same Religion in which she her
self had been instructed. Good Princess (the God of Heaven be blessed for
it) she has her wish: No son of Antichrist; No vassal to the Pope has the
first fruits of her Marriage bed; No superstitious Mass does defile the
celebration of her Nuptials, or obscure the glory of her Marriage, but she is
matched with a Prince, in Religion, in education, in years, in virtues fit,
and fit for none, but for her self. Had she, good Princess, bin linked in
Marriage with one of a different Religion, what an unequal yoke had that been?
How derogatorie from Gods glory? How preiudicious to our State? How dangerous
to her person? How hurtful to her Soul?

But blessed be God, who has provided better things for us, for Her, for his
Churches good. Herein our Gracious Sovereign has manifested unto the World
the sincerity of his heart, and the soundness of his profession, in that no
outward dignity, state or glory, could cause him to match his Child with a
contrary Religion. Doubtless the finger of God has been here, This match is
of his especial choosing; And indeed (did we well consider of it) what
greater, what more glorious match, could we wish for, or desire, for our great
Masters only Daughter? These Kings and mighty Monarchs, who have submitted
their Crowns unto the jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, are but vassals unto
the Pope, not absolute Princes. This our German Bridegroom is a free Prince,
his state is in subjection unto none; Descended of most Noble and religious
Progenitors, even from that House, which first of all the Princes of Europe,
set it self against the Pope, Acts and Monuments of the Church.
in defense of the Gospel, and brought in the name of Protestanisme; Himself
of that name, which to the Popes has been always terrible, and of that
carriage, Fridenrych, in the German tongue, is as much as Solomon, so
Hartma^^us Sprunglius in Job Ho. 1
that in the eyes of all that fear the Lord, has made him truly venerable:
An other Solomon, for so does his Name in his Country language signify: A
young Josias, who has set his heart to fear the LORD. Wherein, even in his
Name we may see Gods great mercy toward us; For whereas it pleased God of
late (because we were unworthy of him) to take away from us our hopeful
Prince HENRY FREDERICK, our Sovereigns Eldest Son (whose memorial is, and
ever shall be blessed) our loss (which was unspeakable) is herein so much the
less, in that we have not wholly lost him: for though HENRY be gone, yet
FREDERICK is left behind. O happy day, blessed Marriage, happy Bridegroom,
glorious Bride! This day is a day of good tidings, who can hold his peace? It
is the day which the Lord has made, we have great cause to rejoice and to be
glad in it; This day is Peace ratified, Religion established, the Church
beautified, the Commo^wealth strengthened, the hearts of good Subjects cheared,
the friendship of confederate Nations confirmed, Britanie and Germany
combined. O Pray for the Peace and Prosperity of this happy Bridal, Let them
prosper which wish well unto it; Let them be confounded that malign it; Let
them perish that envy it.

And thou, O great Jehovah, A conclusion with a Prayer.
God Almighty, King of Heaven and Earth, who for the comfort of mankind have
ordained Marriage, and made it Honorable, and at this day more then
Honorable, in the Royal Marriage of these two great and hopeful Princes;
Bless this thine own ordinance, to thine own glory, and their comfort: Thou
thrice glorious and ever blessed Trinity, Almighty Father, Eternal Son,
Inspiring Holy Ghost, vouchsafe thy presence at this their Marriage-meeting;
Let thine holy Angels pitch their Tents about them, and let thy mighty hand
graciously defend them from the malice of the enemy, and from the mischief of
the adversary, and from all dangers that may beplotted against them. Knit thou
their hearts and minds together with true Love, with the bond of the Spirit, in
the fear of thy name; Marry them to thy self in righteousness, in
judgment, in loving kindness, in mercies and faithfulness; Let the Angels
sing happiness, and the Heavens drop down blessedness upon this their
Marriage: Sanctify their Marriage bed, and in thy good time make them fruitful
in procreation of Children, that they may have many Sons and Daughters whom
they may make Princes in all Lands; And make them and theirs evermore worthy
nursing fathers and nursing mothers unto thy Church. Confirm, O Lord, the good
things which thou have begun in them, and so assist them with thy grace, that
neither Satan's subtlety, nor their youths frailetie, nor the worlds vanity,
nor their peoples flattery, nor man's wisdoms policy, may divert them from
the path of piety. Adorn them more and more with thy graces: cloth them with
thy righteousness, multiply upon them all heroical and spiritual graces,
that they may grow up more and more in favor with thee and with men. Bless
them whilst they are here amongst us, and bless them when they shall be gone
from us: bless them in their bodies and in their souls, in their Government,
and in their Subjects: bless them at home and abroad, by sea and by land, in
peace and in war: smite through the loins of those that rise up against the^:
bless those that bless them, and curse those that curse them: keep and
protect them as the apple of thine eye; continue their love, their health,
their happiness, prolong their days for many generations, that they may live
together a long time here in perfect love and amity, and after this life ended,
may feast with thee at the Lambs marriage with glory etetnally: Amen.

FINIS.

