AN EGLOGVE Upon the death of the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Late
principal Secretary to her Majesty, and of her most Honorable Privy
Council.

Written first in latin by Thomas Watson Gentle man, and now by himself
translated into English.

Musis mendicantibus insultat (...).

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson. 1590.

To the most virtuous Lady, Lady Francis Sydney, all honor and happiness.
MAdam, under the Patronage of M. Thomas walsingham I published a Latin
Funeral poem, where with a pastoral Muse I undertake (in love and duty) to
commend the virtuous life, and bewail the untimely death of our great
Meliboeus the right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, your late deceased
Father, a sound pillar of our common wealth, and chief patron of virtue,
learning, and chivalry. In which poem albeit I never attain the height of
his worthiness, yet many (rather affecting his praise, then my verse) have
requested and persuaded me to publish Meliboeus in English, for the more
general understanding thereof: that as his life was to all men both pleasing
and profitable, so his death might be honored with a public sorrow: and that
the whole body of this realm, in lamenting the loss of so vigilant a
governor, might learn thereby, (as by a just necessity) the more to love,
honor, and obey those few, that yet survive, resembling him in high estate, and
virtuous condition. Such as the translation is, I humbly offer it to your
Ladyships protection, hoping it will be as favorably redd and accepted, as it
is affectionatly written and presented.

Your Ladyships in all duty Thomas Watson.

To the courteous Reader.
GEntlemen, if you suppose me vain, for translating mine own poem: or
negligent, for not doing it exactly to the latin original, I thus desire to
satisfy you. It is pardonable for a man to be bold with his own: And I
interpret my self, lest Melibaeus in speaking English by an other man's labor,
should leese my name in his change, as my Amyntas did. A third fault (happily)
will be found, that my pastoral discourse to the unlearned may seem obscure:
which to prevent, I have thought good, here to advertise you, that I figure
England in Arcadia; Her Majesty in Diana; Sir Francis Walsingham in
Meliboeus, and his Lady in Dryas; Sir Phillippe Sidney in Astrophill, and his
Lady in Hyale, Master Thomas Walsingham in Tyterus, and my self in Corydon.

Desirous to please you Tho. Watson.

AN EGLOGVE Upon the death of the Right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham late
principal Secretary to her Majesty, and of her most Honorable Privy
Council.
Corydon. Tityrus. Now Tityrus, since we at ease are lade,
And both our flocks orespred the flowrie plain:
Sweet friend unfold under this platan shade
The secret cause of thy concealed pain,
How haps thy sighing threats the cleared sky, with gentle Zephyr waging often
wars,
Whose Muse of yoare with hunnie melody, did calm fierce winds, and cease
their boistrous iarres?
What means this moorning weed? thy weeping eine? thy pale aspect? thy
murmuring complaints?
O speak, that I may join my tears with thine, and ease thy burdened heart
before it faints.
Tityrus. O Corydon forbear by deep inquire to rip the skarred wounds of my
unrest:
No tears, no counsel can abate the fire, which loving sorrow kindles in my
breast.
I all alone in darkesom vnkoth place, I all alone must like the Turtle Dove,
Whose joy is slain, bewail my wretched case, and power out plaints agenst
the gods above,

Corydon. By syluane nymphs, and lovely Graces three, that on our lawnes do
sport them to and fro;
By country powers of what so ere degree; by Floraes chaplet; by Dianaes boe,
By fruitful Pales, Ceres wheaten crown, by silver Thamesis old Oceans dame;
By changed Amyntas flower, that decks the down; and lastly by Elisaes
virtuous name,
By these, and those that guide caelestial spheres, I here conjure thee to
difcloase thy grief,
That I may slake thy sighing with my tears, whose comforts often have bred my
hearts relief.

Tityrus. Then thus (though loath) as grief will suffer me, my faltring tongue
shall tell my discontent:
That cares by sympathy may work on thee, And thou uphold some part of my
lament.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
Now Corydon (for eurie shepherd swain reports thee skillful in a sacred
verse)
In such a meeter help me to complain, as may befit great Meliboeus hearse.

Corydon. I now begin: Apollo guide my sound, And weep ye sisters of the
learned hill:
That your Paegasean springs may leap their bound, and from their floate may
seas of tears distill.
Let deadly sorrow with a sable wing, throughout the world go brute this
tragedy:
And let Arcadians altogether sing a woeful song agenst heauns tirannie.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
Are wheeling orbs so full of foul despite, that neither wisdom, nor true
piety,
Nor learned skill, nor speech of choice delight, nor care of countries sweet
security,
Nor watchful study for Dianaes health, nor gentle birth which virtues worth
did raise,
Nor honors titles, nor abundant wealth, nor thousand gifts deserving endless
praise
Could smooth the malice of old Saturnes brow, or heat of Mars, or Lunaes
deathfull cold:
O envious heauns, that wind I wotte not how, grudging the glories of this
earthly molde.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife:
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
Yet glorious heauns, o pardon my blaspheme, whose wit in sorrows Labyrinth
is straide:
All that I spoke was but a furious dream, it was not you, but Fates that him
betraide.
O thou eternal Monarcke, at whose beck the planets move and make their
influence:
O give the Destinies a wrathful check, afflict them for their spightfull
insolence.
In case mine oraison seem ouerlarge, o yet vouchsafe me but this one request,
That fatal laws be giun to Saints in charge, whose hands and hearts will
always work the best.
What can those Imps of euerclowding mist, those ruthlesse daughters of
eternal night;
But (tyrantlike) sunder their vital twist, whose shining virtues are the
worlds chief light?
Alas too soon by destins fatal knife,
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
And was not Astrophill in flowring prime, by cruel Fates cut off before his
day,
Young Astrophill, the mirror of our time, fair Hyales chief joy, till his
decay?
When late a dreadful Lion in his pride descended down the Pyraenaean mount,
And roaring through the pastures far and wide, deuowr'd whole Belgia^ herds
of chief account:
Stout Astrophill incenst with sole remorse, resolved to die, or see the
slaughter ceast:
Then fenst with fire and sword, with manly force he made assalt upon the
furious beast.
But of this tale tears do^wne the latter part: I must return to Meliboeus
fall,
Who mourning still for Astrophils depart, forsook his friends, and lost
himself withal.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife,
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
Now tell me shephards all, and fellow swaynes, who shall with rampires fence
our country soil?
And keep the fluds from breaking ore the plains? and shield our tender flocks
from deadly spoil?
Who shall recure their faintie maladies, and purge their fleeces in soft
running streams?
Who shall defend our lambs from ieoperdies? and shroud our kids from Titans
parching beams?
Who now shall til our ground, and reap our corn? who shall assuage the
strife of swelling pride,
When eurie swynard shall exceed his borne, and will not by God Terminus be
tide?
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife,
Sweet Meliboeus is depru'd of life.

Tityrus. Thy tunes have often pleased mine ear of yoare, whenmilk-white swans
did flock to hear theesing,
Where Seane in Paris makes a double shore, Paris thrice blessed if she obey
her King.
But now o Corydon, that lightsome vain is changd from youth to aged gravity,
That whilst I hear thee bitterly complain, me thinks Apollo sings in
Arcadie.
And yet afford thy moorning Muse some rest, while I (though skill and voice are
both decaide)
With terms of duty from a pensive breast bewail my friend, whom cruel
Fates betraide.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
O all that all the Universe contains In heaun, or air, or earth, or watrie
deep:
With mutual plaints make light my secret pains, for sorrow wastes in tears,
where many weep.
And first ye Figures in the Zodiac line, that deck heauns girdle with
aeternall light:
O feign some griefs, and knit them unto mine, such griefs as may this baser
world affright.
Now Cancer slake thy heat with brackish rain, and Leo roar, to make the
sky dismaide:
Aquarius power thou down salt tears amain, and Aries let thy dancing now be
staide.
Now Libra make not oequinoctiall, but suffer night to ouergrow the day:
For darkness fits all us that live in thrall,
Let those have light that list to sport and play.
Now let the Centaure with his poisned steel upon the Fates inflict a deadly
wound:
That for misguiding late their fatal wheel they may lament with guosts of
underground.
Now let the winter under Capricorn last still: and Pisces lend him watrie
showers:
Let Taurus wound the welkin with his horn, and Scorpio with his tail sting
fatal powers.
Now Gemini forbear with gladsome shine, to comfort Seamen in their chief
despair:
Virgo make fountains of thy daie-bright eine, and tear the treasure of thy
golden hair.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
Ye seaunfold flames, whose euer-circling fires maintain this earth with
influence from your spears,
And with your power guide mortal men's desires, now leave your harmony, and
fall to tears.
Yet cankred Saturn it were all in vain, with my entreats to call for thy
lament,
For if old Orpheus but a sooth have saine, to miseries thy mind is always
bent.
Thou still art lumpish, waiward, cold, and sloe, attended on with Terror,
doting night,
Pale discontent, sighs, discord, tears, and woe, fit mates for me that want
my chief delight.
But thee fair Jupiter I must require, to change the gracious virtue ofthy
star,
And not to temper with thy gentle fire, the raging heates of him that breeds
war.
Let Mars roaue uncontrolled and kindle strife, that Sorrows may sit down by
Slaughters side:
And golden Sol surcease to favor life; and Uenus weep, as if Adonis did.
And Stilbon with thy hatt cloud Phoebus face, And Luna see thou steal no
more his beams:
But let thy Steedes forbear their nightlie race, and from thy bosom power
down weeping streams.
Alas too soon by Destins fatal knife,
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.
Now Air, and what thy circuites do contain, help to lament great Meliboeus
death:
Let clouds of tears with sighs be turned to rain, admit no wind but
euergroaning breath.
Now set thy fiery Pyramids to view, thy diverse Idols, Candles burning bright:
Inflamed Shafts, Comets of dreadful hew; Sparkles that fly, and Stars
that fall by night.
Let all thy Meteors, of what ever kind, with terrorsort them selves in just
araie:
And work such fear in every mortal mind, that all the world may wail for
ones decaie.
Alas to soon by Destins fatal knife,
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.

Corydon. O Tityrus thy plaint is ouerlong, here pause a while, at Corydons
request:
Of what is wanting in thy farfet song, my moorning voice shall strive to tell
the rest.
But I must sorrow in a lower vain, not like to thee, whose words have wings
at will:
An humble style befits a simple Swain, my Muse shall pipe but on an oaten
quill.
Immortal Fauni, Satyrs, and great Pan, the Gods and guiders of our fruitful
soil,
Come seat your selves by me, and wail the man, whose death was hastened by his
virtuous toil.
Ye comely Graces neither dance nor play, nor kembe your beauteous tresses
in the Sun,
But now since Meliboeus is away, sit down and weep, for wanton days are
dun.
Now in the woods be leafelesse eury Tree, and bear not pleasant fruits as
heretofore:
Myrrha let weeping gums distill from thee, and help to make my doleful plaint
the more.
Now in the woods let night-rauns croak by day, and gladles Owls shrike out,
and Vulturs groan:
But smaller birds that sweetly sing and play, be whist and still: for you can
make no moan.
Now in the fields each corn hang down his head, since he is gone that weeded
all our corn:
And sprouting Uines wither till you be dead, since he is dead, that shielded
you from storm.
Now in the fields rot fruits while you are green, since he is gone that used
to graff and grace you:
And die fair Flowers, since he no more is seen, that in Dianaes garland used
to place you.
O herds and tender flocks, o handsmooth plains, o Echo dwelling both in
mount and vallie:
O groves and bubling springs, o nimphs, o swains, o young and old, o weep all
Arcadie.
Alas too soon by Destins fat all knife
Sweet Meliboeus is deprived of life.

Tityrus. O let me interrupt thee yet once more, for who should more lament his
loss then I,
That often have tasted of his bounteous store, and knew his secret virtues
perfectly?
We have already summond eurie part, excepting that which in the Ocean lies:
To stand copartners of our woeful smart, and beat the senseless air with
Elegies.
Now therefore Neptune grant me this one boon, depose great Jove for fo
misguiding fate:
That Meliboeus wounded all too soon, by Mortaes malice dies before his date.
And thou old Glaucus with divining blessed, Prophet to him that never speaks
but truth,
Come with Palaemon, Phorcus, and the rest, and here give oracle of endless ruth.
Come Tethis come with Thetis after thee, and all thy watrie nymphs, a lovely
train:
Vouchsafe to sit upon these banks with me, that I may hear both thee and
them complain.
And thou great Triton with thy sounding shell, impart my grieuance unto eurie
shore:
And with a murmr make the waves go tell, that worthy Meliboeus breaths no
more.
Now let no Dolphins seek Arions Muse, nor play by shore to ketch up heedles
boys:
Let them suppose sweet Music out of use, and wanton louetricks to be
foolish toies.
Deceitful Mermaids leave your ancient guise, forbear to sing while tempest
troubles us:
Let me behold whole fountains in your eyes, for weeping fits unhappy Tityrus.

Corydon. But Tityrus enough, leave of a while: stop moorning springs, dry up
thy drearie eine,
And blithlie intertaine my altered style, inticd from griefs by some allure
divine.
For now my mind reclaimd from careful moan, gins fault her giving place to
sorrows sourse:
And in her change entreats thee cease to groan, that as we grieud, so we may
joy by course.
In just complaint though sorrows were begun, and all too little for the man we
wail:
Yet now at last our sorrows must be done, and more then moorning reason must
preuail.
Iniustlie grudge we Melibaeus death, as though his worth were buried in his
fate:
But neither are his virtues drenchd in Leath, nor virtuous soul remoud to
meaner state:
His faith has framd his spirit holy wings, To soar with Astropbil above the
Sun:
And there he ioies, whence eury comfort springs, and where the fulness of his
bliss begun.
Let us be ioifull after long annoie,
Since Meliboeus lius in perfect joy.
Our Meliboeus lius where Seraphins do praise the Highest in their glorious
flames:
Where flows the knowledge of wise Cherubins: where Throans exhibit earthly
deeds and names:
Where Dominations rule and yet obaie: where Principalities to lower powers
Deep hidden mysteries do still bewraie: where arms are vsd by foe-subduing
powers.
Where Virtues practice miracles and wunder: where both Archangels and sweet
Angels sing,
Whose office is, to us, that live here under, from heaun caelestiall messages
to bring.
Let us be ioifull after long annoie,
Since Meliboeus lius in perfect joy.
Now Melibaeus in comparelesse place, drinks Nectar, eats divine Ambrosia;
And has fruition of eternal grace, and with his countnance cheeres Arcadia.
Then while his spirit dwells in heaunlie towers, let us perform what honor
duty wills:
Let us adorn his sacred tumb with flowers, and sweet it with the riches of
our hills.
Our vernall Flora that bewailes our loss, will gladly let her flowrie locks
be rent:
And clad her self in moornfull roabes of moss, if all the treasure of her
buds were spent.
Then Flora lend us thime and violets, sweet balm and roses for his burial:
Bestow no wealth on wanton amorets, but spare it to adorn his funeral.
And Pales bath his lims in fluds of milk, and cover him with costly ornament:
Inshrine his corpse in sheets of softest silk, for he deserus Mausolus
monument.
And Tityrus let us before the rest set holy lights, and watch his breathles
corse,
Singing sweet himns for him whose soul is blessed, though parted from his flesh
by deaths divorce.
Now cheer we Dryas in her misery, who ouerlong bewailes her hapless case:
Lest ouerlouing like Laodamie, she loose her self in deep supposd embrace.
Now call we Hyale from whispring streams, increast with tears (true servants
of annoie)
Who takes no pleasure but in griefs extremes, nor ioies in ought but in her
want ofioie:
Fair Hyale, who wringing ofthir arms, her arms far whiter then Sythonian
snoa,
with doubling sighs bewails her helples harms, Alas that helples harms
should vex her so.
Yet beuteous Nymph thy careful mother lives, (long may she live, and living
ease thy heart)
Accept what comfort her suruiuing gives, and in life's comfort drown thy
sorrows smart.
Help thou with us, and eurie country wight, to chase all grieuance from
Dianaes mind:
From drad Diana, earths and heauns delight, Diana, glory of her sex and
kind;
Diana, wondrous mirror of our days; Diana matchless Queen of Arcadie;
Diana, whose surpassing beauties praise Improous her worth pastterrene deity;
Diana' Sibill for her secret skill; Diana, pieties chief earthly friend;
Diana, holy both in deed and will; Diana whose just praises have no end.
Ah but my Muse, that creeps but on the ground, begins to tremble at my great
presume,
For naming her, whose titles only sound does glad the welkin with a sweet
perfume.
For in her mind so many virtues dwell, as eurie moment breed new pieties:
Yet all in one conioind do all excel, and crown her worth with sundry
deities.
But that unawares my sorry style proceeds drad Cynthia pardon: love desires
dispense:
As Jove's high Oaks orelook Pans slender reeds, so boue all praising flies
thine excellence.
Yet lest my homespun verse obscure her worth, sweet Spencer let me leave this
task to thee,
Whose neuerstooping quill can best set forth such things of state, as pass my
Muse, and me.
Thou Spencer art the alderliefeft swain, or happily if that word be all to base,
Thou art Apollo whose sweet hunnie vain amongst the Muses has a chiefest
place.
Therefore in fulness of thy duties love, calm thou the tempest of Dianaes
breast,
Whilst she for Melibaeus late remove afflicts her mind with ouerlong unrest.
Tell her forthwith (for well she likes thy vain) that though great Melibaeus
be away:
Yet like to him there many still remain, which will uphold her country from
decaie.
First name Damaetas, flower of Arcadie, whose thoughts are prudent, and speech
virtuous,
Whose looks have mildnes ioind with Majesty, whose hand is liberal and
valorous:
He is Damaetas, that is wont to blame extremest justice void of equity:
Diana terms him by an other name, Hatton, unless I fail in memory.
Then name old Damon, whom she knows of old for such as Nestor was to
Graecians guide:
Worth ten of Ajax, worth all Craessus gold, if his deserts in balance could
be tried.
Damon is he that counsels still aright, and heedfullie preserus Dianaes store:
And wakes when others rest them selus by night we Arcads called him Cecill
heretofore.
Then name brave Aegon, that with ships defenc about our coast orespreds the
Ocean plains,
To keep fell monsters of the sea from hence: we cleape him Howard, that are
country swains.
Name Mopsus, Daphnis, Faustus, and the rest, whose seurall gifts thy singing
can express:
When thou shall tell how she in them is blessed, their very names will comfort
her distress.

Tityrus. Castor and Pollux, Laedaes lovely twins, whose bright aspect cheers
moornful Mariners,
Showing them selves when pleasant calm begins, of gladsome news two welcome
messengers,
Convey great comfort to the weltred mind, and with their sheen appearance
breed delight:
Yet Corydon thy leare and love combinde please more by hearing, the^ those
twain by sight,
For they portending stormy winds surcease, but by portending cause the
hearts content:
Thy learnd persuades command my sorrow cease, and sweetness does allure to
merriment.
Buthie we homeward, night comes on apace, weel learn beliue forget our
doleful notes:
See where fair Uenus shows her radiant face, lets hence, and shut our
sheepfolds in their coat

FINIS.

