THE PLAIN MAN'S PILGRIMAGE. OR IOVRNEY TOWARD HEAVEN.

Wherein if he walk carefully he may attain to everlasting life.

By W. W.

LONDON. Imprinted by G. Eld, and are to be sold at his house in Fleet-lane at
the sign of the Printers Press. 1613.

The Contents of this Book.
Chapter 1. FIrst to serve God with true Faith and Obedience. Chap. 2. Three
special consequents to be followed. First, A speedy going forward in Christian
Religion. Secondly, out of Proverbs 23.26. My Son give me thy heart. Thirdly,
Moses prayer. Psalm. 19.12. Teach us O Lord to number our days. Chap. 3. The
benefit of the renewed Man. Secondly, The nourishment of the renewed Man.
Thirdly, Out of the 14. of Saint John ver. 6. I am the way, the Truth and the
Life. Chap 4. The path for a Christian to walk in. Chap. 5. Three Christian
duties to be observed. First, Rejoice evermore. Secondly, Pray continually.
Thirdly, In all things give thanks. Lastly 4. Admonitions. 1. Quench not the
Spirit. 2. Despise not prophesying. 3. Try all things. 4. Abstain from all
appearance of Evil.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, I have not compiled this work for the delight of thy
worldly mind, but for a preparation for thy Pilgrimage toward Heaven, that is,
to walk with God as Enoch did: For whosoever enters into consideration with
himself of his humane nature, shall easily perceive that it is addicted to
imitation. And though indeed we should live by laws, and not examples, yet by
common experience we find, that examples move more then laws: Therefo^^ what
soever thou art (high or low) judge charitably of this my work. Thus wishing
thee (good reader) not only to look on the title, but read it to the end, and
I doubt not but thou shall be preserved from profaneness Idolatry, and
superstition.

WILLIAM

The Pilgrims journey toward Heaven.
AS GOD has created all things for his own sake, and man being head of all,
is made Lord and Ruler of them, and so consequently they to serve him, he (I
say) is to consider and to counsel with God and his own conscience, why and
wherefore, and to what end he was created, and sent hither into his world, what
to do, and wherein to bestow his days, etc then shall he find, that for no
other cause, matter or end, but only to serve God with true faith and
obedience in this life, and by that service to enjoy heaven, and everlasting
salvation in the life to come, this was the consideration of our redeeming,
fore told by Zachary, before we were redeemed, that being delivered from the
hands of our enemies, should serve God in holiness and righteousness, all the
days of our lives. Of this consideration, do ensue two consequents to be
observed, whereof the first is, that seeing our end and final cause of being
in this world, is to serve God, and so to work our salvation with fear and
trembling, and whatsoever thing we do, or bestow our time in, which either is
contrary, or not profitable to this, that is, to serve God, it is vanity and
lost labor, and will turn us in time to grief and repentance, for that is
not the matter for which we came into the world, nor whereof we shall be
demanded any account of. Secondly, seeing that our business and affairs in
this world, is to serve our maker with true faith and repentance, and so to
save our own souls, and that all other earthly creatures are but here to
serve our uses, and to that end only are they sent of God: We should therefore
be indifferent to all these creatures, as to riches or poverty, to health or
sickness, to honor or contempt, etc. And we should defire but so much or
little of them as were best for us toward the attainment of our said end and
but pretended: for whosoever desires, seeks, or uses these creatures more
then for this, runs from the end for which he came hither.

And for that the most part of all that are in this world, not only Infidels,
but also Christians do run amiss in this point, and do not take care of
that affair and business for which alone they were created, and placed here
in this world. Hence it is that Christ and his holy Saints, both before the
appearing in the flesh, and after, have spoken so hardly and severely of the
very small number that shall be saved, even among Christians, and have uttered
certain speeches which seem very rigorous to flesh and blood, and to such as
are most touched therein, as among other things, that a greedy lover of this
world cannot be saved. 1. John. 29. verse. and those that greedily desire to
be rich, fall into many temptations, and noisome lusts, which draw them into
destruction and perdition, and that such rich men do enter as hardly into
heaven, as a Cammell through a Needles eye, and the reason of which manner of
speech does stand in this, that a rich worldling, attending with his industry
and care to heap up riches, (as the fashion is) cannot attend to that for
which he came into this world, and so consequently can never attain heaven,
except God work a miracle, and thereby cause him to spend out his riches to the
benefit of his soul, and by grace to call him unto the Gospel (as often he
does) and so do make less the Cammell in such sort as he may pass the
Needles eye, whereof we have an example in the Gospel by Zacheus, who being
a very rich man, and a great sinner, presently upon the calling of Christ, he
being in a Fig Tree, and so entering into his house, but much more as
appears into his heart, whereby he received faith, and upon the same did
resolve himself to change his former life, touching riches, and at one blow to
begin withal, gave away half of his goods unto the poor, and for the rest,
made a Proclamation, that whosoever had any wrong at his hands, he should come
and receive four times recompense for it, and so by this conversion he was
made fit to enter into the kingdom of God, for those things which are
impossible to men, are possible with God.

Further, let us consider and behold the great multitude of all sorts of people
upon earth, and see what their traffic and conuersations are, and whether
they seek after those things, for the which they came into this world, for few
of them that seek, you shall find thousands, who spend their time in seeking
after vanities, as worldly honor, glory, riches, and all fleshly and carnal
comforts, and contentments, which are nothing but vanities, and the capital
enemies of our souls.

O ye sons of men, says David, Psalm. 4. Why love ye vanity, and seek
after lies. Also will you have the lamentation of such unfortunate men as thus
vainly and foolishly have spent their golden days. These are their own words
recorded by Scripture. Wisd. 5.7. in the end of their lives saying, We have
wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, and destruction, yea we have
gone through tedious deserts, but as for the way of the Lord, we have not
regarded it: what good has pride brought us, or what profit has the pomp of
riches brought us. All these are passed away like a shadow, and as a Post that
passes by, and we are consumed in our own iniquities: This is the lamentable
complaint of such men as run amiss, and followed a wrong course in their
actions of this life, these are they which pursued riches, honor, pomp, and
such like vanities, and forgot that great and weighty business, for which they
were sent, these are they who were esteemed happy men in this world, and
thought to run to a most fortunate course, in that they heaped up much riches
together, and advanced themselves, and their posterity, and families, to great
dignities, and so become gorgious, glorious, and dreadful to others, and
finally obtained whatsoever their lust and concupiscence desired, this made
them seem blessed to the worldly thoughts, and the way they ran to be most
prosperous and happy, but the Scriptures of God are wholly and manifest against
such, and thundreth many woes and curses against them, for why has God given
reason and understanding unto men, but to serve him, and praise him upon earth.
Therefore so soon as we come to years of discretion, and begin to
understand, we should then begin a new life, and serve him, whom all creatures
do serve with us, or else our understanding is vain.

Now therefore because the militant Church here upon earth are but Pilgrims and
strangers, not having here in this worldly wilderness, any certain place of
abode, but trauaileth for one eternal in heaven, and having daily many enemies
to encounter withal, therefore it stands every child of God upon, and those
that love their own salvation, to have a due regard, and a true examination
of their lives and conuersations, least they be drawn away from their true
service and obedience which they owe unto their God and Creator, and so follow
the intisements of their enemies, to be drawn away from God.

Now that we may the better void the danger of our enemies, we are to
distinguish truly between spiritual carfulness, and worldly carfulness,
and how can we have a truer Judge for the trial thereof, then our Savior
Christ himself, who has deciphred it in the story of Martha and Mary.

For when our Savior Christ entered into the Village where Martha and Mary
dwelt, and so into the house, then they showing their thankful minds to
Christ again, the one by receiving him into her house, and the other by
enterteining him into her heart, as he was God he was received of Mary, and as
he was man, he was received of Martha, but Mary made choice of the better
part, and was preferred before her sister, and although the care of Martha in
entertaining of Christ is not to be misliked: yet Maryes diligence in hearing
his doctrine, is of purpose preferred, to teach us, that it is much better with
Mary to study in the word, and so first to seek the kingdom of God, then with
Martha to labor in the world, and so to neglect that heavenly kingdom, and
yet notwithstanding such is the corruption of this rusty age, that our greatest
care is to provide for this present life, as the rich man in Luke the twelfth,
enlarged his Barnes wherein to put his store for many years, but we never, or
very late, remember to provide for the life to come, like that other rich man
in Luke 16. that never thought of heaven till he was tormented in hell.

These sisters were godly women, and both earnest favorers of Jesus Christ,
and yet in the manner of their devotion, there is such difference that the
wordly affection of the one, may in some sort be misliked in respect of the
godly exercise and practice of the other. Martha is fore incombered with much
serving, but Mary is at tentiue to hear the word of God: for if it be a matter
of cost or trouble, if they cannot hear the word preached without some
hinderance to their worldly business, and some extraordinary charge to their
pursse, then like the Gadarinites they are content to take their leave of
Christ and his word, and had rather loose that heavenly pearl, then they would
part from their worldly pelf, but let Christians learn first to seek the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then to provide for the things of
this life.

Now while Mary was careful for the food of the soul, Martha was curious to
provide food for the body, her greatest care was to entertain Christ, and to
make him good cheer, to testisie her thankful mind unto him, that had raised
her brother Lazarus from death to life, therefore he was worthy to be well
entertained.

It was well done therefore of Martha, to show her thankful mind unto Christ,
but it was not well done at that time, to show her self thankful in that
manner, for she was to hear the word, for at that time Christ preached the
word, it was then no time for her to spend in other affairs, and to neglect
the greatest affair, which is the means of our salvation, there is a time
wherein we ought to labor in our vocation, and a time wherein we ought to
hear the word. And as we may not utterly neglect our lawful callings to
follow Sermons, so must we not bestow the Sabbath which is consecrated to the
service of God, in following the works of our vocation. All things have their
appointed time (says the Wise man) Eccle. 3. and every thing is seemly in
his convenient season, but when things are done preposterously, and out of
order there follows confusion.

Although Martha did not hear Christ, yet she did labor for Christ: many in
these days will neither labor for Christ, nor hear Christ, but as the
Israelites were weary of their journey in the wilderness, and loathed that
heavenly Manna, so these men are weary of every godly exercise, and are cloyed
with the word of God.

Yet behold how our Savior Christ reprooueth Martha, and excuses Mary, for
when Martha complained of her sister to Christ, that she would not help her,
and seeming after a sort to blame our Savior for winking at it, requiring him
to see the matter amended, but Christ reprooueth Marthas curiosity, and then
excuses, yea commends Maryes care, saying unto her, Martha, Martha, thou
carest and art troubled about many things, but one thing is needful. Mary has
chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from her, one thing is
necessary says Christ, and what is that one thing, even to hear the word of
God preached, which is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes.

A man may better want all things, then that one needful thing, and yet we
desire all other things, and neglect that one thing which is so needful: this
one thing has Mary chosen, and therefore has chosen the better part. Marthas
part is good, because it provides for this life, but Mary's part is better,
because it leads to eternal life, it is good to be occupied about our
calling to get our living, but it is better to be occupied in hearing the
word, which is able to save our souls: As the head and the foot are both
needful in the body, so Mary and Martha are both needful in a commonwealth,
therefore God has given two vocations unto man, the one earthly, by his
labor, as he said unto Adam, Thou shall eat thy bread with sweat of thy
brows: the other is heavenly, as is written, Thou shall serve the Lord thy God
in holiness and righteousness, all the days of thy life, so there is an
active life which consists in the practicing of the affairs of this life,
wherein man shows himself to be like himself: and there is a contemplative
life which consists in the meditation of divine and heavenly things, wherein
man shows himself to be like the Angels: for they which labor in their
temporal vocation, do live like men, but they which labor in spiritual
matters, live like Angels; when these hear the word, then GOD speaks unto
them, and when they pray, they speak unto God, so that there is a continual
conference between GOD and them, because they are continually exercised in
hearing and praying.

As for all other things, whether they be honors, promotions, pleasures,
riches, and what not, they serve only for maintenance of this present life,
which is so short, and subject to mutability, but the word of God, is the food
of the soul, the bread of life, that immortal seed which brings forth unto
eternal life: Let the word of God therefore be precious unto us always,
because it is so permanent.

Again the spiritual minds are heavenly and look up, because their minds are
above, where their treasure is, but the carnal minds are earthly, and look
down like beasts, because their treasure i^ below. As the Serpent grouels upon
the earth, so does the Serpents seed, and has not so much as the countenance
of grace.

Therefore as God has given these vocations unto every true Pilgrim, to be
exercised therein, during this present life, the one for himself, the other
for God; And for that we may the better, as it were, bear an even hand in the
practicing and exercising of them as God may be pleased, and we comforted: Let
us therefore take those directions for the same, as God has appointed by his
word, otherwise we should not be able to walk aright, but wander clean out
of the right way: For if we do not ask council at Gods word, but trust in
flesh and blood, we are sure to runneawry, for as the difference is between
the body, and the soul, the one mortal, to live but a short time, the other
immortal to live for ever, even so must our exercise and reverent care be in
our service toward them both.

Now for the bodily estate, the Apostle says. If we have food and raiment,
let us be therewith content. 1. Tim. 6. and Solomon being both wise and rich,
prayed for a competent living, saying, Lord give me neither poverty nor
riches, only grant me a necessary living, Pro. 30.8. Again, the Apostle
exhorts us to have our conversation without covetousness, being content
with such things as we have, besides many other like places for the same
purpose.

Now the worldly man has no contentment, but a continual desire of worldly
riches, which is but a false treasure to trust upon, but Saint Paul shows
unto us a riches which every true Christian ought to covet and desire, saying,
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has. 1. Tim. 6.
Out of these words issue many profitable lessons and instructions for all true
Christians to observe and follow, for a Christian shall find little joy in
riches but shall find great joy in the holy Ghost, they shall find little
peace in the world, but shall find great peace in conscience.

Now, when the Apostle had found out the disease of covetousness, he like a
skillful Physician, goes about to pick out the greedy worm, which makes men
so hungry for wealth, and then sets such a glass before them, which he
calls contentation, that will make a shilling seem as great as a pound, and
a cottage seem as fair as a Palace, etc. that he which has but twenty
pounds, shall be as merry as he which has an hundred pounds.

If we hear and understand them with the same spirit that Saint Paul writ
them, then will they so work upon our hearts, that every man shall go away
contented with that he has, like Zacheus which before he had seen Christ,
knew nothing but to scrape, but as soon as he had heard Christ, all his mind
was set upon giving. This was the first day that Zacheus seemed rich to
himself, when riches seemed dung unto him, and godliness seemed riches, for
when we contemn riches, then shall we seem rich, because no man has
enough but he which is contented, for we shall be covetous until we become
religious. Therefore he that will have contentation, must leave his
covetousness in pawn for it, for what has brought usury, and simony, and
bribery, and cruelty, envy, strife, and deceit into the world, and made every
house an Inn, and every shop a market of oaths and lies, and fraud, but the
superfluous love of money, and therefore name covetousness, and thou have
named then the mother of all these mischiefs.

Of them which seem to be wise, there be no such fools in the world, as
they which love money better then themselves, but this is the judgment of God,
that they which deceive others, deceive themselves, and live like Caine which
was a vagabond upon his own land, so they are beggars in the midst of their
wealth: for though they have understanding to know riches, and a mind to seek
them, and wit to find them, and policy to keep them, yet they have a false
sight and bleered eye, that when their riches lie before them, they seem
poor, and he which has so much, seems richer then they.

It is a wonder to see men compassing about seeking what they may get, such
love is there between men and money, that they which profess good will unto
it with their hearts, will not take so much pains for their life, as they take
for gain, therefore no marvel if they have no leisure to sanctify
themselves, which have no leisure to refresh themselves. Our Savior Christ
knew what he spoke, when he said: No man can serve two Masters, meaning God
and the world, therefore the Apostle says, The love of this world is enmity to
God, signifying such emulation is between these two, that God cannot abide the
world should have a part, and the world cannot abide that God should have a
part, therefore the love of the world must needs be emnity to God.

And so no covetous person is Gods servant, but his enemy, for this cause
covetousness is called Idolatry. Now the Apostle to make us to love
godliness, he calls it by the name of great gain, hear we may see that
God does not command men to be godly only, because it makes for his glory,
but because godliness is profitable to us. Also, for godliness is not called
gain in respect of God, but in respect of us, it is gain to us, but it is
duty to him, so it is not called a health in respect of us, because it is the
health of our souls, so it is not called a kingdom in respect of God, but in
respect of us, because we are entitled to the kingdom, by this difference
from the reprobates.

Now put all the good things in the world together, and the goodness of all is
found in godliness, to show that the godly are as well, as merry, as content,
with their love toward God, and Gods love toward them, as other are with
health, and wealth, and pleasure. Therefore it is said of the godly, The fear
of the Lord is their treasure.

But the riches of the world are called earthly, transitory, snares, dung, as
though they were not worthy to be counted riches, and therefore to draw the
earnest love of men from them, the holy Ghost brings them in with such names of
disdain, to disgrace them with their lovers.

But when he comes to godliness, which is the riches of the soul, then he
calls it great riches, heavenly riches, unsearchable riches, everlasting
riches, with all the names of pleasure, and all the names of happiness.

The worldly man has a kind of peace and joy, and riches, but it cannot be
called great, because they have not enough, they are not content, as the godly
are, therefore godliness has his honor, to be called great gain.

Riches makes bate, but godliness makes peace, riches breeds covetousness,
but godliness brings contentation, riches makes a man unwilling to dye, but
godliness makes a man ready to die, therefore only godliness has this
honor to be called great riches, such joy, such peace is in godliness, and
yet no man couets it.

For this is the quality of virtue, it seems nothing unto a man, until he
have it, but when he has found it, he will not then loose it again for all
the world, because it brings him to be contented with that he has: Now because
contentation is of such a nature, that it can please it self with poverty
as well as riches, as though it had all which they wanted, and this contentment
we owe to godliness because it is not possible for a wicked man to be
contented, but the godly man has found that which all the world does seek,
that is enough.

It is sildome seen that contentation is found in riches, therefore the
Apostle teaches us, to seek it in godliness, saying, Godliness is great
riches, and this riches the world seldom thinks of, but when Godliness
comes unto a man, it says; Peace be in this house, peace be in this heart,
peace be in this man, and this is the sign whether Godliness be in a man, if
he have joy and contentment with that he has: if he have much, he can say
with Saint Paul, I have learned to abound, if he have little, I have l^arned to
want, that is, if we have much as Abraham, as Lot, as Job, as Jacob, etc. Yet
it cannot corrupt his mind, for though the godly man be full of riches, yet his
heart is not rent, his mind is not troubled, his countenance is not changed,
because he remembers that these things were given him to do good: such a
commander is contentation, that wheresoever she sets foot, an hundredth
blessings wait upon her, in every disease she is a Physician, in every strife
she is a Lawyer, in every doubt she is a Preacher, in every grief she is a
comforter.

Therefore if we see a man contented with that he has, it is a great sign
godliness is entered into him, for the heart of man is made the temple of God,
and nothing can fill it but God alone.

Therefore blessed is the man whom godliness does make rich says Solomon, and
brings no sorrow of heart with it Pro. 10.22. these are the riches which at
the last we must dwell with, when all the rest which we have lied for, and
sworn for, and fretted for, and broken our sleep for, and lost many a Sermon
for, will forsake us, like servants which change their Masters, then
godliness shall seem as great gain unto us, as it did to Saint Paul, and he
which loved the world most, would give all that he has for a dram of faith,
that he might be sure to go to heaven when he is dead, though he went toward
hell so long as he lived.

Thus we may see the fruits of godliness, and the fruits of covetousness:
for if we be covetous, we shall never have enough, although we have too
much, but if we be godly, we shall have enough, though we seemed to have
nothing: therefore what counsel is there to be taken herein, but as our Lord
Jesus councelled his Disciples; Be not friends to riches, but make you friends
of riches, and know this that if we cannot say with Saint Paul, in what estate
soever we are in, we have learned therewith to be content, that is whether we
be rich or poor, in health or sickness, or in any other estate whatsoever,
if contentation be not there, then godliness is not yet come unto that man,
for the companion of godliness is contentation, which when she comes will
bring unto us all good things.

Thus much for this first part, wherein is contained the beginning of our
Pilgrimage journey, being strangers here placed in this world, and withal
having all other creatures given and made in subjection for the use and service
of man. And so consequently man himself, while he remains a Pilgrim to ferue
God his Creator, with true faith, obedience, and holiness of life all his
days, and that all earthly things be made indifferent for the use and service
of man, with a brief note how the most part of this world do run contrary
in this point, and do not take care of that duty and business for which alone
they were created and placed here in this world, and is also declared what
great dangers and destructions such runners away fall into, with an admonition
to all true Christians, which are but strangers and Pilgrims in this world, and
having many enemies to encounter withal, and for the avoiding the dangers of
them, we ought to be careful to distinguish truly between spiritual and
worldly care, which is recited in the story of Martha and Mary, by our Lord and
Savior Christ himself. Also that God has given two vocations unto men, the
one heavenly and spiritual for the soul, the other earthly and temporal for
the body; therefore as God has given these vocations to every Christian to
beexercised therein, the one for our selves, the other for God, and that we may
the better bear an even hand in the use and practicing of them, as God may be
glorified, and we comforted, we must embrace and follow the exhortation of
Saint Paul, where he says. That Godliness it great gain, if a man be
content with that he has. 1. Tim. 6.6. wherein ensues many profitable
lessons for the better performing of these two duties both for Gods glory and
our comforts.

The Pilgrims journey toward Heaven. Part. 2.
IN this second part is contained a more careful and speedy going forward, in
feeking to come to the knowledgment of the true way, which leads every true
Pilgrim to his wished desire that is, eternal rest and happiness, to reign
with Christ our Savior, and his Church in the kindome of God his Father, for
evermore: And in this part is set down three special consequents to be
observed and followed. The first is a speedy beginning and going forward in
Christian religion, set down by Solomon in Eccle. 12.2. saying, Remember thy
maker in the days of thy youth, or ever the days of adversity come, which
may be called the young man's tax. The second is likewise set down in the Pro
23.26. saying, My son give me thy heart, and let thy eyes have pleasure in
my ways: which may be called the Christian man's sacrifice* The third is the
prayer of Moses, in the Psalm. 90.12. saying; Teach us O Lord to number our
days, that we apply our hearts unto wisdom: and may fitly be called the godly
man's request.

In these three notes or parts, are set down many godly and profitable lessons
and instructions to be followed of every true Christian, which is careful of
his own salvation and seeks for the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, with such obedience of life and conversation, as may be agreeable unto
the holy word of our God. And for that God would not have us to loose our
labor, but he would have us seek and find, to ask and receive, to run and
obtain: therefore the Apostle says, So run as you may obtain. 1. Cor. 9. As
there is a heaven, so there is a way to heaven; one way Adam came from
Paradise, and by a another way he must return to Paradise, the passage is not
so stopped, but there is a way, though a straight way, and therefore few do
find it, but only those which are like Jacob, that dreamed and saw a Ladder
which reached from earth to heaven, and the Angels descended, and ascended by
it, to show that no man ascended to heaven, but by that Ladder: This Ladder is
Christ, which says, I am the way, in John. 14. there he bids us to follow
him: If we must follow Christ, let us see how he went to heaven, he began
betime, for at Twelve years of age he said, I must go about my fathers
business.

He made speed, for John says 21.25. that he spoke and did more good things
in three and thirty years then could be written. Solomon shows when it best
time to sow the seed of virtue, that it may bring forth the fruit of life, and
make a man always ready to dye. Let him remember his Creator in the days of his
youth, and so all his life shall run, the middle like the beginning, and the
end like the middle: for if the mind be planted in sin, in the time of
youth, sildome any goodness buddeth out of that stock, for virtue must have a
time to grow, the seed is sown in youth, which comes up in age. As the Arrow
is directed at the first, so it flies all the way, over or under; but it never
finds the mark, unless it be leuelled right in the hand. So they which make
an evil beginning, forspeake themselves at the first, and wander out all their
race, because, when they should have directed their life aright, they wandered
clean contrary way.

Therefore God requiring the first borne for his offering, and the first fruits
of his service, requiring the first labors of his servants, because the best
season to seek God in, is to seek him early.

Therefore Wisdom says, they which seek me early shall find, but to them
which defer, she says: ye shall seek me, but ye shall not find me:
therefore the holy Ghost cries so often. This is the acceptable time, this is
the day of salvation, to day hear his voice, etc.

So he which takes time is sure, but he which loses time oftener fails
then speedeth: for when golden opportunity is past, no time will fit for it:
therefore linger not with Lot, for if the Angel had not snatched him away, he
had perished with Sodom for his delay.

Samuel began to serve God in his minority, and was made a Prophet, Timothy
began to read the Scriptures in his childhood, and was an Evangelist, Daniell
being in captivity in Babylon, and a young man, would not be changed from the
service of his Lord God, but prayed daily unto him, yea though he were
therefore put into the Lions Den, yet the Lord delivered him from the Lions,
and brought him in great estimation with the King, and also a great Prophet.
David being the youngest of his brethren, could not abide to hear Goliath to
rail of his God, took in hand to fight with him, and slew him, when none of
the host durst. Joseph being the youngest of his brethren, but Benjamin,
being sold by his brethren into Egypt, and there because he would not defile
the law of his God, by committing fornication with his Mistress, was
wrongfully thrown into prison, yet the Lord his God delivered him forth, and
brought him in great favor with King Pharao, and was made ruler over all his
kingdom.

Therefore this does teach us, how God does love and regard timely beginners in
religion, and so to serve him accordingly, so that they which are young, need
not to try the snares and allurements of the world, or the issues and effects
of sin, which old men have laid before them, but go a merrier way to obtain
their wished desire, that is this, says Solomon, Thou must remember thy
Creator which did make thee, which has elected thee, which has redeemed thee,
which daily preserves thee, which will for ever glorifi^ thee. And as the
kind remembrance of a friend does recreate the mind, so to think and
meditate upon God, will supply thy thoughts, dispell thy grief, and make thee
cheerful.

Now if thou would have this joy, comfort, and pleasure to belong unto thee,
and would escape those thousand miseries, vexations and vanities which
Solomon by many weary and tedious toiles sought to make naked before thee, and
yet held all but vanity, when he had found the right way, Thou must, says he,
remember thy maker in the days of thy youth, and then thy happiness shall be
as long as thy life, and all thy thoughts whilst thou remainest on earth, a
fortress of the glory of heaven: this is the sum of Salomons counsel.

Solomon finds man seeking happiness out of the way, he pittieth to see him
seek, and not find, to run, and not to obtain, therefore he sets him in
the way like a guide sent from God, which often has straied himself before,
and being now recovered to the right way again, stands like a Mark of
knowledge in the turnings that lead unto blind by-ways, to direct all those
that seek for comfort, that they may follow the ready path that leads to
eternal happiness: Therefore from the first setting forth, even from the time
of youth, when man begineth his pilgrimage course, Solomon tells how he shall
therein prepare himself to walk, and sets him in a fair high way, wherein
is no turning, either to the right hand or to the left, which he calls the
Remembrance of God, as if he should say, Walk with God, as Henock did, and
remember well he that shall be thy Judge, does see all that thou do and hears
thee every word, and thy thought shall keep thee in ye way at all times.

Now Solomon sets forth the dangers of delay, and draws them forward as it
were with two cords, that is, short time of their youth, and the infinite
infirmities of age, to show how soon our youth is gone, which we think never
will have end. Solomon does not reckon it by years, but by days. In the days
of thy youth, so the Scripture numbers our life by days and hours, and
minutes, to teach us to make careful use of all our time, and every day think
upon our end: yet least they should post over the remembrance until age come,
which is the general day, that all for the most part set to repent in:
therefore after this verse, Solomon brings in the old man, deaf, blind, and
lame, and stammering for the young man to behold, as if he should say: Look my
son, is this man fit to learn, which cannot hear, nor see, nor speak, nor
go? Therefore remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before this
doting age come upon thee: this then is the level of your message, to hasten
forward them which travel toward heaven, because there is great space
between God and us, and much a do to aspire the top of the Mount of Sion, but
more a do to aspire the top of the mount of heaven.

This is the preferment of our sins, if they have been our companions in
youth, in age they will be our counselors and Masters too: therefore the best
season to seek God in, is to seek him early, before the floods of wrath
arise, and the heap of sins stand up like a rampired wall between God and
us. Therefore says our Savior Christ, If you seek the kingdom of God first,
al other things shall be cast upon you: he says not seek the world first, that
heaven shall be cast upon you, he that does believe this would first seek
heaven: And we say first, let me bury my father, first let me bid my friends
farewell, and so many things come first, so long in burying our fathers, so long
in bidding our friends farewell, that is to say, the riches, honors and
pleasures of this world, that there is left no time to seek the kingdom, but
follow me, is turned to follow us. Christ must follow our sins, and come
after our pleasures, or else he shall not be served at all, therefore I can not
say to you as Christ: seek first the kingdom of heaven, for then you should
have sought it long ago, but now it must be said, which the Apostle says.
Redeem the time and at last seek the kingdom of heaven, for it is to be
feared, that as little flies, when many came together, plagued and destroyed
the Egiptians, so short hours but many in sin and security will steal
away our whole life and deceive our repentance.

There be not many Lots, but many linger like Lot, loath to depart, until we
fee the fire come; there be not many Simions, but many as old as Simion, which
never yet embraced Christ in their hearts, they thought to repent before they
were so old, yet now they dote for age, they are not old enough to repent: Woe
to the security, woe to the stubburnesse, woe to the drowsinesse of this age.

Consider this, ye which might have known a thousand things more then ye
do, if you had begone when Solomon taught you, for God will not always knock
at the door of your hearts. Christ will not always clock like a Hen to
gather her Chickins, John will not always cry, Repent, for the day of the Lord
is at hand, but mercy is in the foreward, and Judgment in the reereward, yet
Wisdom cries in the streets. Let every Joseph store up before the famine
come, for he which promises thee pardon when thou returnest, does not promise
that to morrow thou shall return, Repentance is a gift, and a gift must be
taken when it is offered, for the time past is gone, and thou can not call
that to repent in, the time to come is uncertain, and thou can not assure
that to repent in, the present time is only thine, and thou may repent in
that, but a non that will be gone too.

Therefore as Samuel began to serve God in his minority, as Timothy read the
Scriptures in his childhood, so whether thou be old or young, thy repentance
cannot come too soon, because thy sin is gone before. And if thou lackest a
Spur to make thee run, see how every day runs away with thy life, youth
comes upon childhood, age comes upon youth, death comes upon age, with
such a swift sail, that if all our minutes were spent in mortifying our
selves, yet our glass would not be run out, before we had purged half our
corruptions. All these examples and sentences, and proverbs, and reasons, do
cry with Solomon, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

Now it follows in this second note or part to be observed, for the better
performance of this our Christian duty, we must yield unto GOD that sacrifice
which he requires, and penned by Solomon 22.26. under the name of Wisdom,
and directed unto her sons, for the children of God are called the children
of Wisdom, therefore Wisdom entreats her sons, that they would give her
their hearts. This Wisdom is GOD, we by adoption are his sons, and our
heart is that which Christ calls spirit and truth without hypocrisy, Give me
thy heart says God: David as though he were at a stand and sorrowed that he
could not do enough for God, broke forth to himself: What shall I give unto
the Lord for all that he has given me: Psalm. 116. the Lord as it were hearing
these sighs of his servants, which care and study what they may do to please
him, comes in their suspense, and like a friend, which desires nothing but
good will, answers from heaven, My son give me thy heart, under which suit he
taxes them besides, which are suitors always to him, and look still to
receive more benefits, and yet never cast in their minds what they shall give:
therefore their tribute is set down by equal measure, every man must homage
his heart, which is even the continent of all, and governor of man's house,
which sits on the bench like a Judge to give the charge, and teaches the tongue
to speak, the hand to work, the feet to walk, the ear to attend, the eye
to observe, the mind to choose, the flesh to obey: This heart we must present
to God, like a burnt sacrifice, wherein all is offered together. A wise tongue,
a diligent hand, a wary foot, a watchful ear, a humble mind, an obedient
flesh, put all together and it is but thy heart. My son, says God, give me
thy heart.

This mite God will have, for all his benefits, which we may best afford him,
but thy alms to the poor, thy counsel to the simple, thine inheritance to
thy children, thy travel in thy vocation, but thy heart unto God, he which is
a spirit, requires the spirit, and delights to dwell in the hearts of men.

God here plants himself as in a Castle which is always besieged, with the
world, the flesh, and the Devil, if thy enemy get a thought, or a word, or a
work, yet he has but raised the walls, but and if he take the heart, then
the fortress is left, and for that time all our thoughts, words, and works
are in captivity unto him.

Therefore give God thy heart, that he may keep it, not a piece of thy heart,
nor a room in thy heart, but thy whole heart, in the 6. of Deuteronomy. he asks
all thy heart, all thy soul, all thy strength, there he requires all, least
we should keep a thought behind.

Yet is thy heart but a vain heart, a barren heart, a sinful heart, until
thou give it unto GOD, and then it is the temple of the Holy Ghost, and the
Image of God, so changed, and formed, and fined, that God calls it a new heart.

So the heart is all and chief in request, because if there be any goodness,
it lies in the heart, and he which gives the heart gives all, for out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the eye looks, the ear
listeneth, the foot walks to do good or evil.

We see David is called a man after Gods own heart, but because when God
said, Give me thy heart, his spirit answered like an Echo, I give thee my
heart, go my heart unto thy maker, thy bridgroome has sent for thee, put on
thy wedding garment, for the king himself will marry thee.

Therefore let al suitors have their answers, that the heart is married
already, and say God has my heart, and he shall have it, but take heed that thy
heart do not deceive thee and say it is Gods, when it is the worlds, but by
this thou shall know whether thou have given it to God or no, if it be gone,
and set forward to God, althy members will follow after it, the tongue will
praise him, the foot will follow him, the ear will atend him, the eye will
watch him, the hand will serve him, nothing will stay after the heart, but every
one goes like hand-maides after their mistress.

This Christ verifyed saying, Make clean within all and shall be clean, Saint
Paul teaches us to make melody to the Lord in our hearts Ephesians. 5. showing
that there is a comfort of all the members, when the heart is in tune, and that
it sounds like a melody in the ears of GOD, and makes us rejoice while we
serve him, we have an ensample hereof in Christ which said it was meat and
drink for him to do his Fathers business.

Therefore Solomon picketh out the heart for God, speaking as though he would
set out the pleasants and farest, and easiest way to serve him, without any
grudging, or toil or weariness, touch but the first link and all the rest
will follow, so set the heart a going and it is like the poise of a Clock
which turns all the Wheels one way, such an oil is upon the heart which
makes all nimble and corant about it, therefore it is almost as easy to speak
well and do well, as it is to think well, if the heart indite a good matter, no
marvel then though the tongue be the pen of a ready writer, but and if the
heart be dull, all is then like a left hand, so unapt and untoward that it
cannot turn it self to any good.

The life and conversation of a man testifies what is in the heart, and the
tongue will hardly keep secret what is therein.

Our Savior Christ verifieth this when he says, either make the tree good,
and his fruit good, or else make the tree evil, and his fruit evil, for the
tree is known by his fruit, for a good man out of the good treasure of the
heart brings forth good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasure
brings forth evil things.

Therefore the tongue will not praise, because the heart does not love, the
care does not hear, because the heart does not mind, the hand does not give,
because the heart does not pity, the foot will not go because the heart does
not stir; so that all stay upon the heart, thus to show that he deserves
all, even the Lord our God which brings all.

Again, God requires the heart, showing that the things of this world are not
worthy of it: no not a thought, for if the heart be the temple of God, he
which gives it to any thing else, commits sacrilege, and breaks that
Commandent, Give unto God, that which is Gods. Math. 22.

Again, that all should so consent with the heart, that we should speak, as
if our heart did speak; pray as if our heart did pray, hear as if our heart
did hear; give, as if our heart did give; remit, as if our heart did remit,
etc. As the Apostle says; Do all things heartily, Colos. 3.23. Which if we
could do nothing that we do, should any way trouble us, because nothing is
troublesome, but that which goes against the heart.

God will not have us to speak to him, nor come to him for any thing, unless
we bring our hearts unto him, for the tongue without the heart, is a
flattering tongue, the eye without the heart, is a wicked eye, the ear without
the heart, is a vain ear; the hand without the heart, is a false hand, he
which gave but a mite, and brings his heart, brings more then he which
offers a Talent.

God delights himself in giving, and therefore he loves a cheerful
giver, but he cannot give cheerfully, which gives not his heart, for he
which gives God his lips, instead of his heart, teaches God to give him
stones in steed of bread, that is a shadow of comfort, for comfort it self.

Of all the suitors that come unto us, it seems there is none which has any
title to claim the heart, but God, which challenges it by the name of a
Son. As if he should say, thou shall give it to thy Father, which gave it to
thee: art thou my son? my sons give me their hearts, and by this they know
that I am their father, if I dwell in their hearts: for the heart is the temple
of God: therefore if thou be his fonne, thou will give him thy heart, because
thy Father defireth it, thy Maker desires it, thy Redeemer desires it, thy
Savior desires it, thy Lord and King, and thy Master desires it, which has
given his son for a ransom, his spirit for a pledge, his word for a guide,
the world for a walk, and reserueth a kingdom for thine inheritance.

Now if we would consider the right way, whereby we may give our hearts unto
God, the counsel of him who speaks nothing but the very truth, and he
himself is the truth that is our Lord and savior Jesus Christ which says,
where your treasure is there will be your hearts also, therefore let our
conversation be in heaven, and upon heavenly things, that we may thereby make
our trasure there, and so we shall have our hearts there placed, where our
enemies cannot take it from us, thus much for this note as has been said, now
it follows in the next.

Now if we have not remembered our Lord and Creator in the days of our youth,
and withal have not given our hearts unto him, whereby we might become
religious, and to increase in us renewed hearts and minds for the better
understanding and finding out the right pathway which leads unto eternal
happiness, therefore I say if we have not prepared our selves and done this
already, as has been declared in this second part, it is then now high time
to begin to remember God, and to give our hearts unto him in age, or else to
forget him for evermore, for the gray-head which looks every day for his last
Sabbath, when he shall rest in the grave, had need to pray twice as much,
hear twice as much, do twice as much to prepare sacrifice of his body and
soul ready, and acceptable unto GOD, because the night is at hand when he
cannot pray, nor hear, nor repent any more: It is said, the Devil is very
busy, because his time is short, but an old man's is shorter, therefore if
youth had need of legs, age had need of wings, therefore in the next
consequence it is further to be observed what further duties we are to
proceed in as follows.

Moses in the 90. Psalm. verse. 12 says, teach us to number our days that we
may apply our hearts unto wisdom, this Psalm was compiled by Moses as may
appear by the title; At what time the spies returned from the land of Canaan,
and God for the murmuring of them pronounced that all which were above twenty
years old should die in the wilderness except Caleb and Joshua: that
encouraged their brethren to go into Canaan.

Now when Moses heard the sentence of death pronounced against himself and
all the Jews which came out of Egypt, except only two: That all should die
before they came to the land which they sought for, he prays thus for
himself and the rest. Teach us O LORD to number our days that we may give
our hearts unto wisdom, that is, seeing we must needs dye, and that our days
are short, teach us therefore to think upon death, that we may dye in thy
fear O Lord, and so to live again for evermore: this shows us, that the
consideration of our mortality, will make us apply our hearts to godliness,
therefore Moses thinking of his death, runs to wisdom as a remedy against
death.

Therefore we must come to some Schoolemaister, which is like Saint John
Baptist: what shall we do, that we may grow in knowledge, as we grow in
years? Teach me (says Moses) to number my days, that I may apply my heart
to wisdom; whereby Moses tells us, that this was one of his helps, which
made him profit in the knowledge of God. To remember his days: as a man which
has a set time for his tax listneth to the clock, and counts his hours.

So we have a set time to serve God, work while it is day, John. 9.4. says
Christ: what he does mean by this day, the Apostle shows us, saying: This
is the day of salvation, that is, This life is the day wherein we should work
our salvation: this is a long tax, therefore we had need to remember our
days, and loose not a minuit, least we be be-nighted before our work be done.
As God has numbered our days, so we must learn to remember our days, or
else it seems we cannot apply our hearts to wisdom, that is, unless we
think upon death, we cannot fashion our selves to a godly life, though we
were as well instructed as Moses was.

This we find daily in our selves, that the forgetfulness of death, makes us to
apply our hearts unto folly, and pleasure, and all voluptuousness, that
contrary to his advice, work your salvation, we work our damnation: therefore
this is the fruit which comes to a man, by numbering or remembering his days,
God teaches man to apply his heart to wisdom, and that is his lesson which he
gives for that purpose, Remember thy days, that is, think that wisdom is a
long study, and that thou have but a short time to get it, and this will make
thee get ground of virtue.

Therefore, five things are to be noted in these words; first, that death is
the heaven of every man, whether he sit in the throne, or kept in a cottage,
at last he must knock at deaths door: The second is; That man's life is
decreed, and his bounds appointed, which he cannot pass. Thirdly, that our
days are few, as though we were sent into this world, but to see it.
Fourthly, the aptness of man to forget death, rather then any thing else.
Lastly, to remember, how short a time we have to live, will make us to apply
our hearts to that which is good. For the first point is, that as every man had
a day to come into this world, so he shall have a day to go out of this
world, we are not lodged in a Castle, but in an Inn, where we are but guests,
and therefore S. Peter calls us Pilgrims and strangers, we are not citizens of
the Earth, but citizens of Heaven. And therefore the Apostle says, We have here
no abiding city, but we look for one to come as Christ says, My Kingdom is
not of this world, so we may say, my dwelling is not of this world, but the
soul soreth vp-ward whence it came, and the body stoopeth downward whence it
came, every man is but a tennant at will, and there is nothing sure but death.
In Paradise we might live or die, every thing and every day suffers some eclips
and nothing stands at a stay, but our Creator calls to another, let us
leave this world, our fathers summoned us, and we shall summon our children to
the grave.

So in an hour we are, and are not, we may well be called earthen vessels,
for we are soon changed, what do we learn when we think of this but that
which Moses says, to apply our hearts unto wisdom? The second note is that the
time of man is set and his bounds appointed, which he cannot pass, to this Job
bears witness saying. Are not his days determined, thou have appointed his
bounds which he cannot pass. Again Jeremy says, they could not stand,
because the day of their destruction was come. As there is a day of destruction
and a day of death, so there is a day of birth, a day of marriage, a day of
honor, a day of deliverance, according to that the determination is made, that
is GOD has determined all things. As God appointed a time when his Son should
come into the world, and he came at the same time, as the Prophets and
Evangelists accord. So he has appointed a time when all blessings shall come
unto us, and they come at the same time.

It may be some will say, if any time be set, thus long I shall live and I
cannot pass, then will I take no Physic, you may as well say I will take no
meat: God has not ordained the end without the means, but the means as well
as the end.

If he has appointed one to die in his youth he has appointed means to
shorten his life, or if he have appointed one to live long, he has appointed
also some means to preserve him.

The third note is that our life is but short, the Raven, the Phoenix, the Heart.
Lion, and the Elephant fulfill their hundreds, but Man dies when he thinks
yet his sun rises before his eyes be satisfied with seeing, or his ear with
hearing, or his heart with lusting, then death knocks at his door, and will not
give him leave to meditate an excuse before he come to judgment.

This was the Arithmetic of holy men in former times, to reckon their days,
so that their time might seem short, to make them apply their hearts unto
wisdom. As thus, first they did deductt the time, which is past, for the time
which is past is nothing, then they did deduct the time to come. The time to
come is uncertain, for no man can say that he shall live any time: Now when
the time past and the time to come is set aside, there is then nothing left but
the present time, and is but a moment which is not so much in respect of
eternity as a little moat to the whole world.

Thus we may see what an Epitome man's life is come to, David numbered his days
by measure, My days says he are like a span long, Job says: Man (which is
borne of a woman) has but a short time to live. Our fathers (marueling to see
how suddenly men are, and are not, comparing life to a dream in the night, to
a bubble in the water, to an arrow which never rests, til his fall. This is
our life, for while we enjoy it we loose it as Jacob said, that his days had
been few, so we may say that our days shall be few.

For as some came into the vineyard in the morning, and some at noone, and some
at night for there must be some go out of this worldly wilderness in the
morning, some at noone, and some at night, some man's life has nothing but a
morning, some has a morning and a night, he which lives longest: lives al
toe day: so that a glorious life, may be compared to a glorious day, and a
sorrowful life to a bloody day, and a long life to a Summers day, and a short
life to a Winters day.

Now why has God appointed such a short time to mankind in this world, surely
least he should defer to do good, as his manner is, for though his life be
so short, yet he thinks it to long to repent, for we defer til that week
which we think will be our last: Consider this all which travel toward heaven,
had we not need to make have, which must go such a long journey, in such a
short space, how can he choose which remembers that every day runs away,
with his life.

The fourth point is our aptness to forget death, rather then any thing else,
and therefore Moses prays the Lord to teach him to remember his days, as
though they were still slipping out of his mind: For when Moses prays the Lord
to teach him to remember his days, he signifies that he very feign would
remember them, but still his mind did turn from them, and that he could not
think upon them longer then he thought on the Lord which taught him to
remember them.

Such is the rebelious nature of ours, we cannot remember that which we
should, because we are apt to remember so many things which we should forget.

How often does the Scripture call death to our remembrance, and yet we read
how many put the day of death from them, and would not remember it. Solomon
bids us remember that we shall come to judgment, yea we say in our hearts,
there is no death, or at least death will not come before we be old.

There is a kind of men which cannot abide to hear of death, they are sick
with the name of it, the reason is, death prophsied no good to the wicked, but
evil, for which they cannot abide it, for death comes to the wicked like a
Iailor, which comes always to hail them to prison, therefore their care is
not to remember death, that thereby they might apply their hearts unto wisdom,
and so loose their pleasures, before their time, for he which does not purpose
yet to leave his sin would not be troubled with any thought that might make him
take his pleasure fearfully, for the devil does never teach a man to remember
his death because he gains by the forgetfulness of death, but the Lord our God
which would have us to apply our hearts unto wisdom, it is he which teaches us
to remember our days.

The last point, that to remember how short a time we have to live will make
us apply our hearts to that which is good, two things are to be noted in these
words, first that if we will find wisdom we must apply our hearts to seek her;
the second that remembrance of death makes us to apply our hearts unto it:
touching the first, Moses found some fault with himself, for for all that he
heard, and did see and observed, and was compted wise yet he was new to begin
to apply his heart to learn wisdom, so insatiable and covetous (as I may say)
are the servants of God, for the more wisdom, faith and zeal they have, the
more they defer.

Therefore the way to get wisdom is to apply our hearts unto it, for from that
day which a man begins to apply his heart unto wisdom he learneth more in a
month after then he did in a year before, even as we may see the wicked,
because they apply their hearts to wickedness, how fast they proceed, how
easily and how quickly they become perfect swearers, expert drunckerds, cunning
deceivers.

So if you would apply your hearts as thoroughly to knowledge and goodness, you
might then become like the Apostle, which teaches you, therefore when Solomon
shows men the way how to come by wisdom, he speaks often of the heart: As
give thy heart to wisdom, Let wisdom enter into thine heart, get wisdom,
keep wisdom, embrace wisdom.

Thus we have learned how to apply our hearts to knowlede, that it may do us
good, that we may say with the Virgin Mary, My heart does magnify the Lord,
and then the heart will apply it to the ear, and the tongue (as Chrict says)
out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

The second note to be observed is, that remembrance of death makes us to
apply our hearts to wisdom: as many benefits come unto us by death, so many
benefits come unto us by the remembrance of death. And this is one that makes
a man to apyly his heart unto wisdom, for when he considers that he has but
a short time to live, he is careful to spend it well, like Moses, of whom it is
written, that when he considered he had but a short season to live, he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the children of God then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.

This wisdom the fathers called the wisdom of the cross, which we call the
best wisdom, because it is dearest bought, it is hard to think of a short
life, and to think evil, or to think of a long li^e and think well.

Therefore when Jeremy had numbered all the calamities and sins of the Jews
at the last he imputed all to this, she remembered not her end Lam. 1.9. So it
may be judged why natural men care for nothing but their pomp, why great men
care for nothing but their honor and dignity, why covetous worldlings care for
nothing but their gain, why voluptuous Epicures care for nothing but their
pleasures, that it may be said with Jeremy they remembered not their ends.

Seeing then that so much fruit grows of one stalk, which is the numbering of
our days. Let us therefore consider what an harvest we have lost, which
happily before this day have never prayed with Moses that the Lord would teach
us to remember our days, but also how many days have we spent and yet never
thought why any days were given us.

It may be that thou have but twenty years to serve God, will thou not live
twenty years like a Christian, that thou may live many thousand years like
an Angel? It may be that thou have but ten years to serve God, will thou
not serve ten for Heaven, which would serve twenty years for a farm?

If thou be a man, half thy time is spent already, if thou be an old man, then
thou art drawing to thine Inn, and thy race is but a breath for this cause God
would not have men know when they should dye because they should make ready at
all times, having no more certainty of one hour then an other.

Thus you see that death is the last upon earth and that the time of man is
set, and that his race is short, and that he thinks not on it, and that if he
did remember it, it would make him apply his mind to good as he does to evil.
And thus I end as I began, the Lord our God teach us to remember our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom.

Amen, Amen.
The Pilgrims journey toward Heaven.
These two parts going before are chapters of preparatiues, wherein every
Christian ought to prepare himself, to become truly religious, that he may
learn to know the way to walk before God: whereby he may attain to eternal
happiness, which way is manifestly declared unto us by the word of God. And
for as much as there can be no sound Divine or learned Gramarian, but he must
first come to it by degrees in learning, as appears in schools of learning,
so is it with the Church of God, for our Savior Christ says plainly that
None can come unto him, but he must be drawn of the father, John. 6.44.
aleadging the scriptures how we are drawn, saying: it is written in the
prophets: And they shall all be taught of God, every man therefore that has
heard and learned of the father comes unto me. Isaie. 54 13. Iere: 31.33.

Therefore we are to apply our selves to those means which God has ordained
for that purpose, that is the preaching of his word and meditations thereof,
for the holy Ghost is given for the working of the same in every Christian;
therefore it is written in the Book called Eccl. 6 33. saying, My son, if thou will take heed thou shall be taught, and if thou will apply thy mind thou shall
be wise, if thou will bow down thine ear thou shall receive doctrine, and if
thou delight in hearing thou shall be wit^y.

Again Solomon says: O give ear unto good counsel and be content to be
reformed, that thou may be wise in thy latter days. Pro.

It is also written in the 22. of the Pro. saying: Bow down thine earer and
hear the words of the Wise, apply thy mind unto my doctrine, for it is a
pleasant thing if thou keep them in thine heart, and order them in thy lips,
that thou may put thy trust in the Lord.

Therefore says the Prophet David: The mouth of the righteous will speak of
wisdom, and his tongue will talk of judgment, for the law of his God is in his
heart, and his lips shall not slide Psa. 37. Therefore says Solomon: get
wisdom and get vnderstang, forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love
her, and she shall keep thee, for the chief point of Wisdom, is to possess
wisdom and before all thy gooods get understanding, make much of her, and she
will promote thee, yea if thou embrace her, she shall bring thee unto honor, she
shall beautify thy head with manifold graces and garnish thee with a Crown of
glory. Pro. 4.5.6.7.

Whosoever therefore finds Wisdom finds life, and shall obtain favor of
the Lord. Pro. 8. Now this Wisdom, is called the wisdom of the word of God,
which proceeds from God himself, and all to teach us to walk in holy
obedience and conversation, all our days, and therein to find salvation, and
eternal happiness. For in matters concerning the truth of our walking we must
profes with David: Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my
paths, for whatsoever therefore does not fully consent with the word of God in
matters of truth, and salvation, mast ever be suspected.

For the wisdom of man when it wandreth without the pales of holy scriptures,
is mere foolishnes, which will ever be confounded, and brought to naught. 1.
Cor. 1.

Therefore we must attribute nothing unto natural reason, when it is not
grounded by, some consequent upon the word of God.

So that we are there by aught that God has ordained the means, so we must
prepare our selves to these means whereby we are made religious and so become
capable to receive those graces which come thereby.

In this third part is the way it self, which is the principal.
NOw it follows in this third part, which is the principal, because it
concerns the way it self, which brings to eternal happiness. And
therefore there is none can attain to find this way, and walk in it, but the
renewed, and the regenerate man: For Saint Paul says plainly, That the
natural man knows not the things of the spirit of God, neither can
understand them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1. Cor. 2.14.

Therefore says the Apostle in the 12. to the Romans; Be ye changed in the
renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what the good will of God is,
acceptable and perfect.

When Paul had forbidden the Romans to fashion themselves unto the world, he
shows them another fashion, which he calls the renewing of the mind, this
fashion is called the wedding garment which every man must wear that comes to
the banquet of the King: So Paul here calls them to the old fashion again,
which was used in Adams time, that is, in the image and fashion wherein we were
created at the first.

Now the reason follows, what benefit the renewed mind has, that is, ye may
prove what the will of God is. As if he should say, this is the fruit of your
regeneration, when your minds are renewed, you shall know many things which are
hid from you, for you shall be able to judge doctrins, who preach truth, and
who preach error. And you shall understand the will of God, what he would have
you to do, and what he would have you to fly: for this new knowledge will not
abide but in new minds, the mind renewed knows God, so that this scripture may
be called the path to knowledge, or the way to sound the mind of God.

It may be said, why does nor the word of God teach us the will of God? yes,
but no man does understand this word, but he which has a new mind: for as the
Sun is not discerned by any light, but by his own light, so no spirit can
interpret the scriptures, but by the same spirit which writ it, which is called
the holy spirit, because it is holy, and makes us holy, and is the especial
mean of our regeneration and new birth, whereby we may prove what the will of
God is. It is said in Eccl. 2.26. To a man that is good in his sight, God
gives wisdom and knowledge: therefore though you have seen cunning. Lawiers by
much reading, and expert Physicians by long study, yet you could never see a
perfect found and judicial divine without holiness. Solomon says, the
knowledge of good things is understanding. Prou. 9. So none but they which are
holy have this understanding, he which cannot say with David. My heart
meditateth a good matter, cannot follow with David, My tongue is the Pen of a
ready writer: he which bids us not to cast Pearls before Swine, does stay his
own hand from casting knowledge to the ungodly.

For when we will learn Divinity, we must go aside from the world, and
sequester our sins, and lift up our minds above the earth, or else it will
not stay with us: There is an Herbenger which goes always before the knowledge
of God to prepare the way. And this is love, the bond of perfection. They
which have love (says John) know God. 1.4 but they which have not love, know
not God, though they have never so much knowledge besides: for he that cannot
say with Saint Paul, I have the spirit of Christ, cannot say with him, I have
knowledge. Holy men were always interpreters of Gods word, because a godly
mind, easilest pearceth into Gods meaning, according to that in Math. 5.6. The
pure in heart shall see God. And that in John. 7.17. If any man will do Gods
will he shall understand the doctrine, whether it be of God or no. And in the
Psalm. 19. They which keep thy precepts have a good understanding. And that in
the 1. Cor. 2.15. The spiritual man understands all things; And therefore
the fear of the Lord is not only called the beginning of wisdom. But in the
Prou. 2.5. it is taken for Wisdom it self. As when Christ taught in the
Temple, they asked, how knows this man the Scriptures? saying, he never
learned them. So it is a wonder, what learning some men have, which have no
learning like Prisilla and Aquilla, poor Tentmakers, which were able to
school Apollos, that great Clarke, a man renowned for his learning. What can
be said to this? but as Christ said, Father so it pleases thee: so the holy
and righteous men, cannot give any reason, why they conceive the words of God
so easily, and the wicked do conceive them so hardly, but that Gods brings the
meaning suddenly into their hearts. As it is said in Luke. 24.25. That Christ
opened the understanding, and made them understand the Scriptures. So we read
in the Pro. 1.23. Wisdom promises to the righteous; If ye will turn at my
correction, I will power out my hear unto you, and make you understand my
words. There is a kind of familiarity between God and the righteous, that he
makes them of his counsel, as Solomon says, Prou. 3.32. his secrets are with
the righteous. And David in the Psalm. 25. His secrets are with the righteous.
And David in the Psalm. 25. his secrets are revealed unto them that fear the
Lord.

For as the windows of the temple were large within and narrow without, so
they which are within the Church have greater light then they which are
without: For the spiritual man (says Paul) searches the deep things of God,
but the natural man perceives not the things of God. Thou have reueiled these
things to babes, says Christ, but thou have hid them from the wise of the
world: My sheep hear my voice, the reason of this Paul sets down in a
word, saying, The wicked cannot understand heavenly things, because they are
spiritually discerned 1. Cor. 2.14. Therefore how should he discern them that
has not the spirit: for this cause Wisdom is not said to be justified of any,
but of her own children Math. 11.9. Neither does Christ say, that any sheep
hear his voice, but his own sheep, they follow their Shepheatd, they hear
his voice, they understand his law, they judge of his judgments, they have the
measure of his word. All is open and plain, and manifest unto them, they
search deeper, and judge righter, and know soonest. And though they have no
learning, yet they have better judgment then the learned.

Therefore be renewed that ye may know the good, and perfect, and acceptable
will of God, which must make us good and perfect, and acceptable our selves:
Because we will not renew our minds therefore we are ignorant of so many
things, which we should know. And until we be willing with diligence to
follow the word of God, and to make it a Lantern, etc. we shall never
thoroughly understand it. O what a benefit had Solomon lost, if he had lost his
wisdom which God gave him? even as great a benefit do thou loose, if thou
loose the knowledge of Gods will.

Will thou know what this renewing is? It is the repairing of the Image of God,
until we be like Adam when he dwelt in Paradise. As there is a whole old
man, so there must be a whole new man. The old man must change properties with
the new man, that is, wisdom for wisdom, love for love, fear for fear, his
worldly wisdom, for heavenly wisdom, his carnal love for spiritual love,
hsi servile fear for Christian fear, his idle thoughts for holy thoughts, his
vain words for wholesome words, his fleshly works for sanctified works.

Thus much of our regeneration and new birth, which may be called the
Christian man's practice, because it concerns every Christian to seek for
that food which belongs to the renewed man, according to the saying of Saint
Peter 1.2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere Milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby.

The nourishment and food for there generate man.
9. NOw follows to be observed, for the benefit and duty of the renewed man,
that he may proceed and grow on, and daily increase more and more in faith and
fear of Jesus Christ, whereby we receive all our growth and increase in God.
And therefore he has given us special means, that is the meditation and
lively preaching of the word of truth. Therefore the Apostle by a figurative
and borrowed speech, earnestly presses them to thrist, and to long for the
word of God, even for the foood of their souls: for there are two births
mentioned in the Scriptures, the one fleshly, and naturally by propagation from
the first Adam, whereby original, and our birth sin, as it were a Serpents
poison passes and transfuseth it self into us: the other is heavenly and
spiritual by renouation from the second Adam, which is Christ, whereby grace
and holiness is derived and brought unto us.

In this latter and better birth, God is our father to beget us, the Church his
spouse our Mother to conceive us, the seed whereby we are bred and borne
again, is the word of God, the Nurse to feed and cherish us are the Ministers
of the Gospel, and the food whereby we are nourished and held in life, is the
Milk of the word.

Therefore in as much as children, which are newborn, cannot increase in
growth and stature, but must needs dye and come to dissolution, unless they
be continually fed and nourished with wholesome food. It behooves therefore all
the faithful and godly, who are quickened and revived in the life of God, as
newborn babes, to desire the sincere Milk of the word, that they may grow by
it. Let us now therefore come to the particular parts, which issue and spring
from the several branches of this scripture.

First here is noted a preparation, if we will be bettered, and increase by
the word, we must be as newborn babes. Secondly, our affection and duty when
we are newborn, we must desire. Thirdly, the matter and object of our desire,
is the Milk of the word. Fourthly, the quality of the milk, that must be
sincere, lastly the use and end for which we desire it, that we may grow
thereby.

Now for the first point, we must be as newborn babes: for Children we know
are principally commended for simplicity, and harmlesnes. And therefore all
those which will profit in the school of Christ, and receive light and
comfort, by the preaching and meditation of the word, are here taught to
become as babes, to lay aside all maliciousnes, and to bring holy, and
sanctified hearts to the hearing of it. For we are never fit to hear and
learn of Christ til we be reformed, and newly renewed and changed again, for
the secrets of the Lord, as David says, is with them that fear him, Psalm.
25.14 God will not admit no sinful souls into his secrets, for wisdom will
not rest in the defiled soul, nor in a body that is subject to sin: Therefore
if we will have the Lord to bless our hearing, and reading we must wash and
rence out the dregs of sin, that are frozen in us, that is, we must purge
the leven of maliciousnes that soureth our souls, we must cast up our
covetousness and pride, and our flothfulnes, and for this is the cause why
there are so many sinful, and non proficient hearers of the word because there
are so many sinful hearers. Wherefore to shut up this point, we must be as babes
because Christ reueileth knowledge and wisdom to none but to babes. And yet
we must not be babes only, but newborn babes, which have new souls, a new
life, new members, new affections imparted unto them: for we must be changed
and new fashioned in every part. And therefore they which are implanted into
Christ, are called new Creatures, because neither the old heart, nor the old
man, nor the old ear, nor the old eye, will serve the turn: but all must be
changed, and new framed again, for whatsoever is borne of the flesh is flesh,
If we will have it spirit, that is, fit for Gods worship, who is a spirit, and
will be worshipped in spirit and truth, we must be borne again of the spirit,
the sense hereof made the prophet David cry out create in me a clean heart O
God, and renew a right spirit in me. So let us never rest seasoning our souls,
til all be sanctified, for then we are fit to understand every part of Gods
will, when we be in every part newborn again

We may see the Apostle makes no other account of the unregenerate then of a
dead man, and therefore that they must be quickened and newborn again, before
they can practice or perform any vital action in the life of God.

Christ is resembled to a vine, and we to the branckes, for that al juice and
sap whereby the branches spring, and live, issues and arises from the root
of the vine: So all graces and goodness, that is in us droppeth and distilleth
from the riches of the person of Jesus Christ, so until God bless our hearts
they be wicked and fruitless. Therefore as an unclean fountain cannot send
forth sweet water, nor a bad tree bring forth good fruit, no more can the
corrupt and wicked heart of the unregenerate, bud and bring forth any good and
virtuous actions. Thus much of our condition and preparation whereby we have
learned with how holy, and with how sanctified affections we ought to repair
the hearing of the word of God.

Now it follows our duty and affections when we are newborn, we must not be
children in wavering, and inconstancy, because the Apostle says, that God
has furnished his church with pastors, and teachers, that we be noe more
children wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, nor we must
not be children in understanding and knowledge, because the same Apostle
says: Brethren be not children in understanding and knowledge, because the
same Apostle says. Brethreren, be not children in understanding, but in
maliciousness be children, but in understanding be of a ripe age.

For when we come to hear the word of God, every man must reach and stretch
out his heart; to receive it, for then indeed the word works most effectually
in us, when our hearts before are kindled and inflamed with desire of it. So
when we wax warm in the spirit, and conceive a desire and a thirst of the
word, it is an undoubted token that we are borne again, and that there is
breath and a soul in us, and that we are not utterly dead in the life of
grace: Therefore we must desire and embrace the word, because our faith is not
able to sustain and support it self, unless it be presently fed and
nourished with the food of life.

Now we come to the matter and object which we must desire, namely, the food
and nourishment in Christ our Lord, which is here called the Milk of the word.
By this our Savior recalleth us from all our dainties. Labor not (says he)
for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which endures for ever, for the
word is everlasting food, and immortal seed, because it makes us immortal,
and to last for ever.

The word of God has many titles and names given for the benefit and
nourishment of all true Christians: it is called a lantern to direct us, a
medicine to heal us, a guide to conduct us, a bit to restrain us, a sword to
defend us, water to wash us, fire to inflame us, sault to season us, milk to
nourish us, and a key to unlock heaven gates unto us. It is the word of
salvation, because it saves every faithful soul from damnation, it is called
the word of life, because it reuiueth the spirit, it is called the word of
reconciliation, because it is like a golden chain to link God and the
faithful together. And in regard hereof it is called a Jewel of inestimable
price, as if all the treasures in this world were not sufficient to buy it. The
Prophet David says, it is more to be esteemed then gold yea then much fine
gold, and it is sweeter for comfort then honey, and the honey comb. Psalm. 19.
Again in the 119 Psalm. O how sweet are thy words unto my throat, yea more
sweeter then honey unto my mouth.

Likewise Sallomon his son sets forth the great benefit and comfort that
comes by the word of God, under the title of wisdom, saying, Blessed are they
that find wisdom, and get the understanding thereof, for the merchandise
thereof is better then the Merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is
better then gold, she is more worth then precious stones, yea and all things
that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her, in her right hand is
long life, and in her left hand riches and honor, her ways are pleasant, and
all her paths are peaceable, she is the tree of life, to them that lay hold
on her, and blessed is he that entertoyneth her. Pro. 3.13.14.

Therefore seeing the word is so precious, and so beneficial unto every
faithful Christian: let us most earnestly long and languish for the milk
therefore: The word is resembled to milk in three respects, first, because it
is the only food of the faithful, as milk is the only proper food for babes:
secondly, because it is not hard and intricate, but plain and easy to be
conceived: thirdly, because it is sweet and comfortable to the soul.

For the first our Savior Christ fendeth us to search the Scriptures, because
by them we have eternal life. And therefore it is the food whereby our souls
must live. If we would duly consider, that we cannot be nourished unto
eternal life, but by the word of God^, we would rather wish our bodies might
be without souls, then that we should want knowledge and comfort of the word.

The second point that the doctrine of the Gospel is plain, when the wise man
says, All the words of his mouth are plain and easy to them that will
understand. Again, the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives light to the
simple. If the Gospel be hid (says the Apostle,) it is hid unto them that
perish: So that if the word of GOD be a Lantern unto our feet, and a light
unto our paths: then it is evident that the word has no darkness in it.

The third point that the Gospel is the only comfort and consolation of a
faithful soul, the Prophet Jeremy says. Thy words were found by me, and I
did eat them, and thy word was unto me rejoicing, and the joy of my heart,
thy testimonies have I taken for an heritage for ever, for they are the joy of
my heart. In all the story of the Acts, we see joy and comfort to have
followed the word, so all true Pilgrims may have great matter of joy and
comfort when they hear the word preached, which shall carry them to heaven: So
that if the wicked did seele the calm of conscience, the joy of heart, the
consolation of spirit, and the exceeding and everlasting comfort in God, which
the faithful possess and enjoy, by hearing and reading the word; they would
then more gladly endeavor themselves to hear and read the word with more
diligence then they do.

Now it is to be considered, the end of our hearing, that is, that we may
grow in grace, and increase in the faith of righteousness: for the faithful
are called the trees of righteousness, because they must always spring:
living stones because they must grow in the Lords building, good servants,
which must trade and traffic the Lords Talents to increase, fruitful
branches, which must be purged and pruned by the hand of the heavenly
husbandman.

Therefore we must not always be children, but grow up and increase, and
profit more and more: for we must never rest walking, till we come to God, if
we have faith, we must proceed from faith to faith, if we have love, we must
increase and abide in love, if we have zeal, we must endeavor to be consumed
with zeal, if we be liberal to the Saints distressed, we must double our
liberality, and that with cheerfulness, if we read the Scriptures, we must
go on, and continue in prayer: so we must still increase, till we come to
perfection. Let us be led forward unto perfection. Hebrew. 6.1.

As God has ordained a heaven for all true Pilgrims, so has he appointed a
way to come to it, which way he that misseth, shall never come to the end of
his race, for there be many wrong ways, as there is many errors, but there is
but one right way, as there is but one truth. John Baptist is said, not to
prepare the ways of the Lord, but the way, showing that there is but one right
way to life. So that the right way to heaven is by the word of God, which came
from heaven, as Saint Peter affirms, saying; All Scriptures are given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to doctrine, to reprocue, to correction,
to instruction, which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfectly instructed unto all good works 2. Tim. 3.16. And again, it is said,
The Scriptures came not by man, neither by the will of man but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

And therefore this word of truth must always go before us, like the fiery
pillar, to show us, when we are in the way, and when we are not, or else the
broad way would seem the best way. Therefore all they which care not for the
word, go like blind men to hell for heaven: for the Papist deuiseth many ways
to come to heaven, not being grounded upon the word of God, therefore they are
blind leaders of the blind.

Therefore the Apostle does warn us to examine our selves whether we be in
the faith, that is, in the true faith: therefore it is not enough to believe,
but we must care how to believe. It is not enough to pray, but we must care
how we pray. It is not enough to hear, but we must care how we hear. It is
not enough to work, but we must care how we work, for we cannot do good,
unless we do it well.

Now we come to the knowledge of the perfect truth, which leads all true
Christians unto eternal happiness.
THerefore GOD has prepared the right way, wherein every true Christian may
learn to travel toward Heaven, and to walk truly, and evermore to know the
true way from the false, and is manifestly and truly declared by the word of
God. And therefore Saint Paul has laid down the true foundation of this way,
which is Jesus Christ alone, and as he himself testifeth, saying; I am the
w^y the truth, and the life, that is, the true way to everlasting life. John.
14.

Therefore learn Christ, and learn the true and petfect way to heaven, for to
learn Christ truly is as much as is needful to be learned in all the whole
scriptures, for all the scriptures run upon Christ, and Christ is unto the
faithful al in all for our salvation, and that no man (says the Apostle, can
lay any other foundation that can stand, he exhorts therefore to take heed
how he builds, for the judgment of the scriptures shall try every man's
work, that is every man's preaching, every man's faith, every man's life: And if
any man build upon this foundation, laid by Paul. I mean Jesus Christ,
builds surely to stand fast for ever, because he is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end of our salvation: therefore he is figured in the law,
fortold in the Prophets, and fulfilled in the Gospel, some places point to his
diulnity, some to his humanity, some to his kingdom, some to his priesthood,
some to his prophecy, soem to his conception, some to his birth, some to his
life, some to his miracles, some to his passion, some to his resurrection, some
to his ascension, some to his glorification.

All point to our Savior, therefore learn Christ and learn all that we may
the better learn, we must be taught how we should hear; how we should pray,
how we should love, how we should believe, and how we should follow Christ,
that we may know when we have learned him: therefore the Apostle in the 13. to
the Romans says, put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, as though this word did
contain al our duties unto Christ, to put him on which seems to be the leuel
of this phrase, if you mark how it comes in, for before S. Paul says, Cast
away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, then he names the
works which he should put off, that is, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Strife, Envy,
Chambering, wantonness: After he names the armor of light, which he should
put on, and calls it by the name of the giver, the Lord Jesus Christ, he does
not apply virtue against vice as one would think when he had said cast off
Gluttony, he should have said, put on sobriety. Also when he said cast off
wantonness, he should have said put on continency, when he said, cast off envy,
he should have said, put on love, but in stead of al virtues he commends the
ensample of Christ, for every virtue, and opposes it against every vice: for
his ensample will teach him what he should do, and what he should fly better
then all the precepts in the world: Therefore studdy what this means. To put
on Christ this phrase is read in none but S. Paul which has written most of
justification by Christ, and therefore he uses all fit phrases, to express
how we should apply Christ unto us. And in no terms he has showed it more
lively then in this phrase, for it signifies that Christ does cover us like a
Garment, and defend us safely like an armor, he hides our unrighteousness
with his righteousness, he covers our disobedience with his obedience, he
shadoweth our death with his death, that the wrath of God cannot find us,
judgment cannot spy us, the curse cannot see us, but Christ is not our head
and saue-gard, unless we be his members. Christ is not our Garment, unless
we put him on: As Christ did put on our Garment, when he clothed himself
with our flesh, and took our infirmities, and bare our curse. So we must put
on his Garment, that is, his righteousness, his merits, and his death, which
is as strange a vesture to us, as our flesh was to him: And much a do we have
to put it on, and when it is on, there is great cunning to wear it, cleanly
and comely, from foyling and renting it, least such a precious Garment be not
taken from us again.

Therefore many seem to wear this Garment which should be thrust from the
banquet, because they wear it not as those which will say, when the Lord shall
come to Judgment; We have seen thee in our streets, we have heard thee in
our Synagogues, and Prophesied in thy name, we have cast out Diuils in thy
name: Then CHRIST will say unto them, I know ye not, there is their reward,
you wear not my livery, you bear not my cognizance, for all your shows,
therefore depart from me, so he put them off, because they had not put him
on, for they had no faith to apply his merits, his mercies, his death and his
righteousness unto themselves, without which no man can put on CHRIST, nor
wear him, for faith is the hand which puts him on, says first takes his
righteousness, and covers her unrighteousness, then she takes his
obedience, and covers her disobedience; then she takes his patience and
covers her impatience, and so takes one virtue after another, and tricketh
her self until she have put on JESUS CHRIST, that is, until she appear in
the sight of Almighty GOD like JESUS CHRIST, clothed with his merits and
graces, that GOD has no power to be angry with her because she comes so
like his son.

This is to put on Jesus Christ, and this is the wedding Garment, without the
which no man can feast with the Lord, this garment is called an armor because
it defends us from all the assaults of the devil, the flesh, and the world:
this garment is called a light, because it is the beauty and glory of them
which wear it, this garment is called a kingdom, because none but Kings do
wear it, that is they which are inthroned into the kingdom of Christ and made
kings over the world, the flesh, and the diuill.

This Garment Saint Paul has sent unto us, to go before the king of Heaven
and earth: A holy garment, a royal garment, an immaculate Garment, an
everlasting Garment, whereof every hemme is peace of conscience, every pleat is
joy in the holy Ghost, every stitch is the remedy of some sin, and saves
them which wear it.

Thus if we put on Christ, we are clothed with his obedience, whereby our
wickedness is covered, we are clothed with his merits, whereby our sins
are forgiven, we are clothed with his holy spirit whereby our hearts are
mollified, sanctified, and renewed, til we resemble Christ himself.

This is the Apostles meaning to put on CHRIST, so that to put on CHRIST is to
put on the new man with all his virtues until we be renewed to the Image of
CHRIST, which is like a new man amongst men, they which labor to be righteous,
and yet believe that CHRIST'S righteousness shall save them, and have put on
CHRIST truly, as Saint Paul would have them, and then we shall hear the
voice: Thy sins are forgiven, and then we shall have that blessing thy
sins are covered.

He does not put on CHRIST but puts off CHRIST, and puts on Beliall,
which fashioneth himself to God and to the world; for as Christ's coat was
without seame, so, they must be without stayne that wear it, therefore when
we have put on this garment we must wash our selves, and pick our ways, and
choose our work, that is we must not think as we did, nor speak as we did,
but remember that we have changed our master and to serve him with whom we
are bound.

Now to learn further how we may apply Christ unto us, the text will catechize
it in three names, that is, Lord, Jesus, Christ, the Apostle seems to spell
out the way unto us how we should wear this garment.

First we must put him on as Lord, then we must put him on as Jesus; lastly we
must put him on as Christ. First as Lord, that is our ruler to command us, our
tutor to govern us, and our Master to direct us, we must be no man's servant
but his, we must also put him on as Jesus, that is our Savior in whom we
trust, our protector on whom we depend, our redeemer on whom we believe, we
must not look for our salvation from Angels, nor Saints, nor any thing
besides him, for the name of Jesus signifies a Savior, and is given to none
but to him, for he is the only Savior; therefore when he is called our
salvation, it implies that there is no savior besides him. Also we must put
him on as Christ, that is a king to rule, a Prophet to teach, a priest to pray
and sacrifice and to pacify the wrath of God for us.

For the name of Christ does signify that he was anointed a King, a Priest,
and a Prophet for man. A King to rule him, a Priest to sacrifice for him, a
Prophet to teach him; So then we put on Christ as Lord, which worshippeth none
but him, we put on Christ as Jesus which believes in none but him, we put on
Christ as Christ which hears none but him, believes in none but him,
furthermore when we put Christ first on, is when we are baptized, then we are
sealed and consecrated to his service. For so soon as we came into the world
we vowed to renounce the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and to serve God, we
have put on Christ again, when we are called and sanctified, that is, when we
cast off the old man, which is corrupt with the lusts of the flesh, and the
pride of this life, with the cares of this world, and put on the new man which
is regenerate, in righteousness and holiness to the Image of Christ.

We put on Christ again when we receive his holy sacrament, and are partakers
of his body and blood, that is, the merits of his obedience and passion by
faith, then Christ is become ours and dwells in us, and feeds us with his
grace to eternal life.

Now when we have put on Christ, in these three sorts, which is our garment
for this world, after we shall put on Christ in heaven, and be clothed with his
glory, and that shall be our last vesture, which shall never wear out. Thus
has it been set down what is meant by putting on Christ, to clothe our
selves with his righteousness and holiness, that is, to believe that his
righteousness shall supply our unrighteousness, and his sufferings, shall
stand for our sufferings, because he came to fulfill the law, and bear the
cross, and satisfy his Father for us, that all which believe in him, might
not dye, but have life everlasting.

And that we may the better, and with more strength, be able to walk in this
our right path and way toward heaven, we must pray unto our merciful God,
and with all our diligence seek unto the means for the obtaining the Jewel
of our salvation, that is, a lively justifying faith, according to the faith of
Gods elect, which faith is not man's opinion and conceit, as when they hear the
story of the Gospel, and withal there follows no good works, nor amendment
of life, though they hear, yea and speak many things of faith, but a right
faith is the gift of God, as the Apostle says, and comes from him, and
wrought by the holy Ghost in us, and changes us, turns us into a new nature,
and begets us a new in God, as we may read in the first of John, and kills
the old man, and makes us altogether new in heart, mind, and will, and in all
our affections and powers of the soul, and brings the Holy Ghost with her:
this faith is a lively thing, mighty in working, valiant and strong, ever
doing, ever fruitful, so that it is vnpossble that he which is endued
therewith, should not live a godly and an holy life, and always bring forth
fruits of good works.

Such is his nature, for quick faith in the heart, and lively moving of the
spirit drives him, and stirs him thereunto. Faith then is a lively and a
steadfast trust in the favor of God, wherewith we commit our selves altogether
unto God, and that trust is surely grounded in our hearts, by the word of God,
that it cannot be removed with any tribulation. And such trust wrought by the
holy Ghost, through faith, makes a man, glad, lusty, cheerful, and
true-harted unto God, and unto all creatures, so that it is impossible to
separate good life and good works from this faith, even as it is impossible to
separate heat and burning from the fire: Therefore take heed to thy self and
beware of thine own fantasies, and imagination, which to judge of, faith and
good works, that thou will seem wise, when in deed thou art stark blind:
Pray unto GOD therefore, that he will in mercy vouchsafe to work this true
faith in thine heart, or else shall thou remain evermore faithless.

Now it is for every true Christian to know and understand that they are
accepted, justified, and at peace with God, only through faith in Christ our
savior, and that works are to be set apart, in the only point, to be any
cause of our justification with fay^h* yet hope and charity follow the same
says, by which we are justified, in the regenerate that are the Children of
God, yet we are not justified by them, no nor by faith as of it own virtue,
othervise then instrumentally, as apprehending the righteousness of Christ,
which is without us, and is no otherwise ours then by imputation: for as a good
tree has good fruits necessarily, so has a right faith good life and good
works, but then good works though they be not separated from faith, yet they
are separated from being any cause of justification with faith; As the Apostle
Saint Paul makes diverse and sundry arguments for the proof thereof.

As in the 3. to the Rom: 20.21.22. etc. where he testifies that by the works
of the law no flesh could be justified in the sight of God, for by the law
comes the knowledge of sin.

But now (says he) is the righteousness of God made manifest without the
law, having witness of the Law and the prophets.

To wit, the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and
upon all that believe.

For there is no difference, for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory
of God.

But are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus.

Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins that are past.

To show at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
iustifier of him that believes of Jesus Christ. Now the Apostle when he had
testified, that we are justified by grace through faith, and not by works
concludes by posing a question and giving answer thereunto, saying, where then
is thy rejoicing? it is excluded, by what law? of works, nay but by the law of
faith, affirming with a conclusion, we hold that a man is justified by says
without the works of the law.

Again know this that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ, and we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might
be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because
that by the works of the law no flesh shall be istified. Gal. 2.16.

For if there had been a law given which could have given life, surely then
righteousness should have been by the law, but the Scripture has concluded
all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given
unto them that believe. Gal. 3.21.22.

Ye are abolished from Christ says the Apostle, whosoever are justified by
the law, ye are fallen from grace, for we through the spirit wait for the
hope of righteousness through faith. Gal. 5.4.5.

Again, by grace we are faued through faith, and that not of our selves, it
is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast himself, for we
are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which GOD has
ordained, that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.8.9.

The Apostle says, that the promise that Abraham should be heir of the
world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith, for if they which are of the law be heirs, then is
faith but vain, and the promise made of none effect. Romans 4.13.14.

For if righteousness come of the law, then is Christ dead in vain. Gal. 2.21.

Besides many other places in the Scriptures, which tend to the same purpose,
as to the Gal. 3.11. Ephesians. 3.9, Romans 4.5.6, Titus. 3.5, 2. Tim. 1.9. Heb. 2.4.

Now it follows, to bring some arguments and reasons, to prove, that man is
justified by faith only, and not by works.

The first is, that whereby man shall live, for ever, by that also he shall be
justified.

By faith in Christ Jesus, man shall live, for ever, ergo, by faith also man
shall be justified. For, as we attain to eternal life for Christ his sake,
being apprehended by faith: So, for his sake we are pronounced for just, and
absolved from the guilt and punishment of eternal death, therefore these two
propositions are conuertible. A man justified shall live for ever, and a man
living for ever is justified, these effects of justification is in the holy
Scriptures attributed unto this only cause Faith, for what is more known then
that saying; So GOD loves the world, that he has given his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal
life.

It is said by the Prophet Abacuck. 2.4. The just man shall live by his faith,
and what is more manifest then that, being justified by faith, we are at
peace with GOD. Romans 5.1.

So then, if man be justified by his faith, that is by the righteousness of
another, to wit, Christ apprehended by faith, then is he not justified by his
own righteousness.

For man is saved either by his own righteousness, or by the righteousness
of another.

But man is saved by the righteousness of another, namely by the
righteousness of Christ, as is declared by Abacuk.

Ergo, man is not saved by his own righteousness, wherefore if man should be
justified by his works, then should he also live by his works.

But by the testimony of Baruk, man shall not live by his works, but by faith
only.

For works that are wicked, and do nothing else but provoke Gods wrath,
deserve no reward or recompense, much less do they deserve righteousness and
eternal life.

But the works of all men are wicked, and do nothing else but provoke GODS
wrath, ergo, the works of no man but CHRIST only deserve any reward or
recompense, much less do they deserve righteousness and eternal life.

How Faith does justify, and how works.
GOD does commend unto all the world, the adjoining of outward works to inward
faith. Consonant unto which is Paul the Apostle, when he requires a faith
that works by love, and tells us, that as well with the mouth we confess
unto righteousness, as with the heart believe unto salvation. Romans 9. Also our
Savior himself, who requires to the inward acknowledging of him in the
heart, the outward profession of him before men. Math. 10 This is that which S.
James means, where he says Abraham our father was justified by works, when
he offered Isaac upon the Altar, see thou not (says he) that the faith
wrought with his works, and through the works, was the faith made perfect,
etc. that is, Abraham by this means was known and declared to be justified,
and his faith being effectual and fruitful by works, was thereby known to
be a true faith, and not a ded faith, for S. James speaks not of the causes
of justification, but by what effects we may know that a man is justified, true
is the distinction therefore even of Schoolmen themselves. Christ does
justify a man effectiue, effectiuely by working his justification, faith does
justify a man apprehensiue by apprehending, because it takes hold of Christ,
who is our iustifier. And works do justify also, but declaratiue,
declaringly, because they show that a man is justified, as has been said: so
Christ, faith, and works do all justify, but diversely. Also it is that
Barnard says, works are via regni, but not causa regnandi, that is the way to
the kingdom, but not the cause of the reigning there.

And now we see and understand that faith being the only special mean for
every true Christian to attain unto salvation, and Christ Jesus the special
cause thereof: therefore it behooves every child of God to embrace the benefit
of the Gospel, seeing God does so mightily use the preaching of the same to
beget faith, and to confirm the same in the hearts of the elect, and so to
bring them to salvation: We should greatly therefore esteem of the preaching of
the word, and have it in great price, as in the 1. Cor. 1.18.21.24. Tim. 4.16.
2. Tim. 3.15. Ioh. 5.25.

The grace of God and salvation is given unto them only that have faith and
believe in Christ, for they only are justified: Mark. 16.16.

Therefore neither does salvation nor the doctrine therefore belong at all unto
infidels or unbelievers. Ioh. 3.18.

As unto the believers the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation: so unto
the unbelievers it is the savor of death unto death, because they either
condemn or corrupt it. 2. Cor. 2.15.16

The promise of salvation belongs not only unto certain men, as Prophets,
Apostles, but generally unto all believers. Mark. 16.16. wherefore no man ought
to despair or to think himself exe^pted, but repent and believe only. Lu. 8.50

The Majesty and excellency of the gospel must needs be great, seeing in times
past it was promised by the Prophets as a singular and admirable gift: and
being thus promised was commended in writing for the perpetual nourishing of
the hope of the faithful.

The Gospel or Euangel by the very sound and signification of the word, is
discerned from the law, the gospel to speak properly, is not a doctrine
teaching precepts or perfecter Counsels then the law of God, but a doctrine
bringing from heaven most joyful news, touching the savior, and grace of God
in Christ, toward all such as by faith lay hold on the Mediator.

Hereupon Christ said that the eyes and ears of his disciples were happy,
when they had heard the preaching of the Gospel, and seen the same confirmed
with miracles, for that they saw and heard those things which many Kings and
Prophets desired to see and hear, and yet could not: But we at this day are
no less happy then the Disciples, yea we are much more happy now the^ they
were then, for albeit they saw Christ in the flesh, and heard him teach, yea at
that time, they had not heard that he died for us, and that our sins being
altogether washed away by his death, and that he had risen again from death,
and ascended into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God the father, all
which are in the gospel declared to us.

By the books of the new Testament we be taught also, that Christ before
promised, which is God above all things, most blessed for ever, even he which
was shadowed in the books of the old Testament, and in sacrifices figured,
that he was sent at the last from the father, the self same time which the
father did constitute within himself, at that time when all wickedness
abounded in the world, and then he was sent, and this Jesus our Savior, being
borne in the flesh, suffered death, and rose again from the dead, which acts of
his, were not done by him in respect of the good works of any man (for we are
all sinners) but that this God our father should appear true in exhibiting the
abounda^t riches of his grace which he promised, and that through his mercy he
might bring us to salvation.

Whereupon it is evidently showed in the new Testament, that Jesus Christ being
the Lamb, the true sacrifice of the world, putting away the sins of men, came
into this world to purchase grace and peace for us with the father, washing us
from our sins in his blood, and should deliver us from the bondage of the
Diuill, whom by sin we did serve, and so we should be adopted by him to be
the sons of God, and heirs with him of that most excellent and everlasting
kingdom.

Now that we should acknowledge this singular and excellent benefit of God
toward us, Almighty God gives us his holy spirit, the fruit, and effect of
which is faith in God, and in his Christ, for without the holy Ghost, by which
we are instructed and sealed, neither can we believe that God ye father sent
Messiah, nor yet that Jesus is Christ: So no man, says, S. Paul, can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost the same spirit witnesses to our
spirits, that we are the children of God, and powers into our bowels, that
charity which S. Paul describes to the Corinthians. Furthermore, that holy
spirit does give us hope, which is a sure looking for eternal life, whereof
he himself is the certain token and pledge.

Also he gives us spiritual gifts, of which Paul writes to the Galathians,
therefore the benefit of faith is not to be despised, or so little to be set
by, for by the means of this trust and faith in Christ which works by
charity, and shows it self forth by the works of harit^^y moving men
thereunto, we are justified and sanctified, that is to say, God the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is made our father also by him being our brother,
does account us to be just and holy through his grace, and through the merit of
his son Jesus Christ, not imputing our sins to us so far forth, that we
should suffer the pains of hell for them.

Finally Christ himself came into the world to the intent that we through him
being sanctified and cleansed from our sins, following his will in good
works, should deny the things pertaining to the flesh, and freely serve him in
righteousness and holiness all the days of our lives: And that by good works
which God has prepared for us to walk in, we should show our selves to be
called to his grace and gift of faith, which good works and life who so has
not does show himself not to have such a faith in Christ, as is required in us.

To Christ must we come, and follow him with acheerefull mind, that he may
teach us, for he is our master lowly and humble of heart, he is to us an
example whereby we must learn the rule to live well.

Moreover he is our Bishop and our high priest, which did himself offer up for
us his own blood, being the only mediator, between God and men, who now
sits at the right hand of God the father, being made our advocate, making
intercession for us, who doubtless shall obtain for us whatsoever we shall
desire either of him or else of his father in his name if so be that we thus
desiring shall believe, that he will so do: for thus has he promised, therefore
let us not doubt, if we sin at any time, to come with repentance, and with
sure trust to the throane of his grace, with this belief, that we shall
obtain mercy, for therefore came he into the world, that he might save
sinners by his grace.

This is verily Christ Jesus, which shall come at a certain time appointed by
his father, and shall sit in great majesty to judge all men, and to render to
every man the works of his body, according to that he has done whether it be
good or evil, And he shall say to them which shall be on the right side, which
in this world did look for the good things to come, that is to say life
everlasting. Come ye blessed of my father enjoy the kingdom that has beeene
prepared for you from the beginning of the world, but to them which shall be on
the left hand, he shall say Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and then shall the end be, when Christ
having vanquished all manner of enemies, shall deliver up the kingdom to God
the father.

A brief Description of Christ.
CHrist is described first by his person, secondly by his office. In his person
we are to note first, that Jesus Christ is true God, secondly that he is true
man, thirdly, that the person of Christ is but one, in which there is, to wit,
the divine and the humane natures.

He is proved to be God, because he is the son of God and because his
divine majesty is declared by undoubted testimonies, first, by his might and
power in working miracles, secondly, by his essential sanctity, and thirdly,
his resurrection from the dead, because he quickened and gave life unto
himself.

The office of Christ is here breefely touched, first, because he is Jesus,
that is the savior of his people. Mat. 2.21. secondly because he is, Christ,
that is anointed with the fullness of the spirit above measure, Esaias 61.1.
Psalm. 45.7. John 3.34. Acts 20.38. to be a Prophet a Priest and a King. and so
our Lord, not only by reason of our creation, but especially because he bought
us with his blood, and purchased us for peculiar people and Church for himself.

The Apostle Paul in the first to the Cor. 1 30. says, that Christ is made of
God the father righteousness unto us; and that is to be considered, in two
points first is in discharging us of our sins, and the punishments due for
the same, the second is in presenting ve blameless before his heavenly father
in such perfect obedience as the law cannot reprove, or justly charge with any
want of obedience, according as the Apostle says, that Christ is the end, of
the law, for righteousness to all that believe.

That is, Christ has fulfilled the whole law, and therefore as many as have
true faith in him are compted righteous before God as if they had fulfilled the
law themselves.

And also discharged the punishments which were due for our sins, and so
thereby we are received unto grace, and accepted before God as righteous in
Christ.

The Prophet declares plainly of Christ's obedience, saying; He has only
taken on him our infirmities, and borne our pains, and was wounded for our
offenses, and smitten for our wickedness, for the pain of our punishments was
laid upon him, and with his stripes are we healed. Esa. 53.2.3.

Likewise Saint Peter affirming, that Christ his own self bare our sins in
his body, on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. 1. Pet. 2.24.

All this is performed in Christ for us, who has satisfied in his sufferings
for our sins, and wrought our full discharge, in that he perfectly kept the
whole law, and every commandment thereof, in the behalf of us that be his,
for he being God and above the law, as Lord and giver thereof, needed not to
have beecome a subject thereunto for himself: therefore it appears plainly,
that he went under that obedience in o^^ names, and for us, and that the same
obedience of his is available for us that be his, as it is written, that as
by one man his disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one, (which is Christ) shall many also be made righteous.

The tree must be good before the fruit be good, and therefore we our
selves must be made righteous before any good fruits of righteousness proceed
by faith, as righteous in Christ, who is made of God the Father our
righteousness, before the Lord will take in good part any thing that shall
proceed from us.

For the Apostle proves plainly, that our good works, and holiness of
life, going before, do not justify us, or make us righteous.

For it is written, that God which is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us,
together with Christ, by whose grace we are saved. Ephesians.

Therefore no works then those went before to quicken us, seeing it is said,
that when we were dead in sins, not only sins, but dead in sin. God
has quickened us: This proves plainly, that our good works and holiness of
life did not procure righteousness to be in us, when the matter is clear
that we are dead in sins, when he in mercy quickened us.

So that we ate not to look for any righteousness to be in us, but only in
and by Christ, who is made of GOD the Father righteousness unto us, according
as the Apostle ^aith to the Cor. that Christ is made sin for us which knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, it is not that
Christ did sin, for in him was no sin at all.

But by way of imputation, that is, our sins being imputed unto him and he
take them upon him, whereby his righteousness was imputed unto us, that we
might be made and accepted righteous before God in him.

We must therefore be grafted into Christ and then draw power from him to
bring forth fruit that shall be pleasing unto him, and acceptable in his fight,
according as our Savior Christ says, As the branch cannot bear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the Vine, noe more can ye, except ye abide in Me.

Thus is Christ made our Redeemer, Deliverer, Reconciler, Mediator,
Intercessor, Advocate, Hope, Comfort, Protector, Defendor, Strength, Health,
Satisfaction, and Salvation, his bloodshedding, his death, and all that ever he
did is ours, and does every true faithful Christian as good service, as though
they had done it themselves, so that Christ has left nothing undone that might
pertain to our salvation.

Thus have we found the hidden treasure which he that finds it truly, will
sell all that ever he has, or ever he would loose it, as Paul, says in the
16. to the Romans 25. verse.

The Path of a Christian to walk in.
NOW it follows in this fourth part, to learn and know how all true
Christians should walk in the truth of this way, for as Christ is the only
way it self, so is he also the truth, whereby we must walk, for all the
ways of God are truth and mercy both, for who so does fear the Lord, him will
he teach, and direct such with his spirit to follow the right way. Psalm. 25.12.

Wherefore receive the truth, love the truth, and believe the truth, otherwise
if thou refuse the bread of life, and dig unto thy self a Cesterne that will
hold no water: then shall thou lead thy days in wilfulness, and dye in sin,
thy blood shall be upon thine own head, and thou shall not see the glory of
God, death and damnation shall be thy portion, because thou had pleasure in
wickedness, and did not give thy heart to receive, love, and believe the
truth. To this end the Apostle exhorts the Thessalouians, saying. We beseech
you brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and
more, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to please God.

That is, as the Apostle should say, we command you not, nor use any force,
but entreat you with all patience and meekness, that you will have a regard,
and love your own souls, and think and do those things which may please
God: you are they to whom the promise was made, God has called you out of
darkness into his marvelous light, he has not dealt so with every nation,
neither have they known his judgments. We come not to you in our own name,
says the Apostle, We have charge to preach the Gospel to all nations,
therefore we speak unto you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, we show
you the way that you may walk in it, we declare unto you the will of God,
that you may be saved.

We have opened unto you the whole treasure of Gods mercy, we have led you to
the throane of grace, and made you see the Lamb of God, that takes away the
sins of the world, we have preached unto you the remission and forgiveness
of your sins through his name, if you believe you shall be saved, if any man
preach unto you otherwise then tha^ you have received let him be accursed.

It is not enough that ye believe, ye must also walk and live accordingly to
knowledge, this is the will of God, for we are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus to good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in
them Ephe. 2. For the grace of God has appeared that brings salvation unto
all men, and teaches us that we should live soberly, and righteously, and
godly, in this life, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of
the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ: Titus 2.

In this sort, says the Apostle, has our teaching been among you, that you
might show forth your faith by your works, for it avails you nothing to say
you have faith if you have no works, because the faith that has no works is
dead: thus we are taught by the works of our Lord Jesus, he says not every
one that says, unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
he that does my Fathers will that is in heaven. Again every tree that brings
not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Thus has our Lord
God commanded us to be like our Father which is in heaven, to let our light so
shine before men that they may see our good works, thus the Apostle taught,
thus the Church of God this day teaches, it requires faith as the instrument
and means to apply the merits and passion of Jesus Christ for our salvation,
and good works, as fruits, and witnesses of our faith. Whosoever learneth
aright and believes the Gospel as he ought, grows, and goes forward from
virtue to virtue, if he were ignorant before, he comes thereby to knowledge,
if he were weak, he grows in strength, if he were wicked, he turns unto
godliness. For as we have been taught that we are saved by faith in Christ,
without the works of the law, which doctrine, though it be most true, and most
soundly proved and flatly concluded To. 3.16. yet being understood a miss as
Paul's writings sometimes are 2. Pet. 3.28. it has been the decay of all good
deeds and brought in Epicurisme, and al ungodliness: it is true in deed, that
eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ To 6.23. yet this gift is
bestowed only upon those for whom it is prepared Math: 20.23. and which have
exercised themselves in the works of mercy. Math: 25.35. for in respect of God
our election stands sure, and certain from al eternity, for it has his
seal, The Lord knows them are his. 2. Tim: 2.19. and I know whom I have
chosen. Ioh. 13.18. but in respect of our selves it is uncertain, and therefore
we must strive to make our calling and election sure by good works, albeit it
is sure in it self, for as much as God cannot change, yet we must confirm it
in our selves by the fruits of the spirit knowing that the purpose of God,
electeth leth, sanctifies, and justifies us, these are the ways to come to
heaven, though they be not the cause for Christ is the only cause, therefore
we must keep the way if ever we mean to come to heaven.

For as we are ordained to the end, so are we ordained to the means which
bring us to the end: If God has predestined any to eternal life he has
also predestined them to the means whereby they must attain eternal life,
that is faith and a good conseience.

For the end of Gods law is love, which cannot be without a good conscience,
neither a good conscience without faith, nor faith withou the word of God:
therefore it is certain that whosoever is to be saved shall at one time or
other, before they depart out of this life be called truly to believe, and
shall endeavor by all means as Paul did to keep a good conscience toward God
and man Acts 24.16.

For that which is spoken of Christ in special in 40. Psalm. thou have loed
righteousness and hated iniquity, must be verrified, and in some measure
accomplished in all the members of Christ, they must love righteousness and hate
iniquity, and this is the difference that the Apostle puts between the
children of God and the children of the Devil, that the children of God both
love and do righteousness, and the children of the devil love sin, and do
it 1. John 3.6.7. Let no man therefore think that he is predestined to
salvation, unless he feel, and find in himself the effects, and fruits of
predestination, for those whom God has predestined, them also in his good
time he calls. To: 8.29.30. not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. 1.
These. 4.7. and whom he has called, them also he justifies, and indueth, with
the grace of sanctification To. 6. and whom he justifies, them also he
glorifieth, To. 8 if any be ingrafted into Christ by a lively faith, he cannot
but bring forth the fruit of god life. John 15. And whosoever does not bring
forth such fruit, it is a certain note that he is not yet grafted into Christ.

None can say that they are grafted in Christ and shall be saved by him, but
only those in whom the new work of regeneration is wrought, and do by the
inward work of the spirit feel Christ to be theirs, for it is the sanctifiing
spirit that gives feeling in this point. For as the Vine branch cannot live
and bring forth fruit, except it abide in the Vine, no more can we except we
abide in Christ, and be truly grafted in him by a lively faith, none can have
any benefit by him, but they only which dwell in him, none can live by Christ,
but they which are changed into Christ, none are partakers of his body, but
they only which are in his body, none can be saved by Christ crucified, but
they which are crucified with Christ, noue can live with him being dead but
those which die with him being alive. Therefore let us root downward in
mortification, that we may shoot upward in sanctification. Let us dye to
sin, that we may live to righteousness. Let us dye while we are alive that we
may live when we are dead.

Let us not therefore flatter nor deceive our selves, as though we had true
faith, when we have not the true fruits of faith: for as the sun cannot be
without light, nor the fire without heat, no more can a saving faith be
without good works, which are the fruits and effects thereof. The penitent
thief had but a short time of repentance: yet in that short time, he wanted no
good works to declare his faith by Luke 23.40.41. for no sooner was it given
him to believe in Christ but that presently he makes answer on the behalf of
Christ, and clears him of all amiss, herebuketh his fellow for his
incredulity, he confesses the greatness of their sin, and their just
punishment for the same, he acknowledges Christ to be the Lord, and calls
upon him.

Therefore it is not enough for us to say we have faith, the diuills have a
kind of faith, James 2.19. nor it is not enough for us to come to the Church
only, and to call upon the Lord: for to say Lord, Lord, will not serve thy
turn: Math. 7.21. nor it is not enough for the preacher to preach unto us, for
unto some that have preached in the name of Christ, it shall be said at the
last day, Depart I know you not, it is not enough for us to be only hearers of
the word, for then we deceive our selves Ia. 1.22. but you that say you have
faith must show it by your deeds. Ia. 2.17. And you that come to call upon
the Lord must depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2, 19. And they that preach unto us
must practice that themselves which they preach, and be an example of holy life
for us to follow. 1. Pet 5.3. and we that are hearers of the word, must be
doers of the same: and then we shall be justified. To. 2.13.

There are 10. special notes to be required of al those that shall be able to
walk in this holy and heavenly way, which leads to eternal salvation.

1. The first is he must be a new creature 2. Cor. 5.17. To. 12.2.

2 Secondly he must have faith according to Gods elect, and thereby we are at
peace with God.

3 Thirdly he must not live after the lust of men but after the will of God. 1,
Pet. 4.2.

4. Fourthly he must walk as Christ has walked Ioh. 2.6.

5. Fifthly he must not walk after the flesh but after the spirit. Romans 8.1.

6. Sixthly he must be zealous of good works. Titus 2.14.

7. Seventhly he must die to sin, and live to righteousness. Romans 6.14.

8. Eighthly he must be holy and unblameable. Colos. 1.22.

9. Ninthly he must crutifie the flesh with effects and lusts. Gal. 5.24.

10. Tenthly and last he must serve God in righteousness and true holiness
all the days of his life. Luke 1.75.

God requires true and unfeigned holiness, wash you says the Prophet Esaias
1.16. Make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, this is the Commandment of God, that so we should
be pertakers of his heavenly nature, As he which has called you is holy, so
be ye holy in all manner of conversation says Saint Peter.

Our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost says the Apostle to the Cor.
6.15. and therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits, for they
are Gods, in these bodies, we shall rise out of our graves and appear before
the Judgment seat of God, in these bodies we shall sit upon the twelve
tribes, God shall crown them with glory and honor, keep these vessels
clean, these are precious, keep them in honor, keep them in holiness, make
not the members of Christ the members of the devil, shame not your bodies shame
not your selves.

The Scripture teaches us manifestly that none shall become pertakers of the
glorious rising again, wherein consists the full measure of our felicity,
but those which have endeavored here to die unto sin, and to live again in
newness of life, which is called the first resurrection, even by the spirit of
Christ, whom all true Christians have clothed themselves with all, and which
have mortified the deeds of the flesh which have put off the old man with his
works, and put on the new man according to the Image of him that created us,
and which have cleansed themselves here from all uncleanness both of body and
soul, and that is the reason why Saint Paul having said that when Christ
appears we also shall appear with him in glory, does forewarne us to
mortify our members that are upon earth, whereby he does us well to
understand that this mortification must go before in us here, if we purpose to
attain to glory.

The same Paul tells us that our bodies shall be quickened by reason of
Christ's spirit which shall have dwelling in us here, and whereby we shall
have repressed all our former affections.

Saint John protests that whosoever puts his trust in Christ does purge
himself after the example of Christ.

To be short there are infinite places touching this point in the holy
Scriptures, and though there were no more but this one that is uttered so
often, namely: That the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, it
might be enough to content us withal, and to put us in fear, and make us to
come to the true and earnest repentance.

It is comfortably said: God has commanded us to believe in his son, and for
believing in him, he promises us everlasting life, so that all they which
believe in Christ, taking him for their Savior, and applying to themselves all the benifits, which he has purchased for us by his death are in the right way.

But who be these believers? even they (says the Apostle) which walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit, they which take pains to frame
themselves to the will Christ into whose body they are grafted and unto whom
they be knit together as his lively members, they which endeavor to love God,
and to give over the love of themselves, and of the world, they which have
their whole conversation in heaven, they which loath their former life, and for
fear of falling there-into again do the more watch, and look the wariler to
their thoughts, devices, words and deeds, they which feeling their own
weakness and infirmities, make incessant prayer to God for the spirit of
strength and steadfastnesse, and they which feel their coldness and
vnlustinesse, do crave the spirit of feruentnesse and earnestness, they which
do in the time of adversity keep themselves from murmuring, and endeavor to be
patie^t, they which be think themselves of Gods benefits and yield him thanks
for them: they which strive themselves to succor the poor and needy both in
body and soul, and at a word, they which crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof.

For in so much that they in whom these fruits are not found, we make the
talent of faith to prevail in such manner as has been said, cannot be said
to be in the number of true beeeuers and faithful ones: notwithstanding
though they pretend some countenance of honesty, and therefore much-lesse can
those be said to be of that number in whom the works of the flesh are
aparant.

But some fleshly Christian will say still that as for him he is clothed with
the righteousness of Christ, and that the perfect obedience which Christ has
yielded to God his Father in satisfying the law, is imputed unto him, as if he
himself had yielded it. And to be short that he is reckoned for righteous by
his faith, so as none of all his imperfections are to be made account of.

If thou list to beguile thy self, thou may, but it will be to thy harm and
confusion, indeed Christ lays not our sins to our charge, if we believe a
right in him, neither shall all our imperfections hinder the virtue and
efficacy of his death: But to bear thy self in hand, that Christ holds
thee for righteous, when thou give thy self to unrighteousness, and have no
other care but to follow thine own inordinate lusts, it is not only a doing
great dishonor unto him but also a scorning of him for his redeeming of thee.

But Saint John says manifestly, that as Christ is righteous, so he that
works righteousness is righteous, and that he which sins is of the
devil: yea and he says moreover, that the thing wherein the children of God
do show themselves to differ from the children of the devil, is that the one
sort work righteousness, and the other sort work sin.

And of a truth I cannot tell how Gods true Children, who are al true
Cristians, could otherwise be better marked out then by their aplying of
themselves night and day to do what-soeuer is pleasant and acceptable to their
heavenly father, whom because they know to be righteous, they also do wholly
endeavor themselves to do righteous things, wherein they show themselves to be
borne of God, as Sainr John says further: If you know that God is righteous,
know ye also that whosoever works righteousness is borne of God.

Moreover how can it come to pass that the true Christians should not give
themselves to righteousness, seeing they have Christ's spirit to guide them, for
he that has not Christ's spirit (says the Apostle) is noe Christian, which
being holy of himself, cannot but drive foreward the party to all holiness,
whom he possesses. And it cannot be but that he must needs bring forth his
fruits, which are louingnesse, goodness, quietness, mercifulness,
meekness, faithfulness, mildness, and stayednesse: to be short, it cannot
be but that he must needs alter the whole man both within and without, to
make a new creature of him.

For since that CHRIST'S life was not set forth unto us all only to make
aledgement of it, or to make a wondering at it in words, but to be followed by
us: it is the mark whereunto we must bend, in drawing to perfection, as near
as is possible, and as much as our frailty can afford. And otherwise seeing we
be towled thereunto by Jesus Christ himself, not only in words, but also in
examples, which are as lively portratures of the life which we ought to lead
here in waiting for his glory and glorious coming again, we cannot exempt
our selves from it without prejudice of our salvation, no nor yet without be
wraying that we have no lust to it, for were we rightly desirous to become
happy, and to attain to the endless life, which is promised us in CHRIST, we
could not show it better in taking the way thereto, whereby we may, and must
attain unto it.

And that way is none other then to believe in Christ, and to walk as he
walked, and that is Saint John's meaning where he says, that he which says he
dwells in Christ ought to walk as he walked, that is he ought to endeavor
to live as be lived.

And certes it is not possible that they which are united and knit unto Christ,
as his members should not be touched with desire to resemble him and to follow
his steps, for the very thing, wherein the union and conjunction is showed,
is that the members do show themselves to be of the same that the head is,
and where that is not done, it is an evident proof that the member is rotten,
senceles, and void of life which is in the head.

Not without cause therefore does Saint Paul say, that we must be of the same
mind which Jesus Christ was of, for thereby his meaning is, to give us to
understand that we which are members of Christ, must be answerable to him in
union of affection, and will, which thing he teaches yet more plainly in
another place, where he says that we be grafted into Christ after the likeness
of his death and resurrection, meaning thereby that we which are joined unto
Christ as an impe is to the stock of a tree, ought so to live of his life as
there may not appear any deformity in us, but that as he has dyed, so we
must dye also and as he is risen again, so we must rise again likewise, we
must dye unto sin and rise again unto newnes of life, for that is the death
and the life which he speaks of.

How shall we know that we be in him and are made partakers of his graces
but by our ^ndeauoring of our selves to keep his commandments, and soothly
the only mean to know and to be assured in our selves that we dwell in Christ,
and Christ in us, is our keeping of his commandments as John teaches adding
further that our knowing that he dwells in us is by the spirit which he has
given us, because that by that spirit we endeavor to follow him, and to frame
our selves to his will, whereby we yield proof of the union that is between him
and us, for even as the children of the world witness themselves to be alone
with the world by following their worldly lusts, ambition, coueteousnes, and
pleasures, which may be likewise said also of the members of Satan. So in like
case, the Christians show themselves to be made one with Christ by his holy
spirit, when they follow Christ's steps, and make his life to serve them, as a
most perfect rule to lead their lives by.

What remains then to be done in this case? soothly that we on our parts do
enforce our selves by eschewing all flothfullnesse, which being hurtful, and
noisome in this behalf, for as much as it is of such importance, that we
cannot neglect it without wilful disappoynting our selves of our salvation and
sovereign felicity.

This way is narrow and rough, I confess it is so, as all Christians do, and
so does Christ himself say it also, for in as much as thereby we must forsake
our selves to follow Christ, which is very painful and hard to the flesh,
which desires nothing but her own pleasures and commodities, no doubt but we
feel it, to be verry bitter, and burdensome, but what for that, yet must we
take that way without stepping aside one way or other, for that is the only way
which after many labors and hard pinches, leads in the end unto life. As for
the other way, it is very broad, fair, and accompanied with great pleasures
but the end thereof says our savior, leads unto death.

Now to consider that it is much better to go by labor to rest, by tribulation
to joy, by death to life, then contrariwise to go by rest to labor, by joy to
tribulation, and by life to death, and look what estate comes last shall be
everlasting.

What thing then should hold us back or hinder us in the race.' if it be the
world, with all the goodness, honors, and pleasures thereof, let us understand
that all those things pass away like an arrow which is shot at a white or
mark, the trace whereof is not perceived any more, by the roughnes and
vneasines of the way. Let us consider how there is nothing so uneasy nor
rough which becomes not easy and smooth by continual use.

If it be the infirmity and weakness of our nature, let us think upon him
which has promised to stand by us to help us, and to strengthen us, who being
good will help us, and being almighty will also strengthen us, conditionally
that we pray to him continually. Ask says he and it shall be given unto you
seek and you shall find knock and it shall be opened unto you.

Provided always that we on our side do strive our selves, for he helps
not them that are idle and do nothing, he gives his spirit, but it to such
as feeling their own feebleness, and being displeased therewith, do
earnestly desire and crave his spirit for help, to such as nothing asks,
nothing he gives, it is even he himself that works in us, both the will
and deed, how-be-it not so long as we our selves sleep, not so long as we
fould our arms a cross, and much less so long as we resist him.

The Kingdom of GOD says JESUS CHRIST suffers violence, and the violent
plucked it to them, and who be those violent? they which being inflamed with
great desire and zeal, to fashion themselves like to their head, and do
violence and force to themselves to the intent that their nature and flesh
being restrained and brideled, may not cast any impediment in the way of Gods
spirit, which works in them: those which feel themselves cold and lasie
whether it be in praying to God, or in giving him thanks for all things,
those that do quicken and stir up themselves without suffering themselves
to go on and to be overcome of their flesh: Those which take pains to mark
all their own thoughts and affections and to restrain them from passing their
bounds, and from rouing a stray, setting a sure watch upon their minds and
following the counsel of the wise: Because that from the mind comes the
welspring of al evil, and finally they which by CHRIST'S spirit do incessantly
crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof.

And of a truth we be of our own nature so contrary to GOD, and so bent to
the seeking of our selves and our affections are so headie and vehement, and we
be haled unto evil with so great force of our flesh that we must not think
that GOD can have his dominion in us, unless we use great force to overcome
and subdue our selves unto him.

To conclude, that they only true mark of all Christians, and right
believers, is love, without the which a man may well talk of Christ, and of
the Gospel, and may well have the Sacraments and all the godly ceremonies that
can be devised, and yet all shall be nothing.

Constancy in going forward unto the end of our race.
THe fifth part in this happy journey is Constancy and perseverance to the end,
for if thou begin by time and find the way, and go a right, and continue not
unto the end, thy reward is with them of whom Paul says, their end is worse
then their beginning.

There is nothing in our life which suffers so many changes, as our devotion,
hot and cold, in and out, of and on, not in one mood so long as the Sparrow
sits upon the ground. Thus man is roulled upon a wheel, that never stands
still, he is upon the side of a hill, where it is easy to slide, and hard to
get up the flesh: therefore the Apostle moved with pity, seeing man stand
upon such a slippery ground, as it were in a ship ready to sink, he cries to
them that stand surest take heed least ye fall, that is, when thou have put on
the armor of light, and art in the spiritual field, to fight the Lords battle
against the world, the flesh, and the devil, turn not back like Demas, but
remember the comfort of Elisha, that there be more with thee, then against
thee, and that the tempter can overcome none but them which yield. Take
example of Zacheus, being called by Christ, immediately forsook the world, and
embrased the Gospel: for all that serve God, are like the servant which
received a print in his ear after the manner of the Jews, in token that he
would serve his Master for ever.

The Apostle does not teach us these phrases to doubt of our salvation, or of
the mercy of God but of our Constancy in his service; nor least we fall from
our election, but least we fall from our righteousness, this is a godly fear;
and blessed is he says Solomon not he which stands in fear of Gods mercy,
but he which stands in fear of his own frailty. Pro. 28.14. As Job which
feared all his works Job 9 28. We must have confidence toward God, but
diffidence toward our selves, for God will be true to us, if we be true to
him: This fear is not contrary to faith, but cannot be without it, therefore
take heed least ye fall, is, take heed least ye sin.

Therefore the holy ghost cries so often, be faithful even unto the death, be
not weary of well doing: take heed least ye fall, for when thou art weary of
thy goodness, God does not count thee good, but weary of thy goodness and
when thou declines from righteousness, God does not count thee righteous, but
reuoulted from righteousness: according to the saying of the Prophet, If the
righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and do
according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All
his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, but in his
transgression that he committed, and in his sins, that he has sinned, in them
he shall die. Ezekiel. 18.14. As Gods mercy endures for ever, so our righteousness
should endure for ever: every thought, word and deed of a faithful man is a
step toward heaven, in every place he meets Christ, every good thing puts
him in mind of God, he seeks to find him, and when he has found him, he
seeks him still, he is not satisfied, because at every touch there comes
some virtue from him.

Jacob served seven years for Rachaell, and after them seven years more, and
when he had served so many years, they seemed unto him as nothing because he
loved her: he which served so long for Rachael, served all his life for heaven,
and if he had lived until this day, he would have served God still, and
thought it nothing because he loved him.

To have the Arc but a while, does more hurt to the Philistians, then benefit
them: so to serve God but a while does more damage us, then help us, for
happier is the child that which never began, then Judas whose end was worse
then his beginning.

Wisdom is angry with him which leaves his righteousness to become worse, the
vine would not forsake her grapes, the Olive would not forsake her fatness,
the fig tree would not leave his sweetness, but the bramble did, he is not the
vine, nor the Olive, nor the fig tree, but he was a bramble, made for the fire,
which leaves the joys.

Let the dog turn to the vomet, and the swine to the walow, but thou, like
Abraham, hold on thy sacrifice unto the evening, even the evening of thy life,
and then a full measure shall be measured unto thee.

The way to heaven, if men would bend themselves as much to do good, as they
beat their brains to do evil, they might go to heaven with less trouble
then they go to hell: our idle hours are enough to get wisdom, and
knowledge, and faith, til we were like Saints among men.

But if thou look only to thy steps, and tell the rubbes which lie in the
way, thou shall go fearfully and unwillingly, every thing shall turn thee
aside, and every Shale shall step before thee, and take thy Crown from thee.

But then lift up thine eyes from the earth, and look to Christ calling, the
spirit assisting, the father blessing, the Angels comforting, the word
directing, the Crown inuiting, and then the fetters shall fall from thee, and
thou shall rise like the son and marvel how the thing could seem so hard,
and be so easy, when you do well, remember that ye change not for worse, and
doing so, you shall continue unto the end, and receive the blessing of eternal
happiness, as our Savior Christ says, he that continues unto the end shall
be blessed.

And we may the better hold on, and be constant, in going foreward unto the
end, it is good to make speed, and for this cause the Apostle says So run
that ye may obtain. 1. Cor. 9.24. which is the swiftest pace of a man, as
though he should go faster to heaven then to any place else in the world, his
meaning is this, that as a man does watch and run, and labor to be rich
quickly so he should hear, and pray, and study, and use all means to be wise
quickly.

Thus the Apostle understands when he bids us add, as if he should say;
when thou art in the way to continue, and know good from evil, every day
kill some vice, and every week sow some virtue, and make thy two talents five
talents, and thy five talents ten talents, and ever be doing good, and at
last it shall be opened; because thou have knocked, Christ says, the kingdom
of heaven is gotten by violence; therefore a man must be earnest, and zealous
in religion, for zeal is the love of God, and pleases God.

Saint James says, be swift to hear, we must be swift to pray, swift to obey,
swift to do good, for he is not cursed only, which does not only the Lords
business, but he which does it negligently, Iere. 48.10. that is he which does
any thing before it, like him that would bid his friends first farewell, and
follow Christ after.

The Hound, which runs for the hare, runs as fast as possibly he can, and
shall he that runs for heaven creep more stowly then the Dial? our
Savior says not that his father is glorified that we bring forth fruit, but
that we bring forth much ftuite, for is it not better to be vessels of gold,
then vessels of brass.

God has placed us here in a race to run, we must therefore so run that we
may attain the prise, we are grafts of the Lords planting, we must grow to
the height and breadth of a tree and bring forth fruit, we are Pilgrims and
strangers, and pass by the wilderness of this world, into our heavenly
resting place: we may not stay by the way, but must remove our Tents, and
continually march on forward until that day come when we shall enter into the
land of promise.

Now, that we may the better and with strength walk constantly, by continual
increase in godliness in this our holy journey toward heaven: let us therefore
embrace these comfortable duties of a true Christian, which the Apostle S. Paul
gives unto the Thessalonians the first and the 5.16.17.18. saying, Rejoice
evermore, pray continually, In all things, give thanks: from these are to be
gathered many profitable instructions.

For the first to rejoice evermore.
It is not an indifferent thing to rejoice, and not to rejoice, but we are
commanded to rejoice, to show that we break a commandment, if we rejoice
not: but here God commands to rejoice, as though some men did not rejoice
enough: therefore you must understand to whom he speaks thus in the Psalm.
149.5. It is said let the Saints be joyful with glory, not let the wicked
rejoice: and in Esaias the 40.1. Comfort my people, not comfort my enemies,
showing to whom this Commandment of Paul is sent. Rejoice evermore, it is not
in this as Christ says: That which I say unto you, I say unto all, but that
which I say unto you I say unto all. Solomon says five times that this is the
portion of man under the sun, to receive in the gifts of GOD with
thankfulness and to rejoice in them, He which would have us holy as He is
holy, would have us joyful as He is joyful, He which would have us do his
will upon earth, as the Angels do in heaven, would have us rejoice upon earth,
as the Angels rejoice in heaven, He which has ordained us the Kingdom of
Saints would have us rejoice that we have such a Kingdom to receive.

Therefore he says to his disciples, rejoice that your names are written in
the book of life, the spirit of God is called the comforter, because we
should have joy in it. I will send you the Comforter says Christ, to show that
they which have the spirit have comfort too, and they which resist comfort
resist the spirit: therefore the son of God is called the consolation of
Israel, and that joy is where Christ is, as the light is where the sun is,
therefore the chiefest joy is called the joy of the holy ghost, to show that
they have the chiefest joy that have the holy ghost, and the greatest peace is
called the peace of a good conscience, to show that they have the greatest
peace which have a good conscience: therefore the faithful are to be
anointed with the oil of joy, Esaias 61.3. As though joy were their
countenance, therefore they are said to be clothed with the garment of
gladness, as though gladness did compass them like a garment.

Saint Paul in all his Epistles does join grace and peace together, to show
that the peace of God does follow them which have the grace of God: It is said
in Deuteronomy. 30.9. That God rejoices to do us good, and in the 28. Deuteronomy. the
Jews are reproved, because they rejoiced not in the service of God. As the
Lord loves a cheerful giver, so he loves a cheerful seruer, and a
cheerful preacher, and a cheerful hearer, and a cheerful worshipper: as
David says, Let us sing heartily unto the Lord, showing, as it were, a tune
which delights Gods ears, that is, you must give heartily, you must love
heartily, you must obey heartily, and when you do all these things heartily,
then you shall do all things cheerefuly.

Therefore now I may say unto those which resist comfort, and nourish grief,
as the Prophet says, who has required these things of you: God does require
no sorrow, but the sorrow for sin, no fear but the fear to sin, no care,
but the care to please God, nay he has forbidden all care else, and therefore
Saint Paul says, Cast your care upon him, although God did not allow us to
care, he sent his Apostles with this charge, to cast their care upon him, as we
do cast our sins upon Christ: for God has commanded us to labor, and not
to care, but care hinders our labors.

As we are taught to discern of spirits and doctrines, so we must discern of
care and sorrows, when we sorrow for any thing but sin, our sorrow is
murmuring, for the sorrow of the heart, says Solomon, is the consuming of the
bones, that is it will pull down the strongest man that is, therefore let no
man drink of sorrow before he taste it, for the charge is not to get thy
living with care of the mind, but with the sweat of thy brows: Now as Saint
James says, Resist the devil, and he will fly from you, so resist sorrow,
and it will fly from you.

This is all the care, and all the fear, and all the repentance which ever
could be found in the Scriptures: therefore let us pray to God every day, to
turn all our joy into the joy of the holy Ghost, and al our peace into the
peace of conscience, and all our sorrow into the sorrow for sin, and all our
fear into the fear to sin, and so we may rejoice and sorrow together,
fear and hope together, that is have one eye to the law to keep us from
presumption, and another eye to the Gospel to keep us from despair and then
this comfort is sent to us: Rejoice evermore or else we have nothing to do
with it.

It follows the next duty to pray continually.
AFter rejoice continually, he bids us pray continually showing that it
must be such rejoicing continually, that we may pray continually too, or else
he does not allow us to rejoice, how can these two join together, pray and
rejoice? some if they should pray cannot rejoice for their hearts, nay their
hearts are sick, until their prayer be done, this is the difference between
the rejoicing of the wicked and the godly.

The comfort of the wicked is like a compounded medicine made of many mixtures,
for there must be piping and dancing, and piping and feasting, and dallying at
the game, or else they cannot be merry, but the comfort of the godly is like a
light in the air which shines, when no matter is seen, so the godly rejoice
when no cause is seen, if they do but think upon God, they rejoice
straightway, if there be but a prayer, and a thankfulness and a meditation,
these are instruments enough for them, and they can be as merry as Birds in
May, the reason of it is this, As Christ said I have another meat, which you
know not of, so the godly have another joy which the world knows not of, of
this joy a man may rejoice continually. And therefore Solomon says: a good
conscience is a continual feast Pro. 15.15. that is a continuallioy.

Thus Saint Paul joins rejoice, continually, with prayer continually, as if
he should say, by this you shall know whether you rejoice well if you can pray
to, that is if thy rejoicing move thee to pray, as the joy of the Angels
makes them praise God and sing, holy, holy, holy, always unto him. All this
does conclude, that as we should do Gods will on earth as it it is done in
heaven, so we should rejoice in earth as they rejoice in heaven, and then this
joy is a sign of another joy.

Now we are to consider more perticularly, the benefit of prayer: of all our
duties this is the only duty unto GOD, which is given to none but God,
according to that, Him only shall thou serve, such an excellent thing is
prayer that is offered to none but him, which Solomon calls excellent.

The second, it is such a pleasant thing that Saint Paul enioyneth to pray
continually, with rejoice continually, to show that no man has such joy as he
which is often talking with GOD by prayer, as if he should say, if thou have
skill to pray continually, it will make thee rejoice continually, for in the
company of God is nothing but joy and gladness of heart.

Thirdly, it is such a necessary thing that Christ calls his temple the house
of prayer, to show that we should pray in the Temple, which is so necessary
that GOD built a house for it, and called it the house of prayer, as though
prayer brought God and us to dwell continually in one house together.

Fourthly, if we endeavor our selves to live uprightly and in the fear of
God, according to the precise rule of his Commandments, we shall find such a
heavenly life that it will make us like the Angels which are in heaven: for
when we read GOD speaks unto us, because we read his word, but when we
pray we speak to God, because we commence our suites to him, and so prayer
makes us like the Angels which are always singing to God.

The fifth, it is such a sweet thing above all other things that we do for
God, that in the Revelations 7. the prayers of the Saints are called incense,
because when they ascend to heaven God seems to smell a sweet favor like
incense.

Sixthly it is such a profitable thing that it does more good then alms, for
with alms I help but a few, but with my prayer I may help thousands, prayer
is the rich man's alms as well as the poor man's, for Pharaoh begged for prayer,
as well as Lazarus begged for crummes.

Lastly, it is so victorious and powerful that it overcomes God himself,
which overcomes all things, for if we will overcome our Lord as Jacob did,
we must overcome him by prayer, this God shows when he said to Jeremiah,
pray not for his people, showing that the prayer of the righteous is of such
force and power that he forbids them to pray when he would not grant, least
he should be overcome, this Christ shows again when he resembles his
Father to the deaf Judge, and the suppliant to the importunat woman, which
cried upon him, and made him harken to her, as if she had compelled him. We
read that the Jews did prevail more by prayer, then they could by fight,
therefore one says, he that can pray can do all things, because he can
overcome God, overcome the devil, which hinders all things.

It has such a hand in all things that it is like the sanctifier of every
thing, it blesses our thoughts, it blesses our speeches; and blesses our
actions, for whatsoever thou do, before thou have blessed it with prayer,
thou have no promise that it shall prosper or do good, therefore we should
not presume to use any of Gods gifts, or any of Gods graces without prayer,
least that which is good, do not good, but hurt unto us.

For this cause Saint Paul teaches us to pray before we eat. Romans 14.6. for
this cause Saint Paul prayed before he ioyrned. Acts 20.36. For this cause the
Israelits prayed before they fought, for this cause the Preacher prays before
he preach. It is a good thing to preach, and yet we see they do not pray me
to preach before they pray, because Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God
gives increase.

Even so we should not presume to exercise our faith, nor our repentance, nor
our obedience without prayer, because there is no faith so perfect but it had
need of prayer to strengthen it, there is no love so perfect, but it had need
of prayer to confirm it, there is no repentance so perfect but it had need of
prayer to continue it, there is no obedience so perfect, but it had need of
prayer to direct it, therefore he does sin which does presume to do any good
work without prayer, because he seems to do it, by his own power, for that
he craves not assistance from God, which gives power to faith to bring forth
works, as well as he does to trees to bring forth fruits. Therefore no virtue
has don so much as prayer has done, for all virtues have had their power from
prayer: aman cannot pray heartily, when wrath, malice, or lust, or such like
carry his mind away, this Paul witnesses again when he says, how shall they
call upon him, in whom they have not believed, showing that none can pray, but
they which have faith, and that is a sign the spirit is within, if we can
pray: thetfore as long as God does not take away thy praying, he has not taken
away his mercy.

S. Paul in his 12. to the To. teaches us a reasonable service to God, But
here he seems to ioyn an unreasonable service of God: for who did ever pray
continually, or if we should pray continually, when should we hear, or
preach, or when should we studdy, or when should we work, so one service
seems to hinder all other service: but indeed it does further all other
services, and therefore we are commanded to pray continually, because we can
do nothing without prayer: but if you immagine that this commandment is
broken, if your lips be not always going, then you are out of Saint Paul's
mind, for Saint Paul did not pray continually with his lips, and therefore he
does not mean a lipp-prayer only, neither did Paul frequent the Temple day
and night, and therefore he does not mean a Church-prayer only. And further it
seems that the Jews were not appointed to pray at all times, for they had set
times of prayer, and therefore we read how Peter and John went up into the
Temple at the time of prayer.

Therefore to pray continually is to lift up our hearts continually unto God,
and pray in our thoughts as Moses did, though he opened not his lips, and so
we may pray continually. As when a good man is to answer before the persecutor,
a thought prays in his heart, that he may answer wisely, when he is to give
alms a thought prays in his heart, that he may do good, when he is to hear
a Sermon, a thought Prays in his heart that he may be edified and sanctified
by it.

Thus may we pray, and hear, pray and speak pray and eat, pray and studdy,
pray and work together, therefore prayer seems a harder thing then it is for
if it had been irksome for any to pray Saint Paul would not have joined
prayer, and rejoicing together, it is not hard when a man does it and rejoices.

Now if you will know what prayer is acceptable with God? James says the
prayer of the just avails much if it be fervent, Ia. 5.16, not that the
prayer of the wicked avails any thing for Sal mon says their prayer is
abominable therefore it is sin, if it be never so fervent, but the person
must be just, that is, he must be justified by a true and a lively faith in
Christ Jesus our Lord. By this thou may know whether thy prayer be
acceptable with God or not.

Thus much for the benefit and necessity of prayer. Now for the manner of
prayer, there might be as much said, but for tediousness I will say no more
but the parts thereof, and so end for this duty.

The first is to whom we should pray The second is the cause why we should
pray. The third for the things for which we should pray. The fourth the
Mediator which we should pray by. The fifth and last the affection which we
should bring to pray.
Now we are to speak of the third duty which Saint Paul does admonish us of
saying, In all things give thanks. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.

These three duties are badges or Cognizances of a Christian soldier, that is,
to rejoice in the mercy of God, to be fervent in prayer, and to give thanks to
God in all things: The heathens which have no part in the Kingdom of Christ,
are thankful for their life, liberty, wealth, and glory, and worldly
prosperity, but Christians ought to be thankful even in persecution, in
thraldom, in adversity, in shame, in misery and in death it self.

Who has not heard of the patience of Job, his herds of cattle were driven
away: his houses consumed with fire, his children slain, his body stricken
with scurffe and manginesse, his wife loathed him, and his friends forsook
him: what did Job in all these miseries, what thought he, or what spoke he? his
patience in suffering, and his words of thanksgiving do teach us how to bear
adversity, the Lord, says Job, has given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed
be the name of the Lord.

What are we then that are neither thankful for riches, nor for health, nor
for our pleasures in the abundance of all things: who has given them unto us,
the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the world and all that dwell
therein, he opens his hand and fills all things living with his good
blessings.

Let us look up into the heavens, there is God the Father of lights, there is
our Redeemer Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: when we turn in our beads, when we see our fare and furniture on
our tables, when we see our servants and children about us, when we see our
money and houses, and lands, let us think with our selves how many good men
and faithful servants of God lack the same, and have not received these
blessings in the same measure as we have done, in all these things God
speaks to us, and says, I have given them thee, thou have them at thy hands,
use them well, and be thankful for them.

If a man should declare what causes we have to give thanks unto God for all
his benefits and blessings, noe man could make an end, their is noe beast in
the ground, nor fish in the Sea, nor bird in the air, nor star in the heavens,
noe lease on the tree, no corn in the field, no sand in the shore, no drop of
water, no spark of fire, but God has given them all for the sons of men: so
much are we bound always to give thanks to God, and to say with the Prophet,
O Lord our God, how excellent is thy name in all the world: Let us confess
before the Lord his loving kindness in his wonderful works before the sons
of men.

But who is able to render thanks sufficient to God for that he gives us the
knowledge of his Gospel, and makes us know the secrets of his will: This is a
great blessing, and far above all the other comforts of this life, they that
have not this are in darkness, and in the shadow of death: we have to praise
God, we must say, I thank thee O God for thou have delivered me from this body
of death, thou have translated me unto thy self, that so I may remain with
thee in glory, thus whether so ever ye turn, what state or part of life, or
death so ever ye consider, whether ye be in trouble or peace, things present,
or things to come, heaven or earth, life or death, you shall always find
causes to be thankful.

What have you that have not received, says the Apostle, therefore to teach
man to be thankful to his maker, he was not made in Paradise, the place of
joy and happiness, but he being made out of Paradise, was brought into
Paradise, to show how al his joy and happiness came from God, and not from
nature, that he might know where to bestow his thankfulness, therefore
David, to persuade all men to thankfulness says, It is a good and pleasant
thing to be thankful if we love goodness and pleasure, we are bound to be
thankful.

All things which we receive in this life are given us, least we should want
means to serve God, then because the Apostle requires for all things as it
has been showed, to be thankful to God, he is not thankful before God,
which thanks him only for his benefits: but he is thankful indeed which
thanketh him for his chasticements: it may be while the Lord gives, many will
say, blessed be the name of the Lord, but when the Lord takes, who will say
blessed be the name of the Lord, when the Lord did take, Job said, blessed be
the name of the Lord.

Now that it has been spoken of these three principal duties of a Christian,
the Apostle for the consirmation, and strengthening thereof like a father which
is come to the end of his life, who because he has but a while to speak,
heapeth up his lessons together, which he would have his sons to remember
when he is gone, setting down in four next verses following, these four
admonitions, two negative, and two affirmative, the first two negative, are,
Quench not the spirit, 2. despise not prophesying, the affirmative are, Try
all things, and keeepe that which is good, 2. Abstain from all appearance of
evil.

His first advice is, Quench not the spirit, 1. These. 5.19.20.21.22. that is
when a good motion comes, welcome it like a friend, and cross it not with
thy lusts, the second admonition teaches how the first should be kept, that
is, despise not prophesying, and the spirit will not quench because prophesying
does kindle it: the third admonition teaches how to make fruit of the second,
that is, try the doctrines of them which prophecy, and thou shall not believe
error for truth, but hold the best: the fourth admonition is the sum of all,
and comes last, because it is longest in learning, that is, to abstain from
all appearance of evil, for he which can abstain not only from evil, but
from the appearance of evil, that man is so perfect, as can be in this sinful
life, put all these together, and it is as if S. Paul should say, Quench not
the spirit by dispising of prophesying, neither despise prophesying because all
do not preach alike, but rather when you hear some preach one way, and some
another way, do you try their doctrines by the Scriptures, as the men of
Berea did, and then choose that which is best, and soundest, and truest, having
always such an eye to the truth, that thou abstain from all appearance of
error, so zealous the holy Ghost would have us of our faith, that we set no
atticle upon our religion, but that which is an undoubted truth.

The spirit is quenched as our zeal, our faith and our love are quenched with
sin; every vain thought, every vain word, and every wicked deed is like so
many drops to quench the spirit of God, some quench it with the business of
this world, some quench it with the lusts of the flesh, some quench it with the
cares of the mind, some quench it with long delays: that is, not applying the
motion when it comes, but crossing the good thoughts with bad thoughts, and
doing a thing when the spirit says do it not, some-time a man shall feel
himself stirred to a good work, as though he were led to it by the hand, and
again, he shall be frighted from some evil thing, as though he were reproved
in his ear: then if he resist, he shall straight seele the spirit going out of
him, and hear as it were, a voice pronouncing him guilty, and shall hardly
recover his peace again, therefore Saint Paul says, grieve not the spirit,
showing that the spirit is often grieved, before it be quenched, and that when
a man begins to grieve and check, and persecute it, that is until he seem
to have no spirit at all, but walks like a temple of flesh.

It is meant by the spirit the gifts and graces of the spirit, the spirit of God
is the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of truth, No man, says Paul, can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy ghost. Again, the spirit helps our
infirmities, the same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God, it is he that leads us into all truth, and opens our
hearts to understand, and guides our feet into the way of peace, O despise
not the wisdom of the spirit, refuse not his help, but seek it, that you may
be strengthened: Comfort your selves in his testimony of your adoption, quench
not the light he has kindled in your hearts, disdain not his leading, abuse
not his mercy. Abuse not the time of your visitation, let not so great mercy of
God bestowed on you be in vain, fulfill not your own wills, Abstain from
fleshly iusts: walk in the spirit, defire the best gifts, and let every man as
he has received the gift, so minister the same to another, as good disposers
of the manifold graces of God.

Despise not prophesying.
THis admonition is as it were the keeper of the former, for by prophesying the
spirit is kindled, and without prophesying the spirit is quenched, and
therefore after, Quench not the spirit says Paul, showing that as our sin
does quench the spirit, so prophesying does kindle it, this you may see in the
disciples that went to Emaus, of whom it is said, when Christ preached unto
them out of the law and the Prophets, the spirit was so kindled with his
preaching that their hearts waxed hot within them.

This is no marvel, that the spirit of man should be so kindled and revived,
and refreshed with the word of God, for the word is called the food of the
soul, take away the word from the soul, and it has no food to eat, as if
you should take food from the body, the body would pine, therefore Solomon
says, without preaching the people perish, therefore he which loves his
soul, had no need to despise prophesying, for then he famisheth his own
soul, and is guilty of her death.

Prophesying is the preaching, and expounding the word of God, and he is
called a Prophet, and does prophecy, that opens unto us the will of God,
despise not therefore to hear the word of God preached, turn not away thine
ear from understanding. God gives power to his word, that it may work
according to his good pleasure, it will let thee see the weakness of thine
error, and settle thee in the way wherein thou should walk: if it had been
dangerous for thee to hear the prophesying of the Gospel, he would not have
sent his disciples into the world to preach it, if Lidia should not have liked
to hear Paul preach, how might she have known God, if those great numbers,
which heard Peter and were converted had despised prophesying, and would not
have heard him declare the grace of the gospel unto them, they had never
considered the great mercy of God, nor sought to be instructed in their
salvation, faith comes by hearing says the Apostle. This has been the
means by which Christ has given knowledge to Kings and Princes, and all
nations, it has pleased God says Paul, by foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe. 1 Cor. 1. despise not then to come to the Church of God, to
pray with the congregation of the faithful, to hear the Scriptures of God
read, and expounded, it is the blessing of God, offered unto thee, he that
dispiseth it shall be despised of the Lord, and he shall be left in darkness,
thus much for the negative parts which we must not do.

It follows to try all things and keep that which is good.
AFter despise not prophesying it follows try all things, as if he should
say, but for all that try prophesying least thou believe error for truth, for
as amongst Rulers, there be bad Rulers, so among Preachers there be false
Preachers, this made Christ warn his disciples to be ware of the leaven of
the Pharisees, that is, of their false doctrine, this made John say, try the
Spirits, therefore, we read in the Acts 17.11. How the men of Berea would not
receive Paul's doctrine before they had tried it, and how did they try it? It
is said they searched the Scriptures, this is the way which Paul would teach
you to try other, whereby he was tried himself, thereby you may see that if
you use to read the Scriptures, you shall be able to try all doctrines, for the
word of God is the touchstone of every doubt, like the light which God made to
behold all his creatures, so is the Scriptures to decide all questions, every
doubt must come to the word, and all controversies must be ended at this
tribunal, the Scripture must speak which is right, and which is wrong, which
is truth, and which is error, and all tongues must keep silence to hear it.

A man tries his friend before he trust him, and shall not we try our faith
which must save us, Saint Paul says. Let every man be able to give a reason of
his faith, is this a reason of our faith to say, I believe so, because Rome
believes so, or not rather because the word of God does teach me so, it will
not answer for them that die in heresy to say the Papists taught us so: for
God says, be not deeeiued neither by Serpent, nor by Prophet, nor by Angels.

God does give unto his children the spirit of discretion and of judgment, to
be wise and know what is that good and acceptable will of God, be not therefore
deceived with words of men's wisdom, let not the baseness or simplicity of
any cause you resuse the message which he brings, and carry not your selves to
liking of all that what so ever shall be told you of such as bear a great show
and countenance, this was it that deceived the people of God, they gave ear to
false teachers which led them to worship the works of their own hands.

The Scribes and Pharisees seemed so grave and wise, that the people thought
nothing good but what they allowed, they were altogether aplyable to believe,
to do, to speak, and to think whatsoever the Pharisees willed them.

Christ says bewane of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Matthew 7. Saint John therefore says,
Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
are of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world. John 11.4. and
further declares unto us how we should try them, herein shall ye know the
spirit of God, every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh is of GOD. Again hereby you may try them, whosoever transgresses and
abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not God, he that continues in the
doctrine of Christ, he has both the father and the son, if there come any
unto you bringing not this doctrine receive him not into your houses, neither
bid him God speed, hereby Saint Paul requires the Galathians to try between
him and their false Apostles, if any man, says he, preach unto you otherwise
then that you have received let him be accursed Gala. 1. Paul puts Tymothie
in mind, wherefore he left him at Ephesus, that is to command some that they
teach no other doctrine, and to warn both the teachers, and the hearers that
they give no heed to fables and genealogies which are endless, which breed
questions rather then godly edifying, which is by faith.

Thus are the people of God called to try the truth, to judge between light
and darkness, God has made them the promise of the spirit, and has left
unto them his word, they of Borea when they heard the preaching of Saint Paul,
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so as he taught them,
and many of them beloeued, so do you: give heed to instructions, and yet
receive not all things without proof and trial, that they be not contrary to
the wholesome doctrine of the word of God.

Keep that which is good.
When you have tried and found the truth, be constant and settled in it. A
wavering minded-man is unstable in all his ways, follow the truth, and be not
carried about with every wind of doctrine: The devil will come in the name of
God, and change himself into an Angel of light, let him not take away the love
of the truth from you: let him not remove you from faith, and a good
conscience. Return not like Swine unto your mire: God has purged your hearts,
and made them clean, and except they be preserved, and kept occupied, the
unclean spirit will return, and enter in, and dwell in you: so the last
estate of you shall be worse then the first.

We have great cause to hearken diligently to the Apostle to keep that is
good, for we see daily great confusion in all places, Satan would feign
entangle us again with the error of the wicked, and seeks to draw us from
our stead-fastnesse: Now is the time wherein God makes some trial of his
servants; now iniquity seeks to have the upper hand, they seduce people and
say here is Christ, there is Christ, here is the Church, there is the Church,
GOD give us his holy spirit, to guide us in judgment, that we may discern
the truth from falsehood, and know the blessed and gracious will of GOD, that
we may walk in his ways, and serve him in reverence and fear all the days
of our lives, for as their are many seek Christ with an unfeigned heart, so
their are many that seek Antichrist, and as their be many true professors of
the truth of God, so are their many dispisers of the same, this may we see
here at home within this Realm, we may see it, and mourn for it in our
hearts.

Their practices are opened, they have broken out into open rebellion, to the
breach of the peace both of God and man, they say with their lips GOD save
King JAMES, yet they hold up their swords against him, alas! what has he
deserved at their hands? has he not dealt mercifully, without cruelty,
without shedding of blood? GOD preserve him that he may long reign over us,
and bring all his enemies to confusion: What pretense make they for this their
doing, that hereby they seek to have religion reformed, thanks be to God
religion is reformed far better then ever our fathers knew of these many
hundred years, for if those that lived before us might have seen and heard,
as we see and hear, they would have rejoiced and thought themselves happy.

But they would have the Mass, what find they or see they in it wherefore
they should so desire it? Try all things says Paul, therefore examine and
try the Mass what we do learn by it, what doctrine, what godliness in
life, what comfort of salvation, it is dumb and deadly service, it is the very
key of their religion: the people are bound to be present at it, yet they
neither receive any thing nor eat, nor hear, nor understand any thing, you
are wise, you have reason, you are the children of God, be you Judges herein,
and judge uprightly, for it is Gods cause: will they call this the Lords supper?
Is this the Sacrament of our redemption, is this that which Paul received of
the Lord, and delivered unto the Church? is this the showing forth of the Lords
death till he come?

They paint their banner with the Cross and five wounds, why bring they these
Arms against us? Do not we believe the Cross of Christ, do not we rejoice
and comfort our hearts, by the remembrance of his wounds? do not we read, and
show forth to the people the story of the passion? God knows it, and the
world can witness it, and they themselves cannot deny it, but that we make
this work of our redemption, wrought, by the passion of our savior Christ,
the chief and principal rock and foundation of our faith: therefore say we
with the Apostle, God forbid that we should rejoice in any thing, but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. nay rather they are become our enemies because
we believe in Jesus Christ crucified because we say as Gods word teaches, that
Jesus Christ is the only advocate to the father for our sins, and that he
has with one suffering consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, and that
the blood of Jesus Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin, for this cause
are they become our enemies.

Let us nothing fear their trecheries and attempts: let us keep that is good,
and hold it fast until death: now that we have tasted of the good word of
God, and have received the comsort of the Gospel: Let us not despise it, nor
be weary of it, let us pray to God that he will establish the love of his truth
in us, and that he will open the eyes of their hearts, and bring them to be
partakers of those mercies which yet through ignorance they have despised.

Now when we have tried by the word which is truth, and which is error, what
shall we them do? keep that which is best, that is to say, as the truth, we
must keep and hold the truth, that is defend it with thy tongue, maintain it
with thy purse, further it with thy labor: in danger and trouble, loss and
displeasure, come life, come death, think to do as Christ did, seal the
truth with his blood, so thou must seal it with thy blood, or else thou do
not keep it, but let it go. Well did Paul put try before choose, for he which
tries may choose the best, but he which chooses before he try, takes often the
worst before the best.

Now it follows in this last admonition Abstain from all appearance of evil.
AFter try all things and keep the best follows abstain from all
appearance of evil, as if he should say, that is like to be best which is so
far from evil that it has not the appeara^ce of evil, and that is like to be
truth, which is far from error, that it has not the show of error, whereby
shows that nothing should be brought into the Church, or added to our
religion, but that which is undoubted truth, without suspicion of error, it is
not enough to be persuaded of our faith, but we must be assured of it, for
religion is not built upon doubts, but upon knowledge.

Here we may marvel why Paul bids us abstain from all appearance of evil:
because sin and heresy and superstition are hippocrisie, that sin has the
appearance of virtue, and heresy has the appearance of truth, and
superstition has the appearance of religion: but this the Apostle does note,
that there is no sin, nor heresy, nor superstition, but if the Visor be
taken away from it, it will appear to be sin, and heresy, and superstition,
though at the first sight, the Visor do make it seem none, because it
covers the evil, like a painted sepulcher upon worms and rotten bones.

Therefore keep your selves not only from doing those things which are evil,
but also from all appearance of evil: offend not the conscience of thy
brother, that he may have no occasion to think evil of thee: commit not
adultery, and withdraw thy self from the company of such unthrifty, light, and
suspected persons, be not like to them that are such, lay not out thy money to
usury, nor do any thing whereby others may think evil of thee, beware of
uncharitable conueyance of thy money, be no Idolater, and leave of to do any
thing that may bring you into suspicion of Idolatry, give not thy honor unto
any creature, which is proper unto God, have no fellowship with their works,
bear no show, no appearance of liking their evil, go not as they go, live
not as they live.

Saint Paul reprooueth the Galathians, saying ye observe days, and months
and times, and years, I am in fear of you least I have bestowed on you labor
in vain, Gal. 4. so does he the Collossians 2. If ye be dead with Christ from
the ordinance of the world, why as though ye live in the world are ye
burdened with traditions, as touch not, taste not, handle not: so do the
Idolaters, you should not be like unto them, they are the children of
darkness, you are the children of light, they will not be like you, and
forsake their false Gods, why should you then become like unto them, and
forsake the God that made the heavens and the earth? you cannot make them
ashamed of their errors, and to embrace the truth, why then should you betray
the truth, and be partakers with them in error?

The King Antiochus sent to Jerusalem and to the Cities of Judah, that they
should follow the strange laws of the country, many of them chose rather to
die, then to be defiled with unclean things, and so to break the holy
covenant which God gave them. Machab. 1.

Therefore, abstain from all appearance of evil, be not like the wicked of
this world, you are the salt of the earth, you should not be partners of their
corruptions but powder and season them: You are the light of the world, you may
not be partakers of their darkness, but lighten and guide them, dessemble not,
but serve God in the simplicity of your hearts, and in the sight of the world,
let it be written in your foreheads, what you think in your hearts, why should
any man be ashamed of Gods truth.

Thus we have heard the care of the Apostle in teaching the Thessolonians
three principal duties of a Christian, that is to rejoice, to pray, and to
give thanks, as has been declared more at large, and withal for the
confirmation thereof in the verses following four admonitions, which are as
fortresses to hold up those duties that is, 1. quench not the spirit. 2.
despise not prophesying. 3. try and examine all things, and so hold fast that
which is good, the last is, abstain from all appearance of evil, which has
also been declared: Now when the Apostle had taught them these lessons, and
set them forward in the race of true Godliness, like a good Pastor which has
care over his flock, he does not thus leave them, but withal gives them a
friendly farewell in the next verse saying, Now the very God of peace sanctify
you throughout, and I pray God that your whole spirit and soul and body may
be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1.
Thessalonians. 5. verse. 23.

That is as if the Apostle should say, our God is the God of peace, he gives
peace, and quietness to his Church, he does mussell the Lion, maze the Tyrant,
make blunt the Sword, and quench the Fire prepared against his servants, he
gives his Sons peace and quietness among themselves, he abhors discord
and malice between brethren: God is love says John, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, he that loves not his brother, abides
in death, God has made us all members of one body, there is noe respect of
persons with him, noe difference of learned and unlearned, wise or foolish,
rich, or poor, his will is, that we all should be as one, of one mind, and
that we should all think one thing, and speak one thing, and that we should
be one fould under one shepherd, and with one mouth glorify the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

For this peace Christ prayed for, saying, sanctify them through thy truth,
bless them, take away all bitterness, and swelling from among them, make them
Citizens of thy heavenly Jerusalem, that they may live in peace, and love one
another, that they may be one, as thou O Father art one in me, and I in thee.
This peace we had need of, the peace of conscience within our selves: of peace
from the rage and fury of the world, and of peace of those that are of Gods
household. Let us seek peace at the hand of God, and he will stablish us in
the peace of the Gospel, and so give us rest and peace of our souls.

Now that we have heard some profitable means declared, to keep us constant
from reuolting and turning back, but to persevere still foreward in our race:
it is therefore needful to consider how easily man may be deceived, that so
the better we may know the corruptions and weakness of our nature: and
therefore what cause we have ever to walk warily, to take heed to ourselves,
and to pray unto God, that he will incline our hearts unto his testimonies:
when I say man may be deceived, I mean not children, or babes, or the simpler
sort of men only, but the learned, the wise, the politic, the, Kings and
princes of the world, the teachers and rulers of the people, as appears by
diverse examples,

To begin with Adam, the first man, when he was in Paradise, and made ruler
over all beasts of the field, and was full of graces and blessings of God, he
soon departed from the counsel of God, and gave ear to the Serpent, so
easily was he deceued. Israel was as the apple of the Lords eye, a people whom
the Lord loved, and to whom be gave their hearts desire, he delivered them from
Pharaoh, and with an outstretched arm led them through the red Sea: who would
have thought so great mercies would ever have been forgotten, or such a people
so well taught in the knowledge of God, and so often put in mind of their
duties, should either most part, or all of them turn from God? Moses was but
absent a while, he went aside to receive the tables of the covenant, in the
mean time they made unto themselves a molten Calfe, and worshipped it, they
offered unto it and said these be the Gods of Israel that have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, so easily were the wisest of them, and Aaron and the
whole multitude deceived.

The Children after them forsook the Lord and served Baal and Astroth, Judge.
2. they have turned their backs to me, and not their faces says God by his
prophet Jeremy 2. And was this offense of some small number? were they but few
or of the baser and simpler sort? no they departed from God in great
multitudes, with full consent, and they warranted their doings by antiquity, and
by the custom of their fathers before them.

The Prophet says according to the number of thy Cities were thy Gods O
Judah, and to the number of thy streets O Jerusalem, have ye set up altars of
confusion, even Altars to burn Incense unto Baal, Iere. 11.13, Again in
another place he says, a great multitude even all the people that dwelt in the
land of Egypt in Phathros answered Jeremy saying, the word that thou have
spoken unto us in the name of the Lord we will not hear it of thee, but we
will do whatsoever thing goes out of our mouth, as to burn incense to the
Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done,
we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes etc. Iere. 44.16. etc.

Thus even among that nation which God has chosen unto himself the Apostacy
was so great the departure from true holiness was so universal that not only
every City, but every street was defiled with their Idolatry, and besides the
women with burnt-incense unto other Gods. A great multitude yea all the people
with one consent cried out against their prophets and preachers, refusing to
hear the word of God, but maintained their superstitions.

The like may be said of the Scribes and Pharisees, they were wise men, they
were learned and carried a great show of holiness, yet they loved darkness
better then light, they were blind leaders of the blind, they despised the
commandments of God, for their own traditions, and not only they but Herod
and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, and people of Israel gathered themselves
together against the Lord and against his Christ.

What shall I speak of those churches which the Apostles of Christ planted and
watered, and confirmed in the truth, At Corinth Paul preached the gospel, they
rejoiced at it gladly, he thanked God on their behalf that in all things they
were made rich in him, in all kind of speeches, and in all knowledge.

Yet soon after they abused the holy mysteries, they denied the resurrection
of the dead, they became carnal, and had envying, and strife and contention
among themselves: The Galathians also rejoiced so much in him, that he writes
thus of them, I beat you record that if it had been possible you would have
plucked out your own eyes, and to have given them to me, yet they did not
abide in the truth, but gave ear to false Apostles, and so were deceived.

Therefore he reprooueth them saying, O ye foolish Galathians, who has
bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth? Are ye so foolish that after
ye have begun in the spirit ye would now be made perfect in the flesh, ye
did run well, who did let you that you did not obey the truth, I am in fear
of you least. I have bestowed labor in vain. Gal. 5.

This frailety and weakness of our corrupt nature has showed it self forth,
and has appeared in all ages, we and our fathers have gone astray, and have
followed after lies, the Lord has looked down from heaven upon the children
of men to see if there were any that would understand and seek God, but all
are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that does good, no
not one, says the Prophet David, therefore the Apostle beseeches the Church
of Thessalonica that they settle themselves upon a sure foundation, and that
they be not removed from the truth: he puts them in mind what they have
heard, and of whom they have heard it, and exhorts them to continue steadfast
therein.

Seek therefore the kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, and seek not your
selves, weigh truth and falsehod in an indifferent balance, so shall the
heavier weight of the one, bewray the lightness of the other, what thing in the
world is so massy, and so weighty as the truth?

Therefore as the prophet says, If ye will hear the voice of God, harden not
your hearts, as they did in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in
the wilderness: it is noe sin to yeilde unto God, it is noe shame to lay apart
all affections, and to change our minds to the denial of all ungodliness and
imbracinge of true holiness.

It is the part of a good Christian and a wise man to know himself, and to
know the nature of his flesh, which he bears about him, which fights
always so mightily against the spirit, and to know the waywardness, and
crookedness of his heart, and the weakness and vanity of his mind.

Many are so far from this, they think all their ability is of themselves, I
have, says one, judgment, I have the light of reason, I have sense, I have
understanding, and Counsel, and the ordering of mine own way, thus say they
that neither know God nor themselves.

The will and power to do well is of God, and not of our selves, therefore we
must humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and acknowledge that we
are nothing, we must confess with S. Paul I know that in me, that is in my
flesh, dwells no good. To. 7. Again it is not in him that wills, not in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. To. 9. Our Savior Christ
says, that which is borne of the flesh is flesh and that is borne of the
spirit is spirit, John ^. And God says the immagination of man heart is evil
from his youth Gene, 8. this is his saying and his judgment of us: this we
find true, for our will is froward, and our understanding blind: therefore
says the Prophet, O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself neither
is it in man to walk and direct his steps Iere 12. Again the steps of man
are ruled by the Lord. How can a man then understand his own way? Behold as
the clay is in the Potters hand, so are you in my hand. O Israel, I mould you
and frame you to my glory says the Lord. Iere. 18.

When the Apostle puts the Corinthians in mind of that good success, which
God gave unto his ministers, among them, he says, such trust have we through
Christ to God, not that we are sufficient of our selves, but our sufficiency
is of God. Cor. 3.

Christ shows this to his disciples saying' I am the Vine, you are the
branches, he that abides in me, and I in him brings forth much fruit for
without me ye can do nothing, John 15. To the Collossians Paul says: It is
God that works in you both the will and the deed even of his good pleasure.
Colloss. 2. It is God that disposes our goings, and turns our hearts as
seems him best, he is able to make of the stones in the Streets children
unto Abraham, he is able to take away our stony hearts, and give us hearts
of flesh.

The Consideration hereof leads us to seek help and comfort by prayer at
the hand of God, and because we stand in need of continual help either to
give us something that is good, or to deliver us from that is evil, the Apostle
bids us pray continually, for the ears of the Lord are open to the
righteous, therefore says Christ, ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye
shall find, knoek and it shall be opened unto you Math. 7. Let us therefore go
boldly to the throne of grace that we may receive mercy and find grace to help
in time of need.

David, a man according to Gods own heart prayed diversely, Open thou mine eyes,
lighten my darkness, direct my feet into the way of peace: incline my heart
O Lord, unto thy testimonies, establish O God that which thou have wrought in
us, take not thy holy spirit from us, be thou our helper in trouble. O forsake
us not veterly! David being a great prophet of GOD found no way to attain
unto knowledge of the will of God, unless God would open his understanding,
and endue him with his spirit: faith is the gift of GOD, or else was the
Apostles prayer in vain: therefore without the grace and mercy of GOD, we can
do nothing to the setting forth of his glory, and to the attayning unto our
salvation.

The Apostle says unto the faithful, Let your conversation be in heaven,
from whence you look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, Ye were
once darkness, but now ye are light in the LORD, walk as children of the
light, approouing that which is pleasing to the Lord. The great day of the Lord
shall be dreadful and come suddenly upon the wicked, but to you it shall not
seem sudden, which fear the LORD and put your trust in him, and take all
care to be in readiness against his coming. Arm your selves therefore
strongly, the enemy is the devil with all his force, your strength stands
not in your own prowess or manhood, but in the mighty power of God, put on
therefore the breast plate of faith, and love, he that believes shall be saved,
he that abides in love, abides in God, and whosoever puts his trust in
him shall never be confounded.

For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men has appeared, says
the Apostle, and teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking
for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all unrighteousness, and purge us a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous given to good works. Titus 2.11.12.

Therefore we must not always be children, but grow up and increase, and
profit more and more, for we must never rest walking till we come to God, if
we have faith, we must proceed from faith to faith, if we have love, we
must abide and increase in love, if we have zeal, we must endeavor to be
consumed with zeal, if we be liberal to the Saints distressed, we must
double our liberallity, and that with cheerfulness: if we read the
Scriptures, we must go on, and continue in prayer, so we must still increase
till we come to perfection, Let us be led forward says the Apostle unto
perfection. Hebr. 6.1.

As God has ordained a heaven for all true faithful Pilgrims, so has he
appointed a way to come to it, which way he that trauaileth not shall never
come to the end of his race, for there be many wrong ways, as there are many
errors, but there is but one right way, as there is but one truth.

To knit up this part with that warning and exhortation of the Apostle saying,
Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our
hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in body with pure water, let us
hold the possession of the hope without wavering, for he is faithful that
promised: for if we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful
looking for judgment and violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries.
Hebr. 10.22.23.26.

So it cannot be that they which were lightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift and were become pertakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, and they fall away,
should be renewed again into repentance crucifying to themselves the son of
God a fresh. Heb 6.4.5.6.

The Apostle therefore admonishes the faithful to have discretion in their
walking, saying, Take heed that y^e walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as
wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil,

Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.

Speaking unto your selves in psalms and hyms, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody to the Lord in your hearts.

Giving thanks always for all things unto God the Father, in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Now as al these parts of Scriptures going before in this Book are needful
and special means to teach all true Christians to walk the right way toward
heaven, whereby we may be able not only to walk aright, but also to make a
right and sound reason of our religion agreeable to the word of God, a sound
reason of our faith, and a sound reason of our salvation agreeable to the same
word of truth, and so to continue to the end of our race, then shall we be
made happy for evermore, and be procured happy in the great day of our Lord, by
our Lord: and, you blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom of heaven which
is prepapared for you from the beginning, which kingdom grant us Lord for
Christ Jesus sake.

Amen.
FINIS.

