THE PRACTICE OF QVIETNES.

OR A direction how to live Quietly at all times, in all places, upon all
occasions, And how to avoid or put off, all occasions of unquietness.

Delivered in Six Sermons at STEEPLE-ASHTON in Wiltshire by George Web
Preacher of the Word and Pastor there.

LONDON Printed by Edw: Griffin for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Greyhound, 1615.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Sr Henry Hubbert Knight Baronet, Lord chief Justice of
his Maties Court of common pleas.
RIght honorable and my very good Lord, that which Orator Tertullus attributed
to the governor Foelix flatteringly, may be applied to your Lordship justly and
truly; By your means we enjoy much quietness, Act. 24. ver. 2.
and very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by your providence. That great
Tribunal in which your Lordship sits as President does manifest it, and the
large Weasterne circuit, which for the administration of justice, as chief
Justice, you have often visited, Verse 3.
does always, and in all places acknowledge it with all thankfulness. Job 29.11.
The Ear which has heard you, does bless you, and the Eye that has seen
you does give witness unto you: for mine own part above all others I have
most just cause to bless you, and God for you: when my peace was disquieted,
my person troubled, and my profession hindered, Psalm. 41.12.11
Ministry dissurbed, your Lordship has vouchsafed to hear the plea of mine
innocence, and to uphold me in mine integrity, So that mine enemy does not
triumph over me. In regard whereof to whom can I more fitly dedicate this small
Treatise of The practice of Quietness, the first fruits of my Quietness,
then unto your Lordship, the Author of my Quietness? It is a sacrifice which I
have vo wed to the Lord for my Quietness, and the testimony which I would give
unto the world of my love of Quietness. Under your honorable protection I make
it public to the world, first humbly offering it unto your Lordships
favorable acceptance, craving pardon for this my presumption, and beseeching
almighty God to pour upon your Lordship all the riches of his grace for the
Quietness of your own soul and body, for the public Quietness of the
Church and common wealth, and for your eternal and everlasting happiness.

Your Lordships in all humble duty George Web.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, the Knights, Justices, and Gentlemen, and to all the
rest of my religious countri-men in the County of Wiltshire.
THere is no study next the practice of Piety, like the study of peace; The
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does lincke them both together, Heb.
12.14.
Follow peace and holiness; as if there could be no holiness without peace
and quietness. This Quietness is the daughter of Piety, the sister of Humility,
the mother of many a worthy virtue. It is the honor of a family, the ornament
of a city, the muniment of a common wealth, without which no virtue appears
like it self, nor comfort gives content. This Art of Quietness so needful a
study for all good Christians (Right worshipful and Welboloued Countrim^n)
have I according to the measure of that poor talent which I have received,
taught, as here it is delivered, in my pastoral charge within your country, in
six several lectures. That I have here compacted them together, and brought
them out of the pulpit to the press, I need no other Apology then my zeal
to Gods glory, the common good, and my countries quietness. Whereunto I was
the more emboldned for the stopping of the mouths of those who envying my
peace, both privately and publicly, spare not to censure me as an unquiet
person, and an enemy unto peace. Whither I delight to soiourne in unquiet
Mesech, or to dwell in the contentious tents of Kedar, Psalm. 20.5
let this small Treatise witness. If my heart do not go with my words, and my
desire for mine own practice with the counsel I give unto others, shall not
that supreme Judge, who searches the heart, Ier. 17.10.
and tries the raines, search and try it out? uncharitable censures of
selfe-conceited Critickes, I doubt not but this small Treatise shall find as
well as others which formerly I have published: I expect no less then store of
carps where curious eyes go a fishing, especially where the Torpedo of black
envy does bait the ^ook. They who like none but themselves, how should they
approve any thing of mine? how can they spare their censure against me, who
never speak well of any. But to leave these Zoilists with as slender respect
of their censure, as they do of any Treatise, my hope is (Right Worshipful
and Well-beloved) that with you these my poor labors, though not for the worth
of the work, yet for the worthiness of the subject upon which it does work,
shall find acceptance: It shows the pathway unto Quietness, the proper
object (Right Worshipful) of your office, and the daily subject (Well-beloved)
of your practice. It is the duty of the Minister to teach Quietness, of the
Magistrate to maintain Quietness, of every one to pray for Quietness and to
practice Quietness. This our Country has store of the sons of Leui, who
preach Peace, and persuade Quietness: It has many a worthy Moses and Joshua,
who make Peace and preserve Quietness; Many a sincere Nathaniel, who seeks
Peace and follows after Quietness: Yet there want not in every Division,
Hundred and Tithing, some turbulent Korahs, some seditious Shebaes, some
furious Lamechs, some churlish Nabals, some oppressing Ahabs, who are enemies
unto Quietness. We praise God that our country is so quiet as it is, and do
daily wish unto the increase of Quietness. Which that it may be effected, it
is required of you (Right Worshipful) that you fear God and be men of
courage, that you use all diligence to cut off the occasions of variance, and
to keep the people in all holy obedience. And for the rest it is required that
they learn Piety, practice equity, do justly, and preserve unity. So shall
we have a due respected Magistracy, a firm united communalty, and a most
flourishing country, and the God of peace shall be with us, to multiply all
peace and happiness unto us. To whose blessed protection I leave you, and and
these my poor labors to his blessing.

Steepleashton, June, 20. 1615. Your Worships humbly devoted GEORGE WEB.

Errata.
HEarts for hearts. page 2. surueies for suru^w page 9. melling for meddling p.
20. plucking for pluck p 30. rape for rage p. 55. polypragmaticenes for
polypragmaticalnes p. 68. abstenious for abstemious p. 108. to for to p. 117.
our for their page 133. more. read p. 136. Let him. read p. 168.

THE PRACTICE of quietness.
1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Study to be quiet.


THe Greek Sages (as Plutarch does report) for the daily direction of their
lives, Plutarch. apoth.
were wont to write upon the walls and pillars of their Temples certain short
Sentences or Apothegmes, (such as these are, Know thy self, Use moderation,
Beware of suretiship, and the like) as special Memoratiues and Remembrancers.
I know no fitter Apothegme for such a purpose to be used amongst us Christians
in these so unquiet times, then this short memoratiue concerning Quietness. A
sentence short, but sweet, like unto Habbac. 2.2
Habbacucks vision, necessary to be written and made plain upon Tables, that
he may run that reads it. And surely it were to be wished that this present
Apothegme were often preached in our Temples, proclaimed in our streets,
written upon our poasts, painted upon our walls, or rather engraven with the
point of a diamond upon the tables of our hearrs, that we might never forget
it. As Jonah in his preaching to the Ninevites walked from street to street a
whole days journey, preaching nothing but this short warning, Jonah 3.4.
Yet forty days and Nini^eth shall be destroyed; so have the Preacher of the
word at this day just cause in their Sermons to go from man to man, and day
after day (...) their ears this short but (...) Alarm, M. Latimer in a (...)
befor^^ (...). 5.
Study to be quiet. And (...) her Latimer blessed Mar(...) sometimes said of
his short Text against covetousness, Take heed and beware of covetousness,
Take heed and beware of covetousness, Take heed and beware of covetousness:
and what (says he) if I should say nothing else for three or four hours
space, but, Take heed and beware of covetousness? I could not urge it too
often: So may I say of this present Text, being a Caveat against unquietness,
Study to be quiet, Study to be quiet, Study to be quiet: and if I should
preach of nothing else this five or six weeks (as I think I shall do no
less) if I should continually iterate these words, Study to be quiet, I
cannot urge it too much, or speak of it enough.

That we may the better perceive the occasion of these words, The coherence and
maine scope of the words.
and so diue more soundly into the deapth of the matter therein contained, we
must take notice of some abuses and disorders common amongst the Thessalonians,
which caused the Apostle to write unto them these two Epistles. To omit other
vices among these Thessalonians too notorious (as will appear in the tenor of
both these Epistles) Idleness and Envy were the most outrageous: against both
which the Apostle in both these Epistles, but principally in this present
verse, does bend the current of his speech. There were among these
Thessalonians some 2. These 3.11 (...).
idle bodies, who would not busy themselves about any necessary work, but
lived like drones upon the sweat of other men's labors. These our Apostle
sharply reproves in the latter end of this verse, commanding them to work
with their own hands. There were others too pragmaticall, Ibid. (...).
busy bodies, intermedlers in other men's affairs. These our Apostle checketh
in the middle of this verse, willing them to do their own business. And
because they could neither busy themselves as they should, nor avoid more
business then they would, so long as they gave way to their unquiet
resolutions, therefore, in the beginning of the verse, before either of those
two profitable admonitions, he proposes this most necessary motion: Study to
be quiet.

The occasion of the words being thus explaned (that the words themselves in
the maine substance and proper subject of them may more fully be opened) we may
observe in them these two circumstances. The division of the words.


1. A virtue commended, To be quiet.

2. A duty commanded, Study for it, Study to be quiet. Of each of these, 1.
severally (and that in a word) for the better understanding of the words: and
secondly of them both jointly (and that more at large) for the substance of the
words, and instruction which we may learn therhence. First of the first, the
virtue commended.

To be quiet.

I call quietness a virtue: Quietness what it is. Aristot. Ethie. 8. lib.
for that very Title is given unto it by Philosophers in express terms, and
in the Scriptures by 1. Pet. 3.4. (...).
words to the same effect. We may thus define it: Quietness is a peaceable
disposition of the mind, abstaining from all occasions of offense to it self
or others, either in thought, word, or deed.

By this definition (or rather description) of quietness we may behold, The
seat of quietness.
1. the seat or original of quietness, a peaceable disposition of the mind.
The mind is the seat of every virtue. And unless that same (...), 1. Pet.
4.3.
the hidden man of the heart, be disposed toward quietness, unless there be
a Ibid.
meek and quiet spirit, it is impossible to be quiet. 2. The matter of
quietness, an abstinence from offenses: for so (...).
the word here used does implie a cessation from what may disquiet (as
Etymologists do derive it) and so S. Conrad. Gesner. in Nomenciat.
James does deliver the paraphrase of quietness, Iam. 1.21. A laiing aside of
all filthiness and superfluity of maliciousness. Iam. 1.21.
3. The object of unquietness, either our selves or others. Men disquiet
themselves either by causeless conceit of offense offered, when it is not, by
being too Romans 1.19.
suspicious; or by too much taking to heart on offense when it is offered,
being too 2. T^m 3.3.
furious. Men disquiet others, either by offering occasion of offense, by being
1 Thessalonians 4.6.
injurious, or by too bitter seeking revenge of offense, being too Romans 1.30.
litigious. Men do both disquiet themselves and others when they continue in
their sins without repentance, as Eliah told Ahab, 1. King. 18.18. 1. King.
18.18.
It is thou and thy fathers house that troubles Israel. 4. The parts of
quietness, in thought, in word, in deed: for there is an unquietness in the
mind, Mich. 2.1.
Mich. 2.1. A mind devising iniquity and working evil before the act. There
is an unquietness in the tongue, Iam. 3.6. Iam. 1.6.
The tongue defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature,
it self being set on fire of hell. There is an unquietness in the hand, when
the hand (as it is Psalm. 26.10.) Psalm 26.20.
is full of mischief. There is an unquietness in the foot, when Romans 3.15.
the feet (as it is Romans 3.15.) are swift to shed blood. There is an
unquietness in the e^e and in the ear, when (as it is Eccles. 1.8.) Eccles.
1.8.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. I omit
instances in the rest. And that I seem not too prolix, I reduce all the
parcels of the practice of quietness into these three parts.

1. Quietness of the heart. 2. Quietness of the tongue. 3. Quietness of the
hand.
Quietness of the heart.
Quietness of the heart is a meek and peaceable disposition of the mind, not
1. Tim 6.10
coveting, but Philip. 4.1.
contenting; not 1 Timothy 6.4.
envying, but Galat. 5.22.
reioicing; not swelling with 2. Tim 3.3.
pride and selfe-conceitednesse, but Luke 18 4.
relenting with humility and lowliness; not 1. Tim. 6 4
suspicious or evil credulous, but 1. Cor. 13.5.7.
taking things in the best part, loving and propitious; not Romans 1.30.
teastie and prone to wrath, but Iam. 3.17.
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated. That is a quiet heart, which Zach.
8.19.
loves peace, and Mat 5.9.
longs after peace, and Psalm. 122.6.
prays for pe^ce, Romans 14.19
labors for peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
and endeavors to keep peace.

Quietness of the tongue.
Quietness of the tongue is a mild, modest, and peaceable ordering of the
speech, when our words are not Eccles. 5.1.
rash, but Pro 10.32.
reasonable; not Pro. 18 13.
hasty, but Pro. 25.11.
seasonable; not Pro. 15.1.
grievous, but Coloss. 4 6
gracious; not Rom 12.19
provoking, but Judge. 8.3
appeasing; not ^sal 39.1.
offensive but to good purpose. That is a quiet tongue, which is (...) 1 ^9.
slow in speaking, Tit. 3.2.3.
meek in speech, Math. 7.1.
sober in censuring, Pro. 15.1.
soft in answering, Galat. 6.1.
mild in reproouing, Psalm. 109.4.
faithful in defending, and Psalm. 39.1.
fearful of offending.

Quietness of the hand.
Quietness of the hand is a peaceable carriage of our selves in all our
actions, Galat. 5.12.
not disturbing the peace of others but Ephesians. 4.3.
preserving it, not 2. Ioh. 9.
opposing our selves against others but Math. 5.9.
composing the variance and dissension of others, not Romans 16.17.
offending others, but 1. Cor. 1.12.
endeavoring to keep a good conscience. This is Quietness of the hand, when a
man Pro. 17.14.
abstaineth from meddling, is 1 These 4.6.
just in his dealing, is free from Leuit. 25.14.
wronging Leuit. 19.35.
defrauding, and 1. These. 4.6.
deceiving.

By this breife surueies we may see what it is to be Quiet, A corrolarie.
and wherein Quietness does consist. To contract the substance of it into a
few words. To be Quiet (if we take notice of it by negatiues) is thus much in
effect. Not to trouble our selves with stirring thoughts, not to trouble others
with needless suites, not to entermeddle with other men's business, not to
adventure upon rash attempts, not to offend others with provoking terms, not
to take offense at others actions, not to give ear to idle tales, not to
contend without just cause, not to sow discord, not to seek revenge. Or (if we
would rather take the description of it by affirmatiues) thus. To be Quiet is
to have a meek heart, a contented mind, a charitable eye, an affable tongue,
a peaceable hand, a sociable gesture, a neighborly behavior: to be Quiet is to
judge charitably, to speak lovingly, to converse freindly, to put up wrongs
patiently, to wrong no man willingly. This is the substance of the virtue here
commended, in the next place we are to take a veiw of the duty enioined, or
the affection toward Quietness required.

Study to be Quiet.

I call it a duty, What is meant by studying after quietness.
because it is here required at our hands, nay more, commanded, yea more then
that enjoined unto us, as a mark at which we must always aim, as a prize for
which we must always strive, as a (...)
treasure which we must always seek. For so the word here used, does import an
earnest affection and longing after a thing most admirable. Old translat. Beza.
operam alacriter date. Vatabl. in hoe incumbite. Piscator. tanquam honorabile
quiddam existimate.
Some translations read it thus, Use all diligence that you may be Quiet;
Others thus, Labor with all alacrity to be Quiet; Others thus, Strive for this
with might and maine that ye may be Quiet: Others thus, Count it an honorable
labor and endeavor to be Quiet. The Phrase here used in our new and most
exquisite Translation (Study to be Quiet) does include all the rest, alluding
both to the love which we should bear unto it, and our longing after it, and
our labor to procure it, and our care to keep it. And it is as much as if he
should have said, Let this be your desire, let this be your endeavor, let this
be your labor, let this be your honor; use all good means, try all good
ways, put in practice all good policies, whereby ye may lead a life in peace
and quietness.

Study to be Quiet.

The words of the Text being thus severally opened and explaned, The Doctrine
let us in the next place consider of the substance of them jointly, and what
they propose unto us for our instruction. This may briefly be contracted into
this one doctrinall proposition.

Every good Christian ought to be of a peaceable and quiet conversation.

This proposition both Testimony of the Bible, example of the faithful, and
evidence of Reason will plainly confirm unto us, if we note it (as we ought to
do) with diligent and intelligent attention.

And first for Scripture testimony to this purpose, Scripture proof.
the book of God is very full of it, in so great a field of variety I will
make but a gleaning. The present text does plainly enforce it: 1. These. 4.11.
Study to be Quiet; The same our Apostle to the same Thessalonians in his
latter Epistle, Chap. 3. verse. 12. does more forcibly inioyne it, 2. These. 3.1^.
We command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye work with
Quietness. Here is both a precept peremptory for it, Mandamus, we command
it, and a persuasion patheticall to imprint it, (...), We exhort you by the
Lord Jesus that ye put this duty in practice. Besides this of Paul we may
hear the admonitions of other both Prophets and Apostles, Zach. 8.19. Love
Peace, or, Zach. 8.19.
Quietness; There is for our affection. Psalm. 34.14. Psalm. 39.14.
Seek peace and quietness, there is for our action, 2. Tim. 2.22. 2. Tim.
2.22.
Follow Peace, there is for our imitation. Ephesians. 4.3. Ephesians. 4.3.
Endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, there is for
our estimation, Mark. 9.50. Mark. 9.50.
Have peace one with another; there is for our conversation. Would we all of
these in one, observe what is written Romans 12.18. Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace, with all men.

Thus you see what a cloud of witnesses we have to confirm the necessity of
Quietness unto us, Examples of Quietness.
I might compass you about with a cloud of examples likewise to this purpose.
I might propose unto you the pattern of quiet Abraham thus settling quietness
between his own Family and Lots Genes. 13.8. Genes. 13.8.
Let there be no striefe I pray thee, between me and thee, nor mine and thine,
for we are brethren. I might tell you of quiet Joseph persuading his brethren
unto Quietness Genes. 45.24. Genesis 45.24.
See that ye fall not out by the way. I might tell you of Quiet Moses of whom
it is said, Numb. 12.3. Numb. 12.3.
Now Moses was the meekest man above all that was upon the face of the earth 2.
Sam. 16.
. I might tell you of Quiet David, whose patience when by railing Shinei it was
much provoked, and 2. Sam. 16.
the Sons of Zeruiah did egg him on to seek revenge, 2. Sam. 16. resolved
notwithstanding all this, to be Quiet. I might tell you of Quiet Job thus
settling himself to quietness, Job. 40 5. Job. 40.5.
Once have I spoken, but I will do it no more, yea twice, but I will proceed
no further. I might tell you of Quiet Paul thus protesting of his quietness,
1 Thessalonians. 2.7. 1. These. 2.7.
We were gentle, or Quiet among you, as little children. But what need I
instance in multitude of examples, seeing he who is the example of examples,
sends us to his own example, Learn of me (says the Mirror of the world)
(...), Math. 11.29.
That I am meek. Math. 11.29.

Thus have we both precept and example to move us to be Quiet. Evidence of
Reason.
Now (because a threefold cord is not easily broken) let us in the third place
see it confirmed by evidence of reason, Eccles. 4.12.
wherein if we prove not altogether unreasonable we shall find sufficient
motives to stir us up to the careful performance of this duty, whither we
consider 1 The Equity of it. 2 The Excellency of it. 3 The Profit by it. 4
The Hurt if we neglect it.


And 1. for the Equity of it, The Aequiti^ of it.
It is a matter of right and equity that every good Christian should study to
be quiet: 1 Because there is a kind of Antithesis between blessedness and
unquietness, 1. Pet. 3.10,
What man is he who loves life and would feign see good days, let him
refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips from guile, 1. Pet. 3.10.
Secondly, They who would have their consciences assured that they are Gods
children, must be quiet, for Mat. 5.9.
Blessed are the peacemakers, they shall be called the children of God. Thirdly,
seeing true Christians are Luke 10.6.
the sons of peace, and 2 Cor. 13.11
serve the God of peace, who Ioh. 14.27
has left us his peace, promising everlasting peace to Luke 19.38.
them that love peace, it is their duty even of equity, to study to be quiet.

But if the equity of this duty cannot persuade us to be quiet, The
excellency of it.
yet let the excellency thereof move us to embrace it. For it is an excellent
ornament to a man to be of a quiet Spirit. It is an excellent ornament unto
him, First, in the sight of men, Ecce quam bonnm and quam iucundum, Psalm. 135.1.
Behold how good and how pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together
in unity, Psalm. 135.1. Secondly, It is an excellent ornament unto him in the
sight of God, 1. Pet. 3.4.
A meek and quiet Spirit is in the sight of God (...) a precious thing.
Thirdly, It is better then strength; Pro. 16.32.
He who is slow to anger is better then the mighty, and he who rules his
spirit, then he that takes a City, Pro. 16.32. Fourthly, It is better then
wealth; Pro. 15.16.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord then great treasures with
trouble, Pro. 15.16. Fifthly, It is better then great dainties, Pro. 17.1.
Better is a dry morsel and quietness therewith then an house full of
dainties with strife, Pro. 17.1. Sixthly, It is better then pleasures; Pro.
15.15.
A merry heart has a continual feast, Pro. 15.15. Therefore seeing a quiet
life is better then pleasure, better then treasure, better then dainties,
better then strength; Seeing God does so approve of it, and men so much commend
it, what a forcible motive is this, that we should Study to be quiet.

But if the excellency of this virtue cannot move us, The Profit of it.
yet let the utility or profit of it allure us. For it is a very profitable
thing to live in quietness. First, It is profitable to the purse, Pro. 21.5.
The thoughts of men that are quiet tend to pleuteousnesse, Pro. 21.5. Pro.
24.34.
It builds the house and fills the chambers. Pro. 24.34. It is profitable
to the health, Pro. 14.30.
A quiet heart is the life of the flesh, Pro. 14.30. Pro. 15.30.
It makes fat the bones, Pro. 15.30. Thirdly, It is profitable to the good
Name, Pro. 14.29
He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding, Pro. 14.29. Pro. 24.26.
Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a quiet answer, Pro. 24.26.
Fourthly, It is profitable to the Soul, Pro. 16.17.
He that keeps his way preserves his soul, Pro. 16.17. It preserves the
soul from Galat. 5.21.
Envy, debate, strife, sedition, and from other fleshly lusts 1. Pet. 1.11.
which fight against the soul. Seeing then that Quietness is so profitable to
the name, to the purse, to the body and to the soul, what an effectual
motive should this be unto us, to Study to be quiet?

But if neither the silken reason of Aequitie can persuade us, The hurt from
the neglect thereof.
nor the silver reason of Excellency move us, nor the golden reason of profit
allure us, yet let theiron reason of peril and danger happening upon the
neglect thereof enforce us unto quietness. For it is a most unseemly,
devilish, dangerous, and damnable thing to be unquiet. First, It is unseemly.
For it sauoreth of no religion, Iam. 1.20.
The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, Iam. 1.20. It makes a
man unsociable, Pro. 22.24.
Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man go not, for he
will be a snare unto thee, Pro. 22.24. It is better to dwell Pro. 25.24.
in the corner of an house top, better to dwell Pro. 19.13.
where is a continual dropping, better to dwell Pro. 21.19.
in the wilderness then with a contentious person. Secondly, It is devilish;
for so Iam. 1.5. The original of it is said to be Iam. 1.5.
earthly, sensual, and devilish. It fills a man full of sin. So Pro.
29.22. Pro. 29.22.
A furious man abounds with transgression. And Iam. 3.16. Iam. 3.16.
Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work.
Thirdly, It is dangerous, hurtful to others, Pro. 26.^1.
As coals are to burning, and wood to the fire, so is a contentious man to
kindle strife, Pro. 26.21. But most hurtful to the unquiet person himself,
Pro. 11.17.
It troubles his own flesh, Pro. 11.17. Pro. 11.29.
It troubles his own house, Pro. 11.29. Pro. 14.30.
It impaireth his own health, Pro. 14.30. Pro. 25.8.
It impeacheth his own good name, Pro. 25.8. Pro. 21.23.
It endangereth his own Soul, Pro. 21.23. Fourthly, It is a damnable thing,
These six things (says Solomon) does the Lord hate yea seven are abomination
unto him, Pro. 6.16.17.18.19.
A proud look, a lying tongue, Hands that shed innocent blood, An heart
devising wicked imaginations, Feet that be swift in running to mischief, a
false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among brethren,
All which evil properties we may find in an unquiet man; his heart will ever
be devising wicked imaginations, his looks are proud and ambitious, his
tongue is false and slanderous, his hands melling and factious, his feet swift
to make debate, his daily practice is to sow discord. Therefore an unquiet man
is one whom God does hate, if God do hate him, his estate is fearful; Heb.
10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31.
Therefore study to be quiet.

By this little which already has been declared, Application of the former
Doctrine.
may sufficiently appear what a proper, pleasing, and profitable a thing it is
to be Quiet, and on the contrary side, what a base, sordid, dangerous and
damnable a thing it is to live an unquiet life. Now in the next place by way of
application, let it be set upon the Conscience.

And first of all, let this serve for the comfort of their souls who love
Quietness and study to be Quiet. For the comfort of Quiet persons.
Math. 5.9.
Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God, Mat.
5.9. Can thou in sincerity take up David's Motto, Psalm. 120.7. Psalm. 120.7.
I am for peace, does thine heart long after quietness? do thou endeavor to
behave thy self in quietness? do thou seek quietness and ensue it? Lo
then, to the comfort of thine own Soul an evident testimony that thou art
the child of God. For Romans 16.20.
God is a God of peace, and the more men are addicted unto quietness, the
nearer they come unto the image of God. Galat. 9.19.
Unquietness sauoreth of the flesh, but peace and quietness is a Galat. 5.22.
fruit of the Spirit, and sauoreth of the Romans 8.6.
wisdom of the Spirit, Romans 8.6. Art thou quiet, and do endeavor as much
as in thee lies to live a quiet life? Thou show hereby the fruits of
religion, that thou art not an unprofitable hearer of the word of God; for
where religion does rule the heart, there peace and quietness bear sway.
Isay. 2.4.
They break their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning
hooks, Isay. 2.4. And men will Zach. 9.10.
speak peace one toward an other, Zach. 9 10. Do thou study to be quiet?
It is a sign that thou art wise, for Pro. 17.14.
the beginning of strife is as when one lets out water, therefore leave of
contention before it be meddled with, Pro. 17.14. Pro. 20.3.
It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling,
Pro. 20.3. Art thou peaceable and of a quiet disposition? That is the way to
thrive well; Psalm. 122.6.
They shall prosper that love peace, Psalm. 122.6. Thus where quietness is,
there God is, where God is, there religion is, where true religion is, there
only wisdom is, where wisdom is, there prosperity is; therefore happy are
they who are quiet, and let every one who loves God or goodness, wisdom or
wariness, health or happiness, Study to be quiet.

But woe unto thee who art unquiet; For the terror of unquiet Persons.
It is an evident sign of apparent wickedness. For, to whom is it that the
Prophet Esaias threatens this disease of unquietness? is it not to wicked
persons? Isay. 49.22.
There is no peace says the Lord to the wicked, Esaias. 49.22. It is a sign
thou art irreligious; if any man would seem to be religious. and refraineth
not his tongue (and so likewise all other instruments of unquietness) Iam.
1.26.
his religion is vain, Iam. 1.26. Thou must needs be full of sin, Pro. 29.22.
for a furious man abounds with transgression, Pro. 29.22. Thou can look
for no favor at the Lords hands, for t they who are of a froward heart are
abomination to the Lord, Pro. 11.20. Thou art a very fool, for Pro. 14.17.
he that is soon angry deals foolishly, Pro. 14.17. Ibid. 29.
He that is hasty of spirit exalts folly, Pro. 14.29. There is no hope unto
thee of thrift, For Pro. 17.20.
He that has a froward heart finds no good, Pro. 17.20. Unquietness is like
to gluttony and drunkenness, Pro. 23.21.
Which will bring a man to poverty and cloth him with rags, Pro. 23.21. It
will lade thee with trouble, and bring thee unto misery, For Pro. 19.19.
a man of great wrath shall suffer punishment, though he be delivered yet will
he fall into it again, Pro. 19.19. Now then consider this with thy self,
unquiet man, or woman, what a gulf of woes thou do wilfully throw thy self
unto; Thou dishonorest God, thou offendest thy neighbor, disquietest thy
self, thou disclaimest religion, disgracest thy profession, thou impairest
thine own health, thou blemishest thy good name, thy neighbor is the worse for
thee, good men are sorry for thee, evil men take example by thee, the Angels
note thee, the Devils laugh at thee; what a shame is this unto thee? what a
madness and frenzy in thee? Art thou a Christian? did thou ever learn
this in the School of Christ? do thou observe this in the practice of the
faithful? O no, but thou have it even of thy father the devil: for Ioh. 8.44.
He was a murderer from the beginning. Unquietness is Iam. 1.20.
earthly, sensual, and deuillish. The Pro. 17.14.
beginning of it is perilous, the Pro. 22.5.
process of it grievous, and the 2. Sam. 2.26.
end of it will be in bitterness. Therefore if thou have in thee any fear of
God, any soundness of religion, any spark of conscience, any regard unto thy
good name, any love unto thine own soul, study to be quiet.

Lastly, For a direction to every one concerning quietness.
seeing quietness is so commodious, and unquietness so dangerous, let every
good Christian long after and labor for a quiet conversation. And let every
one that reads this, in the name and fear of God apply it to himself. Mat.
6.6.
Enter into thy closet, Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with thine own heart, 2. Cor. 13.5.
examine thine own self. Call thy self after this manner to account: How do
I feel my self affected toward quietness? How do I study to be quiet?
Have I never been unquiet? Have I never been too teastie and prone to wrath?
Have I not been too suspicious? Have I not been too litigious? Have I not
been too envious? If thou find that in any of these at any time thou have
ouer-shot thy self, (as who sometimes in some of these does not slip over
shoes?) then thus lament it, and lay it to thy soul: Ah, Lord God, how wicked
have I been? what a vile wretch am I, thus to give way unto Satan's
suggestions, and mine own unruly passions? Now Lord give me more wisdom to
look unto my ways, more grace to have thy fear before mine eyes, more zeal
in mine affections, more power to resist temptations, more patience in time of
prouocations. And let every one take notice of his own infirmities, whether
he be of a nature more passionate then is fit, whether he be teastie and
choleric, whether too suspicious or froward in any course. And as he sees
his own weakness, so let him use the more diligence in avoiding the occasions
which may distemper him, and using the best remedies which may reform him. Of
which remedies and helps to further us in the practice of quietness, more
shall be spoken at large in its proper place. Before which let us take a little
view of the general want of quietness, and of the common motives which move
unquietness, that so the wound being opened, the plaster for the healing of
it the better may be applied.

In laying open the general want and defect of quietness, The want of
quietness.
what words (or rather sighs) shall I use? Ier. 9.1.
O that mine head were waters, and mine eyes fountains of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the unquietness of our times, and for the unquietness
of our people. For these times in which we live are the last and worst times,
those perilous unquiet times foretold by the Mich. 7.2.
Prophets and 2. Tim. 3.1.
Apostles; Quietness is perished out of the earth: and quiet persons are rare
birds. Men are headie, high-minded, fierce, makebates, prone to take things at
the worst: they are briers and thorns: they hunt every man his brother with a
net. In what place soever we live, we may say with David, Psalm. 120.6.
Woe is me that I soiourne in Mesech and dwell in the tonts of Kedar, with
enemies of peace. Look we into the Church? There we shall find
unquietness. Look we into the commonwealth? There we shall find
unquietness. Look we into private families? There we shall find
unquietness. Look we into a man's most private self? There we shall find
much unquietness.

Unquietness in the Church is apparent principally in these three
Horse-leaches which suck the blood of the Church, Unquiet persons in the
Church. o Pro. 30.15.
Heretics, Schismatickes, and Sacrilegists. Heretics will not live at quiet
in the Church: for like the Devil their father they will be ever plotting
mischief and sowing tares. And of all Heretics none more unquiet then the
Papists: for they (like their forefathers the Pharisees) are never quiet, but
Math. 23.15.
compass Sea and Land to make a proselyte of their religion, and so twofold
more the child of perdition. And of all Papists none more unquiet then the
Jesuits: for they are never quiet, but like the Reu, 16.13.
Frogs coming out of the Dragons mouth, Revel. 16.13. They are ever croaking,
setting kingdom against kingdom, children against their parents, subjects
against their Princes, plotting pouder-mines, hatching homicides^, breathing
blood of Kings, ruin of States, and bringing all out of quiet wheresoever they
come. 2. Schismatickes, I mean those who are the 1. Cor. 3.3.
authors of division, as that word is used, 1. Cor. 3.3. for they will never be
at quiet, Plin. lib. 10.39
but (like Plinies (...)) always stirring, like the factious Galatians, Galat.
5.15.
ever biting and galling. And of all Schismatickes none more unquiet then the
Separatists: for they (like S. Iudes Planets) are Jude. 13.
wandering stars, rouing and raging. Here they cannot be quiet, but post
beyond the Sea to Amsterdam: There they cannot be quiet, but are at divisions
amongst themselves. 3. Sacrilegists, for they cause much unquietness in the
Church. They are never quiet, but (like wild boares) break down the hedge of
the Lords inheritance, Ps. 78.12.13
and plucking at every branch of the Levites portion. And of all Sacrilegists
none more unquiet then Church-patrons: Psalm. 79.1.
for they content not themselves to creep into Gods inheritance, and to take
the houses of God into their own possession, but (like Psalm. 104.35
Catterpillers) pill the bark off the trees in the Sanctuary, and make it
bare. But to none of these sorts of unquiet persons in the Church (as I hope) I
now speak: and if these words should happen to sound in any of their ears, or
this Treatise should happen to come into their hands, I have little hope that
they would be quiet. And therefore I were as good be quiet, and turn my speech
to the discovery of another sort of unquiet persons, unquietness in the
Commonwealth. Unquietness in the Commonweal.


Where, which way shall we turn our selves, but we shall see and hear much
unquietness? Look we into the Court? In Court.
(Let it be spoken without offense) What secret enuyings, what open
oppositions, what devices of politicians, what ambitious hunting after honors,
what incessant begging of Monopolies, what tricks of restless policies, what
unquietness amongst Officers is there daily to be seen? Look we into the
Courts of justice, In Courts of Justice.
the very seats (as I may justly call them) of quietness: and how are they
fraught and pestred with unquietness? O Westminster Hall, thou Oracle of
justice, and remedy of wrongs, if there were no other demonstration to
convince the unquietness of these our times, thy very stones so worn out with
the tracings of troublesome suitors and troubling Lawyers, thy very seats so
frequently attended on with contentious causes and tedious suits, would
proclaim unto the world that the men of this world are much out of quiet.
Look we into our Universities, the Courts of learning, In the Universities.
and Nurseries of wisdom, (then which, were it not for this blemish, Athens it
self were not more Atticke) what factions in Colleges? what distraction in
opinions? what opposition is there to be seen even amongst fellow Students?
Look we into the City? In the City.
What emulation may we behold among Merchants? what enuiing among Matrons? what
prying among Officers? what quarrelling among Gallants? Come we down into the
Country? What heart-burning is every where to be seen among equals? In the
Country.
what grudging at superiors? what scolding among neighbors? what sowing of
discord by busybodies? what calling before Justices? what complaining every
wherein our streets? Yea (which is more to be pitied) if we look but into
private families, shall we not in most of them see much unquietness? In
private families.
That which our Savior so long ago did foretell of unquiet times, we find
too lamentably verified in our time: Math. 10.35.
The son is at variance with the father, the father with the son: The
daughter in law is against the mother in law, and the mother in law against the
daughter in law. Look we into most houses? we shall hear in them grievous
complaints. Here we shall hear one complaining of an unquiet Wife, there
another complaining of an unquiet Husband, another complaining of an unquiet
Parent, another of an unquiet Child, another of an unquiet Master, another of
an unquiet Servant; So rare a thing is Quietness; And yet more (which is most
to be wondered at) how many a Man is out of quiet with Himself? In a man's
private self.
how many times in one and the same Man may we find an unquiet mind? how many
be there in the world, not Iam. 1.19.
slow to anger (as Saint James does advise them) but Romans 1.29.
full of wrath (as Saint Paul reproves among men) peuish, froward, teastie,
headie, Heautontimoreumenoi self vexers, disquieters, as if they had been
borne of waspebroode, never Quiet, but (like mount Aetna) burning up
themselves? Infinite were the evidence which I might alleadg of the want of
Quietness in all sorts of people, persons, and places. It were endless to
undertake the ripping up of the variety of unquiet Humors. Non mihi si Linguae
centum sint oraque centum.


"Had I an hundred tongues and mouths to hold them
"Yet could I not therewith in any sort unfold them.
And therefore from this circumstance I will briefly pass over unto the next,
from the observation of the want of Quietness, unto the consideration of the
cause; what the cause is why there is so much unquietness, what the reason is,
why so few labor and study to be Quiet.

In the handling whereof (for method sake) we may reduce these causes or
procurers of unquietness into two sorts. The causes of unquietness.


1. Principal. 2. Isntrumental.
The Principal Cause, or rather Causer of unquietness is the Devil, The
principal Causer of un quietness.
for he is that same (...) that Math. 13.25.28.
enemy Math. 13.25. and as he is farther noted with this addition verse. 28.
(...), that envious man, who, whiles men sleep, sows tares of discord and
unquietness in their hearts. And the names which are given unto him
doeintimate no less. He is called Psalm. 12.24.
Beelzebub, which signifies a master of flies, because as flies are busy
buzzing about men ears, so he is busy in buzzing unquietness in men's minds:
he is called Reu. 12.10.
Satan, because he is an accuser of men, to God, to men, to themselves. He is
called a Math. 4.2.
Tempter, because he does tempt and egg on one man against another. He is
called Reu. 12.3.
the great red Dragon, because he is full of wrath, and spitteth the poison of
it upon them that yield unto his unquiet motions. Neither is it marvel if
this unquiet Devil be so busy in sowing the seeds of discord and dissension
in the minds of men; For he was not quiet in heaven, but Jude. 6.
lost his first estate, and l^ft his first habitation; And since the time that
he himself fell from heaven like lightning, He Luke 10.18.
rages here on earth like 1. Pet. 5.8.
a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. He as the grand Makebate and
Master of misrule in the world goes about to Reave. 12.9.
seduce the world; He it is who throws a bone of variance between the
Husband and the Wife, as he did between Genesis 30.1
Jacob and Rahel, between Father and Son, as he did between 2. Sam. 15.
David and Absolon between brother and brother, as he did between Genesis 37.
Joseph and his brethren, between friend and friend as he did between 2. Sam.
3.
Ioah and Abner, between neighbor and neighbor as he did between Genesis 20.
Abrahaem and Abimelech. He is that Dauus which disturbeth all things, making
the nations drunken with the cup of Unquietness and impatience. When this
Luke 11.24.25.
unclean Spirit finds a booty fit for his purpose, he takes unto him
these seven hellish Spirits who enter in and take possession of him. First,
Orgilotes or Teastie snuff, which upon every light occasion stirs up and
pronoketh anger. Secondly, Eris or Quarrel-picker, which whetteth the tongue
with chiding and brawling, hiding the poison of Aspes under the lips. Thirdly,
Acrecolia or heart eater, which fills the heart with the gall of bitterness
and whetteth it on to malice. Fourthly, Picrotes or cholericke-Reuenger, which
makes him engraue wrongs and inturies in marble never to be forgotten. Fifthly,
Chalepotes or brazen bulk; which remooueth out of his body the fleshly heart
and makes him an heart of flint. Sixthly, Alecto or Malecontent, which makes
him factious and seditious. Seventhly, Menis or furious frantic, Mat. 12.45.
which makes him perfectly outrageous and mad: Now when a man has all these
seven hellish Spirits in him (as it fares with the unquiet man) how can it be
but that his latter end should prove worse then his beginning. Satan deals
with those whom he allureth to unquietness, as he dealt with the possessed
child, Mark. 9.18. Mark. 9.18.
He takes them and teareth them, and makes them foame, and pine away. And as
he played his part with the two Psalm. 120.5.6
Gergasens Math. 8.28 So he keeps reuell-quoile in all unquiet persons,
makes them so fierce that no man can converse with them, or live peaceably by
them. Consider this Psalm. 120.56
you that dwell in Meshek and lurk in the tents of Kedar, enemies unto peace,
an evil spirit does follow you, and an hellish fury haunt you, the Devil
intends a mischief toward you, and by this means he sets it on you;
what means you? will you suffer Satan to lead you, possess you, and to
tyrannize over you? O pity your own Souls, take compassion upon your
selves, labor to come out of the paw of this ramping Lion, have nothing to do
with him, Iam. 4.7.
Resist the Devil and he will fly from you, bid him Mat. 16.23.
Auaunt Satan, Study to be quiet.

From the principal cause or Causer of unquietness, The Instrumental causes
of unquietness.
let us in the next place take notice of the isntrumental cause thereof, what
be the Devils instruments, engines or means whereby he does work unquietness; the
which for methods sake, we may rank into these two classes.

1. Inward Motives. 2. Outward Means.
We will first begin with the inward motives, Inward metiues to vitquietnesse.
that we may strike at the root of this sin and trace it to the very form.
That which S. James speaks of sin in general, Iam. 1.14. Iam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
entised; may be particularly verified in this sin of unquietness, men
become out of quiet, when they are drawn away by their own concupiscence and
are carried away with their inward lusts. Which the same Apostle in Iam. 5.1.
another place pithily confirms, From whence (says he) are wars and
contentions among you? Are they not hence even of your lusts which fight in
your members? So that the inward motives to unquietness (as here we see) are
inward lusts: Now what these lusts are S. John does plainly demonstrate forth
unto us, 1. Ioh. 2.16. where we find them thus trichotomised. 1. Ioh. 2.16.
1. The lusts of the flesh. 2. The lusts of the eyes. 3. The pride of life. For
the better understanding of each whereof, as they are to be applied to our
present purpose, we may thus subdiuide them and assign to each of them their
proper parcels. Lusts of the flesh provoking to unquietness.


The lusts of the flesh.

Contains under it 1. Anger. 2. Malice. 3. Envy.


The lusts of the eyes.

Contains under it 1. Covetousness. 2. Curiosity. 3. Jealousy.


The Pride of life.

Under which 1. Vain glory. 2. Hypocrisy. 3. Singularity.


of all these orderly, and of each of them as briefly as I may with any
perspicuitie; And first of the lusts of the flesh which do provoke
unquietness; And therein first of Anger.

Anger is a lust of the flesh (for so Anger.
the Apostle does repute it among the works of the flesh, Galat. 5.19.) Gal.
5.19.
and it is a stirring lust to unquietness, For so Pro. 15.18. Pro. 15.18.
An angry man stirs up strife. And again, Pro. 26.21. Pro. 26.2^.
As the coal makes burning coals and wood a fire, so an angry man is apt to
kindle strife. What was that which made Genesis 4.5.
Caine so unquiet; was it not Arger? Came was exceeding wrath (says the Text)
and his countenance fell down, Genesis 4.5. What brought Saul out of quiet with
Jonathan? was it not Anger? 1. Sam. 20.30.
Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and that made him break forth into
these unquiet terms, Thou son of the perverse and rebellious woman etc.
What was it which brought Jonah so out of quiet with himself? was it not
Anger? Jonah. 4.9.
He was angry (says the Text) even to the death. And what is the cause of
most men's unquietness in these days, especially of domestical unquietness
between Husband and Wife, Masters and Servants etc. Is It not Anger? Ask we
the reason, when we meet with such unquiet people, what mean you thus to
disquiet your self? what moves you to this unquietness? Their answer
commonly will be this, I am angry; But let me reason with thee, (thou unquiet
person) as the Lord did with Jonah when he was in his unquiet angry fit;
Jonah. 4.8.
Do thou well to be angry? If thou, with Jonah, reply, I do well to be
angry, for I have just cause, I am highly provoked, I cannot forbear; Let me
(or rather the Apostle James) tell thee; Iam. 1.20.
The wrath of Man does not accomplish the righteousness of God, If thou
farther reply (with Job. 7.12.
Job) Am I a Sea? am I a Whale? am I a stock or stone that I should bear this
wrong? flesh and blood cannot endure it, the occasions to me offered would even
move a stone; let me entreat thee to remember thy self what thou art, or at
leastwise would seem to be, a Christian, let Grace then over rule Nature,
and Piety prevail over Passion; Iam. 1.19.
Be slow to speak and slow to wrath; Romans 12.21.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Ephesians. 4.
Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath. Study to be quiet.

The second lust of the flesh tending to unquietness is Malice, Malice.
A work of the flesh as the former, Galat. 5.20.
Galat. 5.20. It differs from Anger as the Habit from a Passion. Valerius
Maximus does thus distinguish them, Valor. Maxim. lib. 9. cap. 3.
Anger at the setting forth is the quicker, Malice in continuance the longer.
Augustine. Ira inueterata fit malitia, Illa turbat, hac eutingu^t, illa festuca,
haec trabs est.
And learned Augustine to the same purpose, Anger when it is of long
continuance provoke malice, Anger does disturb, malice does destroy, Anger
is a moate, Malice is a beam. Therefore if Anger be a Disquieter much more
Malice; Hence is it that the Apostle taxing the contentious carriage and
unquiet disposition of such as are given up unto a reprobate sense, Romans 1.29.
sets this down as a prime cause of it, Romans 1.29.
They were filled with malice. And the Apostle James imputes the original of
all filthiness (and so by consequence of unquietness) unto a Iam. 1.21.
superfluity of mallitiousnesse, Iam. 1.21. What caused Nehe. 2.10.
Semballat and Tobiah so troublesomely to disquiet the Jewish builders? was it
not Malice? what was the cause that moved the Scribes and Pharisees to be so
unquiet in vexing our Math. 27.18.
Savior Jesus Christ, whiles he was here on earth? was it not Malice? Let
Pilat himself be the Judge; He knew (says the text) that of malice they had
delivered him to him. What was the cause of most of those troublesome suits
commensed among the 1. Cor. 6.6.
Corinthians, against which the Apostle inueigheth 1. Cor. 6.6. was it not
Malice? And what is the cause in these our days, why there is so much uncivil
civil disquietnesse, such heart-burning among Neighbors, such crossings and
oppositions between parties, such calling before justices, such suying and
seeking to vex one an other for trifles: is it not Malice? I appease unto the
conscience whatsoever outwardly may seem a pretense. If men's hearts were not
bigger then their suits, and Malice did not more provoke then surmised wrongs,
not one half of these Quarrels, Suites, and Contentions would be set a
broach which now are so rife and common in the world. But o thou whosoever thou
art, whom Malice does thus whet on unto unquietness, know thou how much thou
offendest God, how much thou do endanger thine own Soul? Though thou
carriest the name of a Christian thou art indeed a professed Atheist, a man of
no religion, for 1. Ioh. 2.11.
he that hates his brother is in dark^nesse, and knows not whither he
goes, because darkness does blind his eyes. 1. Ioh. 2.11. Take this to thy
terror, Thou art a murderer, 1. Ioh. 3.15.
He that hates his brother is a manslaier, 1. Ioh. 3.15. Nay more 1. Ioh. 8.44.
Thou art of thy Father the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. And (whiles thou continuest in
this case) a very firebrand of hell and of damnation, Iam. 3.6.
Sam. 3.6. If therefore these my words sound to the ears of any one whose
conscience may justly check him for malicious unquietness, and of vexing
others out of a cankred desire of revenge, I beseech such a one in the bowels
of the Lord. nay more I require him upon the peril of his Soul, Iam. 1.21.
To lay aside this filthiness, this superfluity of malitiousnesse, and to
behave himself with meekness. And if he will not hear me, let him hearken
unto the wholesome counsel of the blessed Apostle; 1. Pet. 2.1.
Lay aside all malitiousnes and guile and dissimulation, and evil speaking.
And that he may the better prepare himself thus to do, let him follow the
direction of an other Apostle, Colos. 3.12.13.
Put on the bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one an other, if any man have a
quarrel to an other, even as Christ forgave you, so do ye. Verse. 14.
Above all things put on Love, if ye Study to be quiet.

The third lust of the flesh which makes men unquiet is Envy: Envy.
A work of the flesh, Gal. 9.21.
Galat. 5.21. As much more outrageous then Malice, as Malice was then Anger,
Pro. 27.4.
Wrath is cruel, and Anger raging, but who shall be able to stand before
Envy, Pro. 27.4. Quietness has no greater enemy then Envy; Pro. 14.15.
Envy (says the wise man) is rottenness to the bones, Pro. 14.15. And (as
Job speaks) Job. 5.2.
Anger kills the foolish, and Envy slays the Idiot, Job. 5.2. Therefore
Enuies portraiture in old time was painted thus: Ovid. metamorph. 2.
A withered body feeding upon it self, having a pale face without blood, a
lean body without Juice, squint eyes, black teeth, Platarch. de Inuidia.
an he^^^ full of gall, a tongue tipped with poison, never laughtng but when
others weep, never sleeping, but ever musing mischeiefe. The right emblem of
unquietness. It was Envy which wrought that unquietness between Joseph and
his brethren, Genes. 37. Genesis 37.4.
When they saw that their father loved him more then his brethren, they hated
him, and could not speak peaceably unto him: It was Envy that wrought
unquietness between 1. Sam. 18.8.
David and Saul, 1. Sam. 18.8. It was Envy that wrought Daniel so much
unquietness among the Dan. 6.4.
Medes and Persians, Dan. 6.4. And what is it but Envy which breeds most of
our factions in societies, opposition in Sectaries, Aemulation in equals,
molestation to superiors; Envy finds out an Ostracisme to disquiet worthies,
a stratageme to ensnare men's betters, and a Schism to rent the peace of
others: How many are there in the world who disquiet themselves at others
virtues, and disquiet others for their virtues? How many pick a hole in others
coats, and draw them into troubles, either because they envy their wealth,
their wit, or their worth? And who sees not what an unquiet stickler Envy is
in most Suites, debates, contentions and Aemulations that are a foot in our
age. But o what a wretched thing it is to be envious? Where Envying and strife
is, there is Sedition and all manner of evil work. Iam. 3.14.
Iam. 3.14. Envy (says Augustine) is Vitium Diabolicum a devilish vice,
Augustine. in Psalm. 139.
or a vice proper to the Devil, for it is his Envy which makes him so much
to thirst after men's perdition. Envy is worse then any other poison. For they
are only hurtful to others, this most hurts himself who is envious. Why
should thou disquiet thy self at an others happiness? Is not this to oppose
thy self against Gods providence? why should thou disquiet others for what
is theirs? is not this malicious peevishness? Math. 20.15.
Must thine eye be evil, because God is good and gracious? There is nothing
more beseeming Christianity then charity, Ioh. 13.35.
By this (says our blessed Savior) shall men know that you are my disciples,
if ye love one another, Ioh. 13.35. There is nothing more repugnant unto
charity then Envy for love enuieth not, 1. Cor. 13.4. Therefore beware of
Envy you who would Study to be Quiet.

The lusts of the flesh tending to unquietness being thus briefly discussed,
The lusts of the eyes making unquietness.
in the next place we are to take a view of the second sort of lusts the lusts
of the eyes, what great enemies they are unto Quietness. In which kind
(observing our former distribution) we may consider these three parcels, 1.
Conetousnesse. 2. Curiosity. 3. Jealousy. Of which three in order briefly.

Covetousness is a lust of the eyes vnmeasureably longing after wordly
Covetousness.
wealth. The covetous man's Eccles. 1.8.
eye is never satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1.8. And being not satisfied with
seeing it can never be quiet from wrangling, for 1. Tim. 6.10
Covetousness (as the Apostle speaks) is the root of all evil, 1. Tim.
6.10. And most specially of this evil, as it follows in the end of that
Verse, They that covet pierce themselves through with many sorrows.
Covetousness brings a man out of Quiet with God, with his Neighbor, with
himself. 1. With God, for a covetous man is angry with God, distrusteth his
Providence, shakes of his obedience, and is in a manner at plain defiance
with God, deuoting himself to the service of Luke 16.13.
Mammon, Luke 16.13. making the wedge of gold his confidence, Job. 31.24.
Job. 31.24. and committing gross Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.9.
Ephesians. 5.9. 2. With his Neighbor, for Covetousness will not suffer him to be at
quiet, but he is always litigious and very troublesome Mich. 2.2.
They covet fields and take them by violence, and houses and take them away,
They oppress a man and his house even a man and his heritage, Mich. 2.2. Mich
7.20.
To To disquiet his Neighbor, The Covetous man will lie in wait for blood and
hunt his brother with a net, Mich. 7.2. yea he is so unquiet toward him,
Mich. 3.2.3.
that he will pluck of his skin from him, and his flesh from the bones, he
will not rest until he has broken his bones, and chop him in pieces as for
the pot, and as flesh to the chaldren, as it is Mich. 3.2.3. 3 A covetous man
is never quiet with himself, For Pro. 15.27.
he that follows covetousness troubles his own house. Pro. 15.27. He 1.
Tim. 6.9.
brings himself into many a snare, 1. Tim. 6.9. 1. Tim. 6.10
He pierces himself through with many sorrows, 1. Tim. 6.10. Eccles. 5.11.
His very unquiet thoughts will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5.11. What
wrought that unkind unquietness between Genesis 13.7.
Lots and Abraham's household, but Covetousness? what made that great
unquietness between the Nehe. 5.20.
rich men and the commons of Israel, in Nehemiahs time, but covetousness?
what made that vproare in the City Act. 19.27.
Ephesus, Demetrius and his fellow crafts-men rising in an Hubbub, but
covetousness? and what does in these days breed most suits, quarrels, and
contentions among men? does not covetousness? when men are covetous bitten, it
is like the biting of a mad-dogge, it makes them rage they can never be quiet,
every light loss will bring the covetous man out of quiet, every small
trespass will make him commense an Action, curry small flawe or show of a
title will egg him on into a suit. A covetous man will not care to break the
laws of God and Man, to trouble his own Father, to rob his own brother, to
undo his own child, to vex the Fatherless and the Widow, rather then
fail of his covetous desire. Thus Solomon brings in the Covetous man
resolving upon any wickedness for the obtaining of Riches, Pro. 1.11.12 Pro.
1.11.12
come let us lay in wait for blood, and lie privily in ambush for the
innocent, we will swallow them up like the grave, we will fill our houses with
the spoil. And least we should think this to be the unquietness of some few
only, he concludes Verse 19. Verse. 19.
Such are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, he would even take
away the life of the owners thereof. As the Wolf will never be quiet among the
Lambs, nor the Hawk among the Birds, nor the Cormorant among the fishes, so
neither is a covetous man at quiet in himself, neither will he be quiet with
his Neighbors. Therefore thou, whosoever thou art, who love quietness, Luke
12.15.
Take heed and beware of covetousness, Heb. 13 9.
Have thy conversation without covetousness, Pro. 28.16.
Hate covetousness, If thou study to be quiet.

Next Covetousness, in the rank of the lusts of the eyes, Curiosity.
follows Cu^iofitie in the second place; A lust of the eye, because it is
bred by the eye, and consists in prying into that which no way concerns us;
an enemy unto quietness, because it suffers not the mind to be at rest.
Curiosity was a maine cause of unquietness among the Thessalonians, 2. These.
3.11 (...).
There were some among them which waiked unquietly, Curiose satagente^, busy
bodies, curious fellows. It was censured as the chief cause of the Emperor
Antoninus his troublesome time and unquiet mind, that he was full of
curiosity in prying into others states. And who sees not that busy prying
eyes, have troublesome hands, and unquiet heart? they who are prying into other
men's business, are sharp sighted like Eagles in censuring others Actions, but
bats and moles in their own. Many such curious unquiet persons there are
abroad, who not unlike those Lamian witches of whom Plutarke speaks, Plutarch
de Curi^s. cap. 1.
put their eyes into a box whiles they stay at home, but set them gogling when
they go abroad, and so seeing Math. 6.4.
a moate in their brothers eye, when they cannot discern a beam in their
own, raise the dust of much unquietness with the furious whirlewinde of
contention. To such unquiet curious, furious, franctickes, I say no more, then
that grave censure of Solomon concerning their folly; Eccles. 2.14.
The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness. Pro.
17.24.
His eyes are peeping in at every window, Pro.
therefore he shall not want sorrow. O beware of busy curiosity and prating
folly, whosoever thou art that love peace, and studiest to be quiet.

The third and last Disquieter among the lusts of the eyes is Jealousy.
Jealousy.
A lust of the eye because the eye is an immediate instrument unto it, and
therefore, in writings both divine and humane, he who is infected with this
malady is called a man of a jealous eye: And that this jealousy is a great
quietness, Number. 5.14.
enemy unto may appear out of Numb. 5.14. Where Jealousy is called a Spirit,
Spiritus Zelotypiae, a spirit of Jealousy. And indeed it is such a Spirit, as
will never suffer those whom it haunteth to be quiet, but like that unquiet
Spirit, Luk 11.24. Though it Luke 11.24.
wander up and down seeking rest it can find none, for why? It fills the
heart with a world of unquiet thoughts and raging agonies. It disquieteth the
party possessed with it, filling him full of fear, of frenzy, and of rape;
it makes him suspect every motion, misconster every action, and to torment
himself upon every light occasion. It disquieteth the party suspected, if
guilty with trembling conscience, if innocent with hazard of good name. It
disquieteth those with whom they converse, for where this rage of jealousy is,
there is a continual tempest, man and wife live like dog and cat, Innocents
are traduced, Neighbors are molested, every one disquieted; O beware of
Jealousy thou who would not be haunted with an hellish fury; For jealousy
is the greatest rage, Pro. 6.34.
Pro. 6.34. There is no peace no patience, no quiet, where this does dominere;
Be not hasty to jealousy, give no occasion, grieve not without occasion, be
not prone unto suspicion, if thou studiest to be quiet.

These were the Iusts of the eyes which do provoke men unto unquietness. The
Pride of life suppressing quietness.
Now in the next place follow those unquiet l^^sts which come under the name of
the pride of life. And these (according to their former distribution) are
principally these three, 1. Vain glory. 2. Singularity. 3. Hypocrisy. which
because they seem so jointly linked one to the other, therefore in a word we
will handle them altogether.

For the first of these three, Pride or vain glory.
Pride or vain glory, it is a too-well known Makebate and moouer of
unquietness. Pro. 13.10.
Only by Pride (says Solomon) comes contention, thereby plainly showing
that if there were no other Instigator to unquietness then Pride this alone
were sufficient to raise up mountains of unquietness; Hence is it that,
Philip. 2.3. Pride and contention are yoaked together as twins, Philip. 2.3.
Let nothing be done through contention or vain glory, And 2. Tim. 3.2.3. 2.
Tim. 3.2.3
Men shall be in the last days lovers of themselves, proud etc. And then it
follows, that thence they shall prove fierce, treacherous, and headie. It was
Pride which brought Genesis 4.33.34.
Lamech out of quiet, Genesis 4.34. It was Pride which brought Hest. 5.13.
Haman out of quiet, Hes. 5.13. It was Pride that wrought 1. King. 12.14.
Rhehoboam so much unquietness, 1. King. 12.14. It is Pride which makes men
now adays so prone to offer wrongs and so unwilling to put up wrongs, Pride
makes men so stout in their conversation, so contentious in provocation, so
injurious in action, so full of molestation, and so far from pacification. O
then take heed and beware of Pride; For Pro. 22.25.
thorns and snares are in the way of the froward, Pro. 22.25. Ye proud
persons, Pro. 75.4.5.
deal not so foolishly, lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a
stiff neck. Pro. 6.17.
The Lord hatheth the proud eye and the mischievous hand, Pro. 6.17 Pro. 16.5.
A proud man is an Abomination to the Lord, though hand join in hand, he
shall not be innocent, Pro. 16.5. Therefore be of an humble mind and study to
be quiet.

Singularity is an other spice of Pride, Singularity.
a Spiritual pride, when men have a singular good opinion of themselves, and
contemn others out of a proud conceit of their selfesufficiencie. Such
Singularitans there were among the 1. Cor. 11.22.
Corinthians who by contemning others by comparison of themselves did much
disquiet the Church of Corinth: Such Disturbers were crept in among the Galat.
1.7.
Galatians much disquieting the peace of that Church with presumptious
positions and distracted factions. And such there will be still (alas the
more the pity) who being singular in themselves, disquiet both Church and
common weal with their peevish and obstinate resolutions. Pro. 30.13.
There is a generation (says the son of Iaketh) that are pure in their own
eyes, and yet not washed from their filthiness, Pro. 30.13. What follows in
the verse next save one? Verse. 15.
There is a generation whose teeth are like as swords, and their iaw teeth as
knives. Beware (good Christian) of singularity which makes men to contemn
others, to be stoicall Cynickes, and severe critickes against others, and so
enemies unto quietness. Pro.
He that is wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool then of him:
Strive against supercilious singularity, and (following the rule of the
Apostle) Galat. 5.26.
Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one an other, envying one an
other. Philip. 2.3.
Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in lowliness of
mind let every one esteem an other better then himself, if he study to be
quiet.

The third and last branch of Pride making unquietness among men is
Hypocrisy. A very branch of Pride, for every Hypocrite is proud, Ierem. 8.8.
Ierem. 8.8. And a very enemy to peace, for every Hypocrite is a worker of
deceit. 2. Cor. 11.13.
2. Cor. 11.15. The Hypocrite albeit he has a flattering tongue, yet a
deceitful Psalm. 12.2.
heart, Psalm. 12.2. What unquietness did 2. Sam. 15.
Absolons hypocrisy effect in the common wealth of Israel? what unquietness
was effected in the Church of Revel. 3.9.
Philadelphia by the Hypocritis all Jews? what contentions arose in the Church
of Philip. 1.
Philippi through Hypocrites? It is the proper mark of Hypocrites (as the
Apostle Peter notes) 2. Pet. 2.3.
with fair words to make merchandise with Gods people. Hypocrisy breaks
peace with God, For Job. 27.8.
the hope of an hypocrite shall perish Job. 27.8. It breaks peace with
themselves, For Isa. 49. v. vlt.
there is no peace to the wicked, Isay. 49. It hinders the peace of others,
for it provoke the wrath of God upon a people, Job. 39.13.
Job. 36.13. Therefore beware of Hypocrisy if thou would Study to be quiet.

Hitherto we have seen the inward Motives of unquietness, Outward means of
unquietness.
now we are to take a veiw of those outward means whereby quietness is much
infringed and unquietness many times effected, which outward means (to omit
curious subdiuisions) we may reduce into these three heads.

1. Wantonness. 2. Idleness. 3. Busy business.
By wantonness I understand all vovuptuous causes giving occasion of
unquietness, Wantoines.
whither they be in look or gesture, in word and communication, or in work
and Action: for every one of these do break the peace of quietness. 1.
Wanton looks and gestures what unquiet brookers they are may appear by Genesis
39.
Joseph's Mistres, Genesis 39. By 2. King. 9.
Iezables paintings 2. King. 9. By Isay. 3.
Zions gallants Isay. 3. By Pro. 7.
Salomons Curtesan, Pr. 7. and by daily experience, French Academie.
for (as one worthily observes) In a proud look is a cloud of strife, and in
a wanton gate is a gap to dislike. 2. Wanton words and speeches are no small
Proctors for unquietness, as we may see in Genesis 30.1.2.
Rachel Jacobs wife, Genesis 30.1.2. In 1. Sam. 1.6.
Peninnah Helkanah his wife 1. Sam. 1.6. 2. Sam. 6.20.
In Michol David's wife 2. Sam. 6.20. Pro. 18.21.
Death and life (says Solomon) are in the power of the tongue, Pro. 18.21. And
in an other place, Pro. 11.1.
Gricuous words stir up anger Pro. 15.2. The tongue (as Petrarch testifies)
is the mightiest bellows to blow unquietness, evil words (says he) breed
profaneness, nice words suspicion, quipping words discontentednes, Therefore
beware of wanton speech if thou love quie^nesse. 3. Wanton works, work much
unquietness, as may appear by many instances. Whoredom,
Whoredom and Adultery the Chamberlain of wantonness, what a factious
factor is it for unquietness? what unquietness came unto 2. Sam. 12.13.
David upon his Adulterous fact with Bathsheba? what trouble came unto 2. Sam.
23.
Ammon upon the rape of Tamar? what wars and tumults did there befall the
Judge. 19.
Beniamites upon the Adultery of the men of Gileah? Hieronim.
O how sharp (says Hierome) is the fruit of whoredom? It is more bitter then
gaul, more cruel then the sword, more devouring then the fire. Pro.
6.32.33.34.35.
Who so commits Adultery with a woman (says Solomon) disquieteth his own
soul, A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped
away, for jealousy is the rage of a man, Therefore he will not spare in the
day of vengeance, He will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content
though thou give many gifts, Pro. 6.32.33.34.35. Therefore Lechers must look
for no quietness. Next Whoredom and Adultery in this rank of wantonness
follow Gluttony and Drunkenness as deadly enemies as any unto quietness:
Gluttonse and Drunkenesse.
For so the Wiseman tells us in express terms; Pro. 23.29.
Who (says he) has woe? who has sorrow? who has quarrels? who has wounds
without a cause? They that tarry long at the wine, Pro. 23.29. And he shows
the reason of it in an other place; Pro. 20.1.
Wine is a mocker and strong drink is raging, Pro. 20.1. Much unquietness,
Seneca.
many calamities (says Seneca) have proceeded from drunkenesse, By this loving
friends have been made enemies, brothers have been set together by the cares,
whole families have been distracted into dismal factions, whole Cittics have
been infected with seditions, whole Countries brought into utter desolations.
We need not seek abroad for foreign instance, lamentable experience lays it
daily before our eyes. Whence come most of our quarrelious contentions but from
the pot? when are men and women most out of quiet, but when they have taken a
cup of Nimis? where is the Drunkard who is not unquiet? where is any potting
without quarreling? therefore Solomon gives us a special warning; if we love
quietness to abstain from such a meeting: Pro. 23.20.23.
Be not (says he) among wine bibbers, nor among riotous eaters, for this will
cloth a man with rags, Pro. 23.20.21, There is yet an other kind of
Wantonness, viz. Playing and Gaming.
in Plays and Sports, which also many times prove bitter enemies unto
Quietnesse^; witness that of. 2. Sam. 2.14.
Ioab and Abner and their companies, 2. Sam. 2.14. Their sport began in jest,
but ended in earnest, for they caught (says the Text) every one his fellow by
the head, and thrust their swords into each othere sides. Witness the daily
experience of Gamesters in these our days, wherein who sees not how many
quarrels daily arise in bowling allies, cockpits, races, set mu^ches, but
especially from cards and dice? Recreations many times prove vexations,
especially in games of glory and of gain, wherein the looser is disquieted
for his loss, the winner hated for his gain, and many times play turns from
sport to spite, from wit to words, from words to blows. Digest. lib. 11.
Tit. 5.
Therefore in the Pandects there was a special law against Gamesters as unquiet
persons; And therefore Cyprian has a pithie saying to this purpose, Cyprian de
alea etc.
He that loves his own profit let him abstain from play, he who loves
quietness let him take heed of sports. And thus we have seen a little view of
the seeds of wantones which corrupt the fruits of quietness.

The next outward means which hinders quietness is Idleness. Idleness.
The which is a notorious breeder of unquietness, for so Pro. 10.26. Pro.
10.26.
The idle person is as vinegar to the teeth and as smoke to the eyes. Vinegar
will fret the teeth, and smoke will distemper the eyes, so does an idle person
the state in which he lives. In Mat. 25.26. Math. 25.26.
The slothful man is called an evil man; Now an evil man cannot be but an
unquiet man, for so Isay. 49.22. Isay 49.22.
There is no peace unto the wicked. The idle body and idle brain (says a
worthy writer of our own) is the Devils shop, Mr. Perkins.
in which the Devil has a forge of unquiet motions upon which he is always
hammering. When a man is most idle then the Devil is least idle, for then he
is most busy to allure him to unquiet thoughts. As it is the emblem of a
provident man, Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus, He is never less alone then
when he is alone, for then his thoughts are working most upon goodness. So it
may be the Emblem of an Idle man, Nunquam minus otiosus quam quum otiosus, He
is never less idle then when he is idle, for then his thoughts are hammering
upon unquietness. Though the sluggards hands refuse to Pro. 13.21.
work, Pro. 13.21. yet he has Verse. 19.
a stirring mind, Verse. 19. Though he be Pro 6.10.
loath to come out of his bed, Pro. 6.10. yet he can Mich. 2.1.
denise mischief upon his bed, Mich. 2.1. When Nero was idle and loath to
employ himself in worthy action, he set the city Rome on fire, and fed his
eyes with the flames thereof; So when men are idle and employ not themselves in
a lawful calling, they will be ready to set on fire the minds of those who
are about them, that they may feed themselves with the sparks of their
contention. This was it verified in the Thessalonians unto whom the Apostle
wrote this Epistle, 2. These. 3.11.
We hear (says he) that there are some among you which work not at all,
and yet are over busy, living disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. And this we may see
by lamentable experience in these days among us, none more contentious, none
greater Make-bates, none greater enemies to quietness, then our idle unthrift,
drousie sluggards and lazy loiterers, Which sort of people (if these my words
shall sound into any of their ears) I exhort and admonish (as the Apostle here
does in my text) that 1. These. 4.11.
They labor with their hands, that they do their own business and study to
be quiet.

The third and last, but not the least, Busy business.
external means to hinder Quietness is Busie-businesse; I cannot find in
all our language a fit term to express it. The native and proper word is
(...), we may call it a Polypragmaticall stirring in business not concerning
us, or at leastwise not fit for us, which Polypragmaticenes (for we will use
that name) must needs be a great enemy unto quietness. Pro. 26.21.
As a coal makes burning coals and wood a fire, so does this kindle wrath,
Pro. 26.21. This the Apostle taxes as a maine cause of this unquietness among
the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. 2. The. 3.11
We have heard (says he) that there are some (...), Curiose Satagentes, busy
Bodies, and that these are sowers of debates and unquietness. And who sees
not by daily experience, that from hence proceed the most unquietness in
these our days? which yet that it may appear more plainly and evidently unto
our experience, we will take a brief veiw of some principal delinquents in
this kind. 1. Talebearer^.
The Talebearer that busieth himself in carring news and raising tales for
the detracting, defaming, or laying open an others doings, is an enemy unto
quietness, by his ouer-busie, pickthanke-busines. Pro. 26.22.
The words of a Talebearer (says Solomon) are as wounds, and they go down to
the inwardmost part of the belly, Pro. 26.22. Pro. 12.18.
They are like the piercing of a sword, Pro. 12.18. Psalm. 10.
The poison of Aspes is under their lips, Psalm. 10. Yet these kind of
Make-bates, these Susurrones, these Gazitiers, these tatling Talers are very
rife in the world abroad. They walk about with tales and slanders as Pedlers
with their packs; for that very phrase is attributed unto them, Leuit 19 16
(...)
Leuit. 19.16. They being idle go about from house to house, prattling and
busying themselves with what is not convenient, 1. Tim. 5.13.
1. Tim. 5.13. Let these unquiet Gazitiers know, that they are of the most
devilish kind of unquiet persons, Pro. 25.18.
for they carry with them an arrow, an hammer, and a sword, as it is, Pro.
25.18. Without wood the fire is quenched and without a Talebearer strife
cease, Pro. 26.20.
Pro. 26.20. If then they love their own quiet, if they would not disturb the
quiet of others, let them cease their wandering about with tales: and all others
who would be thought friends to Quietness, take heed how they lay open their
ears to receive false reports; Psalm. 15.3.
let them shut their ears to Sycophants, and turn them away with a frowning
countenance; Pro. 25.23.
As the North mind drives away rain, so does an angry countenance the
slaundring tongue, Pro. 25.23. 2. In the second place of busy Bodies great
disquieters we may place the Flatterer, Flatterers.
for howsoever he would seem to please, to salve, and to be a man of peace,
yet he is a sore disquiete^. Pro. 29.5.
A man that flattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his feet, Pro. 29.5.
Psalm. 28.30.
He speaks peace to his neighbor but thinks evil in his heart, Psalm.
28.30. Romans 16.18.
They that are such (says the Apostle) serve their own bellies, and with
fair speech deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. Therefore beware of
a flatterer thou who love quietness: for Pro. 27.6.
the wounds of a lover are faithful but the kisses of an enemy are to be
shunned, Pro. 27.6. 3. The Busy Plotter.
The busy plotter is a great enemy unto quietness, Mich. 2.1. Mich. 2.1.
They devise iniquity and work evil in their beds, and when it is light they
practice it. They who have stirring heads, plotting pates never love
quietness. 4 No more do they who love to have an oar in other men's boats,
The Saucie ^ Peddler.
as our saucie medlers do, who love to be meddling where they have little cause
and less thanks. Pro. 26.17.
He that passes by and medleth with strife not belonging unto him is like one
that takes a dog by the ears, and like a madman that casts firebrarnds,
arrows and death, Pro. 26. Pro. 17.14.
The beginning of strife is when one lets out water, therefore leave of
contention, before it be meddled with, The Busy Lawyer.
Pro. 17.14. 4. But among all these sorts of busy makebates I may not forget
the busy greedy Lawyer, who makes it the mystery of his profession to make
debate, and thinks to salve all up again with Demetrius the Ephesian
siluer-Smiths Apology Act. 19.20.
Sirs ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. But let me answer him
with Simon Peter's reply unto Simon Magus, Act. 8.20. Act. 8.21.
Thou and thy wealth shall perish with thee, if thou seek to grow wealthy by
others misery, and to raise up thine own estate seek to ruinate the estate
of others by animating them unto contention* It is far from mine intent to
scandalize the most necessary use of the Law, or to reproach the honest and
conscionable Lawyer; I acknowledge law the physic and the Lawyer the
Physician of the body politic; neither are there wanting (blessed be the
name of the Lord) in this our Land and in these our days, both of Judges,
Scargeants, Counselors, Attournies, and generally of all sort of Lawyers, many
that fear God, endeavor to keep a good conscience, and both love and labor
for quietness; whom I am so far from traducing by this my discourse, that I
honor both their persons and their profession. Notwithstanding as the medicine
is more available that preserves health then that which cures sickness,
even so the mean that keeps neighbbors in peace and quietness is more
profitabe then that which ends controversies, and being now in hand with the
enemies of quietness I cannot spare the just censure of many unjust Lawyers,
who sees not what unquietness is set abroach every where by the busy
sollicitings of many that shroud themselves under this title of law; and
amongst them by none more then by the inferior Attourneis in the Country, and
among these by none so much as by our Boy Lawyers, new Vpstarts or prating
Petifoggers; These if they can but a little blurt forth a few misunderstood
law terms, and know the Tearmetimes, and days of appearance, and have learn^d
the way once into Westminster Hall, or can make mention of the name of some
famous Counselor or well spoken Seargeant, whom peradventure they never saw,
But, good Lord, how ambitious? how seditious do they grow upon the sudden,
how do they pry into men's estates? how do they lift at other men's possessions?
how do they labor to set men together by the ears Of these botches and blaines
of the law our grave learned! Countryman Sr Thomas Smith himself a worthy
Lawyer writes thus; De rep. Auglorum.
These busy heads and inuentours of troubles are men even permitted of God
like flies, lice, and other vermin to disquiet them who would employ themselves
upon better business, and more necessary for the Commonwealth: These men
(says he) are hated and feared of their Neighbors, loved and aided of them
which gain by process, and wax fat by the expense of others. What lamentable
experience has this our poor Country had hereof within these few years, yea
not many months since? In this our County (none of the greatest) there are not
so few as twenty common Attournies. One of these has been known in one
term to have the soliciting of thirteenescore causes at the least, (himself
glorying the number was far greater.) Now then calculate we but the fifth,
nay the tenth part of the like clients unto every one of the residue of the
like practioners, and what a world of unquietness must there be over the
whole County, when a little corner of it is so pestred with it? And how much
unquietness must there needs be through the whole land, when as a little
parcel of it is so disquieted? Have not creditours been notoriously cosened,
debtors oppressed, widows and orphans beggered, houses unpeopled, famous
markets unfrequented, and religious temples polluted, by the unquiet designs
of these Leguleian Catiffes and their bailiefs? And was not this of late a
general complaint in all our streets? But blessed be God which has broken
the tusks of these wild boares, and blessed be the hand of Gods Deputies and
religious Judges Itinerate of this circuit, who have curbed these furious
courses, and provided so seasonably for our countries Quietness. Honest
Lawyer, be not thou a reproach unto thy profession, by blowing the bellows of
contention. Fortise. fol. 11.
Thine own Fortiscue will tell thee, that Humane laws are no other but
wholesome rules which instruct men to do Justice; Thou should be an
Atropos to cut off the web of controversies between man and man, prove not a
Lachesis to draw in length the thread of their contention; Thou should be
an Oedipus to untie the knots of difficult and doubtful matters, be not a
Spinxe to entangle it in more knots, or like Hydra, who for every head which
was struck off, brought out seven other; Thou should be a Physician to
heal the unquiet maladies of the the body politic, be not like an
unfaithful Surgeon, who for his greater gain poisoneth the wound that it may
be the longer an healing; Do thou seek praise? Seek not to please men,
but to speak truth: Seek thou honor? The way to be honorable is to be
conscionable; Would thou gather wealth? The way to thrive by clients, is by
faithful diligence. Honest Countriman, do thou love thine own peace,
betraye it not to Lawyers, Haunt not their chambers, Abstain from suits, Fly
contentions, Study to be Quiet. And let us all so many as love Quietness,
beware of Satan's suggestions, inward temptations, and outward motions which
may give way unto unquietness. And thus much of the causes both internal and
external, Remedies against unquietness and means to preserne Quietness.
both principal and isntrumental which provoke unto unquietness.

Now in the next place we are to proceed to the Remedies of unquietness, and
to take a veiw of those means which are most available to procure and preserve
Quietness. Before I come to the unfolding of which discourse, let me by the
way admonish thee (Christian Reader or Hearer of this discourse) that this is a
lesson hard to be learned, the way to Quietness is hard to find. The World
has many crooked and by-ways to turn us out of it. The Devil has so many
rubbes to make us stumble in it, that Flesh and blood can hardly brook it. And
therefore our Apostle here is so vehement in urging it; 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
Study to be Quiet, which in effect is (as already we have heard) that we
should use all good meane^, try all good ways, use all good practices whereby
we may maintain Quietness. To the same purpose the Psalmist, Psalm. 34.14.
Seek peace and ensue it: We must seek by all means to have it, and when we
have it, we must use all good means to keep it. So the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.3.
Endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; Endeavor to
keep it, with all labor, pains and industry, in the bond of peace. Bind thy
self as it were to the good behavior and to the peace, that thou may
retain Quietness. So 1. Tim. 2.22. 2. Tim. 2.22.
Follow peace: repeated with an addition. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all
men; Heb. 12.13.
amplified with an explanation. Romans 14.19. Romans 14.19
Let us follow after the things which make for peace; If we would study to be
Quiet, we must study to know, study to find out, study to embrace, all helps,
means, and furtherances which make for Quietness. Would we see how, and with
what affection we are to prosecute these means, lo how powerfully the
Apostle Paul does explain it, Romans 12.18. Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace with all men. (If it
be possible) if by any means it may be effected, or by any ways procured,
(as much as in you lies) for your part let nothing be wanting, neglect no fit
opportunity, omit no kind of courtesy, (Have peace with all men) Be quiet,
live peaceably, carry your selves mildly at all times, in all places, with all
persons. The practice of Quietness we must not only approve but prove, not
only meditate upon, but make it manifest, Let your moderation (or mildness) be
known to all men. Let me therefore entreat thee Christian Reader to read with
understanding, and with diligence, both to observe and practice these wholesome
directions, which I am now to deliver concerning this so difficult and yet so
needful a matter as is this practice of Quietness. Read with a quiet,
teachable and meek Spirit, and follow these following directions with a
settled resolution, which I am now to propose unto thine observation.

Directions for the study of Quietness may bereferred unto two heads. The
(...) thode of these directions.
1. General observations. 2. Special instructions. General observations
serving for the procuring and preserving of Quietness at all times, in all
places, among all persons, upon all occasions. Special instructions are such
as tend to the study of Quietness at sometime, among particular companies, and
upon Special occasions. First I will propose directions for Quietness in
general because these being rightly understood the other will be the more
apparent.

At all times and in all places good Christians ought to follow the course of
Quietness. General directions for Quietness.
1 Timothy 2.8.
I will (says the Apostle) that men every where lift up holy hands without
wrath: And again, 1 The. 5.13.
Be at peace among your selves; Verse 14.
Be patient toward all men: And again, 1 Timothy 4.11.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear to all. And yet more, 1 Timothy 6.11.
Thou o man of God fly these things (viz. foolish and hurfull lusts which may
hinder Quietness) and follow after righteousness, love, faith, patience,
m^ekenesse* By which words we may learn a twofold path way unto Quietness.
The one by shunning those occasions, means, and motions which breed
unquietness; The other by observing and practicing those things which belong
to Quietness, or make for Quietness. What those evils are which do cause
unquietness, Page 23.24.25 26.27.28.
and are therefore carefully to be shunned by all those who study to be quiet,
I have already showed in its proper place to which I do refer the Reader:
what the duties are which we must practice in the practice of Quietness, I am
now to deliver. And for methods sake I do distinguish them into two sorts.

1. The Affection to it. 2. The Disposition toward it.
As in every Art or Action whatsoever a man would effect with commendation, The
Affection of a Christian unto Quietness.
he must first affect it in his estimation. So in this practice of Quietness,
he who would have it in Action must first embrace it in Affection. Whosoever
would study to be quiet, he must love quietness, and long after it in his heart.
In loving it.
So Zach. 8.19. Zach. 8.19.
Love the truth and peace: there must be a love toward it, a delight in it, a
making much of it. So Coloss. 3.15. Coloss. 3.15.
Let peace rule in your hearts (or as some translations read it) Let it be the
joy of your hearts. (...).
And as the Psalmist speaks in express terms Psalm. 119.164. Psalm. 119.164
There is much peace to them that love it. Love to a thing quickens a man to
do any thing for what he loves; love makes any lesson easy, any labor
light; love overcomes any difficulties, ouerleapeth any stumbling blocks,
ouerruleth any unruly passions, 1. Cor. 13.4.5
Love suffers long, love is kind, love enuieth not, love does not behave it
self unseemly. 1. Cor. 13.4 5. Therefore if we would study to be quiet, we
must love to be quiet, if we would follow the practice of it in our
conversation, we must love the worth of it in our affection.

Neither is it enough for us in the study of Quietness, to love Quietness,
and to like of it, for so the most unquiet turbulent Spirit may sometimes
approve of it, In longing after it.
but we must heartily long after Quietness, if we truly and sincerely study
to be quiet. We must long after Peace and Quietness, Psalm. 42.6.
as the Heart does pant and long after the water brooks. We must seek peace
and ensue it. Psalm. 34.14. Psalm. 39.14.
We must follow after it. 2. Tim. 2.22. 2. Tim. 2.22.
David's motto must be ours. Psalm. 120.2. Psalm. 120.7.
I am for Peace. And surely there is great reason why we should both love it
and long after it, as well for the equity of it in it self, as also for Gods
estimation and approbation of (...) for the profit also which it bring (...)
with it, Page 9.19.11.
to our selves, to others, to our souls, to our bodies, to our health and to
our purse, as has been already manifested unto us. Quietness is like that
Mat. 13.44.46.
precious treasure and peerlesse pearl mentioned Mat. 13.44.46. which when a
man has found and rightly valued, he so longs after it, that he is content
to part with all things else to purchase it. To which purpose might be
alleged, that golden saying of the golden mouthed Father Chrysostom.
Chrysostom.
Did thou know (says he) the worth of Quietness, or consider the
sweetness of it, thou would sell all that thou have to buy it, were it
present thou would welcome it, were it absent thou would make search after
it, were it lost thou would seek it, were it to be bought, thou would
think no silver or gold too much to procure it.

The feruency of our love toward Quietness, In Praying for it.
and the earnestness of our longing after it, will appear by another duty in
this case requisite unto it, and that is Prayer for it. Prayer is an excellent
means to procure Quietness; Iam. 1.5.
Does any man lack wisdom, let him pray for it? Iam. 1.5. Prayer is an
excellent means to preserve Quietness: Philip. 4.6.
Be careful for nothing but diligent in Prayer. Philip. 4.6. Prayer is an
excellent means to recover Quietness: Iam. 5.13.
Is any one one afflicted let him pray: Iam. 5.13. We are commanded to pray for
our own peace and Quietness. Romans 12.12. Romans 12.12
Rejoice in hope, be patient in tribulation, continue instantly in prayer. We
are commanded to pray for others peace and Quietness. Psalm. 122.6. Psalm. 122.6.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee; We are
commanded to pray both for the means both of our own and others Quietness.
1. Tim. 1 Timothy 2.1.2
I exhort that Supplications and prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks
be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Out of which words
may be gathered a fou^efold observation. 1. There can be no godliness and
honesty without peace and quietness. 2. No peace and Quietness without the
help of Magistrates, and such as are in autho^ity. 3. No blessing upon
authority unless God bless their ministry. 4. No way so likely to get a
blessing as Prayer unto the Deity. Therefore if thou would study to be
quiet, love Quietness, long after it, pray for it, pray zealously, pray
instantly, pray for peace, pray for the preseruers of peace, who are in
authority. And thus much briefly for the hearts affection unto Quietness.

From the Affection of the heart, The outward disposition toward Quietness.
we are now to proceed to the outward disposition unto Quietness; which is
the wise and discreet carriage of the whole man in all them who study to be
quiet. This Disposition toward quietness may be considered in a twofold object.
1. In man's behauior toward God. 2. In man's behavior toward man.

He who would study to be quiet, In respect of God.
must first of all seek for inward Quietness, Romans 5.1.
to have peace toward God. To. 5.1. and 2. Pet. 3.14.
to be found of him in peace. 2. Pet. 3.14. For without this peace with God,
there can be no hope of Quietness with men: Isay 57.20.
There is no peace unto the wicked. Isay 57.20. When Ioram spoke of Quietness
unto Iehu, as it is recorded. 2. King. 9.22. 2. King. 9.22.23.
Is there peace Iehu? Is there peace? He received this answer, what peace? or,
why do thou talk of Peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel,
and her witchcrafts are so many? Therefore the Angels make an excellent mixture
of this in their melodious caroll upon Christ's nativity. Luke 2.14. Glory be to
God on high, in earth peace, Luke 2.14.
good will among men; First there must be a Gloria in excelsis before there can
be a Pax in terris, first there must be peace with God, before there can be
Quietness in our selves. Again, we must first have inward Quietness before
we can have Quietness with others. And indeed when a man is at peace with God,
then he has the greatest quietness. No unquietness like to that of an
unquiet conscience, Pro. 18.14.
for A wounded conscience who can bear, Prou. 18.14. No quietness like the
peace of conscience, for that peace does pass all understanding, Philip. 4.7.
Philip. 4.7. When a man has his Quietus est from God, he is in the high way
of Quietness. Pro. 16.7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, the Lord will make his very (...) to be at
peace with him, Pro. 16.7. Yea he shall be in league with all the creatures,
Hos. 1.18.
With the beast, of the field, with the fowls of the air and with creeping
things as it is, Hos. 2.18. Therefore labor to be at peace with God all ye
that desire quietness. But how shall a man be at peace with God, and obtain
this inward Quietness? Let him Psalm. 2.11.
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him in trembling, Psalm. 2.11.
Let him with David, Psalm. 119.
have an eye unto all Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. Let him, with Genesis 17.1.
Abraham, Walk before God and be upright, Genes. 17.1. Let him with Act. 23.1.
Paul endeavor to keep a good conscience always toward God, Act. 23.1. This
will be a sure foundation for Quietness and without this can be no Quietness.

This foundation for quietness being laid, In respect of man.
by having peace with God, we may the better build upon it the work of outward
quietness, according to that Mark. 9.50. Mark. 9.50.
Have peace one with an other. Which mutual peace and quietness that we may
at all times and with all persons constantly keep and preserve, we must
carefully look unto these three points.

1 Our gesture. 2 Our words. 3 Our deeds.
And first for our very gesture we must have a special care of it if we
study to be Quiet. Gentleness in our gesture.
For our gate or gesture though other things be silent may bewray our own
unquietness and disquiet others. Thus Caines gesture was an index of his
unquiet heart, and the Lord reprooueth him for it, Genesis 4.6.
Caine why is thy countenance cast down? Genesis 4.6. Thus the unquiet Jews
sought to disquiet our Savior, by shaking and nodding their heads in contempt
of him, Mat. 27.39
Math. 27.39. And Genesis 21.9.
Ismaels ieering at Isack is called persecution, Gal. 5.29.
Galat. 5.29. Whence it is that our Savior does so sharply censure all
uncivil gestures, Math. 5.22. Math. 5.22.
Whosoever says to his brother Racha (which is only an interiection of
indignation, and a contemptuous gesture) shall be worthy to be punished by the
counsel, Aetius.
that is, does deserve condemnation. Therefore it stands us in hand to make
conscience of every gesture of our body, least thereby we show contempt or
Anger toward our brethren, and cause unquietness either to them or to our
selves. Ephesians. 4.32.
Be ye courteous one to an other says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.32. And again Tit.
3.2. Tit. 3.2.
Put them in remembrance that they be (...) soft or gentle showing all
meekness to all men, whether they be good or badde. The practice of this
mildness in gesture will show it self in these three particulars especially
1. In conuersing one with an other amiably. 2. In saluting one an other
friendly and courteously. 3. In giving reverence to every man in his place
respectively. A notable president hereof we have in the Patriarch Abraham Genesis
23. Whose courteous gesture unto the children of Heth is often there repeated,
Genesis 23.7.12.
He stood up and bowed himself to the people of the land. And it is there
related what love his kind carriage procured unto himself, and what
quietness among the people of the land. We need no other instances in this
kind then that of 2. Sam. 15.6
Absolome 2. Sam. 15. where we may see him with kind courtesies and courteous
gestures stealing the hearts of the men of Israel. On the contrary side we
may behold Ismaels unquietness by reason of his uncivil gestures, Genesis 16.12.
Genesis 16.12.
He being a wild man, his hand was against every man, and every man's hand
against him. Many such Ismaels we have in these days, rough Satyrs like Genesis
27.11.
Esau, stern Sirs like 1. King. 12.14.
Rhehoboam, dogged Malcontents like Genesis 4.6.
Caine, Cynicke stoics like Timon of Athens, Misanthropoi, Men haters, whose
very countenance is the Idea of Malice, whose sour looks and uncivil gesture
like vinegar do turn milk mildness into soreness and unquietness. But
thou, o man, or woman whosoever thou art that fear God and love quietness,
beware of stern looks and stately gestures: be like Moses in thy carriage, of
whom the Scripture gives this report, Numb. 12.3
Moses was a meek man above all that lived upon the earth. Colos. 3.12.
Put on the bowels of kindness, humbleness of mind, and meekness, Colos.
3.12.

In the next place, Wariness in words.
if we love quietness, we must take heed unto our Words: for there is
nothing which does more breed unquietness then unquiet Words. Iam. 3.5.6.
The tongue is but a little member, and yet it disquieteth the whole body, and
sets on fire the course of nature, it self being Iam. 3.5.6.
set on fire of hell, Iam. 3.6. Words many times prove like the Pro. 12.18.
peircings of a sword, Pro. 12.18. Many a man is Pro. 12.13.
snared by the transgressions of his lips, Pro. 12.13. Pro. 18.6.7.
A fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes, A
fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul, Pro.
18.6.7. Pro. 21.23.
Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles, Pro.
21.23. Therefore, if thou be wise, if thou love quietness, if thou would
keep thy self from trouble, have a care to thy tongue; resolve with David,
Psalm. 39.1.
I will take heed to my ways that I offend not with my tongue. Pray with
David, Psalm. 141.3.
Set a watch (o Lord) before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. Ephesians.
4.31.
Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking be put
away from you with all malitiousnesse, Ephesians. 4.31. Pro. 16.1.
Let God rule thy tongue, Pro. 16.1. And that thou may the better avoid
unquietness of the tongue, to the framing of thy speech observe with diligence
these three cautions. 1. For the matter of thy speech, that it be justifiable:
Zach. 8.16. Verse. 19.
Speak the truth, Zach. 8.16. Love the truth and peace, Verse. 19. Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. Again
that it may be profitable, Pro. 10.32.
The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, Pro. 10.32. And lastly it
must be seasonable, Pro. 25.11.
A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold^n pictures of silver, Pro. 25.11. 2
For the manner of thy speech, have a care that it be modest, Ephesians. 5.4.
Let not filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, nor words inconvenient
proceed out of your mouths, but rather giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5.4. Have a
care that thy speech be meek and mild, Colos 4.6.
Let your speech be always with grace, Colos. 4.6. Whether it be in ordinary
talking, Pro. 10.31.
The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom, Pro. 10.31. or in answering,
Pro. 15.1.
A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger, Pro.
15.1. Or in reproving, Galat. 6.1.
If any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a
one in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6 1. And verily these two latter are very
available to the practice of Quietness. For as concerning soft and mild
answers what a singular virtue they have to appease wrath, may appear in the
answers of 1. Sam 25.10.24.25.26.
Abigaile unto David, 1. Sam. 25. Nabal by churlish language provoked David
unto wrath, she by mild and humble speech pacified David's wrath and stops
his fury. So Gedeon, Judge. 8. when the men of Ephraim were exceeding angry
against him, and chid with him sharply, as it is Verse. 1. He spoke Judge. 8.1.3.
gently unto them, and gave them mild and courteous answers, and it
follows, Verse. 5. That when he had so spoken their spirits abated toward
him. Therefore Solomon says well, Pro. 15.23.
A man has joy by the answer of his mouth, and a word spoken in due season,
how good it is, Pro. 15.23. And as for meeknes in reproving, we may see what an
Antidote it is against unquietness by Abraham's dealing with Lot, Genesis 13.8.9.
Genesis 13.8.9.
Let there be I pray thee, no strife between me and thee, neither between
mine heard-men and thine, for we are brethren. Such kind of mildness in
reproouing will be as Psalm. 141.5.
a precious ointment and as balm into the head; Such a Pro. 17.10.
reproof will enter more into him that has understanding, then an hundred
stripes into a fool. 3. Lastly, if thou love Quietness, thou must have a care
to the measure of thy speech. Psalm. 31.1.
Thou must keep in thy mouth as with a bridle, Job. 39.37.
Thou must lay thine hand upon thy mouth, Iam. 1.19.
Thou must be swift to hear and slow to speak. Be not too talkatiue, for Pro.
10.19.
in the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that refraineth his
lips is wise, Pro. 10.19. Be not to hasty to speak, For Pro. 18.13.
he that answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame unto him,
Pro. 18.13. Be not too full of speech, For Pro. 25.11.
A fool powers out all his mind; but a wise man keeps it in till
afterward, Pro. 25.11. That which Valerius Maximus reports of Xenocrates may
be truly verified by most men's experience, He would often say, that it
repented him many times that he had spoken, but it never repented him that he
had held his peace. He that would not offend with his tongue, and so avoid
the unquietness which may fall thereupon, let him observe those three things
which Ambrose requires unto speech. Ambrose.
1. A yoke 2. A balance. 3. A metwand. A. yoke to keep it in stayed gravity,
A balance to give it weight of reason, Ametwand, to keep it in measure and
moderation. In just deeds and actions.


But what will it avail us to show courtesy in our gesture, and to be Quiet
in words, if our deeds tend to unquietness? Cor. 15.33.
Evil words corrupt good manners, but wrongful deeds do most breed
unquietness; many a man has the voice of Genesis 27.22.
Jacob, but Isay. 3.8.9.
the hands of Esau; Though the show of their countenance do not witness
against them, yet their doings tend to provoking. Therefore he who would
study to be Quiet must have an eye to all his actions, and take heed to all
his ways, that he may follow those things which belong to peace and avoid
those practices which are injurious and offensive unto others. For a general
rule in which direction I propose unto thee that golden rule of Nature so
pithily urged by our blessed Savior, Math. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do so unto them. Which
sentence did so well please Alexander Seuerus that in all his palaces and
public buildings he caused it to be engraven, Alexander Seuerus.
and when he punished any man, he caused this saying by the crier to be
proclaimed; Quod tibi fleri non vis alteri ne feceris, Do not to an other what
thou would not have done unto thy self. And certes if this rule of equity,
this very law of Nature were well observed, it would prove a notable remedy
against unquietness; how Quiet would all things be if men would offer no more
to others then what they would be content to receive from others, and would as
patiently bear with others, as they would have others to bear with their
infirmities. But this is a notable property of our corrupt nature, we are
forward and froward in exacting upright dealing at other men's hands, slack and
backward in returning the same back again to others; In other men's dealings
toward us we are Masters, able to teach them what they ought to do, but in
our own dealing toward others we are scarce Scholars to learn our own
duty. And from hence is it, that many times we are so much out of Quiet our
selves, and so vainly sow the seed of unquietness among others. Therefore
Psalm. 15.2.3.
walk uprightly and work righteousness whosoever thou art who longest after
Quietness.

Now because this large field of Innocence and upright dealing does consist
either in actions distributive or commutatiue, In our Actions distributive.
therefore we will take a brief view of the means of upright carriage of a
man's self in both these sorts of actions, for the doing of justice and
avoiding of unquietness. Actions distributive consist in the distribution of
Rewards and Punishments; in both which whosoever would practice Quietness must
observe a geometrical proportion, according to the worthiness of men, or
their deserts. For when Rewards are distributed vnrespectiuely, occasion is
offered to the unrewarded to murmr, grieve, or envy, and when Punishments
are inflicted undeservedly, a gappe is opened to discontent, complaint and
mutiny, both which are enemies unto peace and Quietness; therefore he who
would take away all occasion of unquietness in this kind must observe this
Christian policy, Rewards.
1. For Rewards let them be distributed justly, Romans 13.7.
Render to every one their dues, Romans 13.7. Fitly, Luke 12.42.
give to every one their portion in due season, Luke 12.42. Cheerfully, for 1.
Cor. 97.
God loves a cheerful giver, 1. Cor. 9.7. Secondly, Punishments.
for Punishments, let them be given moderately, Eccles. 7.16.
Be not thou just overmuch, Eccles. 7.16. Advisedly, Eccles. 7.7.
give not thine heart to all the words that men speak, least thou hear thy
servant cursing thee, Eccles. 7.23. Lastly, Punishments must be inflicted
seasonably, Pro. 19.18.
Chasten whiles there is hope, Pro. 19 18.

Actions Commutatiue consist in mutual traficke and dealings between man and
man, In Actions commutatiue.
as in Contracts, Covenants, and common conversation one with an other; wherein
for the practice of Quietness an Arithmeticall proportion is to be observed in
the equality and equity of our dealings. That rule of the Apostle taking
place in every particular of this kind, 1. These. 4.6.
Let no man oppress or deceive his brother, 1. These. 4.6. We will take notice
of it in some particulars. As 1. In bargnings.
In buying and selling, if we would preserve Quietness, we must look that the
commodities which we commute be, for Quality, saleable; we may not Amos. 8.4.5
sell the refuse, Amos. 8.4.5. For Quantity justifiable; Leuit. 19.36.
just balances, true, waights, a true epha, a true hin, Leuit. 19.36. For
Price tolerable, Amos. 8.4.
Thou may not make the epha small and the shekel great, Amos. 8.14. 2. In
borrowing and len, In lending and borrowing.
ding, wherein if we would preserve Quietness: we must lend freely, Psalm.
37.21.
The righteous is merciful and lends, Psalm. 37.21. we must borrow
sparingly, Pro. 22.7.
The borrower is a servant to the lender, Pro. 22.7. we pay truly, Exodus 22
14.15.
If a man borrow of his neighbor, he must make it good, Exodus 22.14.15. we
must beware for whom we become surety, Pro. 11.15.
he that hates suretiship is sure, Pro. 11.15. 3. In covenants and promises.
In Covenants and Promises, wherein, if we love Quietness, we keep these
caueats; Promise advisedly, Eccles. 5.2.
Be not rash with thy mouth, Eccles. 5.2. Covenant lawfully, 1. Tim. 1.19.
Make not shipwreck of a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.19. Perform justly, Pro.
25.14.
A man that boasts and keeps not his promise is like clouds and wind
without rain, Pro. 29.14. 4. In our Conversation.
In our calling and conversation, wherein if we would study to be Quiet: we
must follow our calling diligently, 1. Cor. 7.24.
Let every man whereunto he is called, therein abide, 1. Cor. 7.24. we must
live in our calling contentedly, Phil. 4.11.
learn in whatsoever estate we are therewith to be content, Phil. 4.11. we
must deal truly, Ephesians 4.15.
Follow the truth in love, Ephesians. 4.15. we must wrong no man willingly, Psalm.
15.3.
the righteous man does none evil to his neighbor. We must avoid all
occasions of offense, 1. These. 5.22
Astaine from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Finally, Phil. 4.8.9.
Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of a good report,
if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things, and
have a care to practice them, so the God of peace shall be with us and we live
one with an other in peace and Quietness. Special directions for Quietness.


Hitherto we have heard the general means for Quietness at all times, and in
all places to be observed by all them who would dispose themselves toward
Quietness. Now we are to proceed to the special directions for Quietness
among particular companies, and upon special occasions, wherein we shall meet
with several remedies against several diseases of unquietness, and learn
how to demean our selves against occasions of unkindness offered unto us by
others, as in the former Sections we were taught how to behave our selves to
the Quiet both of our selves and others. For the more methodicall handling
whereof, we must distribute Quietness into a twofold rank.

1. Oeconomicall Quietnsse. 2. Political Quietness.
Oeconomicall Quietness is that Household Quietness which is to be observed
in the private family, Oeconomicall Quietness.
between the Husband and the Wife, the parent and the child, the Master and
the Servant. Political Quietness is that civil Quietness which ought to be
observed in the common wealth between neighbor and neighbor, between the
superior and the inferior, between the magistrate and the subject. First we
will take a veiw of the former kind of Quietness, that which is domestical,
which is so necessary unto every house, that it is, as it were, the foundation
of an house, Pro. 24.3.
Through wisdom an house is builded and with understanding it is established,
Pro. 24.3. It is a sign of a Christian fam^l^e Luke 10.6.
if the son of peace be there and peace rest in it, Luke 10.6. And where
Quietness is wanting there is a sign that it is nigh unto desolation, For
Math. 12.25.
an house divided against it self cannot stand, Math. 12.25. Therefore
household Quietness is much to be respected, much to be desired.

In the Household Man and wife do bear the greatest sway, Between man and wife.
and therefore it is most meet and expedient for them to cheerish and to
maintain Quietness. They must 1. Cor. 7.3.
give to one an other due benevolence, 1. Cor. 7.3. This they cannot do,
unless they study to be Quiet; They must Ephesians. 5.
maintain mutual love and unity, Ephesians. 5. This they cannot do unless they
study to be Quiet. They must Pro. 5.18.
rejoice together, Pro. 5.18. This they cannot do unless they study to be
Quiet. They must Galat. 6.2.
bear one with an other, Galat. 6.2. This they cannot do unless they study
to be Quiet. They must Colos. 3.16.
not be bitter one to an other, Golos. 3.16. This they cannot choose but be
unless they study to be Quiet. Their near conjunction may teach them
Quietness, Math. 19.6.
They two are one flesh. Math. 19.6. It is Ephesians. 5.29.
unnatural for one and the same flesh to be out of Quiet with it self. The
manner of their conjunction may learn them Quietness, for marriage is or
should be merry age, it being a compound of two loves, wherein unless there
be a joining of hearts as well as a knitting of hands, there can be no unity,
but man and wife prove like two poisons in one stom^^h, the one will ever be
sick of the other. The end of marriage will put married couples in mind of
quietness: Genesis 2.18.
it was the mutual comfort and help of each other, Genes. 2.18. Now unless
they both study to be quiet, they prove like Jobs friends, Job 16.2.
miserable comforters. Discord between married parties is a disorder of all
disorders, a plague of al plagues, a misery of all miseries. A man were better
to dwell in the Pro. 25.24.
corner of an house top, Pro. 19.13.
better to abide under a continual dropping, Pro. 21.19.
better to dwell in the wilderness, then with unquiet married folks.
Quietness in the married estate Ioh. 2.7.8.
turns water into wine, but unquietness turns wine into water. Psalm. 133.1.
Behold how good, and how pleasant a thing it is (says David) for brethren to
dwell together in unity. Much more comely and pleasant a thing is it, for man
and wife to dwell together in unity. Syracides. 25.
Three things (says the Son of Sirach) does rejoice me, and they are
beautiful before God and man, Unity of Brethren, Love of Neighbors, A Man and
Wife who agree together.

By how much the more woeful and lamentable is the estate of many in these our
unquiet times, Unquietness between man and wife how it does arise.
who live so unquiet in Marriage estate. Blessed be God, I cannot descry it by
any feeling experience of mine own, for Cant. 6.3.
My W^slbeloued is Mine, and I am Hers; But I have often heard the complaint of
it in other houses, and having in my place interposed my self to compose such
domestical variance, I find that it were Pro. 17.12.
better to meet with a Bear robbed of her whelps, then with the furious
discord of unquiet married persons: there is no unquietness like to this, no
contention so difficult to be appeased Some impute the blame heerof most of
all unto the woman, Where the fault lies.
as if she by reason of the weakness of her Sex [mulier mollis aer] or the
stoutnesse of her stomach [Foemina ferens minus] were most prone to set
forward unquietness: But I cannot acquit the Man or exempt him wholly from the
fault hereof, When the fault is in the woman.
for (Maritus male irritatus) a provoked Husband (Vir vaeira) woe to the wrath
of such a man and (Homo) the Man many times, may at least wise go ((...))
together in that crime. 20. sorts of unquiet shrewes.
The Wife may then justly bear the blame, when she is guilty of any of these
unquiet shrewish properties, either 2 Kin. 2 30.
Proud like Iezabel, or Provoking like Number. 12.1.2.3.
Miriam, or Prying like Judge. 16.16.
Dalilah, or sullen like Hest. 1.10.
Vashtas, or imperious like 2 Kin. 11.1.
Attaliah, or scoffing like 2 Samuel 6.23.
Michol, or skornefull like Genesis 16.4.
Hagar, or skolding like Exodus 4 25.
Zipporah, or taunting like 1 Samuel 1.6.
Peninuah, or lying like Act. 5.9.
Zaphira, or lustful like Genesis 30.1.
Rahel, or spightfull like Mat. 14.8.
Herodias, or wilful like Phil 4 2.
Euodias, or disdainful like Genesis 26.35.
Esaues wives, or tempting like Job 2.9.
Jobs wife, or wanton like Genesis 29.7.
Potiphars wife, or wandering like the Judge. 19.2.
Leuits wife, or subtle like 1 Kin. 14.4.
Ieroboams wife, or hanging back like Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife, or too unconstant like Judge. 14.20. When the fault is in the man.
20. Sorts of unquiet Husbands.
Sampsons wife. The Husband may then justly bear the blame; when he is
attained with these following ill properties, either too vxorious as Genesis 24.8.
Shechem, or too abstenious as Genesis 38.9.
Onan, or too curious as the 2 Kin 4.32.
Shunamite, or too careless as Genesis 29 32
Esau, or too rash as Judge. 11.29
Iephta, or too facill as 1 Kin. 21.
Ahab, or too indulgent as the Judge. 19.3.
Leuit of Ephraim, or too inconstant as 2 Samuel 13.15
Ammon, or too foolish as 1 Samuel 25.25
Nabal, or too furious as Genesis 14 23.
Lamech, or too obsequious as Mat. 14 9.
Herod, or too sullen as Genesis 4 6.
Caine, or too proud as Hest. 5.12.
Haman, or jealous as 2 Samuel 3.7.
Ishboshoth, or adulterous as Genesis 35.22.
Ruben, or an unthrift as the Luke 15.13.
Prodigal, or covetous as Gen 31.41.
Laban, or troublesome as Genesis 16.12.
Ismael, or malecontent as 2. Sam. 7.23
Achitophel, or imperious as Hest. 1.16.17
Pemucan. Therefore that both the Husband and the Wife may the better prevent
these maladies, and live quietly each with the other, I will propose certain
caueats for Quietness as well to the one as to the other.

And first for the Wife (because she according to the common voice is first in
this transgression (if she would study to be quiet, How the wife may work
Quietness.
let her put in practice these directions. 1. Let her have a reverent awe and
respect of her husband, Ephesians. 5.33.
Let the wife see that she reverence her husbnand, let her consider that her
husband is Genesis 20.16.
the veil of her eyes, and that he is (...). 1.8.
deerer unto her then al earthly things. 2. Let her always give unto him
quiet, reverent and courteous language, 1 Pet. 13.6.
Sarah called her hushand Lord, Pro. 16.24.
Pleasing words are as an honey comb, sweet to the Soul, and health to the
bones. 3. Let her beware of indiscreet and snappish answers, Tit. 2.9.
please well in all things, not answering again. 4. Let her be obedient, Ephesians.
5.24.
As the Church is in subjection to Christ, so let the wives be subject to their
husbands in every thing, Ephesians. 5.24. Col. 3.18.
Wives submit your selves to your husband as it is comely in the Lord. Coloss.
3.18. 5. Let her be faithful, Heb. 13.4.
keep the marriage bed undefiled, give no occasion of offense, Phil. 2.14.
Do all things without murmurings, 1 The. 5.22.
Abstain from the appearance of what is evil.

But here me thinks I hear many a discontented wife replying with that
forward Ruler in the Gospel, Objections and excuses answered.
Luke 18.18.21.
All these things have I kept from my youth up, even from the first day of my
marriage until now, and yet I cannot live in quiet: A less poor Soul, thine
hap is hard, thy case to be deplored: But take heed, thou do not deceive thy
self, it may be, there is somewhat lacking and that thou have little cause
thus to instifie thy self: O no, thine Husband (thou say) is most unkind,
teasty, furious, nothing can please him; Be it so, yet he is thine Husband,
thou must sit down content with Jeremy, Ier. 10.19.
This is my cresse and I will bear it. Put on patience, and then it will be
Josh. 2.24.
nothing to overcome these infirmities. O but there be many occasions offered
to provoke unquietness; what then? these are but trials to prove good wives,
Pro. 19.11.
it is an honorable thing to pass by infirmities, Pro. 10.12. Erasm: Apothegm.
lib. 8.
and love covers a multitude of offenses. Alphonsus of Aragon, was wont to
say, Where the husband is deaf, and the wife blind, marriage is quiet and
free from dissension. The woman who would live quietly with an unquiet husband,
must be many times blind and not see what she does see, she must be deaf, and
not hear what she does hear. The wives Quietness does much depend upon her
own discretion, Pro. 14.1.
Every wise woman builds her house, but the foolish plucketh it down with
her own hands, and Pro. 11.16.
A gracious woman retains honor. It is a notable means also for the wives
quietness, when they apply themselves to the inclination, nature and manners
of their Husbands, so long as the same imports not wickedness. For as the
looking-glass howsoever fair and beautifully adorned is nothing worth if it
show that countenance sad which is pleasant, or the same pleasant which is sad,
so the woman deserves no commendation, that (as it were) contrarying her
husband, when he is merry shows her self sad, or in his sadness utters
her mirth. Men (says Socrates) should obey the laws of the cities, Socrates.
and women the manners of their husbands.

Now whiles we teach the Wife quietness, How the Husband may work Quietness.
the Husband happily may think that he has no need of such instruction; but
let him not deceive himself: for though he be the head, yet he may not
tyrannise over his mate, or disquiet her if he love his own Quietness. Nay
his very creation does show, that in the head is placed, reason, wisdom,
judgment, sight, hearing, and all other gifts which tend to the quiet
government and order of the body. Therefore thou Husband if thou would have
quietness, learn thy duty. 1. Love thy wife fervently, Ephesians. 5.33.
Let every man love his wife even as himself, Ephesians. 5.33. 2. Show thy love unto
her effectually, both by protecting her from danger, for Genesis 20.16
Thou art the covering of her eyes amongst all that are with thee, Gen, 20.16.
as also by cherishing her, and maintaining her estate, for Ephesians. 5.28.
So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. Ephesians. 5.28. 3. Honor
her, 1 Pet. 3.7.
give honor to the woman. 1. Pet. 3.7. make account of her as thy companion
and yoakefellow; bear with her infirmities; be content when it is for thy good
to be ruled by her admonitions. 4. Avoid occasions of discord and unquietness;
Col. 3.16.
Husbands love your wives and be not bitter unto them. Col. 3.16. Not bitter in
words, for Pro. 12.18.
there is that speaks words like the piercing of a sword; Not bitter in
gesture for Psalm. 101.5.
Him that has a proud look and a lofty heart who can suffer? Nor bitter in
deeds, Mal. 2.15.
Let no man trespass against the wife of his youth, Mal. 2.15. Therefore the
Apostle Peter requires husbands to 1 Pet. 3.7.
dwell with their wives as men of knowledge; And the Heathen Philosopher
teaches the self same Iesson. Arist. Ethie. 8.
The master of a family (says he) exercises (after a sort) a power
Tyrannical over his servants, a power Regal over his children, but in respect
of his wife he exercises a power Aristocratical, not after his own will, but
agre^able to the honor and dignity of the married estate.

And here me thinks I hear the dismal moan, Objections and excuses of
Husbands answered.
and doleful lamentation of many a woeful Husband, vexed, plagued and
tormented with an unquiet wife; Job. 3.1.2.3.
Cursed (says he) be the time that ever I met with mine unquiet mate, let the
day perish wherein I was married, let it not be joined to the days of the
year, let it not come into the number of the months for there is no man
plagued with such a wife, she is a very Alecto, a Megara, a Xantippe, worse
then a Quotidian Fever: poor man (though I feel not thy malady) yet I pity
thy case: But now there is no remedy, thou have made this thy choice for better
for worse, if it fall out woorsethen thou did expect, blame thine own choice;
But tell me in good sooth, what is it that thou do so much dislike in thy
wife? Are they infirmities of nature, as frowardness, sullenness,
suspiciousnesse, teastinesse, austerity in behauior, want of complementall
kindness and such like,? Pro. 19.31.
It is the glory of a man to pass by an infirmity, and 1 Cor. 13.
Love suffers all things; Husbands must bear with the wife as with the weaker
vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7.
women are like crystal glasses, brittle, yet profitable: as therefore a man
does more carefully take heed of breaking such a glass, then of a tin or
earthen vessel: So the Husband should have regard of the frailty of his wife,
more then with others, and must consider that even he himself is not without
infirmities. Yea but (will the perplexed Husband say) my wives insolent
conditions are not infirmities, but habitual maladies, they are rooted in her,
they do exceed, and who can endure them? but consider with thy self (O man)
whither thine own indiscretion, and lewd conversation have not given just
occasion: there be husbands in the world that forget the bond of marriage, and
impart the love due to their own wife unto other men's wives: there be some
Prodigals, great spenders, idle and slack in their business, whereby their
wives and children languish in poverty, there be others who haunting Tauernes,
Alehouses, and lewd company, consume that which should mainetaine the family,
and coming home drunk beat and vex their wives, there be others who by high
and bitter speeches, threatening looks and unkind actions, provoke their
wives, and stir up such strife and debate as do convert the felicity of
marriage into an Hell: Now if thou be attainted with any of these evil
properties, thou deseruest no less then such bitter sauce (howsoever it be an
evil piece of cookery in thy wife) to thy distasteful courses. But thou will
say, that thou art no such manner of man, thy carriage of thy self is without
exception, thou give no just occasion of offense unto thy wife and yet she
will never be quiet. It may be there is offense taken, where it is not given,
and all would be well upon the remoouall of that offense. Therefore if thou
would be thought a good husband, seek diligently to remove the stone,
whereat thy wife stumbleth and takes occasion of grief: Thus did Genesis
16.4.5.6.
Abraham, when Sara was out of quiet because of Hagar, and objected unto him
(albeit wrongfully) that he was the cause that she contemned her, bearing with
his wife, he removed the cause of contention, in suffering her to turn Hagar
out of doors. So must thou do if thou love thine own Quietness, as also what
thou see amiss in thy wife, either wink at, as if thou saw it not, or
reprove with meekness. But what (will thou say) may not I chide my wife? may
not I tell her of her infirmities? may not I reprove her when she does amiss?
Reprove her thou may, chide her thou may not, unless the offense be
against God, and thou art to reprove an irreligious practice; If Rachel
require that of Jacob which is only in the power of God, Genesis 30.1.
Give me children or else I die, Jacob may blame her importunity, Verse 2.
Am I in Gods steed who has withholden from thee the fruit of the womb? If
Jobs wife tempt him to impiety, Job 2.9.
Curse God and die, Job may check her more sharply, Verse 10.
Thou speak like a foolish woman. But otherwise in their own causes and
quarrels the husband must reprove gently and lovingly, like Helkana when his
wife Hanna mourned because she had no children, 1 Samuel 1.7.8.
Why weepest thou? why is thine heart grieved? am not I better to thee then
sons? Again, Reproof must be given in such a case discreetly not upon the
sudden rashly, not in open presence or before company. Therefore Cleobulus of
Lindie one of the wise men of Greece, among other precepts to married men,
gives these two principally: Plutar^. Apoth
First, that the Husband may not flatter the wife to her own face. Secondly,
that he do not reprove her before strangers. And Marcus Aurelius has a
pretty saying to this purpose: A wise Husband (says he) and one that seeks
to live in quiet with his wife, must observe these three rules, Often to
admonish, Seldom to reprove, Never to smite. But I cannot choose (will the
impatient husband say) I must needs speak, and if speeches will not serve, I
must use strokes, I must try what stripes will do, I will curry her coat and
tan her hide, I will make her smart but I will make her quiet: Indeed that is
the way to pull an old house (as we say) about thine ears, the ready way to
raise up more and more the dust of unquietness; Believe it, if gentleness
will not prevail to work quietness, much less strips: but may not I correct
my wife? No, thou may not do it; she is thy mate, thou and thy wife are but
one flesh, Ephesians. 5.29.
No man will hate, much less beat, his own flesh; It is an express
prohibition. Malach. 2.15. Malach. 2.15
Thou shall not trespass against the wife of thy youth. It is the greatest
reproach in the world (says Chrysostom) for a man to beat his Wife.
Chrysostom.
And Plutarch in the life of Cato the Censor affirms, Plutarch. in vita Cat.
that he which smites his wife does all one as if he should lay violent hands
upon the sacred images of the gods, which was counted an high degree of offense
among the heathens. I close up this clause with a more sound and serious
sentence of a writer judicious; Taffin.
The wives infirmities, must either be taken away, or borne with all, he that
can take them quite away, makes the wife, often far more commodious, he
that can bear with them, makes himself better and more virtuous.

Hetherunto we have seen the duty of Man and Wife single by themselves each
in his place for the practice of Quietness, Mutual duties betwixt Husband and
wife for the study of Quietness.
now it will not be amiss to direct them jointly both together for better
preservation of Quietness; their mutual duties to this purpose are these, 1.
Let them live together, 1. Cor. 7.10
Let not the Wife separate her self from her Husband, 1. Cor. 7.10. 1. Pet.
3.7.
Let the Husbands dwell with their Wives, 1. Pet. 3.7. And therefore in the
name of God I dare pronounce, that rash desertions or parting from one an other
in the married estate (a practice to common in our times) is unchristian, Math.
19.6.
that which God has joined together, let no man put a sunder. I know that in
these cases discontented and disseuered couples will allege that this they
do for Quietness sake which in their cohabitation or dwelling together is not
to be hoped for, their natures being so contrary; But let me tell them, that
this is an illusion of the Devil, he transformeth himself into an Angel of
light, and by propounding a show of living in Quiet, for the compassing hereof
induces them to gainsay Gods prohibition and to make a most offensive
separation. August in Ioh. tract. 9.
And to this purpose excellently speaks the learned father Augustine, As
conjunction comes of God, so separation proceeds from the Devil. 2. Let
them love together: In the book of the Cant. 2.15.
Canticles each calls the other Love, and what a reflection there ought to
be beweene their loves we have already showed in their several loves, now
this love between them must be steadfast not variable, settled, not mutable,
well grounded, not rashly conceived; for such love resembles only a fire of
straw, making a blaze for a while, but soon out. 3. Let them draw the yoke
together, Mare. 10.8
they are no more two but one. Man and Wife are partners, like two oars in one
boat, therefore they must both share together, and help together; when the
Husband is laborious, the Wife must not be riotous, when the Wife is thriftie,
the Husband must not be prodigal, for the Husband that has such a Wife,
casts his labors into a bottomless sack, and the Wife that is sped with
such an Husband, draws a cart heavy laden through a mirie way without an
horse. 4. Let them be careful to support one an other, Ephesians. 4.31.
Be gentle and friendly, Ephesians. 4.31. Galat. 6.2.
Bear one an others burden, Galat. 6.2. Let the Husband think that he has
married a daughter of Adam not free from infirmities, likewise let the woman
think that she has not married an Angel but a son of Adam not without
corruptions, and so let them both resolve to bear that which cannot be
amended; let not the body complain of the head though it ache or be out of
temper, nor the head of the body albeit it be crooked or misshapen. If the
Husband be given to brawling or the wife to chiding, let them both beware of
giving any occasion; he who would not hear the bell sound must take heed how
he be meddling with the rope. 5. Eccles 12.13.
Lastly let them both see that they fear God, Psalm. 119.6.
let them have respect unto the word of God, for Pro. 2.12.
this will keep them both from the way of evil, and from froward things. This
will be to Pro. 4.9.
the head an ornament of grace, and a crown of glory to our ways.

I have been the longer in this discourse of Quietness between Man and Wife,
because of all others, Parentall and filial quietness.
married parties especially should study to be Quiet, and their unquietness
carries with it the greatest blemish. I will be the briefer in handling the
two other sorts of Oeconomicall Quietness, viz. the Quietness of the Parent
with the Child, and the Quietness of the Master with the Servant; And first
of the former, parentall and filial Quietness. A practice well beseeming a
Christian family, and a gracious fruit of the word of grace, whose property
(as is declared first of all by Malach. 4.6.
Malachie, and afterward confirmed by the Angel unto Luke 1.17.
Zachary) is to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the heart
of the children to the fathers; the very project of an happy Quietness. And
surely I would to God there were not too needful cause to enforce this
exhortation of Parentall and filial Quietness, for who sees not what
lamentable presidents of more then unnatural unquietness are obuious in this
kind in many places; Many Parents are more unquiet then the Dragons, Lament.
4.4
and more unnatural then the Ostriges; and many a child is of a gastrill
kind to disquiet his own nest, of a very viperous brood, and as if the fell
Tigers had given them such. Therefore both of these had need to go to School
to study to be Quiet.

And first for Parents, How Parents should study for it.
Quietness is an excellent ornament for them; They, of all others, ought to be
sober, Tit. 2.3.
grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience. It is for their
ease, for the good example of their children, and for their honor to study to
be Quiet. Yea it is expressly enjoined unto them, Ephesians. 6.4.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, Ephesians. 6.4 And again, Coloss. 3.21.
Colos. 3.21.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, least they be discouraged. But
what shall Parents do for the better performance of this Practice of
Quietness? First, They must Ephesians. 1.4.
instruct them in the fear of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. As Genesis 18.19.
Abraham did his children, as 1. Chro. 28.9
David and Pro. 31.1.
Bathsheba did Solomon, and as 2. Tim. 1.9.
Timothy even in his childehood was instructed by his grandmother Lois and his
mother Eunice; For the Job. 28.28.
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and this is the only means to
avoid evil, as pride, Pro. 8.13.
arrogancy and the evil way. Secondly, They must labor to see them trained
up in a lawful calling, observing therein their natural inclination, for Pro.
20.11.
a child will be known by his actions whether his work be pure and right.
Thirdly, they must provide for them; for 2. Cor. 12.14
Fathers ought to lay up for the children. And 1. Tim. 5.8.
He that provides not for his own is worse then an infidel. Fourthly, They
must not be too indulgent unto them; for as the son of Sirach says,
Syracides 30.8.9.10.11.
If thou bring up thy son deliciously he shall make thee affraide, if thou
play with him he will bring thee to heaviness, laugh not with him least thou
be sorry with him, and least thou gnash thy teeth in the end; What was the
cause of old 1. Sam 2.23.
Elies dismal unquietness and of the insolent courses of his children (...)
was it not his own indulgencie and conniuencie when he should have reproved
them? Therefore Solomon says, Pro. 29.17.
Correct thy son and he will give thee rest, and give pleasures to thy Soul.
And again, Pro. 23.13.
Withdraw not correction from thy child, if thou smite him with the rod he
shall not die. Yet this correction must not be too severe, but done with
moderation; Ephesians. 6.3.
fathers must not provoke their children unto wrath, they must not too Colos.
3.28.
much discourage them. Fifthly, They must be exceeding wary in manifesting
their affection, for it is a dangerous thing for Parents to show more love and
affection to one child then to an other (except upon great and just occasion)
as we see by the example of Genesis 37.3.
Jacobs children, who because their father seemed to love Joseph their brother
more then them, they took occasion to hate him and to work much unquietness
unto him. Parents therefore, to prevent the like inconveniences, are to use
equallitie among their children so near as may be, whether in their ordinary
usage, or in the division of their goods. For, as all men naturally are
inclined too much to the love of earthly goods, so the unequal sharing of the
same does often times breed great brawles and pernicious debate between
brethren. Sixthly, they must require no more of their children then they are
able to perform, for that is a great discouragement unto the child when he
sees his parent to be too hard upon him, either in imposing over much labor,
or exacting more means of him then he is able to perform. Seventhly, They
must labor to maintain peace, unity and concord among their children: a
notable president wherein Parents may learn from Scilurus an ethnic parent,
Plutarch. Apoth.
who having many children, and fearing some unquietness likely to grow among
them, to the end he might induce them to live together in peace and concord,
he took a sheafe of many arrows and offered it to each of his children one
after an other, willing them to break it; but they could not, then pulling
forth the arrows one by one, they brake them all; even thus (said their
father) is it with you, so long as you remain united and love each other, no
man can hurt or break you, but if once ye fall at jar and strife, every man
will destroy, and overthrow you. This duty of Parents to keep their children
in peace and loving concord, Plutarch. in Lacon Apoth.
did the Lacedaemonians well understand, for when on a time two brethren fell at
strife and contention, they punished both the father and the mother, because by
good instruction they had not prevented, or at least wise, presently appeased
the dissension between their children. Eighthly. Lastly Parents must give good
example of Quietness unto their children, Jdem de educatione pueyorum.
Let Parents (says an ancient Philosopher) so order and govern themselves,
that their children seeing the same as it were in a glass may be restrained
from dishonest speeches and wicked deeds. Let them do as guides that show the
right way over foards and rivers, by going before those whom they lead, that
their children following their steps, may conform themselves to their virtues,
and so with them and by them learn Quietness.

If this be the duty of the Parent to live Quietly with his child) as How
children must study for quietness.
already has been specified) then much more is it the duty of the child to
seek and keep his parents Quietness. Pro. 10.1.
A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son, is an heaviness to
his mother, Pro. 10.1. And again, Pro. 17.25.
A foolish son is a grief unto his father, and an heaviness unto her that
bare him. Take away the beam from the Sun (says a good father) and it will
not shine, take away the springs from the river and it will dry up, take away
the bough from the tree and it will wither, so take away from children this
duty to their parents, and they are no longer children, but brethren and
companions with those unto whom Christ said ye are the children of the Devil.
Ioh. 8.44.
As we are to study to be Quiet with all men, so especially must we embrace
it with our parents from whom we have received our being, we must 1. Tim. 5.4.
first learn to show kindness at home, and to requite our parents, for that
is good and acceptable before God. He that is out of quiet with his Parent is
as the viper which eats through his damme, and as the raven which defiles
his ownenest. Plutarch. in Lycurg. Bodin. 1. lib. de Rep.
The Lacademoman law did disinherit unquiet children, the law of Nations does
hold them infamous, The Exodus 21.15
law of God (that judicial law given by God unto Moses, does doom it unto
death. Wherefore that children may not become liable to this so foul a
transgression, let them learn this friendly admonition. 1. They must have
always a reverent respect and estimation of their parents, whether they he
rich or poor, whether gentle or froward, Exodus 20.12 Ephesians. 6.5.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that it may be well with thee, and that thou
may live long upon earth. Respectfull children are sure of a blessing, but a
contemptuous and unquiet child is near to cursing. Pro. 30.17.
The eic that mocketh his father and despises the instructions of his mother,
the Ravens of the vallie shall pick it out, and the young Eagies shall eat it.
2. They must yield them due obedience, Colos. 3.20.
children obey your parents in all things, for this is acceptable unto the
Lord. And that we might know what is meant by all things wherein Parents must
have obedience, the same Apostle speaks thus in an other place, Ephesians. 6.1.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. The neglect of
which obedience as it is a great breach to Quietness, so it does incur the
penalty of a great offense; Deuteronomy. 21.18.
If any man (says Moses) has a Son that is stubborn and disobedient, which
will not hearken to the voice of his father, and to the voice of his mother,
and they have chastened him, but he would not obey them, then shall his father
and his mother take him, and bring him out to the elders of his City, and
shall say unto them, This our son is stubborn and disobedient, and he will
not obey our admonition, then the men of the City shall stone him with stones
unto death. Deuteronomy. 21.18.19.20. Thirdly, They must seek to please their
parents, and beware of offending them; Leuit. 19.3.
Every one of you shall stand in awe of his father and mother; As indeed
whosoever loves father and mother, fears their displeasure and on the
contrary side, he who has no regard how he does behave himself unto his
Parents, cannot choose but procure their displeasure. Fourthly, They must help
their parents, releive their wants and comfort them in their adversities. It is
Paul's counsel that 1. Tim. 5.4.
Children and nephews should recompense the kindness of their kindred; then
much more to help and serve their parents in their necessities. Neither shall
they perform herein any more then the payment of part of their debts,
whereunto they are bound in consideration of the benefits that they have
received from their parents. Fifthly, They must be content with patience to
bear with the infirmities of their parents; what though thy parents be
rigorous? what though they be froward? what though they be testie, sullen,
wilful, spightfull, or any ways prove either to provoke or to be provoked
unto wrath? yet we must remember that they are our parents, and what will not
good children take with patience at their parents hands? I conclude this
clause, with the saying of the son of Syrach. Siracides. c. 3.9.10.13.14.15
Honor thy father and mother indeed and in word, and in all patience, that
thou may have Gods blessings, and that his blessing may abide with thee in
the end, for the blessing of the father establishes the houses of the
children, and the mothers curse rooteth out the foundations, help thy father in
his age, and greiue him not as long as he lives, if his understanding fail,
have patience with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength,
for the good entreatie of the Father shall not be forgotten, and for thy
mothers offense thou shall be recompensed with good, and it shall be founded
for thee in righteousness.

Whiles we are in this discourse of domestical Quietness between the Parent
and the Child, How brethren and sisters may keep Quietness.
it will not seem impertinent either to the text, in general, or to this
Section in special, if we take a view of Fraternall Quietness that which is
between brethren and hrethren, between sisters and sisters, or between
brethren and their Sisters. A property (where it is) so commendable that David
with admiration does extol the same. Psalm. 133.1.
Behold how good, and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity. It is not only good but also pleasant, if for brethren in profession
much more for brethren both by nature and profession to be affectioned to Romans
12.10
love one an other with brotherly love, and to entertain one another 2. Pet.
1.7.
with brotherly kindness. But unquietness between brethren is a thing most
unseemly, most barbarous and prodigious. All enmity (says an Heathen man)
breeds within our selves a thousand tormenting passions, Plutarch.
but especially the enmity between brother and brother, for this is merely
unnatural. Xenophon. l. 2. de dictis and fact. Socrat.
When Socrates saw Chaerephon and Chaerecrates two brethren iarring and warring
each with other, he said unto them, ye do now, as if the hands which were
created to help one the other, should hinder and hurt each the other, or as if
the feet which were framed to bear one an others burden, should supplant one
the other, or as if the ears, which are coaiutors of mutual good should wax
deaf to hear good one for the other, or as if the eyes whcih are fellow spies
for the good each of other should look asquint at the good one of the other.
You will grant it to be very unnatural, either for the hands, or the feet,
or the ears, or the eyes, one to strive against the other; much more, more
unnatural and monstrous will the strife between brethren be, because the aid
which one of them may and should give unto the other does far exceed the
cooperation of the hands, the supportance of the feet, the coaudience of the
ears, or providence of the eyes. As Nature does abhor unquietness among
brethren, so is it detestable in the sight of God; Amos. 11.1.
For three transgressions of Edom, and for four (says the Lord) I will not
turn unto it, because he did pursue his brother with the sword. And where
Solomon speaks of those things which the Lord does specially hate, he makes
this the vpshot of all the rest; Pro. 16.19.
The man that raises up contentions among brethren. Of all the vials of the
wrath of God powered down upon sinners, it is one of the soarest, when a man
(according to Esaias his phrase) is Isay 49.26.
fed with his own flesh, and made drunk with his own blood. B. King upon
Jonah. Lect. 15.
That is (as a reverent pillar of our Church does expound it) when a man takes
pleasure in the overthrow of his own seed, and seeks the destruction of his
own kindred. As there is no unity to the unity of loving brethren, so there is
no enmity like to the enmity of brethren. Pro. 18.19.
A brother offended is harder to be won then a strong city, and their
contentions are like the bars of a castle. The implacable hatred of Genesis 4.8.
Caine against Abel, Genesis 27.41,
Esau against Iaacob, Atreus against Thiestes, Eteocles against Polinices,
Romulus against Remus, Bassanus against Geta, together with the late more then
tragical examples of brothers discords, in the Kingdom of Argiers, Tunes, and
Barbaric, are they not as Trumpets to sound out the truth hereof? Woe unto
that house, Mat. 13.36.
where they of one house are divided, and where a man's enemies are they of his
own house. Wherefore as my desire is to persuade quietness among all sorts of
people, so especially among brethren, and where there is this unnatural
variance and contention, let me entreat them to consider with themselves how
unseemly in nature, how offensive to God, how injurious to their own souls,
how unbefitting Christians, yea reasonable creatures, this their contention is.
Let me press Abraham's argument unto them, Genesis 13.18.
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me, and mine and
thine, for we are brethren. The name of brethren, the remembrance of affinity
should be a sufficient motive, to stop all controversy, and to pacify all
enmity. Let brethren and kindred hold together, not like Genesis 49.5.
Simeon and Leui, brethren in evil, but like 1 Samuel 18.1.
David and Jonathan, to preserve one another from evil: let them bear and
forbear one with another, for what shall a man bear withal if not with his
own flesh? let 2 Cor. 13.11
them be of one mind, and live in peace. In a word, let both brethren and
sisters to this purpose follow the counsel that mellifluous Bernard gives
unto a Sister. My loving Sister, Bernard.
hear (says he) what I speak unto thee, if ^n any thing thou have grieved
thy Sister, or caused her to be sorrowful, satisfy her, if thou have sinned
against thy Sister, repent before her, if thou have standalized her, ask her
forgiveness, go on with speed to reconcilment, sleep not till thou have made
satisfaction, rest not, till thou return in peace, use all means for to
procure Quietness.

There is yet one more caveat to be given as concerning Domestical
Quietness, and that is, Mutual duties between Masters and Servants for the
preservation of Quietness.
the concord and aggreement between Masters and Servants: Householders, and
their Families, how they may study to be quiet. For between these many times
falls out much unquietness, and complaints are commonly of Householders
against the unquietness of their Household, of Servants against the
unquietness of their Masters. For the preventing of which malady, both sorts
in their places, may observe this remedy.

To begin with the master of the family, Duties of masters for quietness.
because he has the Sovereignty, and is Paterfamilias the father and chief
head of the family; if he love (as he should) quietness in, the family. 1. Let
him take heed to his choice whom he does admit into his family: David's wary
practice may be herein his worthy president, Psalm. 101. Verse 4. 5. 6. 7.
A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person, who so
privily slaundereth his neighbor him will I cut off. Him that has an high
look and a proud heart, will not I suffer, Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me, He that walks in a
perfect way, he shall serve me, he that works deceit shall not dwell in
mine house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. 2. Next unto
his choosing, let him look well to the well using of his servants, enjoin no
grievous burdens unto them, nor require no more of them then strength will
bear? Leu. 25 46.
Over your brethren, ye shall not rule with cruelty: give them their portion of
food in due season, Fro. 27.27.
Let there be sufficient for the food of thy family and for the sustenance of
thy maids. Give them their deserved pay and hire, Luke 10.7.
The Labourer is worthy of his wages, It must be duly and truly paid, for the
neglect of this breeds much unquietness Deuteronomy. 24.15.
in the servant, and it is a Iam. 5.4.
crying sin in the ears of the Lord; be not too severe in punishing; Pro.
11.17.
He that is cruel troubles his own flesh; nor too rigorous in threatening:
Ephesians. 6.9.
Ye masters (says the Apostle) forbear threatening knowing that your master
also is in Heaven. 3. The good Householder who would preserve quietness in his
household must have a watchful eye over them and their carriage. Pro. 27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, Pro. 31.27.
ouersee the way of the household, and when he sees unquietness beginning to
arise in any of his household, he must with Exodus 2.1^.
Moses and with Genesis 13.18.
Abraham, seek to make a speedy pacification, and to quell unquietness in the
beginning. 4. He must give good example to the family, he must Psalm. 101.2.
behave himself wisely in a perfect way, and walk within his house with a
perfect heart. He must beware of froward speech, hasty gesture, and unquiet
behavior, for his example i^ (...) lesson to the family: Therefore as by Deuteronomy.
6.7.
word he is to instruct them in all godliness, so by example he must show
the pattern of sobriety, meekness, patience and gentleness if he study for
household quietness.

Now as concerning Servants, Duties of Servants for quietness.
their estate and condition (as being in subjection, may put them in mind of
their required quietness; which duty that they may the better practice, they
must thus faithfully and diligently demean themselves in their affairs. 1.
They must have a reverent awe and respect unto their masters and household
governors; 1 Timothy 6.1.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed. 2. They
must yield obedience willingly and cheerfully: Col. 3.22.
Servants be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling in singleness of heart as unto Christ. Ephesians 6.6.7.
Not with eye service as men pleasers, but with good will doing sernice. 3.
They must seek to please their masters in all their words, gestures and
actions. Tit. 2.9.
Let Servants be subject to their masters and please them in all things, not
answering again; where that latter clause ((...)) not answering again, does
insinuate an apparent means of the breach of Quietness, when Servants are too
talkatiue, or when they bandy words for words, and are too malapert in their
answers, or too prone unto complaints, and withal shows an excellent means
to redress this, which is discreet silence. 4. They must be patient,
contented to bear with their masters infirmities, injuries or frowardness. 1
Pet. 2.18.
Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward, where we see an objection answered, the
impatient servant might peradventure stand upon this: My master is outrageous,
bedlame, furious, without any mercy, without any mean, and therefore how can I
brook with quietness his continual frowardness? The Apostle tells him
that howsoever the case stands he must be patient and embrace quietness, and
to this end does propose to their imitation the example of Christ Jesus, Ibid.
ver. 23
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. 5. They that are
Servants must labor to maintain quietness between themselves, as they are to
be quiet toward their superiors, so they must study to be quiet with their
equals and fellowseruants, one must not envy the other, nor provoke another,
nor slander another, nor wrong another, for that is the way to set the whole
house on fire, and 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
God is the auenger of all such things, he is an evil servant who presumes
upon his masters patience, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and
revel with them, or rail at them. Matthew 24.49.50.
His portion shall be with hypocrites by reason of his unquietness. I
conclude this Section, and so this whole discourse of Oeconomicall Quietness,
with that worthy sentence of learned Augustine concerning prosperities of
Families: August. tract. 51. in Ioh.
That family (says he) is of most sound tranquillity and firm stability,
where the master or goodman of the family is like Josh. 24.14.
Joshua religious, and the mistress or goodwife of the family like 1 Samuel 25.25
Abigail, discreet and virtuous; where the father is like Genesis 18.19.
Abraham faithful, the mother like 1 Pet. 3.6.
Sara helpefull, the son like Genesis 23.6.
Isaac dutiful, the brethren and sisters; like Ge. 24 60.
Laban and Rebecca amiable, the servants like the Luke 7.8.
Centurions servant tractable. There is quietness in the house when every
member of the house studieth for quietness; when man and wife live together in
amity, brethren and sisters in unity, servants and companions in unanimity,
when superiors give examples of integrity, inferiors discharge their duty,
when the elder sort art patterns of Sobriety, and the yoonger sort are vessels
of Sanctity.

Hitherto we have heard instructions for Domestical Quietness in private
families: Political Quietness.
now we are to proceed unto a discourse of Political Quietness abroad. For it
is not only required of us, that we study for Quietness at home, but as far
forth as it is possible, Romans 12.18
and as much as in us lies, we are to labor to be at peace with all men. This
Political Quietness (that we may methodically take notice of it) may be
distributed into a twofold rank.

1. National Quietness war and peace.
National Quietness: betwixt Nation and Nation. 2. Civil Quietness: betwixt
people of the same Nation.
As concerning the former of these two, my position is this. Quietness
between Nation and Nation is by all means to be maintained and preserved, it
was the grace of the glorious time of grace so long agone promised under the
Gospel of Christ, that then Mich. 4.3.
They should beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning
hooks, nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more. And so by the Prophet Zachary; Zach. 9.10.
The battle bow shall be cut off, and he shall speak peace unto the Heathen
from sea to sea. I am far from that Anabaptisticall frenzy, as simply to
deny the lawfulness of war, or peremptorily to condemn all use of arms, for
I know that there is Pa time of war, as well as a time of peace, Eccles. 3.8.
I acknowledge that wars are sometimes of necessity, sometimes both approved
and vpheld by divine autheritie, Exodus 15.3.
The Lord is a man of war, his name is Jehovah, There are battles which are
called the 1 Samuel 18.17
Lords battles, and of many a battle it may be said, 1 Chr. 5.22.
The war was of God, The Psalm. 144.1.
Lord teaching men to make war, being the Josh. 5.15.
chief captain and leader in that war, Psalm. 18.34.35.
as also decreeing the victory of the war. But yet notwithstanding I far
prefer peace before war, and pleading now for Quietness, am of the same
mind which Timotheus was when he gave counsel to the Thebanes, Plutar. Apoth.
That war is not to be undertaken, when peace and quietness may be gotten,
and I approve of that short but sharp answer which Archidamus gave unto the
Aeolians, St Mart. Cognets politic discourses upon truth. cap. 12.
when they asked his advise concerning aid that the Argians required of them in
their war, in a large letter he wrought only these few words, Quietness is
good. For Xenophon writing of the acts of the valiant Greeks, shows that it
is more glory to overcome by wisdom then by force, Xenophon.
and that all wise men do abstain the most that they are able from war,
albeit they have thereunto just occasion, yea, M. Tul. Cicero. Jniquissima pax
iustissimo bello est antefevenda.
the oracle of the Roman Orators was wont to say, That a disaduantageable
peace was to be preferred before a just war, and that they who desire war,
when they may have peace, are detestable creatures. It is reported in the life
of S. Jn vita Augustini.
Augustine, that he would never pray for such as had wilfully and voluntarily
thrust themselves into needless wars: And out of his own writings we read
this pithy sentence to this purpose, August. de Ciuit. Dei 19.
Wars howsoever just, yet prove trooublesome and sorrowful to the best. And
therefore the same Author writing to his friend Boniface, Jdem Epist. 105. ad
Bonifacium.
advises him before all trophies and triumphs attending victories of war to
prefer Quietness. To the which purpose he does allege that ancient
mandate given by God him self unto the Jew, hat Deuteronomy. 20.10
before they denounced war against any place they should first offer peace.

It is not a common blessing which we of this land at this day enjoy, An
admoninon to be thank full for our common peace.
in that we are free from wars, and may enjoy a common Quietness: Lam. 4.20.
The breath of our nostrils, The anointed of the Lord came unto us like Genesis
8.11.
Noah's dove with an olive branch of peace, our Augustus has shut the iron
gates of war, and settled peace among us, Mich. 4.4.
We may sit every every man under his vine and under his fig tree, and there is
none to make us afraid. Had we ever felt the scourge of war, we would better
prize this garland of peace, had we been in the coats of our forefathers, or
our neighbors, we should have known how to esteem this great blessing of
God: The murdering peecesabout men's ears, the burning of Churches and houses
over men's heads, the ghastly cryings and shreikes of killing, resisting, and
dying people, the horrible effusion of human blood the risling, spoiling and
wasting of all sorts of commodities, with a thousand more such like insolences
of Soldiers, do plainly show the miseries of wars. Our neighbor countries
which are about us have seen and tasted these calamities; this little Island
has stood immooueable whiles all the rest of the world has been up in
tumults. O that we were so happy as to know our own happiness? O that we were
truly thankful to our good God for these so great blessings, yet there are
some amongst us, who repine at this our peace, and both wish and pray for
wars. Let me ask them, how they put this precept of my Text in practice?
do they study to be quiet? they will reply, the hereditary enemy gets most
advantage by this peace, after this great calm, there will come in all
likelihood a greater tempest; Fears I confess not altogether careless; And
therefore I could wish our peace would not make us so secure, and that in this
common. Quietness there were a more common care for the preservation of this
Quietness, for there is no trust to be had in their truce, who maintain that
faith is not to be kept with heretics, that is which are not Idolaters like
themselves: But yet in the midstof this careful providence, I would have every
good Subject, every good Christian to seek peace his continuance, Psalm. 122.6.7
O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, peace be
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. When wars are to be
prosecuted.


Here by the way, because it may be, some will desire to be informed, when
wars are to be undertaken without the offense of conscience; how we may wage
war and yet study to be quiet? I will in a word or two set down the lawful
causes and occasions of a lawful war. The first is the defense of true
religion against the oppugners thereof So did 2 Chronicles. 13 6.7 8.9.10.11.
Abijah against Jeroboam. 2. Chro. 13. 2. For the freedom and deliverance of
such as are oppressed for religion, as we see in the histories of the Judges,
who raised Judge 3 and 4. and 5. and 6. etc.
war for the delivery of the distressed people out of the hands of their
oppressors. 3. For the necessary defense of the common wealth Iud 11.13.
by repulsing injuries, 2 Samuel 10 4
by revenging indignities, and Sam 30.18. Genesis 14.16.
by recovering losses. In these cases wars bring peace, arms cause
quietness, and therefore are not to be condemned or disallowed.

From this National Quietness abroad, Civil Quietness.
I come to civil Quietness at home, Bodin de rep.
The glory (as one calls it) of a common wealth, The beautiful ornament of a
Nation within it self. In which kind of civil Quietness the people of
Laconia in old time did so excel, that Lycurgus beholding the general
concord and unity among them, said thus unto a noble man that did accompany
him; Plutarch. in Lycurg.
Are not all the people of Laconia Brethren? And the same Lycurgus upon the
like occasion has this saying, Jdem ibidem.
The Sinews of a commonwealth are peace and Quietness; The chiefest felicity
of a city consists in the civil concord and unity of the inhabitants. This
civil Quietness may be subdiuident into two sorts.

1. Public Quietness: between superiors and inferiors, magistrates and
subjects, people and pastors. 2. Private Quietness: between Neighbors and
Neighbors.
In the former of these two I shall be the briefer, Public Quietness.
because it is neither so seasonable, nor so needful to be enforced as the
latter. We live not now (blessed be our great good God who has given us this
Quietness) in the unquiet times of discontented factions, or in the unquiet
broiles of civil commotions: yet for the better preservation of our peace and
Quietness, something may be spoken both pertinently from the text, and
seasonably in the time, to all sorts of persons in public places for the
study and practice of Quietness.

Unto Magistrates let me propose David's example for the study of quietness,
Between the Magistrate and Subject.
Ps. 122.8.9.
for my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, peace be within thee,
because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good. Let me propose
unto them the imitation of the Titles which Julius Pollux gave unto the Emperor
Commodus, Suetonius.
whom for his Quiet behavior toward all his Subjects, he terms the father
of the people, gentle, loving, merciful, just, courteous, affable, sober,
gracious. Let me lay before their eyes for the practice of Quietness the table
of Ptolomie Arsacides which the Emperor Marciu Aurelius found at Thebe wherein
were contained these protestations in Greek Characters, Taffin lib. 3. of
amendment of life.
I never exalted the proud rich man, neither hated the poor just man, I never
benifited for affection, nor punished upon passion; I never suffered evil to
cape unpunished, neither goodness unrewarded, I never denied justice to him
that asked, neither mercy to him that deseruedit, I never punished in anger,
nor preferred in mirth, I never did evil upon malice, neither good for
covetousness, I never opened my gate to the flatterer, nor mine ear to the
back-biter, I always sought to be loved of the good, and dreaded of the
wicked, I always favored the poor that was able to do little, and God, who
was able to do much, favored me. Unto Subjects likewise that I may preach
Quietness, let me put them in mind, that they be Tit. 3.1.2.
subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates and to be ready to
every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle,
showing all meekness to all men: Let them 1. Pet. 2.3.
submit themselves to cuery ordinance of man for the Lords sake. And let them
Romans 13.5.
obey the Magistrate for conscience sake. There be six duties (says
Augustine) which Subjects owe unto their Magistrates if they would live under
them a Quiet and peaceable life. 1. Love, August. in Romans 13.
They must love them as their Protectors, and 1. Pet. 2.17.
honor them as their fathers. 2. Renerence, They must respect them in heart,
mind, word and work, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of the people; nor Eccl. 10.20.
curse them no not in thought, for the fowls of the heaven will carry the
voice. 3. Subjection, Romans 13.2.
whosoever resists the Magistrate resists the ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall bring upon themselves judgment. 4. Obedience, Romans 13.5.
Obey the Magistrate for conscience sake. 5. Assistance, Mat. 22.11.
Give unto Caesar that which is due unto Caesar; Romans 13.6.
give unto all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to
whom custom appertains. 6. Prayers and supplications for them, 1. Tim. 2.1.
I exhort that supplications and prayers, and intercessions, and giving of
thanks, be made for them that are in authority that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. The Subject who is careful to
put in practice these duties is a fit Subject for Quietness.

To the Pastors in the Church and their congregations, Between the Pastor and
people.
that they may mutually embrace Quietness, let me give these few directions.
1. To the Pastors and faithful Preachers my admonition is; That in all things
they 2. Cor. 6.4.
approve themselves as the Ministers of Christ, in much patience; For their
doctrine, let it be sound and seasonable, not sharp with bitterness but
delivered with mildness, 1. These. 2.10.
let them exhort, comfort and beseech as a father does his children; let them
1. Tim. 6.4.
shun questions and strife in words, whereof comes envy, railings and
surmises. And let them 2. Tim. 1.13
keep the pattern of wholesome words in love and faith. For their life and
conversation let them in Tim. 2.7.
all things show themselves examples of good works with gravity and
integrity. Let them be 1. Tim. 3.2.3
wise, vigilant, sober, of good behauior, hospitable, not quarrelsome, not
covetous, but patient. In a word, let them follow Bernards counsel: Bernard.
Learn (says he) o ye Pastors, to be mothers, not Lords over the sheep of
your fold, study rather to be loved then to be feared, And when you must use
severity, let it be fatherlike not tyrannous; suppress bitter speeches, and
prefer your pappes in offering the sweet milk of the same with Quietness.
2. To the people for their quiet conuersing with their Ministers, this is my
admonition, 1. These. 5.12
Brethren we beseech you, know these which labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and that ye have them in singular love for their work sake. Heb.
13.17.
Obey them that have the over sight of you, and submit your selves unto them,
for they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do
it with joy and not with grief for that is unprofitable for you. By which
place we see that the unquietness which Parishioners procure unto their
Ministers, does prove their own hurt, and their Ministers peace is their
quietness. Therefore memorable is the example of the Millanois for Ambrose,
Theodoret. Eccles. hist. l. 4.14
and of the Samosetans for their Pastor Eusebius, who were content even all of
them to hazard their own peace yea goods, yea lives, for their Quietness.
And excellent to this purpose is the saying of the same Ambrose, Ambros. de
dignit. sacerd.
Honor thy Pastor reverently, hear him diligently, suffer his reproach
willingly, pay his dues truly, converse with him friendly, defend him from
wrongs continually, love him entirely. Where these mutual duties are performed
seriously, there Pastor and people are sure to live quietly.

To the residue of what rank or calling, Between Superiors and Inferiors.
estate or condition, that love the common Quietness, this shall be mine
admonition. Let not the poor envy the rich, nor the rich despise the poor,
let not the mighty oppress the mean, nor the mean sort oppugn the mighty,
let not the Superior domineere over his inferior, nor the inferior set light by
his superior; But 1. Cor. 7.20.
let every man abide in that calling wherein he is called, Galat. 5.13.
Let every one do service to another by love. Philip. 2.3.
Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory. Psalm. 85.10.
Then shall mercy and truth meet together, righteousness and peace shall
kiss each other. Then shall people live in Quietness, and Quietness lead to
endless happiness.

From the practice of Public Quietness we are in the next place to proceed
unto the pattern of private Quietness, Private Quietness.
namely that which ought to be preserved between private persons, in private
cases, and upon private occasions. And this may be reduced into two sorts.

1. Quietness in diversity of opinions. 2. Quietness in suffering wrongs.
Quietness in the former of these two cases, Quietness in diversity of
opinions.
is so much the more needful to be practiced, because it is seldom seen
observed. Dissentions and contentions are like snow water congealed and
dissolved the one into the other. The Judge. 5.15.
Divisions of Reuben,) says the song of Deborah and Barack) were great
thoughts of heart. Surely divisions in judgment, differences in opinion have
bred at all times great thoughts of heart, greiuous distractions, and most
bitter alterations. What unquietness difference in opinion wrought in old time
among the learned Philosophers, Stoics, Academicks, Peripateticks and others,
we may read abundantly in humane histories. What great unquietness the vpstart
opinions of Arrius, Nestorius, Nouatus, and other Heretics, have raised up in
the Christian world, the histories of the Church do make manifest,: Our latter
times have had experience of the furious unquietness of Papists, Schismatics,
Martinists, Seperatists, set abroach only by dissentions in opinions. The
tempest is scarce yet ouer-blowne of that intestine unquietness which
difference in opinion had whirled about here in our own Church in
controversies of things indifferent: so that I may repeat again (as in the
afore-cited song it is often iterated as the burden of the song) the divisions
of Reuben were great thoughts of heart, or rather (by a little inuerting of it)
the divisions of Levy have done great hurt. For an Antidote against which
poison of opinionate unquietness I might preseribe the Apostles confection,
Ephesians. 4.14.
follow the truth in love, Philip. 2.2.
Be like minded, having the same love, be of one accord, of one mind. 1 Cor.
1.10.
Be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment:
Phil. 2.14.
do all things without murmurings, without disputings. I might propose unto you
the same Apostles caveat, Phil. 3.2.
beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision; and his diet
which he prescribes to them who would be Quiet, 2 Timothy 2.16.
Shun profane and vain bablings, 1 Timothy 6.4.5
Abstain from needless questions and contentions of words, whereof comes
envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of
corrupt mind and destitute of the truth, from such withdraw thy self. 1 Cor.
11.16
If any man (says the Apostle) seem to be contentions, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. But to whom shall I in this case persuade
the study of Quietness? shall I speak to the contentions Papist? Psalm. 57.4
5.
his heart is set on fire, his teeth are spears and arrows, his tongue a very
sword. Shall I speak to weyward Seperatists? their Soul Psalm. 120.6.
hates peace; and therefore as good Theodosius said to contentious Demophilus,
Dr. Hall in his Passion sermon.
If thou fly peace, I will make thee fly. So I may say concerning them, if
they fly from peace, let us fly from them, or if they save us that labor, in
seperating themselves from us, the more is their fury and our Quietness. To the
Reverent Fathers and brethren of this our Church, who profess themselves the
sons of peace and agreeing in the substance, yet differ peradventure somewhat
in opinion concerning ceremonies, let me speak without offense as Augustine
did to Jerome and Ruffinus: Augustine.
I would fall at your feet, I would weep unto, I would beseech you, either of
you for other, each sort for your selves, both for the Church of God, that you
would embrace peace and follow Quietness. And where there is any difference in
opinion (as there may be sometimes even between the best, for 1 Cor. 13.7
here we know but in part, and some have more revealed unto them then others
have) I would speak unto them in the Apostles phrase; Phil. 4.^.
I beseech Euodias, and I beseech Syntiche, that they be of the same mind in
the Lord, Romans 12.^.
Let no man presume to understand above that which is meet to understand, but
let him understand according to sobriety. Let no man be too much wedded to his
own opinion, Romans 12.16.
Be not wise in your own conceits; Phil. 2.3.
In lowliness of mind let each esteem others better then themselves. Let no
man please himself with wrangling sophistry and altercations, 1 Cor 11.1^
if any man lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of
God, let no man despise or disdain him that is contrary opinionated, Romans
15.1.
they that are strong ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not
to please themselves. Let no man count it a disgrace to forsake a wrong opinion
when he is better informed, but let him with Job lay his hand upon his mouth
and say, Job 40.5.
once have I spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no
further. 1 Cor. 16.4
Let all things be done in love; And howsoever we be crossed in our opinion, or
contradicted in our judgments, yet let us study to be Quiet.

I come from this unto the latter kind of private Quietness namely that
Quietness which is to be showed in suffering wrongs, Quietness in suffering
wrongs.
the chiefest ornament indeed of a quiet mind. Now whereas there is a
threefold sort of wrongs, there must accordingly be a threefold sort of
Quietness in this required practice.

1. In wrongs offered to our good name 2. In wrongs offered to our body. 3. In
wrongs offered to our goods.
For the first of these three; Quietness when a good name is impeached.
it is the duty of every good Christian in patience and Quietness to possess
his soul when wrongs and injuries are offered unto his good name. True
Christians must approve themselves in Quietness. 2 Cor. 6.8.
Through honor and dishonor, through evil report and good report, as deceivers
and yet true. Thus does the Apostle Paul demonstrate by his own example, 1
Cor. 4.10.14.15.
We are made a gazing stock to the world, to Angels and to men, we are
reniled yet we bless, we are defamed, yet we eatreat. And the Apostle Peter
proposes our blessed Savior for our imitation: 1 Pet. 2.21.23.
Christ (says he) has left us an example, that we should follow his steps,
who when he was reviled, reviled not acaine, when he suffered threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

I confess this is a sore prouoker to unquietness, Objections and answers
concerning Quietness in this case.
when our good name is scandalized, or our selves abused by slanders or
suspicions. And methinkes I hear parties traduced reasoning thus. Alas who can
be Quiet being thus defamed? evil suspicions are raised up against me, they
lay things unto my charge, whereof I am as innocent as the child but this day
borne, my good name is called into question, they provoke me with bitter
words, they call me Theife, Knave, Whore, Witch, or with such like infamous
and reproachful terms; would you have me to be quiet in such a case? who
can endure it? it touches my freehold; I had as willing they should take away
my life as take away my good name; Eccles. 7.1.
A good name is better then precious ointment, Pro. 22.1.
A good name is to be desired before riches, and loving favor above silver and
gold. These are the Apologies which many make for their unquietness, when they
are provoked by slanderous speeches and false furmises. And for these causes
they think they have a sufficient warrant for their unquietness. But let me
reason the matter a little with them: Are these suspicions, or slanders, or
defamations true which are raised up against them? or are they mere inventions
and false suggestions? If these things are justly imputed unto them; then have
they just cause to mourn and grieve, as they that justly suffer for their own
wickedness: But if these accusations raised up against them be forged, untrue
and unjust, then why should it disquiet thee? O but if thou were guilty (will thou say) if thou were faulty in those things wherein thou art accused, it
would the less trouble thee: Nay then had thou just cause of grief; for 1
Pet. 4.15.16.
Let none of you (says the holy Apostle) suffer as an evil doer, or as a
busy body, but if a man suffer as a Christian (this is without any just cause
on his own part proffered) let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in
this behalf. Matthew. 5.11.
Blessed are ye (says our blessed Savior) when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely. And now
tell me, what is the wrong offered unto thee which does thus disquiet thee? Is
it reproach, slander, scoff, evil suspicion, wrong information, false
suggestion, or such like? what does this hurt thee? does it hurt thy flesh?
does it prejudice thy health? does it rob thee of thy wealth? No, but it
robs thee of thy good name, and preiudiceth thy good report? A less poor
soul, thy report is but mean, thy fame but slender, which will so soon be
shaken: Plutarch. in vita Alexandri.
lying tongues are no corasiues to a good name, neither is a good man's
reputation depraved by a slanderers project. It is a Kingly thing (says a
great King) to hear^ evil when thou do well; when wretched Shemei railed
against David, with these bitter and provoking terms, 2 Samuel 16.7.
Come out, come out, thou bloody man, thou man of Belial; Did David fret and
fume? did he disquiet himself? No, but when he might have avenged himself
upon that slanderous tongue, and he was mightily by some of his company egged
on, he passed it over and would seem to take no notice of it, Let him alone
(says he) let him. In like manner when some told Domitian, Sueton. in vita
Domit.
how he was traduced by foul mouthed slaunderers, and persuaded to take
vengounce of these lewd persons, It is not (says he) for a generous man to
lift up his hand against every dog that barketh at him, let them alone, if
they cannot be master of their tongues, I will be master over mine ears. It is
a man's glory to pass by these triuiall, verbal injuries, to be deaf at them
and not to take notice of them: learn this practice of holy David, that man
after Gods own heart; Psalm. 38.12.13.
They lay snares (says he speaking of his malicious enemies) they seek my
hurt, they speak my hurt, they speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit
all the day long. But I as a deaf man, heard not, I was as a dumb man that
opened not his mouth.

If any Christian Soul desiring farther satisfaction in this point, Admonition
for a man's carriage in time of false reports.
shall farther require mine advice, what were fit for him to do in such a
case, and how he may demean himself in the midst of these evil reports
without the breach of Quietness, briefly let him follow these directions. 1.
Let him consider all his ways, and mark well wither he have not at one time
or other given occasion to make way unto such evil conceits. If we would
avoid an evil name, we must (as our Proverb goes) avoid all things that
cause the same. 2. Let him suspect himself, and fear the omission of some
good duties required, which by Gods just judgment may breed the imputation of
those vices wherewith thou art charged: Evil reports (says our worthy
Greenham) must teach thee that although thou be not so evil as men would make
thee, M. Gr^e^ham in his Sermon of a good name.
yet thou art not so good as thou should be. 3. Let him look carefully to
his future conversation, 1 Pet. 2.12.
Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. 1 Pet. 1.15.
For so it is the will of God that with well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

In the next place we are to learn the practice of Quietness in bodily
wrongs and injuries, Quietness in case of wrong offered to our body.
wherein every good Christian must study to be quiet, notwithstanding he be
provoked by wrongs and hurts done against his body. For so our Savior Christ
expressly enioyneth to all his followers, Mat. 5.39.
I say unto you, resist not evil, but whosoever shall strike thee on thy right
cheek, turn to him the other also. By which phrase of speech he does imply
that his disciples must with patience put up many blows, strokes, and
stripes, rather then infringe Quietness: which precept as he gave unto us by
word, so he does commend it unto us by his own example, for Ioh. 18.22.
when he was smitten before the high Priest, he smote not again. And when
Peter drew out his sword in his defense to resist the officers which
apprehended him in the garden, Mat. 26.51.52.
he spared not to give him for that fact, a sharp, severe reprehension.

I confess likewise that this is a very difficult thing for flesh and blood to
be quiet in such a case, Objections and answers for Quietness.
and me thinks I hear rebellious nature reasoning thus. What? would you have
me quiet, when I am thus far provoked? he has drawn my blood, I feel the
smart, he has given the first blow, I cannot choose but reply with the next, he
shall have as good as he brought; it were a disgrace unto me to put up such
apparent wrong, the world would condemneme for a coward, I cannot forbear,
Deuteronomy. 19.18
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But heareme, my friend, where
find thou that revenge allowed? thou have not learned it in Christ's school;
where does the book of God give way to quarrellings, fightings, duels or
private combatings? who gave thee authority to avenge thy self? Does not God
himself tell thee Heb. 10.30.
vengeance is mine, I will repay it; But thou art provoked? Whet thee? Romans
12.19
Avenge not your selves, rather give place unto wrath. But thou art challenged,
and it is a disgrace to refuse a challenge; know this that true grace and
credit stands more in yielding obedience unto God, then in foolish hazarding
of life or limbs for a blast of vain reputation among men.

But what will you have me do (says provoked Nature) in such a case?
Directions for Quietness in this case.
will you have me stand still like a stock) will you have me to put up these
blows? that were the ready way to make me a common Ass, every one will be
ready to ride upon my back; though thou may not be thine own caruer, yet
may thou seek a remedy, though private revenge is forbidden them, yet there
is the place of Justice to right thee, Romans 13.4.
the Magistrate is the Minister of God unto thee for thy good, he bears not
the sword in vain, he is to revenge upon evil doers; To him must thou have
recourse, here art thou to seek redress. So may thou keep thy body from
violence, and thy mind from unquietness.

In the last place we are to learn the practice of Quietness in worldly
losses, crosses, or damages: Quietness in wrongs offered to our goods.
for the performance whereof, every good Christian must rather put up many
wrongs, suffer many losses, sustain many hindrances, then to breed
unquietness. Mat. 5.40.
If any man (says our Savior) will sue thee at the law, and take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloak also: And the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 6.7.
This is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another,
why do ye not take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be
defrauded? Strabo.
Strabo reports of the Indians that they would e^dure any thing rather the^
enter into contentions: Herodotus.
and Herodotus of the ancient Persians that they would rather depart from
their own ancient right then seek to recover it by litigious actions.

By how much the more lamentable are the contrary courses so usual at this day
among us Christians: The unquiet suits and contentions of these our times.
what unquiet courses, suits, pleadings, nisi prius, lawings is there now a
days for very trifles. The least loss, the smallest trespass is ready
presently for an action at the law; Caesar. Commen.
Once it was counted ominous for a man to commence actions and follow suits,
but now he is no body that haunts not the courts of Justice, neither is there
any city, town or village almost in a country without some suitors or sued.
When a citizen of Rome made a motion to have the pleading place at Rome covered
over with canuasse, for that the heat of the sun was hurtful to the pleaders
and the clients heads, Cato that grave Senator replied, I for my part (quoth
he) could rather wish that all the ways to the place of pleading were cast
over with caltrops, and the floor before the pleading place paued with sharp
flints, Plutarch.
that the feet of those whose well love pleading might feel so much pains of
those pricks in going thither, as their heads of the sun in tarrying there. It
were to be wished that Catoes wish might take place in our pleading places:
that our litigious suit followers might smart as well in their bodies for their
pains, in following frivolous suits, as they smart in their purses before the
end of their suits, then should we have less lawing and more love, less
quarrels and more quietness. Aeneas Siluius (afterward better known by the
name of Pope Pius, Platina.
though less pious and far worse after he undertook that name) had a
pretty conceit in comparing clients to birds, courts to the field, laws to the
net, and Lawyers to the fowlers: Many a silly foul and simple fool, becomes a
just prey through their own unquiet stirrings unto these cunning fowlers, who
thoroughly pluck their feathers, and strippe them naked, before they suffer
them to get forth of their hands. Demosthenes.
Far wiser were the Lacedaemonians, who had rather to end controversies
between themselves, then to suffer themselves to be betrayed by others. It was
good counsel which a grave Philosopher gave unto the Thebanes; Crates.
If he which harm, you (says he) be weaker then your selves, pardon him, if
more mighty pardon your selves. The wise man tells us, that Pro. 20.3.
it is an honor to a man to cease from strife. And the Apostle taxes this
common going to law one with another, as a shameful thing: 1 Cor. 6.5.
I speak it (says he) to your shame: and he goes farther reputing them and
those that suffer them very fools: Ibid.
Is it so that there is not a wise man among you, no not one that is able to
judge between brethren. And yet farther he thundreth against such furious
courses, Ibid. ver. 1.
Dare any of you, having matter against another, to go to law one with another?

Which place of Paul is not so to be wrested (nor my present discourse so to be
misapplied) as if all suit of Law were simply condemned as unlawful. How and
when a man may go to law with another.
The Scripture forbid death not men's going to law, but tells them how they
should go to law: Law is not evil, though contentious men and unconscionable
Lawyers have vilely abused it, but it is Gods ordinance, and may lawfully be
used if with these caueats. 1. It must not be for every trifle, every
trespass, every evil word, 1 Cor. 6.2.
but in matters of weight and of importance. The Law is not ordained to be a
judge of every trifle, not for the smaller and triuiall matters. It is a shame
to our Law, and a dishonor to our Lawyers that men be suffered to trouble each
other for triuiall affairs and trifles, for recovery whereof many times, ten
times, yea twenty times as much is spent, as the cause is worth. It is a shame
for our Nation that at every Assizes there should be so many actions of
trespass, wherein the damage is little or nothing. 2. It must be the last
refuge: Law is a kind of war, as therefore war is the last means for the
attaining of public peace, so should the Law be the last means for the
attaining of private peace: All means must be tried, ere thou go to law,
Romans 12.18.
If it be possible as much as in us lies, we must live peaceably with all
men, And if no other means will serve, then Law may have his course. It is a
foul misorder in our land, men are sued when they would gladly compound, when
they would willingly satisfy by private order, they are compelled to answer by
Law; yea which is worse then this; the Law which should be the last, is not
only made the first means, but many times a close and a secret means, it
steals upon men before they be aware, and heapeth charge where it might be
avoided. 3. It must be prosecuted with mildness, not with extremity. Phil. 4.5.
Let your moderation be known to all men. In suing bands, taking forfeitures,
recovery of damages, a man must not always lay, upon his adversary the
extremity, but he must moderate it with pity. It is a bloody biting practice
for neigbour to hold neighbor at the bay, and to use rigor, as many do, Iam.
2.13.
Mercy rejoices against judgment, and he shall have judgment without mercy,
that shows no mercy. It is not a sufficient cloak to cover thy cruelty in
extremity, that the Law does afford thee this advantage, woe were it unto thee
if thy God should deal with thee according to extremity, thou that daily
pleadest for mercy, if thou hope for mercy, show mercy.

Thus far have I travailed in describing the way to Quietness, Means to
preserve Quietness.
and in deciphering the practice of Quietness both in persons and cases
public and private. Now that I may draw to a conclusion of this discourse I
will shut up the remainder of this little Treatise with a brief delineation of
the means which serve to keep and preserve Quietness. The means
preservative of Quietness, are in effect the same with the former which
procure Quietness. For it is a rule in Natures school. By what means things
are gotten, by the same are they vpholden. Yet for as much as these means are
in this case to be considered with another respect, it will not be amiss to
enquire somewhat into them, and for orders sake thus to distinguish of them.

The means preserving Quietness are either Personal. Practical.


The Personal means are either more public: As first, The Magistrate in the
commonwealth. Secondly, the Minister in the Church; or more private. As first,
the Householder in his family. Secondly, the Neighbor in the vieinity.

The Practical means are either matters of equity. As first, upright
dealing. Secondly, just censuring for matters of piety. As first, holy carriage
of our selves. Secondly, prayers for our selves and others.

Of both these with their particulars I will entreat as briefly as I may with
any perspicuity, rather pointing at them, then discoursing of them, lest this
small Treatise should exceed the intended bounds, and might seem too tedious
to the Reader.

First then to begin with the personal preservatives of Quietness, The
Magistrates duty to preserve Quietness.
and therein first of all with the Magistrate. Who knows not that the
Magistracy is the principal means for the preserving of peace and quietness
in the commonwealth? The Romans 1.3.2.
ordinance of it is from God, and the end of it is for Ibid. ver. 3.
our good: And their office is to punish Verse 4.
offenders that are unquiet: and therefore (as the Apostle teaches) 1 Timothy 2.2.
it is our duty to pray for them, that by their means we may live a quiet and
a peaceable life. Therefore we must justly abhor the frantic opinion of the
Anabaptists, who deny the lawfulness of Magistrates, and (with the better
Jude) we count these turbulent wretches, Jude 8.
who despise Governors and speak evil of those which are in authority. What
a monster were a Commonwealth without an head? what Quietness? what peace?
what justice can there be expected where Magistracy fails? Judge. 17.6.
When there was no Ruler in Israel, every man did what seemed good in his own
eyes: and so would it be with us, if there were no Governors to ouerrule, no
Magistrates to seek redress: who could then live quietly in his house, or
sleep quietly in his bed? But blessed be God who does not plague us with an
Anarchie, but does preserve our Quietness by his own ordinance the
Magistracy. To whom as we are to yield obedience Romans 13.5.
for conscience sake, and for our own Quietness: so it is their duties to
employ all their endeauours to mainetaine and preserve the Quietness of the
commonwealth, that under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life. Kings.
Psalm. 2.10.
Be wise therefore o ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth: For even
Kings and Princes must make this the principal scope of their Sovereignty.
According as our own renowned King does testify in his Kingly instructions to
his Son, our late hopeful Prince of happy memory: King James in his (...) 1.
Book.
A good King (says he) must think his highest honor to consist in the due
discharge of his calling, and therefore must employ all his studies and pains
to procure and maintain by the making and executiou of good laws the welfare
^od peace of his people, and as their natural father and kindly master, to
make his greatest contentment in their prosperity, and his greatest surety in
their tranquillity. But because (as Iethro said to Exodus 18.1^
Moses) the whole burden would be too heavy to lie upon them, neither are
they able to perform it them selves alone. Therefore they have their
Subordinate Ministers of Justice, as Judges, Instices, and other inferior
officers, to see that peace and quietness be maintained within their several
circuits and divisions. To whom that I may speak in order. First let me
entreat the honorable Judges, Judges.
Arist. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 10.
the chief Guardians of Justice and Prouidors of Quietness next unto his
sacred Majesty, that they would study for the Quietness of the commonwealth,
and regard that more then their own, 18. Edw. 3.
either honors or purchases. This their oath which they take at their
admission into their office, 4. Edw. 9.11.
this the very commission given unto them by virtue of their office, does upon
peril of their bodies, Magna charta. 9. Hour. 3.29.
and danger of their souls require of them. And therefore I say unto them as
Iehosaephat said unto the Judges of his time, 2 Chr. 19.6.7.
Take heed what ye do, for ye do not administer the judgment of men, but
of God. And with David let me show them their duty, Psalm. 82.2.
Do right to the poor and fatherless, deliver the poor and needy, save them
from the hands of the wicked. Next to the worshipful Justices of the peace
(which are as the Ephori of our commonwealth, Instices of the Peace.
the overseers of the common Quietness) that my speech may be seasonable. Let
me entreat them to study for the public Quietness. Their very Title puts
them in mind of this. Justices of peace, as much to say, as ministers of
Justice, preseruers of peace, a beautiful epitheton, a blessed action, for Mat.
5.9.
blessed are the peacemakers. What is the sum of their office, Magna charta.
but the preservation of Quietness? The extent of their commission is to
enquire and determine of all and singular such accusations and informations
made of any offenses disturbing the common peace; 2. Edw 3.6.18.
Edw. 3.2.24.
to hear and determine at the Kings suite all manner of fellonies and
trespasses committed in their several counties against the peace; to restrain
offenders, rioters, and barreters, to bind to the peace and good behavior
unruly persons, to pursue, 2. He. 5.4. 12. R. 2.10.
take and chasten offenders. Four times yearly they are to keep their
public Sessions (according to the laws of this realm) and many times to
have their petty Sessions, and that in several places, that they may the
better take notice of misdemeanors, and take order for every ones Quietness.
What worthy proiects? what excellent courses are here intended for Quietness?
what remains for our Iusticers then, but that they put this their office duly
in practice; their diligence wherein is of so great moment that it is of force
to keep the Judges idle in Westminster Hall and the plow to be followed in the
country, it would abridge the number of Nisi prius, and bring down the pride
of insolent Lawyers. But from these to descend to the inferior officers, as
Constables, Churchwardens, Constables and Tithingmen.
Tithingmen, and Overseers, let me tell them, that they are in place to
preserve Quietness, and withal entreat them to study for the common
quietness. They are or should be aduertisers to the Insticers as they are eyes
unto the Judges: 1. Jac. 17.
they are to suppress Vagrants, Rioters, Quarrelers, their office is to see
that peace be kept; they are informed of the extent of their office at Assizes,
39. Eliz. 4.
Sessions, and other such like meetings. O that there were an heart in these
our Officers to demean themselves in their places; o that they were men of
courage to put in practice these their duties; then should we have more
Quietness, and less complaining in our streets.

But to leave the civil Magistrate, The Ministers duty to preserve quietness.
and to come to the Minister, he likewise by virtue of his calling is a means
to preserve Quietness. For the Preachers of the word are the Luke 10.6.
Sons of peace, they come with a Isay. 5^.7.
message of peace, their message is a doctrine of 2. Cor. 5.18.
reconciliation, Malac 4.6.
Mat. 5.13.
Mat 3.3.
Isay. 57.21.
their doctrine the pathway to peace and quietness. They are the Salt of the
earth, to season the hearts of men that they may be capable of peace. They are
the prodromi to prepare the way for Quietness, by speaking to the conscience,
and teaching inward peace, without which there can be no Quietness. And
therefore the Preacher must be a principal Actor for the preservation of
Quietness. It was once a common saying, that the want of preaching, was the
cause of the want of Quietness; I have heard a question once moved, what was
the cause that there were so many bad Lawyers, which was presently answered,
because there were so few good Preachers. But now, blessed be God, there are
many good Preachers (the Lord increase their number) Sermons are plentiful,
and many public lectures. And yet alas we see little the more quietness,
nay our ignorant common people would persuade themselves that there is the
less Quietness. Notwithstanding all which I would admonish and desire, yea in
the bowels of Christ Jesus beseech my reverent brethren and fellow laborers in
Gods harvest, that they would both in their lectures continually preach
Quietness, and with the utmost of their endeavors in private conferences and
public meetings persuade Quietness where they see dissentions. Canutus Law.
It was a notable custom of old time observed in this land (and I think the
statute for it at this day is in force) that in the place of judgment the
Bishop or Minister should sit with the Magistrate, in the decision of
controversies, and suppressing of enormities, that so the one by Gods law might
instruct the conscience, and the other by the law of the Realm might correct
the delinquents. It were to be wished that seeing the Magistrate peradventure
accepts not so well the Ministers presence in his place of justice, he would
vouchsafe his own presence at the Ministers lectures. As in some places of our
Country it is worthily observed (I would every where it were imitated) once a
week at places where weekly lectures by authority are established, the
Magistrates of the country round about and the chief Divines do meet, the
one to instruct the people Christianity, the other to appease cases of
controversy. O what an excellent preservative would this be for quietness,
when the word and the sword did meet together, Moses and Aaron did assist each
other.

As concerning the Houshelders preservation of Quietness I shall speak the
less, The householders duty to preserve Quietness. Page 77.78.
because I have already touched it more at large in its proper place. Only by
the way let me give him an item, that he may, and ought to be a notable means
in preserving the common Quietness, if he look well to the keeping of
Quietness at home. Every family is a little common wealth, and every governor
of a family, is as it were a Judge or Justice of peace within his own
family. He must therefore (with David) Psalm. 101.2.
walk wisely in the midst of his house; he must with Genesis 13.^.
Abraham labor to compose and stop controversies at home so soon as ever they
arise; for as in the breach of a water course, if it be taken in time and
stopped at the beginning; it will prevent the flowing abroad which otherwise
must needs ensue; so if in the breach of private peace and Quietness there be
a present redress at home, it will not break forth into such open contention
abroad.

The like may be said as concerning the help of neighbors for the mutual
preservation of Quietness. Neighbors duty for the preservation of Quietness.
As in a common fire every one will be ready to help to extinguish, and as for
a common good every good man will be willing to put to his helping hand; so
every honest, every Christian neighbor must be ready with all his endeavor
to labor to extinguish the flame of variance, and to settle peace one with an
other. It is reported of that learned and worthy judge the late Judge L. Dyer,
if there came any controversies of poor men to be tried at the Assizes before
him, he would usually say that either the parties were wilful, or their
neighbors without charity, because their suites were not quietly ended. Indeed
there is a great defect of charity among neighbors; when a controversy is
come to extremity and has proved costly we can say, it is pity that it was
not ended by neighbors, but why are neighbors s^ pitiless that they interpose
not themselves to the appeasing of these inconveniences? 1. Cor. 6.5.
I speak this (says the Apostle) to your shame, is it so, that there is not a
wise man among you? no not one that is able to judge between brethren? My
brethren and beloved countrymen let us take away that infamy, that shame, that
disgrace from our Towns, Parishes, and vicinities, yea especially from our
selves, let us not make our selves guilty of other men's furies, Galat. 6.2.
whiles we cease to pacify their unquietness: Let us bear one an others
burdens, and every one help forward the common quietness, by 1. These. 5.14.
warning them that are unruly, comforting the feeble, supporting the weak, and
showing patience toward all. Practical means for the preservation of Quietness.


The means which we and every one of us to this purpose are to put in
practice, remain now to be commended vntovs; which, because we are now drawing
to a conclusion, I will bind up as it were in one bundle, and with all
possible brevity commend to your imitation. The way to preserve Quietness,
Theognis verse. 147. (...). Plutarch.
is to do justice, and to practice godliness. Under the name of justice all
moral virtues summarily are comprised: One asked Solon, what did most keep
men from troubles; he answered; upright dealings, do says he to others, as
thou would be done unto, so shall not thou disquiet other, nor others
trouble thee. And to the same purpose Plato in his platform of the common
wealth says, Plato de Rep. lib. 4.
that both public and private concord and unity is preserved by public
justice and private equity. The practice whereof, Marcus Aurelius does explain
unto his son in his deathbed Admonitions, M. Aurelius.
My Son (says he) would thou live quietly, and have others with thee and
by thee to live peaceably, carry thy self uprightly, deal plainly, judge
truly, abstain from injury, right the wronged, relieve the oppressed,
suppress the wicked. The Sum whereof the Holy Scripture proposes in this
two words: Psalm. 1.16.17.
Cease from evil, learn to do well, and there is a gracious promise upon
this gracious practice, Psalm. 72.3.
The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
righteousness: which words (as may be explain it) The Magistrates as the
mountains shall keep the peope in people in peace, and ^he little hills, the
meaner sort the infriour subjects, shall enjoy Quietness, and all by
righteousness.

But what is Equity without Piety? Piety a preserver of Peace.
what is lustice with godliness. Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness there is no peace. 2 Kin 9.22.
What peace (says Iehu) can there be, so long as Iezabels whoredoms and
witchcrafts are in great abundance? Therefore when the Apostle would show us
the way how we may live a quiet and a peaceable life under them that are in
authority. He adds this in the end of it that it must be done 1 Timothy 2.2.
in all godliness and honesty. Quiet we can never be without honesty, nor
honest without piety. Therefore every one who would study to be quiet, must
study to be godly; and they who are in authority must labor to maintain
Godliness as well as Equity. 1 Timothy 6.8.
Godliness has the promises, not only of the life to come, but also of the
life present: Among which promises, these are, but not the least, Hag. 2.10.
peace and Quietness.

But how shall we be able either to live godly, Prayer a preserver of peace.
or to live justly our selves; seeing we are so full of frailties and
imperfections? How shall we establish it in others who are so unable to effect
it in our selves? Therefore we had need to be fervent in prayer, both for
our selves and others. Art thou in trouble? Pray for Quietness; Do thou li^e
in peace and Quietness? Pray for the continuance. Prayer gets Quietness,
Prayer keeps Quietness, Prayer the very lock and key of Quietness.
Therefore when thou have performed all the rest, fail not in this, for this is
more effectual to the study of Quietness then all the rest: when thou can
not prevail with men, heerby thou may prevail with God.

Thus hauel, The Concl^sion.
as God has enabled me, explained this needful duty, the study of
Quietness. What effect it has wrought in the hearts of the Hearers, or will
work in the minds of the Readers: He knows who only knows and tries
men's hearts and reins. It is a study, I fear me, wherein but few will
proceed Graduates, few will set themselves to learn it. Howsoever I shall
hardly persuade others to the study of it, yet sure I am, that I have studied
to persuade it. And my desire was to help forward the common Quietness in it.
If it please God to give a a blessing to these my poor endeauours, that by
them the heart of any troublesome or troubled Auditors have been reclaimed
unto Quietness, his holy name have all the glory of it, If I have spent my
strength in vain, and the more I speak for peace, the more men study for
unquietness: yet for Ierusalems sake I will not hold my peace, for my
Countries sake I will ever pray, that peace may be within our walls, and
prosperity within our palaces: For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now
say peace be within thee, because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek
thy good.

FJNJS.

