THE Entry to Christianity, or, An admonition to Householders, very necessary
for instruction of their Families, as also others, whereby, with some small
labor, they may attain to the understanding of the Christian faith: (if holy,
and Christian exercises, as prayers, and such sanctified means) be devoutly
used.

Drawn out of the sacred Scriptures, as also proved by the judgment of
famous learned writers.

Very fit for this diseased and sickly age, where-in popish ignorance and
deuilish Atheism does so abound.

By Thomas Wats, Minister of the word of God.

Printed at London by T. O. for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling at the Sign of the
black Bear. 1589.

THE ENTRY to Christianity. That it behooves Parents to bring up their
Children in the knowledge of Gods Word.
Authority of the Scriptures. Genesis 18, 19. Exodus 12.26, 27, 13, 8, 14. Deuteronomy 4,
9, 10.6, 6, 7, 20. to the end, 11, 18.19, 32, 46. Josh. 4, 21, 22, 23, 24. 1.
King. 2, 1, 3. Psalm. 78, 3, 4, 5.6. Esd. 38, 29. Ephesians. 6, 4. 2. Tim. 1, 5. 2.
Ioh. 4. Judgment of the Learned.
Question. DO you not coumpt those fathers to have discharged their whole
duty, which do teach their children to say the ten Commandments, the
Lords Prayer; and the Articles of the faith: and say they have done what they
can?

Answer. It is most sure they have to render accoumpt unto God for a far
greater matter then the teaching them to speak these things, for they are to
see that they understand them, they are to instruct them in all points of true
Religion; they are to show them the steps of godliness: they are to exhort
them with all diligence, yea and to charge them to fear God, and to walk in
his ways.

Question. All men are not able to do this you speak of.

Answer. The more shame for them, that they will be fathers, before they can
do that which is the duty of fathers, and the more heavy judgment tarieth
for them, for casting away, and spilling the souls of their children. Master
Gyff. Catechism.

We all be careful and very circumspect in providing for the cattle that are
bred at our house, and we are much busied and take great pains about them, and
the like diligence we use also in looking unto young trees, and plants; but our
children are much more of valewe then all cattle, and they are the tender
plants of the Paradise of God: it cannot therefore with words be spoken, how
greatly the wicked and cruel negligence of those parents is to be detested,
which so much neglect, and so little set by these most worthy creatures on the
earth, and these goodly plants of the Church and heavenly Paradise, that they
are moved with no care of their good education. Let Parents therefore meditate
this saying, Math. 18, 10. See that ye despise not one of these little ones:
for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels always behold the face of my
father which is in heaven. But a great sort think themselves well excused, if
they can pretend either their own ignorance, or other businesses. But such
excuse is rather to be lamented then admitted. If Parents be so ignorant, that
they can neither teach their children the sincere doctrine of the Catechism,
nor yet be able to discern between virtues and vices, things that be honest
and dishonest, seemly and unseemly: surely such excuse is a most grievous
accusation of themselves. And touching businesses, the thing that is pretended
is not only foolish, sottish, and odious: but also ungodly, wicked, and
blasphemous. For, as in all the substance of the house, no treasure is more
worthy then be the children, so among all businesses, this ought to be the
chiefest, that the children be rightly cared for: and well looked unto. Paul.
Eitz. Ethic. Doctr. lib. 3. cap. 4.

Now, a word or two of the bringing up of children, and preparing them to
confirmation. Wherein I would God the old order were duly observed, that they
were instructed perfectly to know Religion, and their duty to God, and might
be brought before the congregation, and make an open profession of their
faith, with promise, that neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution,
nor famine, nor nakedness, nor fire, nor sword, nor life, nor death: shall
ever make them deny their faith. Hereof might much be spoken, but I will be
short. The whole stands in knowledge and in the fear of God, that they may
know God, and walk before him in reverence and in fear: and serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. The Jews are a
miserable people, they live in error, they die in their own blood; yet have
they so much understanding, that they bring up their children in the knowledge
of God: and that knowledge they teach out of the word of God. They remember
what charge God gave them: Thou shall teach them thy sons, and thy sons
sons, etc. Let us look upon our children, as upon the great blessings of
God. They are the Lords vessels ordained to honor, let us keep them clean:
they are Christ's lambs, and sheep of his flock, let us lead them forth
into wholesome Pasture. They are the seed-plot of heaven, let us water them
that God may give the increase; their Angels behold the face of God, let us not
offend them, they are the temples and tabernacles of the holy Ghost: Let us
not suffer the foul spirit to possess them, and dwell in them. God says,
Your children are my children. They are the sons of God. They are borne a
new, and are well shapen in beautiful proportion: make them not monsters. He
is a monster whosoever knows not God. By you they are borne into the world,
be careful also that by your means, they may be begotten unto God, you are
careful to train them in mixture and comely behavior of the body, seek also
to fashion their minds unto Godliness; you have brought them to the fountain
of Baptism to receive the mark of Christ, bring them up in knowledge, and
watch over them that they be not lost. That man of God Bishop Jewel in a
treatise of the Sacraments.

Every householder is here appointed a Bishop of his house. And a little after,
Householders therefore must be careful, that they have the knowledge of matters
divine: otherwise how shall they instruct them that are of their household?
Paul suffers not women to teach in the Church, but commands them to
learn of their husbands at home: what husband shall teach his wife, himself
being unlearned and ignorant? in the sixth of Deutronomie it is well set down
Therefore first, And these words which I command thee, shall be in thine
heart. And then immediately after it is added: And thou shall teach them to thy
sons. And this thing is engraft almost in all men, and specially in the
ignorant, to hold fast and highlye esteem the things that they have learned of
their Parents. And therefore it mattereth much what is taught by Parents to
their posterity. Now-adaies we hear this thing common: I will believe that
which my forefathers believed. Thou beleeuest well, if so be that they believed
well: and if they have delivered to the posterities such things as be good.
Otherwise the Jews and Turks under this pretense defend their errors, which
they have received of their fathers. Let every householder therefore beware and
take good heed what he teach his household. A man may find householders which be
so ignorant and unskillful in things divine, that they can by no means
perform that thing which is here commanded. Let such not be ashamed to hear
and learn, yea, if it were of little boys, the things which hitherto they
have not known. A man may find also some householders which will not perform
their duty in teaching Religion, although they be able to do it. Again, a
man may find others, which by wicked force do even let their households from
learning the things which concern the Religion and service of God. But herein
it belongs to the Magistrate to use his office, to erect and set forward
public schools. Wolf. Musc. in Psalm. 78. verse. 5.

Speak men of discipline never so much, complain they of the want of
Church-gouernment never so loud, preach they, teach they never so much
abroad, unless they will begin discipline in reforming their houses, and give
Religion some room at home, they shall travail much, and profit little. Let
there be never so good laws in Cities, never so pure orders in Churches; if
there be no practice at home: if fathers of families use not doctrine, and
discipline in their houses, and join their hands to Magistrate and Ministers:
they may indeed, but unjustly, as many have done, complain that their Children
are corrupted abroad, when they were before, and are still corrupted at home.
Exhortation for household Discipline.

Both married men, and Monks, and wives, commonly have this contention among
themselves, who may learn most scriptures. Hierom. in Psalm. 33. Fathers, bring
up your children in the learning, and nurture of the Lord, and teach them the
holy Scriptures. Ignatius Epist. 6. If ye be willing that the holy Scriptures
may become sweet unto you, and that Gods Commandments may profit you as
they ought, withdraw your selves from worldly businesses at certain hours,
on which even in your houses read over the word of God, and dedicate your
selves wholly to his mercy, that they may be happily fulfilled in you, which
is written concerning the happy man. For, in the law of the Lord will he
meditate day and night: And that, Blessed are they that search his testimonies,
and seek him with their whole heart: And that, Thy words have I hid within my
whole heart, that I might not sin against thee. For as you have heard, as he
which hides Gods words in his heart sins not: so also he which hides them
not cease not to sin. For, if it suffices not buyers and sellers, to make
their gains of one sort of ware only, but they get many wares by which they
may increase their substance: and if Husbandmen do their endeavor to sow
diverse kinds of seeds, whereby they may sufficiently provide meat for them
and theirs; how much rather in spiritual gains ought it not to suffice you,
that you hear the divine lessons in the Church, but in your houses, and at
your meals: and when the days be short, some hours in the nights also ye
ought to labor earnestly in divine reading, to the end, that ye may get you
spiritual wheat into the Barn of your heart, and in the treasuries of your
souls lay up the Pearls of the Scriptures, that when at the day of judgment
ye shall come before the judgment seat of the eternal Judge, ye may be
found, as the Apostle says, Clothed, and not naked. August. ad frat. in Erem.
Sermon. 56. If through ignorance, or otherwise by sinning ye have done any thing
against God, be not slack through your well doings to amend it, carefully
calling this to your remembrance, that the married man live in his house quietly
and peaceably as it becomes a good Christian, that he honor his father and
mother, that he love his wife, that with very great discipline he teach his
Children the Catholic faith and law of God, to the end, that they may know
how to love, fear, and honor God. For this thing is acceptable before God.
August. ad frat. in Erem. Sermon. 64. Hearken, all ye of the world, that have
Wives and Children, how S. Paul the Apostle of Christ, commands you to read
the Scriptures, and that not slightly, or as by the way, but with great
diligence. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Coll. Hom. 9. Hearken not hereto only here in
the Church, but also at home; let the husband with the wife, let the father
with the child, talk together of these matters, and both to and fro, let them
both enquire, and give their judgments: and would God they would begin this
good custom. Idem in Ioh. Hom. 2.

Touching the duty of Householders, for the daily exercising of their families
in Christ his Religion.
Authority of the Scriptures. Genesis 18, 19. Exodus 20, 10. Josh. 24, 15. 1.
King. 10, 5, 8. Hest. 4, 16. Psalm. 101. John. 4, 53. Acts. 10, 2, 16, 15, 31,
32, 33, 34, 18, 8. Romans 16, 5. 1. Cor. 1, 11, 16, 15. Coll. 4, 15. 1. Tim. 3,
4, 12, 5, 8. 2. Tim. 4, 19. Philem. 2. Judgment of the Learned.
AFter the good man of the house is risen out of his bed, let him go about none
other thing, then that, that he may be doing and talking of such matters: as
by which his whole household may profit more and more in Religion. And as for
the good wife of the house, let her be very vigilant, and look well about her
house: but let her mutch more care that her whole family diligently study and
do the things that pertain unto heaven. For if in our worldly affairs, before
we dispose the things that concern our own houses, we first of all care for
the services which we owe to the Commonwealth, least for such duties, we be
drawn into the Law, punished, and with shame discredited; how much more in
Spiritual matters ought we first to take order for the things that belong to
God the creator, and King of all things: least we be perforce haled to the
place where is gnashing of teeth, Chrisost. in Matthew. Hom. 78. When he speaks
of the Church in Nymphaes house, we ought to remember, that in one household,
there is prescribed, what manner ones it becomes all Christian households to
be: to wit: that they be so many little Churches. Wherefore, let every one
know, that this burden is laid upon him, that he instruct his house in the
fear of the Lord, that he keep it in holy discipline, and to be short, that
he there make a representation of the Church. Calvin in Col. c. 4, 15. They
were well instructed which obeyed to be Circumcised without resistance: which
thing declares, that masters in their houses ought to be as Preachers to
their families, that from the highest to the lowest, they may obey the will of
God: Geneva note upon Genesis 17. verse 23. Have thou bought thee a Servant? teach
him, and command him to do the things that pertain to the knowledge, service,
and Religion of God, that he may be gentle and quiet toward his other
fellow-seruants, and all other ways virtuous. Every man's house is a certain
City, and every man is a Prince over his house. In rich men's houses this
thing is plainly to be seen, where-as there be both Manors with demeanes, and
Stewards, Bailiffs, overseers, and officers one above another. But I say also
that the house even of poor men is a City; for even in this there be also
principalities, for so much as that the Husband bears rule over the Wife, and
the Wife over the men-seruants, and the men-seruants are above the women: and
again, Husbands and Wives rule their Children. Do thou not think then the
good man of the house to be as it were a certain King, having so many Princes
subject to him, and that it is good reason, that of all others he should be
most skillful to govern, and most civil: Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Sermon. 22. Verily
I am of that mind, that then there was no family to be found, in which there
was not either the Master or Mistress, either the Son, or the Daughter, or
at leastwise, some one or other of the household, that could not at appointed
times read certain Chapters of the holy Bible, and indifferently well
expound all the profitablest places in them. The holy books were at ye time
coumpted for most precious household stuff: and every house was after a sort (I
say) not only a School, but even a Church also adorned and beawtified with the
daily exercises of reading the Scriptures, interpretations, and prayers. Hyp.
lib. 1. De quotid. sac. Script. lect. speaking of the days in S. Hieroms time,
when he wrote to Sunia and Fretela. There is no house that can rightly be
called a Christian house, except the word of Christ dwell in it, and something
be daily uttered and heard, as touching holy matters, or points of Divinity.
Every well ordered, and true Christian family, ought to represent the form and
similitude, as well of the commonweal as also in special of the Church, and
that most chiefly by the continual handling and interpreting of the word of
God, Ibid.

Question. Do thou then think that those households are disordered, and not
rightly ruled, where there is no daily meditation of Religion kept?

Answer. Such families may rather be counted a sincke of sin, where the
people are careful of worldly proffits, and vain delight, and careless of
the word of God, and true Religion. And therefore they are in this case
oftentimes nearer to destruction: Master Shut in the testimony of a true
faith.

Question. What do thou think of those Masters, which do not teach their
Servant the true knowledge of God?

Answer. How-so-euer they take themselves, it is manifest, that they have not
so mutch as the show of Christianity, nor of any godly mind: for can those
be good, which suffer their family (which should be a little Church) to be so
full of wickedness, as roisting, swearing, railing, lying, quarelling, and all
other filthiness (that is even a little Hell) and never go about to examine
and instruct them in any goodness: So that they have their work done well in
the week day, they care not where they become upon the Saboth day, they never
examine them how they profit by the word, Master Gyff. in his Catechism. The
third commandment is broken, by omitting and neglecting the occasions and
opportunity that is given to enstruct other, and to bring them to the
acknowledging of the truth, especially children and others that are committed
to our trust and charge, Vrsinus in his Catechism. The householder
transgresses the fourth Commandment, who especially on the Saboths and
festival days, so also some-time on the work days has not propounded, or
caused to be propounded and taught to his Children and family, the chief heads
of Christian Religion, namely, such as be taught and contained in the
Catechism. Hyp. in the trial of a man's own self.

Masters and Dames are required in the sixth Commandment, to enstruct their
servants in Religion, to see that they bestow not the Saboth day, nor any such
other time lawfully exempted in worldly affairs, but in divine service, and
such other works, as becomes such oportunities. And the said Masters and
Dames do break the sixth Commandment, when they do not diligently train up
their servants in Religion and virtue, when they set their servant about
their own bellies, or other worldly affairs upon the Saboth day, especially
then, or at any time else, when of right they should be at Service or Sermons:
Ma. Bunny in a short sum of Christian Religion, under the consideration of
the ten Commandments.

The first Counsel of Nice decreed, that no Christian man should be without
the Bible in his house, Corn. Agrip. de vanit. scient. c. 100. Take the Bible
into your hands in your houses at home. At home in our houses let us apply the
reading of the holy Scriptures, Chrisost. in Genesis Hom. 28. Think it not
sufficient, that ye hear the Scriptures in the Church only: but also in your
houses at home, either read your selves, or, get some other to read unto you,
and hear them willingly, August. de temp. Ser. 55. Let the reading of Gods
word begin to take up and use the time, that furious Table-playing is wont to
take from us. In stead of idle Tables, biting jests, and venomous detractions,
let holy conferences, and communications of the Scriptures come in place,
August. de temp. Sermon. 56. Augustine to Volusian, and in certain of his
Sermons, craves of the people, whose Pastor he was, that in stead of Dice,
Cards, and other pastimes, they would get them, and read the holy Scriptures,
Bulling. Comp. Christ. Relig. lib. 1. c. 7. Let one of you take in hand the
holy Book, and let him call his neighbors about him, and by the heavenly
words, let him water, and refresh both their minds, and also his own,
Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 6. Hear the holy Scriptures both in the Church as ye
have been accustomed, and also in your houses, read them over again. If any
be so busied, that before meat he cannot study the holy Scripture, let it
not grieve him even at his small repast, to peruse somewhat of the holy
Scriptures, that as his flesh is fed with meat, so his Soul may be refreshed
with Gods word: that the whole man, that is to say, both the outward and the
inward may rise filled with an holy and wholesome banquet. For if the flesh
only be refreshed, and the Soul not fed with Gods word, the maid is filled,
and the mistress grieved with hunger. And how unjust a thing this is, your
holiness cannot be ignorant. And therefore as I have already said, ye ought
to read and hear the divine Scriptures with such desire, as that both in your
houses, and else wheresoever ye shall be, ye may be able both to frame your
speech of them, and also to teach others the same, that in mind as in a clean
Soul always calling to remembrance the word of God, ye may be able both to
receive for your selves the profitable juice, that is, the spiritual sense,
and also by the help of God, ye may be able to bring and show the same to
others; that, that may be fulfilled in you which is written, and thy cup that
runs over, is very excellent, August. De temp. Sermon. 56.

The Conclusion to each well disposed Christian, containing the use of this
Table.
Marvel not I pray thee good Christian, that I have not expressed the
authorities of the sacred Scriptures word for word, but only noted them by
book, Chapter, and verse: I hope that either thou haste a Bible of thine own,
or else by extreme poverty wanting it, yet according to thy christian bounden
duty thou either art, or henceforth wilt be a diligent frequenter of the
place, where thou may have the use of it. The persons by whom, the times at
which, and the places where-in the private exercise of Religion should be begone
and continued, this monition plainly shows. For matter what should in this
exercise be handled, and manner how the same with profit may be done, together
with the aunswering of such objections as may be made against it, the worthy
works heedfully gone over, whose Titles here thou have already, will
sufficiently instruct thee. In fine, upon the reading, or hearing of this
monition, for the glory of Gods Gospel, the safety of thine own soul, and
the good ensample of others, in the tender bowels of christian love, I beseech
thee accept this council willingly; so many of these passing good Authors, or
their like, as thou shall be able, provide speedely: study them thoroughly,
commit them to memory carefully, thy knowledge heere-in impart to others
gladly; frame thy doings accordingly: cry to God, to God even the Father, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, cry in daily prayer for these and other graces
necessary to salvation, in most plentiful sort to be powered upon his Church
universal, our most gracious godly Sovereign, the whole Nobility, the whole
Ministry, all places of learning, and the whole Comminalty of this land: and
for the continual remembrance of these things, I pray thee let this book be
in some convenient place, where it may be most in sight, not only for thine
own, but also for the use of all such as do be long, or resort unto thee.

Farewell in the Lord from Priston, in Sommerset. Thine, from the very
heart-roote in Jesus Christ, Thomas Wats, Preacher of Gods Word.

Certain Titles of zealous men's learned works, published for the gathering
together, and edification of Gods Saints, extant in our English tongue, and
here set down by order of their easiness, beginning with the briefest and
playnest, and so proceeding to the larger, and most profound.
The little Catechism with additions. Master Somes Catechism. The Sum of
Christian Religion. Master Derings Catechism. Master Nowels little
Catechism. Master Giffards Catechism. Master Woods form of Catechizing.
Master Nowels middle Catechism. Zacharias Vrsinus Catechism. Master Beacons
Catechism. Master Bullingers Decades. Wolfgangus Musculus common places. M.
Calvin's Institutions. D. Peter Martirs common places. B. Jewels Reply, and
Defense of the Apology.
FJNJS.

