THE TEARS OF Fancy. OR, Love Disdained.

Aetna grauius Amor. Printed at London for William Barley, dwell(...) in
Gracious street over against Leaden Hall. 1593.

ID

Go Idle lines unpolished rude and base,
Unworthy words to blason beauties glory:
(Beauty that has my restles heart in chase,
Beauty the subject of my ruefull story.)
I warn thee shun the bower of her abiding,
Be not so bold ne hardy as to use to her:
Least she enraged with thee fall a chiding,
And so her anger prove thy woes renewer.
Yet if she daigne to rue thy dreadful smart,
And reading laugh, and laughing so mislike thee:
Bid her desist, and look within my heart,
Where she may see how ruthles she did strike me.
If she be pleased though she reward thee not,
What others say of me regard it not.
Sonnet. I.
IN prime of youthly years as then not wounded,
With Loves impoisoned dart or bitter gall:
Nor mind nor thoughts on fickle Fancy grounded,
But careless hunting after pleasures ball.
I took delight to laugh at Lovers folly,
Accounting beauty but a fading blossom:
What I esteemd profane, they deemed holy,
Ioying the thraldom which I counted loathsome.
Their plaints were such as no thing might relieve them,
Their hearts did wellnie break loves pain enduring:
Yet still I smild to see how love did grieve them,
Unwise they were their sorrows self procuring.
Thus whilst they honored Cupid for a God,
I held him as a boy not past the rod,
Sonnet. II.
LOng time I fought, and fiercely waged war,
Against the God of amarous Desire:
Who sets the senses among themselves atiarre,
The heart inflaming with his lustfullfire.
The winged boy upon his mothers knee,
Wantonlie playing near to Paphos shrine:
Scorning that I should check his Deity,
Whose dreaded power tamed the gods divine.
From forth his quiver drew the keenest dart,
Wherewith high Jove he oftentimes had wounded:
And fiercely aimd it at my stubborn heart,
But back again the idle shaft rebounded.
Love saw and frownd, that he was so beguiled,
I laughed outright, and Venus sweetly smiled.
Son. III.
She smild to see her son in such a rage,
I laughed to think how I had Love prevented:
He frownd and vowed naught should his ire assuage,
Till I had stoopt to Love, and love repented.
The more he raged the greater grew our laughter,
The more we laughed the fiercer was his ire:
And in his anger swear my poor hearts slaughter,
Which in my breast beauty should set on fire.
Fair Venus seeing her dear son in chollar,
Fearing mishap by his too hasty anger:
Persuaded him that she would work my dollor,
And by her means procure my endless langor.
So Love and loves Queen (Love having consented,
Agreed that I by Love should be tormented.
Sonnet. IIII.
THo taking in her lap the God of love,
She lightly mounted through the Crystal air:
And in her Coach ydrawne with silver Doves,
To Vulcans smokie Forge she did repair.
Where having won the Ciclops to her will,
Loves quiver fraught with arrows of the best:
His bended bow in hand all armd to kill,
He vowed revenge and threatened my unrest.
And to be sure that he would deadly strike me,
His blindfold eyes he did a while uncover:
Choosing an arrow that should much mislike me,
He bad wound him that scorns to be a Lover.
But when he saw his bootles arrow shiuer,
He brake his bow, and cast away his quiver.
Sonnet. V.
HOpeles and helpeles too, poor love amated,
To see himself affronted with disdain:
And all his skill and power spent in vain,
At me the only object that he hated.
Now Cytherea from Olimpus mount,
Descending from the sphere with her dear son:
With Douelike wings to Alcidalyon,
Love on her knee, she by the Crystal fount;
Aduisde the boy what scandal it would be,
If Fame should to the open world discover
How I suruiu'd and scornd Loves sacred power.
Then Cupid lightly leaping from her knee,
Unto his mother vowed my discontenting:
Unhappy vow the ground of my lamenting.
Sonnet. VI.
THen on the sudden fast away he fled,
He fled apace as from pursuing foe:
Ne ever looked he back, ne turned his head,
Until he came whereas he wrought my woe.
Tho casting from his back his bended bow.
He quickly clad himself in strange disguise:
In strange disguise that no man might him know,
So coucht himself within my Ladies eyes.
But in her eyes such glorious bearnes did shine,
That welnigh burnt loves party colored wings,
Whilst I stood gazing on her sunne-bright eien,
The wanton boy she in my bosom flings.
He built his pleasant bower in my breast,
So I in love, and love in me does rest.
Sonnet. VII.
NOw Love triumphed having got the day,
Proudly insulting, tyrannizing still:
As Hawke that ceazeth on the yielding pray,
So am I made the scorn of Victors will.
Now eyes with tears, now heart with sorrow fraught,
Heart sorrows at my watery tears lamenting:
Eyes shed salt tears to see hearts pining thought,
And both that then love scornd are now repenting.
But all in vain too late I plead repentance,
For tears in eyes and sighs in heart must weeld me:
The feathered boy has doomd my fatal sentence,
That I to tyrannizing Love must yield me.
And bow my neck erst subject to no yoke,
To Loves false lure (such force has beauties stroke.
Sonnet. VIII.
O What a life is it that Lovers joy,
Wherein both pain and pleasure shrouded is:
Both heavenly pleasures and eke hells annoy,
Hells foul annoyance and eke heavenly bliss.
Wherein vain hope does feed the Lovers heart,
And brittle joy sustain a pining thought:
When black despair renewes a Lovers smart,
And quite extirps what first content had wrought.
Where fair resemblance eke the mind allureth,
To wanton lewd lust giving pleasure scope:
And late repentance endless pains procures,
But none of these afflict me save vain hope.
And sad despair, despair and hope perplexing,
Vain hope my heart, despair my fancy vexing.
Sonnet. XVII.
THen from her fled my heart in sorrow wrapped.
Like unto one that shund prusuing slaughter:
All well nigh breathles told me what had happed,
How both in Court and country he had sought her.
The drerie tears of many love repenting,
Corriuals in my love whom fancy stroked:
Partners in love and partners in lamenting,
My fellow thralls whose necks as mine were yoked.
The shepherds praises and their hearts amiss,
Vrgd by my Mistres over weening pride:
For none that sees her but captiued is,
And last he told which to my heart did glide;
How all the tears I spent were vain and forceles,
For she in heart had vowed to be remorceles.
Sonnet. XVIII.
THo with a shower of tears I entertained,
My wounded heart into my breast accloied:
With thousand sundry cares and griefs unfeigned,
Unfeigned griefs and cares my heart annoied.
Annoying sorrows at my hearts returning,
Assaild my thoughts with never ceasing horror:
That even my heart heart like to Aetna burning,
Did often times conspire for to abhor her.
But envious love still bent to eke my mourning,
A grievous penance for my fault inflicted:
That eyes should weep and heart be ever groaning;
So love to work my sorrows was addicted.
But earths sole wonder whose eyes my sense appalled,
The fault was loves, then pardon me, for love is frantic called.
Sonnet. 19.
MY heart imposed this penance on mine eyes,
(Eyes the first causers of my harss lamenting:
That they should weep till love and fancy dies,
Fond love the last cause of my hearts repenting.
Mine eyes upon my heart infflict this pain,
(Bold heart that dard to harbor thoughts of love)
That it should love and purchase fell disdain,
A grievous penance which my heart does prove.
Mine eyes did weep as heart had them imposed,
My heart did pine as eyes had it constrained:
Eyes in their tears my paled face disclosed,
Heart in his sighs did show it was disdained.
So the one did weep the other sighed, both grieved,
For both must live and love, both vnrelieued.
Sonnet. 20.
MY heart accused mine eyes and was offended,
Vowing the cause was in mine eyes aspiring:
Mine eyes affirmd my heart might well amend it,
If he at first had banished loves desiring.
Heart said that love did enter at the eyes,
And from the eyes descended to the heart:
Eyes said that in the heart did sparks arise,
Which kindled flame that wrought the inward smart
Heart said eyes tears might soon have quenched that
Eyes said hearts sighs at first might love exile:
So heart the eyes and eyes the heart did blame,
Whilst both did pine for both the pain did feel.
Heart sighed and bled, eyes wept and gazed too much,
Yet must I gaze because I see none such.
Sonnet. 21
FOrtune forwearied with my bitter moan,
Did pity seldom seen my wretched fate:
And brought to pass that I my love alone,
Unawares attacht to plead my hard estate.
Some say that love makes lovers eloquent,
And with diuinest wit does them inspire:
But beauty my tongues office did prevent,
And quite extinguished my first desire.
As if her eyes had power to strike me dead,
So was I dased at her crimson die:
As one that had beheld Medusaes head,
All senses faild their Master but the eye.
Had that sense faild and from me eke been taken,
Then I had love and love had me forsaken.
Sonnet. 22.
I Saw the object of my pining thought,
Within a garden of sweet natures placing:
Where in an arbor artificial wrought,
By workemans wondrous skill the garden gracing.
Did boast his glory glory far renowned,
For in his shadie boughs my Mistres slept:
And with a garland of his branches crowned,
Her dainty forehead from the sunney kept.
Imperious love upon her eielids tending,
Playing his wanton sports at every beck,
And into every finest limb descending,
From eyes to lips from lips to yuorie neck.
And every limb supplide and t'euerie part,
Had free access but durst not touch her heart.
Sonnet. 23
A Ye me that love wants power to pierce the heart,
Of my hearts object beauties rarest wonder:
What is become of that hart-thrilling dart,
Whose power brought the heavenly powers under.
Ah gentle love if empty be thy quiver.
Un mask thy self and look within my breast:
Where thou shall find the dart that made me shiuer,
But can I live and see my love distressed.
Ah no that shaft was cause of sorrow endless,
And pain perpetual should my Lady prove:
If heart were pierst, the dear love be not friendles,
Although I never found a friend of love,
If not without her heart, her love be gained,
Let me live still forlorn and die disdained.
Sonnet. XXIIII.
STill let me live forlorn and die disdained,
My heart consenting to continual languish:
If love (my hearts sore) may not be obtained,
But with the danger of my Ladies anguish.
Let me oppose my self against sorrows force,
And arm my heart to bear woes heavy load:
Vnpittied let me die without remorce,
Rather than monster fame shall blase abroad;
That I was causer of her woes enduring,
Or brought fair beauty to so foul a damage:
If life or death might be her joys procuring,
Both life, love, death, and all should do her homage.
But she lives safe in freedoms liberty,
I live and die in loves extremity.
Sonnet. XXV.
THe private place which I did choose to wail,
And dear lament my loves pride was a grove:
Placed twixt two hills within a lowly dale,
Which now by fame was called the vale of love.
The vale of love for there I spent my plainings,
Plaints that bewraid my sick hearts bitter wounding:
Love sick hearts deep wounds with despair me paining,
The bordering hills my sorrowing plaints resounding.
Each tree did bear the figure of her name,
Which my faint hand upon their backs ingraued:
And every tree did seem herfore to blame,
Calling her proud that me of joys depraved.
But vain for she had vowed to forsake me,
And I to endless anguish must be take me.
Sonnet. XXVI.
IT pleased my Mistress once to take the air,
Amid the vale of love for her disporting:
The birds perceauing one so heavenly fair,
With other Ladies to the grove resorting.
Began dolefully report my sorrows endless,
But she nill listen to my woes repeating:
But did protest that I should sorrow friendles,
So live I now and look for joys defeating.
But joyful birds melodious harmony,
Whose silver tuned songs might well have moved her:
Inforst the rest to rewe my misery,
Though she denyd to pity him that loved her.
For she had vowed her fair should never please me,
Yet nothing but her love can once appease me,
Sonnet. 27.
THe bank whereon I leand my restles head,
Placd at the bottom of a myrtle tree:
I often had watered with the tears I shed,
Sad tears did with the fallen earth agree.
Since when the flocks that grase upon the plain,
Do in their kind lament my woes though dumb:
And every one as faithful does refrain
To eat that grass which sacred is become.
And every tree forbeareth to let fall,
Their dewie drops among any brinish tears:
One^^e the mirth whose heart as mine is thrall,
To m^lt in sorrows sourse no whit forbear.
So frantic love with grief our paind hearts wringing*
That still we wept and still the grass was springing.
Sonnet. 28.
FAst flowing tears from watery eyes abounding,
In tract of time by sorrow so constrained:
And framd a fountain in which Echo sounding,
The'nd of my plaints (vain plaints of Love disdained.)
When to the well of mine own eyes weeping,
I began repair renewing former greeuing:
And endless moan Echo me company keeping,
Her unrevealed woe my woe revealing.
My sorrows ground was on her sorrow grounded,
The Lad was f^ire but proud that her perplexed:
Her hearts deep wound was in my heart deep wounded
Fair and too proud is she that my heart vexed.
But fair and too proud must release hearts pining,
Or heart must sigh and burst with ioies declining.
Sonnet. 29.
TAking a truce with tears sweet pleasures foe,
I thus began hard by the fountain side:
O dear copartner of my wretched way,
Nosooner said but woe poor echo cride.
Then I a gain what woe did thee betide,
That can be greater than disdain, disdain:
Quoth echo Then said I O women's pride,
Pride answered echo. O inflicting pain,
When woeful echo pain a gain repeated,
Redoubling sorrow with a sorrowing sound:
For both of us were now in sorrow seated,
Pride and disdain disdainefull pride the ground.
That forced poor Echo mourn ay sorrowing ever,
And me lament in tears ay joining never.
Sonnet. 30.
ABout the well which from mine eyes did flow,
The woeful witness of hearts desolation:
Yet tears nor woe nor ought could work compassion,
Did diverse trees of sundry natures grow.
The mirrhe sweet bleeding in the latter wound,
Into the crystal waves her tears did power:
As pitying me on whom blind love did lower,
Upon whose back I wrote my sorrows ground.
And on her rugged rind I wrote forlorn,
Forlorn I wrote for sorrow me oppressed:
Oppressing sorrow had my heart distressed,
And made the abject outcast of loves scorn,
The leaves conspiring with the winds sweet sounding,
With gentle murmor playnd my hearts deep wounding.
Sonnet. XXXI.
I VVrote upon there sides to eke their plaining,
If sad laments might multiply their sorrow:
My loves fair looks and eke my loves disdaining,
My loves coy looks constraines me pine for woe.
My loves disdain which was her lovers dolor:
My loves proud heart which my hearts bliss did banish:
My loves transparent beams and rosy color,
The pride of which did cause my joys to vanish.
My loves bright shining beeautie like the starte,
That early rises sore for the suns appearance:
A guide unto my thoughts that wandering arre,
Does force me breath abroad my woes indurance.
O life forlorn, O love unkindly frowning,
Thy eyes my heart despair my fad hope drowning.
Sonnet. XXXII.
THose whose kind hearts sweet pity did at faint,
With ruthful tears bemond my miseries:
Those which had heard my never ceasing plaint,
Or read my woes engraven on the trees.
At last did win my Lady to consort them,
Unto the fountain of my flowing anguish:
Where she unkind and they might boldly sport them,
Whilst I mean while in sorrows lap did languish.
Their meaning was that she some tears should shed,
Into the well in pity of my pining:
She gave consent and putting forth her head,
Did in the well perceive her beauty shining.
Which seeing she withdrew her head puffed up with pride
And would not shed a tear should I have died.
Sonnet. XXXIII.
Some say that women love for to be praised,
But droope when as they think their fair must die:
Ioying to have their beauties glory raised,
By fames shril trompe above the starrie sky.
I then whom want of skill might be with drawing,
Extold her beauty not as yet deserved:
She said my words were flattery and fayning,
For good intent to bad event soon swerued.
Some say again they will deny and take it,
I gave my heart my heart that dearly cost me:
No sooner offered but she did forsake it,
Scorning my proffered gift so still she crossed me.
But were I (alas I am not) false and truthles:
Then had she reason to be stern and ruthles.
Sonnet. XXXIIII.
WHy live I wretch and see my joys decay,
Why live I and no hope of loves advancing:
Why do mine eyes behold the sunnie day,
Why live I wretch in hope of better chancing.
O wherefore tells my tongue this doleful tale,
That every ear may hear my bitter plaint:
Was never heart that yet bemond my bale,
Why live I wretch my pangs in vain to paint.
Why strive I against the stream or against the hill,
Why are my sorrows buried in the dust:
Why do I toil and loose my labor still,
Why do I feed on hope or bild on trust.
Since hope had never hap and trust finds treason,
Why live I wretch disdainde and see no reason?
Sonnet. XXXV.
AMongst the Idle toys that tosfe my brain,
And reaue my troubled mind from quiet rest:
A^le cr^^d love I find does still remain,
To breed debate within my grieved breast.
When weary woe does work to wound my will,
And heart surchargd with sorrow lives opressed:
My sowlen eyes then cannot wayle there fill,
Sorrow is so far spent and I distressed.
My tongue has not the cunning skill to tell,
The smallest grief that gripes my trobbing heart:
Mine eyes have not the secret power to swell,
Into such hugie seas of wounding smart.
That will might melt to waves of bitter woe,
And I might swelt or drown in sorrows so,
Sonnet. 36.
MY waterie eyes let fall no trickling tears,
But floods that over flow abundantly:
Whose spring and fountain first in forced by fears,
Does drown my heart in waves of misery.
My voice is like unto the raging wind,
Which roareth still and never is at rest:
The diverse thoughts that tumble in my mind,
Are restless like the wheel that wherles always.
The smokie sighs that boil out of my breast,
Are far unlike to those which others use:
For Lovers sighs sometimes do take their rest,
And lends their minds a little space to muse.
But mine are like unto the surging seas,
Whom tempest calm nor quiet can appease.
Sonnet. 37.
Where may I now my careful corpse convey,
From company the worker of my woe:
How may I wink or hide mine eyes always,
Which gase on that whereof my grief does grow,
How shall I seem my sighs for to suppress,
Which help the heart which else would swelt in sunder,
Which hurts the help that makes my torment less:
Which helps and hurts, O woeful weary wonder,
How now, but thus in solitary wise:
To step aside and make hie way to moan,
To make two fountains of my dasled eyes,
To sigh my fill till breath and all begone.
To die in sorrow and in woe repent me,
That love at last would though too late lament me.
Sonnet. 38.
O Would my love although too late lament me,
And pity take of tears from eyes distilling:
To bear these sorrows well I could content me,
And ten times more to suffer would be willing.
If she would daine to grace me with her favor,
The thought thereof sustained grief should banish:
And in beholding of her rare behavior,
A smiyle of her should force despair to vanishe:
But she is bent to tiranze upon me,
Despair persuades there is no hope to have her:
My heart does whisper I am woe begone me,
Then cease thy vain plaints and desist to crave her.
Here end my sorrows here my salt tears stint I,
For shes obdurate, stern, remorseles flintie
Sonnet XXX.XIX.
Here end my sorrow no here my sorrow springs,
Here end my woe no here begins my wailing:
Here cease my grief no here my grief deep wringeth
Sorrow woe grief nor ought else is auailing.
Here cease my tears no here begins eyes weeping,
Here end my plaints no here begins my pining:
Here heart be free no sighs in heart still keeping,
Tears plaints and sighs all cause of joys declining.
Here end my love no here does love inspire me,
Here end my hope no here does hope fair flourish:
Here end my life no let not death desire me,
Love hope and life and all with me must perish.
For sorrow woe grief tears and plaints often plained,
Sighs love hope life and I must die disdained.
Sonnet. 40.
THe common joy the cheer of company,
Twixt mirth and moan does plague me evermore:
For pleasant talk or musicks melody,
Yelds no such salve unto my secret sore.
For still I live in spite of cruel death,
And die again in spite of lingering life:
Feed still with hope which does prolong my breath,
But choackt with fear and strangled still with strife,
VVittnes the days which I in dole consume,
And weary nights bear record of my woe:
O wrong^ full world which makst my fancy fume,
Fie fickle Fortune fie thou art my foe.
O heavy hap so froward is my chance,
No days nor nights nor worlds can me advance.
Sonnet. 41.
Imperious love who in the prime of youth,
I light esteemed as an idle toy:
Though late thy fiery dart has causd my ruth,
And turned sweet happiness to dark annoy.
Why have thou pleasure in my hearts deep groaning,
And do not rue and pity my vexations?
Why have thou joy at my laments and moning,
And art not moved at my imprecations?
Why have thou stroke my heart with swift desire,
And perst my Ladies eyes with fell disdain?
Why has fond fancy set my thoughts on fire,
And pent my heart in prison of sad pain?
Why am I drowned in dolors never ceasing,
My ioies still fading, and my woes increasing.
Sonnet. 42.
O Thou that rulest in Ramnis golden gate,
Let pity pierce thy unrelenting mind:
Unlade me of the burden cruel fate,
(Fell envious fates too cruel and unkind)
Have heapt upon me by too froward love,
Too froward love the enemy of fortune:
Whose fierce assaults my heart (too late) did prove,
My silly heart which sorrow did importune.
Yet in thy power is my hearts redeeming,
My hearts redeeming from vile thraldomes force:
Vile thrall to one my sorrows not esteeming,
Though she be cruel yet have thou remorce.
Be thou to me no more inconstant variable,
But let thy fickle wheel rest firm and stable.
Sonnet. 43.
LOng have I swome against the wished wave,
But now constrained by a loathsome life:
I greedily do seek the greedy grave,
To make an end of all these storms and strife.
Sweet death give end to my tormenting woes,
And let my passions penetrate thy breast:
Suffer my heart which does such griefs in close
By timely fates inioie eternal rest.
Let me not dwell in dole since thou may ease me,
Let me not languish in such endless durance:
One happy stroke of thy sad hand will please me,
Please me good death it is thy procurance.
To end my hearts grief (heart she did abhor thee)
O have thee gentle death I linger for thee.
Sonnet. 44.
LOng have I sued to fortune death and love,
But fortune, love, nor death will daine to hear me:
I fortunes frown, deaths spite, loves horror prove,
And must in love dispairing live I fear me.
Love wounded me, yet nill recure my wounding,
And yet my plaints have often him inuoked:
Fortune has often heard my sorrows sounding,
Sorrows which my poor heart have welnigh choked.
Death well might have been moved when I lamented,
But cruel death was deaf when I complained:
Death, love and fortune all might have relented,
But fortune, love, and death, and all disdained.
To pity me or ease my restles mind,
How can they choose since they are bold and blind.
Sonnet. 45.
WHen neither sighs nor sorrows were of force
I let my Mistres see my naked breast:
where view of wounded heart might work remorce,
And move her mind to pity my unrest.
With fled fast eye she gazed on my heart,
wherein she saw the picture of her beauty:
which having seen as one aghast she start,
Accusing all my thoughts with breach of duty.
As if my heart had robbed her of her fair,
No, no, her fair bereand my heart of joy:
And fates disdain has killed me with despair,
Despair the fountain of my sad annoy.
And more, alas, a cruel one I served,
Lest loved of her whose love I most deserved.
Sonnet. 46.
MY Mistres seeing her fair counterfeit,
So sweetly framed in my bleeding breast:
On it her fancy she so firmly set,
Thinking her self for want of it distressed.
Envying that any should enjoy her Image,
Since all unworthy were of such an honor:
Tho began she me command to leave my gage,
The first end of my joy, last cause of dolor.
But it so fast was fixed to my heart,
Ioind with inseperable sweet commixture,
That naught had force or power them to part:
Here take my heart quoth I, with it the picture,
But oh coy Dame intolleberable smart.
Rather then touch my heart or come about it,
She turned her face and chose to go without it.
Sonnet. 47.
BEhold dear Mistres how each pleasant green,
will now renew his summers liuerie:
The fragrant flowers which have not long been seen,
will flourish now ere long in bravery.
But I alas within whose mourning mind,
The grafts of grief are only given to grow:
Cannot enjoy the spring which others find,
But still my will must wither all in woe.
The lusty ver that whilome might exchange,
My grief to joy, and my delight increase:
Springs now else where and shows to me but strange,
My winters woe therefore can never cease.
In other coasts his sun does clearly shine,
And comfort lend to every mould but mine.
Sonnet. 48.
THe tender buds whom cold has long kept in,
And winters rage inforst to hide their head:
will spring and sprowt as they do now begin,
That every one will joy to see them spread.
But cold of care so nips my ioies at root,
There is no hope to recover what is lost:
No sun does shine that well can do it boot,
Yet still I strive but loose both toil and cost.
For what can spring that feels no force of ver,
what hour can flourish where no sun does shine:
These balls dear love, within my breast I bear,
To break my bark and make my pith to pine.
Needs must I fall, I fade both root and rind,
My branches bow at blast of every wind.
Sonnet. 49.
DIana and her nimp^s in siluane brook,
Did wash themselves in secret far apart:
Bu^ bold Acteon dard on them to look,
For which fair Phoebe turned him to a Heart.
His hounds vnweeting of his sudden change,
Did hale and pull him down with open cry:
He then repenting that he so did range,
would speak but could not, so did sigh and die.
But my Diana fairer and more cruel,
Bereft me of my heart and in disdain:
Has turned it out to feed on fancies fuel,
And live in bondage and eternal pain.
So hartles do I live yet cannot die,
Desire the dog, does chase it to and fro:
Unto her breast for succor it does fly,
If she debar it whither shall it go.
Now lives my heart in danger to be slain,
Unless her heart my heart will entertain.
Sonnet. 50.
HAand, heart, and eye, tucht thought and did behold,
The only glory that on earth does grow:
Hand quakt, heart sighd, but eye was foolish bold,
To gaze til gazing wrought hearts grounded woe.
The object of these senses heavenly saint,
with such a majesty did me appall:
As hand to write her praise did fear and faint,
And heart did bleed to think me Beauties thrall.
But eye more hardy than the hand or heart,
Did glory in her eyes reflecting light:
And yet that light did breed my endless smart.
And yet mine eyes nill leave there former sight,
But gazing pine, which eye, hand, heart does try,
And what I love, is but hand, heart, and eye.
Sonnet. 51.
EAch tree did boast the wished spring times pride,
when solitary in the vale of love:
I hid my self so from the world to hide,
The uncouth passions which my heart did prove.
No tree whose branches did not bravely spring,
No branch whereon a fine bird did not sit:
No bird but did her shrill notes sweetly sing,
No song but did contain a lovely dit.
Trees, branches, birds, and songs were framed fair,
Fit to allure frail mind to careless ease:
But careful was my thoughts yet in despair,
I dwelt for brittle hope me cannot please.
For when I view my loves fair eyes reflecting,
I entertain despair, vain hope rejecting.
Sonnet. 52.
EAch Creature joys Appollos happy sight,
And feed them selves with his fair beams reflecting
Night wandering trauelers at Cinihias sight,
Clear up their clowdy thoughts fond fere rejecting
But dark disdain eclipsed has my sun,
Whose shining beams my wandering thought were guiding,
For want whereof my little world is done
That I uneath can stay my mind from sliding,
O happy birds that at your pleasure may:
Behold the glorious light of sols a rays,
Most wretched I borne in some dismal day:
That cannot see the beams my sun displaies,
My glorious sun in whom all virtue shrowds
That light the world but shines to me in clouds
Sonnet. 53.
IN Clownes she shines and so obscurely shines,
That like a mastles shipe o^ seas I w^n^^er:
For want of her to guide my heart that pineth,
Yet can I not entreat ne yet command her,
So am I tied in Laborinths of fancy,
In dark and obscure Laborinths of love:
That every one may plain behold that can see,
How I am fetterd and what pains I prove.
The Lamp whose light should lead my ship about,
Is placed upon my Mistress heavenly face:
Her hand does hold the clew must lead me out,
And free my heart from thraldomes lothed place.
But clean to lead me out or Lamp to light me,
She scornefullie denide the more to spite me.
Sonnet. 54.
BLame me not dear love though I talk at randon,
Terming thee scornful, proud, unkind, disdaineful
Since all I do cannot my woes abandon,
Or rid me of the yoke I feel so painful.
If I do paint thy pride or want of pity,
Consider likewise how I blase thy beauty:
Enforced to the first in mournful dittie,
Constrained to the last by servile duty:
And take thou no offense if I misdeemed,
Thy beauties glory quenches thy prides blemish:
Better it is of all to be esteemed,
Fair and too proud than not fair and too squemishe.
And seeing thou must scorn and it is aprooued,
Scorn to be ruthles since thou art beloved.
Sonnet. 55.
MY love more bright than Cinthias horned head,
That spreads her wings to beautify the heavens:
When Titan coucheth in his purple bed,
Thou live by Titan and inioiest his beams.
She flies when he begins to run his race,
And hides her head his beauty stains her brightness:
Thou staiest thy beauty yields the sun no place,
For thou excelst his beams in glories sweetness.
She has eclips, thou never do eclips,
She sometimes wanes thy glory still does wax:
None but Endymyon hangs at her lips,
Thy beauty burns the world as fire does flax.
She shines by months, thou hours, months, and years,
Oh th(...) beauty should enforce such tears.
Sonnet. 56.
WEre words dissolved to sighs, sighs into tears,
^^d every tear to torments of the mind:
The minds distress into those deadly fears,
That find more death than death it self can find.
Were all the woes of all the world in one,
Sorrow and death set down in all their pride:
Yet were they insufficient to bemone,
The restles horrors that my heart does hide.
where black despair does feed on every thought,
And deep despair is cause of endless grief:
where every sense with sorrows ouer-wrought,
Lives but in death dispairing of relief.
whilst thus my heart with loves plague torn asunder,
May of the world be called the woeful wonder.
Sonnet. LVII.
THe hunted Heart sometime does leave the Hound,
My Heart alas is never out of chase:
The liue-hounds life sometime is yet unbound,
My bands are hopeles of so high a grace.
For natures sickness sometimes may have ease,
Fortune though fickle sometime is a friend:
The minds affliction patience may appease,
And death is cause that many torments end.
Yet I am sick, but she that should restore me,
Withholds the sacred balm that would recute me:
And fortune eke (though many eyes deplore me)
Nill lend such chance that might to joy procure me.
Patience wants power to appease my weeping,
And death denies what I have long been seeking.
Sonnet. LVIII.
WHen as I mark the joy of every wight,
How in their minds deep throbbing sorrow cease
And by what means they nourish their delight,
Their sweet delight my pain the more increases.
For as the Dear that sees his fellow feed,
Amid the lusty heard, himself sore bruised:
O^ as the bird that feels herself to bleed,
And lies aloof of all her pheeres refused.
So have I found and now too dearly try,
That pleasure doubleth pain and bliss annoy:
Yet still I twit my self of Surcuidrie,
As one that am unworthy to enjoy,
The lasting fruit of such a heavenly love,
For whom these endless sorrows I approve.
Sonnet. LIX.
Often have I raild against love many ways,
But pardon love I honor now thy power:
For were my Palace Greece Pyramides,
Cupid should there erect a stately bower.
And in my Palace sing his sugared songs,
And Venus Doves my self will finely feed:
And nurce her sparrowes and her milk white Swans.
Yea, in my restles bosom should they breed.
And thou dear Lady sacred and divine,
Shall have thy place within my heart assignd:
Thy picture yea thy fiery darting eien,
I Will carry painted in my grieved mind.
The chiefest coulle^s shall be scarlet blood,
Which Cupid pricketh from my woeful heart:
And tears commixt shall further forth my good,
To paint thy glories cording their desert.
I now am changd from what I wont to be,
Cupid is God, And there is none but he.
Sonnet. LX.
WHo taught thee first to sigh A less sweet heart? love.
Who taught thy tongue to marshall words of plaint? love.
Who filled thine eyes with tears of bitter smart? love.
Who gave thee grief and made thy joys so faint? love.
Who first did paint with coullers pale thy face? love.
Who first did break thy sleeps of quiet rest? love.
Who forced thee unto wanton love give place? love.
Who thrald thy thoughts in fancy so distressed? love.
Who made thee bide both constant firm and sure. love.
Who made thee scorn the world and love thy friend? love.
Who made thy mind with patience pains endure? love.
Who made thee settle steadfast to the end. love.
Then love thy choice though love be never gained,
Still live in love, despair not though disdained.
FINIS.
T. W.


