THE CONTROVERSY DEBATED About the Reverend gesture of Kneeling, in the Act of
Receiving the Holy Communion.

By JAMES WATS, Minister of Gods Word at Woodnosborough in Kent: And sometime
fellow of Magdalene College in Cambridge.

HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV printer's device of William Jaggard

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane, 1621.

TO THE REVEREND and Right Worshipful M. Doctor Boys, Deane of Christ-Church
in Canterbury, all prosperity and happiness in the LORD.
Reverend Sir: Albeit I am conscious to my self of my inability to answer the
opinion your love long since has conceived of some faculty in me for
improuements of a Scholar: yet cannot Salomons word, being represented now to
my thought (Stultus reputabitur sapiens si tacuerit) dishearten me from
imparting such of my meditations unto you, as some of them a good while since,
and some more lately I had written down, to satisfy (if I might) some
scrupulous consciences, touching the lawful and convenient use of the gesture
of Kneeling in the Act of receiving the holy Eucharist. About the sign of the
Cross in or after the other Sacrament, I had filled many sheets of paper,
before I could read much of the more accurate writings of other men in that
argument, and being loath according to the old Adage, to make that all only my
Cipresse tree: I undertook upon earnest request of a friend (more profitable I
hope to the Church in his labors, then I can be) to show the vanity of one who
gloriously boasts in print, to make proof; that the controuerted ceremonies
are defended by no other arguments, then are used by Papists, and which by
elder Protestants have been long since answered. Between his second (though
Senior Ignoto to me) and my self, the same was drawn so often in writing con
and pro, that yet I am not ashamed to make it appear to any upon what terms I
left him. Then an occasion was offered me to answer some Quaeres about
kneeling, and afterward more closely to join issue for repelling all the
Objections which I have observed in reading, and which for the most part have
bin urged in conferring with me. My arguments and answers such as they be, I
must profess that I can get no reply to them: yet I do not perceive, that any
one formerly opposite is willing to yield himself persuaded by them. And for
this cause partly I present and submit them to your reverend censure, whether
contempt, or some more learning wermeetest to be set against them. Partly, for
that I am slow in extemporary speech, and so as is nothing likely to purchase
an opinion of more judgment or understanding in me: therefore I had rather let
my pen run as you see, then inter Vocales et reales amicos, to be still
realiter a mute. I gratulate unfeignedly your dignity, and no less the comfort
of your own soul, and esteem in Gods Church, by your learned and godly
labors published: my desire is to adhere to you still in all services of love,
and that with ingenuity: neither soliciting nor expecting any thing else, but
your favor and encouragements, as formerly you have vouchsafed me. The God of
heaven grant unto you many comfortable years to help to support his truth with
Sions peace, and them that stand for both. So I rest. Ian. 1. 1619.

Your Worships most affectionate to be commanded, James Wattes.

QVi genua, admissus mensae conuiua tremendae,
Flectere nescit (and hoc nescire est nolle proteruis)
Prauum, quod didicit, dediscere discat; and harum,
Queis (...) inest, rationum ponderepressus,
Submittat rigidos curuato poplite neruos.
Pondus habent haec tela; grauant, franguntque columnas
Se non flectentes. Lector, si for sitan anceps,
His cessure, Vale, vel responsure Responsis.
De hoc libello sic iudicat. T.G.

THE CONTROVERSY debated about the gesture meetest to be used in our Church,
of the members thereunto pertaining, in the act of receiving the holy Supper of
the Lord; by way of Demands or Oppositions, with Solutions and Answers
adjoining to them; and in such form and order as the Questions are wont
commonly to be propounded.
Question.

IS it lawful to kneel (in receiving) when Christ sitting, did administer to
his Disciples, and they also received sitting?

Answer.

First, by this question it cannot be supposed that Communicants should receive
sitting, except we also in administering, use the same gesture, which in none
of our Churches is, or well can be observed.

Secondly, (...). Math. 26.20. (...). Luk 22 14. (...).
Christ and his Disciples did not sit as our manner is, but it seems they lay
leaning one upon another bosom; for which see John 13. Job. 13.25. Not as it
is said of him when he preached sitting. (...). Matthew. 5.1.
ver. 23. with the note upon it. Whereunto I add, that all the words used in
the Original do signify either lying, or falling down, and not sitting:
therefore if his example were intended to be a pattern for gesture not to be
changed, why would we have it changed into sitting after our fashion, and so
argue against kneeling hereby?

Objection.

We must follow Christ's example, in that he and his did observe the usual
gesture.

Answer.

But must we think he observed It, because it was the usual gesture in
receiving other meats? nay rather, seeing we must come with another mind and
affection, and with another intention (as not desiring food for the body, but
for the soul) how can it be thought, that he would especially commend the
common gesture to be used now, which is used at taking ordinary sustenance for
the body? It may rather be conceived that our Savior did respect to observe
the common gesture which the Jewish Church did then use in celebrating the
Passover. From whence the argument follows strongly to urge, that we should
all conform our selves to the usual custom of this our Church in receiving
also: for shall Christ and his Apostles observe the common gesture with the
Church of the Jews: and shall not we observe the common gesture of the Church,
whereof we are members? shall his example that way (tending to peace and
uniformity) be of no force therein to sway us?

Instance.

That which Christ did, howsoever, we are sure was best.

Reply.

Yet (as is supposed) he varied in communicating of the Passover from the
prescript order set down in the Law, Exodus 12. v. 11. which was, to be girt,
and shod, with staves in their hands; and therefore standing, (as Doctor Willet
upon that place, by those circumstances, and by ancient testimony proves). Now
if it be credible that this gesture was changeable after it was enjoined: how
much more the gesture which Christ did use and his Apostles, the same only
being reported to us, and no commandment set down for us at all?

Objection.

We say still, Christ his doing and approbation then, has the force of a
perpetual command, concerning us, and to bind us.

Answer.

This assertion is many ways liable to exceptions; for when the Lord said (
This do, Luke 22.19. 19. 1. Corin. 11.24.) it must needs be, he respected the
substance, and not precisely the circumstances: therefore the Minister
communicating unto others is not allowed, nor at any hand required to sit.
Secondly, whereas he always himself receives first, Christ's own example
will not warrant. Thirdly (to omit difference of number in Communicants from
his number, and difference of sex) who doubts but that it is fittest to
receive in the public place of Gods worship, though the first celebration
were in a private chamber? and that it is fittest to receive in the fore-noone,
and before dinner, albeit the time then were after supper, and not then only,
but long afterward? as Acts chapter 20. verse. 11. the breaking of bread was (it
seems) after the sermon, 1. Cor: 11.21.
and so after midnight. Likewise in Corinth every one took his own Supper
before, which the Apostle there reprooues, only in respect of the excess, and
of such banqueting in the Church, and of uncharitableness toward the poor;
not in respect of the time, and therefore does expressly mention the time of
Christ's institution, to have been in the night, by and by after, verse. 23. Now
seeing we hold all those circumstances may vary from the first institution, why
must only the same gesture be observed, which (as I showed before) is not the
same but in a generality? A common gesture ye press still must be used as
Christ did use it; wherein we would join with you, if ye meant common by the
Churches use in receiving; but of that before.

Objection.

Christ's institution, and the practice of his Apostles may be urged against
kneeling, because they were not required to kneel: neither did they so at
receiving, when he himself was present, and did minister unto them.

Answer.

This shall be answered more directly, when a like objection will come in
again. First then I now reply, that the words are ( Math. 26. v. 26. and Mark
14.22.) As they did eat, Jesus took bread, etc. not as they did sit, or as
they did lie, etc. so that our Saviors practice must needs afford a stronger
argument for a necessity of eating somewhat before (which is expressed) then
for receiving by such or such a position of the body, which is not expressed.

Secondly, seeing the bread was broken to them, as they did eat, and as their
manner of sitting or lying was to eat: we see (I think) a plain difference,
how we may kneel more conveniently in receiving (as the seats be fitted for
us) then they could.

Thirdly, the argument from Christ his practice (ministering to them who did not
kneel) to urge a necessity, as if therefore we may not kneel: is a plain
fallacy: as if one should say, Christ did usually preach sitting (as Math. 4.1.
and 13. v. 2. and Luke 4.20.) therefore we may not preach standing: or, he is
noted to have preached standing but once, therefore we may not do so often: or
thus, Christ did preach many times, but we read yet only of one time wherein
he took a Text. Luke 4. v. 16.
So we should do best to preach commonly without taking of a Text.

Furthermore, seeing the Lord Jesus is propounded to us for an ensample, not
only in his manner of performing the parts of Gods worship, but in all manner
of conversation, 1 Peter 1.15. (excepting what appertained to his divine
nature, or to his offices) therefore as well, seeing he chose to be poor, we
must refuse to be rich. As he wore a coat without seame, so we must have no
seame in our upper garment. And thus, way may be made for the spirit of
contradiction, to trouble the whole Church of God, and every member of it.

Objection.

But we marvel still, if this gesture of kneeling were to be allowed: why all
reformed Churches do disallow it, and that it is used only among the Papists?

Answer.

The gesture among the Papists (which some relate, was commanded first by Pope
Honorius the third) was kneeling not at receiving, Balaeus de actis Romans
pontif. l. 5 page 279.
but at the elevation or lifting up of the Masse-cake or host (as they term
it) over the Priests head, that all should then together fall down and adore
it: but we have no such kneeling, because we have no such elevation, nor we
have no such host to eleuate, but in our hearts we abandon it: yet can we
imagine no other, but that the members of the Church (severally) in time of
receiving, did kneel of ancient time, because of these and the like sayings of
the Fathers that then lived; Cyprian ad Quirinum. l. 3. cap. 94.
as that the Eucharist with fear and honor is to be received, and that it is
to be discerned and distinguished from other meats, August in Epist. 118.
veneratione singulariter debita; by a veneration singularly due unto it. And,
at this day, Hodie in mysteris adoramus carnem Christ. Amb. dispu. Sanct. lib.
3. cap. 12.
we adore Christ's flesh in the mysteries, which (being a sentence, the Papists
allege against the Church of England) Doctor Bilson answers ( lib. 4. page
537. in 8.) Verily, and so do we, we adore Christ in them, we adore not the
mysteries themselves; which must needs be Ambrose his meaning, because he said
a little before (neither do we read that any thing is to be adored besides
God.) Neque adoratudum quicquam prater deum legimus.
Chrysostom also held, that Christ is to be adored in the Sacrament, no less,
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in cap. 16. ad Corinth.
cum reuerentia and tremore, with reverence and trembling, then as the wise men
did perform to him lying in the manger, Matthew. 2. which we see there plainly
was by kneeling. But if these and like sayings of the Ancients, should either
be suspected or contemned, we refuse not the judgment of Churches reformed now
adays, and of the godly learned in them. The Church of Bohemia in their
confession, Anno 1575. as they say first, Hoc sacramentum, etc. This sacrament
ought to be administered and received without adoration, and the worship which
is due to God only: so they say by and by after, Populus fidelium vsitatissime
in genuo procumbens hoc accipit.
The faithful people most usually receive this, falling down upon their knees
with giving of thanks, and rejoicing, and himns, and rehearsal of benefits,
by the death of Christ; and all this (as they understand) according to Christ's
bidding, Do this in remembrance of me. The Heluetians also in their confession
( page 113.) to clear themselves from having a mean regard, Sunt enim haeres
sanctae and venerandae.
de sacris symbolis, of the holy signs, they say thus of them, These are
things holy and venerable. And the censure (in the name of the Churches of
France, and of the Low Countries) given upon those words of the Bohemian
confession (falling down upon their knees) it is this: In hoc etiam ritu suam
cuique Ecclesiae libertatem saluam relinque^dam arbitramur, non quod per so
hunc morem damnamus.
In this rite also we think it meet that every Church (they say not every
particular man and woman) should be left entirely to their own liberty, not
that we in it self condemn this custom, etc. yet those Censurers think (for
avoiding bread-worship) it were better in most places this ceremony of
kneeling were abolished. But let it also be remembered, that in their preface
they modestly submit their judgment (wherein they dissent) unto the judgment
of their brethren. Like as Master Beza did write concerning the sign of the
Cross in Baptism: Scio nonnull^s sublata crucis adoratione, aliquem signi
crucis vsu^ retinuisse. Vtanturigitur ipsi sicuti par est sua liberate.
Respo^s. ad Balduinum.
I know that some who have abandoned the worshipping of the Cross, have yet
retained some use of the sign of the Cross. Let them therefore as it is meet
use their own liberty.

Objection.

We have heard tho, that Master Beza did disallow kneeling, while the mysteries
be in receiving.

Answer.

He did so: howbeit not simply neither, but for fear of superstition; yet he
confesses there, that it has Geniculatio du^symbola accipiuntur specie^
quidem habet piae ac Christianae venerationis, ac proinde olim potuit cu^
fructu vsurpari, etc. Epist. 12 page 100.
an appearance (not of evil, but) of godly and Christian veneration or
reverence, and therefore might once be used with fruit and profit. And he
deriues not this custom of kneeling from the Papists, but rather thought that
their superstition and Idolatry in bread-worship took the beginning from this
custom. Nevertheless upon his former concession or grant, we should need
(me-thinke) no fitter vmpire then himself was to be judged by, for allowance
of our use of kneeling; for in his last Epistle of all, his words be these:
Huius seculi dies ita mali sunt, vt ia^ nemo fere (abiecta vera Religione)
cogitet de superstitiodibus reuoca^dis nam superstitiones nunc ijs relinquuntur
qus imperiti and Idiota appellanter, tametsi, ad speciem and simulationem
retineantur. Impietas autem and religionis omnis contemptus, quod crimen ita
nefarium est vt etiam diaboli sint eius iudices, pestiferum illud venenum est a
quo te potissimum cauere oportet, vtpote quod in eam voraginem homines
praecipitat. Epist. 84. Regi Nauarrae.
The days are so evil now, that none almost (rejecting true religion after
they have received it) think of returning again to superstitions.
Superstitions are now left for them that be counted ignorant and simple, though
they be somewhat retained, and counterfaited for a show. But impiety and
contempt of all religion (a crime so detestable, that the devils themselves may
and will be Judges of it) that is the direful poison above all to beware of,
which tumbles men headlong, and ouer-whelmes in that gulf, whereout there is
no hope of recovery.

And because I find some men forward to muster up the names of worthy
neotericall Divines in this question, as if all did plainly avouch kneeling in
the act of receiving to be unlawful, I propose in the first place, the
sayings of three to be considered of, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr, and Mr.
Greenham. Oecolampadius (a most worthy instrument to cause the light of the
Gospel to break forth and shine in the house of God, and to dispell the
darkness of Popery) giving his Epistolarum ib. 4 fol 177. ad fratres in agro
Solotino.
advice unto a Church (concerning the gesture to be used in receiving the
Sacrament; no man being reputed to hold farther off from the adoration of it
then he) says thus: Some like to follow the rite of Zurich, some of Berne,
some ours of Basil, but may agree all well together, although we use not the
same rite as they do. Nunquid Christus magis sedetes ve! sta^tes vel genu flec
tents respicit? At nihil co^sultius esse potest qua^ vt in vna^ formulam
concedatis. Non patiuntur res vestrae vt in ritibus diuersi nunc sitis qua^do
aliae sectae inter vos esse audiu^tur, vt licet paru^ momenti sit in varietate
ceremoniarum, apud spirituales, apud eos ta me^ quibus no^est ta^tu^ charitatis
studium, si (velictis ijs quae accident plerisque) nouam and singularem viam
ingrediantur, necesse dicit vt inde simultatibus causa porrigatur. Fatemur esse
quidem quod incaena variare non licet, vtpote etc. Porro in secundarijs
curiosiores esse non tam religio quam superstitio est. Nolumus vos in nostra^
etc. sed vobis nihil vtilius est conformitate quadam. Profecto vbi per
ostentatione singularis ritus quaeritur, and receditur a fratrum communs
ratione, vtilius foret interim caena destitus, etc. date (oro) operam ne sit in
vobis varietas
Has Christ respect more to them that sit, or to them that stand, or to them
that kneel? yet (says he again) nothing is more behooueful for you, then to
agree all in one form among your selves. And although there be small weight
in variety of ceremonies with them that be spiritual, yet if some (who have
not such a respect of love and charity) shall leave those rites which the most
approve of, and enter, or go a new way singular from the rest; it must
necessarily be the occasion of strife and variance. We confess there is
somewhat in the Lords Supper which in no case may be changed, as if we should
have cheese offered us in stead of bread, or milk in stead of wine, or if they
should change the Sacrament, and turn it into a sacrifice, or of a Communion
make it a private banquet, or any other way that the substance of the Supper
may be impeached. But to be ouer-curious in secondary matters, argues not one
to be religious, but rather superstitious. We will not draw ye to observe our
ceremonies, nor of the Church of Zurich, nor of Berne; howbeit nothing is more
profitable, then that ye do hold a conformity among your selves. And then his
judgment was moreover, that such as (in the rite of receiving) would be
singular and odd from the congregation, it were better they were shut out from
receiving altogether. Then he fell to entreat thus: I pray do your endeavor,
Caueie omnino ne in contemptu^ veniant Sacramenta.
that ye may one do like another, and not vary or be diverse among your
selves; yea and ye must mainly beware of this, That the Sacraments come not
into contempt.

Whether the Lincolnshire Ministers in their abridgement had cause to allege
this worthy man, as standing on their side, I leave it to any ones judgment,
that shall compare what they allege, with this that I have set down at large.
They cite also Peter Martyr, as being clear on their side, to condemn the
gesture of kneeling. Yet who so reads his Commentary upon the book of Judges
imprinted at Zurich, in the second chapter fol. 33. he shall plainly find
these words: I think we should not contend that rites and ceremonies should
be any where the same, but there must be this prouiso, that all come as near
as may be to the word of God, and that edification (with decent order) may be
furthered; Nihil alioquin interest si coenae dominicae sacramentum stantes aut
sedentes, aut genibus flexis percipiamus, modo institutum Domini conseruetur
and occasio superstitionibus praecidatur. Vide etiam inter locos communes, fol
193.
otherwise it makes no matter whether we receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper standing, or sitting, or kneeling, so that the Lords ordinance be kept,
and that occasion of superstitions may be prevented. And this appears to be
penned by him after his book set forth against Stephen Gardener.

I have heard some reply that Peter Martyr is yet against us, because he says,
it makes no matter whether of the gestues be used; and yet our Law binds to
kneeling only. Unto which (besides the former reioynders) this is to the
purpose, that the abridgement before named, citing Hooper in his sixth Sermon,
as utterly against kneeling, his words are yet found, and by others of them
alleged no otherwise than thus: that he could wish it were commanded by the
Magistrates, that the receivers should do it standing or sitting, and that
sitting rather he thought best. Now if either of these two were enjoined, the
other could not be left so indifferent, that every particular man or woman
might yet make their choice; therefore that could not be Peter Martyrs meaning,
but that herein liberty was left to the choice of every distinct Church.

Master Greenham also a worthy man for zeal and industry in preaching the
Gospel, and one who is alleged in the Register of opposites, to have much
withstood our ceremonies in his younger years; afterward, one coming to ask
his advice, whether to sit or kneel, at the Lords Table; it is set down among
his grave counsels upon the word (Sacraments) that he gave this answer: For
such things let us labor what we may, to do as much as we can for the peace
of the Church.

Being occasioned to write further upon this argument, and in manner as before:
thus I proceeded, first arguing in this manner.
IT is the holy Communion, therefore how should not the gesture which is most
proper to piety and holiness, be (at least) as fit as any other? Surely
standing or sitting are not gestures more fitting devotion then kneeling is;
Nay, how are they so much? seeing that, howsoever devotion may concur with
them, yet it is not declared by them, but by kneeling we partly express it:
therefore to bow down and to worship are often joined together; as, O come let
us worship, fall down and kneel, Psa. 95. and in Psalm. 22.29. All that be fat
on earth shall eat and worship, and they that go down to the dust shall
kneel before him: Where we see, eating and worshipping are joined together,
and bowing down is not severed from them.

1. Objection.

Oh, but this is a maine reason why we dare not kneel, lest we should seem
to worship, and namely, to worship the Bread and the Wine, because our kneeling
is appointed to be before them.

Answer.

From whom should seeming or censure be feared? Not from any that understand
the doctrine of the Church of England, nor yet from the Papists; for they
auerre still (notwithstanding our kneeling) that we receive but Bread and
Wine: howsoever they wrong us herein, yet they traduce us not so much as to
say, we pretend to worship them: Lib. 4. de Eucharistia. c. 29.. 2.
For Bellarmine plainly acknowledges, we all renounce that. And how should
our worship (by any of our selves) be thought to be directed to the Bread and
Wine (as having Christ's body in them, before we receive them, or whiles we are
only in the act of receiving) when the order of the words is first to take and
eat, before they be Sacramentally declared to become his body and blood? Also
the prayer going before, makes it plain against all cauilling, viz. That we
receiving these thy creatures of Bread and Wine, according, etc. in
remembrance, etc. may be partakers of his most blessed body and blood.

2. Objection.

Yet we think we should not bow down before a creature, to worship God; as
the Papists do in and before their images.

Answer.

No more we do: for our worship is directly to God and to Christ, no way unto
the creatures; Tom. 6. conera Maxi^ (...) 3. cap. 22. (...) ^54
because (as Saint Augustine says) In sacramentis non quid sint, sed quid
oftendant semper attenditur: We consider not what they are, but what they show
or signify. And the signification is such, as it does justly occasion our
humiliation, when we receive, and are about to receive them: for so our famous
Divines P. Martyr, BB. Iuel, and the Lord du Please, all of them allow of Saint
Augustines saying in Psalm. 98. No man eats the flesh of Christ, except he
first worship it: These divines all say plainly, We do so, we worship him in
the Mysteries, but not the Mysteries themselves; in the Sacrament, but not the
Sacrament; the Creator in the creature sanctified, and not the Creature. Peter
Martyr loc. com. class 4. cap. 10. page 863. Iuel fully to the same effect in
his answer to Harding, Act. 8. division 22. page 404. and Morney fourth Book
of the Sacrament, cap. 6. p. 452. Hereunto I annexe the confession of two
worthies among our Martirs, BB. Ridly and Latimer. Ridly in his disputation at
Oxford, answering Doctor Glin, page 1451. says; We adore and worship Christ in
the Eucharist: and if you mean the external Sacrament, I say that also is to
be worshipped as a Sacrament. Latimer also says, page 1458. We worship Christ
in the heavens, and we worship him in the Sacrament; but the massing worship is
not to be used. Again, as touching the Papists bowing before Images, they say
they worship them, because by them they remember Christ; whereas we do not
worship bread and wine in remembrance of Christ, but we worship only Christ,
of whom we are remembered by the bread and wine; and Bellarmine shows, if they
should worship images no otherwise, it were to be accounted no image worship
at all; his words be these: Siimago non est veneranda nisi improprie, De imag.
San. lib. 2. cap. 21. 2. probatur est.
quia nimirum coram illa, vel in illa, aut per illam adoratur exemplar, certe
licebit simpliciternegare imagines esse venerandas.

3. Objection.

We think still tho, that with respect to creatures we should not bow down
religiously before them.

Answer.

True, if we hold our respect fast to the creatures, and do not ascend in our
thoughts higher. But that which outwardly draws our thoughts and affections
more to Godward, should not hinder our devotion in humiliation to bow unto
him. Civil gifts (says Bishop Morton well) ought to be taken from Princes
with civil reverence; therefore spiritual gifts, and the instruments by which
they are conueighed, are to be received with spiritual and religious
reverence, as from the Majesty of Christ. This reason could never seem to
want force with me, that the principal pledges of the price of our redemption
from the highest Lord, require a bowing to receive them.

Secondly, I answer, Sacraments be words visible; if words audible, the^
spoken to be heard, may justly occasion a falling down, 1 Cor. 14.25.
so may these also, but of the former we have an example, 1. Cor. 14.25. A man
hearing the secrets of his heart revealed in the exercise of Prophecy, it is
affirmed, and not disallowed, that he would fall down on his face to worship
God.

Thirdly, our bowing before the Sacrament has in equal construction no more
show of Idolatry, then the fact of Hezekiah, when (to be affected the more)
he spread a letter before the Lord and before his own eyes, Isa. 37. v. 14.
15.
to be more fervent in his prayer, wherein it is probable enough he did not
spare to kneel down. Or how is not the objection before made as strong
against kneeling down to pray with a book lying open before one, to give
direction, and to help devotion? or against uncovering the head to worship God
in prayer before the ordinary food set upon our tables?

4. Objection.

The Papists by kneeling, worship the bread, how can we then kneel without
appearance of evil?

Answer.

The Papists do so indeed, yet they deny their so doing because they hold
transubstantiation, thereby Bellarmine would prove it to be a slander, when we
say they worship bread, and therefore need not say that intentionally and
formally, but materially they do it. Yet howsoever they do, we may use it
nevertheless freely, and the gesture in us is not liable to suspicion, because
we renounce their doctrine, and because we have no communion with them; Romans
16.16.
as Saint Paul exhorted the Christian gentiles to salute one another with an
holy kiss, albeit the practice of kissing, not only profanely, but
superstitiously also had bin abused, among them before; adhibita erant ascula
in deorum cultu; 2. Elect. cap. 6.
as Lipsius shows.

5. Objection.

This gesture in kneeling to receive the Sacrament could never be fit, seeing
we have no warrant by Christ or his Apostles for it.

Answer.

This Objection has two parts. And touching the former, Master Beza was clean
of another mind; for he affirms it (against the fourth Objection) to have an
appearance of godly and Christian veneration or reverence; Beza Ep. 12.
and (to answer this Objection also) he says in old time it might be used
with fruit and profit, vt supra: his judgment also against the use of it now
is answered by himself before, page 5. Master Burges in his Apology to the
Bishop of Lyncolne.. 10.
Master Burges likewise (a Preacher of note) at, in, or before the time of his
being silenced, although he made one of his exceptions against subscribing, to
be about kneeling at the Communion; yet he said he never stacke at it, as a
thing unlawful to be used, because (says he) it is administered with a prayer
over every receauer, and for that it is not unlawful, and (if superstition had
not stained it) unfit to take such a token of Gods favor (as well as the
favors of a Prince) upon our knees. Now suppose the prayer be not said
particularly over every one, but in common; and that (at the instant of
receiving) these words only be used; (Take and eat this, etc.) yet I would
feign know, whether every good heart cannot beg and entreat of God (at that
instant) for Christ to join himself more feelingly to our souls, as the
Bread and Wine are presented and proffered ready to be taken into our bodies.
And if the heart incline unto such a prayer, and if it bow: how is it not
seemly the body also, (to keep proportion between them) should use the
gesture of Beggars and Petitioners?

Now to the other part of the Objection (no warrant by Christ's example or by
his Apostles) I answer.

First, no more is there for sitting, because it is not certain that Jesus did
sit, no not after the Jews common manner; the words of the Text being (as is
noted before) as they did eat (not, as they did sit) Jesus took the bread,
etc.

Secondly, I refer to my former writing, how Christ's example may be urged for
us.

Thirdly, there is warrant for kneeling in way of reverence, if there be
warrant then to sit uncovered; for Divines and Zanche by name, yield baring of
the head, to be a gesture of worship, as well as bowing: and it cannot appear
likely to us, that the Disciples did eat the Sacrament bareheaded, more then
that they did kneel.

Fourthly, if Christ did leave a gesture strictly to be observed, how comes it
about (I would feign learn) that only kneeling should be excepted against, as
swaruing from Christ's example, and sitting or standing, either of them, left
indifferent? For so T.C. page 600. said, Harmon. 4. synod page 33.
sitting at the Communion is not holden to be necessary; and the Harmony of the
four Synods in Hobland, says; Liberum est stando, sedendo, vel eundo caenam
celebrare, non autem geniculan do ob (...) periculum.

Fifthly, Christ in administering to his Disciples, did not change place or
romoue his body, to go first to one, and then to another: will you say then
(you may as well) that we should not (as having no warrant by Christ's ex^mple)
go from seat to seat, or from one end or one side of the Church or Chancell
to minister unto you?

Sixthly, to omit other variable circumstances mentioned before (which are of
like nature with this, Bucor in Eps. to John Anste.
as seemed to Master Bucer) we are sure Christ did administer in unleavened
bread; therefore scruple might be made as well about this, as about the
gesture; and as Beza reports, Beza in Gita Caluim.
Master Calvin did make scruple of it once, not because he would use it, but
because he would not have it urged (their custom having been in Geneua, to
communicate in common bread before; yea he left the City, rather then he
would be tied to minister it so; yet (says Beza) after he returned the second
time, he would never move contention about it, and he did feriously admonish
others (who began to take such offense at it, that they thought they were
better not communicate at all) to thend they should no longer (ob istud (...)
litem mouere) make sturres for that indifferent thing; so he then rearmed it,
howsoever he thought otherwise of it before.

Seauenthly, I answer, we are no more bound to the gesture at the first
institution, then we are to observe the time in the receiving, because (if the
gesture were as is commonly supposed) one was occasional and accidental, as
well as the other. The time for the passover you will say, was occasion for
the one: and then may the gesture for the passover appear as well to have
been occasion for the other.

6. Objection.

Christ ordained this Sacrament to be for a banquet, to witness our fellowship
with him and our joys, etc.

Answer.

Yet we should remember, that God is fearful in praises, Exodus 15.11. Psalm.
2.11:
and that we are commanded to rejoice with trembling; and that the Saints of
the heavenly banquet, in the Church triumphant, are not only said to cast off
their Crowns (as we now are content to put off our hats) but also to fall
down and worship him, Apoe. 4.11.
that lives for evermore, Revelation 4. v. 10. Stephen was admitted into so
great grace with God that he saw heaven open, and Jesus standing, etc. Acts 7.
yet he fell on his knees to pray before him, and so ended this life.

Furthermore, I cannot think we should do best to take state upon us, when
we are about acting of it; for which we are most humbly to prepare our selves
before. And when as we confess a little before, that we are not worthy to
gather up the crummes under his table: is it meet we stand upon terms (when
he offers himself to be our food) as that we ought not to bow to him? The
bitter remembrance of our sins, a little before professed by us: should we so
slack it, and as it were forget it in the act of receiving, that whereof our
sins make us most unworthy, that (as some have written) we may not use a
gesture of inferiority and abasement: It suteth not (they say) with a ghest or
coheire of Christ, to kneel at his table, as if they that be the true heirs
indeed, were not as yet in their minority or nonage (whiles they be on earth)
and so by the Apostles rule must be under, Gal. 4.1.
and not challenge the privileges which may belong to them when they come to
years.

7. Objection.

This is a Sacrament of thanksgiving, therefore bowing is not the fittest
gesture to be used in it.

Answer.

It is indeed the Sacrament of thanksgiving, but especially for the death of
Christ, and to show his death. August. in Psalm. 21.
Saint Augustine therefore held, that when the Lords Passion is celebrated, it
is as well a time of mourning, and sorrowing, and confessing of sins; as of
praises, and of craving pardon for them. And he delivers his judgment more
plainly in another place, saying; (...) Psalm. 98.
Non solum non peccamus adorando, sed peccamus non adorando: we sin not if we
do worship Christ (when we are about to eat his flesh) but on the other side,
we sin if we do not worship. If men's judgments now adays be urged against
it, I need not to be ashamed of this man's judgment (far more ancient) for it.

8. Objection.

Eighthly, it is objected, that these terms (of the Lords table, Abridgement
Lyncoln.
and of eating and drinking) make strongly against kneeling, it being no where
the custom to kneel at meat, and they that urge this argument most, press
the use of tables, as if we did not use tables for our Communions: for what end
else is Master Fox and Doctor Fulke, and other Divines alleged to prove the
old communion tables were made of boords? and so placed, that men might stand
round about them? And whereas the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury (when he was
Deane of Winchester) in his book against Hill, page 38. mentions an
extraordinary celebration of the Communion in Bohemia, and how 30000. did
communicate upon 300. Tables, set up in the fields; this is alleged by the
silenced Ministers of Lyncolneshire, as the Bohemians manner of receiving,
which they did use; and with all, to show the ancient use of receiving the
Communion standing.

Answer.

I answer to the last first. Neither is the Bahemians use and manner here
related (in the Testimony cited of a fact extraordinary,) neither can the
mention of so many Tables enforce that the Communicants (at least many of them)
did not kneel: as for the Bohemians common use, Page 4.
it is set down before (in their own confession) to be by kneeling: and
touching mention that is made of standing about the Tables; the word is so used
sometimes as no particular gesture can be determined by it; for in beginning of
describing the prayer which Solomon made to dedicate the Temple, it is said, 1
Kings 8. verse. 22. 1. Kings 8. Verse 22.
that he stood before the Altar of the Lord, and stretched forth his hands, and
said, O Lord, etc. Yet again, in verse 54. we read thus; Verse 54.
When Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer, etc. he arose from
before the Altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees, etc.

The usual eating otherwhere not to be with kneeling, is much objected, and
little to the purpose, if we understand and consider, how different the end
and intent is of eating at or before the Lords Table, from the usual intent of
eating food otherwise. Likewise, the setting of other meat upon Tables, is to
be eaten by such as sit or stand about them, otherwise the^ our Communicants
possibly can, about the Lords Table, when there are 5. hundred or a thousand to
communicate at one time: Besides, the vrgeing of Table gesture, may (if one
would be contentious) be enforced as well to bring in a liberty of table
talk, and table courtesies of one drinking to another; and for men not to be
bareheaded, but covered.

9. Objection.

The gesture of kneeling is held not to be enjoined, in respect of any lawful
or convenient reverence due to the Sacrament; because it is not required in the
act of Baptism, unto which as much reverence is due, as to the Supper of the
Lord.

Answer.

Whatsoever reverence were meet to be used by the parties that receive
Baptism: they are such now in all Christian Churches, as must be held up by
others, and cannot kneel themselves. Secondly, it is a left hand construction
to surmise; as if by this gesture we meant (like the Papists) to magnify this
Sacrament more highly then the other; when as the reason is clear on the other
side, that the Papists do not charge us for profaning Baptism, as they do
in saying we make no more account of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, then of
Bread out of the bake-house, and of Wine out of the cellar, who are sensibly
confuted by our reverent gesture (extraordinary from that we use in all other
feeding.) And (if we stand stiff to use but the same common gesture) it may be
taken of them as a confirmation of the scandal, they would enforce against us.
Now I see not what Religion or policy should be in it, to feed them (as one
says) with scandals, as dogs be fed with bones. To yield them any colorable
pretense to be clamorous; as it is no way to win them, so it is no way to
retain those that are weak, from falling to them.

Moreover, if this order were not, and were not strictly enforced, (to kneel)
it is to be feared (in these profane times) the holy fymboles or Sacramental
signs, and the whole Sacrament, would be profaned much more then they be:
sunt enim haeres sanctae venerandaeque: these things are holy, and to be taken
with veneration (said the Heluetians in their former confession:) to answer the
cauillation of some, who thought they did parum tribuere sacris symbolis: Vide
supra. page 4. in fir.
yield too little to the Sacramental signs.

10. Object. Yet it is gross hypocrisy (say the Lynconians commended by
Robinson the separatist, for their zeal in this cause) to pretend more
reverence in receining, then was used by the Apostles in Christ his own
presence.

Ans. We read not that the Apostles did ever kneel to Christ while he was with
them; must we then never? Again, we have no ground to conjecture that they
sat uncovered before him; how then (by this reason) may we? Father, he said
then he was among them as one that served; Luk, 22.27.
I trow we do not so reckon of him now. They, for having his presence bodily
before their eyes, as some say, it should have occasioned their kneeling the
rather (and then they must always have been kneeling,) so I reason on the
other side: they (because of his presence before their eyes) needed not such
outward helps (as we may now need) to possess their souls with reverence
toward him; for it is prudently and iudiciouslie affirmed by S. Aug. lib. de
cura pro mortuis cap. 50. tom. 4. coi. 884.
Augustine, that by means of external gestures performed visibly, the inward
and invisible intention which stirs them up, is much increased. Cum genua
figunt.
And (speaking of bending the knees and prostrating the body) I know not (says
he) how, Hi motus corporis fieri, nisi motu animi non possunt: tamenijsdem
rursus externis visibiliter fact is, ille interior inuisibilis (quieos fecit)
augetur, ac per hoc cordis affectus (qui vt fierentista praecessit) quia
factasunt crescit.

11. Ob. The urging of kneeling at the receipt of the Sacrament, is a humane
prescript for Gods worship.

Ans. It is a divine prescript for man to kneel in Gods worship, Paeg. 101
or at least to warrant that he may kneel. And it is proved before, that it is
convenient in receiving, to worship God and Christ; therefore it is not to be
rejected as a mere humane prescript, to apply the gesture (having express
warrantize in other parts of Gods worship and service) unto this part also,
even according to Master Caluins definition of a Sacrament, Calvin Instit. l.
4. c. 4 sect. 1.
where he says; It is a testimony of divine grace in us, or toward us,
confirmed by an external sign, with a mutual testification of our piety and
service toward him, as the Passover is called a service, Exodus 12.16.
Exodus 12. v. 26. And whereas we profess afterward to offer up our selves to
God a living, holy and acceptable sacrifice, ought not the same to be done
indeed as well at the instant when he offers himself unto us? I think then
chiefly.

12. Object. To kneel in receiving, though it be not to worship God otherwise
then he has appointed: yet it is to worship him otherwise then he has
appointed in this thing.

Answ. These be like squirrell shifts to leap from bow to bow, and at length
to fasten upon a trembling twig where she catches a fall; for it is clear,
some things outwardly belonging to Gods worship have been allowed, though they
have not been required: as God did not appoint David, to build him a house, 1.
King. 8:18.
yet the Lord did commend him that he was so minded. So seven days only
were required to celebrate the feast of the Passover, yet the assembly under
good Hezekiah agreed together to keep it other seven days, 2. Chro. 30.23
id est, 14. days in all.

Secondly, I answer, that to pray before Baptism, is no prescript in the Word
at the time of administering it, yet both is lawful, then, and at weddings, and
at burialls, neither do we fear that for such usage the Lord will say to us
one day (vpbraidingly) who has required this at our hand?

Thirdly, I take it to be a general (tenet) in the Church or Churches of
Christ, that the ordinances of God may be fitted with circumstances, as by
every Church shall be thought convenient for the farther gracing and adorning
of them, which are (in right) no more to be counted an addition to Gods word,
or Gods ordinance, then it is an addition to the shape of a man to be arrayed
in seemly apparel; in which saying (full out) we have Master Calvin to join
with us, Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10.. 29.
whose words be these; We shall account that to be comeliness, which shall be
so meet for the reverence of holy mysteries, that it be a fit exercise to
godliness, or at least such as shall serve for convenient garnishing thereof,
and the same not without fruit, but that it may put the faithful in mind,
with how great modesty, religiousnesse, and renerence they ought to handle holy
things. I grant that in the ninth section of the same Chapter,. 9.
he says it was a just cause for him to impugn ceremonies, because the
Authors define the worship of God to be contained in them; but this he
explanes his meaning afterward, Sect. 15. of the worship of God, saying,. 15.
they were accounted as sacrifices to cleanse sin, and to obtain
righteousness and salvation, and that the necessity imposed of keeping them,
was not only referred to a general end, but was reckoned to confist in the
things commanded (in the end of the fifth Section:). 5.
which cannot fitly be applied to our ceremonious gesture of kneeling, or to
other of our ceremonies controuerted, of which plainly that necessity (whereby
they are urged) respects only general ends of reverence, seemelinesse, and
uniformity, not as if God would not, or could not be pleased without them:
Vrsinus part 3. doct. Christ. in fine 2. peacepti. ob. 3. page 739.
and therefore they are not to be esteemed as essential parts of Gods
worship, but as things that belong accidentally thereunto. The end of urging
them is specified before, and therefore is strictness required for observance,
because of the contention and confusion which cannot be avoided, if (as Calvin
says) it should be lawful for every man to change those things that belong
to the common state:. 6.
they are not advised sure that would have it left indifferent at least, for
who list to kneel, who list to sit, who list to stand: Page. 6.
but of this heretofore, Beza is also plentiful to this purpose, in Epistola
24.

13. Objection.

Yet godly Divines would have ceremonies most pure according to Christ's
institution or example.

Answer.

First, this objection is nothing to the purpose in this case, there being no
institution, nor clear example for one gesture more then another.

Secondly, I answer. Godly Divines would not have contention or opposition
maintained in the Church for things indifferent, or that may be tolerated when
they are once grown to be in use. Calvin. Epist. 118. 120.
M. Calvin says, that diversity of rites and vsages in one and the same Church
well composed or ordered, is not tolerable in Epist. 118. wherefore he says,
he wished Hooper not to stand out as he did about Cap and Rochet, Epist. 120.
Beza in conference with Iacobus Andreas, Colloquiu^ mon. pelgartense.
page 425. says, Non repugno quin coena Domini in altari celebrari possit. I
gainsay not, but that the Lords Supper may be administered upon an Altar.
Zanchus lib. 1. de cultu dei externo, col. 485.
And Zanche says, Quta neque Christus, neque Apostoliprohibueru^t altaria, aut
mandarunt vt mensis ligneis vteremur, idcirco inter adiophora hoc quoque
annumerandum est. If Master Beza had been altogether so indifferent to the
Church of England, Beza in expla^. 2. page 25.
as he was to his neighbors of Zurich, I cannot think but he would have
written as favorably concerning our use of kneeling, as he did of their use,
to receive from their Ministers with their mouths, and not with their hands.
He says indeed that use came up from a superstitious veneration of the signs
(and the original of kneeling he makes to be better, vt supra:) he spares not
to call it monstrous, when an opinion of worship concurs with it; yet he
yields, that whatsoever is rightly done (as viz. to abolish such a use) is
not simply and absolutely necessary: therefore they that so urge taking with
the hand, that they hold it a profanation to receive it other-way (when
receiving with the mouth only is without impiety and superstition, and vpheld
to avoid the peril of innovation.) I am afraid (says Master Beza) they that
censure it so hardly, do themselves rather offend or sin by ignorance, of
what is fit to be held in these cases, or else (...) of pertinacie, and
selfe-wilfulnesse.

Again, if we may reason as Master Calnin does, Harmon. 4 lib. pentateuch.
writing upon the second Commandment, page. 286. for the lawful use of such
Churches or Temples as have formerly been defiled with Idolatry: Quia nos non
obstringit quod propter consequentiam vt loquuntur legi additum est; which to
my understanding, is q. d. the abuse of a thing does not restrain us from
making a lawful use use thereof.

I see not (by this reason) how any Popish abuse of kneeling, surplice, or the
Cross, can utterly make unlawful the usage of them, so as in our Church they
be enjoined. And if (under name of taking away what may nourish superstition)
we stand precisely to urge removing of somewhat which is per se medium, in it
self indifferent: M. Calvin says says, we may esse in nimio rigore
superstitiosi, our selves become superstitious in too much strictness, like
him that did caleare fastum Platonis alio fastu.

Thirdly, I know not whom our Church of England are to esteem for more godly
Divines, and free from all partiality, then the two public professors in the
two Universities in King Edwards time, Bucer and Martyr: who (notwithstanding
they had not been formerly accustomed to the use of our English ceremonies)
yet (beholding them) they did in no wise dehort from them, but persuaded the
use of them (as their letters extant do show:) and partly for this reason,
Bucer in script. Anglic. fol. 708 Hooper.
because (as Bucers words be) it is evident that Jesus Christ our Lord did
only prescribe the substance of the ministering both of the word and Sacraments
in his own words, and al other things which pertain to the decent and
profitable administration of his mysteries, he has left and admitted to be
ordered by his Church: and hence (says he) we celebrate the Lords Supper,
neither in the evening, nor in a private house, nor leaning, nor yet with men
only. Master Beza to this purpose says again, Beza Epistola. 8. page 71.
That whatsoever was performed by the Apostles in rites and ceremonies, he did
not judge that forthwith it must be followed for a rule without adding or
altering; because in the beginning the Apostles themselves could not
determinately set down all what they judged to be expedient for the Churches,
and therefore they did necessarily proceed by little and little, as appears by
their institution of Deacons, and their practice so often, and in so many
things of the Jewish ceremonies.

Heereto I may add that which another has declared more at large, Sprint in
his Cassander.
how the Apostles did some things for the peace of the Church, and furtherance
of the Gospel, which in some other respects they did censure most hardly; Acts
16.3.
for S. Paul circumcised Timothy, although he professed to the Galathians, If
they were circumcised, Galat. 52.
Christ should profit them nothing. He made vows, shaued his head, Acts 18.18.
chap. 8.26.
and was purified after the Jewish manner, and yet he called such observations
impotent and beggarly rudiments, Galat. 4.9. The Apostles also did impose some
things, (tearming them necessary, Acts 15.28. as to abstain from blood and
that which is strangled) yet I hope we join not with those sectaries, who
would bring the Church into such bondage again.

I wish heartily too, that among other godly Divines they were not neglected (I
mean in their reasons) whose direction otherwise by authority is pressed upon
us, by law; for the Preface before the book of Common Prayer, seems to me to
be so penned, as may give all sincere Christians (void of prejudice) good
satisfaction.

Lastly, I cannot but think it dangerous to reason thus, that because Popery is
Antichristianity, therefore it should be a good rule in reformation, to show our
selves unto them most opposite; for this false-light (like ignis fatuus) seems
to have deceived the old Arrians, who would not entitle the Son and the Holy
Ghost to be essentially God, that so they might be most unlike the Gentiles,
who professedly did worship many gods. Then, the eagernes to be most opposite
to Arius, made some to be Tritheits, accounting the three persons to be three
gods: and some to hold with Sabellicus, that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
were but merely names, and did not note out so much as a threefold distinction
personal: and to conclude (in stead of instancing farther of old) we cannot
deny but the Separatists (upon this ground) are departed from us; and (if the
position be sound) we ought all to go out after them. Sed Deus meliora, qui
facit vnanimes in domo; cui in domo sua ex pietate and concordia suorum, sit
laus and gloria in sacula seculorum. Amen.

FINIS.

