A PITHIE EXHORTATION TO HER MAJESTY FOR ESTABLISHING HER SVCCESSOR TO the
crown.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED A DISCOVRSE containing the Authors opinion of the true and
lavvfull successor to her Majesty.

Both compiled by PETER WENTWORTH Esquire.

Prudens Princeps haeredem nominando Regno prospiciet, and si desit filius de
successore serio cogitabit. Ex Spart. A wise Prince by naming his heir will
provide for the safety of his kingdom: and if he have no son, he will be
the more careful to establish his successor. Out of Spart. IMPRINTED. 1598.

Thomas Foley of Great Witley Court in the County of Worcester Esquire.

bookplate

TO THE READER.
GOOD Reader the two Treatises ensuing were written by M. WENTWORTH, whose
zealous affection to the preservation of Religion, his Prince and country,
has been made better known to al her Majesty's good subjects, by his patient
and constant indurance for so good a cause as he maintained, then it can be by
any man's report or commendation. In the former (which by the advice of some
friends he preferred to her Majesty in form of a supplication) is prooved,
that for the safety of the kingdoms of England and Scotland, and of the
Religion professed in them, it is absolutely necessary that all the claims
and titles to the crown of this Realm be tried by Parliament, and that the
rightful successor to her highness be declared and confirmed now in her
Majesty's lifetime. I doubt not but every religious and true hearted subject
is of his mind. The latter declaring his opinion concerning the person of the
true and lawful successor, he sent to some privy friends at their instant
request: it may seem strange that he would venture to write it, in respect
of these ticklish times, and of his present troubles for a lesser matter: but
yet there was strong reasons leading him to do the same. I have published them
both not so much to procure commendation and praise to the dead, though he
justly deserve it for his most worthy parts, as to work a due regard of
right and equity, to the good and behoof of all my countriemen: and that he
whose mouth was stopped from speaking the good which he would when he did live,
might now without danger openly proclaim the same, (though some would not)
after his death. And as he was accustomed to say to his friends, if it be a
duty required of us to communicate our knowledge in the meanest matters for
mutual instruction: who in any good conscience can suppress his knowledge in
matters so greatly importing every private and public estate of these Realms?
yea both earthly kingdoms and the kingdom of Christ. For these respects I
have thought it expedient, that he who has spoken in the Parliament with so
great regard and good liking of all the hearers, should now as it were with
his own mouth speak to all the subjects of England, seeing it is a matter that
so greatly concerns us all. I have altered or suppressed no thing in either
of them, unless it be titles and names of persons, and places, and words of
courtesy, which were not at al requisite to be known. Some things I have
quoted in the margent for thy better understanding, being acquainted with his
meaning, and have also englished some things for the help of the unlearned. Now
for my self (good Reader) I speak my opinion in the truth of my conscience,
that the Scottish King (for anything I know) has the best right to succeed
to our gracious and Sovereign Lady. Wherein I am the more confirmed for that
I know it to be the opinion of some me^, who make as much conscience of their
doings, and have as much wisdom and law in their budgets, as any man
whatsoever that is in this land. And to me it seems a thing altogether
needless, yea void of common sense and reason, to fetch with so great ado
the branches and pedegrees from William the Conqueror, Edward the first, or
Edward the third, and to contend and to dispute a fresh for the houses of
Lancaster and York, seeing all good men confess, that the right must have
been in the children of Henry the seventh, and Elizabeth eldest daughter to
Edward the fourth. And if by all our judgeme^ts the two titles were in them
most happily joined he must be unhappy, that would seek to dissolve them. We
have paid too dear for pleading broken titles: and other service will please
God better, then to purge this land with our blood for our unthankfulness of
all the benefits which we do at this present enjoy. But to go a little
further, if her Majesty had a daughter or sister, I dare be bold to avouche
that none in all Engl. durst presume to speak against her: yet she could not
possibly have any better rightor title, I speak of the ground of it, then the
heirs of the Lady Margaret Teuther may claim by her. For if the right of the
brother King Henry the 8. and his children be good, the right of his eldest
sister Lady Margaret and her heirs cannot be badde, and for want of his
issue, hers must needs come in. The acts and statutes wrested against the
Scottish king, are, in my conceit* by diverse sufficiently answered. The
inconveniences pretended for barring him, are but suspicions and surmises
alleged without any colorable ground, and though they were true, yet they
were rather to be admitted, then the manifest ruin of the Realms. Finally, I
wish thee so to read these treatises of M. Wentworths, as he was accustomed to
read other men's, to wit, to yield tot he reason, and not to the man, for if he
or I be deceived, it is enough that we bear the blame of our own error,
though we be not also burdened with thine, and therefore do as thou will
answer for it, for I seek thy good, and not to hurt thee. Thus protesting that
with my heart I desire hereby nothing more then the preservation and advancement
of Religion, the standing of my native Prince and country, and that if I did
know a better right then the Scottish kings, I would unfeignedly favor it, I
leave thee for this matter to the gracious direction of the Almighty.

Farewell.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page 3. in the margent, cause, read offense* Page 6. in the margent, 46.
read 49. Page 11. Lin. 22. vveighie, read weighty. Page 45. Li. 14.
discomfort, read discomfite. Page 52. Lin. 17. perserue, read preserve. Pa.
83. L. 8. which, read with. Page 89. L. 3. and, read add.

In the second Treatise.

Page 30. Line 3. thereupon, read therefore Page 48. L. 5. leadged) are, read
leadged are) Page 81. L. 8. 7. root, read root). Page 75. Li 12. up, read
upon, P. 81. L. 17. lose, read loss.

AN EXHORTATION TO HER MAJESTY, FOR ESTABLISHING HER SVCCESSOR TO THE CROWN.
MOST high, and The bounden duty of a faithful hearted subject to God, his
Prince, and country, is the cause of this Treatise.
mighty Prince, our dear sovereign and liege Lady, we protest before the
Almightythe searcher of al hearts, that true and hearty love, first toward God
and his true Religion, secondly a loyal and dutiful affection toward your
highness person, and preservation: and lastly, a mind, by all lawful means
unfeignedly wishing the good peace and prosperity of this our native country of
England, and no other respects whatsoever, have moved and stirred us up: first
to devise and write, and now to offer and deliver unto your Majesty, this
short discourse following. Whereby, though it might be feared we shall incur
your graces displeasure, and are not ignorant that the anger of a Prince is as
the roaring of a Lion, and even the messenger of death, because it is so said
in the Scripture: yet notwithstanding the former respects have so prevailed
with us, that we durst not but adventure thus far* forthough the matter which
herein we labor to persuade you unto be such, that (by great likelihood) it
will at the first provoke you to wrath, and kindle your displeasure toward us:
yet we nothing doubt, but that we shall make it appear to be a thing most
necessary, profitable, and honorable for your highness The knowledge of the
second person necessary before God and man.
to yield unto, both before God and man, and the most safe mean for your
Majesty's present preservation also. We therefore presume, and therewith we
have encouraged ourselves, that such is your graces wisdom and gracious
disposition, that (in the end) this our enterprise both will be well taken, and
favorably construed. For our consciences bears us witness before God, that
we aim at nothing else herein, but his glory, your safety, The writers purpose
most allowable.
the good of the Church, and profit of this noble Realm* according to which
our meaning, we humbly crave that all that we have written may be expounded.
For as loath are we needlessly and wilfully to offend your Majesty, as any
poor subjects you have. But yet you know, such is, or ought to be, the
faithful love of every true hearted Christian subject toward his sovereign,
that fear to offend A true subject regarde^^ the saiftie of his Prince, more
then the fear of his vn^ust cause.
him may not stay us from performing of a necessary, profitable, and honorable
service unto God, our Prince, and country. We being therefore persuaded, and
fully resolved, that even such is this present (now) tendered service of ours
we hope we shall not be blamed of you: Mere regard of consci^nce to God*
glory and the good of the Prince has e^^^^ced ^he Author ^o hi^ d^^course.
sithence a desire to show our selves true loving and faithful subjects to
God and to your Majesty, has ouerweighed with us all human fear. Wherefore
we, in the behalf of all your true and faithful subjects, do lie even
prostrate before your Graces feet, most humbly and heartily beseeching your
Majesty, to peruse these few leaves following: and as the matter therein
handled, is weighty: so to consider accordingly, what we your faithful and
loyal subjects have therein uttered unto you. In perusing whereof, this we
would wish to be still in your Majesty's mind, that if we, a few of the
insufficientest of many thousands of your subjects, have said thus much, that
then very much more it is that can, and may be said to this end. The Lord of
heaven and earth (who has the hearts of al Princes in his hand to rule them as
it pleases him) so direct in his favor, your Royal heart herein, that you
may read willingly, mark attentively, and perform spedilie and
effectually, the wholesome counsel ministered therein unto you.

THe thing (most Gracious Sovereign) which we and all true English hearts
have long wished, and which (now) we would most gladly persuade The aim and
drift of this book, and the method thereof.
your highness unto, is this: That it would please your Grace with all
convenient speed in Parliament, to cause all titles and claims to the Crown
of England after your Majesty's decease, thoroughly to be tried and examined:
And then forthwith (by sufficient authority thereof) to declare and make
known to your subjects, in whom the right to succeed you rests. Concerning
which point, as this discourse is like to want all kind of eloquence: so also
it will want all order and method. First, we will set down the reasons and
arguments, which, (as we conceive) ought to move your Highness to yield
hereunto: which done, we will confute all the objections of any force, which
we can imagine have been, or can be made to stay you from yielding hereunto.

First, we presume that you will easily yield, that it is your duty to do
that, The first argument. Princes ought to obey God*
which God by his written word, has enjoined all Christian Princes to do: and
that therein the settling of the Imperial Crown is enjoined to all such
Princes, as a most necessary duty, plentifully and diversely it appears.
For first, therein it is an usual thing with the holy Ghost, to call you
Princes, Gods, and nursing Fathers Psalm. 82. Esaias 46. 23.
and nursing mothers unto his Church. What Princes are to learn in that they
are called Gods and nurses by the holy Ghost.
Which names and titles, as they prove the honorablenesse and lawfulness of
your high callings, against all Anabaptisticall spirits: so they are given
you, to teach you your duties, and what you ought to be toward the people
committed unto your charge: Namely, that your duty toward them is, to be as
gods and natural fathers and mothers: for the resemblance that is betwixt the
office of God toward man his creature, and parents toward their Children, is
the ground and certain cause, why these high names are communicated and given
unto you by the spirit of God. Now, who is so simple but he knows and will
confess, that God not only cares and provides for his people for the
present time, or some certain season only: but also for all times and seasons.
And it is most evident, that nature has taught parents to think that they do
not their duties, unless they provide (not only) what they may, for the good
of their children whylest they themselves live: but also for their wealth and
prosperity, to the vttermoste of their powers, after their death. Wherefore, if
your Majesty would be justly honored with these high and regarde-full
titles, and have right (indeed) unto them: then you see, that it is not enough
for the time present, while you your self live, to provide for the safety and
welfare of your subjects, what you may: but also that you are bound to do
what lies in you for their peace and safety, wealth and prosperity after you
be gone. And how can this be by any means The conclusion of the first
argument joined with an exhortation*
more conveniently, then by yielding to this motion: yea, if this be not
yielded unto, (you being of that rare wisdom and foresight that you are:) you
cannot choose but see, that immediately after your death, there is nothing else
to be looked for, but extreme confusion and subversion of the whole estate of
this your noble land. As therefore you are our head, show your self to have
dutiful care and love to your body, that if you may help it (as by yielding
hereunto in time you may) you leave it not headles, as a dead trunk. And
seeing God has ordained you our nursing mother, we your children cry upon
you, and most earnestly beseech you, that by neglecting this motion, you
unnaturally leave us not unto the evident spoil of the merciless bloody
sword. And seeing God has honored you with his own name, most dear
sovereign, take heed, you do not unto him, and unto your self that dishonor
for lack of listening to this counsel, contrary to his will and nature, to leave
us your people wittingly and willingly at random, to the rage and fury of hell
and helhounds.

But to proceed, secondly in the word it is also written, That he has denied
The second (...). 5. 8.
the faith, and is worse than an infidel that prouydeth not for his own: as
Masters of families are bound to provide for their families after their death,
therefore the Queen for her kingdom.
namely, them of his family: where, this word [prouydeth] bids not only
such (whiles they live) to provide what they may for the necessary good of
theirs, during their own lives: but also, after they be gone: as reason,
nature, and experience has taught (in all ages) all Christian householders to
take it. Now, what be your subjects, and all the inhabitants of your noble
dominions, else, but your Graces Royal family? Doubtless, you are the
Mistress, head, and householder appointed of the Lord, to this honorable
family. And you may not think that the holy Ghost has thus tied and bound
petty householders to care, and to provide thus (every way) both for their
own time, and after, for their small and little families: and that he leaves
such mighty parents and householders as you Princes be at liberty to provide
for the good of your Politic families, but for as long, and as little a time
as you list. Nay, without all doubt, he that has thus taught care and
provision to be made for the less, he would not (in any case) have the
greater neglected: yea, certain it is, that seeing under this penalty, every
mean householder is to provide for his family: much more strongly, such as
you are, be therefore bound to provide for yours. wherefore, to make your
successor known, being an especial mean to provide for the good of your
people, as most certain lie it is, you see by this place that you are bound
thereunto most strictly, as you are desirous to be counted our Christian Queen
and Mistress, and as you would be loath to be accounted of the Lord, one
that had denied the faith, and so worse then an infidel: even so, in no case,
you may not omit this Christian point of provision for us.

Furthermore, Saint Paul gives this as a general rule to all Christians, of
The 3. argum. Philip. 4. 8.
what degree soever, that they would think of, and seek after what things
soever, Princes are bound to seek after things that be just* ho
are honest, just, and of good report, to the end that they might practice and
perform the same. Of which kind, to nest and commendable, of which sort is
this especially to make their successor known.
make your successor known in manner aforesaid, is one: for who can deny,
but that it is honest, just, and of wonderful good report, for a Christian
Queen, to have that care, and tender love toward her natural subjects, as
for their peace and tranquillity, and to prevent infinite most evident evils,
that otherwise she sees they must needs fall into, to establish where, and
in whom, the right of succession to the Crown rests? Wherefore by this rule
of the Apostle you are to think of it, and carefully to go about it. The
iustnes of this conclusion will cleerlie appear unto you, if you do but a
little weigh with your self, first how honest a thing it is for you, to seek by
such a lawful mean, to preserve your natural subjects and dominions:
secondly, how just a thing it is that you should, in this so great and weighie
a controversy, determine in whom the right is* and thirdly, of how good and
honorable report it must needs be, that you therein and thereby should show
your self most loving and careful over all your subjects, in so honorably
prouyding for their good and safety: both during your own time, and after.

Moreover, least you should think, that we go about by these arguments to
The 4. argument. The president of Moses and David, who established their
successors before they died.
persuade you to that which others of your place have not thought themselves
(upon consideration of the same, or the like arguments) bound to show
themselves mindeful of: may it please you further to call to mind, that it is
written to the everlasting commendation of Moses that famous and first public
governor of the people of Israel, that he understanding that shortly he
should die, and foreseeing into what confusion that people would be brought, if
he should leave them without a known successor, made this earnest prayer unto
the Lord, saying: Let the Lord God of the spirits Numb. 27. 16. ^^.
of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation, who may go in and out
before them, and lead them out and in, that the congregation of the Lord, be
not as sheep without a sheep-heard. And that it may appear how well this care
of his (to make his successor known before he died) was liked and approved of
the Lord, it follows immediately in the same place, that the Lord gave him
direction Numb. 27. 18.
to appoint Ioshuah, the son of Nun, to be the man. According to which
direction, it is recorded also in another place, that Moses most willingly and
faithfully did ordain him to succeed him. By this president and good example,
Nathan Numb. 27. 22. 23. Deuteronomy. 31. 5.
had a good warrant to move Bathshebah (as the fittest person to make the
motion) to go unto king David, and to put him in remembrance of the dangerous
consequent of not notifying in his lifetime, who should succeed him. Who
being thereupon moved by her to declare who it should be, as it appears in
the story, most readily and speedily, in most solemn manner, caused
Salomons 1. King. 1. from the 11. verse unto the 41. verse.
title to be published to be the right, and the next. And so danger was
prevented, though Adoniiah was then up in arms for it: and old David went
unto his grave in peace, and the kingdom was established to Solomon his son,
and most notably it flourished in his time. There was likely then to have been
great contention about the title of succession amongst the sons that David
had by diverse wives: and so great peril to the kingdom The comparison of
Israel and England.
and subjects of David. The consideration whereof made David careful to end
the controversy in his lifetime. But now amongst us, the contention for the
crown, when God has once taken you hence (if by like means by you it be not
prevented) is like to be amongst the children of diverse families, and
therefore the more deadly: and consequently the more dangerous. Wherefore as
the state of Israel then moved David to make his successor known: so now
the state of England ought to move you: for herein, he did but that which Moses
example taught him to do: and therefore that, which as a king he was bound to
do. Again it is evident in the story that the Lord did like and allow of his
so doing, and therefore there was obedience therein to the Lords will: for
man's own will-works, he never delights in. An example then it is to follow
in the like case to all good Kings and Queens: and as a mirror, it remains
still to all such to teach them to do the like, when like need requires.
For whatsoever is written in the Scripture, Application of the former examples
to her Majesty. Romans 15. 4.
is written for our learning. Think therefore (most gracious sovereign) that
these facts of Moses and David are thus recorded in the holiestoric, not only
that you should know that God his Magistrates thus governed: but especially,
that hereby you may learn to govern to the safety of your subjects, as they
did. Thus you see, that neither peril to their persons, nor fear of Eclipsing
of their own present honors could stay either of these from governing to the
safety of their people: and yet they had sufficient wisdom to foresee what
might befall them that way. And therefore, if it were virtue and obedience to
God in them: and so, no work of supererogation, as sufficiently it has
already appeared: how can it be but a falt and disobedience to his holy will
in your Majesty, if (upon so urgent and just occasion as they or ever any
Prince had) you refuse to do as they did?

Further we read that when Esaias the Prophet brought Hezekiah word that he
should set his house in order, for that he should die: that the king wept
sore: of Esaias. 38. 1. 2. The fifth argument from the example of Ezechiah, who
wept when he heard that he should die, because then there was no heir apparent
to succeed him.
which his weeping, S. Augustine upon Esaias affirms this to be the
principal cause, that if the^ he had died, he had died without an heir
apparent. And very well may it be so, for if it had so fallen out to his grief
he foresawe, that not only great calamities and troubles thereupon would have
ensued to his people, but also, that it was some testimony of the Lords wrath
toward him, if in him God should have ceased from performing his promise to
David, of never leaving him without one to sit on his throne after him: which
caused him rather to weep, then the news of his death, says Augustine. And
to use a good proof for the truth hereof, this is certain, that Manasses his
heir that succeeded him, was not either borne or begotten when he so wept. For
it is said that he was but twelve years old when he began to reign* and
Ezechiah upon his repentance had 15. years added to his life, after thus he
had wept. Least therefore your Majesty have just cause bitterly to weep, for
the denying of this mercy to your natural people, even then, when you would
most gladelie have comfort and consolation: and do most ferventlie crave it
at the Lords hand: Sweet Lady, provide aforehand that there may be one known,
who of right is to sit upon your throne after you, when you be gone to the
Lord.

The rather (most noble sovereign) The sixth argument from the example of her
Majesty's father, King Henry the eight.
your Majesty is to take these examples to heart, and to imitate them: because
your own most noble Father King Henry the eight of famous memory, showed
himself, as appears not only by diverse statutes made in his time, and by
him produced to that end: but also by his words (yet in Chronicle) to his
great ^^^^ton page ^^76.
honor and renown, most careful and willing to imitate the same: for it is
chronicled that he said thus in Parliament to his subjects. When we remember
our mortality, and that we must die, then do we think that our doings in our
lifetime are cleerlie defaced, and worthy of no memory, if we leave you in
trouble at the time of our death: for if our true heir be not known at the
time of our death, see what mischief and trouble shall succeed to you and your
children. Mark (gracious Queen) your dear father in his wisdom foresaw
wonderful miseries immediately and directly arising, from his leaving of his
subjects without succession known, and established: and that of his
compassion and commiseration that therein he had of his natural subjects,
he was a prouoker of them, that therein sufficient order might be taken, to
prevent it. Mark also, that he contented not himself with ruling of them
well, and protecting of them in safety and peace whilst he himself lived:
but that his care for them stretched to their children and childrens children.
God (for his Christ's sake) grant your grace to prove his natural child
herein. But that it might appear, that upon sound advise and good experience
he had spoken the former words, he adds a dole-full president, saying unto
his Nobles: The experience whereof some of you have heard, what mischief and
man slaughter continued in this Realm betwixt the houses of York and
Lancaster: By which dissension, this Realm had like clearlie to have been
destroyed. O Christian and sweet words, worthy such an heroical and mighty
Potentate of the world: truly, worthy to be written in letters of gold and
always to be carried and drawn in a Table before the eyes of all his
successors to the worlds end: for though the things done by him in his
lifetime, for the good of his people, were many and great, even such as ought
never to be for gotten: yet see, he counted al them clearlie defaced, and
worthy of no memory, if before his death (to prevent the mischiefs that
otherwise would ensue to his subjects) he did not make known unto them, who
of right ought to succeed The lamentable evils that befell this land by the
dissension of the houses of York and Lancaster proceeded hence, that the right
of succession was not cleared and established.
him: yea, it seems by his speech that he was of opinion, (as indeed it may
be well gathered) that all the evils that came to this Land by the dissension
of the two houses of York and Lancaster (which were infinite) arose even
hence, that there had not sufficient care been taken to make publicly known,
and to establish the right of succession: and it seems also, that he feared
no less evils to ensue after him, if he (in his lifetime) showed not himself
careful in this point. And truly, Madame, we think there is none that duly
The application and enforcing of this example of K. Henry 8. to her Majesty.
considers in what terms the title of the crown after you stands now
amongst us, but he presently sees, that if it were so dangerous then when
your father uttered these words, he having then issue of his own body to
leave the Realm unto, without further determination and declaration of his
right heir: that it cannot, but be far more dangerous for you, now to leave
it quyte without establishment, to whomsoever can catch it. The foresight of
mischief to ensue, by reason of not making known in his life his certain heir
apparent, was reason of sufficient weight and force to move, incline, and to
bind your noble fathers heart (notwithstanding he could foresee, and forecast
as wisely as any the reasons to the contrary) to be most forward to
determine it: and therefore so should you his natural daughter and heir do
upon the like ground, and be therein likewise affected. Otherwise you see
(your own father being your judge) that al your noble acts done in your life
time are not only blemished, but also clearlie defaced, and worthy of no
memory. It is glorious for you to be the daughter and heir of so noble a
king, in so noble a kingdom: but truly far more glorious to be also his
natural daughter and true heir, in his princely affection toward your
subjects. And therefore as you are his natural daughter and true heir in the
one, so show yourself to be as natural also in the other.

Think not (most dear sovereign) The 7. argument from the examples of the
heathen. The heathen by the light of nature did see this duty to be necessary,
and performed the same to their subjects: much more ought Christian Princes to
do the same.
that this was any singularity in your father, and that you may do well
enough though you be not like him therein: for besides that therein he did but
as the examples of Moses and David taught him, and bound him to do: he did that
which very nature it selfvsuallie has taught even heathen Princes from time
to time to do. For we read that it was an use amongst the Medes and
Persians, when they went but forth to battle (therein being some danger of
their life) before they went, to make known who should succeed them:
insomuch, that the better to make him known, he was appointed to reign in the
stead of the Prince absent* until his return, as was Cambyses, in the rowme
of Cirus, whilst he went to war against the Scythians: and Darius
long-hand, in the rowme of Xerxes, whilst he warred against the Greeks. Hence
also it came, that we read that the Roman Emperors when otherwise their
successor was not known, did in their lifetime adopt them heirs, to whom by
order of that government, they caused the right to succeed them to be
established. Suetonius.
Thus Julius Caesar adopted Octavius Augustus, and he Tiberius Caesar. Dion.
Spartianus.
Nerua, Traian. Adrian, Antoninus Pius: and he again Antoninus Philosophus.
And for further proof of the force of the light of nature, yet remaining in a
mere natural man to teach him this lesson: it is written in Chronicle that
the Emperor Tiberius Caesar a little before his death said: That of all the
griefs and troubles that the grievous pangs of death brought with it, this
greeved and troubled him most, how to preserve the kingdom committed to him of
trust: and also to see the inheritance thereof conveied unto him, to whom of
right it did appertain: concluding with these words, This is the duty of a
king. Oh what a strange thing were it then for a Christian Prince, having not
only light of nature, but also the light of the word shining unto her to
direct her hereunto: if (all examples both divine and human, foreign and
domestical, of all ages and times provoking also thereunto) she should not, or
would not suffer her self to be drawn unto this Christian duty: truly,
strange it were: yet (God forbid) but that we should conceive very good hope,
and ere it be long, see and understand according to our hope, that we your
subjects shall find you willing, for your and our good to deal effectually
herein, and that spedilie.

Howbeit, yet the better to hasten you to this resolution, that we to our
comforts may see the effects thereof: First, let your pitiful and merciful
heart enter into consideration of the miserable state, that you shall leave
(every way) your dominions The 8. argument is the avoiding of manifold
calamites like to ensue her Majesty's death, if the successor be not before
known and established
and subjects of all sorts in, if you should be translated hence to the Lord,
before you have yielded unto this present motion, and effected it. Whereof,
when we think, we may tremble every iointe. For when that day shall come,
(which God for his mercies sake put far off, and grant that we neuersee) then
straight all the competitors and their partakers will be up in arms: and the
common people that are not acquainted with their titles, will then of
necessity be at their wits end, not knowing what part to take: and yet some
they shall be driven to follow: so that presently, the whole Realm will be
rent into as many shivers, as there be competitors, at the least. And thus,
while the title to the crown is in trying in the field by the dint of bloody
The lamentable miseries of civil warr^.
sword, one part will consume and devour another, and so the land is like to
be every way so weakened, that it may easily become a pray to any of our
foreign malicious enemies. Oh the rivers of blood, which then by these doleful
consequents will ouerflowe every where this noble Island, the strong men shall
be slain in the field: children and infants murdered in every town, honest
matrons and maids every where ravished: then also strong holds shall be
razed and burned with fire: fair buildings in city and country defaced, and
made even with the ground, the rich shall not be able to say, this is mine:
but they as well as the poor, shall think themselves happy, if they may have
their life for a pray. To be short, then, then alas, all the mischiefs that
the mischeevous wit of man can devise, will be practiced amongst your loving
subjects by one toward another without controlement. For all the bands of
all good order and Policy will then be broken asunder: Religion, and all the
good exercises thereof, will be laid in the dust, with small hope of ever
rising up again: and neither God nor man will be regarded, but (according to
the variable suggestions of Satan) all kind of villainies will be freely in
every corner committed. Oh therefore, but once to think that this land is like
to come to these woeful calamities, will tear any godly, pitiful, or natural
English heart in pieces. Behold therefore (most gracious Lady) your Nobles and
Commons, yea, even all your people, men, weomen, and children, lie prostrate
now before your feet, most lamentably, and humbly beseeching you to save
them, and to preserve them from these heaps of confusions, and chaos of
miseries: and most instantly with bitter tears, beg at your hands, that you
leave them not, (who are now most ready to lay down their lives for you) in
this lamentable and miserable case, to lose their lives with all that they
have: and all, at the beck and pleasure of every furious peasant. Remember,
that Moses took the people without a certain known head and governor, as
sheep without a sheep-herd, and that your most noble father foresaw that no
better then the fore-rehearsed calamities, would be the state of this land, if
he had died before he had made his heir known: yea, that he imputed all
the miseries that this land had abode, through the contention betwixt the two
houses of York and Lancaster, to this: to wit, that the order and right of
succession, had not been (in former time) carefully enough looked unto, and
made publicly known. And so you may perceive that herein we do not forecast
more perils, then these wise and grave persons have done in the like case. Yet
for further That calamities does befall any nation where the Prince dies
without a known successor proved by the example of the Israelites. The book
of Judges.
ground of this our fore-casting of perils, the whole book of the Judges of
Israel serves most fitly: for through that book we see, how that when soever
they were left without a known governor (as in those times they were often)
they fell into extreme miseries, and were straight brought into slavery under
the hands of their enemies, the Cananites, the Moabites, the Midianites, the
Amalekites and Philistines: in which state sometimes they continued 18. years,
sometimes 40. years: sometimes more, sometimes less. We read also that
Alexander the great, when he Of Alexanders empire. Arrianus. Q. Curtius.
had made himself the greatest Emperor in the world, yet dying, not determining
of his successor before he died, but leaving his noble Empire to them that
could catch it, and hold it: that thereupon, immediately after his death, there
grew most hot, fierce and bloody wars amongst his noble Dukes and
Captains: and so in the end, his kingdom or Empire was rent and torn into as
many several kingdoms, as he had noble Dukes able to take them, and keep
them. We Of Scotland after Alex. 3.
read also in the Scottish Chronicles of Alexander the third king there, who
lived in the time of Edward the first King of England: that he dying, leaving
his heir and successor unknown, it came to pass, that upon his death his
kingdom was torn into two parts, the one part following one Bayllioll studied
to make him King: and the other favoring one Brussius, sought to advance him.
But in the mean time, whiles thus the title was in debating, it appears in
the story, that the whole kingdom was brought to extreme desolation. But
what need we (in this case) to peruse foreign stories. O that your Majesty
would but remember And of England after Lucius and Gorbodug.
the miserable state of this land after King Lucius, and after the death of
King Gorbodug and his two sons, Ferrex, and Porrex: for you shall in those
hystories find, that the root and fountain of all those lamentable miseries
of 15. and 50. years civil dissension, grew of this: that then, the land was
left without a certain known successor. Yea, infinite be the stories in all
Chronicles, that lay forth most doleful sequels always of this. And sure we
are, such is your Majesty's wisdom, that you must needs foresee that if you
should so leave us, it were never more likely, that thervpo^ would follow the
extremest miseries that ever befell kingdom. Wherefore once again (most
merciful Lady) cast your pitiful and merciful eyes upon your noble Realm,
and all your subjects, who with stretched out hands cry unto you to show
mercy unto them in this point: in delaying no longer to the hazard of the
spilling of all their blood, and losing all their good, to make known unto
them, who of right is to succeed you. O sweet Lady, let this long longed
for, and looked for most necessary drop of mercy, drippe now at last down
from you, to the chearing and comforting of all your true English subjects: and
so shall you establish your throne in mercy, and purchase unto your self, the
most glorious title of a most merciful Queen, to the comfort of your own
conscience, both before God and man, and to your perpetual good name and fame
with all posterity. The 9. argument is from the safety, honor and profit which
will ensue the establishing of a successor both to her majesty and to her
subjects.


But to provoke you the more easily to yield to show this especial point of
mercy, consider yet further, that so to do, is not only very necessary, both
for you and us, in respect of both our safeties: and also that it is not only
profitable to us, but also even very profitable and honorable to you, both in
respect of God and man. That it is very necessary and profitable for us, the
contemplation of the good that we shall reap, and quyetlie enjoy by it: and
the view of the evil that directly shall thereby be turned from us, makes it
most evident. And that it is necessary for you also, yea profitable and
honorable, as we have said, diversely it may appear: for first it cannot be
denied, that amongst all the means that otherwise Princes have amongst men in
this world, to make them selves strong by, and to sit safe in their throne,
this is a principal one. That they alienate not the hearts of their subjects
from them, by their unkind and mercielesse dealing toward them. For how
strongly soever Solomon left his son Rehoboam established in his kingdom:
yet he* by listening rather to the counsel of young green heads about him,
then Princes that would establishe their thrones must deal kindly with their
subjects, and plant in their hearts lone and affection. 1. King. 1^.
to the advice of the grave and ancient: and so by his unkind and hard
answer to his subjects, alienating the hearts of them: grew so weak, that a
mean man, a servant of his, Jeroboam by name, rose up against him, and ten
Tribes of twelve, far the greater part of his kingdom, revolted from him, and
did cleave to Jeroboam: and neither he nor any of his successors, could ever
recover them again. And on the otherside, there is no one thing in the
foresaid respect more necessary, profitable, and honorable to any King,
Queen, or Emperor, then so to behave themselves toward their subjects, as
that thereby, there may be bred and nourished in them, an hearty and unfeigned
love and affection toward their sovereign. For by this means chiefly,
Princes grow strong and invincible, for thereby they find, that not the bodies
on lie of their subjects be theirs at commandment, but their hearts also. And
when occasion serves, by experience they learn that the hearty good will and
liking of their subjects toward them, is a far better and stronger mean of
their preservation, then either riches, strong Anno 1588. when the Spanish
fleet was in the narrow (...)
holds, or any such outward thing whatsoever, as lately your Majesty has had
good experience thereof.

And therefore in all stories it appears, that those kings that have carried
any note of wisdom, have always studied most carefully for the hearty love
of their subjects. Now then, seeing the not making your successor known, is a
matter of such dangerous and perilous consequent to all your good and kind
subjects: and the establishing of succession, the very ordinary mean to
prevent these dangers and perils toward them, and also to continue your
subjects and their children in quiet and peace-able possession of all the good
things they now enjoy: your wisdom may easily conceive, that there is no one
thing whereby you can more grieve, daunt, and alienat the hearts of all your
subjects, then by not going about to prevent their destructions, by making your
successor known. For that will cause them to think, that you love them no
farther, then for your own safety sake: for that (in not doing thereof) you
shall show your self careless what shall become of them after your time which
thing, of what force it will be to abate their hearty and true love and
affection toward you, your wisdom will easily guess. And you may also
hereby perceive, that there is no readier way to bind your subjects more
tenderly to love, and reverence you even in their secret chambers: and so to
be ready most willingly rather to die them selves in your quarrel at all
times, then that any danger or peril should come near you: the^ forth with
in Parliament to cause this great controversy lawfully to be determined and so
the right of succession made publicly known. For heerby your subjects cannot
but see that you love them, even for their own sakes, and that you love them
tenderly and unfeignedly: yea, this wonderful mercy and kindness would make
them in all thankful manner, to acknowledge and confess, that you had not
only by this means preserved them from all the fore-saide evils: but that
you had also by this godly means, even given them again their lives, their
wives, their children, their lands, their goods, and their country: yea, and
that which is most precious therewith, the fruition of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Which two-folde good would so inflame their hearts toward you,
that never Prince had more loving and hearty subjects, then your Grace should
have. Does it not then follow, that it is necessary, profitable and honorable
for your own self to yield to this motion? Again, necessary it is, because
otherways you take the only high way to abate the love of all your faithful
subjects, which is most necessary for you to have: especially, these days
and times considered, when you have so many enemies both at home, and abroad:
secret, and public. Profitable also it is, in that wonderfully, it will
strengthen the hearty good will and love of your subjects toward you, which
will be at all times a most strong mean of defense and refuge for you, against
all your enemies. And how can it choose bot be very honorable unto you to do
so honorable, profitable, and necessary a thing unto yourself, your people,
and country? Further, the truth hereof may and will more clearly appear unto
you, if it fall out (as most likely it will) that the right of succession be
found and declared to be in a Protestant: He means the king of Scots.
for then, not only be that means should you make the hearts of every true
Protestant like the heart of a Lion, ready and courageous at al assaies to
perform the duty of faithful subjects: but you should so break the neck of
the Popish hope of their golden day, that the despair thereof would presently
cause most of them (in reverence be it spoken unto your Majesty) either to
hang, or conform themselves: and the rest would also give over all detestable
practices against your noble person: yea, they would be glad to pray with us,
and to use all good means with us for your preservation. Great reason may move
it: for they will fear, least it will be much worse with them when you are
gone, under your successor, then it is now under your so happy government.
And therefore we may now conclude, that to make your successor known, is a
thing most necessary, profitable, and honorable for your self.

But we said it was necessary, profitable and honorable also in respect of
God or before him. And this may be most easily and strongly proved: for
besides that all the reasons that hitherto we have used, do prove the same: we
say confidentlie now further: first, it is necessary for Princes as well as for
others to do those things that are pleasing and acceptable to God: and
therefore, when they shall sit upon the throne of their kingdoms, they are
commanded to have the book of God, and to study it, and not to depart
therefrom either to the right hand, or to the left: and they are willed, yea,
they namely, especially to be wise and learned, and to show their learning
and wisdom in serving the Lord in fear. And that this is a thing both pleasant
and acceptable to God, we need not prove it again: for we have already
proved it sufficiently both by reasons and renowned examples: and therefore in
this respect, it is necessary before God. Secondly, that also it is
profitable before him, hereby it is evident: for it is a thing (in No surmise
of hurts to ensue or hope of purchasing gain should draw us from that which is
right and equity before God
deed and truth) always most profitable for Princes to obey the will of God:
and most hurtful and unprofitable to refuse so to do: for it is written
Psalm the 2. verse 12. as uttered to Kings. Kiss the Son least he be
angry, and so ye perish out of the way, if his wrath be kindled, yea but a
little. And we read that 1. Sam. ^. 30.
God said unto Eli, a governor of Israel, Them that honor me, I will honor*
and they that despise me, shall be despised. And we read that Azariah the
Prophet 2. Chro. 15. 2.
said unto King Asa: The Lord is with you whiles ye are with him, and if ye
seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake
you. This is a caveat, even to Princes: for a praesident thereof, Saul to his
woe and David to his joy had experience. And diverse was the success of King
Solomon, and of king Asa prosperous whiles they followed the way of the Lord:
but desperate, when they went from them. At a word, all the Kings of Israel and
Judah did always (as it appears in the holy story) find this most true,
that it was always most profitable for them to obey the Lord, and to do
whatsoever he would have them. This settling of the succession that we are
therefore now moving you unto, being a thing (as doubtless it is) which the
Lord of duty requires at your hands, and which you have heard proved so to
be, both by places of Scripture, examples out of the same, and sundry other
strong reasons: you are to resolve with your self (whatsoever the wit of man
can say to the contrary) that it will be most profitable unto you to yield to
the Lord, both speedy and willing obedience theerein. As long as you walk in
his ways, he Psalm. 9^. 11. 12.
has given his Angels charge over you, that you shall not hurt your feet
against a stone: and therefore, in this you need not to be afraid. You
remember, we are Proverb. 8. 1^ Psalm. 82. 1.
sure, that the Lord has said in his word, That by him Kings reign: and that
it is written, that he sits amongst you Dan. 4. 2^
Gods, and judges you: yea, that he is so King of kings and Lord of Lords,
that he sets up and throws down, whom, when, and how it pleases him.

Whereupon your Grace may perceive, that the most safe and profitable way for
you to preserve your person and honor, is by all good means to keep this
King of Kings on your side. He that has a good farm, and has none other
hold thereof, but at his landlords pleasure, A similitude enforcing her
Majesty, by naming her successor to obey God*
the best policy for him we would think, is, to please his landlord. And
this is the case, Madame, betwixt you and God, in respect of your kingdom. We
must needs therefore even of hearty good will, and of abundance of desire that
we have, that you may long reign over us, beseech your Majesty, to weigh with
your self whither it be not likely, that this your landlord and sovereign
judge will be angry with you, and lay to your charge one day, all the blood
that shall be shed, and all the evils that shall be committed in this land,
for want of a known successor, if you do not what lies in you in time by
making him known to prevent al those doleful cruelties that will ensue
thereof. Even the light of nature could teach the heathen Philosopher Cicero
to write in his Offices, that he is as well faulty, that lets not the doing
of an evil or injury, being able to let it, as he that does it himself. Oh
provoke not the Lord (sweet Lady) even in respect of safety and profit to
your self, to be offended with you, for this your great unkindness toward him.
Remember, that in respect of the present dangerous and evil days that we now
live in, and in regard of our enemies, neither you nor we had ever more cause
to seek to please him, and to keep him on our side. Hitherto, never Prince had
more cause, then you: nor subjects in respect of their Prince, then we, to
confess that if he had not been on our side, our enemies. long ere this, had
swallowed up both you and us: for it is he that has discovered, yea, detected
and confounded all the devises and conspiracies (hitherto) of your enemies and
ours it is he that gives us peace at home, and victories abroad. It is he that
does keep all evils from us, and continues al good things unto us. And if he
continue on our side still, we need not to be afraid whosoever be against us,
for he both can and will protect us, and confound them. Then, an hundredth on
our side shall discomforte a thousand: and the weakest means shall be strong
enough to withstand and to prevail against the mightiest, as the holy stories
do most comfortablie teach us. But if he be occasioned to depart from us,
and leave us to our selves, then al things shall and will fall out clean
contrarily with us, as there we learn also. Assure your self therefore, that
to show your self a merciful Queen to your subjects in this so weighty a
point, and this work of great mercy and love, the which all your people crave
with tears, added unto your former good services of God: it will bind God in
his mercy (for his promise sake) not to slake, or withdraw his most
merciful protection from you: but to enlarge his favor every way toward
you. Be heartily sorry therefore (good Prince) that you have not been
provoked by his marvelous former protection of you from evident dangers, many
and sundry times, to show your self thankful unto him, in performing this so
necessary and profitable a duty, ere this. Think not because (as yet) he has
spared you, and not called you to account for it that therefore he misliketh it
not: for his long suffering must be construed to amendment: or else, it is an
heaping of (...) ^. 5.
vengeance, against the day of vengeance. They are but flatterers, doubtless,
whosoever they be, and so shall you find it in the end, that would persuade
you otherwise: neither can they be, (the premises considered) either sound
friends to their country, or loving subjects to you, which either have bred or
nourished in your Royal heart, an unwillingness to yield to this most
necessary and profitable motion.

But to grow to an end of this our first part: lastly we advouche, that to
yield your best furtherance to make your successor known, is an honorable
action, Princes are no less bound to protect their subjects, then subjects are
bound to obey their Princes.
both before God and man. It is honorable for you before man, because as it is
your subjects duty to yield you all love and dutifulnes, to the preservation
of your noble person and estate: so it is your duty again to yield unto them
protection for them and theirs by what good means you may: amongst which, this
is a principal good mean. And who can deny, but that it is honorable for a
Prince, not to be behind with his subjects in any duty, especially then, not
in this, which is so necessary and profitable for them: nay we are sure, you
your self will confess, that it were very dishonorable for a Prince to look
for, and willingly and wittinglie to receive at the hands of his subjects, all
tokens and fruits of perfect loyal love and to requite them withal* to leave
them all for want of a known successor to extreme confusion and desolation.
And seeing there ought to be such true love indeed, and such true mercy
extended on your part, even toward them toward whom it is due in equity, as
certainly it is in you to your subjects, even in making your successor known:
it cannot be but that so to do, before the Almighty, who is the fontaine of
al true love, and delyteth more in true mercy, The conclusion of the former
part of this book, con^evning a brief recapitulation of the reason before set
down.
then in any other thing, it is a thing most honorable for you so to do
Wherefore to conclude, you see that your titles given you in the word, that
your place and charg over us as your family, that the honestnes, iustnes and
the goodness of the report that it carries with it that the examples both
sacred and profane, foreign and domestical: that the miseries otherwise like
to ensue upon the whole land: and now lastly, that the necessarines,
profitablenes and honorablenesse of the thing it self, both with God and man,
to your self, as well as unto us: join hands together, earnestly to move and
stir up your Majesty, to yield unto us this dutiful mercy. Now then, these
reasons considered, we may say unto you, and do, as Bathsheba 1. Reg. 1. 20.
said in the like case to king David. You our Sovereign Lady know, that the
eyes of all England are on you, to the end that you should tell them who should
sit on your throne after you* God grant that England may find that kind and
melting heart in your majesty, whereby they may receive as comfortable an
answer from you, as Israel did then from David.

But these reasons notwithstanding, yet The latter part of this treatise,
containing answers to certain objections arising from difficulty of knowing,
and peril in naming the known successor.
your Majesty will say, or think; that such is the difficulty of determining
this great controversy* who of right is to succeed you: and such peril there
is in it to your person and honor, that the consideration thereof cannot but
make you afraid and somewhat loath to go about it. Wherefore we beseech you,
let now the objections that arise from these two heads, of difficulty, and
peril, be heard, weighed and examined: that so it may the easilier be
determined, whither your Grace ought to yield to the settling of the succession
by force of the former reasons, or to stay from so doing through the weight of
those. The difficulty of determining The difficulty consists of two parts.
this point, arises partly of the doubtfulnesse and ambiguitie of the title
it self, and partly of the supposed impatiency of the Competitors, in hearing
their titles crossed, in debating, and spoken against. To this we answer: first,
that the The objection of the former difficulty taken away, because the right
of the title is plain and easy to the skillful.
obscurity and difficulty of the title it self by the wise and skillful in the
Laws of this Realm, will as easily be removed, as the dross is severed
from the gold, by the skillful finers: or as the bright shining of the sun
does cause the clouds to vanish and flee away. Indeed, as it cannot be
descried how much gold is in the lump before it come to the hands of the
finers: and as the sun, though it be (indeed) the most excellent ornament
of the firmament is not seen in his beauty, whiles it is shadowed with clouds:
even so in this case, until the baser titles be descried and severed from the
purest, by the skillful learned: and the clouds wherewith the best title is
darkened, removed by them: it is hard either to epsy the right, or to
determine of it. But grant that it be never so hard and difficult to determine
who has the best right: yet* it being so great a point of equity and
justice, as it is, that he should have the title that has best right unto it:
and it being (also) as it is an especial and chief point of exceeding
merciful justice, the which of all others, as we have proved, you the
sovereign and high Judge and minister of justice amongst us, are bound to see
judged: both in respect of your duty to God, and your people: you may not
think, that the hardness to perform such a duty, can breed any exception, or
dispensation unto you, to exempt you from going about it: but it ought (rather)
to force you the more spedilie and thoroughly to take it in hand: for the more
hard and The difficulty of the title ought to be so far from being a bar,
that it ought rather to provoke her Majesty to the search thereof.
doubtful it is, so much it is the more dangerous. And therefore, the more care
ought they to have that stand at the helm. Now, as for the supposed
impatiencie of the Competitors, while the title is in debating, and the
dangerous consequents thereof, alleged to prove such The second branch of
difficulty answered.
difficulty therein: as that therefore it were not safe and good for you to
deal in it, least so the inconvenience of civil war might arise in your
days, which we labor so much by moving you hereunto, to prevent after your
death: we answer: first, that there is no Competitor so void of reason, but
he is resolved that some one has the most and best right. Secondly, he
cannot but in his conscience be persuaded that whosoever he be both reason and
justice would that he should have it. And lastly, we say that it is very
unlikely that there can grow any impatiencie, especially, likely to breed
any great danger, either to your state or person: when that (in a lawful
Parliament) every man shall indifferently be heard to say what he can for his
title: and only inquiry is made, where the best right is, to the end that
there it may be settled and established. For thus may every one of them see,
that there is no in-iustice or injury intended against any of them, but the
right is only sought out, to be given to the rightful owner: and that
therefore, none has any just cause to be offended, but rather every one has
good cause to be glad and joyful thereof: for that both his person and
posterity shall be preserved thereby. And yet if any such impatiencie should
appear, without any great difficulty might it be stayed by you in your life
time, from bursting out into any dangerous effect. Whereas, if you should
depart from us before the determining of this woeful question: then, there
would be none amongst men to stay the fury thereof, but the bloody and
devouring sword. Oh, most doleful judge. Allas, what can any ambitious
competitor be able to do to peril your state or person, seeing his title
dashed, or put further of then he looked for, albeit he were never so
impatient, you reigning and living: yea, you having also by entering into this
so honorable an action, made your self mightily much stronger by your just
deserving then ever you were before: as well in pleasing god, as by binding not
only him and his, whose title you have cleared: but also all your subjects to
love you at their hearts, most deerlie: and therefore, to back you against all
dangers, most courageously and faithfully. No, no, there will be none of them
(if you take this course) but they will evidentlie see thereby, that you and
your friends are grown so strong, that for any of them to burst out of due
order, were but even willingly to bring upon them-selves and their families,
utter destruction. Adonijah was up in arms for the crown, when his father
David lay on his death bed: and he had gotten Ioab, the mightiest captain of
Israel, and Abiathar the high Priest on hisside: and yet when David had
(according to the order of the government) settled and established Solomon to
succeed him: though before Adonijah was grown to strength, and so by
possibility able to have withstoode both his father David and Solomon, yet,
when he heard thereof, he and al his partakers were so dashed and crushed, that
every one straight ran home to his house: and Adonijah himself took
sanctuary: and so this broile notwithstanding, David continued out his time in
peace, and Solomon his son reigned many years triumphantly after him. How
much more, if Queen Elizabeth yet in health and prosperity, do once by this
orderly mean establish the succession, will all aspiring Adonijahs, how
strong soever they have made themselves before, stay from beginning to do, as
Adonijah did: least they be enforced with shame, as he was, to give over
straight again. Let this example encourage you (most noble Queen) not to be
afraid of the crossing and disappointing (in this case) of all the proud
Adonijahs in the world: for no doubt of it, if you do herein seek to please
God, and benefit all your subjects, as he did, God being the same now that
he was then, you may confidentlie look for the same blessing at his hands that
David had: that is, peace in your own days, and for ever after wealth and
prosperity to all your dominions after you.

Now, this objection drawn from the difficulty of determining this matter,
thus answered: let us now proceed to the rest, which are grounded upon the
peril (heerby) supposed to ensue to your noble person and dignity. And
concerning The objection grounded upon peril of naming of the successor,
confirmed by 3. reasons.
your person first it is feared, that the known successor, partly through his
own longing after the highest place, and partly through the provocation of
others, will breed peril to your person. And it is likely, that (in this
respect) your your course. Another fear may grow

Before we come to the answer to these objections, which (in effect) we do
think are all that can be used in this case, we protest unto your Majesty,
that such is our tender love and loyal affection toward your Majesty's noble
person, and to the preservation thereof, in long life and princely honor; that
unless we were most fully persuaded, that the yielding thereunto
(notwithstanding these objections) would not at all prove perilous, but rather
very beneficial and profitable to the safety and security, both of your
person and honor, albeit we had given leave unto our selves somewhat to have
thought of this motion: yet would we never have proceeded thus far therein:
for we wish your days to be extended as far as Methushelahs, in all princely
honor and felicity: and we covet not to live one hour after you. This truly
and faithfully protested: to these objections we answer Answered generally 3.
ways.
first generally, and then particularly: for general answer unto them we
say, first, which being so, does not discharge you from doing so necessary,
profitable and honorable a duty to God and to your people, as this is,
whereunto you are now moved. Secondly we say, suppose there Confirmed by the
example of Esther.
and safety. Always Queen Hester, the wife of Ahashuerosh king of 127.
provinces, understanding into what extreme peril her country people the
Jews were brought by the means of Haman, put her life and honor in evident
peril, wittinglie and willingly deserving death by law, to prevent the danger
toward her natural people. For to the hazard of her life (as appears in
the story) she came into the Kings presence without leave, (the which was
death by the Law) to make means for their safety, saying, that if I perish,
I perish, thereby carrying a resolute mind, that though she did perish, yet
not to omit to do what possibly she might for the safety of her people. In
deed, she prepared her self to this action with long fasting and earnest
prayer: and so we would wish all such weighty and necessary services to
God and our country (especially when there is feared some danger and
difficulty in the accomplishing of them) to be taken in hand, But this story
shows especially, seeing this is reported of her in the Canonical Scripture
to her commendation, that herein she did well, and that others may lawfully,
and ought, even though they be Queens, to offer themselves to peril for the
good and safety of their country: when otherwise, without their so doing, it
must needs come to some extreme misery. What doubt can there be of this,
seeing we read that even the light of nature has taught Codrus Athen. Decij Romans
many heathen Princes to offer themselves to extreme peril for the good of
of their country. And your Majesty has And of King Henry the 8.
a Christian and domestical example of your noble father hereof: who spak
these natural words to his nobility and commons: Grafton page 1278.
namely, For your defense my tresure shall not be hidden, nor (if necessity
require) my person shall not be vnadventured. And so (Madame) give not your
majesty's kind subjects cause once to imagine, that a conceit only of fear to
peril, either your person or honor, can or will stay you from doing so great a
duty as to perserue all your most loving subjects and whole country by this
means from utter confusion and desolation: otherwise palpably seen to be
unavoidable, and ready to come upon them every hour. Nay, how can it be, but
you having so often, yea, so miraculouslie and sensibly found God ready to
protect and save you from many perils: but you must needs gather to your
comfort, that much more (if you honor him in this case) he will show that
both he can and will preserve you from all your enemies. Therefore let not
your noble heart persuade it self for fear of peril either to your person or
honor, to omit the doing of that, which in all honor, duty, and conscience
both to god and man, you are most bound to do, for the furtherance of Gods
glory, and safety of al your people and country. Howbeit, for a third
general answer to these and love of his subjects? which he vouchsafes ever
to them that prefer his will before their own, and obedience to him before
their own safety. Let all histories, both sacred and profane, be perused, and
it shall be throughout all ages found true, God give the blessing to those that
obey him in actions that seem very dangerous.
that those princes (even in show and appearance of greatest perils) have
always been most safely protected and preserved by the Lord: which for doing
their duties to God and their people, have hazarded themselves. And therefore,
in doing this so needful, merciful and honorable duty, your Majesty needs
not once doubt of Gods providence and protection toward you therein: but
boldly (this show of perils notwithstanding) and confidentlie resting on the
Lords safegarding of you therein: you may when you will most safely go about,
and effect it.

Yet for your Majesty's full satisfaction The objection of peril answered
particularly.
let us (by your Graces patience) proceed to lay before you in order as they
were propounded, the weakness of every one of these objections. The first
fear, arises from the longing that is supposed will be in your successor,
(when he is once known) after the highest place. The second, from the
provocation that he is like to have that way by others. Wherein first, we will
answer the objection concerning his own ambition: and then, the other,
concerning provocation by others. It is supposed in the objection that it
cannot be, but that there will be such a desire to climme in the once made
known successor, as will peril the present Prince. We grant, that naturally
flesh and blood is prone to be so affected: but yet this is certain, that
where the sprit of God is, this corruption of nature The known successor does
strengthen the present Prince.
is so bridled, that it brings forth no dangerous fruits to the present
governor Let King David bear witness hereunto, whose succession being
appointed Confirmed by the example of David.
and confirmed by God, and he himself long time most injuriously and cruelly
persecuted by the present king Saul, and he having opportunity twice to have
slain his enemy, and to have saved his own life, and also to have taken the
crown: yet neither the glory of a kingdom, the desire of revenge, nor the
care of preserving his own life, could make him once to lay hands on the Lords
anointed, to peril him. Nay, not only the spirit of God in Gods children:
but also natural piety, and humanity has so much prevailed And of the
heathen.
in this case, that we read that Antoninus Philosophus being made the known
successor to Antoninus Pius in the Romain Empire, hearing that Antoninus
Capitolinus.
Pius did lie in most extreme misery, even weary of his life, and to be
rid thereof, had commanded one of his men to kill him. This Antoninus
Philosophus hearing thereof, with a forcible hand stayed that unnatural
murder: for the which fact the story says, that the present Prince with
furious words rebuked his successor bitterly: and that yet his said successor
answered him again thus, Were I worthy to succeed so noble a Prince in so
high a dignity, if I did not use my best endeavor to preserve your life, seeing
it in peril? No surely, I were not worthy thereof. Lo, here, an heathen
known successor, not by nature, but by adoption (as it is clear in the
story) for all that which is objected against a known successor, has not only
not perilled, but preserved the life of him that had made him his successor.
And infinite be the examples in all stories of such as being next to succeed,
yet have never perilled the present governor: and in comparison, very few be
the examples to the contrary. And why then may not your Majesty, rather
presume to find the like good affection in him, whom you shall make your
successor, then otherwise? Truly, the reason is very strong that may be
yielded, to prove why he will as little peril you, as David did Saul, or
Antoninus Philosophus the other Antonine, that was in the place before him: for
whosoever it be (the title now standing so doubfull as it does) when you have
cleared his title, and by Parliament authority established it: he must of
necessity confess and take himself so bound to you therefore, as though you
had (even) given him the kingdom: for the which your wonderful goodness and
bounty, if there be but common reason and nature in him, it will bind both
his heart, tongue and hands from ever contriving any thing to your peril. Yea,
who can be so monstrouslie brutish and void of reason, as having received
such a benefit at your hands, as the clearing of his title to such a noble
kingdom (so much also to the good and safety of al your subjects) but he will
think that by this means you must needs so win the hearts of all your
subjects, and bind them to such an hearty love and thankfulness in such fast
sort to you: that if he should once but offer you unkindness, he should be
thought generally a monster amongst men, and so not worthy of common life:
and then to be had in a general contempt amongst all degrees. Which so being,
were it likely that ever he should get any strength to peril your person?
And for further stre^gthening of this reason, we are persuaded that if all
stories were perused, there could hardly any one example be found, where the
present Prince was peri^led by the means of that successor, who had his title
to succeed cleared unto him by the present prince, it being obscure and
doubtful Few Princes hurt by their successors thus established.
before that time. And this will be your Graces very case, if that it shall
please God to stir up your heart to make your successor known: and even thus
much shall he stand bound unto you. Again, The successor whither Protestant or
Papist, or neuter would not hurt her Majesty, the one for conscience, the other
for fear.
lay it upon, he is like to be either Protestant, papist or neuter: if the
first, then Religion and conscience will keep him in due order: if he be
either of the latter, yet then also, fear to lose all that they have already,
whiles they seek more, or to make their state worse then it was before (by all
good reason and likelyhoode) will cause them patiently to wait for their
time. But to put this fear quite out of fear, good means would be used to
reform and bridle this ambitious inclination in the once known successor: and
so And if he should how he might be restrained.
to prevent all peril thereby. As first, a sharp and severe law would be
made, to take away his life (if he be a subject) and quite disable his issue
also, that shall contriue the peril of the present Prince, or any way consent
thereunto. Secondly, he would be used honorably and courteously of the
present prince: for if the present Prince want issue, he is (then) his child,
by adoption, and heir by law. Thirdly, he is virtuously and religiously to
be brought up (if he be under years) and to have about him always some
trusty and faithful friends and counselors to the present Prince, to direct
him in a good course, and to descrie him if he begin but to tread awrie. And
lastly, where these means will not serve, there, restraint of liberty under
straight and trusty guarde (if he owe allegiance) may well and lawfully be
used. And thus, the danger that might arise to your majesty's person by the
proper motion of a known successor has his answer, That which follows is
that which might ensue by their means The known successor can not be able to
hurt her Majesty by the provocation of others.
who were likely to prick him forward to peril the present Prince, either
hoping for further advancement by him, or else (upon what sinister conceit so
ever) desire to see an alteration: wherein we shall not need to trouble your
Majesty with many words: for if fidelity be planted in the heart of the
successor, or he kept within the bounds thereof, by the means and reasons
aforesaid: the provocations of others shall be in vain. For though David's
servants were ready 1. Sam. 24. 5.
to provoke David (when he had Saul at advantage in the cave) to kill him,
saying, Now is the day come whereof the Lord said unto thee, I will deliver
thine enemy into thine hand. Yet David thereby would neither be moved to
suffer them to do it, neither would he do it Ver. 7.
himself, saying, God forbid, that I should touch the Lords anointed. But it
may be said* that all successors be not David's. Truth it is, but yet, what so
ever they be, by the means aforesaid, this danger of yielding to the
provocation of any, may well be prevented. And this still remains a comfort
to your Majesty, that the Lords arm of protection and defense will not be
shortened toward you, for the performing of this so acceptable a service of
mercy and compassion toward his people and yours. And sure you may be (if God
defended wicked Saul, when godly David was to succeed) that more assured shall
his defense be over you, studying by this godly way to please him. The
dangers that can arise either of his own motion, or through the instigation
of others (suppose the worst) must either be by open hostility, or secret
practice. By open Neither by open hostility.
hostility and force, he will never attempt it: first, because he must needs
see that you have possessed justly and deservedly the hearts of your
subjects, through your manifold and vnrecompensable deserts: and lastly,
through this deserved love of yours fastlie knit unto you, he shall never be
able to grow to any strength to stand against you in the field because taking
a view of your subjects, though he shall find amongst them some
mal-contents, some for religion, and some otherwise: yet, when he has mustered
them all together in his mind, he shall find them not one handful to those
that will like so well of their present state, that they will never be brought to
hazard that sweet and peaceable government that they presently enjoy under
you, for a change: for the number of those that love you for religion sake (God
be thanked) are great: and these will, you may be sure, live and die in your
defense most willingly: and worldlings there be very many, we think, more
then either Papists or Protestants: and those (sure) take such joy and pleasure
in the things of this world, that they can never be brought to hazard the
quiet possession and fruition thereof, which they now possess and which they
must needs see, they do hazard, in consenting to treason: for sure to prevail
they can not be. And if they should, neither can they be sure to better their
estate, for there will be then so many rake-helles to please and satisfy with
other men's goods, that for satisfying of them, they may justly fear, that
they must part with some of their own goods. And if the known successor
be a Protestant (as Whither he be a protestant
there is great ods it will so fall out, when the matter comes to
determining) The Scottishe King.
the^, all kind of Papists, whither they be Papists of state, or of
conscience, will refuse to join with him, least they feel his little finger
heavier, then they have felt your whole hand: and least he make their yoke much
heavier, then you have done. And whereas you (so they keep their fingers from
treason) beat them but with rods, as a mother does her children: he shall then
beat them with whippes, as slaves and dogs: for, they can never hope for more
mercy at the hands of any Christian Prince (differing from them in Religion
as you do) then they find at your hands. But suppose, (which we hope is
impossible) that the right to succeed, shall be found in a Papist: yet, by
open Or Papist.
force he were never able to endanger you. For besides that he shall be
forsaken both of the sound Protestant, and of the worldling also: of the one
for his Religions sake: of the other for the love he has to his possessions,
he should find among them of his own faction a number so politic, that they
might perhaps give him the looking on: but join with him they would not, nor
durst not, for fear of had I wist: and so he should find those that durst
stand forth with him in the field indeed, but very few in number, and them of
the weakest in wealth and strength.

Howsoever therefore it fall out, your highness need not to fear any danger
by open hostility, at the known successors hand, albe it he were much
provoked thereunto, or be prone enough thereunto of himself. And this is an
especial reason no English successor can be of sufficient wealth, to maintain
war with you, within your own Realm. And if the successor fall out to be a
stranger, he will rather seek by all friendly and good carriage to requite
your gracious and faithful dealing with him, and so more and more procure the
love of you and of your subjects, then by such hostility alienate your own and
your subjects hearts and minds from him. And as for the danger by secret Nor
secret practice.
practices, great hope there is, that men considering how many that way have
come to confusion, for fear of the like reward, will not dare to meddle that
way any further. And surely your Majesty has just cause to comfort your
self against all the secret dangers which may be intended against you for
well doing, with the most wonderful and merciful experience of God his
protection, which you many times have had against such: though flowing from
many subtle and malicious hearts and heads. For you may be sure, that God
will not take less care of you, and protect you the less, but rather much the
more, for adding this heroical and princely virtue, of preserving your people
and state, to all your former noble deeds. Use you therefore (sweet
sovereign) the best and speediest means that possibly you may, to prevent
the peril of all your subjects, and in your well doing, you may rest safe and
secure under the shadow of the Almighty, and so put your only trust in him:
and then shall you be like mount Sion, that shall never be moved.

and were as a sheep appointed to the slaughter: whereas your known successor
(at your hands) is to receive this incomparable benefit, to have his title to
the crown after you, cleared by you, the which lay hid, and in controversy
before. Her regiment was very unfortunate An opposition betwixt her Majesty's
government, and her sisters.
and bloody, and yours is (Gods name be blessed for it) prosperous and
merciful. She patronized Antichristianitie, which is a special mean to
provoke God, to undermine the estate of those Princes that do so: and you
countenance the truth, and the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is a
principal mean to move God (for the good of his Church) as tenderly to
preserve you; as the apple of his eye. She, by her marriage with a stranger,
had almost brought this land into wonderful danger, if God (by making her time
short here) had not prevented it. For she would have cast out her old
inhabitants, and have had this Island to have become a dwelling for strangers:
much like unto an unnatural nurse: whereas you maintain it in peace and
prosperity, most like unto a natural nursing mother, for the use of the
ancient inhabitants thereof. Which strange doings of hers considered, no
mervaile it is, though our countrie-men then, to shorten and to prevent those
intolerable evils, wished rather you in place, then her: and very great wonder
were it we say, that any now (especially once worthy to be regarded)
should wish rather your known successor to wear the Diadem, then your
self: for these are things of great moment, both to stay others from giving
him any such counsel, and to withold his heart from ever consenting
thereunto. And therefore, the differences of the times thus considered,
together with Gods protection of your sister in her place, till God himself
(with his own hand) put an end to her days: these differences notwithstanding
(we say) may encourage you, rather by your own experience to make your
successor known, then otherwise: for that God that herein showed himself
both able and willing thus to protect and preserve your sister from all the
dangers and perils intended against her, by all those that would feign have had
you in her place: no doubt of it, much more easily can and will protect you, a
nursing mother to his true church from al perils and dangers that can arise
either from your known successor, or from his provokers.

And therefore, to come to your last The 3. argument that some kings have been
de posed by their successors answered*
by making a known successor, drawn from examples of certain kings in this
land, deposed by their successors. The answer thereunto, is most easy: for
what are those few in comparison of infinite numbers that had known heirs and
successors, and yet were never endangered by them? And why then should not your
Majesty's noble heart (especially already having had so often and so sensible
experience of Gods goodness toward you) rather take encouragement by the more
examples to make your successor known, (it being a thing every way as it is,
beco^ming your person and honor to do) rather then discouragement therefrom by
the fewer? Truly we must needs think God being so ready at hand to help you,
as you have always found him hitherto, and the thing being as it is, a most
especial point of your Majesty's dutiful service unto him: that if ever God
preserved Prince for so doing (as he has many) you should persuade your
self, that heerin also he would preserve and protect you.

But as for these examples, they are little or nothing to the purpose in hand:
for never a one of these that deposed their predecessors, were (by them) made
and declared to be their heirs apparent, or their successors, their titles
being doubtful and lying in suspense before: whereas the question now in hand
is, Whither the present Prince, whose successor is made known by him, and is
also advanced to that clear hope by him, is to fear any such peril from the
successor? In which case, we have showed in our reasons before, that hardly
in any story any such example can be found. Yet seeing these examples are
alleged it shall not be amiss (somewhat) to consider of them. Edward the
third was but 15. years Edward 2. deposed by his son Ed. 3. and how.
old when his father was deposed, and therefore not likely to be contriver
of his fathers deposing. Nay, who so reads Grafton page 213. 214. 215.
the story, he shall find that he was deposed by his Nobility and commons,
as one (in their judgment) not worthy to be a king. Their reason was* for
that he was altogether ruled by the lewd counsel of the two Spensers, Robert
Baldock, Pierce of Gauestone, and other ill counselors: whereby he vainelie
consumed the treasure of the land, and overthrewe King ^ich 2^ deposed by Hen
^^ why Grafton page 401.
the nobility and state. And king Richard the sec. was deposed, not by one
whom he had made his known successor, but by Henry the fourth: no successor
to him by right, but an usurper, and that for his great misgovernment, as it
does appear in the story by 28. articles objected against him at his
deposing: wherein his nobility and commons showed, that they liked rather to
have an usurper to reign over the^, that would preserve the crown and them,
then a rightful king, that would peril the crown and state also. So Henry
Hen. 6. deposed by Ed. 4.
the sixth was deposed by Edward the fourth, who had a present right to the
crown, and was neither heir apparent nor known successor unto him: but he
was deposed for the causes, for the which God is often angry with princes,
namely (as witnesses the story) for being to much advised by the wicked
counsel of William de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk, by whose means (as the
history says) the good Duke of Gloucester, the kings uncle, was put to death:
and the countries that the crown of England did then possess in France, were
delivered and lost: he being the swallower up of the kings treasure, whereby
the wars were not maintained, and the expeller from the King of all good and
virtuous counselors, and the bringer in, and the advancer of vicious persons,
common enemies and apparent adversaries to the public weal. Here be many
hard points discovered in a counselor, the which a Wise Princes will look
narrowly into the affections of their counselors.
wise Prince will narrowly look into: least any of his be infected with any
of these faults. His wife also and others did likewise so overruled him, so
that the state was (by his evil government) greatly troubled and vexed, and
the nobility much perilled. Now, King Edward the fifth was murdered being but
a child, by his Ed 3. murdered by Rich. 3.
wicked and traiterous uncle, Richard the third, who was neither his heir nor
successor by right. So that these examples rather prove, that there is peril
to the present governor from secret, ambitious, and unknown competitors, than
from known successors: for three of these were neither heirs nor successors by
right, to them whom they deposed: and the fourth had the Crown thrown in his
lap, both unlooked and vnwished for. And in deed and truth princes are in
far more danger, succession not being established, then when it is settled. The
reason is forcible, for the neglect thereof produces the disfavour of God, and
his subjects: whereof we have a good example of David, who before he did
establish the succession in Solomon, was in far more danger then afterward:
for before, first Absolon, then Adoniiah were up in arms for the crown, but
Solomon once settled in the title of succession, we read of no more such
dangerous attemptes in his time. And certain it is that your Majesty has
been in much more danger hitherto (the title to succeed you being
undetermined) then you can be by any likelyhoode, when soever it shall be
declared who has the right of succession. And so by this that is said
already, it sufficiently appears, that the perilles by having a known
successor, are rather shadows of perilles then perilles in deed: whereas by
concealing of the succession, and not declaring where it rests, your Majesty
knows, a successor how weaklie soever supposed, yet mightily supported, both
by domestical traitors and forrayne enemies, has bred you many evident and
dangerous perilles. The Lord be blessed, who has delivered you out of their
snares and pits, and has intrapped themselves therein. But you have no cause
yet to think (most gracious Lady) but that the popish faction, which other
malcontents, having now lost the staff of their hope, but that they ere this
have The Queen of Scots.
busied themselves to find another: for you may assure your self, the more
silent you are to make known your successor, the glader are they: for they
think they may thereby the more boldly set up one to themselves in their own
conceits: wherein, when their devises and plots are come to any ripeness,
former experience has taught you what to look for from them, or at their
hands. God preserve you always from them and their treacheries, and give you
grace ever to beware of them, and never to trust them. Again, what danger is
there that you can suppose to be likely to arise by making known your
successor, that evidentlie arises not of keeping him unknown: for it is to be
thought, that where the best right is, it is well known to him that has it.
Then the more the right of his title be sought to be suppressed and concealed,
the more (it is likely) it will stir the coals of wrath in his heart, and
the sooner it will cause him to put forth himself, least he should (by
silence) miss of that which he accounted his right. And will not the
concealing thereof cause many to flatter themselves that they have a title: and
so danger may spring unto your Majesty from many fountains, and from some
perhaps that are not thought of. And all reason persuades, that there is less
danger to be feared from him that has right to succeed especially being
bound unto your majesty for publishing and manifesting of his right, then by
one that is grieved and offended with your majesty, for hiding and suffering
his title to lie hid. And every one sees that the danger that arises from
one, and him known, is easilier prevented, then that which arises from many,
and some of them also unknown. It were questionless therefore (every way)
the safest way for your majesty, to bind him that has the best right to
succeed to you, to all love and thankfulness toward you: and consequently (by
that kind means) from seeking to endanger you any way: but especially by
your kind clearing and declaring his right: and then also, to put out of hope
all others, that now wrongfully imagine they have right thereunto: whose
ambition may stir them up to seek the diadem. This (as I have plainly
prooved) is the way that best pleases God, and that stands best with the
discharge of your duty, both to him and to your people: and therefore it cannot
be, but that it is far more safe for your noble person so to do, then
otherwise: because as al stories and experience teach, it is always the
safest way, both for Prince and subject, to please God: and very dangerous to
think that there is more safety in following our own devises and fantasies,
then his will and pleasure. Saul (you know) was threatened for that he had
broken Gods commandment, to have his kingdom rent from him, and it was so. And
the rather may you see, that there is no reason in respect of peril to your
person, to stay you from thus doing: because (not only) it has been made to
appear manifestly unto you, that they are rather phansied perils, then perils
in deed. And now lastly, evident reason has showed you, that what soever
those perils be, yet the same, and rather greater, are more justly to be
feared of the not settling of the succession. Wherefore we conclude, that
(notwithstanding the former objections) there is no sufficient cause why you
should not make your successor known, in respect of any peril to your
person: seeing we have rather proved it much more safer, then perilous for
your highness so to do.

And the danger that might come unto your honor thereby, is also the less to
The other branch of the objection grounded upon peril, concerning the decay of
the princes honor and dignity, if the successor should be made known,
answered and refuted.
be feared: for that no act can be more honorable, then that whereby you
should provide for the continual safety of your kingdom, and people? And
who can (with a reverent opinion) think that ever your Majesty would desire to
maintain the full brightness of your glory, by hazarding the glory of God?
and the utter overthrow of your kingdom? For who knows not but that your
Majesty has read and heard not only how far noble King David in dancing
before the arc, was content to debase himself? thereby 2. Sam. 6. 14.
to advaunce the glory of God: but also, that very heathen Princes have often
been found ready with their lives (as precious Codrus Athen. Decij Romans
as their honor) to redeem the safety of their countries. As for the reason
to prove it perilous to your honor, in that as men are given rather to honor
the Sun rising, then the setting thereof: so, it is thought in this case, that
they are given to prefer their new Master, before their old Mistress: but
these be arguments of small moment: for the Barbarians that do worship the
Sun, do as well fall flat on their faces, when it sets as when it rises.
And reason teaches wise men rather to honor that sun, the rising whereof
has already much benefited them: then that which they cannot tell, whither it
will benefit them in like measure, or no: Indeed, if the sun setting has
been all the former day, but a glowming and vn-comfortable Sun: then there is
some reason, why the next days Sun rising (in hope that it will be more
comfortable and lightsome) should be rather honored, then the other. But if the
sun setting, has been all the day before, a clear, lightsome, and
comfortable sun, all wise and honest men will be so far in love with it,
that they will be exceeding loath to part with it, and will highly honor it,
setting: and also dolefullie mourn, when it is set. And the like affection,
wise and discreet men cannot carry to the next sun rising, for that they
know not whither it will prove comfortable, or not unto them. Let your Majesty
therefore go on, as your Grace has begun: in sending forth the glorious
beams of the Gospel of Christ, thoroughout your dominions: and now, and this
kind comfort to your loving and kind subjects: to wit, to make your
successor known: and assure your self, that you shall be more infinitlie
honored, setting, for these benefits already received: then the next sun
rising can be possibly (whosoever he be) for benefits but barelie hoped for.
And further you know, that though many things be most desired, when they are
new: yet many are greatliest esteemed, when they are old. But what if some
light persons do withdraw (then) some honor from you, and give it to your
successor? what can that eclipse your honor? when (by making your successor
known) you are grown great and mighty (with a settled and vn-remoueable love)
in the hearts of all the grave, faithful, and godly wise men of the land.
And what loss of honor can it be to you, to lose a little at the hands of
vain and light persons, who are of very small or none account, and to get ten
thousand times more honor at the hands of the other: namely, of all your
grave, wise and faithful subjects: yea, and to gain immortal honor both
with God and man also, by doing so famous and worthy a deed. Thus we hope your
Majesty, does plainly see, that there appears as little force in this
objection, as in any of the former, and that therefore we may conclude also,
that the peril in the settling of the succession, is nothing so dangerous to
your Princely honor and dignity, as the contrary.

And certainly (dear sovereign) the The last arg. the establishing of a
successor will take away all foreign conspiracies. Proved.
surest means to kill the hearts of all your enemies both here, and in
foreign countries, and to stop their greedy hungring to advaunce any to the
Diadem, and also to stay their bloody desires to take away your Majesty's
life, by murder of your noble person, or any other wicked means, is the
settling of succession only. The reason is, the chief cause and end that
moves traitorous Papists and your foreign enemies to hunger so eagerly after
your life, is this: they are certainly persuaded, and it is holden for a
resolute opinion amongst them, that if they could bereave your Majesty of your
life, that then your good subjects had no one (only) head to cleave, and
resort unto for succor: but should (by inclyning to sindrie factions, and
following of as many heads at the least, as there would be claimers of the
crown) grow to civil war and unnatural division: and so be ready every
one of us, to cut one another throat: and then, were we easily all over-runne
by them, and the common enemies the strangers. The only good and surest
means to alienate all their minds, from intending the murder of your
Majesty's person (the which otherwise they will never cease to practice) is, to
settle the succession of the crown, successively to as many, one after
another, as the Law shall take notice of, to be inheritable thereunto. For
thereby they shall see, that they are never a white the nearer winning of the
goal, though they should take away your Majesty's life. For that
notwithstanding, yet no civil war or discord within this Realm (the only
cause of their greedy thirsting after your Majesty's blood) were like to ensue
thereof: for that your subjects wits and minds would not thereby be
distracted, seeing they then should know, and be certain what head to lean
and cleave unto: and would so be all united in one mind, to follow one, and
the self same head. Many therefore and great are the benefits which your
Majesty, and the whole Realm should reap by the present establishment of
succession: for as soon as this were done, those English traitors which are
used by the strangers, as wicked instruments, to shorten your Majesty's days,
would presently desist from practizing of that vile enterprise, and your
Majesty's enemies will likewise desist from hyring and pricking any forward
thereunto: for that no civil war (the only mark whereat they aim) would
ensue thereupon. And further they should see, that (by executing their malicious
and longed for attempt) the Realm should be governed by such a man, who (in
their They closely mean the King of Scots, who in every man's judgment is
most able to defend it; but chiefly in the opinion of strangers.
opinions) would defend it more strongly and stoutly, then any woman.
Further, the consideration hereof by the strangers, will be (here after) a
good mean to stay their purpose of coming again, if they hear of it before:
if they hear of it after their landing, it will hasten them faster away, then
a thousand peales of gunnes: for small is their hope of overrunning this land,
without the advantage of domestical war amongst our selves. And it is not
like, that they will leave off with this dishonor, but will (another year)
give a new onset. Lastly, admit that they will presume upon their own
strength, without this advantage: yet, the establishment of the succession will
so effectually and unfeignedly win unto your Majesty, the hearts of all your
Nobility and commons (some handful of desperate Papists and Malcontents set
a side) and so reconcile their minds one toward another, which are now
distracted by favoring and inclyning to sundry titles, that the whole Realm
(without al doubt and difficulty) will put on hearts like unto the hearts of
Lions, and so stick wholly and heartily together for the defense of your
Majesty, and this their noble country. If the settling of the succession prove
not the surest and best means for your Majesty's present safety, and also for
the discharge of your duty to God and your people, thereby banqueting with the
most dainty dishe of a quiet conscience: and for the winning to your Majesty
of an honorable name and fame throughout the whole world: and for the knitting
of all your subjects hearts fast unto you, with love deserved, and so
unremovable: let our heads pay our ransom, for stirring up your Majesty
hereunto.

Wherefore (now) to grow to an end, A recapitulation of the arguments going
before, with a pithie exhortation annexed thereunto.
(most gracious sovereign) if obedience to God, examples of Kings, both
Christian and heathen: yea, and of your own dear Father, or care and
compassion over all your own natural liege people, (otherwise) sure to come
to extreme confusion, the necessarines, profitablenes, and honorablenes of the
action, to the eye of the whole world, and to your self also, and both before
God and man: together with the weakness of all objections that can be made to
the contrare, be of any force and account with your Majesty, as (we doubt
not) but they are: then (Princely Lady) deny not to your most merciful God
this thankfulness: but (in thankful consideration of all his benefits bestowed
upon you) yield in most effectual manner to this holy, natural, and most
needful motion: deny not this Princely mercy and duty to your noble
Realms and Dominions that have bred you, and hitherto maintained you in all
honor, and princely estate: and without the which, you could not, nor cannot
be preserved, and so maintained. And so, not we only, but all your people, one
and other, that have any true fear of God, or love to their whole country
generally, or any natural care to posterity, night and day, with tears and
gronings in most lamentable and pitiful manner do cry and call upon you
(sweet Lady) in this point, for mercy, as ever there was any spark of true
mercy in your princely heart, that you will (now) with speed show mercy on
us all, and all our wives and children, kindred and friends, and al our whole
posterities: but especially to show mercy upon our souls: for that
otherwise as all your true and faithful subjects, cannot but perish with the
sword: even so our souls will surely sterue for want of the Word: yea, we (in
most fervent manner) humbly beseech you, and God charge you to show mercy
in this point (if in any) to his whole Church throughout Christendom. For it
will receive great strength by the establishment of the succession here. Alas
(if you should not) what sin and impiety were it in you, when (by this
only mean) you may prevent unavoidable perils to your whole people, and noble
Realm, to suffer so many thousands of your loving subjects, (who would
willingly have shed their blood in your defense) to have their blood most
cruelly spilt, by sundry cruel and bloody battles: yea, to suffer such a
flourishing Church and commonwealth (by your unkind leaving it without a known
successor) to be spoiled of al policy, order, government, and Religion, and to
be brought to utter desolation Oh, (in so dangerous times especially as these
be, in the midst of secret enemies at home, and mighty and malicious abroad)
provoke not (most noble sovereign) the wrath of your kind God upon you so
justly: neither offer any such unkind occasion of alienating the affections
of your best subjects from you, so deservedly: it tending (so much as it does)
to the weakening and peril of your self: but in the fear of God, and of desire
every way to please him, and to the discharge of a good conscience, take in
hand (and that without delay, because delay breeds danger) this most godly,
honorable, and natural action. And still to whet you thereunto, in stead of a
final conclusion we leave these short questions to be considered of by you,
and answered between God and you in your secret chamber.

FIRST, whither the Lord himself did Ten questions to be considered of by her
Majesty.
not set the crown on your head, when your enemies earnest purpose was to have
taken your head away.

Secondly, whither the same Lord has not (with a mighty hand and
outstretched

Thirdly, whither he has not also wonderfully in your regiment blessed

Fourthlie, whither in regard of all these exceeding benefits, you are not

Fiftlie, whither you do not think, that it is an especial duty that Princes
owe unto God, and their people, to do what may be done to preserve them and
their posterities from all evils and mischief?

Sixtlie, whither you do not plainly and

Seventhlie, whither you do not think,

Eightlie, whither (then) you do not

Ninthlie, and whither that therefore, the revenger of all ungodliness, to make
straight account of this greevous sin.

Lastly, whither in the mean time, it be not a mean greatly to your
peril,

TRue and unfeigned love, does even The conclusion of the whole treatise, and
exhortation enlarged with two new arguments, the one from the ignominy which
is like to befall to her Majesty's person after her death, for wanting the
honor of burial: the other from the danger the conusellors are like to fall
into after her decease, for not procuring the establishing of a successor, as
though by their default her Majesty had neglected the same.
force us to utter unto you (our most dear and natural Sovereign:) that when
soever it sall please God to touch you with the pangs of death, (as die most
certainly you shall, and how soon is known to none but to the Lord only)
if your Majesty do not settle the succession in your lifetime, which God for
his mercies sake long prolong, we do greatly fear, that your grace shall,
then, find such a troubled soul and conscience, yea, ten thousand helles in
your soul, even such bitter vexation of soul and heart for the perilling of
the Church of God, and of your natural country, as to be released thereof, you
would give the whole world, if you had it. Of true love to your Majesty, and
of a reverent regard that we have unto your honor and good name after your
decease: we beseech your Majesty to consider, whither your noble person is
like to come to that honorable burial, that your honorable progenitors have
had, or that (as we doubt not) your grace will take order for by your
testament, or whither any part of yourwil shall be performed by your executors,
if your successor be not settled before your death. It may be, that this is a
matter neither thought of, nor yet doubted of by your highness, but that you
hold it as a clear and undoubted matter or question. To let your majesty
understand our opinions herein, we do think it our duties. We do assure our
selves, that the breath shall be no sooner out of your body (if your successor
be not settled in your lifetime) but that al your nobility, counselors, and
whole people will be up in arms with all the speed they may: yea, their care
and haste to arm themselves will be so earnest, that they will think
themselves most happy, that can first draw themselves and their power into
the field: and then there will be as many kings proclaimed, as there will be
competitors, the which will be four or five at the least, though all have not
the like right: so that then, your executors will be so busied to set up a new
king, yea, (it is likely) two or three, that they shall not possibly have one
hours leisure to attend, nor once think of your burial, or will: and then it
is to be feared, yea, undoubtedly to be judged, that your noble person shall
lie upon the earth unburied, as a doleful spectacle to the world, but
chiefly to such as dearly love you. The shame and infamy hereof, we
beseech your grace to be careful of: and true and unfeigned love, yea, our
duties do force us to warn your majesty of it: for it would be a wonderful
sorrow to a great number of our hearts, if your noble person (being the restorer
of true religion) should come to that shame as to lie unburied. Again, we
fear (if your majesty do not prevent these perils before your death) that
(after the dissolution of your life) you shall leave behind you such a name of
infamy througout the whole world, even in such an opprobrious manner, that the
forethinking thereof, cannot (we do persuade our selves) but deeply grieve and
wound your honorable, pitiful and tender heart: especially, sithence your
wisdom and kind heart cannot but foresee, that those whom you shall leave
behind you, which be of natural kindred, or bear any hearty or true love
and affection toward you, will daily die a thousand deaths, to hear the
evils that shall be howrelie used in vile reports, songs and rymes against your
noble person: and may not with truth defend you, for that you have not
dutifullie prevented the overthrow of the Church of God, and of your noble
kingdom, but have suffered both to be subverted, even by the most cruel
means that may be, to wit, by the merciless shedding of rivers of innocent
blood, by all those endless bloody battles which shall be fought in that
cause: and al for that you have not showed pity and mercy in the settling of
the succession of the imperial crown of your noble realm: This is not al, for
your privy counselors, which you shall leave alive after you, who (of fear)
to trouble you, have suffered you to sleep in quiet, as though you had no just
cause to take care for the safety of the Church of God, and of your country,
and also, in that they have not incessantly called upon you, thereby stirring
you up (with all ferventnesse) to prevent these intolerable evils, shall (in
all likelyhoode) pay full dearly for their silence after your decease. For
we cannot persuade our selves, but that the realm will call them to a sharp
account for suffering the Church of God and the crown of England to be
utterly subverted. And well they shall deserve it, both at the Lords hand, and
of this their worthy and native country, if it should so fall out: for they
took their corporal oaths to be true counselors unto this noble realm,
Counselors sworn as well to the realm as to the Prince.
as well as to your noble person, when they were sworn to be counselors to
both. And when they shall reap the just reward of their deserts, then they
will cry out upon your Majesty with a doleful woe: saying, that you have
utterly cast them and all theirs away. This woeful tuned song, (we do persuade
our selves) will the Lord (in his justice) force them (then) to sing,
doubtless, if the aforementioned mischiefs be not prevented in your majesty's
lifetime. Therefore, an happy, and a thousand times happy, yea, and a most
blessed thing were it to your majesty, and to all your said counselors also,
if they did so heartily and truly love you, that they would not suffer you
to rest in quiet, neither at bed nor at board, until you had prevented the
aforementioned lamentable perils to your own soul and noble person, and to theirs
also. For then might your Majesty, and they also, both live and end the
residue of your days in great safety: with a merry, cheerful, and quiet
heart, and be at good peace, both with God and man: things greatly desired,
and heartily wished to your noble heart by us, your loyal, true, and most
faithful subjects, even of very true, and unfeigned love, as the Lord knows
before whom we shall make a straight account if we use any flattering or
dissembled speeches. Wherefore we humbly beseech your Majesty to bear with our
true hearted plainness. Thus with all humble ferventnesse and loving duty (our
most sweet sovereign and merciful Princess) we eft-soones beg the
reading, and the reading again hereof by your highness, with patience, and
with all godly attention, and wise weighing of the reasons therein. And God
grant you grace to suck out the honey out of the sweet flowrs thereof, and to
spit out the venom that has heertofore envonomed you with a fearful,
wrongful, and deceit-full conceit, and settled opinion, even to the great and
wonderful peril of wounding the Church of God, and your whole people and
noble Realm, unto death: yea, and a poisoned dart to wound your own sweet
soul, and your noble person likewise: whose line of life, we as heartily
desire may be stretched out of as great a length as any subjects you have,
whatsoever they be: yea, albeit they have received never so much honor,
credit, estimation or benefit at your Majesty's hands. And this we speak
truly from our hearts, of love unfeigned, and without flattery, according to
the rule of S. Paull: being heartily desirous to gain unto your Majesty, the
favor of God, the general, fervent and true love of each degree of your
subjects, unfeignedly: a glorious and immortal good name throughout the earth,
with the immortality of your most sweet and precious soul.

The Lord of heaven and earth work so effectually in your noble heart, that
you may so thoroughly, and so deeply weigh this, and what else we have said
in these few leaves, as to the glory of God, to the safety of your noble
person and honor, and to all your true subjects comforts and preservations, we
may have shortly (in Parliament) this most necessary question (who has most
right to succeed you) lawfully, peaceably and effectually decided and
determined. God grant it for his sweet Christ's his sake.

AMEN.
THIS OBJECTION WAS SENT AND answered, when I was prisoner of the Gate House at
Westminster.
Whereas the Scottish King is now our friend, if the successor were settled,
and the title to the crown given from him to another, he would, after, become
our enemy. And for revenge he would suffer the Spaniards with all their power
to land in his country, and so to enter into ours.

FIVE GENERAL ANSWERS UNTO THIS OBJECTION.
FIrst a wise King may think it very subjects, as there is between the
papists and the Scottish king: for so might the papists join with that strange
power, and either peril or utterly drive him out of his country. And he and
his counsel are to wise to trust wicked and deceitful papists, having had so
good experience of their false hearts, as they have. And there are many
presidents of states greatly perilled, and free cities lost and gotten by this
policy, slender care, and trusting the untrusty. And were it not a good
policy of the Spaniard to win the possession of Scotland by such a
strategeme? For then would he deem England more then half gotten. No, no,
the Scottish king and his counsel are to wise and godly disposed to peril
both the Church of God, and their commonwealth* by trusting of the false
Romish sect, who have set this down for a principle. That no solemn oath,
faith or faithful vow, is to be kept with heretics. Of the which number (in
their judgment) the noble and virtuous Scottish king and his counsel are
numbered, yea, even as the most chief and principal heretics.

If the Scottish king should take offense

To prevent this mischief, I affirm, it

It is a general rule amongst the wise,

To forbear to prevent an apparent for the preventing of a supposed or
imagined peril. I refer to your grave and wise judgments, what wisdom it
were.

NOw let us consider what commodity or benefit would grow to him thereby: or
whither he should not (thereby) make a rod to scourge himself withal?

To the which end I desire to have the questions ensuing considered of.

Whither were he ever the nearer the attaining of Crown of England, if the

Whither will his own experience

Whither the malice that the Spaniards, and all the princes of the league of
Trent, do bear unto this land, be not chiefly for Religion?

If it be for Religion, whither the like

Whither, if one self same cause, move

Whither were it good policy, wisdom,

Whither Scotland were able to resist

Whither the Scottish King desire or

If by right and good title, what prejudice or offense were it unto him to have
it judged and established by act of Parliament, whereby he may come by it, and
enjoy it with peace: and with the love and good will of all your nobility, and
commons of this land? For God forbid, that he should not have it willingly
yielded unto him, if it be his right: for god would accurse this land for their
injury and injustice, if they should wrongfullie detain it from him.

If he have no right or title thereunto, would it not be a great benefit unto
him after and great comforts, and also to the preservation of the holy
Religion of Jesus Christ, now established, preached, and openly professed and
taught in both these blessed Realms, the only cause of all the malice to
both, by the Princes of the league.

If the successor were settled by Parliament, lawful, and the most peaceable
means that could be possibly devised) seek and endeavor to preserve both the
Realms of England and Scotland: Both which being fast linked and chained
together with the strong and godly linkes and chains of true love, and
Religion, and with the sure amity thereof: God will so take their parts, and
strengthen them, that they should not need to fear the malice, and enemitie
of any Princes of the earth. And I do persuade my self, that the christian
Scottish king, and his christian nobility, have such a natural love and care
to the preservation of their commonwealth, that if they were conferred with,
they would yield willingly to have his title to the crown, quyetlie,
vprightlie and lawfully judged and determined by Parliament: to the
preservation of both the realms. Sure I am, that both godliness and wisdom
would it should be so: in respect of both their safeties.

I astlie, if it so fall out, that he will (of will) be offended for settling of
the successor, yet it will betoken in us a more godly regard and truth to the
state, rather to offend him by preserving of it, then to please him, either be
perilling of it, or suffering this worthy realm to be utterly subverted. For
it will be (far) an easier matter to recover his favor, being lost, then to
recover the state, being overthrown: And the state is, and ought to be a
Jewel of greatest price, and of most account with us, next unto the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

Sure I am, and in reason it cannot be avoided, but the time will come (and the
wisest knows not how soon) that if this title be not quietly determined and
settled by authority of Parliament in her Majesty's life (the which God long
lengthen) that both the realms of England and Scotland, will dolefullie rue
it. For they both are like to become (through their ungodly dissension) prays
for a strange people. O woeful, cruel and lamentable time, Let such as sit at
the helm, and rule the stearns of the ships of both these our commonwealths
(with great care) have dutiful regard unto this weighty service in time, if
there be in the^ either love natural care to posterity, or pity and
compassion to avoid the shedding of so much innocent blood, by many bloody
battles, as may make rivers to run. Let such (eftsoons I say) as rule the
stearns of both the commonwealths of England and Scotland, lovinglie and
kindly confer, consult and prevent the overthrowes of both Church and
commonwealthes in both their countries, and that spedily: for the holy Ghost
says, whatsoever Ezra 7. 23.
is by the commandment of the God of heaven, let it be done speedily for the
house of the God of heaven: for why should he be wroth with the king and his
children. And I think it no presumption to affirm, that princes and
magistrates are ordained and commanded of God, to preserve both Gods Church and
Gods people (as the text says) and that speedily, even when they see them in
unavoidable peril without their helps: and much the more, sithence that
perils may come unexpected and suddenly. And sithence that the wisest knows
not how soon: let wise magistrates and counselors beware of that woeful
counselor, Had I wist: who ever comes to late, and is always a repentant
cou^sellor, remediless.

My simple capacity judges it to be a fearful and presumptuous sin, yea,
and a tempting of God, in both English and Scottish magistrates, to hazard the
precious pearls of the imperial crowns of both these noble realms, upon
the uncertain life of one, albeit never so much wished and desired to be
drawn on length by all true and faithful English hearts: yet, not to be
attained, for God has appointed the certain time, though it be uncertain
and unknown to any. And when that doleful time shall once come, no earnest
wailing, wishing or sighing can recover it again. And so I recommend this
simple labor to your honors wise and grave judgments, deeming, that the
preservation or ruin of the realm of England in this case, will be the same
unto the realm of Scotland: and therefore to be carefully considered of both.

And so to conclude, I may affirm (in my simple judgment) that the settling of
the successor by Parliament, equity and authority, will be an especial good
mean to increase, and long to continue true and faithful love and amity
between our Christian Queen, her christian nobility and commons: and the
christian Scottish king, his christian nobility and commons: albeit the
imperial crown of this worthy realm, should be given (after her highness
decease) from the said Scottish king: sithence he and his nobility may
(hereby) plainly and evidentlie see, that we kindly desire and embrace his
love, and neither envy him nor his title: neither (yet) his rule nor
government: but desire (only) that the right may be carefully and vprightlie
examined, sought our, and given to him, to whom (of right) it duly
appertains: whereby God may give a blessing to both these noble Realms for
this heavenly justice, by means whereof, the unnatural and ungodly subversion
of both these worthy commonwealths may be avoided.

If the Scottish king were conferred with in this matter of great importance,
as much concerning his safety and the safety of his realm, as the safety of
our state, and should refuse and deny this godly and quiet trial offered in
the ellevinth question: thereby perilling both these worthy Commonwealths:
it would wound all hearts. And God (in his justice) would revenge himself, who
is the Lord of anger, and the mighty revenger. Nahum. 1. 2.
And the Prophet Ezekiell says, As Ezech. 35. 6.
I live (says the Lord God) I will prepare thee unto blood, except thou hate
blood, even blood shall pursue thee.

FINIS.
A TREATISE CONTAINING M. WENTWORTHS IVDGEMENT CONCERNING THE PERSON OF THE
TRVE and lawful successor to these Realms of England and Ireland.

WHEREIN THE TITLE IS BRIEFLY AND PLAINLY SET down: DOLMANS objections
refuted, and inconveniences removed.

Made two years before his death, but published a year after his death for
the public benefit of this Realm.

IMPRINTED 1598.

A TREATISE CONTAINING M. VVentvvorth his Judgment of the heir apparent.
SIR, I have received your letters, by the which you crave my opinion for the
drift of DOLMANS book, and further what I think for the person of the true
sucessor. Sir, my judgment in my own conceit is but weak, and I would The
occasion of this treatise.
be loath to diue into such questions as may increase my affliction. But yet
as conscience does bind me to communicate my small measure of knowledge upon
good respects with all those that seek not to entrap me, (as the late L.
Chancellor did at the Counsel table) but to inform themselves of the right,
in a matter so highly importing them, that they may be able to discern
between error and truth. So I am first to discharge this duty to you, and to
those your friends whom you do mention, by reason of many other great bonds.
I pray you be careful how you impart it: the times are ticklish, and the
handling of this question very dangerous, although conscience and sound
policy do require that even they who forbid it, should most of all others
search it out, and earnestly debate it: for as we now find in experience
by this book, the most dangerous practice which the enemies and traitors to
our state could ever have used for the undermining of the same, is by such
seditious and pernicious courses, to overwhelme the light and right of
succession, with so great darkness, as the judgments not only of the
multitude, but even of many of the better sort may be dazeled: and when the
time of trial shall come, they may be stricken with such a dump and amazement as
they shall not discern what to do, or whom to follow. So the merciless sword
shall give judgment with them that may be strongest, and our country which is
now populous, wealthy, and renowned for valor, shall be by our own hand
dispeopled, wasted, tread under foot, and made a byword by the proud enemy.
Al which might be easily prevented, if it would please God to move our dread
sovereign to take to heart that humble petition which in the conscience of my
bounden duty to God, her Majesty, and my country, I did exhibit to her
highness: and for which now I patiently suffer, though most guiltless, not
only in my own conceit, but even in the judgment of my Lord Tresurer: who as
he affirmed at the counsel table, had three several times perused my book,
and found no thing but what he thought to be true and stood assured would at
last come to pass. But as he then said her Majesty had determined, that that
question should be suppressed so long as ever she lived. Good Sir, God has
his own work going on, which no man shall stay, whither it be for our good (as
I hope and most heartily wish or otherways, and on his will I willingly
rest, that has appointed a time for every purpose under heaven.

As for the book, this is my opinion in few words. That no man can in reason
expecte to gather grapes of thorns, or The authors opinion of Dolmans book.
think any good can be intended to our Queen and country by a Spanish
hearted papist. His name does forewarne you of his deceit, which cleerelie
appears in every part of his book. His purpose is plain to work our
dissension, debate and destruction. The book is no fuller of lines then of
lies, which are countenanced most times with the credit of noble men, other
whiles floorished and glazed with sentences and textes of Scripture,
impudentlie dissuading the trial of succession, which every favorer of our
good does wish: it gives title to many, who have no reason to be touched with
any such matter, and closlie impeaches the right and government of our
gracious Queen. It is wisely suppressed, not for that it carries any other
force or greater matter then gross forgeries and palpable lies: but because
our people are weak and simple in this question, and may be easily seduced,
being barred to look into it: notwithstanding they stand charged by their
duty to God and their country, to examine and search out the same. I have not
a little stood with some of my friends, whither this question was more to be
regarded then the matter of discipline. And I think by such practices, we have
sufficient proof, that this is the foundation and pillar, on which the Realm
and Religion does rest. It is to no purpose to answer him, for we shall never
be without gainsayers, even against the cleerest truths, yet in this my
discourse I will briefly touch in their own places, some things which he has
craftily foisted in, applying himself closlie and covertlie to the
dispositions of our nation, especially of the common sort, that he may the
more forcibly persuade the doubtfulnes of the right of succession, and so
distract us in minds, and turn our forces against our selves. As for any
thing else that is in the said book, I say with Solomon, that a fool is not to
be answered in his foolishnes, when the answering may imply some estimation or
conceit of that which of it self is just nothing, but yet by answering may
be thought to be something.

For my opinion of the right of succession, it were fitter it came after then
went The Authors opinion concerning the true successor which was the second
point that was demanded.
before a Parliament, as I told my Lord Chancellor: for this matter does
rather require the mouth of all England, then of any one man: yet without
prejudice to any second person, I will tell you truly what I do discern,
and what I would speak, if I were to reason this matter in a free Parliament.
But first I must confess, and you and many of my friends well know, that I
have somewhat fleeted and altered concerning some points of this question: yet
at this present I am of that mind, and so, as I think, shall be still, that the
right shall be found in this king of Scots to succeed to her, to whom we The
King of Scots next lawful successor to her Majesty proved by the pedigree
wish, if it may please God, the length of Noah or Methuselahs days: my
reasons I will first allege, and then answer to such objections as are to be
met withal.

First I take this ground as yielded, that you and every loyal and true
hearted Englishman will freely confess, if the Lady Margaret, the eldest
sister of King Henry 8. were at this present alive (the line of her brother
ceasing in our gracious Queen) that she I say should without all controversy
be received, and by all England acknowledged to be the only righteous and true
heir to her Majesty, and that all others should give place to that her right.
Now seeing the said king is the very next in descent from her, and by a
lawful, unstained and unblemished line by both parents, what conscience or
reason can warrant us to defeat him, her next heir of that right, which by
just devolution is come to him, and which we (by our own confessions) stand
bound to have yielded to her, if she had at this day been living to have
received it.

Now to come to the objections which Objections made by Dolman and others
aganist the king of Scots answered.
are made against this reason, and which seem to be of some value, they are
handled at large by the Bishop of Rosse in his former book, but better in a
late treatise privilie put out in his name, and in my small judgment, well in
that book which at our last conference you had in your hands. I will therefore
deal with such points, as none of the former have fully satisfied, or were
not acquainted with, and with such as carries some weight with some of our
friends. And these, Sir, are of two sorts: either such as directly assault his
right or then such as yielding that he has the best right, do notwithstanding
maintain that the Parliament may (for great regard and respects importing
this Realm) transfer his right from him to some other, whom it shall think
good to make choice of. The impedimentes that are alleged to bar his right
are three: the first general against his country and foreign birth: the
other two are particular against the two branches of his fathers and mothers
lines. 1. Objection of foreign birth.


The impediment by reason of his birth, is grounded upon a statute made anno 25
Edwar. 3. which though by Rosse and the rest it be very well answered, yet
two difficulties to such as understand not the statute, seem to remain. The
first is, that notwithstanding diverse praesidents may be brought of strangers
who have obtained the crown before the making of the said statute, yet none
can be alleged who since the making of the same has got it. The other is,
that her Majesty within these few years, has taken the opinion of some
Judges and Sergeants at law, concerning the meaning of the words, Enfants du
Roy, which, as is said they expounded to be no further extended then to the
first degree. For answer to the former, the reason is plain, why no stranger
came to the crown since the making of this statute, not because the statute was
or could be any let, but because there was no stranger since that time before
the now king of Scots, that could make any claim to the crown. To the
second, with reverence to the places of the said Judges be it spoken, if their
resolution was such, the proviso or exception of Enfants du Roy in the first
degree, that is the Kings immediate children, carries neither sense nor reason
for they can not be said in any respect to be begotten of Parents out of the
kings allegiance, being indeed begotten of the King himself, of whom it were
very absurd to say that he were under or out of allegiance: but if you say
they meant by the first degree the kings sons children, or his nephews, why
I pray you should they more be called Enfants du Roy, then his Nephews
children, or their Nephews, seeing there is the like reason for both. Now for
full answer to this objection of his country, I will set against this opinion
of the Judges and Sergeants and all other private opinions or expositions of
any men whatsoever, a public judgment of the Lords Justices of both benches
given in the Kings bench Term. Michael. 13. and 14. of the Queen, concerning a
Scottish-man who was arrained in the said bench upon an indictment of rape, and
he having pleaded, not guilty, and a Venire facias being adwarded, a Jury
returned, and three of his Jury sworn, he did then plead that he was a
Scot borne, and prayed in regard he was a stranger (as he did allege for
himself) the benefit which by our Laws is afforded to strangers, to wit, to
have Medietatem linguae, that is, the half of the Jurors to be of his own
countrie-men. But by the judgment of the saides Justices he was denied it,
for that a Scot was not to be accounted in England for a stranger, but rather a
subject: and also that the language of the Scots is no strange language, but
mere English. etc. And this judgment thus given with these reasons is extant
Term. Mich. 13. and 14 Reg. Eliz. 51.
and to be seen in M. Dyers cases, as the meanest stude^t in the Innes of
Court knows.

Against his Fathers line is objected, that Lady Margaret Douglas his
grandmother The 2. objection concerns a stain in his fathers line, by
alleged bastardise of Lady Margaret Douglas fully answered.
was base, her father Archebald Earl of Angus having a former wife at the time
of his marriage with her mother the Lady Margaret Teuther: for which cause also
the said Lady Margaret Teuther did afterward sue a divorce, and took to
husband one Henry Steward, who was afterward created Lord Methven. For
answer, the allegation of the former marriage, and it to be the cause of the
divorce which ensued, cannot choose but seem ridiculous to every man that
shall hear of it. For to what purpose should so noble an Earl without any
cause have formerly married in a corner: or who will once think that his wife
(alleged to have been alive) would not have made some hinderance or stop, at
least some challenge at the time of his marriage with the Lady Margaret
Teuther. So as this Lady might more easily and honorably have shrunk back
from the marriage and avoided it before it was solemnized, then to have sought
to dissolve it, it being once accomplished: and admit that this was the cause,
yet it can stand with no reason that she should defer it whole four years
and more, and after all this while to seek then to be divorced from him, when
he had issue by her. But they that are but meanly acquainted with the
Scottishe histories knows that this is, non causa pro causa, and that the true
cause was, because the Earl fell in love with a gentle woman of Douglas-dale,
whom he kept as his concubine, which his Lady took so to heart, as she would
never be reeonciled to him after, that by this act he had defiled her bed such
was her Princely mind. And it is reported of king James the fifth that he was
accustomed to ask such of his servants as were most inward with him, whither
the said gentlewoman were fairer then his mother. So this act of the Earl of
Angus falling out about some four years after the birth of the Lady See
Holins. compare page 303. with 306. in the Scottish history.
Margaret Douglas his daughter, can no whit stain or embase her in blood, being
begot and borne in lawful marriage.

But for further proof of the legitimation, she was always by all men taken
and reputed as the sole and only heir to the Earl of Angus, and served (as
they call it) by the Scottish laws to the said Earedome, and had all the
evidences and writtings Page 335.
of the same delivered to her, as to whom of right they did appertain. But
upon the marriage of her son the Lord Darnlie with the late Queen of Scots,
she was content, at the said Queens instance to permit and yield the said
Earldom to the disposing of the Queen, according her best liking, which
honor and Earldom the said Queen of Scots did bestow upon Archbald late
Earl of Angus, Fran. Thine in his supplem to Holinshed.
all which you may see at large in the Scottish and English Chronicles. And my
Lord Douglas, who at this present has his lodging in Lyme-street, was the man,
as I take it, that was sent from the said Queen to the Lady Margaret, being
then prisoner in the Tower, to treat of the resignation of the Earledom, with
this message, It was a well lost Earldom which brought home a kingdom. These
are sound proofs that the L. Margaret was no bastard, and that this which is
brought to impeach her legitimation, being truly delivered, does maynlie
strengthen the same. For mine own part, I make no question (if her Majesty
would be pleased) but that my Lord Treasurer, who has sifted this matter more
then any man, and who is esteemed of all men to be wary and wise enough, and
not to be any of the Scottishe Kings greatest friends, would venture Sir
Roberts young son (though he be under years) upon Lady Arbella, and her
title, albeit it come by this only branche of the Lady Margaret Douglas, and
come also even in it a degree after the king and his children. And that you may
the better believe me, I pray you be remembered what attempt my Lord made for
one of Sir Thomas his sons. To conclude this point, whatsoever right my L.
does give by this branch to the said king collaterallie with Lady Arbella, I
see no reason why any other man should seek to take it from him, knowing that
most men comes short of my Lord in the search and knowledge of this matter:
but very few, or none short of my L. in favor and affection toward him.

The objection made against his mothers line, is not so much the argument of
any competitor or any of their favorers, or the doubt of any of the
skilfuller and better sort, as a scruple bred in the minds of the common
people, arising from I know not what buzing report of an act of Association,
the truth of which is this. During the custody of the Scottishe Queen, there
were diverse conspiracies practiced by Jesuits, and other Papists and
male-contentes against our Sovereign Lady, not without the knowledge and
privitie of the said Queen, which course of conspiracies and treasons, when
the LL. of her Majesty's most honorable privy council did discern that they
could by no means stop, so long as the Scottish Queen lived: and withal,
that the only remedy to prevent them, was, that the Law should take place for
her trial. Yet fearing that her execution (if she should be found guilty)
might be the cause of great sturres and troubles by reason of her great
factions in the neighbor Realms, and of her favorers in this land, it seemed
good to them, for withstanding and repressing of such commotions (if any
should ensue) and for the better maintenance of the peace and tranquillity
which the state did enjoy, to make an act of Association, the tenor whereof,
for your better satisfaction and further instruction, I have thought good to
set down at large, as follows.

AN INSTRVMENT OF ASsociation, for the preservation of the Queens Majesty's
person made An. 1584. and confirmed by an act of Parliament Anno Reg. Eliz. 27.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has ordained Kings, Queens, and Princes, to have
dominion and rule over their subjects, and to preserve them in the profession
and observation of the true Christian Religion, according to his holy Word and
commandment, and in the like sort, that all subjects should love, fear and
obey their Sovereign prince, being king or Queen, and to the uttermost of
their power at all times vvithstand, pursue and suppress all manner of
persons that shall by any means entend and attempt any thing dangerous and
hurtful to the honors, states and persons of their Sovereigns. Therefore
we, whose names are, or shall be subscribed to this writing, being natural
borne subjects of this Realm of England, and having so gracious a Lady,
Elizabeth by the ordinance of God, our most rightful Queen reigning over us
these many years, with great felicity, to our inestimable comfort: and
finding of late by diverse depositions, confessions and sundry aduertisements
out of foreign parts, from credible persons well known to her Majesty,
counsel, and diverse others, for the furtherance and advancement of some
pretended titles to the crown of this Realm, it has been manifest that the
life of our most gracious Sovereign Lady has been most trait erouslie and
diuelishlie sought, and the same follovved most dangerously to the peril of
her person, if Almighty God her perpetual defender, of his mercy had not
revealed and withstood the same: by whose life we, and all others her
Majesty's true and loyal subjects do enjoy an inestimable benefit of peace
in this land: DO FOR the reasons and causes before alleged, not only
acknovvledge our selves most justly bound, with our bodies, lives, lands, and
goods, in her defense and for her safety, to pursue and suppres all such
mischeuous persons and all other her enemies of what nation or degree soever
they shall be, or by what color and title they shall pretend to be her enemies,
or attempt any thing against her person, but we do also think it our most
bounden duties, for the great benefit of peace, wealth, and godly government
which we have more plentifully received these many years under her Majesty's
government, then our forefathers have done in any longer time of any other her
progenitors kings of this Realm, to declare, and by this writing make
manifest our bounden duties to our said Sovereign Lady for her safety. And to
this end, we and every of us, first calling to mind the holy name of the
Almighty God, do voluntarly and willingly bind our selves every one of us to
the other iointlye and seuerallye in the bond of a firm and loyal society:
And hereby swear and promise before the Majesty of Almighty God, that with
our whole powers, bodies, lives, lands and goods, with our children and
servants, we and every one of us will faithfully serve and humbly obey our
said Sovereign Lady against all estates, dignities and earthly powers
whatsoever, and will asvvell with our joint as particular forces during our
lives vvithstand, offend and pursue asvvell by force of arms, as by all other
means of revenge, all manner of persons of whatsoever estate they shall be
and their abettors, that shall by any act, counsel, or consent do any thing
that shall tend to the harm of her Majesty's royal person. And we shall never
desist from all manner of forcible pursuit against all persons to the uttermost
extermination of them, their counselors, aiders and abettors. And if any such
wicked attempt against her Royal person shall be taken in hand or procured,
whereby any that has, may, or shall pretend title to come to this croun by
the untimely death of her Majesty so wickedly procured (which God for his
mercies sake forbid) may be advanced, We not only svvear and bind our selves,
not only jointly but severally, never to accept avovv, or favor, any such
pretended successors, by whom, or for whom any such detestable act shall be
committed or attempted, or any that may any way claim by or from such a
person or pretended successor as is aforesaid, by whom or for whom such an
act shall be atte^mpted or committed, as unworthy of any government in any
Christian Realm or civil society. But do also vovv and further protest, as
we are most bound, and that in the presence of the Eternal and everliving
God, to prosecute such person or persons to the death with our joint and
particular forces, and to take the uttermost revenge of the^, that by any
means possible we, or any of us can devise, and do, and cause to be devised
and done, for their utter overthrow and exstirpation. And to the better
corroboration of this our loyal Bond and Association, We do also testify by
this Writting, that We do confirm the contents hereof, by our oaths
corporal taken upon the holy Evangelists, with this express condition,
that no one us shall for any respect, or persons, or causes, or for fear or
reward separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution
thereof, during our lives, upon pain to be by the rest persecuted and
suppressed, as perjured persons, and as public enemies to God and our Queen,
and our native country. To which punishment and pains We do voluntarlie
submit our selves, and every of us, without benefit of any exception to be
hereafter challenged by any of us under any color or pretext. In witness
of al which premises to be inuiolably kept, We do to this vvriting put our
hands and seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit any other
hereafter to this our society and association.

Dated An. Dom. 1584.
THis Act was made up into several instruments, and sent to several shyres
for obtaining a general approbation and consent under the noble-mens and
gentle-mens hands and seals, whereunto many of a preposterous zeal, did
redilie yield: diverse of the wiser sort, of all degrees and states of persons
refused modestly to ratify and confirm the same: because by due examination
hereof they perceived that the general words therein contained might easily
be wrested to a very hard construction, contrary to equity, and the minds
of the makers thereof. And further they judged it unconscionable that such as
might pretend title to the crown, being in their own persons guilty of no
heinous offense, (though they by whom they should claim were convict
thereof) should utterly from hence be debarred of their right. This opinion
howsoever it displeased men at that instant, yet at the Parliament ensuing the
same being duly weighed, an act was made which limited this sharp penalty,
only to the persons offending, without any prejudice to their heirs, if they
were not consenting to any wicked act or attempt, devised or enterprised
against her Majesty. Which act of Parliament because it strengthens and
expounds the former act of Association, and cleerlie dissolveth this great
doubt, which Dolman esteems vnsoluble, I have here set down, as it is in the
original records.

ANNO 27. ELIZ. CAP. 1.

FOrasmuch as the good felicity and comfort of the whole estate of this Realn,
confisteth only next under God, in the surety and preservation of the Queens
most excellent majesty: and for that it has manifestly appeared, that sundry
wicked plots and means have of late been devised and laid as well in foreign
parts beyond the seas, as also within the Realm, to the great endangering of
her highness most royal person, and to the utter ruin of the whole common
weal, if by Gods merciful providence the same had not been revealed.
Therefore. for preventing of such great perils as might hereafter otherwise
grow by the like detestable and devilish practices, at the humble suit and
earnest petition and desire of all the LL. spiritual and temporal, and the
commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority thereof, BE
IT enacted and ordained, if at any time after the end of this present Session
of Parliament, any open invasion or rebellion shall be had or made, into or
within any of her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, or any act attempted tending
to the hurt of her Majesty's most Royal person, by or for any person that shall
or may pretend any title to the crown of this Realm after her Majesty's
decease, or if any thing shall be compassed or imagined tending to the hurt of
her Majesty's most Royal person by any person* or by the priuity of any person
that shall or may pretend title to the crown of this Realm, THAT THEN, by her
Majesty's commission under her great seal, the LL. and others of her Majesty's
privy counsel, and such other LL* of Parliament to be named by her Majesty,
as with the said number of the privy counsel shall make up the number of 24*
at the least, having with them for their assistance in that behalf, such other
of the Judges of the Courts of Record at Westminster as her highness for
that purpose shall assign or appoint, or the more part of the same Counsel,
Lords, and Judges shall by virtue of this act have authority to examine al and
every of the offenses aforesaid, and all circumstances thereof, and thereupon
to give sentence or judgment, as upon good proof the matter shall appear
unto them. And that after such sentence and judgment given and declaration
thereof made and published by her Majesty's proclamation under the great seal
of England, ALL PERSONS against whom such sentence or judgment shall be so
given and published, shall be excluded and disabled for ever to have or claim,
or pretend to have or claim the crown of this Realm, or of any her Majesty's
Dominions, any former Law or statute whatsoever notwithstanding. And that
thereupon all her highness subjects shall and may lawfully by virtue of this
act, and her Majesty's direction in that behalf, by all forcible and possible
means pursue to death every such wicked person by whom or by whose means,
assent, or priuitie, any such invasion or rebellion shall be in form
aforesaid denounced to have been made, or such wicked act attempted, or any
other thing compassed or imagined against her Majesty's person, and all their
actors, comforters and abettors.

If any such detestable act shall be execute against her Majesty's most
royal person, whereby her self shall be taken away (which God of his great
mercy forbid) that then every such person by or for whom, any such act shall
be executed Mark this clause.
* and their issue being in any wise assenting and privy to the same, shall
by virtue of this act be excluded and disabled for ever to have or claim or
to pretend to have or claim the said crown of this Realm or any other her
Majesty's Dominions, etc. AND TO the end the intention of the Law may be
effectually executed, if her Majesty's life shall be taken away by any
violent or unnatural means (which God defend)

BE IT further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the LL. and others
which shall be of her Majesty's privy Counsel, at the time of her decease,
or the more part of the same counsel joining to the^ for their better
assistance, five other Earls, and seven other LL. of Parliam* at the least,
(foreseeing that none of the said Earls, LL. or counsel be known to be
persons that may make any title to the crou^) choose persons which were chief
Justices of either bench, master of the Rolls and chief Baron of the
Exchequer, at the time of her Majesty's death, or in default of the said
Justices, master of the Rolls, and chief Baron some other of those which were
Justices of some of the Courts of record at Westminster at the time of her
decease, to supply their places, or any 24. or more of them, whereof eight to
be LL. of Parliament, not being of the privy counsel, shall to the uttermost
of their power and skill, examine the cause and manner of such her Majesty's
death, and what persons shall be any way guilty thereof, and all circumstances
concerning the same, according to the true meaning of the Act* and thereupon
shall by open proclamation publish the same without any delay by all forcible
and possible means prosecute to death all such as shall be found to be
offenders therein, and all their aiders and abettors. And for the doing
whereof, and for the withstanding and suppressing of any such powers and force
as shall any way be levied and sturred for the disturbance of the due
execution of this Law, they shall by virtue of this act have power and
authority not only to raise and use such forces as shall in that behalf be
needful and convenient, but also use all other things and means possible and
necessary for the maintenance of the same forces, and prosecution of the same
offenders. And if any such force shall be levied or sturred in disturbance of
the execution of the Law by any person that shall or may pretend any title to
the crown of this Realm, whereby this Law may not in all things be fully
execute, acording to the true effect and meaning of the same, THAT then every
such person shall by virtue of this act be excluded and disabled for ever to
have or claim or to pretend to have or claim the crown of this Realm, or of
any other her Majesty's Dominions, any other form, Law, or statute whatsoever
to the contrary.

BE IT further enacted, etc. That all and every the subjects of her Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, shall to the uttermost of their power aid and assist the
said Counsel, and al other the Lords and other persons to be adjoined to them
for assistance as is aforesaid in all things to be^ done and executed according
to the intention and effect of the Law. And that no subject of this Realm
shall in any wise be impeached in body, lands, or goods, at any time
hereafter for any thing to be done or executed, according to the tenor of the
Law, any Law or statute heertofore made to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And whereas of late many of her Majesty's good and faithful subjects* ha^^
in the (...) of God, and with the testimony of good conscience, by one
uniform manner of writing under their hands and seals, and by their several
oaths voluntarily taken, joined themselves together in one bond and
association, to withstand to the uttermost all such malicious actions and
attempts against her Majesty's Royal person. Now for the full explaining of
all such ambiguities and questions, as otherwise might happen to grow by any
sinister or wrong construction or interpretation to be made or inferred of or
upon the words and meaning thereof: BE IT DECLARED and enacted, etc. That the
same association, and every article and sentence therein contained, as well
concerning the disallowing, excluding, and disabling of any person that may or
shall pretend any title to come to the crown, as also for the pursuing and
taking revenge of any person for any such attempt, shall, or ought to be in
all things expounded and adjudged according to the true intent and meaning of
this act, and not otherwise, nor against any other person or persons etc.

THese acts of association and Parliament Dolmans ignorance.
are by Dolman confounded, as if they were both one, uncertain, whither of
gross ignorance or deep malice. In the margent he calls them the statute of
association, whereby if he mean the act of association severallie, it seems
he knew not the statute which expounds the act, and gives it the force that
it has, and without which it may be as lightly rejected, as it is by him
weightily urged: for it is well known, that by this act of association all
were not bound, seeing many refused to sign and seal the same, doubting what
particulars might be carried under general terms. Next, these instruments
bound only the parties agreeing, of whom a great number are now dead, whose
heirs succeeding to their fathers places in the commonwealth, must also renew
in their own persons their fathers bonds, before the same prove any thing
prejudicial. Thirdly, many did yield for fear or facility, who without all
question for such like respects will be also content to yield to the contrary.
Lastly, it was a private order, and no act of Parliament, and thereupon could
be of no force or strength to bind as a law, before it was confirmed by
Parliament. And to yield a little further, though all the hands and seals in
England had been got to it, yet it could not truly have been got to it, yet
it could not truly have been esteemed or thought to be, or have the force of
an act of parliament, seeing they were not freely and jointly given, but
secretelie and severallie urged and begged: whereby it is manifest that this
matter is more in show and report, then in substance and effect.

Again, if by this statute, he mean the Ormalice.
act of Parliament ratefying and allowing the act of association, he
manifestly bewrays his impudency and rooted malice against the Scottish
king, in misalleaging the words of the statute: for whereas the statute binds
not the heirs of any that should attempt or procure the Queens death, or be
privy or accessory to the same, to any penalty of loss of their right,
claim, title, pretense or action, that they have or may have to the crown of
England, unless they be consenting thereunto. On the contrary, Dolman
wittinglie and willingly, against his own conscience (as it seems) perverteth
the statute, and in alleging of it, leaves out that clause, which he knew
would make most against him, and cleerelie dissolve that doubt, which before
he judged to admit no solution.

But without doubt, if Dolman was impudent in falsifying the statute, he will
peradventure be nothing ashamed to advouch, that the Scottish king was privy
to his mothers conspiracies, thereby to make that clause (of the heirs not
consenting) frustrate and of no benefit to him. A shameless person may
affirm what he will, but this were an hard matter to prove, and contrarily,
it is an easy matter to disprove it: for who knows not that this were a most
malicious slander, seeing in all the examinations and depositions of such as
were convicted for her actions, nothing could be found that might sound that
way: neither indeed was it possible: for the actions of the mother and the
son was so far different, as the East is from the West: the one a papist
and a maintainer of superstition: the other a protestant and enemy to all
superstition: the one adhering to that which was falsely called the holy
league: the other puklikely opposed himself to the same, and motioned a
counterleague: the one a follower and favourer of the house of Guise, the most
pernicious enemy that Engl. had in their time, the other in a manner ruled and
governed by our Sovereign, the surest and firmest friend she has in Europe,
as plainly appeared An. 1588. And briefly the whole frame and course of their
lives was in some sort one opposite to the other.

But to proceed further, though I should admit that this clause were left
out, and that the statute, as Dolman alleges, took hold, not only upon the
parties offending, but also upon their heirs, yet the Scottishe king can not
be prejudiced in this case of the crown, if he may have the benefit of the like
preside^ts to lean unto, that others before him have had, without fetching
foreign examples, which might be infinitely alleged: I will content my self
with the proof of that which I affirm in two kings of this realm of late
memory, Edward 4. and Henry 7. who were by Parliaments attainted, and holden
convicte of high treason, notwithstanding this was no impediment or hinderance
to them to bar them from enjoying the crown when their time came. I am not
ignorant that it was answered by some concerning them two and such others,
that they came to the crown as being called by Parliament, and not by any
virtue and force of their right. But it may be more truly replied to the^ that
they tell but a tale: for all Engl. knows that they came in before they were
sent for by Parliament, and claimed it by sword before they were called or then
they might have gone without it for ever. Nay, the Parliaments did no otherwise
admit them at all, but in regard of their rights and claims. And who doubts
that the house of Huntington should have good right, if the former rights were
spent and ceased, notwithstanding the most of them by whom it does claim,
were by King Henry the eight, and his father King Henry the seventh for
treasons cut off, and their attainders Margaret countess of Salisburie and her
son Henry Poole.
allowed by Parliament. I think verily the Scottishe King is to look for no
less favor then so lately her Majesty's grandfather and great grandfather
have had: yea, and all they which since that time without any question or
impeachement have enjoyed the scepter by them, and which others may hope for if
it shall come to their turn. And the rather that his love to our Prince and
country, and the friendship and amity by him maintained has been firmer and
surer during all his reign, then it was in the time of any his progenitors,
notwithstanding he has had greater occasions of greevances, and they more
bonds which might have tied them unto us. M. Bows making relation of some of
the Kings Christian speeches, protested, that he has heard the King say many
times, that he would not be touched so much as in thought with a desire of her
Majesty's death, if it might gain him the present possession of all her
dominions: yea of all the realms and kingdoms of the world. And he added
further that he heard him discourse most wisely and religiously of the
impiety and madness of some men, who by the just judgments of God have
defeated themselves for ever, of that, which in due season they might have come
unto, if they had not followed perverse and wicked courses to compass it, before
the just time at which they should have got it. Lastly, to admit with Dolman
that this statute was good and of sufficient force to bar the Queen of
Scots, and all such as might claim that way, yet all this cannot defeat or
hinder the Scottishe King of that right which comes in to him by his father,
and which has the first and next place, if his mothers title should abate and
surcease, as I have already sufficiently prooved.

But this abuse and deceiving of the common people by mis-reporting the tenor
and intent of the act of Association is (by the like means of whispering and
muttering in the ears of the ignorant) seconded with an other suggestion and
slander more gross and impudent then the former, for the better persuading and
helping forwards (as it may seem) of the other error. So as both of them does
appear to be derived from the same fountain. And this is it forsooth, that
as the Scottishe King is debarred from the The opinion of conferring to the
Queen by Parliament the establishing of the successor by her last will confuted.
crown by one act of Parliament, so her Majesty by another act of Parliament
has the disposing of it referred to her last will, of purpose to defeat the
said King, as they would bear us in hand. As though her Majesty were
deprived of memory and reason, and had quite forgotten the fruit of such
pretended wills of her noble brother and father, or delited to follow and
embrace such courses by which her sister and she, were like to have lost their
kingdoms, liberties and lives: or that through ignorance she does undergo
too weghtie a burden for the whole kingdom to bear: to wit, to dispose of
the crown by discretion, and sees not, that she does sow the seed of
horrible miseries, which are to spring and grow from so crabbed and wicked
root. But if they will not have her so forgetful and senseless, as I am sure
they will not, then are they more injurious to her: who does make her to seek
purposelie to embarke her most faithful and loyal subjects in most furious
and raging seas of dole-full calamities after her death, whom she has been so
careful to preserve in all her lifetime: and withal will have her (contrary
to al her most princely courses) to be more led with an unjust respect of
some person, her affection, or will, then to be ruled with the due regard of
good right, the true heir, equity, and reason. They deserve ill her gracious
favors who weigh not (so as their lies may take place) how highly they
derogate from her sacred honor. How deeply they impeache her of falsehood in
violating her promises and leagues, made and ratified with the Scottish king,
and his mother, and so often renewed before most honorable witnesses of both
the Realms, and by many Ambassadors at several times. I mervaile strangely
how they can be ignorant of her Majesty's most excellent and most wise speech
delivered to Metland the Scottish Ambassador concerning this same purpose,
about the third year of her reign, which is extant to the view of all those
that can or will read the same, both in our Chronicles which are Cum
Privilegio, and in the Scottish Chronicles permitted to be used here freely
of all men. Her speeches were so Princely and royal, and so manifestly
known both to the English and Scots, that Buchannan (though he Lib. 17.
was a Scot) could not choose but set them down in the same words, and with
the same grace, to her highness eternal praise and commendation. I will
allege some few sentences only in the authors own words, which may serve
to clear this matter which we have in hand, Si quid (says her Majesty to
the The Queens speech Englished. If it shall please God to call me, yet your
Queen shall never find that I have done any thing which may hurt or impare,
that right which she claims to the kingdom of England in a^^i^te. And I
call God to witness the hearer of this our conference, that I know none, next
to my self, whom I can prefer before her, or if the matter should come in
controversy, that can debar her. You know what the Competitor, are: upon what
confidence of ability or power can those simple things attempt so high a
matter? And I do highly commend the wisdom of your nobleme^, that would
both provide providently for their own safety. and avoid by almeanes the
effusion of christian blood, which I confess could not be saved if any
faction should oppose it self in the claim of the kingdom. But where is
that faction, or by what confidence of any power can it presume so to do.
Scottish Ambassador) mihi humanitus acciderit, nunquam tame^ illud co^periet
(Regina vestra) quicquam a me factum fuisse, quod ius (illud) quod illa sibi in
regnum Angliae esse asseverat, aliqua ex part laedat aut im^^inuat, etc. And a
little after. Ac Deum praesentem nostri sermonis arbitrum testor, me neminem
secundum meipsam nosse, que^ illi praeferam, aut sires in controversiam veniat
(qui) eam possit excludere. Tu qui competant nosti (inquit) quibus ta^dem
opibus, aut quavirium fiducia misellae illae cantam rem attentabunt, etc. And
in the conference of another day. Nec minus prudentiam (procerum vestrorum)
amplector, quod and suae securitati prospiciant, and a fundendo Christian^
sanguine abhorreant: cui fate or parci non posset, si qua factio se obi^ceret
quae regnum sibi vendicaret: Sed quae tandem illa erit, aut quibus viribus
freta. And so forth in the whole course of her most Princely speech. By
which, Sir, you may better discern and learn from her Majesty's own mouth,
then you can by any mal-contents malicious suggestion. First, what is her
opinion concerning the person of the rightful heir, which does not slip from
her vnawarres, and not thinking of it, but is deliberatlie and most advisedlie
delivered, accompanied with an attestation of God the hearer and witness of that
conference. Secondly, that she does not at all dislike the desire of the
Scottish Queen, seeking to have her right made known, for the avoiding of
bloodshed, and such other good respects: notwithstanding she refused to
yield to the demand for many reasons by the author mentioned. Thirdly, that
by her judgment all the rest of the Competitors (which were the^ stronger,
wiser, and much more popular then they that are now) were utterly of no power
or force, to match or encounter with the Scottish Queen. Fourth lie, that she
very well did discern and foresee what merciles effusion of Christian blood
would ensue, if any Competitor should be set up against the true heir.
Lastly, most Princely promises never to impare or impeache in any io^e the
Scottish Queens right. Therefore the impiety of them (who would burden her
highness with such dishonorable practices contrary to her princely word) is
no less damnable then the indignity offered is punishable, for that they make
her who is and has been ever accounted by all estates (according to her Posie
Semper eadem) most constant, The Queens posie Semper Ead^m.
and faithful in all her promises, and leagues, princely and vprightlie
minded in all her speeches, pretenses, and actions, and the very pattern of
true clemency, for that they make her I say wavering, unfaithful, perjured,
deceitful, and the only plotter and contriver of the causes and grounds of
most bloody wars, which by her own confession must fall out amongst
faithful Christians, and such true hearted subjects who have tendered no thing
so much, as her safety and life. To perclose this treatise for his right, if
we may give any credit to her Majesty (who is more to be believed and rested
upon in this case then any subject in England) the Scottishe King needs not to
distrust the strength of his title, or to fear any dishonorable or
unconscionable courses, that shall at any time proceed from her Majesty.

The impediment of king Henry 8. his will is answered by Rosse and the rest,
whom I have alleged: other surmises of records reserved and laid up, I know
not where, to his prejudice, because the opposers did esteem them to be but
waking dreams, and not worthy to be alleged, I likewise pass them over,
as not worthy to be answered, thinking them in this respect wise that they
pestered not their treatises with known untruths and lies, to the discredit
of these things, which otherwise might carry some colorable show, and they
could not be excused of a gross oversight, who stood so much upon testaments
and wills if there had been any likelyhoode of a better record.

Now I come to the other sort of arguments which do maintain that
notwithstanding Dolmans respects answered and retorted.
his right be the best: yet the high Court of Parliament may lawfully give it
from him to some Englishman, whom for the respects ensuing it shall think
fit to make choice. First there be many English Competitours who will hardly
endure a stranger to be preferred before them, for that they shall never be
freed from his jealousy, which cannot be without the danger of their lives, the
disturbance of the quiet and peace of the realm, and that to fortify himself
against them, he shall needs be constrained to bring in foreign forces.
Secondly, all Englishmen will follow English competitours, for we cannot
patiently brook (say some) the government of strangers: and so ioining
together for our countries sake, we need not to fear, but that we shall be
strong enough against the Scottish king and all his confederates. Thirdly, the
two Nations are so alienated or the like, or rather greater.

First, for the power of the Parliament, The Parliament cannot by any authority
it has take away a Kings right to the crown.
according to the bounden duty of a faithful and loyal subject, and the
place which I have been vouchsafed in it. I do acknowledge, and from my heart
confess that it is most sacred, most ample and large and has prerogatives and
preheminences far above any Court what soever, which is established by God
under the heavens. But yet with the confidence of a good conscience I am bold
to advouch that which is the ground and foundation of al disputation in the
Parliament house to wit, That the power and authority which it has, is
straightly stinted and defined with the limits and meeres of justice and
equity: and is appointed by God, as the power next to himself to reform and
redress wrongs and outrages which can not be helped by any other means, and
by good and wholesome laws to procure the peace and wealth of the Realm. So
as, the nearer it is to God, the more sound, sincere and upright it ought to
be, being the Court of most pure and exquisite judgment. If therefore by
presumption of the great power and authority which it has, it do injury to
any man, or do transgress the bonds of right, I say this transgression is
accounted of before God, not as the sin of one private man, one Prelate,
nobleman or Citizen, but as a combination and conspiracy of all the Prelates,
noblemen and Citizens, yea, and of all the people of the whole land, to
pronounce for pure judgment, heinous iniquity from the bench of highest
Justice. To this I add further, that a Prince which has the right (as we
speak) of God, he is the ordinance, not of any man, but of God, appointed and
substituted by God himself, as his deputy for the maintenance of his truth,
and to minister Justice according to the good and wholesome laws of that land
over which he does place him. These grounds thus laid, I say, if the
religious and wise king of Scots (having this right of God, as the alleadger of
these inconveniences do admit) be willing to govern us according to our own
laws (as no question he will) it were the highest injustice that England could
do, for such surmises of imagined inconvenie^ces feared to ensue, to go about
to offer or do to him that wrong, which is appointed, yea before God, in
respect of his right anointed to be the chief Officer and minister of
Justice and right to every of us after her Majesty. So the wickedness of this
fact shall abound in this, if we take from him his best right, who should
preserve us from all sorts of wrongs. But some have answered, that the
Parliament may and has taken the rightful lands and livings of men, and has
repealed the acts and statutes of former Parliame^ts. To this I reply, that as
in a natural body no man can be allowed to cut off a member for blemishe or
imperfection: but is esteemed wisely and rightly to take that member away*
which without the help of such remedy was manifestly discerned to endaunger
the rest. So the members of the politic body may upon the like respect of
danger, and not for likelyhoodes and imaginations, or surmised inconveniences
(such as the alleged) are take away the lands, livings, yea, or life of any
subject. But where is this danger to be showed here? seeing he will peaceably
govern us, with the preservation of our religion and laws. And to say
somewhat further, though our parliament may have that power over every English
subject, as well competitours as others, to take or keep back from them
(because they are under our power, being members of our own body) that which
otherwise is their due and right. Yet it is to be doubted whither it may
likewise take or keep back his good right from the Scottish king, who is no
subject, neither any member incorporated with us, but is the head of an other
politic body. And this is a doubt, or rather Judgment of some of the best
divines in England.

Again, whenever a Parliament is said to have taken away men's lands or
livings, or to have repealed any act or statute of a former Parliament, it is
ever to be understood of lands, livings, and acts, which did concern private
men and not Princes. To whom whatsoever has been given by a free and lawful
Parliament, to stand and to remain to them and their heirs, I think you shall
not find altered or taken away by another free Parliament, unless it were with
the consent of the said Princes, or their heirs to whom it was formerlie
given: take for example the resignation of Richard the second. And therefore I
take this for a sure and sound principle: If all the people of the whole Realm
by common and voluntary consent, for themselves and their posterity, do
transfer and surrender the government of themselves and their state into the
hands of some chosen man, to be governed by him and his heirs for ever,
according to such and such laws, as they shall agree upon, or have already
established: that they cannot in reason (if he be willing to preserve their
laws) think, that that power does yet rest in themselves, of which by consent
of all the people jointly giving, and the Prince receiving, they had formerlie
dispossessed themselves. And if this be true Par non habet potestatem in
parem, then much more this, minor non habet in matore^. And by consequence this
posterity thus dispossessed of the power and interest of bestowing the right,
cannot make void the act of their ancestors, in whom the said power and
right was actuallie and reallie, to dispose of their government before they
bestowed it. Neither can the act of the rest of the members without the head
and against it, be of that power and force that the joined act of the head and
whole members together is. For further proof hereof, when the whole line of
Solomon ceased in Ieconias, could all the Jews in the world by any act, have
given the right of the title from the house of Nathan? Though Salathiell the
next successor of his line was about 38 degrees distant from the said Ieconias,
and the ground of his title above 400. years old (and might therefore have
been weaker more litigious, doubtful and obscure, then it can be in the
Scottish king, who is but the fifth in descent in direct line from the root.
Nay the same Ieconias before his deliverance out of prison M. Broughton
(as is well declared by our famous countrie-man) appointed the said Salathiel
to be his heir apparent, for which respect the Scripture speaks of him, as
of leconias son, saying that he did beget him. And the ambition of the
Machabees, usurping (not without the pretense of many worthy respects) the
government and sword in the weakness of the house of David, escaped not an
horrible judgment of God, who gave them up to slaughter and murder one
another, and to be led with the sprit of errors and doctrine of Devils.
Alexander one of their kings being a Saducie (as many more of them were)
killed 50000. Pharisees. Antigonus another king died with torment. of
conscience, and vomiting blood. Judas and all his brethren fell by the sword,
others were poisoned, almost none died but by violence. And thus by God the
revenger of the oppressed, that ambitious, though valiant, family which
against right had exalted it self, was headlong thrown down and brought to a
most shameful and miserable end. By all which it is most evident and plain,
that not Judas, or Simeon Macchabeus, because they were valiauntest* and for
many true and good respects seemed fittest at that time to have protected and
releeved the oppressed and distressed servants of God: but some Matthan or
Joseph (though very poor and base) because they were most rightful to the
crown, and they being rulers appointed by God should have had the government
and guiding of Judah. And so Sir, to make an end of this first reason, I pray
you think with your self if it should fall out, that the Parliament for many
respects should bestow the crown quite contrary to the expectation of these
men, who stand so precisely for the absolute power and soveraignetie of it:
imagine, I say, that such a thing fell out, do not you think that the case would
be altered with them and perhaps, then would be more bent against it, then
now they are for it, this being always such men's desire to have the
Parliaments follow them, and not they the Parliaments. But the meanest and
simplest in all the land knows this much I hope, that the wisestmen of the
Realm are chosen out and sent to the Parliamentes, not to determine or
establishe whatsoever they will, but to advise, dispute and discern what in
reason and conscience they ought and should determine and conclude.

Secondly, that the Parliament cannot advaunce him: but quite contrary,
because he is next and true heir and successor to such or such a Prince of
late and famous memory, therefore it is his right that the and none else should
be advanced. As who would say: he is not heir or successor because the
Parliament declares him to be so, but because he is so, therefore it is that
the Parliament by right ought and does declare him to be so. Which ground and
reason of the Parliaments doing is so apparent and plain, that the very
usurpers, who were otherwise sequestered from all reason and right, thought it
not sufficient to be established and confirmed by Parliament, unless they had
some ground or show of succession to warrant it withal. So Henry the fourth
did more rest upon the blind pretense of a claim by Edmond crook-back, then
upon the voice of the Parliament, though it were strengthened with the
resignation of Richard the second. Also Richard the third rather then he
would have been without some show of succession, how bare and weak soever,
did Sir Thomas More in the story of his reign.
choose to cause proclaim at Paul's Cross, his mother an harlot, and his
brethren bastards. And thus he sought the kingdom no otherwise, then by right
of succession, as does plainly appear by the determination of his counsel,
Doctor Shawes preaching, and the Duke of Buckinghames speech in King Richards
behalf, to the same effect. By which you see, that even in the conceit of the
usurpers themselves, the most lying, infamous and falsely forged pretense of
next and most lawful blood, is to be preferred before any Parliament, as being
the ground and warrant for justifying and clearing the acts and doings of the
same And if the crown might be lawfully given at the pleasure of a Parliament,
what reason is there to call Rich. 3. or any such others, usurpers: for they
cannot deserve so odious a name, receiving the crown no otherwise, then at the
hand of the parliament. To shut up this second reason, unless the right of
succession were a thing impregnable by any Parliament, by what reason, or with
what face could the Duke of York or Edward the fourth, so boldly and
confidentlie have claimed the crown in the very Parliament it self. Or how
could the Realm of England have adjudged it to them, which by so many
parliaments going before had been confirmed to three several Kings of the
house of Lancaster.

My last reason (which I pray God every man whom it does concern may take
to heart, and chiefly they who are set at the helm) is brought from the
lamentable and bloody fruits which we have reaped by such bastard succession
established by Parliaments. These doleful remembrances should now make us wise
least in the end we be taught by the mistress of fools. Of al these that
since the days of the Conqueror have wrongfullie attained to the crown, and
have had it confirmed by voice of Parliament, who is almost he or she, that
has not been forced to leave it, with an expiation of blood. I do here
refer me to our Chronicles, to the usurpers, their adhaerents and accomplices,
and to a migh tie number also of the guiltless and better side. Yea who does
not know that this manner of wrongful intrusion into the higher powers and
places has often times procured rightful Kings upon jealousy and suspicion to
cut away such of their own blood, as they did fear would take advantage of the
like courses. To conclude these my reasons concerning the limited power of the
Parliaments, I beseech God, that they may rather seek to maintain their
honorable power, by doing that which is conscionable and right, then to
bolster out wrong by the strength of their power, seeing there is no wisdom nor
counsel, nor any strength of man that can prevail against him who does
overruled all things by his omnipotent power.

It follows next to examine the reasons, for which some Englishman may be
thought fitter to be advanced to the government of the realm: notwithstanding
Inconvenience, objected by Dolman in admitting the King of Scots to succeed,
refuted
it be yielded that the king of Scots has the true right. The first is this,
there be many English competitors, who will not endure a stranger to be
preferred before them, for that they shall never be free from his jealousy,
which cannot be without the hazard of their lives, the trouble of the realm,
and that to fortify himself against them, he shall needs be constrained to
bring in foreign forces. To these points I do answer: first, that he is no
stranger as is already proved, and if they be, for them it is so much the
worse, for a kingdom divided against it self cannot long stand, so as this
objection makes more against themselves and our Realm, then against the
Scottishe King: for whosoever get the victory, we are still overthrown, and
this is the only means that will weaken them all. Fourthlie, if any of them
should wrongfullie then to any man else, especially he being a king, and of
such favor, force and affinity with our neighbor Princes. But most of all,
for that they may well think if they do not cleave to him, yet there be many
others of their country that will. Fiftlie, I confess there be more that are
him to defend him in his right. Seventhlie, the title may be tried, and given
to whom of right it does belong: for the throne is not established by
iniquity, but he shall best brook it who should have it by right. By this
means the competitors shall be secured, the seat of the Prince more
fortified, by his good title being acknowledged and confirmed in Parliament,
then ever it could be by any foreign forces: all parties shall be pleased,
and both these noble realms which do at this present enjoy the light of the
gospel, shall be satisfied and settled in peace and tranquillity.

The second reason that is alleged in transferring the right of the Scottishe
reckonings shall find themselves short of the just account: for when the ways
of a man are acceptable to God, he will make all things in league with him:
yea, and his very enemies to become his friends. If therefore the king of
Scots do follow a good cause by good and lawful means, I doubt not but many
thousands will follow him, which we have not as yet thought of. And seeing the
very heathen Arist. 1. ^thi^.
Philosopher preferred truth before his dearest friends, have we any reason
to imagine that faithful Christians in work of justice and equity will
endure to be counted worse then the faithles heathen. What? will they hazard
their consciences for love of their countrie-men? That competitor shall not be
well advised, that trusts any follower, who has more regard of his country
then conscience. The wise will be loath to buy grievous repentance at so high a
rate. Secondly, say (Sir) that all the Englishmen who are not so much led with
affection to us, as they are carried to him with the love of their supposed
kindred and blood, and possessed with the credit of their old prophecy books.
And whom (may we say) do these Englishmen follow, whose leaders being
competitors does adhere to the king, either for hatred of the other, or for
conscience, or for fear, or for hope. Yet I admit he get neither English nor
Walshe, but that both of them stick fast to the English competitours, and
join all their endeavors and forces to aid and assist them. Are we not then
joined together, like joined ropes of sand? We do make a badde choice, me
thinks, to join us to them, that cannot be and will not be joined to
themselves: no, not so much joined as the legs of iron Dan. 2.
and clay. And it may seem a strange paradoxe to a man of understanding, that
rather then we would be friends and subjects to the Scottish king, we are
content to be adversaries and enemies to our selves: and so as we may avoid
him, care not to be overthrown. For though he and his confederates should
willingly forgo us. we are never a whit the better. Nay, then much worse, for
by that means the question of the Competitors is put further of from an end.
The reason is plain, if the first right and best be displaced for some
respects, will there not be as great or greater respects found against the
second and third. I durst pleadge my head, that there would not be wanting
some great and popular personages, who with some respect or aspecte to
themselves would allege greater respects against all the English competitors
then any of these be which are alleged against the king of Scots. And thus
by the competitours and their accomplices, without the help of the Scottishe
king or his confederates, we are made strong enough to destroy our selves for
certane respects. For remedy of this inconvenience, if the right be his, I
think that conscience and our natural affection to the safety of our selves
and our country should make us most willingly and heartily receive him: of
which there may be the better hope conceived, for that our nation is of it
self more inclined to the subjection of our Prince, to obedience to our laws,
to reason and to right, then any other people which is between the two poles.
And who can say for certain whither many have not already received him in
their hearts? The surmises for it are great. What should make us think but
that Protestants would embrace him for love of Religion? Both Protestants and
civil Papists (as I may term them for conscience they have none) for a
regard of his right? the rest of the Papists for fear of an heavier yoke? (for
none of the^ could ever expect greater favor at any successors hands, then
at his, who has already showed himself too too remiss in punishing so many
of his own subjects of their profession: neither is there any co^petitor a
Papist of whom they might look to attain their desires.) Lastly, the Neuters
for hope of advanceme^t which they love as their God, or for fear to hazard
and perish their estate, which they shun and hate as the Devil, would a
thousand to one sooner submit themselves, then in vain oppose to both the
other two. And to conclude this inconvenience, though hand should join in
hand to commit iniquity, yet the Lord of Hosts has means to dissolve, cast
down, cast away, and to destroy: for what the Lord stands for, no Policy
shall stop it.

The third reason for giving the crown to some Englishman from the Scottish
King is, the natural aversion of the two nations, which (as some do affirm)
will never agree though they were made one To this I answer, that it is a bare
presumption without any good ground or warrant. Nay, the contrary is true as
we al see: for during her Majesty's most happy government, we and they by
means of the league and amity of the two Princes have still maintained
brotherly friend ship and peace, in so much that the remembrance of our old
enmity is almost utterly vanished and gone. Now if the concord and league of
the Princes has been able to make and to continue us both quiet after this
sort, why may we not much more be linked in a mitie and sound friendship, when
of two nations we are made one, by the unity of one and the same Prince,
seeking with an indifferent affection the quietness and peace of both Realms,
as being one, like to him self?

Secondly, this reason of the prognosticated dis-agreement to dissuade their
uniting, is in effect, and does so sound in my ear, as if one should say: This
sick and diseased man will hardly brook his Physic, though he should be made
to take it, therefore if you will be advised by me you shall minister him none:
which argument ought rather to be inverted and turned over to this form.
These two Realms could never hitherto agree because they were still kept as
two: therefore to work and settle their agreement, it is absolutely solutelie
necessary, that they be united in one, that the ground and occasion of all
the wars being taken away, al their contentions and battles may likewise sur
cease. But if any man be so weak to believe, that because the discord of the
two Nations has been great: therefore their agreement can never be firm: he
might by the same reason think, because we have fought more battles, and had
bitterer wars, against and amongst our selves, then ever we had with the
Scots: that therefore the concord and peace which our Nation did enjoy under
our Sovereign Queen, it cannot be sound, and that it were much easier to make
a perfect amity and union with the Scots, then that we could be brought to
be faithful and true hearted friends with our selves. Well, the times and
seasons do change, and all things do by them alter and turn, so as nothing
can possibly stand at one stay, except that God, that turns the wheels of
all things, stay the same: we are therefore to labor to change to the best,
and seeing by Nature we are so careless to be constant in good things, let us
never endeavor to be constant in bad things: for he that by diversity of
Religion can set the father against his own son, can by the power and
efficacy of his true Religion make of mortal enemies most faithful friends,
and having so made them, he can continue them so. Let God be justified in his
truth, and men manifested to be liars: when God is obeyed and his ordinance
followed, it shall have a blessing, contrary to the expectation of men: for it
is to be thought, that he may move the hearts of any subjects, who does at his
pleasure command the hearts of all Princes. And truly in the sight and
judgment of man, it may seem that at this present God has a purpose to unite
us, having in his providence disposed of so many effectual means amongst us,
all which do concur most forciblie to accomplish that work, unity of true
Religion (which never does want the bond of the spirit) unity of language,
likeness of discipline and manners, the long peace and concord of the Princes
and countries, the often and next descent of the Scottishe king from the blood
royal of England, his rare wisdom and love of Religion, with sound knowledge
and judgment in matters of the same, does divine some extraordinary charge
and employment from God, (for graces are never given but to fit some place
and calling answearable to them) the propagation from us of many of their
noblest families, and no small number of their meaner houses (which do carry
our surnames to this present day) does in a manner invite us to be of one
family or household. The removal of the most wise, heroical and popular
competitors and their favorers, which might have opposed, does smooth and
plain a way for him to come in. And the two countries, by seas not dis-vnited,
but making one Ila^d, does wish the two nations to make up one people. Other
means there are, which I do here omit, of which a part are very well set
down in the late Scottishe proclamation (full of affection and love to us) set
out for making preparation against the Spaniards, and for the maintenance of
peace of the borders, penned (as I am credibly informed) by the king himself.

The last inconvenience which is alleged to be mervailous, and to bring more
contempt and danger to the English state then all the other three, is this. The
Scottishe king will be more affected to the Scots, and will advance them to the
chief places of credit and confidence about him: so the English which has
hitherto been accustomed to command and rule other nations, and not to obey or
be ruled by any, shall become subject not only to the king, but also to the
Scots whom once they did conquer. And this no English heart can endure.
Besides the greatest commodity that England can look for, is like to be none
other, then the increase of more subjects. If this were true, as it is
alleged, it were contempt, damage and danger I confess, and could no ways
be pleasing to any Englishman to be subject to those whom they count their
inferiors. But it may be more truly answered the^ it is objected, that we need
not doubt of his future affection, whose favor from time to time has been
formerlie proved by good evidences, to all such of our nation as has stood in
need of it. I have heard diverse of them openly confess, that they had better
hearing more gracious aunsweres, and speedier dispatches from him, then any of
his own subjects could get, or yet they themselves could ever get of the
Queen: and specially one, whose suit (for an other Englishman that was
committed to prison and condemned to be hanged) the king (though much busied)
patiently heard, red his petition, and (protesting that he had rather hang
twenty of his own knaves, then the poor man should take any harm) gave
present direction for his enlargement, though many reasons were alleged to
the contrary by some of his Nobility that were most gracious with him. This
matter fell out very lately as he that heard it of the petitioner himself did
assure me. Yet this is nothing in respect of that which he has showed during
all the space of above twenty years. So as I hope he is of that princely
nature that we shall never be able to overcome him with kindenes. And I would
know what just occasion have we thus to imagine, and thus to guess what his
affection and inclination must be at any or at all times hereafter: as though
every man without possibility of divorce were so wedded to one affection,
that no thing could alter or change it: when as we see that men of wisdom and
of understanding do rule and frame their affections according to the better
respects, and as they see greater reason. Therefore we may the more safely
conclude, that he that is now perhaps more tenderly affected to his own,
because he is more bound to them by the rules of conscience and nature, will
hereafter be more, or at least no less affected to us, if there be the like or
greater respects and precepts of conscience and nature why he should do so.
Neither can his present affection and favor be a sufficient rule or square, by
which you may measure and judge what his affection shall be at all times to
come. We are fully and thoroughly taught, even by the instinct of nature, that
the vilest monster which she brings out, or the cruellest beast which she
nourishes, will favor and fane up those of whom they have good. And will not
he to whom the heavens are so beneficial in furnishing him with rare graces
and gifts of body and mind, advaunce, prefer, and make much of those, who
have or shall chearefullie and willingly advance and prefer him before al
others, even of their own nation. To whom (may we think) can he more safely
commit his person and his state, then to them who for the confidence and
assurance which they do repose in him, have committed to his trust, their
livinges, liberties, lives, and all that ever they can have. Nay, it is without
all question, that he who is so often, and by both his parents descended of
English blood, will in England become English and a favorer cheiflie of
Englishmen, according to the speech (if not the prophecy) of his most noble
auncestor, King Henry the seventh, who in answer of the same doubt affirmed
to his honorable counsel, that he made no question if any such thing should
fall out, but the Scottish king being (as all Princes are by their royal
nature) inclined to Majesty, to statelines, to eloquence, to policy and to
civilitie, should frame and conform himself to the better country, and be
taken with a liking of the more honorable discipline, fashions, and carriage of
England, the rather for that he has so ample and large a reward proposed to
him for the same. The meanest Scottishmen that are settled in England are
content to forget their country, kindred, and Parents, and to frame and apply
themselves unto us, that they may freely enjoy their poor condition or
calling. And is it like that he who may still retain his subjectes, his
country, his Queen, and children, will not apply himself to us, in our
lawful and honorable desires, that he may rule us? Likeness of manners
does conciliate and fasten affections. Therefore for mine own part I doubt
not but ere he have been any long time with us, he shall be so won to us,
and englished with us, by our natural and reverent obedience to our Prince
above other Nations, and by all the verteous and commendable parts of our
civilitie, that Scotland shall have more cause to fear their subjection to
some English deputy, then we have now to fear our subjection to the Scots.
Truly I mervaile not a little when I do consider how unwilling and froward we
are to receive that kingdom being offered, which we have fought for most
egerlie for many hundredth years. Is not this the way to subordinate (if not to
subdue) to us, that people by policy, whom we could not by force? Who
bears the loss when we get the gain? They depart with the best member that
their body can afforde, that they may become one body with us. And to speak
as I think, in taking their King we take also their kingdom, which was
wisely foreseen of the aforesaid Prince, who stood persuaded that the
worthier kingdom would annexe and draw to it the lesser and weaker, and for
the same purpose his most famous son King Henry the eight did earnestly
affect and go about at several times, by promises, policies, gifts and
threatninges to unite the two Realms, and their two Princes: first, when, with
the allegation and answer of this our doubt, he made offer of his only
daughter and heir Lady Mary to king James the fifth, (the place of Holins. is
worth the reading) And after when he sought in marriage for Prince Edward his
son, the young Princess the late Queen of Scotland: so as the refusal of
the first, and breach of the last being once agreed upon, was the occasion
of bitter wars, and great bloodshed between the two nations. And now the
difference is no other then this that we did seek before to annexe them unto
us, and that they do seek now to be annexed unto us. Therefore the ods is ours
that they who did lately refuse to give us their Queen, are now most willing
and content that we do take their King. Wherein, in my opinion, we should be
as forward to receive them, as they are willing to make offer of themselves,
seeing it is plain by proof of experience, that we shall no less keep our
pre-eminence above the Scots, though we submit our selves to the Scottish
king, then we have kept it to this present day over the Walsh-men,
notwithstanding we did submit our selves to King Henry the seventh. Yet on
the part we are not to think or expect, that he will quite abandon or banish
them from being about him, for that were rather to rent them of from us, then
to encorporate them with us in one Politic body.

The second point for the commodity it will be much more then the bare
increase of subjectes, if the opinion of a most faithful and wise counselor
(as any this land has) may have any credit with us: who thought it the only
safety of England to stand fully assured of our back door. And indeed we
had never more need to have it fast, then at this time being environed and
compassed about with so many malicious and hateful enemies, as in a manner
having no faster friends then such as are our friends for their own advantage:
which gives me occasion to distrust greatly this new confirmed league with
the French king, which (notwithstanding I wish it may stand always
inviolable) yet I greatly fear by the president of former experience that it
will no longer stand then the Fre^ch-me^ may see how to help themselves better
by new friendship, be it with This prophecv of that prudent man is now prooved
true.
Spaniards or others. And if we account it a great benefit that the Scottish
king is not our enemy in these broken times, is it not to be esteemed a
thousand times a greater benefit to have him made as fast and sure to us, as
if he were our countrie-man or native Englishman borne, and one of our selves,
and that we be increased and made up with the access of his strength and
kingdom, by which we shall be so fenced and fortressed on that quarter without
our charges, or employment of our men (as now we are forced to do) that no
port or part of Engl. shall be surer. Nay, whereas now we are driven to seek
the amity, and in a sort beg the favor of foreign nations, yea, of the
heathen and Turks, and with infinite charges and lose of our men, to
entertain their friendship, being once enlarged and strengthened with the
forces and power of Scotland, we shall not need to currie favor with Mahomet
or Muscovite, or weigh the displeasure or offense of all the Princes in the
world. And Ireland, which (now stealing furniture and provision of munition
from thence) does with flashing flames of rebellion, consume our people and
empty our coffers, shall then (being not only destitute of that aid, but
having it all employed against it self) be content with lesser charges then the
own revenewes to be ruled and to be kept in loyal obedience, having England
on the one side, and Scotland on the other to command it. Thus our treasures
and powers shall be increased, our people spared, our subsidies eased, and our
charges abated. Lastly the increase of subjects, which some esteem but as a
matter of small or no importance. I affirm it to be the greatest commodity
that any kingdom could ever afford. I have for my warrat the words of as wise
and rich a king as ever did reign, who says not, Prove. 14 28.
that wealth or riches, but that the multitude of subjects are the honor of
the Prince, and that for the want of subjects comes the destruction of a
Prince. That is, the multitude of subjects is the riches, strength, power,
protection and stay of the kingdom, and it is the cause of al things for which
any state is honored and renowned: and for want of the^ subjects any kingdom
or state does decrease and decay fro the glory and honor of the forenamed
things: for any Political state is called in the Scripture a Prince, or King,
and all Dau. 8. 22.
these things that are accompanied with honor, or that procure the same are
called also by the name of honor. If therefore the right be his, let us stand
persuaded though all the world would say the contrary, the only way to
attain to riches, honor, and all kind of commodities is for conscience sake to
yield to him his right For he that cannot lie has said, Godliness is great
riches, and brings the contentation of mind: and in obedience to God there
is wonderful gain. So to finish this part of the pretended inconveniences, I
say, that every worldly commodity has some discommodity, and inconveniences
may be alleged against the best actions and purposes that any man could ever
have intended or done: but this si a sound Maxim embraced by all men: that,
Any inconvenience is rather to be admitted then a manifest mischief.

Now let us see what he is, or where he is, that may be thought fitter then
the Scottish King, to carry the sweigh and the burden of the Realm. An
Englishman he must be, for it were too too bad, yea intolerable to defeat
the King of his right, and to give it to a stranger. Which therefore of the
English competitors is of that extraordinary wisdom, spirit, action, favor
with the nobility and commons, power and force, who shall be able with love or
fear to lead and draw after him all the rest of the competitors? To manage
our state, yea our troubled state at home, to wage wars with the Scottish
king, and with all the rest of our enemies abroad? Or what respects has any
of them all, for whose sake all we should undertake so hard a match, as to
encounter with God? It is not my meaning to seek the disgrace, or to lay open
the weakness of any noble personage: but if it be true, that men of good
credit (who have reason to know him) do confidently report: All our English
competitors if in all kind of respects they do freely yield to him: yet in my
judgment they shall do themselves no wrong. And I think that many of the
state (if not al) be much of my mind, for they think and call the Scottish
king too deep, for his singular wit and wisdom as it should seem. As for the
hidden respects of our English competitors, what should we talk of them, seeing
they came never yet to the trial: they should much better appear, if the best
respected of them all, or they all jointly had his place for a few years to
rule the vn-rulie Scots. It were then to be feared, that for want of respects,
without any respect the Scottishe prickers would ride them: yea, I persuade my
self it were by great ods a better choice for them to seek out this new
kingdom of Guiana, or to reign in Vtopia, then to undertake the handling of
such a heady people, though they had this advantage that they were Scottish-men
borne. Yet he almost from his cradle has kept them in by fear, by authority
or policy: he has revenged the oppressed, repressed mightily their deadly
feeds, and has punished most severelie the mightiest offenders All this has
he done with that liking and good love of his people, that none of his
ancestors ever had: and there is strong hope that he will continue to do so
still. Further to leave the Scottish king, if they be compared with themselves,
and (al their respects being laid in true balance) be vprightlie judged,
which of them for respects shall go beyond the rest? will not every man think
himself as fit as any other. And if the matter go not by men's right, but by
their respects, is there not some men in Engl. that will look to be as much
respected, yea and a great deal more, then any of them all? Some men may
answer, that the Parliament will decide it. And who shall call this
Parliament? Or at whose commandment will the states assemble? for after that
her May. breath is out of her body (as the Earl of Leicester did not stick
to tell her) her highness privy council, then is no more a council. And I wish
that all the counselors and all the Nobility do not find themselves
otherways busied at that time, then to be calling of Parliaments. Yet admit
that the council may be most willing, that it may be a council still, and have
both the power and means to call the said Parliament: what? will we indeed be
so stout as to call in question, and handle that matter then? which as we
plainly do profess we are afraid to touch now? or will the longest sword
and greatest power give place and permit it to be a free Parliament? Yet I will
also yield that it may be so, though the like were never seen nor heard of
before. When the Parliament is set, will the matter then be presently cleared?
no objection made? no stop, hinderance, inconvenience, or respect alleged
against the first by the latter co^petitors? al without interruptio^ will go on
peace-ablie? And the Scottish king (belike) will be so saint-hearted as he
dare not to demand his right then, notwithstanding that by every of his
Ambassadors almost, he renueth his claim now? He nor his friends will make
no manner of stir in the North, because he is, forsooth, too weak to match
any of the Competitors that be now, notwithstanding that by the skillful and
wise judgment of her Majesty in the third year of her most happy reign, the
com petitors that then were could not in respectof favor or of force be
compared to his mother. No man will presume to proclaim him, till such time as
they shall hear what will be the resolution of the Parliament, whither it is
given to some that he can like of or not. Neither York, Berwick nor Bishopric,
nor no place else there will receive him: he must therefore keep himself close,
because the matter does not concern him. All the Welsh gentlemen, as
degenerated, will dis-regarde their kindred, and wholly abandon him. Natural
blindness or foolishnes is to be pitied, but wilful blindness and foolishnes is
to be condemned. Yet to go a little further. When the Parliament has said
and resolved, will they all indeed take it for a final judgment? Nay I
warrant you: All the Competitors that miss of the crown, will be highly
displeased, and a great many more that can pretend no claim: and it is like
that all these will plainly disclaim it, and call it unlawful, and there will
not be wanting some, that for private respects will egg on the competitors to
take exceptions against it. Here it may be imagined, that the Parliament will
carefully and providentlie provide for such issues: either by taking
recogniza^ces of great sums of the parties grieved for the keeping of the
public peace, or pledges for their loialty to the new elected Prince: or in
case they refuse these things, by committing themselves to prison: A jolly
round tale to remedy the matter, if they did forfeat their bonds in what court
should they sue them? for it carries no sense, to think that they will
answer in the lower Court, who do disclaim the highest: and take the best
pledges that they can give, will they be more careful of them, then desirous
of the kingdom? But it might be, that they would find means to set them at
liberty, and if that should not fall out so, durst the king elected, in case
of rebellion, execute the pledges, or when they were executed, were he then
any surer? Nay, I dare assure you, in a more dangerous case: for the execution
of great personages is never free from hatred and envy. The committing of
themselves, I confess, is the only way, if it have this Proviso, that all
their adherents, favorers and friends be at once laid up with them. And who
shall commit all these, and to what prisones? for it is like they will be much
about two parts of England. The Lord grant we deceive not our selves with our
own conceits: for our comfort or help that we may look for, to come from
other nations, it will be just none at all. Rebellion in Ireland, all in arms
in Scotland, God knows what in Wales. And if any realm should aid us, al
their aid must be this, that by their help we are furthered to root out
ourselves: wars shall devour everie-where, and our safety shall be nowhere.
The Protestant shall yarne for the blood of the Protestant and the papist and
athiest for the blood of them both: no regard shall be had of profession, sex
or age. And, which of al miseries is most doleful and lamentable, we can no
sooner expect an end of this tragedy, then our realm, or rather both realms
be utterly exstirped and brought to an end. For the Scottisheking can not in
any reason, think himself or his posterity sure, so long as their professed
enemy or any of his posterity shall reign kings in England, seeing he that
takes a man's living, will also seek to take his life, if he may come by it.
And on the other part, the king of England must think that he stands most
ticklous and slippery, so long as either the Scottishe king, his posterity,
accomplices, or any other of the competitors do live, according to the speech
of the Poet, Nulla fides regni socijs. Then we which cannot now be content
with the ordinance of God, shall suffer against our wills the lusts and
pleasures of men: for being enemies to our selves and to God, how can we
think that others will be our friends? Then for our profaned Sabothes we
shall have Sabothes enough: and a number of us, who are not moved with this
question now, may perhaps then for the same, and, it may be in the maintenance
of the wrongful querrell be brought, not to rest and lay down our bodies in
honorable peace in our ancestors grave, but to be buried in the bellies of the
beasts, or in the mawes of the fowls of the air. I am grieved to think or to
talk of this lamentable subject, it may please God that I shall not live to see
it debated. Therefore to surcease more So it pleased God to call him to his
hevenly kingdom in the time of his imprisonment in the Tower, where he was
committed
writing of that which both mine ears do tinckle to hear: I will give you
that counsel and advise, which I could wish (if it pleased God) all England
did take, to wit. That seeing they who are bound in conscience to clear this
question, have for making petition to have the title to the crown decided by
Parliament.
forsaken and abandoned it, and that the trial of it must certainly come
(the Lord knows how soon) and that every man is to satisfy his own
conscience, because he shall be accountable for his own doings: that
therefore I say, you would never give sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to your
eyelids, till such time as by conference with the most wise and religious (who
will make conscience of their speeches) by search, by reading, and by all
other possible means, you have satisfied your self concerning the true titler.
For I would be loath that this my opinion should be a ground for you, or for
others to rest upon: Wise men will build their actions upon knowledge, and not
do as beasts do, go, whither they are led. A fool (says Solomon does
believe every thing, but the wise will consider his steps, and will work by
understanding. It is the wisdom of the prudent to understand his way: but the
foolishnes of fools is to be deceived. Good Sit, if you do see or discern
more then I, be willing for conscience to communicate it with friends, for
all do stand bound to yield to better reason. And they that have any means of
knowledge vouchsafed them from God, ought to use them to the best benefit and
instruction of others, and this they ought to do while they breath in this
life: for there is neither conference, nor advise, nor counsel in the grave,
whither we must go. By these means having the blessing and direction of God
we shall notstand amazed, and as out of our wits in the day of trial, but by
certainty of knowledge and persuasion of a good conscience shall cleave and
join our selves to the best right. A man half warned, is wholly armed: but
the armor of a good conscience is like to a brazen wall. Having thus both
attained to this knowledge yourself, and for conscience sake helped others to
the same, the second, third, fourth, fifth, and all the rest of the parts of
mine advise are, that stoutly, and with a good and honest heart you follow the
known truth, without any respect of country, or kindred: for he whom we are
to prefer before our children and wives, has assured us that the
uprightness of the upright shall guide his way, and that the wicked shall be
taken in his own wickedness: That a man shall not be established by
wickedness, and that the root of the righteous shall not be remooved. So to
conclude mine opinion and to make an end of this Treatise, I had rather choose
to die in defense of the good right, then once wish to live to maintain a bad
quarrel. The Lord only wise, merciful, and gracious clear our
understandings and minds in this case, and strengthen and direct all our
hearts, that we in obedience to him, may give the crown and Realm with
cheerfulness and peace to that man, to whom he has been pleased to give
the right.

Amen.
FINIS

