THE Flaming Bush. OR, AN EMBLEM OF THE TRVE CHVRCH.

Written by THOMAS WESTERN, Minister of Gods Word at Alderleigh in CHESHIRE.

-- Spirat Rubus asper Amomum.

LONDON: Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE Gentleman, Mr. THOMAS STANLEY of Alderleigh Esquire, all
health and happiness.
Right Worshipful:
GOod Wine needs no Bush, a good face no band: but gross Wine a Bush to vent
it: a course face a band to grace it. Were my lines polite they need less
Patronage, but such they are that they want tutelage. The old Romans had their
tutelar* gods, but they by them robbed God of his honor: be you to be a tutelar
god, Ps. I have said you are Gods.
(you may be hereafter a titular god) so God shall have praise by this my
labor. When Adam beheld his own nakedness, he ran to a Bush to hide his
follies: Now the World must view my many weaknesses, I come to you to shelter
my fraylties. But Adam, and I differ in this: He like a Wood-cocke thrust his
bill in a Bush, to be kept close from the eyes of Eternity: I would be shrouded
under your bows to be kept dry from the storms of Calumny. Adam might think
that God would follow him: the Devil I think (for detractors are Devils) will
follow me: if he do, your generous name on the front of this Pamphlet shall be
a general exorcisme to conjure this spirit, adiuring him to more then
Pythagorian silence. But silence: why should I look for any such indulgence,
as that these nifles and trifles should purchase your Countenance? Believe it
Sir, the fault is yours, because you have been benevolent, therefore am I
grown impudent: remove that cause, the effect cease, if you restrain your
courtesy, I shall refrain mine insolency; but your worship (as yet) has not
done the one, therefore am I presumptuous in not doing the other.

This flaming Bush I do d^uote to you,
Wherein the Churches portrait^re to view,
I have displayed, adorned with root, and bole
The Bark, the branches, leaves too of the soul,
With sovereign fruits. A second task remains
Which God assisting does require my pains:
Namely to show how this our Bush with fi^^
Does flame* as always subject to the ire
Of Devil, Pharoh, Turk, and mitred Pope
Which would with faggot quite burn up her
And then a third, wherein shall be dis^rid^
How this our Bush that in the fire is tried,
Does find her Planter so benign and kind,
That she consumed is not, but more refinde.
This the Platform of this my building, it is no great edifice, only three
bays: whereof the first you have here in facto, already read; the other are
in fieri, perhaps in squaring if the workman be not discouraged: Howeuer this
is vented, the goodwill of him that dwelt in the Bush, dwell with you: he that
was figured by the Ram in the Bush, protect you, while I that have labored and
beaten the Bush will serve you

most obsequiously, obseruantly: Tho. Western.

To the Reader.
BEcause the Proverb says, One Bird in the hand, is better then two in the
Bush; I have presented thee here both a Bird and a Bush, and having two Birds
in a Bush, to catch for thee hereafter, one Bird in the hand I offer thee here:
thou will say an Ousel; be it so: yet if her feathers be black, her flesh is
restoratiue: Only her war^ling tunes expect thy censure, if they please, she
is pleased, for to this end she sings that thou might dance: If otherwise, had
she a tongue to speak, she would crave pardon: I that should teach her, am
no good whistler; therefore as the labor mine, so the fault mine: let
gentleness be thine, as I will be thine, I hope well, (for I mean well) that
thou will accept well, what it not done well.

Farewell. T. W.

THE Flaming Bush.
EXODUS 3. VER. 2. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a ^lame of
fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and behold, the bush burned
with fire and the bush was not consumed.
Among all the Volumes of the book of God there is none repleate with matter
of more admiration, exhortation, imitation of wonders, precepts, virtues, then
the Pentateuch, or, 5. books of Moses. As Psalm.
David, my song shall be of mercy, and judgment: here mercy and judgment are
met together, truth and righteousness have kissed each other. Judgment, Adam
sins, Adam sweates: Eve sins, Eve smarts: Serpent sins, Serpent creepes:
Cain sins, Cain runs: Noah sins, Noah shames: the world sins, the world
swimmes: Sodom sins, Sodom burns: Pharaoh sins, Pharaoh drownes: Chorah
sins, Chorah sinkes: Semper certa venit vindicta, si sint dilecta nostra
delicta. Mercy: The great Monarch of this great All, daigning to become all in
all: a Taylour to Adam, a Saylour to Noah: a Pilot to Heber, a Car^uan to
Abraham, a co^uoy to Isacke, a ladder to Jacob, a chariot to Joseph, a midwife
^o Moses, a leader Psalm.
to Israel: (oh thou that leadest Israel as a sheep) she was the sheep, he
the shepherd that Israel might Psalm.
sing with the singer of Israel.

My Shepherd is the living Lord, Nothing therefore I need:
In pastures fair with waters calm, He sets me for to feed.
Led them from Canaan where bread was wanting: Fed them in Egypt where food was
abounding^ bred them in Goshen to numbers exceeding: till another King arose
that knew nor Joseph: that knew not the indulgence they had by Joseph, but knew
to increase the afflictions of Joseph: it is rare to find posterity heir of
his fathers charity. Dolor and voluptas Seneca.
inuicem cedunt; br^u^or voluptas: their Halcyon days are now at an end: mirth
had presented the former Scene, now sorrow (...) in to act her part. Jealous
was Pharaoh of Exodus 1. 10
their multiplying powers, therefore makes policy his pyouer to undermine their
strength. Come let us work wisely; as if Machia^^lisme Exodus ^. 11.
should be christened by the name of wisdom. Taske-masters are appointed over
Israel.

They should not be Israel in this their perigration, did they not wrestle
with God in many an affliction. Pharaoh supposed, that continual working would
cool their desire, and power of begetting; as if, Sine Cerere, and Baccho
frigate venus: Dum moritur viuit. Naz' ligabantur inclu debantur cedebantur
torquebantur and multiplicantur. Aug. de ciu. dei. l. 22. Exodus 1. 15.
but Gods vine is ever more fruitful with bleeding palm, and Cammomill more
fertile with treading. Then Shiprah, and Puah must be bloody Lucinas, to
murder their males as soon as they are borne: but though Misraim be flesht in
Cain-like cruelty, their feminine hearts are suppled with mercy.

Now the people must drown whom the midwiues had spared, Exodus 1. 22.
like bloody executors of their masters will; while the streams of Nilus are
the infants Sepulchers. Nilus was made white with bodies, bare bodies of
Innocents drowned: Nilus was made to swell with tears, salt tears of mothers
that mourned: Nilus was filled full of cries of Fathers that lamented: Fathers,
mothers, brothers, kinsfolks, sorrowing for their babes, and would not be
comforted, and would not be comforted because they were not. In this
persecution Moses was born; Exodus 2. 2.
the mother reioyces when a manchild is borne, but quickly this joy was
Eclipsed with moan: he cannot abide in Egypt with safety, nor reside in
Iochebeds arms with security, but must be exposed to Neptunes mercy: where
every gust is like to ouerwhelme him, and every billow like to swallow him. A
cradle of bulrushes is the babi^boat, a bark of Exodus 2. 3.
reeds the little ones ship, but God was the Pilot, Christ the mast, faith the
anchor, love the sails, hope the tackling, confidence the deck, therefore he
could not but arrive at a happy port. Pharaohs daughter came Exodus 2. 5. (...).
forth to wash her in the cool streams of Nilus to bath her, heard a cry,
saw no creature, at last she beheld the precious casket, where beauty pleaded,
and begd relief, whilst his mourneful Oratory pierced her heart. Her heart was
struck with gentle compassion, yet her tongue could say it is an Hebrews child:
yet this Hebrews child must be her son: he the son, she the mother:
only there wanted a milkie nurse, and who so fit a nurse to suckle him, as she
that felt such throws to bear him? (when we do seem most dejected, the
providence of God is most declared.) No doubt, but often the Lady did visit him,
as much rejoicing when she beheld him, nor Orphan-like did she nourish him,
but what court, or school could put into him, was duly administered. But who
can wash the Ethiops skin? or who can hide the Leopards spots? or make him
forget he was an Hebrew? though nurture often alienate nature, as Lycurgus
intimates in his Lacedemonian whelps, here partus sequitur ventrem, insomuch
as all the honors in Egypt could not weane Moses from calling his nurse
mother: or win him from willingly suffering with Israel. A good soul cannot
but grieve with others, and have a feeling Sympathy with its fellow members.
He walks forth and beholds their miseries, and as he well can; reuenges their
injuries. An Hebrew, and a Gypsye are at contention, he rescues the Hebrew,
Exodus 2. 12, 13.
slayes the Egyptian. An Hebrew, and an Hebrew strive together, (domestical
broils are fullest of dangers:) his courteous Rhetoric can nothing win,
behold an Egyptian in an Hebrews skin: a full vessel must needs vent, a
great heart must needs speak, a turbulent stomach cannot stay: will thou kill
me as thou did the Egyptian the other day? oh with what impatient passion 14.
does a galled heart receive admonition? Then did Moses fly into Midian: 15:
Caelum mutat, non mutat animum, change of soil does not change the soul, but
a man that is good, in every place will be doing good: Quis enim celauerit
ignem? If he cannot yet free the Israelites from Pharaoh, he will aid the
wronged Exodus 2. 17.
daughters of Iethro: they attend their sheep and come to water them, the
ruder shepherds keep the water from them: a currish mind and churlish
disposition, has no respect of sex or condition. Moses perceiues them the
weaker vessels, therefore thrusts himself betwixt them and dangers, and by
his undaunted valor, and magnanimity, assures, and secures them from the
Shepherds inhumanity. Their old Father is quickly told it, and with hospital
welcome entertaines him for it: and being a great and wealthy peer admits
Exodus 2. 21.
him his servant, adopts, makes him his son in law, and sends him abroad to
follow his sheep. Now he that in Egypt followed his book, in Midian betakes
himself to his hook. Moses his hook, as Peter's net, Paul's tent, and Joseph's
rule may minister to us this short instruction, that neither greatness nor
Note.
goodness need to be ashamed of an honest vocation. Forty years in Egypt a
Courtier, and forty years in Midian a Shepherd; a solitary life, yet he likes
it, a melancholy calling, yet he continues it. He was not ignorant of
Court-cares, that A^lae culmen sublime lubricum, he that climbes the highest,
falls the soonest, therefore a private, and retired life in a higher degree
does more content Note.
him. He that has true worth in himself, and outward, or inward familiarity
with God, finds more pleasure in a Midian wilderness, then others delight in
Princely Palaces.

While innocent Moses follows, and tends his innocent lambs, God does
graciously appear to him visibly; idle persons are not graced with visions:
Idleness is a cushion Note.
whereon Satan sits, where he appears, or rather suggests manifold
temptations. God had been ever present with Moses, yet he had never seen him
till now. When Adam Gen 3. 8.
did ill, he would have hid him in a Bush: when Moses did well, God is seen
in a Bush. A great wonder, in a small matter: that a tender bush should burn
with fire, was nothing marvelous, but that the fire should not burn the bush,
was truly miraculous.

A true Emblem of the true Church, and of every true member of the Church.

1 It Is like a Bush. 2 A burning bush. 3 Yet it is no combustible bush.
The Church of God is resembled to a Bush.

1. In stature. quantity. 2. In nature. quality.
The Bush is low: the Church is so in others eyes. 1 Stature In other eyes.
in it own eyes.

The worldling brandes it with marks of baseness: the Papist scorns it
because of the smallness. In the worldlings eye, the Church is a bush: the
bush is low; low, and Wo^dling.
contemptible: the Church is base, base and despicable. Tune credis Christo?
credis crucifixo? Was the common quaere in Augustines time. What tu? Mecaenas
atanis edite regibus? Thou have been of great report? thou who have borne a
goodly port? will thou be stigmarized with the name of Christ? the shame of
(...) vita (...). (...).
Christ? a new and wicked superstition. A Carpenters son, a carpenter
himself, and ver dolorum, a man of sorrows; that had not so much as a house
to be borne in, but borrowed a stable: not a bed to be laid in but borrowed a
manger: nor a pot to drink in, but borrowed a pitcher: nor an horse to ride on,
but borrowed an Ass: nor a room to eat in, but borrowed a parlour: nor a
grave to be buried in, but borrowed a Sepulcher: thy Gods debasement, will be
thy disparagement: being an offense to the Jews, madness to the Graecians,
dotage unto worldlings: a seditious Serres page 652. Aug. Cos. lib. 11.
vermin (said the Duke of Guise) but (seditious Duke) good words we pray:
Al^ud est ridere* aliud est videre, the natural man sees not the things of
God, and no marvel, for he sees naturally when the things of God must be
discerned spiritually. Therefore with Hilary Hill* de T^^n. 5.
we may say with hilaritie: Oh stulta mundi sapientia, Christi opprobrium, non
sentiens esse Dei virtutem, and mundi stultitiam, non intelligens esse d^i
sapientiam: oh unwise wisdom of the worldly wise, not understanding the
opprobrie of the son to be the glory of the Father: nor that which is esteemd
folly with men to be the invincible prudence of God. Then let rides be changed
to vides, then let vides be changed to fides, and faith will refell this
preiudicate opinion, faith will repel this supercilious traduction, for faith
will tell though For As nigra, yet intus formosa: though foul without, yet
fair within, a fair soul, though a foul skin: the Kings daughter is all
Psalm. 45.
glorious within, behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, Formosi
pecoris custos, formosior ipse. Cant. ^. 1.


Christ is the Shepherd, and the Church his Flock,
Most fair the Shepherd is, and fair^ the Flock.
In the Papists eyes, the sound Church ^ Papi^^.
is a bush, the bush is small, and of no repute: our Church is vile, and of no
esteem. Theirs is a Ceder, ours a shrub* theirs a vine, and a pi^e, ours does
pine, and they repine. They have antiquity, plead visibilitie, universality:
we are a company of few, obscure, contemptible people, lurking from time to
time in shades and corners, known to few or none. Theirs has had, and yet
has a fa^e Farther p^rs. 2. part of 3. (...)uey. Dr. Hill. ^ ^as. ^. B^^^^wood
inq^i^y, cap. 14.
greater sway in the world then any other ever had, or has, how truly spoken
let Brerewood judge: the Christian part of the world (all professions and sects
of that name put together) is as five: the M^^umetanes as six: the Idolaters
as nineteen, beside that Heathenish tract of Terra incognita, so far is that
from truth which this our Islands natural son, bragd in behalf of his
Romish spiritual mother.

But let them brag: we know who bragges of the greatest number: Antichrist. I
confess indeed R^u. 19.
the number of ^he faithful, is less far then the number of the faithless:
there is more chafe th^n corn in the Lords barn: more ^ares then wheat in
the Lords field: for one No^h and his family (being but eight) the whole world
drowned for their wickedness: for one Lot and his household being but four, all
the cities of the plain burnd for their ungodliness: for one thankful
Samaritan, nine ungrateful leapers: for one Ier. 3. 14. Reu. 3. 4.
Elias 450. Pseudoprophets: but one of a city, and two of a ^ribe: a few names
in Sardis. Christ's sheep are not many ( Pauci, pauperes, pusilli,) for
quanti^y; but more then all the rest for quality: he esteems more one of his
mystical members, then all the worlds unhallowed members: yet is it not Gods
family so small as to be measured by humane Geography: for it is no^ tied to
the seed^ of Jacob, as the Jews would have it, no^ to the s^yle of Aff^^^ as
the Donatists would have it, nor to the Sea of Rome, as Popelings would have
it: but God has chosen for the children of Abraham all that have the faith of
Abraham, and for the tribes of Jacob all that worship Ioh. 4. 23*
the God of Jacob in spirit and truth. Then do not preoccupate the Lords seat,
take not upon thee to judge thy brethren, neither do thou despair of thy
self, but leave judgment to God, and look for mercy of the Lord: his
foundation is sure, and has this seal, Dominus 2 T^^* ^. 1^
nouit qui sunt sui, the Lord knows who are his: and we know that we are his,
our Church is his. Though they boast of their numbers, des^ising our handfulls:
saying, all the world is theirs, scarce any corner ours, and who can choose but
suspect D* (...)
a few? we dare, and can share equally with them, with our reformed Churches
opposed to them, and if we could not, this rule of theirs will but teach us to
advance Turcisme above Christianity, and Paganism above Mahumetry, the Word
above the Church, and Hell above Heaven: if any proof can be drawn from
altitude, you know all, the Ceder is vnfruitfullest: if any proof can be
drawn from multitude, he that knows all says, the best are fewest. Thus our
Church is a bush, low in 2 in it own eyes.
others eyes, so is it a bush, low in it own eyes.

I am dust and ashes; I am a worm and no man: vermis sum, non v^r, I am of no
estimation, reputation: I am a man of polluted lips: I am not worthy of the
least of thy mercies; I am not worthy under whose roof thou should enter; I
am not worthy to vnty the latchet of his shoe; I am not worthy to be called
thy son; I am not worthy the name of an Apostle: humble, lowly,
bushy-confessions, sifting themselves to a course brain, far from that
humerous, tumerous, Thrasonicall, Pharisaicall, Pyrgopolynice^icall
Braggadochio. Aug. hmo. 30 de verb. dom secun. Luke
that shows not vulnera, but munera, not his wounds, but his worth; not his
misery, but his bravery. I thank God, I am not like other men, while Luke 18.
11
the silly bush, the poor Publican stands a far off, as not daring to
approach the Mount of Gods glory, casts down his eyes, as acknowledging
himself guilty, knocks upon his breast, the closet of his impiety, and with a
look dejected, soul perplexed, voice submitted, cries out Domine miserere
mei, Lord be merciful to me, to me, I say not thy son, I 13
have so offended thee; to me, I say not thy servant, I have so displeased
thee; to me, I say not thy friend, I have so abused thee; to me, I say not thy
creature, I have so rebelled against thee, but Domine miserere mei peccat^ris!
Oh Lord be merciful to me a sinner: so good a follower of the Son of God, is
the child of God: Man. 11. Aug. de te.
Learn of me to be meek* and humble, Cum humilitatis doctor^ non ^r^t
superbia tua: Pride and peace cannot dwell together, but learn of me to be
meek and humble, and you shall Mat. 11. 2^
find rest to your Souls. Humility is the mother of tranquillity: and quanto
quis humilior, ta^to Christo similior: The more humble thou art, the more like
^hy Master thou art: but Pride like Colloquintida will imbi^ter a whole
pot-full of pottage.

Si tibi sit copi^ aut sapientia formaque d^tur,
Sola superbia, destr^et omnia, and comitetur.
Though beauty, wealth, and wisdom, all thou have,

Pride will them all demollish quite at last.

Oh be not ignorant of what thou art, Dumus, Rubus, a Bush, a Shrub, nequam,
nequicquam, naught, nor ought: Thy Body is (...), as much to say, as (...), thy
Souls Sepulcher. Thy Soul is anima, as much to say as (...), a wind that
passes speedily, and that passes the wind in vanity: Thou wast Corpus, a
Body, but Cor is gone, thy heart lost, only Psalm.
pus remains putrefaction, so vain a thing is man: Then esto quodes, be what
thou art: Thou art low, be lowly: As holiness, so lowliness becomes the
Saints.

Thus for stature, now for nature: 2. Nature.
Our Church is a Bush. Naturally and for the most part to a Bush belongs these
parts, R^di^, Ramus. Cortex, folia, fructus. A Bush has naturally a Root:
secondly a Body: thirdly Bark: fourthly Branches: fifthly Leaves: sixthly and
fruit, so has Scaliger de Subtle. ex^. ^ 40. P. 2.
the Church, only here is the difference, they have their branches upwards, we
our branches (legs and arms) downwards: we enclosed in a skin, they in a
bark; they have their mouth in the earth, we ours toward Heaven, etc. Christ
is the Root, the Root of Iesse, the Root Root, Romans 15. 12. Esa. 11. 1. Reu.
5. 5. Esa. 53. 2. Esa. 11. 10.
of David, called a Root in his Conception: a Root in his Passion: a Root in
his Ascension: a Root in the general Judgments discussion. Now is the Axe laid
to the root of the Mat. 7.
tree: thou bear not the root but the root thee: As the root is to the
Bush, so is Christ to the Church.

1. Fundamentum. Being a prop and stay to uphold it. 2. Alimentum. Bringing of
sap and iuyee to nourish it. 1 Founda.

No other foundation can any man lay than Jesus Christ, which is already laid:
angular stone, immovable rock, elect, and precious: There is none other named
in heaven or earth, by whom to be saved: though some think that Philosophers
may be saved without him. But other roots has Rome.
Rome; thus they say: thus they pray, Papa Domine mei miserere; O Lord Pope in
thee is my hope, have mercy upon me: and qui tollis peccata mundi miserere
nostri; as the Sicilians to Pope Martin the 4: thou that take Serres
Inuentory.
away the sins of the world have mercy upon us. To the Virgin:

Oh foelix Puerpera,
Nostrapians scelera;
Iure matris impera Dr. Hall.

Redemptori:
Oh happy mother of that son
That has all our sins fordonne;
By a mothers right we pray thee,
Bid our Redeemer to obey thee.
Further: Guili. Nenbrigens. ^ l. 2. cap. 16


Tuper Thomae sanguinem, quem pro Christo fudit;
Fac vt ego ascenderem vbi Christus sedit:
By the blood of St. Thomas which was shed on the ground;
Let me ascend thither where Thomas sits crowned. And,
Aqua benedicta,
Dele delicta:
By this water blessed,
Be thy sins releast; be it life and health unto thee.
Remission cold
Nere known of old.
The Guilt of sin put from thee: and infinite other: Rotren roots, Egyptian
reeds, waterlesse wells: of noe life, force, strength. Sunt infirma quaedam
refugia, ad quae cum quis fugerit Aug. in Ps. 45.
magis infirmatur, quam confirmatur: they that trust to them are not only
deceaud in them, but weakened by them. But Christ is the root of our salvation.

Pendimus a te
Tendimus ad te
Credimus in te:
non nisi per te optime Boys.
domine.
We depend on thee,
We belong to thee,
We believe in thee:
Lets be saud by thee,
oh sweet Jesus.
Other Roots has the Carnal Carnal.
men, and women; taking, making; staves, and stays; broken staves, rotten
stays: mere Quagmires to themselves. As the Courtier that builds his houses
on the favor of 1. Courtier
Princes, whose breath is, (and shall be shortly) in their nosthrils: Trust them
not, non est Salus in e^s; their is no health in them, no help in them: the
Salve of their tongue like the Saliua thereof has some venom in it. Psa. 146.
Psa. 82. 6
Dixi Dii, I have said you are Gods; but you shall all die, and die like men:
for what are they, but as thou thy thy self? (...) soul and soil, the one
nothing but a puff of wind; the other nothing but a pile of dust: Greg. Naz.
Esa. 2. 22* Genesis 2. 7.
both shall pass away, even as the wind scatters the dust. And who would trust
dust? it will slip out of thy hand and deceive thee; and more than so fly in
thine eyes and blind thee: viri magni sunt montes naufragosi, quo Nauem quisque
cum impulerit soluitur: Aug. in Johan. Tract.
mighty men are mighty rocks, thy ship splits if thou launch toward them.
The Lawyer: the root of whose tree is a mercenary Fee. Woe be 2 Lawyer.
unto you Scribes and Lawyers Tenures, Offices, Suits, and Pleaes, Wars and
Iarres; procure your ease: and how could you feed so fat without them? But,
Nouerint vniuersi per presents: be it known unto all men by these presents,
that such siluer-Causidicists money-Spermologists, shall once plead hard at the
bar of Gods judgment, and shall not be hard: their Case shall be ill like a
Chancery-bill, pitifully complaining, not mercy obtaining, whilst Bribery is
reigning.

The Usurer: who grows on a 3 Usurer.
Ba^ke; his mind is on his Mine, that's his Root, and there he roots. But
(...) * love of money. 1. Tim. 6. 10
(...): Philargury is the root of villainy: Couetuousnes, fo^ntaine of
wickedness. He sels the air, takes money for time, contracts with Satan, gives
his soul for surety, when he puts out his money, puts his hand to the bill,
when he receaues the use. But the Condition of this Obligacion is such, that if
Luke 19. 8.
he do not Zacchize (restore) presently (and heel be hanged first) he, and
his heirs shall be quite extinct.

De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres.
Three heirs successively do scarce enjoy,
Ill wealth successively without annoy. Minister.

The Minister: whose Root is in the Chancel not the Church: Tithes and glebes,
commendams and qualifications; are that h^e grows upon: Hara domestica, his
own Stie; not Arae Dominica, Gods house: not caring to, 1 Feed 2 feed 3 feed;
either by his 1 teaching, 2 living, 3 releiuing: but Carking wholly to feed
himself, shall I say wjth Ezechiell with a Barley-loafe? noe, with the Panada
of finest Manchet, while the Temple of god remains unbuilt. O Prophet covet
not profit; it is time, if ever, now to awake least like Jonas his Gourde, thy
means slake, and Jonah 4. 7.
thy Superintendency another take.

Epicure, de grege porcus. That is a 4 Epicure.
lover of pleasure more than of God therefore pleasure, not god is his root,
(...)
he grows in the Celler under the tap, or else in some corner in a wantons lap:
either carousing the three Outs; 1 wit out of the pate, 2 drink out of the
pot, 3 coin out of the purse: or hazarding all at the three Innes, 1 civility
in Bedlam, chastity in a Bawdy House, 3 revenues in the compter. Are not most
of our Despots turned Tospots? music for the ear: beauty for the eye:
Pomanders for the nose: Banquets for the tooth: healths for the throat: (noe
health for the body) Hell for the Soul. But Oh bone Jesus, fons indificiens,
Tu humana corda reficiens;
Ad te curro te solum sitiens,
Tu mihi domine solus suffici^ns:
Oh sweet savior thou art our stay
When these mundane props shall vanish away,
Thou art that Root that shall never decay.


As Christ is the fundament; so he 2 Nourishment.
gives aliment, juice, and nutriment, moisture and nourishment to the Bush, his
Church. Radix est os ^t stomachus arboris; the root is the mouth and stomach
of the tree: mouth to feed it, stomach to nourish it: gives sustentation, which
breeds vegetation, and fructification; nor would it have verdure, or greenish
tincture, without this sappie moisture; but would be leaueles, liueles, and
fruitles. Even so Christus est os et stomachus fidelis; Christ is the mouth and
stomach of his Church; mouth for instruction, stomach for refection: manna of
the soul to feed man's soul: bread of life to breed man's life, sown in heaven;
reapt in earth; in'd by Mary; thresht by the Pharisees; ground on the cross,
between two stones, beetweene two thieves; baked in the Sepulcher;
distributed, in the Sacrament, where god does impart to every faithful branch
its part: Sumit vnus sumunt mill, quantum isti tantum ille: whoeuer feeds on
this refection, eats and drinks his own 1 Cor. 11.
salvation* my flesh is meat, my blood is drink; flesh and blood, meat and
drink; meat indeed, drink indeed: Psa.
therefore as the Heart thirsts for the rivers of water; so does my heart
thirst for this heavenly moisture.

Cuius guttulis abluuntur animae
Cuius riuulis dispelluntur maculae
Quem qui effugiunt moriu^tur viui
Quem qu^ sequ^^tur viu^nt ^orituri:
The Bush has a bole, trunk, or 2 Body. Romans 12. Ephesians. 4. 4.
body; so has the Church: we are many members, yet but one body glued, and
served, and cemented together; with the mortar of Unity plaster of Amity,
asphaltum of Unanimity; where the King is the head, Council the eyes, Judges
the ears, Laws the teeth* Pastors the tongue* good Houskeepers the stomache,
Husbandmen the feet, Soldiers the hands; the Pope was the hair, the hair of
the head above the crown; till Harry the eight did shave him down. God grant
his trentals still to be excrements.

We are all baptized into one body. 1 Cor. 12.
Why does then the Guelph and Gibbelin, why does the red and whitros^ faction,
or Papist, Hugonet, or Precisian, harrow and til the soil of dissension? Vnum
corpus, vnus a^^mus; one Bole, one Soul: but of this succinctly, 1 Cor. 10^ 3
Bark.
cause by others sufficiently.

The Bush has a Bark, so the Church.

The Bark to the Bush is a beauty or ornament: 2 a cover or tegument: A good
conversation is such to the christian: this does Corpus tegere, Cor protegere;
deck the soul, protect the body and moves god to respect both. A fa^re Rind
argues a good mind; good Conversation a sign of sanctification; as virtuous
manners are precious treasures, commodious to us and also to others, to us ad
iustificandum though not effectiuely: so we are justified by Christ, not
apprehensiuely, so we are justified by faith yet declaratiuely by just and
holy virtuous works. So our Savior of himself, the works that I have d^^
bear witness what I am: to others ad aedificandum that others seeing our
works on earth, may glorify our father which is in heaven. V^^^tur exemplis,
man is led by practice, more than instruction, like pliable wax for any S^neca
Epist. lib. 1 Epist. 1.
impression. But if you be either male agentes doing wickedly, or nihil
agentes lying idly, or aliud agentes vnbeseemingly, your Cover is gone, your
honor's none, you are barkles Bushes, naked Forresters. Moreover the Bush has
not only a bark without, but also a little Filme within: so have god^
Darlings, as fair outward parts, so good inward hearts, corporal vrbanity,
and cordial sincerity, as knowing that, Sermo interpres cordis apud v^rum,
cor interpres sermonis apud Deum; men judge of our hearts by Philo-Iud.
the outward countenance, but god of our works by the inward conscience:
therefore as they hang out a bush, so they have also Wine, lodginge for Christ
as well as a sign.

As pargetted walls, so garnished chambers, and furnished closets, swept and
washed, rubd and pared from dust, cobwebs, filth and rubbish; ab offensis
le^ioribus smaler offenses, and suauioribus sweeter concupiscences, and
grau^oribus grosser vices: know you not that you are temples of the Holy Ghost?
but the holy ghost will not dwell in those temples, where En^y stands at the
door, Wrath leanes in the porch, drunkenness lies on the ^^^ore, Gluttony sits
at the table, Lechery keeps the bed, and Pride looks out at the window.

Let us now with Zacche get up to 4 Branches.
the branches, that we may eye and epsy our beloved Jesus. The bush has
abundance of twigges, redundance of sprigges, sprouts, and shuts, boughs, and
arms: so has our slender tender Church: whereof some are temporal, some
spiritual: the issue of the womb, the issue of the word: nor without the
former can we have the later: for no filij soeculi, no filij coeli, no
generation, no regeneration: barrenness was a curse among the Jews, we
think it a cross among us Gentiles. Children are the first, the best
blessing. Thus could* Juno preach to Ae^lus.

Sunt mihi bis septemprestanti corpor^ nimphae:
Quarum, quae forma pulcherrima, D^^op^ian
Con^^bio iungam stabili, propriamque dicabo.
(Aeole) qua faciet pulchra te prole beatum.
Twice seven beauteous nymphs I have in store,
Whereof the fairest I will give to thee:
Instable wedlock which shall bless thee more
With children, than great ^oue has blessed me, Psa. 128.

And thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord. His wife shall be like
a fruitful vine by the house sides: his children like Olive branches round
about his table: vt Angeli in circuitu throni dei, like a garland of angels
round about gods throne: vt stellae in circuitu Poli Arctici, as a garland of
stars round about the North Pole. Alcibiades asked Socrates how he could
endure the chiding of his wife; Socrates asked Alcibiades how he could endure
the cackling of his hens, says the one pariunt pullos my hens hatch me
chickens; but the other parit filios, my wife bears Psalm.
me children. Happy he that has his Psalm.
quiver full of them, he shall not be ashamed to speak with his enemy in the
gate: they preserve our Species, and after a sort make us immortal, by
deriuing life from the root to the branches, from the Father to the Son, from
the Son to the sons son in longinquum, as David speaks for many
generations. But because many of these are not mild but wild, not fertile but
stertile, not straight, but crooked branches, some like Cain butchering their
brothers, some like Nero, murdering their mothers, some like Ammon defiling
their sisters, and others like Ham, reuiling their Fathers, let us cast our
eyes a ventre ad verbum, from the issue of the womb to the issue of the word.
As many as are begotten by the word of God, are branches of the bush, members
of the Church of God. God husbandeth, the Sacrament waters, the Spirit
refreshes, repentance moysteneth, the minister planteth, the word seedeth, and
feeds, and breeds, then the Branch springs. Ioh. 15 35.


O powerful Sperm able to make Foelix quake, the iaylor shake, of stony hearts
to raise up children to Abraham, and metamorphize the most obdurate: Lions into
lambs, bears into kids, the covetous, as merciful as Job, and liberal as
Zache: the timorous, as bold as Laurence, and courageous as the Martyrs: the
luxurious, as chaste as Joseph, and continent as Iudeth, the blood-thirsty as
tenderhearted as Zippora, and detesting blood as Jacob: finally, the vicious
as penitent as Peter, and loving Christ as Mary: modo pateant aures, and
sitiant sapientiam pectus: These are the branches of the true vine, ( Ioh. 15.)
King Abibeiba Lanct. lib. 3. inst. 26. Pet Mart. Dec. lib. 3.
had his palace in a tree: I am sure Iehoua dwells in these Branches: for
though the world be his consistory, and the Scripture his dying room, yet is
ever the soul of the righteous Heb. 3. 6. Psalm. 132.
his Bedde-chamber. We are his house.

Where he sets his rest,
And builds his nest,
And thinks it best, to tarry
If we to sin
Our soul within
Do not begin to marry.
But why do I throstle so long in these branches? I must leave them Leaves.
and come to the leaves. The Bush has them, the Church does not want them. The
leaves are part of that blessing which God does impart, to such as are best, to
such as are blessed: He shall be like a Juniper, a Bush, a Palm, a Date, a
tree, Datetree, Psalm. 1.
Palm Tree, planted by the water side: (his regeneration) which shall bring
forth fruit in due season (his sanctification) whose leaves shall not fall
(his continuation) he begins Trem. in Psalm. 1.
well, goes on well, ends well, so all is well, Quid per folium nisi fidem and
amorem? What other are these, not falling leaves, not falsing leaves, not
failing leaves, not fainting leaves, but faith and love? Faith and love are the
lovely leaves of this lively Bush. Faith in the great little Diocese Faith.
of the soul (though love be the Chancelour, memory the Register, conscience
the Paritour, praise the Choristour) is the Archbishop, Metropolitan,
superintendent of all other graces. Fides est prima quae subiugat animam deo.
Faith is that which (being Aug.
animam deo. Faith is that which (being first, or best) ties the soul first,
and fast, to the first, and last, Alpha, and Omega, the Vne and Trine, Trine
and Vne blessed God. Love is the kernel in the Nut, the pearl in the Oyster,
Dyamond in the ring, luster of the Sun, chaste Diana among her maids:
humility is her handmayde, charity her kitchin-mayde, chastity her
chamber-mayde, and gracious sobriety a maid of honor. Oh you vestall nymphs;
let not hautinesse woo you, nor covetousness win you, nor concupiscence wed
you, nor surfeiting beuomit you: Be wise virgins that your lamp may be love,
and oil faith. If you have faith, you cannot want love, for one of these
leaves buds from the other, love from faith, righteousness from holiness.
Faith is fire; fire is operative: where there is fire, there will be heat, the
greater fire, the greater heat, the lesser fire, the lesser heat: no fire, no
heat, no heat, no fire: Fides Luther. Gal 5. 6.
debet pinguescere operibus: Our faith must work by love: if we have no love,
our fire is extinct, our candle Ientile^^
out. Let it never be said of us (as one sometime of the Monks of his time
that their fasts were fat, and ptayers lean) our faith hot, our love cold. Oh
shame that the child of heaven should resemble hell: Hell has fire, ( Qui non
credent, sentient) but that fire has no light.

I doubt we have too many such firebrarnds of hell, that have a flashing fire
of faith in their tongue, but the fire of their faith, makes not their love
boil, their light does not shine out before men, leauelesse trees, empty
clouds, waterlesse wells (like the Mat. 5. 16.
sumptuous Sumpter-mules of that vainglorious Cardinal) seeming without
wondrous rich, but nothing within save old shoes and boots, stones and
rubbish. Gods child is Gods Priest, therefore must bear on his breast not
only Vrim (Science) but Thummim too (conscience), cursed be those that like
Adonibezecke want these thumbs: and in his skirts, not only Bells (a sounding
profession) but Pomegranates too (a sound devotion) faith must have a nature,
as well as a name, otherwise it is fides nuda, fides nulla, a bare faith, a no
faith, and wants leaves to cover it nakedness. Once more! these leaves are
physical of condition: green of complexion.

Phisical leaves: the leaves shall be for Physical. Ezech. 47. 12, 13. Reu. 2.
22.
medcine: the leaves shall be for the healing of nations: Faith, and love the
leaves of our Bush, heal, and help, cure, and recover the Vertigo of
drunkenness, hecticke of lasciuiousnes, lethergie of idleness, wolf of
usury, consumption of envy, quotidian of blasphemy, with other the like
spiritual diseases. Do but pluck these leaves with the hand of devotion,
mix them with the Syrrup of discretion, bruise them in the mortar of a good
conscience, and boil them on the fire of true repentance, apply them to thy
soul both full and fasting, morning, noone, and evening, and thou shall see a
miracle; a dead man restored to life. Green leaves: her leaves Green. le^.
17. 8. Psalm. 1. 5.
shall be green both summer and winter ( i. e.) in the tempe of prosperity,
and tempest of adversity: always green, the leaves shall not wither, the
frost shall not nip them, nor the air blast them, nor the wind scatter them:
Faith and love on the altar of Ioh. 5. 24.
the heart, are like fire on the altar, not to go out, or depart like the
stone in Pliny, which being once made not, could never be cold.

I confess indeed, they may sometime be seen in the Orient in their full
heat, and feruor, sometime in the occident in the declining of their luster, but
men, Angels, devils, can never extinguish them: for he that believes is
passed already from death to life: and he that loves, never fails, 1. Cor.
13. 8.
or falls from God, but is so hot, much water cannot quench it, Nec
immergent nubes, neither can the Cant. 8. 7.
clouds drown it. The Cardinal otherwise: that a man may make shipwreck
Bell. de just. lib. 3. 14.
both of faith and love, but I have neither faith to believe him, nor love to
like him, nor envy him his red hat with this label, this babble: for whom God
loves, he ever loves; neither can any one snatch them out of the hand of
Christ.

He that is elect, and whose faith works by love, either never falls, Aug.
de Cor and Gra. c. 8.
or if he fall, is raised and revived before this life be ended.

If your leaves be true, they can never wither, if wither away, they were never
true: then let your faith, and love have a continual spring, that you may bud
now, and flourish always: be not Gods prentises a while, and the devils
iourney-men after, God will scorn the blew bottom, if Satan sup the cream.
Forget not Ephesus, remember you forsake not your first faith, first love: hold
on, hold out, Vsque ad extremum vitae terminum, to the December of your days,
till your spirits ascend to heaven, to him that gave them, your bodies descend
to the earth whereof he made them, your carcasses transcend on four men's
shoulders to Golgotha the place of dead-mens skulls.

Thus, and this for the Root, Body, Fruits.
Bark, Branch, and leaves: while I shake the fruits, prepare the basket of
attention to gather them: the mouth of meditation to chew them: and the
stomach of obedience to digest them. The myrtle is a little bush, In Elide*
but it has many berries: Pausanius makes it an Emblem of one of the graces.
The Church is this myrtle, fruitful, and fertile, and like Theophrastus his
tree, every child of God is fructiferous: he is that true tree of Reu. 22. 2.
life which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yields her fruit every month:
These twelve fruits are twelve good works, six for the body, and six for
the soul: you may wedde them together in that old^ distich.

Visito, poto, cibo, recoligo, vestio, condo.
Instrue, castiga, remitte, solare, fer, ora.
To visit the sick, is a wholesome 1. Visito.
fruit, Religio munda non mundi: it is pure religion and undefiled to visit
Iam. 1. vlt.
the fatherless and widows in their affliction. Be not slow to visit the
Eccl. 7. 35.
sick, for this shall make thee beloved. Christ takes this office as done to
himself, When I was sick, and in Mat. 25.
prison ye visited me: therefore let every one visit: The King his Subjects,
the realm is sick, almost sick to death: from the shoulders to the sole,
many infirmities.

1. The shoulders (the Nobles) in many places are sick of phlegmons, and
tumors: either attending in Court (but what says the Proverb? Exeat Aula qui
vult esse pius) or ruffling in city, while their Emissaries ( Bayliues) are
rifling the Country: visiting not the whole, the sick, but the sick the
whole to make them sick.

There was once but one rack, and that in the Tower for Traitors,
circumcelions, and malefactors: now we have in every hamlet too many for
honest Tenants, husbandmen, and farmers: enhaunsing their fines finem facere,
to undo them, improouing their rents, to rent their estates, and impouerish
them, or enclosing their Commons, that their Oues and Boues, and caetera
peccora campi, cannot peep out of doors for fear of a trespass, so hedging
God out, and fencing the devil in (here a bush, and there a thief) that God
might justly send some hunting Nimrod to trample down their quicksets. The
feet (the Commonaltie) are sore pained with botches, and ulcers, as Informers
that eat up Gods people, as if they were bread: Forestallers, that scarce
suffer Gods people to have any bread, unless they will buy it at their price,
or can do as the devil counceld Christ, turn stones into bread: Scriueners
that hale men to the Counter with parchment halters: Brokers that deal with
old garments as the most with void offices. Who will give most? without a
pawn, a man shall sooner borrow their conscience, then their money: Breakers
that gallop they care not in whose debt, then play at most in hiddles till they
trot out on the back of a protection, or skip up into the saddle of a
reference: while the poor of the land are bridled, and sadled, and ridden, and
spurred, expecting the supreme power to visit them.

The Judge his Circuit: Justice (like 2
that traveler twixt Jericho and Jerusalem) is fallen amongst thieves.
Covetousness that old thief has put out her eyes, mercenary Lawyers have
deflowred her, Bribery has cut out her tongue, countenance in Court has deaft
her, Partiality has robbed her of her sword, wilful conniuence has broken
her balance, and a swarm of perfidious bayliues are ready to cut her throat:
help sage Senators, and visit this desolate widow, do right, be expedite
while Psalm. 82. 3.
you have light: be not Iudices, quasi ius dicentes, nor legis-latores quasi
legis latrones, but doers, rather then speakers, treaders, rather then pleaders
of the law.

Why should great thieves hang up little ones? or Saul spare Agag for pretexts?
or Ulysses swerve from Telemachus in the furrow? take heed, perhaps some severe
Cambyses shall make cushions of your skins for your successors: Let not poor
supplyants both pay, and pray, and stay, and in the end go empty away. Every
unjust Demurr anagramatized is murder.

The Bp. his Diocese: the plague 3
of Egypt is lightamongst us; and many, too many are sick of the scab.
Religion though not deceased is sore diseased, while truth keeps her chamber
with a scratched face.

Atheists would stifle her: while walking Nebuchadnezzar-like upon the turrets
of nature, and battlements of reason, they breath forth blasphemy against God,
and infamy against man: is not this great Babel, which I have built? Is not
that which we D^n. 4. 27.
do, done by natures power? have not we wit? have not we will? have not we
reason? have not we skill? thinking to be good, when indeed they are ill:
disarming themselves while they make flesh their arm, rejecting, neglecting
the power of God: but when his name is mentioned Adder-like, they clap one ear
to the ground, while with their tail they stop the other: wolfe-like they
bark against the resplendent moon: Owle-like they fly the light at noon:
Asse-like they bray against the thunder, and Viper-like gnaw out the bowels of
their mother, saying with the Psalm. 14. 1.
fool there is no God: yet science in the most, conscience in the rest,
notions in the soul, motions of the heavens, ptoclaime to his face that his
tongue is a liar.

Papists would smoother her: loading the Church with such a multitude of
traditions, that groaning under the burden, she is fal^e into sweat.

Pope Zachary excommunicated one Virgill a Bishop for confessing the Antipodes:
and Popery would exterminate our Virgin truth for suppressing their ceremonies
(the want whereof is the best company: ceremonia a care^do) O Lord send this
cursed cow but short horns, else truth had need to look to her essence, for
she will be in danger to loose her existence. If Father Sweet be her
Physician, he will teach her speak Spanish, while the purchase of Christ shall
be fed with a half Sacrament, a wafer-cake, and now and then, a draught of
the whores holy-waterbottle: Transubstantiation of the bread, justification by
works, invocation of Saints, adoration of Images, peregrinations to Loretto,
Tridentall decrees, Remish glosses, Romish asses, knauish Seminaries, and a
myriad of other their Babylonish opinions.

Seperatists would strangle her, whilst with the sheeres of shameless
dissension, they so cut and divide the coat of Christ Jesus, that Gath and
Askalon may justly laugh at us; wandering as much on the right hand, as
Antichrists disciples on the left: for whereas they would ouerpresse us with
too many, these will not admit us any ceremonies, but like the naked Adamites
would have a bare Church without the apparel of all order.

Alphonsus the tenth of Spain, said blasphemously, Si in principio mundi ipse
deo adfuisset, multa melius, ordinatiusque condenda fuisse, that if Lipsig.
God in the beginning had chosen him for a Counselor, many things should have
been ordered better, and with less confusion; and if these men had as much
power in their hands, as slander in their tongues, and faction in their
breasts, many things in our Church government should be otherwise then they
are, for* Quod volumus sanctum est, is as truly conceited by them, as it was
by the Donatists: Bishops? Down with them, down with them even to the ground,
best let every private minister be a superintendent: the surplice as the
whores smock torn in pieces: the ring put in the bears s^out: and for the
cap, what should they do with any, but a cap of maintenance: stinted prayers
(says one of them) are stinking prayers: and God (says an other) is like a
man that loves pottage Pow. Brow.
well, but as man may be glutted with one broth often used, so will God with
one prayer often said: yet these are the men, that make the silly Plebeians
believe they know more (like Marcian and Montanus) then ever Christ or his
Apostles; when like the Lesbian Masons, they rather frame the square of the
Scriptures to their braine-sicke positions, then bow their positions to the
noterring Scriptures. Therefore it is no wonder, if in stead of the trees
dancing, the dogs fall a barking, while such unskillful Neanth^, handle
Orpheus his harp. Help sovereign judge. Bp. visit these distressed,
oppressed may dens, charity, justice, truth, else God will visit for these
things. But who am I that Phormi^-like I should presume to read any lectures of
Chiualry to Hannibal.

Let each man visit his neighbor, brother, sister, friend, enemy, in sickness,
and in prison, in distress and misery: The day star from on high has
visited us, and we must visit one another: not as Henry the fifth did his
father to snatch away his crown, nor as many amongst us to catch at the sick
man's crowns (preferring one Testament of a rich man, before both the
Testaments of God) but as the virgin (blessed for ever) did visit hercozen
Elizabeth, she carried Christ in her womb, we must carry Christ, as in our
hearts, so in our tongues to minister (as what worldly thing soever is wanting)
so some words of comfort to diseased Patients, that their hearts like John
Baptist may leap and spring within them.

It Is pure religion vndefilde,
To visit Gods distressed child.
To quench the thirsty is a moist Poto. 2. Psalm.
fruit: the thirsty ground cries for water, the thirsty stomach calls for
moisture: God gives the one, give Romans 12. 2*
we the other. It Is the Apostles mandat, if thy enemy thirst give him drink
(how much more thy friend?) he that requires it will one day requite it: thus
says the Lord, he that gives not a gallon, but a cruse, not a pottle, but a
pot, not a but, but a cup, but a sup, not of Nectar, but of water, be it cold
water, to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Non perdet mercedem, shall not
loose his reward. But least I loose my self in this buttery, or teach you to
wring at a wrong spigget, learn in brief whose thirst to quench. Who is drier
then the drunkard? It Is the ^ap-house catch; Drink will make a man drunk, and
drunk will make a man dry: Quo plus sunt pot^, plus sitiuntur aquae, the more
drink they have, the more drink they crave: though with Maximine they drink
an Amphora a day (almost six gallons) yet by no Iul. capit. Herod.
means they will leave their reckning pot, but ever they cry one tooth is dry.
Shall we quench this thirst? No, unless we will quench it in them, as the
Indians did in the Spaniards: they with boiling gold (eat gold Christian)
Oliu. de Noort. Benz. lib. 1. cap. 23. Luke 16. 25.
scalding broth were too cool for these hot throats.

Be as inexorable to them, as Abraham was to Dives, and wet not 1.
the tippe of thy finger to cool their 2.
tongue, much less to augment or provoke 3.
their thirst, least of all to make thy self merry. Woe unto him that gives
his neighbor drink, that puts his bottle unto him, and makes him drunk, he
may drink too, but shameful Abbacu. 2. 15, 16.
spewing shall be on his glory: But broach thy beer to such as indigence
inforceth to ask. Dapotum ouibus, water these sheep, be it at Genesis 29 7.
the wellhead, and at the bleating of such cattle let the rock of your heart
gush out streams of pity.

Let not your fosset once be dry
To such as want compells to cry.
To feed the hungry is a full fruit, 3. Cib^.
and full of this fruit must be every Romans 12. 20 Deuteronomy 11. 17 Luke 19. 8. Ioh.
12. 3. 1. Sam 25. 18. Eccl. 11. 1.
branch. If thy enemy hunger, feed him: shut not thy hand from thy poor
brother: but make a diuident of thy goods with Zache, an unguent of thy oil
with Mary, a banquet of thy bread with Abiga^l. Cast thy bread on the face of
the waters, to those whose face is wet with tears, moist with waters. The
Hebrew is Lachem, which is all sort of fruit as well as bread: were it bread
alone, then bread is Panis and P^nis is P^n, and Pan is all, meat, and drink,
and welcome withal, else it is as good not to give at all. The Scripture does
Way.
give certain cautions to direct our giving. Est modus in dando, quid our,
Quid.
cui, quomod^, quando. What must we give? that which is ours; honor the Pro. 3
9.
Lord with thy own substance, and feed not the poor at another door? for
why should thou be free on an others trencher. The devil would give all the
world to our Savior, (a liberal alms but out of Gods Exchequour) and
Alexander the sixth America ^n. domin. 1493.
to Spain, (a bountious Larges, but of the Indians freehold) and many a
gentleman keeps a good house, when worse then a Jew he crucifies his tenants:
for feeding at his wicket some poor that hunger, other poor are enforced to
furnish his dresser: say (gentle proverb) whether this be not to rob Peter to
pay Paul.

Why must we give? good reason: for as 1. God commands it, love Cur.
the stranger: the poor are strangers, Leu. 19. 34.
used strangely, but then beloved, when relieved: and 2. Christ demands it,
Date Eleemosynam: he that L^k. 11. 41.
gives you all requires your Alms: and 3. the spirit commends it: the Phil. 4.
17.
poor to be fed, relieved, and eased, is an holy sacrifice wherewith God is
pleased: so 4. this the means to make you rich, the RR. say, tith and be rich,
God says, give, and be rich; a special argument, for show me that man that
would not be rich, Et eris mihi magnus Apollo, has not the noise of earthly
profit drowned the voice of the heauently Prophet? each man almost imitates
Ahab, lies on his 1 Kin. 21. 4.
bed, turns away his head, and will eat no bread.

Neither can sleepie Morpheus close his eyes,
Least Naboth fall, that he, or his may rise.
Ye Vineyard-mongers, come, and behold the ladder, Jacobs ladder, heavenly
stayres, stayres to heaven, charity! now in time, get up and climb if you
would be wealthy: for he that gives to the poor, shall never be poor, he
that gives to the poor shall have greater store, like that cruse of Oil shall
be more and more. Date and dabitur, and caput coronabitur, give a cross, get a
crown, Pro. 19. 17.
a purse here, a kingdom after, Qui miseretur, proximo foe^eratur domino: if
you pity the indigent, you lend to the omnipotent, and he becomes, as the
poores surety, so your paymaster: Non ad triplas, imo adce^tuplas vsures.

To whom must we give? feed Cui.
not the Spaniel, I mean the fawning Sycophant, that (as one told Queen S. W.
R.
Eliz.) will never cease begging, while any continues giving: nor the
grayhound, the ryotous Prodigal, who will be so much the duller, by how much
the fuller: nor the maistiue, the gullet-theefe, who at the end of the term
will be ready to recatechise thy purse for an other booty: nor the Curr^, the
bawling slanderer, the hook for him is the fitest morsel: nor any other of
the Devils whelps, that are sick of that Canina appetentia, the greedy worm,
Epicure, gluttons, belly-gods, whose only study is to read Apicius his
lectures of the art of Munchery: no, no, give not the childrens bread to these
dogs: but when thou make a feast, let the poor be thy guest: yet not
Popish poverty that is wilful Luke 14. 13.
iniquity: nor devilish poverty growing from the devils bones, and books,
dice, and cards, wine, and women, and such like husbandry: but inuit to thy
table such as are Gods poor, whom the hand of the Lord has brought to
necessity, only must these be the object of our alms, while godly discretion
is steward of our kitchen. Tribue illis diuitias tuas non qui phasidem auem,
sed siliginis panem comedunt, qui famem expellant non qui luxuriam augeant,

How must we give? let the Apostle 4. Quomodo. 2. Cor. 9. 7.
direct. The Lord loves a cheerful giver, (viz,) a giver with a cheerful
eye, no supercilious lowerer: 2. a cheerful tongue, no sesquipedalious
brawler: 3. a cheerful hand, no obnoxious retarder: to this end the oil of
our charity must be compounded rightly. Shall I play the Druggist? God
commanded Moses to put into the holy oil certain spices: our alms must admit
of Exodus 30. 23, 24.
the like mixture. Myrrh, a precious liquor, that distills from the tree
without cutting or incision: so must charity from us without constraint or
compulsion. Gods Almoner must not be drawn like a Bare to the stake, a
free will offering, (be it but of some offall) is very pleasing. 2. Cinnamon:
which is hot in the mouth and stomach too, so must we neither be stone-cold
with Na^al, nor lukewarm with Laodicea, but boiling hot with John Baptist
of Constantinople, whose daily practice was to feed, and relieve the poor
himself. 3. Cassia, as sweet as the other, but a low shrub: the true Emblem
of humility: give therefore, but not vaine-gloriously. Let not one hand know
what the other hand Mat. 6. 3.
does do: and give not to men, to be seen of men, to be praised of men, for
why should thou trumpet out thine own fame: if thou love ostentation, God
will use detestation, and thy soul find desolation. 4. Callamus: an
odoriferous powder, but of a fragill reed: weak man, silly man, sinful man,
no way meritorious. Then give upon earth, but think not thereby to purchase
heaven, for when you have given, when you have done all that you have, all that
you can, you cannot but confess you are unprofitable servants. Therefore Saint
Bernard, Periculosa domus eorum qui Ber. in Psalm. qui habitat Se^. 1.
meritis suis sperant: dangerous is their house that think to merit salvation
by keeping of house, dangerous because ruinous. But least I seem tedious, let
us consider the time.

When must we give? To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your Quando.
5. Psalm.
hearts, have not hard hearts, be not hard-hearted. While you are alive, see
you relieve and look that you give while you live, while we have time let us
do good unto all. Our Gal. 6.
Saviors action, must be our imitation, I must work the works of him that
sent me while it is called to day, Ioh. 9. 4.
for the night comes (death comes) when no man can work. The
posthume-workes of many (making legacies of their wealth when they cannot keep
it, and feeding the poor with a mould-meat at their door) though it may
profit the living, yet cannot help the dead; then benefit Eccl. 14. 13
thy friend before thine end, and carry not the candle, behind thy back.

With what, and why, whom, how, and when,
Learn you to feed the sons of men.
To harbor the stranger, is a Lot-like-fruite: 4. Re^olligo.
two, or three Angels may bear him witness. All Sodom beside could not show
such an Apple, no not before it was watered with brimstone, much less since
being mare amarum and mare mortuum, a Joseph. deb. Iud. l. 5. c. 5. Corn.
^aci^us, hist. li. 5. S^rab. li. 16. Plin. l. 5. c. 16. Job 31. 32.
bitter sea, a dead sea, neither giving harbor to a bird, nor house-roome to a
fish, nor welcome to any thing else that has life: inhospitable churl, no
such churl Job; the stranger did not lodge in the streets, but I opened my
door to the traveler: an open heart has an open door, and an open mouth
too, to language forth a courteous inuitation, as come in thou blessed of the
Lord, why stand thou without. The fruit of this Genesis 24. 33
fruit is sweet, and odoriferous, for hereby as 1. man is eased: what better
ease to a deuious traveler, then a bountious host, or a knight hospitalar?
Thus was the Thisbite, eased by 2 Kin. 4* 10
the Shunamite; so God, 2. is pleased: he that sheets a bed for the members,
lays a pillow for the head, and he that lodges a Christian, entertaineth
Christ: thus Christ. He that receives you (so pleasing is hospitality that) he
receives an Angel? yea Heb. 13. 2. Aug. contra 5. hereses.
me. Discite Christiani, non indiscrete exhibere hospitia, ne forte cui domum
clauseritis, ips^ sit Christus: open the door oh man with discretion, least
thou exclude Christ, while thou excludest a Christian. 3. Wealth increased.
Pro. 11. 24. ^ Kin. 17. 14
There is that scatters, and more increases: see the Sareptans barrel, the
more is taken out, the more is put in. Poor Baucis inricht for harboring
Jupiter: Delos made firm land for entertaining Lato^a: and Obed* 2 Samuel 6. 11
Edome blessed for his guest the arc: Societ^te hospitis benefit hospiti, Genesis
39. 3.
as Joseph's presence prospered P^tiphars substance: and he that receiu^th a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall be rewarded with profit: 4. Heaven
possessed: when I was a stranger, you received me: what follows? therefore
come you blessed Mat. 25.
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Saint Augustine says as
much of Lot, Temporale Cont. 5. her
^uasit incend^um, aeternum consequutus est praemium: the Angels were welcome
to his house, therefore (beside temporal favor) was he welcome to Gods
house. But how are our Hospitalar knights chased from Rhodes? exil^d their
aboades by that Ottoman horse? The devil that great Turk has so locked up the
gates of gracious Hospitality, that Mahometan-like we prefer dogs before
M^nster. ^os* lib. 4. Pinner. re. camb.
men: and Cambaian-like have hospitalls for hawks, when the feet of Christ
must lodge in a barn, perhaps not so warm: if our face be toward Jerusalem,
we may travel through Samaria, and no man inuit us, nor shall we drink at
Jacobs well, unless some woman, some weaker vessel of the poorer rank, (for
they that worst may must carry the candle, and they that have most, will give
least) do hap to give it us: though Peter bids us be harberous 1 Pet. 4. 8.
one to another without grudging.

Porter set open every gate,
That Christ may enter in thereat.
To cloth the naked, is a warm 5. V^stio.
fruit. Begin at the beginning; it Genesis 3. 21.
grew in Paradise: in the third of Genesis God had his wardrope, whence Adam and
Eve bare Adam and Eve, had all their accoutrement, skins of beasts, (for
their figge-leaues were not worth a fig) to cover their nakedness.

And as he our Progenitors, so we our naked neighbors. It Is the precept of
Christ, he that has two coats, let him give unto him that has none, give him
one. The Communion of Saints, fruit of our faith, part of our Creed. The
practice of Job, if I have Job 31. 19, 20. 22.
seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering, if his
loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warnd with the fleece of my
sheep, then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade. Sic vos non vobis
vellera fertis oues, Job's sheep* clothed him, and he clothed Gods sheep.

But now are our Cloathiers like our inclosers all for themselves, always
contending who shall be finest, I say not in a woollen livery (unless some
Jason array them in a golden fleece) but in the Argonautstuffe of D'dutramer
bravery. I have read of a Rabbin that advises husbands to cloth themselves
beneath their ability, their children according to their ability, and their
wives above their ability: this last is good Doctrine much in request (for
somewhere the wives back pincheth the husbands belly) but we take not his
counsel in that which is first, in that which is best for every mushroome
(that is ingendered ex putredine, and crept but the last day out of the
dunghill) will imitate Cal^gula in his change of suites, never wearing one
twice.

A new fashioned block, a Virginian lock, an Indian ear, a Spanish Loue-lock
taught the V^rg^nians by the Devil. Ear hanged full of pearls.
b^ard^, a short wast (that no body now is a right Gallant) ruff upon ruff,
set upon set, lace upon lace, till the apparel it self be also apparreld:
Poccadillio's little sins are laid aside, and every man almost turned Ruffin
(specially if Mr^s. Yellow be an hired Laundresse) while David's messengers, and
our Saviors members, have not a jag, have not a rag, nor an Harrington in a
bag to hide their posteriors. Tabitha Cumi, oh for some Dorcas to condemn
these Ammons, and with the contrary virtue to shame these shauers.

Such garments as you have in store
Make gard-ments for the naked poor.
To bury the dead is a living fruit, 6 Condo.
a fruit which the living must give to the dead: when I am dead bury 1 Kin.
13. 31
me. If Bull's flesh lie above ground Lemnius.
and putrify, it will engender Bees, if Horsflesh, Hornets, if Mansflesh,
Serpents: if so, necessity bids bury it, least S^rpents sting us, and we have
no Brazen Serpent to cure us, if no, yet piety bids bury it, know you not that
your bodies are members of Christ? 'Twas piety in Joseph to bury the head, no
less in us to interre the members: Custom bids bury it. Though the old
Graecians Herod. l. 3. porchacci funer. Anli. Elian. var. ^ist. Solinus.
burned their dead corpse (as the Romans had their vrne for their dust adust)
some Scythians hanged them upon Trees: The Berb^ccae in tombed them in their
bellies: the Bactrians cast them to their dogs: Alexander the sixth baked his
Cardinals: Diogenes Serres.
wished to be devoured of Fishes: and dissolute Mec^nas cared for no Funeral,
carelessely singing, Non tumulum curo.

No grave for me when death cuts off mine age,
The bird being flowne what matter for the cage?
Yet have the Hebrews used to put earth in earth, that Cumulus cineris might
be tumul^s corporis, a Genesis 25. 9 Ios. 24. 30.
heap of mould, a heap of mould, As Abraham in Machpelah, Iosuah in
Tem^athsera, skuls in Golgotha, Mat. 27. 33 Mat. 27. 7
and strangers in Ace^dama: says Iehu of Iesabel, a wicked King of a Queen
more wicked, visit yonder 2 Kin. 9. 34
cursed woman and bury her* cursed, yet buried. And what is the practice of the
God-spels professors, our stately Sepulchers with mournful Elegies may be
vocal Expositors: Spice to imbalme it, sheet to enwrap it, Beer to support
it, porters to bear it, mourners to condole it, Bells to bewail it, tomb to
ingraue it, till the second appearing of Christ shall revive it. Therefore
Saint Paul calls the place of burial S^minatio in an assured hope of the
resuscitation: (...) A sleeping place.
The Greeks Caemeterion, in a presuasiue confidence of a joyful resurrection,
and the Germans Gods-akre, as if it were hallowed for Gods habitation: though
Julian scoff it as a camp of cottages. Indeed I confess that pompous
exequies profit but little deceased Carcasses, Nec Sen* ep. 92*
magis ad defunctum pertinent hominem, quam secundae ad editum infantem. They
see not our tears, hear not our cries, take no notice of our colors, whether
they be black as in M. Sandys.
Europe, or white as in Asia, neither do our Bells skarre away the worms: Tamen
inuenta est sepultura vt visu Sen. de remed. fort.
corpora, and odore faeda amouerentur: Yet is the grave that which does save,
not them from putrefaction, but us from infection: So, it profits the living,
hurts not the dead, therefore by the living must be giving to the dead. Nor
have we any that oppose this order but (that wandering Planet that will keep no
order, and therefore deserves to be deprived of his orders) that curious,
furious, injurious innovatorer, that being sick of Stoicisme will not shed a
tear, sick of Schism will not read a prayer, nor meet the Corpse, nor bring
it into the Church, nor say ought at the Grave, but like a Dog or an Ass
tumble the defunct into a squalled Ditch, as if it were Decorum to bury the
dead Sepultura asinorum, or as the Nabathaeans did their Kings in a Dunghill:
Martin dye, and I will be thy Poet: A^. Marc.


Passenger, stay, read, here lies.
A Comet blazing with a glow-worme zeal,
Pulled down from Heaven, with the Dragons tail:
Who when alive did search with ni^ble feet
The stews of Amsterdam, now in a sheet,
Does naked pae^ance: gentle friends forbear
To wet his Tomb with any humid tear,
Nor Funeral rite unto his Carcass give,
That gave no Funeral rite whilst he did live:
But let him have when vital breath does pass*
The burial of (Iehoiakim) an Ass.

Thus for the body, shall we feed Iere. 22. 19
the soul? our Bush is not barren of Spiritual fruit: Cadit asina et est qui
subleuet; perit anima* non est qui recogitet: If a Beast but fall, we strive to
help it, when the soul is hungry, who would not feed it?

To instruct the ignorant is a witty ^ Instrue.
Fruit, the taste of which Fruit must sharpen our wit, else our best plea will
be ignoramus: Alexanders image will not shine bright, unless Phyd^as oil it,
nor the soul (Gods image) understand aright except some spiritual paedagogue
instruct it. Can the knife cut without the whetstone? The great M^gor took 30.
Relat. reg. mogor. Ioh. or.
children, kept them secretly, guarded them closely, nursed them silently,
intending to serve what god they would serve: but neither could Auth. great.
exem.
they ever speak any word, neither would he ever serve any god. Mich. Dray
Bar* war. cant. 4.


* Thus great wits forged into curious tools
Prove great wits often to be the greatest fools.
Surely nature is an Owl, and were her nest at Athens, had need of spectacles.
We cannot come to Christ if the Father draw us not, nor do any thing of our
selves, if Christ help us not: Faemina monetam non moneta faeminam, the woman
found Solinus.
the silver, not the silver the woman: But as the Beare's Whelpe, is fashioned
by licking: So is our soul new formed by schooling. Therefore a Word of the
Master, Scholar, School, Lesson: 1. Let the Mr. be judicious, and able to
teach:

How can he write that is destitute of* ink?
Or speak a right that nothing right does think?
Si Sacerdos est sciat legem Domini, si Hier. super Agg. cap. 2.
ignoret legem D^mini ipse se arguit non esse Sacerdotem Domini: Art thou a
Teacher in Israel, and know not these things? He that would have a Teacher
to be a Knower, would not have a Tutor to be an John 3. 10.
Vnvnderstander, least the Blind, leading the Blind both be ditch'd* Pregnities
precedit lactationem* the mother must conceive before she suckle, and they that
will teach must be, Doctorum Discipuli, before they be Imperitorum Magistri,
for how should he teach the Accidens, that Hier. ad Demetri.
has not learned the A B C? 2. Industrious, and willing to practice, as Greg.
in Eze. hom. 1
lampas a Torch to lighten others: so carbo also a Coal to burn to himself,
least while the lips relate knowledge, the hands bewray ignorance, no doubt
but action is a feeling instruction.

Segnius ^rritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus.
A word in th^eare is suddenly forgot,
When th'obiect of the eye evadeth not.
For this cause would Augustus have the Senators Children present in Court.

Therefore thou that teach others see thou teach thy self, and cast not
this item away, least after all thy teaching thy self be a Castaway: why
should thou be like a Bell summoning others to the service of God, and doing
thy self no scruice to God? or like that Bestia Pharmacopolae that Julian
twitted Austin with; a Beast pretended of great virtue over night, that ere
morning was come, had devoured herself: great brute, small fruit. But Christ
taught as much by work, as by word: and example speaks after the Sermon is
ended, even after the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let the Scholar be
first, credulous to beleeu: Scholar.
selfe-conceite may as well play the Tr^want as go to School, he that
distrusts the Doctrine, shall want grace to proceed Doctor. Israel believed
the Lord, and Moses: and Exodus 14.
the Disciples heard, and believed the Messiah: All thy hearing will do thee no
good without believing: a man may hear, and read, yet be a non proficient
without a ^reed, for can any one profit by that he will not credit? Therefore
let both people, and puple leave us, if they will not believe us: for why
should our Oratory aggravate their misery in that day when the word which they
have heard (but not believed) shall judge them? Yet we are no Rabbis, they
Sal. Iarch. in Deuteronomy. c. 17. 0. 12.
are peremptory, and think to be believed though they say (as one said) that
the right hand is the left; or do as Hillel did, that one day taught his Salm.
^rac. de Sab. Ignat. Lyolae epist. de obedient. ad Frat. in Lusitan.
scholar, Aleph, Beth, Gimel, and the next day* Gimel, Beth, Aleph: nor are we
Jesuits to bind our audience to a blind obedience: me thinks, this implicit
faith, is explicit folly, only we say with Saint Bernard. Propositorum
mandata non esse a subditis iudicanda, vbi nihil iubere deprehenduntur Bern. Ep
7.
diuinis contrarium institutes, etc. believe us, only so far as Scripture
does second us, no further.

Ingenious to conceive, Quid absurdius 2.
qua^ surdo canere? it is labor in vain to school the deaf, and as vain labor
to teach the dolt. A foolelike Nabal, has a heart like Nabal, a head like
Nabal, a heart like a stone, a head like a stone: the stone is not sensible,
nor he intelligible. Suidas^
Like the fool Amphistides that knew not whether his father or mother brought
him forth: or that Perera.
simple Turk that could say no more for his Religion then this, Mahomet was a
Moore, my Father was a Moore, and I am a Moore: so that we may say of him (as
Aristippus of one like him) when he comes unto us, or sits before us, (...),
one stone sits upon another. apud Laer. l^b. 2.


Therefore pray unto him who must bore thine ear, that he will also bore thine
heart, be an Augustine in this, Da mihi domine ^d quod iubes, tun^ iube Domine
quicquid voles. Lord make me conceive what thou A^g. Sol. 1.
Lord make me conceive what thou command, then Lord command me to do what
thou please. Studious to thrive: Non progred^ens, regrediens: he goes
backward, that 3.
goes not forward. The Soldier in the camp must not always rest, there is a
time when he must be trained: Isa^c must not always hang on the breast: there
is a time when he must be weaned. So the child of God (be he but a petty)
must strive to thrive, that he may take out. It was Peter's iniunction, (and if
he be Peter, build upon this) as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of
the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
word that you may grow thereby. Ber* de confid. lib. 2.
If thou want growth, thou have no truth: for quomodo profic^s, si tib^^am
sufficis? he has nothing learnd, that thinks him so learnd, he has nothing
Pli^. not. hist. l. 8. c. 25
to learn. The Crocodile is growing as long as breathing, be thou learning as
long as living.

So Bookish was Socrates, that the Ecue of his death he would be taught
music, because as he loved learning, and therefore lived learning, so he
would dye learning: vita schola. School.
This life is a Seminary, this world a phrontistery, universe an university:
into which we are admitted (being in the womb matriculated) like Gymnosophists
naked: naked as of outward habiliments, (and so worse then a beast, not having
so much as sitis, and fames, and fr^gora poscunt) of so inward ornaments herein
as ^ad as a beast, our sole eye, the eye of our soul being put out by
ignorance, a worse disease then pox or pestilence. But says David, Come
hither, Psalm*
and I will teach thee the fear of the Lord: This world is a field whereon we
must now, if ever, sow: this life Mat. 13.
a school wherein we must now, if ever, know; ^u^c erudi^io* postha^
repetitio, therefore let us conne our book here, for statutum est, I assure
you we must repeat our weekesworke hereafter.

Quod sibi q^^sque serit presentis tempore vitae,
Hoc sibi m^ssis ^rit cum dicitur, it^ venite.
That which is plowed, and sow^d by a^, and some,
Shall be the crop when it is said, go come.
But we must go and come from Lesson.
the school to the lesson. Less then one we cannot have, and we need no more,
if we learn this one: Christcrosse, God be my speed, and well we shall speed
if scripture be lecture. Consil^orum guber^aculum lex diuina: Cyprian.
holy writ, must be the Adelantado of holy Church.

Else the Armado of all our Counsels* is likely to have a feelie haven, Silla's
haue^: you err says Christ, not knowing the Scripture: ignorance of Scripture
is the mother of error: but verbum Dominicum mare p^cificum heavenly Says are
placable seas: oh Lord be my Pilot, and I fear no wrack: Dei doctrina v^^i
medicina* the speeches Cries in ep. ad Col. c. 3. v. 16.
of God are the lessons of men, anim^ pharmaca, the medicines of men: then
speak Lord, for thy servant hears, thy scholar learneth. Aug de bap cont.
Dona. l. 6. c. 1.
Secular learning may be an afternoones lesson, in arundine sterili sole^* vua
pendere. A grape may hang on a fruitless tw^gge, and truth (in truth) is truth
in Menander, as well as in Paul: But first of all, (says the Son of God) seek
the kingdom of God: the kingdom of God is the word of God* a saving lesson, a
Lesson which will make us wise to salvation. Fathers, Philosophers, Poets,
Orators, may like the Al^ptae amend our complexions; but mors in olla, mors in
olla, death in the pot, death in the pot, if Ezechiels salt do not season
their broth, or Moses his wood relish the marah of gentle learning. Hierome by
an Angel was buffe^ed sore, for studying too much in heathen lore: but John by
an Angel was forced to eat the book which he brought him to be his meat.

To correct the delinquent is a (...), Castig^* 8.
a bitter-sweet: ^. Bitter in eating, for molestus est medicus fure^t^
phrenetico, Aug. ad Bonif. de correct. Do^at.
pater and molestus indisciplin^to filio, ille ligando, iste caedendo: the
Surgeon binds, and the patient is teasty, the father corrects, and the son
is angry: and who but selfe-flashing Papists (that think the blood of calfes
equivalent to the blood of Christ) is in love with lashing? Verily natures
constitution cannot away with correction: are we not all averse to reproof?
it is a choak-peare, Monitores acerbi, they that tell us of our faults are
bitter to us, Monitoribus I^v^nal.
asperi, we that are faulty are no better to them, Gradere, fuge in terram Amos
^. 1^
Iudae, and open no more thy mouth in Bethel. Bethel must only eat placentia,
Bethel must only be fed with pleasings: but placentia fallentia, pleasings
are leasings, as placentiae are cakes, and cakes (...), such spiced meat is
naught for the souls stomach. They that in a cup of gold drink the poison of
flattery, shall quaffe the gall of bitterness in the Celler of misery. But
albeit reproof be bitter in tasting, we have learned by proof, it is sweet
in digesting. And Dulcia non meruit qui non gustavit amara.

He meriteth for ever to be ill,
That does refuse to taste a bitter pill.
Patient! a while be patient, and in fine, thou shall find it is the finest
Physic. David (sick of sin) was content to take it, willing to taste it,
could well digest it: let the Righteous (says* he) reprove me, not the Balmes
of Gilead, much less the Balmes of the wicked are half so precious. Therefore
let every one have his Dosis, a word, or a blow, or a word, and a blow. If
wording will serve, let not sinners want it, thus the Lord, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor. It Is as great an offense not to reprove thy brother
Leu. 19. 18.
when he falls into a trespass, as it is (says Rabanus) not to pardon him,
Rab. in Mat. 18. ^
when he asks forgiveness.

But to sacrifice with honey in stead of salt, and to sooth, and smooth when
thou should bite and smite, is offerre coccum sed non bis tinctum, non
duplicatum, to offer red, but not scarlet, Orig. in Exodus ^
the Die of thy words goes not deep enough, and if men dye for want of words,
thine shall be smart enough. Cry, cry aloud, cry aloud and spare, lift up thy
words like a trumpet, etc. But if words will not do, add blows thereto.
Grauissimus nodus in ligno, Esa. 58.
non potest expelli nisi grauissimo oppressorio. An hatd knot, requires an hard
knock, a desperate sore, a desperate Ambr.
cure: Phineas his zeal, must use Phineas spear, when sin is shameless and
cannot blush. But Fides suadenda Ber. in can. sermon. 66.
non imponenda, and says another, impetranda, non imperanda: faith must be
wrought rather by persuasio^ then by coaction. True! therefore we pronounce,
peace, before we denounce war: Tamberlanes banners, white before red: many
being like that Indian Lama, a sheepish beast, that will do more by entreaty,
then Huld. Sch. midel. c. 44.
by stripes twenty: therefore first entreat; if that will not serve, thou
may profitably beat. Speak to the ear, if the ear be deaf, speak to
the purse, if that avail not, speak to the body, that the ear may say, I am
instructed, purse may say, I am impouerished, body may say, I am a^flicted,
that ear, and purse, and body may say I am compeld, that the will of the Lord
may be fulfilled, that the house of the Lord may be also filled. These tart
corrections did amend, and reformd the Circumcelians, Aug. ad Vincent.
which when they did suffer, they began to consider, whether they were scourged
for matters of piety, or rather corrected for tenants of obstinacy.

The bridle (says Solomon) belongs to the horse, a whip to the ass, Pro. 26.
3.
and a rod for the fool. Correct a wise man with a nod, a fool with a rod,
Pro. 17. 10.
yea with a club. If nodding will not serve nor breaking serve, it must be a
club, a hatchet, or a halter. Bind him fast that has a frenzy, prick him
up that has a lethargy, least our Salt -- Peter -- Rebels, keep gunpowder
Revels.

Where Mercury cannot persuade,
Let Mars be there the Marshall made.
Suspende verbera, produce vbera: Solare. 9.
hang up your rods, hang out your dugges. To comfort the sorrowful, is a
pleasant fruit. The forbidden fruit was a fruit most pleasant, though
ignorance forbids me to descry, or describe it. The Cabalists think this fruit
was grapes, so Riccius Ric^: de Talm. do^t. Ara caeli. l^. 5. c. 4.
tells us. Moses Barcepha, not grapes, but wheat, so Boskier informs us.

But Drusius is confident, it was a fig; take his word for a payment: Sane
ficum fuisse illam arb^rem, cuius fructu illis vesci non licebat, non malum
Drus. de Tetrag. cap. 4. Genesis 3.
vt vulgus opinatur pia credidit antiquitas. Whatsoever it was Eve esteemed it
pleasant to the eye, but this as more Cordial, is pleasant to the heart. The
spirit of God is called a Comforter, (...) quasi (...), moving in all, going
through all, Ioh. 14. 26.
therefore he is spiritual that ministers comfort, and somewhat a kin to the
Holy Ghost.

Power good Samarit an
The Oylo of compassion into my wound:
Mirth ecchos pleasautly
Where sorrows mightily late did abound.
Si paupertas angit, Si luctus maestificat, si dolor cordis inquietat, si vlla
calamitas conturbat nos, assint bon^ amici, Aug. in Job.
qui non solum gaudere cum gaudentibus, sed etiam flere cum flentibus
didicerunt: tunc aspera leniuntur, ad^ersa superantur, and grauia releuantur,
etc. When poverty pincheth me, or sorrow deiecteth me, or heartsgriefe
afflicts me, or ought that's ill troubles me: oh for some friend, that
singing when I am merry, and mourning when I am forrie, knows how to bring
sweetly my pangs to an end. Give wine to the sorrowful, comfort to the
mournful. Comfort my people: comfort Jerusalem: Comfort one another. He that
is in misery has need of an Electuary: Pro. 13. 1. Esa. 40. 2. 1. These. 4. 18
Job. 6. 14
he that is afflicted, should be pitied: whosoever he be that is in the pit of
oppression, let him drink with thee of the cup of consolation. Sorrow is dry,
and wants a comfortable health. Ier. 16. 7. 2. Cor. 1. 3, 4
Has not the Lord comforted us, that we might be able to comfort others, with
the same comfort wherewith we are comforted our selves?

Now comfort is duple, as the object is double. Vnus duo, one man is two, body
and soul: there is comfort outward, and comfort inward. For that which is
outward turn the leaf, and look backward: we have touched it before, only a
word more. The imbroydred Lazar comes to thy gate, craves thereat not all but
some, a pittance or crum, the froth or scum: give him comfort.

See thy self in him, and Christ in thy self. Behold I stand at the door and
knock, Oh send not away thy Christ with a mock: do thou behold him, and hold
it not from him.

Christus petit (magna penuria) Christus non accipit (magna iniustitia) Aug.
vt habeas vnde luxurietur filius, charitate careas vnde egeat Deus. Christ in
the poor man asks it of thee (great indigence) the poor man for Christ's
sake gets it not from thee (great negligence) that thou by thy wealth should
make thy son a wanton; while Gods Son in his members is suffered to want it.
But spiritual 2.
comfort is the special comfort: let not the soul want this Antidote, a quo
recessit anima plangis corpus, cur Aug.
non and animam a qua recessit^ Deus? thou mourn'st for the body when the soul
is banished, why not rather for the soul whence God is departed? Haeccine
viscera compassionis? are these the bowels of Christian compassion? for the
passion of Christ, quench not the smoking flax, break not the bruised reed,
but bind up the broken heart, preach the Gospel to the poor, that the
children that sit in darkness may receive light. Let Esa. 9. 2.
this, or the like be thy Dialect. Poor soul! though thy sins be many, and
therefore thy sorrows mighty, yet fear not the Lords fury, despair not of
Gods mercy. Judas his desperation was worse then his treason. Thou can not
commit more then God can remit: his mercy transcends his works, therefore thy
works. His promise is indefinite to all. Come unto me All, Whoores, Thieves,
Murderers, Mat. 11.
Usurers, Purse-cutters, Persecutors, Sodomites, Gomorrhaeans, Idolotars.

Christ in his life raised three to life: the Rulers daughter, the Widows
Luke 8. 55. 7. 11. Ioh. 11. 44.
son, and stinking Lazarus: one dead an hour, the second a day, the third
four: resembling three sorts of sinners, (all sorts of sinners:) 1: in
intention. 2. action. 3. dilectation. Aug. de ver dom. ser. 44.
Therefore thy sins are not so deadly, but Christ can restore thee. At what
time (what time soever) a sinner (what sinner soever) repents of his
wickedness (what wickedness soever) the Lord will forget Glos. in Joel. 2.
any more to remember it, (being gracious, and merciful, Benignus affectu,
misericors effectu) but will Esa. 40. 1.
remember for ever to forget it: and comfort ye, comfort ye: Oh how beautiful
are the feet of those that bring these glad tidings.

Sound up the Dulcimer with glee,
That drouping souls may merry be
To pardon the offender, is a mellow fruit, and falls from the tree without
plucking. Happy are they that eat it: happier they that bear it. Our blessed
Bush is full of it: S^iunt perfecti viri in^uriam diss^mulare qua^doque
obliuis^i penitus and donare, et si Remitte 10. Sen. in Pro.
necesse sit in patientia supportare.

A righteous man can dissemble an injury: sometimes forgive, and forget it
wholly: and if need be, endure it patiently.

There be many stalks on which this fruit grows.

1. Gods precept. 2. Christ's practice. 3. Want of merit. 4. Assurance of
profit.
Must, for the King: the King of heaven tells us we must, if ever flourish in
anno gloriae bear this fruit in anno gratiae: thou shall not revenge thy self
on the children of thy people, (my people) for vengeance is Leu. 19. 18. Romans
12. 19
mine, and I will repay it (who dare preoccupate Gods prerogative?) It Exo. 21.
24.
was once said an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: but Was is past, and
Mat, 5. 35.
the Canon is inuerted: a cheek for a cheek, a cloak for a stroke, a suite
of apparel for a suit or a quarrel, a 44
kiss for a stabbe, a chalize for a challenge. Love your enemies, we love not
aright if we pardon not injuries: forgive one another. The mandate of Col. 3.
13.
the Almighty implies necessity. The sons of Rechab would drink no Ier. 35.
6.
wine, because their father forbad it; nor we wrath, because our heavenly
Father has interdicted us.

The example of Christ inuites us 2
to it. Si sequi nequis pr^cipientem, sequere tamen antecedentem: if thou can
not follow him that commands, follow him that obeyes: he was despised,
rejected, wounded, bruised, oppressed, afflicted: They spit upon him, that
restored the blind by his Esa. 53. 3. 5. 7.
spittle.

His front with thorns, they sharply crown,
Which (though they pricked it) would not frown.
Strip him, whip him, All hail him* Psalm. 69. 22 Mat. 27* 48. Pseud. Sib.
nail him. This gall was his meat, his drink was vinegar.

(...),
But course his welcome we may think:
When bread so sour, so sharp his drink.
For all this he opened not his mouth, I mean against them, but he opened it
for them. Father forgive them, they wot not what is done by them. All his
revenge was a prayer against vengeance, writing in grass, what others in
brass: wrongs. Are you wronged? Let not that mind be in you which is in Lions
and L^opards: but let the same mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who
being reviled, did not revile, being smitten, did not resmite, etc. Non qui
Phil. 2. 5.
percutit, sed qui reper ^ut it bellum facit. Not he that sends, but he that
accepts the challenge, makes the Duel.

Gods child is sensible of his own 3.
blemishes. There is that in me which was not in Christ Jesus. Sin. I am
conscious of mine own infirmities, deformities, I have wronged God, I have
wronged my neighbor. My watch has not been well kept, for I have misspent my
talent of time: my chimney has not been well swept, for the pot of my charity
has seldom boylde: my linen has not been well washed, for I have not arrayed
the naked mendicant: my soul has not been well scowrd, for I have hated my
brother in my heart: my hands have not been well purged, for I have injured
others: and it is lex talionis, if others do so by me, Shall I seek revenge
if God punish me? no* my wrongs to him have deserved it. Shall I be witness,
Judge, and hangman in mine own cause, if another vex me? No, he is but Gods
hammer, why should I be like a dog to bite at the stone, and not look to the
thrower? my wrongs to God ot him, to God and him do merit it. Grego. mor. 30.


Is patienter tollerat iniuriam, and erubescit peccatis non parcere, qui apud
Deum and proximum multa quibus pati necesse est se recol^t comminisse: he
cannot choose but take patiently, and forgive freely (he must needs blush that
does contrary) such offenses as are offered him: that does consider how he has
offended his God above him, and his neighbors with him.

Our sins deserve a mittimus, 4
pains without end, are our sins stipend, it is Gods mercy that we were not
in the goal long since: but if we will grant a Demittimus, and pardon others,
God will pronounce a Remittimus and forgive us. Demittite, and Demittemin^, it
is his own language; forgive, and you shall be Luk 6. 36.
forgiven. If you will forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father Mat
6. 14.
will forgive you. Here is gain, and great gain indeed: Quare quis non fratri
demittat parum, vt dignetur and Aug. de re^^i^^d. Cath. conuersat.
dominus demittere totum? who would not forgive a penny to be forgiven a pound?
thy brothers sin to thee is as a penny, thy sin to God as a pound; his
feathers, thy lead, but this milne to smelt it.

These with others are the stalks of this fruit: let them make thee, and me
forbearing long suffering. Be not Aristotle's Disciple to think it magnanimity
to retaliat an injury. Let not Scylla's Epitaph be engraven on thy grave.

Nemo m^ inimicus inferenda i^uria superauit.
Here underneath this ragged sto^e,
Does lie the corpse of such an one:
As never any could out go,
In taking vengeance on a foe.
Be not like that wild Irish, who would not have the right arm of his child
put in the font, least being regenerated M. Speed.
by water, he should not be able to execute his rancour: a true kerne, a true
Carib: rather imitate that gentle Caesar, that said to Metellus, Nunquam
efficies vt iram Caesaris merearis, thou shall never cause Caesar to be angry
with thee: rather imitate Marcus Cato, who said to one that wronged him, and
cried peccaus, non memini me percussum, I do not remember that I was smitten:
rather imitate blessed David, who concerning Shimes that reuild him, said let
him alone, the Lord had bidden him.

In the games of Olympus he wan the prize that gave the most blows to his
adversary: but in the lists of Christ Jesus he gets the praise that puts up
most wrongs by an enemy. for God is his Agonotheta who will reward his injury.

Ecce quam bonum,
Et quam ^ucundum
Est habitare
Fratres in vnum.
Good in it self,
Fair to the eye,
Brethren to dwell
In unity,
( i. e) Supportare onerosum, to assist Offer.
the helpless, hapless, and hopeless, burdned, ouerburdned, with grief and
care cumbred, is a feeling fruit: feel the pulse of a Christian, his veins,
are not vain, but bear with compassion. Compassio, a compatior, therefore
alter alterius onera portare, bear you the burdens one of another: Gal 6.
and if an other grieve, diuidatur ^qualiter, say half mine.

Altera prostratum corpus in ponte ita collocat vt altera insistere prostrato
Plinius.
corpori, and transire per illam possit.

Upon a bridge two goats did meet
So narrow that the ^r Satyr feet,
could not have room to tread,
One coucht him on his belly flat,
That the other might (admire thereat) quite ore him be conuayd.
Here you hear of a Goat couchant: Moses tells you of an Ass couchant,
Isachar couching between two burdens, not only undergoing his own patiently,
but bearing the burden of others feelingly. Good reason. We are members one of
another, and must therefore yield subuention one to another.

The outward members did complain,
That they (forsooth) took all the pain,
The idle belly to sustain with Diet:
Quoth one my friends I think it best,
That neither hand above the breast,
Once moved be, if we will rest in quiet.
This said, and done, the body pynd,
Seeing the members so unkind,
As to refuse to feed and find each other,
Learn mortal man by what is said,
Thy love be not confinde, and stayed,
Unto thy self, but help, and aid thy brother.
Thou stand in as much need of 2
him, as he of thee, and if so, it is but one good turn for another.

A blind man once did sue to wed,
A woman that was lame:
Saying their love was firmly bred,
Where wants were like or same.
I cannot see she cannot rise,
I lend her feet, and she me eyes.
But if thou have both eyes, 3
and feet, profit, and comfort now, thou know not what weather 'twill be to
morrow.

Tu quo que fac timeas, and quae tibi. Ovid de pont.
laeta videntar dum loqueris fieri tristitia posse putes.

Therefore, fear while thou speak, least thy sweet to sour be turned.

Saint Paul does counsel it, consider thy self (says he) least thou also be
tempted. Saint Bernard does affirm it, speaking of a brother that fell under
the burden of some vice. Ille body, and ego cras: he to day, and Ber. de
resur. dom. Ser. 2.
I not unlikely to fall to morrow.

When grief does seize another heart,
Be thou content to bear a part.
Faithful Orison is a fruit most sovereign, Oration. 12.
Orapronobis, says the daughter: Oraprovobis, says the mother: Daughter the
soul, mother the Church, Mother Church, Quae si nil habeat dare, vult taemen
or are, who should she be poor, and had nothing to give us, yet is she too
pure to cease praying for us: absit a me hoc peccatam, 1. Sam. 12. Iam. 5. 16.
let this sin (says Samuel) be far from me: hence the Apostle, pray one
for another. When our blessed Savior had made his will, and bequeathed his
mother to John, his kingdom to a thief, his coat to a soldier, his body to
the cross, his soul to hell for the redemption of mankind, he prayed Pater
ignosce, forgive them father: Frater dignosce, learn this brother: Tu non
frater si non orator, Thou art no brother, If thou pray not for another: for
albeit faith says, not Our Father, but my Father, as Thomas my God, and my
Lord, since another man's faith cannot be the Vicar of my conscience: yet
prayer says not only, my Father, but our Father (every man for himself, and
God for us all deserves to be cursed and anathematized of all) when you pray,
thus say, Mat. 6.
Paeter noster.

When David played, the Devil 1. Samuel.
would not dance, belike he liked not his music: Saul was well rid of him,
better was his room then his company: when Moses prayed, Israel conquered the
Amalakites, as Gedeons Judges.
broken pitchers (broken hearts) and sounding Trumpets (ecchoing Ch^^s. in Heb.
hom. 27. 1 Samu^ll.
lips) chased away, and overcame the Midianites. Certemagna sunt arma oration,
ipsa bella (...). D^uout prayers, are strong spears. Hereby the Patriarch
prevailed with Jehovah. Genesis 12. 4.




Pater noster.

Dirges, Masses, Tretalls, Requiems, are to beg a pardon when the thief is
hanged, and after the fair, to vnpacke our ware. Medicus postquam Chrysostom. in
Mat. Hom. 75.
aegrotus obijt nequicquam prodesse potest, in vain is the potion after
dissolution. If they be in heaven, they need not to us: if in hell, there is
(...), a great gulf twixt us, and them, our prayer cannot go over for want of
a bridge: Tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in scripturis Aug. cont.
pelag. Hyp. lib. 5.
sanctis inueniemus. There is no mean between these extremes: Purgatory is
but imaginary: a Poetical Chimaera: a paper prison, like the other Limbos,
whereof Virgil (I think) the heathen was one of the first builders: but Lord
remember me now thou art in thy kingdom, and say to my Soul, it shall be
with thee in Paradise.

Do not supplicate, for any Apostate: 2
There is a sin unto death (to 1 Ioh. 5. 16.
pray for it is as to pray for the dead) I do not say you shall pray for it:
the Prophet says, You shall not pray I^^. 7. 16.
for it, to attempt it, is to tempt God: therefore Judas gai^^ fair by his
pension, when he lost the benefit of each good man's petition: bad husbandry,
for half a crown to exchange a crown, for thirty pence of silver, many
talents of golden treasure: he may well hang whom no man speaks for, no man
prays for.

But (now affirmatively) except 2
before excepted, we are commanded 1 Timothy 2. 1 1 Timothy ^2 2
all to pray for all. Magistrates: bless, 1
(blessed God) our gracious King 1
James by thy grace, etc. that as he does reign by thee, so he may reign for
thee, that he may reign, and remain perpetually with thee: Our hopeful
Prince Charles, that no Hittite 2
or Amorite may sleep in his bosom, but a true Israelite, that he may be
greater then great Charlemaigne on earth, and reside, and abide above
Charles-waine in heaven: The Count of Reyne his spouse and progeny, that 3
again they may reign of account in Germany. And our Albion-Senators, 4
oh let them be neither trans-nor Cis-Alpine-pensioners: and sic de caeteris.

Ministers: we pray for you, pray 2
you for us: Paul does bid it: pray Ephe. 6. 19 Act. 12. 5.
for me: the Church did it, for she prayed for Peter.

But how is the world become a glutton? instead of praying for us, prcying on
us? of 9284 English Parishes, Ca^b. ^rit. edit. vlt.
3845 are become impropriations. But quorsum ^^c? our Bellygod-patrons-latrons
have no ears for us, nor prayers for us.

We must all finally pray for all generally, for Jews and Pagans, Turks, and
Papists, though some Lincolne-shiere ministers say such a petition implies a
contradiction to particular election, that it would please thee to have mercy
upon all men: yet in this also we beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Indeed such charity is not to be found in Popery: for when one Turner a
Martyr did at the stake desire Act and Men
the peoples prayers, Brown a Papist (oh pitiful Papist) said he would pray
no more for him, then he would for a dog. They have Bell, Book and Candle
for us, we a Communion Collect for them, that having but one shepherd, we
might all be collected into one fold: The Syrophenician prayed for her daughter
possessed with a devil, and we for our brother be he never so evil.

But how can any pray for others, that seldom or never pray for themselves.

Oh Lord thou know I never prayed before,
But hear me now, I Will trouble thee no more.
Quoth that seafaring passenger, when the storm beat with anger, or how for
others, and themselves, that are full of vice, and fraught with sins? If I
regard wickedness in Psalm. 66. 18
my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Silete ne vos hac illi nauigare sentiant.

Keep silence ye, least God do see,
You pass this way that sinners be.
Then purge thy heart that God may hear thee, and pray for thy self, that
others may be prayed for by thee.

But happily it will be said, I have often prayed, yet find no aid: I and my
brother periclitamur, are still in danger. Foolish man, though thou be
Popilius, God is not Antiochus: Popilius to Antiochus being sent on a message,
drew a circle about his seat, adiuring him, ere he stird to answer his
Embassage: but faith tarryes the Lords leisure, and though the Lord tarry, it
waytes his pleasure. Is qui credit non prefestinabit, he that believes makes
not have, when as he that believes not makes have, and he that makes have,
makes wast: have, and wast, are mother, and daughter, too hastfull, and
wastfull, was Chone Hammigal, a Jewish Rabbi, who when the weather was
droughty, put himself in a Pie made fit for his body, saying, Lord of the
world, thy childrens eyes are fixed on me, as one whom they think familiar with
thee, I swear by thy name I will not out my Pie till thou grant them rain,
here was flesh in a Pie, but no salt, no wit.

Omniasal sapit, insipidum caput est tibi Rabbi,
Add salem vt sapidum sit tibi Chone caput.
In fine. Mutual prayer procures grace,
When brinish tears bedew the face.
I am peruenimus vsque ad vmbelicas. Martial.
Let us gather the fragments, the banquet is ended, and a rare one it were,
were it well disht: howeuer by such as it is, you plainly see our Bush is
abounding with excellent fruit. Go thou and do likewise: Bring forth (says
the Baptist) not flowers or flourishes, blossoms or semblances, buds or
appearances, but fruits: not the fruit of the world, that is folly, nor the
fruit of the flesh, that is frailty, nor the fruit of the eyes, that is fancy,
but meet fruits, meet for contrition of heart, reformation of life,
sanctification of Soul.

Even such as are vicious, are very fructiferous, producing, and bearing, as
green fruits of imperfectnesse: so red fruits of blood-thirstines, yellow
fruit of gall and bitterness, flamecollourd fruit of drunkenness,
earthcolourd fruit of covetousness, pale-colord fruit of lasciuiousnes: whose
root is concupiscence, Bole consent, branches, bad desires, buds, lewd words,
flowers, vile actions, fruits, naughty customs; which the devil does plant,
suggestion does water, continuance increase, necessity ripen, judgment gather,
and hell burn. Oh let not the children of this world, the brats of night, be
wiser and fruitfuller then the children of light. Let every one labor to be
like our Bush, whose fruit is good, good and much.

Be not an Olive bush (when the goats do lick it fruitfulness, does leave
it) when others praise thee, let them not pride thee: be not a vine bush, (the
more boughs, the fewer grapes) but if thou receive more blessings from God,
look thou return more fruit to God. Be not a Clouebush, (so hot by nature,
and greedy of water, that it robbes it neighbors plants of moisture) if thou
have much be thankful for it, if little, be content with it, and see thou do
not coue^ an other man's profit. Why should thou be like that Greene-land
foul (called an Allen) that (being of greater power) beats the lesser birds
till they vomit up their prey for him to devour, then dismissing them with few
feathers on their backs) less meat in their bellies. I fear we have in
England too much of this fo^^, but be not thou so foul.

In a word: if ever thy branches begin to wither, use Aristotle's receipt to
make them prosper: ( viz.) Cut the root, put a stone in the cut, that the pure
air may go in, and gross humor flow out. Cut the root, namely thy heart
by repentance, and true compunction: put in a stone, the remembrance of thy
graue-stone, death, and dissolution: that the gross humor, thy sins by
confession may leave thee, and the air of Gods Spirit, by devotion fulfill
thee, thus shall much and good fruit grow on thee: which gracious blessing that
it may happen unto thee, I power forth my prayers continually to the Almighty.
To whom be prayer now, and praise for ever.

FINIS.

