THE Mirror of Martyrs, OR The life and death of that thrice valiant Captain,
and most godly Martyr Sir John Old-castle knight, Lord Cobham.

OCCVLTA VERITAS TEMPORE PATET


Printed by V.S. for William Wood. 1601



To the lively image of all moral Virtues, and true perfection of heauen-borne
Arts, William Couell Bachelor of Divinity, all success agreeable to the
ancient worth of his ancestors.
THis Poem (Right Worcester:) which I present to your learned view* some two years
ago was made fit for the Print; that so long keeping the corner of my study,
wherein I use to put waste paper: This first true Oldcastle; thought himself
iniurde, because he might not be suffered to sustain the scond Martyredome of
the Press: In so much that I was contented he should stand bare-headed to these
churlish times, and endure the censure of his utmost enemies, only to make his
Death more glorious. Howsoever, now he passes under your protection; and
though my pensill be too weak, either for his or your picture; accept of the
same, because it comes from zeal.

The admirer of your virtues, Io: Weeuer.

To the Authors most honored friend, Richard Dalton of Pilling, enricht with
all gifts of Nature and graced with the chief ornaments of true Gentilitie.
HOw joyfully the Authors Poem goes,
To thee, whose wit, whose virtues he admires,
With what a willing soul he daily shows,
That love, the which thy love of him requires,
Whose name he honors, and whose machlesse worth,
He can imagine better than set forth.
His mind far more is, than his feeble might,
Yet has he wouen of this home-spunne thread,
So fine a web, so richly scourde and dight,
(Minerua like) beyond the wisest head:
The which to praise, were only to this end,
To mar the loome, and not the cloth to mend.
The Life and death of Sir Io: Oldcastle knight, Lord Cobham.
Fair Lucifer, the messenger of light,
Upon the bosom of the star-deckt sky,
Begins to chase the rauen-fethered night:
That stops the passage of his percing eye:
And heauing up the brim of his bright beuer,
Would make that day, which day was counted never.
But Mercury, be thou the morning Star,
Bear my embassage from Elysium,
Show to my country hence removed far,
From these pauilions I can never come:
Staind vice ascends from out the infernal deepes,
But in the heavens unspotted virtue keeps.
Deliver but in swasiue eloquence,
Both of my life and death the verity,
Set up a Si quis, give intelligence,
That such a day shall be my Tregedie:
If thousands flock to hear a Poets pen,
To hear a god, how many millions then?
The many-headed multitude were drawn
By Brutus speech, that Caesar was ambitious,
When eloquent Mark Antonie had shown
His virtues, who but Brutus then was vicious:
Man's memory with new forgets the old,
One tale is good until another's told.
Sing thou my dirgies like a dying Swan,
Whose painful death requires a playning dittie:
That my complaint may pierce the heart of man,
Plain be thy song, sweet, pleasing, full of pity:
And more, to move the multitude to ruth,
Let my apparel be the naked truth.
Truth bring I nak't, for other weeds she scorneth,
Save that her smock in flames of coulored silk
Is straunglie wrought, her beawtie it adorneth,
As through the same it pears more white then milk:
In open view she comes, fair, comely, meek,
For, Truth the hidden corners does not seek.
My father Reignold Cobham (whom so many
Have crowned with euer-greene victorious baies,
For valorous worth before him placed not any;
O but I must be parciall in his praise.
T'emblazon forth her own truth, Truth's denide,
Herein the Truth, for Truth, is counted pride.)
Within the Springtide of my flowring youth,
He stepped into the winter of his age:
Made means ( Mercurius thus begins the Truth,)
That I was made Sir Thomas Mowbraies page:
A means to die, who means to live so long,
Aged in ill, in goodness ever young.
There did I spend my purple-coloured May,
Bathing in bliss, and courtly blondishment:
Until the sentence on Saint Lamberts day
Pronounced was of M^wbraies banishment;
Of Englands woe, of Richards low deposing,
Of Herfords honor, of my service losing.
He might have seen how Fate that day sore-pointed,
That gloomie day wherein the heavens did moan:
She would have Herford Englands king anointed,
To rend the wreath of Diamonds from his Throne:
But Majesty, whose luster is so bright,
Destroies the sense, and dazleth the sight.
Fate the foul offspring of black Erebus,
Th'inhabitresse of foamie Phlegeton:
Ill fortunes day star, good lucks Hesperus,
Pale Deaths fore-teller, grim Porphyrion.
Jove's scribe in brass with pens of dragons wings,
The chief commaundresse both of gods and kings.
Earths Genius, man's inauspicious star,
A triple power, the knowledge of things past,
To come, and present, Trumpeter to war,
Ill at the first, injurious at the last:
A cross wherewith we all must rest contented,
Fare tho foreseen can seldom be prevented.
Then whilst the April of my young years lasted,
(Aged in nothing only but my name:)
Her forward budding in the prime I blasted,
With wind of pride, and hoarie frost of shame;
With riotous Love, whose highest point's a pleasure,
with pain before, repentance at more leisure.
And like a Trau'ler which his way has lost,
In th'vnknowne woods, when up and down he rangeth,
On every side with blind Meanders crossed,
And this for that, that for another changes:
Within the sharp-set thickets long thus tossed,
At length finds this that he himself has lost.
So in my youth I was a Traueler,
Within this world a wilderness of woe,
No Palmers then could tell a Passenger
Which way from danger safely he might go:
Led once astray in youth, who ever found
His first trod path, where pleasures do abound.
Thus lost within the Laborinth of sin,
Wandering the woods in Egypts gloomie Night,
Tying no thread from whence I first came in,
No Sun to shine, no star to give me light:
Echidnaes offspring, hell-borne serpents knew me,
And at their pleasures to strange pleasures drew me.
Some way I left before I had begun it,
And some was knottie, othersome would bryre me:
This marrish ground, and yet I could not shun it,
This steep and sandy sooner it would tire me.
This way to follow virtue would procure me,
To this my youthful headstrong years did lure me.
And youth excusd the errors in my nature,
Whose greenenes took upon him all the fault:
Persuading me, su^^ power was in no creature,
Once to resist vice when it gave assault,
Perswasion's vain, for one to vices bent,
The mind agrees, as Nature does consent.
Audacious Youth, impatient being moved,
A witless substance in a seeming show;
Scorner of age, of age yet best beloved;
By Phaeton the world's overthrow,
A sleep, a dream, a brauling lunacie,
A self-conceit short-killing plurasie.
Before this Youth in mirthfull sports was lauisht,
No mean Cumrades, no base associates,
In company with my perfections ravished,
Swore me for one of their confederates,
For valor, wit, and court-ship few came nie me,
In all which, Richard, Henry's both did try me.
But valor, court-ship, wit, and all good parts,
Make without manners but a glittring show:
Nature is only beautified with arts:
Wit oftentimes is her own overthrow.
This court-ship, valor, wit, al are disgraced,
Within the mind when virtue is not placed.
For strange attempts, for Mars-like chivalry,
Among my fellows yet I bear the bell,
In hasty wroth, and heedlesse hazardrie.
I counted virtue always to excel,
And deemed it better perish in the field,
Then for basefeare my weapons up to yield.
Fear the minds fall with lasting infamy,
In expectation of some future ill:
Twixt Mars and Venus got in luxury,
A cold con^ealed ice, a bloudlesse chill,
An Ecstasis, a breeder of gray hairs,
An object spirit, scorn to youthful years.
Yet the world poys'ned with a swaggering humor,
Of some shape-altring Succubus begot;
A wynd-swolne monster, many headed Rumor:
Vices preserver, virtues festred rot;
Prides malcontent, minds putrified wound,
A liqour moist distilled from the ground.
This airs innate and chiefest quality,
This Ship-mans hose; this heat extinguisher,
This gallants wisdom, wise-mens gullerie,
This painted wethercocke, Arts diminisher.
With cowardice begins to empeach me,
Because in worth not able for to reach me.
We daft the world with time our selves beguiled,
Dreaming on naught save on eternity,
And good Success from highest heavens smiled
On our attempts and mirthfull jollitie:
For that seems good which present pleasures brings,
Though It be the root, from whence all evil springs.
Succeesse the friend of famous Conquerours,
Fair Fortunes handmaid, daughter of pure blood,
The worlds darling, wish of Emperors
Desires great Goddess, favorite of the good.
From pale facde death or danger ever blessed me,
And with the robe of honor does inuest me.
And seeking how she might the more inhaunce me,
Though lewd my hauiour was, unsound my carriage,
With roialtie and high descent t'aduaunce me,
She joined me with a Lady fair in marriage;
By whose high honor I first won the name
And Seigniorie of Cobhams endless fame.
Long I injoi'd this weary wing of Fame,
My beauteous wife, my Margarite of worth,
Whose Nature was more precious then her name,
All titles were but strains to set her forth:
For stature, beauty, virtue, wit, and blood,
More comely none, fair, sober, matchless, good.
But beauty, stature, virtue, wit, nor blood,
Nor yet the ripeness of a flowring age,
Fair, comely, sober, matchless, lusty, good,
Can ought at all delay deaths murdrous rage,
For all these gifts from Margarite y come,
And buried lie with Margarite in her tomb.
Hymen put on his saftron-coloured cote,
And now vice had no warrandize by years,
With that I gin my fellows faults to note,
Sounding sweet council in their Adders ears.
But ill it seemed me them to blame: though I
Censurd my self like mine own enemy.
Delight saw this; and would not slip the season,
But in my soul thee made a strange division,
The sensual parts she armed all against Reason.
Defending goodness to be superstition;
A fopperie, a fond Precisians toy,
The which who loves, does live still void of joy.
My will, whose object was the chiefest good,
And understanding faculty the truth,
This sharp encounter cowardly withstood,
So weakened with the pleasures of my youth.
It Is hard to hate vice which we long have loved,
An habit got once, seldom is removed.
The troops dispersed, now darkness ends the fight,
And reason held his late-won victory:
But inward Senses skirmish in the night,
The common sense, Remembrance, Fantasy,
Whose war, is war, war only to increase,
When Reasons war, is war to live in peace.
Fair was the field where first we met, and spacious,
Environed with odoriserous meads,
Joined to a City, to the sight most gracious,
Where stately Trees, with wood-bine pleighted heads.
Of Mandrake, Poppie, ever green did flourish,
With herbs whose juice the drowsy sense would nourish.
Here none save night-byrds houer with their wings,
The fatal scritch-owles, feast profaning Bats;
From two fair founts the River Lethe springs:
And on the clearest Mineral she pats;
Whose stealing streams along the channel falls,
Like Euphrates, at first, twixt Edens walls.
This crawling runnet, hony-bubling fountain,
Whilst thousands stepped in Nights security;
Descending from the Diamond-rockie mountain,
Like the mellifluent brook of Castilie;
Turning the sand, and playing with the stones,
Would always answer both their sighs and groans.
The City with two entrances is graced,
Whose workmanship the matter seems to scorn;
The first, wherein expreslie dreams are placed,
With curious Art is builded all of horn;
The other made of polisht Iuorie,
Where dreams vnvail'd, and ouershaddowed be.
A sumptuous Temple, all of burnisht gold
Within the walls erected unto night,
Which Fantasies in greatest reverence hold;
Another Chapel Alethia hight,
With diverse forms, to diverse shapes, some tall,
Some ugly, winged, withered, gross, some small.
With scaling ladders on the walls I venture,
(In which fierce entrance well I might have perished,)
Whose Palaces no sooner could I enter,
But pleasant sights, my soul and senses cherisht:
From ghastly fear fair Icolon me keeps,
And lullabies my thoughts with careless sleeps.
Sweet Sleep, distress and sorrows sovereign cure,
Worthy entitled Nox son Morpheus,
Send down from Heaven unto Pallinure,
Man's king and Gods endeard by Orpheus,
Within the circuit of this palace knew me,
And pleasures past, with what would come, did show me.
For the Idaea of a thing in sleep,
May be imprinted in the Fantasy,
With shape-transforming visions so deep,
That it deludes the senses outwardly,
And so in form, and in estate appear
Within the mind, as if he waking were.
Thus near Iberiaes foremost fertile coast,
I entered in Gades two-leau'd brazen door.
Where I espide of Demigods an host,
Landing upon the sea- Atlanticke shore,
In years none young, with years not any old,
None parcht with heat, none withered with cold.
These Deities lived in so rare a ground,
Which thrice a year her fruitfulnes did show,
Yet plow nor planting did her forehead wound,
No other wind but Zephyrus did blow,
No showers, no rain for fruits will never perish,
Which the danke moisture of the air does cherish.
Down in a dale enameled with roses,
Ten thousands Adones standing on a raw,
And by a crannie which a garden closes,
So many Virgins and wood Nymphs I saw,
With breasts half hid, with loose dishevil'd hair,
To catch the baulme-sweete breathing of the air.
Which game somlie into their bosoms got,
Whisks up and down, twines, curls up their tresses,
And enterlaces with a Trew-loues knot;
And last; diuides each hair, each plight vndresses;
Plays fast and loose, as fearing least his sport
Should end too soon, his pleasure be too short.
Thrice twenty thousand Cupids in their eyes,
Bathing them selves; so many Graces set
Upon the banck* their brows; each (naked) hies:
The first place in this paradize to get.
Tell me the man these visions would not move,
For Sight breeds wonder, wonder brings Love.
One thought of hate, ten thoughts of love reuiueth,
Whilst beauty charms the virtue of the senses,
Great powers, small aid against loves encounter gives:
Wit's but a warrant for these sweet offenses:
What hope has reason now to quench loves fire,
When hate breeds love, wit kindles loves desire?
Mine inward sense thus argued with my reason,
Told her these saints, this heavenly place enjoying:
Spent all their life in mirth, their baiting season
Slept in delights; and past in amorous toying:
Against heaven herself who would not be rebelling,
To live, where love, youth, beutie have their dwelling.
With that I stretched my lims along the bed,
Having no power to open my gowlie eyes;
Thrice ore the caddow I mine arms out spread:
Thrice did I fall, before I once could rise:
Leaning upon mine elbow for a rest,
Nodding, I knocked my chin against my breast.
Then sighed, slipped down, and twixt the sheet and pillow
I nuzled in, joined knees and chin together:
I dreamed I wore a garland of green willow.
But snuffling low, I pricked me with a fether;
So wakt, the bolster for my back I chose,
And yawning thrice, I rubbed mine eyes and rose.
At length, well wakened from that pleasing slumber:
(O that such slumbers ever should awake!)
As I began my follies past to number,
Despair against comfort gins a head to make.
Yet in remembrance of my youthful years,
Innumerable sins, I spent innumerable tears.
Like to a needle placed in equal distance,
Betwixt a Lodestone and an Adamant,
By either drawn, to neither makes resistance^
But stands immote as she their force did dant.
So do I stand in great perplexity,
And only certain in uncertainty.
I Am in a wood, green may it ever grow,
Yet over my head, a threatening Rock still hingeth
The Rock despair, the wood does comfort show,
The rock my soul, which worm of conscience stingeth,
Twixt wood and rock, I stand on six and seven,
Yet m^kes the wood my through-fare into heaven.
So (but I list not of my valor boast,
It Is no ambition though, to boast of good:)
Reason outbrau'd this heauen-aspiring host,
And left them wallowing in their loathsome blood,
Whilst many fled, which made the more affraide,
Thus I mine ensigns in the air displaide.
But Rochester shall Echo forth, my praise
If Rochester remain not most ungrateful,
A sin in fashion for these humerous days:
To whom we owe, to them we are most hateful:
O that it were in fashion; I am sure
Nine days (like wonders) fashions but endure.
I must vpbraide ber else, not praises giving,
How first my favors patronag'd her pride:
But in too much remembrance of the living,
In dark oblivion dead men's praise we hide.
A beggar from the dunghill on^e extold,
Forgets himself, whom what he was of old.
When first her grauell-purified river,
No bridge upon her bote-lod'n bosom bore,
Some high renown I striued for to give her,
And made a bridge her swiftest current over.
Sir Robert Knowles was in the same an actor:
But Cobham was the chiefest benefactor.
And Walter Merton, Mertons College founder,
(Why does mischance near charity thus dwell,)
With lime and sand against tempest-beating bound her,
Who from her top by great misfortune fell,
Riding along the workmen for to see:
Fortune is always virtues enemy.
Kind Rochester it seems has yet respected,
His name should live in ages for to come,
In whose memorial: lately is erected,
An Epitaph upon a Marble tomb:
But one good turn another still does crave:
For this; they found a goblet in his grave.
Warham th'archbishop once of Canterbery,
The Iron bars upon the bridge bestowed:
Warner the copings did reedifie,
And many since their liberal minds have showed,
Whose deeds in life (if deeds can heaven merit)
Made them in death all heavenly joys inherit.
Thus Medway by this fair stone bridge adorned,
Made Thamesis enamored of her beauty:
All other rivers England had he scorned,
Yielding to her kind loue-deseruing duty,
In smiles, embracements, gracious looks and greetings,
In amorous kisses, murmures, night-set meetings.
But how he courted, how himself he carried,
And how the favor of this Nymph he won,
And with what pomp Thames was to Medway married.
Sweet Spenser shows (O grief that Spenser's gone!)
With whose life heavens a while enricht us more,
That by his death we might be ever pore.
With swifter current Medway to this day
From Maidstone runs, in hope the bridge to kiss,
One stream another chasing fast away,
That thousands hasting of their purpose miss:
And down the gullet all in anger glide,
Yet turn in whirle-pooles round, to view her side.
One stream stands kissing with a naked pillar,
Whose force rebutts the stream which runs after,
And back retires, with glauncing looks to fill her
Long-wisht desire; and smiles, and falls to laughter,
Last (in her language) when she slides away,
She seems to thank me for her marriage day.
With thanks the gods, with thanks good men are pleased,
And thanks she gives him that this bridge first founded:
Because this rest her weary stream has eased,
And now with oars her sides are never wounded,
But thankful she, unthankful all the town,
The cause (no doubt) was once the bridge fell down.
Jove's issue borne of fair Eurynomes,
Mirth's naked mothers, snow-white Charites:
Daughters of the Ocean, rivers Presides,
The pride of Deserts, sweet mouthed Naides,
These Nimphs of Ashdon forest never haunted
Medways flour'd banks; whilst this fair bridge she wa^ted
For goddesses could not abide the savor
Of millions overwhelmed in her brook:
These deyties now take it for a favor,
Their beauty in her glassie streams to look,
All do rejoice; and are most thankful; man
Which should be thankful, most unthankful than.
Let mariners which shute his arches through
Describe aright, his length, his breadth, his beauty;
Riding in's sight, they veil their bonnet low,
And strike their top-saile in submissiue duty:
He Will not be brau'd; no vessel since the marriage
Will he receive, but of a lowly carriage.
Some higher ship, whose sails are swollen with pride,
Whose bloody flaggs like fiery streamers hing,
At Chattam lies, and from her hollow side,
With double charge sendes forth a culuering,
Which rends the shore, and makes the town to shake,
The bridge her breath, herself in snuff does take.
The fiery smooke this Engine vomits out,
To him transported by the air and wind,
He straight receives; and prisons in throughout
His hollow vaults, his creuices, and rindes,
So the air redoubling in his arches, slips
A mocking echo to these prowder ships.
This bridge reuiues my dying memory,
Over the which I pass into the town,
To view the sacred church of Trinity:
Built by Sir Robert Knowles: and (though unknown)
That Chauntrey joining to the same I founded,
Where Harmony for ever should be sounded.
Sweet Harmony supposd of Pithagoreans,
To be the spheres and heavenly bodies motion,
Of Platonists, Amphibolites, and Iouians,
A Simmetrie within the souls sharp notion:
Heavens handmaide, one of the liberal arts
A concord, all of disagreeing parts.
Soule-drowning pleasure rauisher of sense,
Elisiums Anthem, court-enchanting spell,
Our nouice lady-woing eloquence,
The fetcher of Euridice from hell,
The cowards courage to uphold his arms,
The valiant man's encountering fresh alarmes.
The joy to griefe-accloyd calamity,
Thebes singing Siren to display her banners,
Prisoners comfort in cold misery,
Cares cosoner, reformer of the manners;
In sorrow, smart, exilement, hunger, anguish,
An helper, least we faint, despair, or languish.
Wench-wanton Jove, and fair Electraes daughter,
Of seven stars, the seventh not appearing,
Empress of solace, greatest Queen of laughter,
Venus white dove, and Mars his only dearing,
Why am I thus in thy remembrance rotten,
And in thy sweet saint-pleasing songs forgotten?
Had some feirce Lioness by the Libian so untaines,
Or blacke-mouth'd barking Scilla brought thee forth,
On flintie Etnaes sulphur-flaming mountains:
By Tygres nursed in th'ice congealed north,
Thou could not be more frozen hearted hateful,
Injurious more, less loving, more ungrateful.
Neptune obtaining but his Amphitrite,
By the Dolphins means in heavens azure frame;
In the remembrance of this benefit:
Ten star^ compacted by the Dolphins name;
Nor Gods, nor men, but Clownes, illiterate, rude,
Would thus be poisned with ingratitude.
O but I hear thy notes Angelical,
On Orpheus siluer-sounding Harp excuse thee,
Whose strayned ditties most melodicall
Tell me, the world in dotage does abuse me:
The world is old, and I more old in name,
Old age, by youth's preserved, not by the same.
The time's in dotage, and the world in years,
This organ-aged little world man,
Which cradle-witted infant-waxen pears,
Gray coated, fond, pale, hoarie, feeble, wan,
Bald, dry, diseased, rheumaticke, and cold:
Therefore the world is earthly doting old.
He that lies well, does well this ill age fit,
He Is a bare fool which speaks the naked Truth;
The one wise folly, the other foolish wit:
This stripling world is always thus in youth:
Such wisdome's doting, doting's frostie cold:
Therefore the world is foolish doting old.
Old age within her heart a Fox does hold,
A Kyte in hand; a Be within her breast,
Fox false, deceaues, Kyte greedy, catch thee would,
Be angry, stings, believed, come near, deprest;
These signs all show within this world I could,
Therefore the world is crooked dooting old.
She builds high roofes with ruins of the Church,
Sels lies for nothing, Nothing for too much;
Faith for three farthings, to have thee in the lurch:
She Is meal mouthed, simple, scarce abiding tuch.
First she is greedy, next, her craft behold:
Therefore the world is wily doting old.
When for a look she will be in the law,
To take the wall, is by the wall to dye,
At a great word she will her poynard draw,
Look for the pincke if once thou give the lie,
Is she not angry, hot, audacious bold?
Therefore the world is testie doting old.
It Is greedy, first, which usurers will nourish,
It Is crafty, Lawers lie not to the truth,
It Is angry, Fencers every where do flourish,
Craft, anger, usury, never seen in youth:
In crabbed age these vices we behold,
Doubtless the world is wondrous doting old.
But all the world in question is not called,
For art can varnish over decayed nature,
Old men have hair, and many young men bald,
Yet perriwigs and painting help their feature,
In nature weak, in art the world's strong,
The world in age again thus waxes young.
When great Apollo shows his threefold might,
And by his issue dayly's made the younger
Keeping his virtue, influence, and light,
May not man think thereby to live the longer*
No, he is a father, though his chin be bare,
But man's a monster if he want his hair.
Time was of old, when all of us were young,
Then we learned much, for little were we knowing,
When riper years and manhood made us strong,
Then we knew much, and more still would be showing,
Age knows all well, do nothing well it would
In virtue young the world, in knowledge old.
Our fixed stars, a pur-blind old man's eyes,
The aire's a gnastie old man's breath ill smelling,
Water a rhume in dropsy when he lies,
Valleys rough wrinckles, mountains gowtie swelling:
The earth a sleepy old man's long-kept dregs,
Men now a feeble old man's windy eggs.
Let us but look into the giants age,
Danske Corioneus English Albion,
Or Titans brood which against the heavens did rage,
Fierce Lentesmophius, Effra, Gration.
These were the worlds first youthful progeny,
To these our men are an Epitomie.
Whose dig'd up relics, if we but behold,
Do we not wonder at their ribs or teeth?
Like props and milstones: so our issue old
Will wonder at our greatness which she sees,
Now are we dwarfs, they will be pismires then,
This is the fumbling of our age^ men.
Nor thou fair frame with azure lines thick quoted,
Bright heaven thy swift orbicular round motion,
(As Linceus-eyde Astronomers have noted:)
From East to West keeps not thy revolution,
Seven stars their seats have left, and lost some light:
The world is old when heaven is dim of sight.
Ioue's gone to Libra from his amorous maid,
And Mercury you are fled to Scorpio then
From Scorpio, Saturn to the Shooters straide,
Mars loathes the crab, lie's in the lions den:
How can the course of this our world go even:
When all this ods and jarring is in heaven?
Pure, thin, and pleasing, was the aires first breath,
Now thick, gross, noisome it is whereon we feed,
A vile contagious mist which can uneath
But pestilence or worse diseases breed:
If sickness thus infect her from the skies,
Then the world's old, and on her death bed lies.
The water famous by a Nimphs fair name,
Of some foule-leprous body now is the lees:
The sea a sink, and rivers to the same
Are rotten pipes, so fountains in degrees,
The world o'reworne, unwholesome, for new birth
She must return needs to her grandame earth.
Our grandame earth whose for-head is over thwarted,
With highways bald, whose back huge buildings sway,
Whose bellie's stuffed with piles of men departed
Boweld, pulled out, and garbisht every day,
Heaven, earth, air, water, man, the world and all,
Are doting old and must to ruin fall.
Deceiptfull world, blood-thirsty, covetous,
Bleare-eyde, mishapt, untoward, impious,
Three-legd, treble-tong'd, bifronted, traitorous,
Backe-broken, bald, enuie-swolne, obliuious,
Air, water, putriside, heaven, earth, infectious,
To gods, to men, and to thy self injurious.
Wax old and die what? do thou want a toombe?
Into thy Chaos back again return:
And thus twice child perhaps thou may becoome,
Wax old, a new the sooner to be borne,
Mean while increase, thou may decrease thereby,
At length wax old, and last for ever die.
Die thou for ever with thy harmony,
Extenuate no more worth's matchless deeds,
Rochester blot me out of memory,
Let Cobham have disdain for worthy meedes:
For slaue-borne pesants are for worthies deemed
And worthies worse then pesants are esteemed.
Jove's Purfiuant; nimble Mercurius,
The proloquutor of my worlds won glory,
Swift as Medusaes flying Pegasus:
Hear now (O hear) the process of my story,
Greiu'd at the world, in anger ouer-shot,
My just complaint I almost had forgot.
Look when the sun most bridegroom like does rise,
Soon as the morn vnbarres her crystal gate:
So Bullingbrooke unto the gazers eyes,
Rises in Richards royal chair of state,
Whose rising was the cause that millions fell,
That we in peace, and endless pleasure dwell.
Great Bolingbrooke this type of chivalry,
In ayding false-faith-breaking Orleance,
Against the hot assault of Burgundy,
Whose civil wars near drive him out of France,
To higher honor willing me to call,
Of all the forces made me general.
Then led I war mailde up in sheets of brass,
Drawn in a Chariot with amaze and horror,
Whose fiery steedes Bellona stern would lash,
To strike the Frenchmen in an uncouth terror;
Fear, clamor, wrath, wars followers but assembled,
The French astonished, turned back and trembled.
Burgundy stonisht, which so prowdly vaunted,
Turned back and trembled, turning war to peace,
So much our soldiers sight his courage daunted,
So much the Frenchmen loved to live at ease:
How would these warriors then have feared to fight,
When with out looks whole myriads took their flight
Mark what ensues (for marking it deserves,)
With this days honor Orleance not content,
But from his oath and near alliance swerues;
And a bold challenge to king Henry sent:
But once forsworn and be forsworn for ever:
A Traitor once will be a subject never.
Henry (to calm the Sea of war) betrayed,
Rebates the edge of choler with advise;
Most mildly answers to the challenge made:
So of himself the Conqueror did rise.
Which conquest is a far more kingly boast,
Then for to brag the conquering of an host.
Proud Orleance marching with six thousand strong,
(For hate deep rooted hardly left in Frenchmen)
Beseig'd the Town of Vergie three months long:
Three hundred English only there entrencht then:
Of which small force, (in force great to withstand hers,)
I and Sir Robert Antfield were commanders.
Three months expyr'd, mind-loftie Orleance
Saw that his Soldiers courage began recoile,
With that retired his forces back to France,
Without all honor, victory, or spoil.
All Guien since for saving of their Town,
Long time gave tribute unto Englands Crown.
With Thomas Percie Worcesters brave Earl,
Against the French again I went to fight:
Percie of bold aduenterous knights the pearl:
Many to sword; but more we put to flight.
In wars abroad, in civil broiles at home,
Oldcastle still selected was for one.
Then high-resolued Hotspur Scotlands terror,
The child of Mars and magnanimity;
The throne of fame, wars palm, and knighthoods mirror,
Ioin'd with the Yorkists, made a mutiny.
Thus ill to worse, and worse to wo^se did fall,
Worst to rebellion, which was worse then all.
To raise all people sooner to commotion,
The Archbishop let the commons understand,
In guilfull Rhetoric that it was devotion,
Which caused them take these homebred wars in hand.
This ever is a Rebels chief pretense,
To veil his treason over with innocence.
Look how a Swarm of hony-gathering Bees,
(The Muses birds) leaving their luscious bowers,
Follow their king in order and degrees,
Until they find some arbor decked with flowers:
And then they murmur, hum, and all rejoice:
Even so the Commons yielding, made a noice.
And followed Percie to these civil broiles,
Who made no doubt of Henry's victory:
Emboldened by Scotlands late-won spoils,
Yet left him slain behind at Shrewsbury:
And all the Army, ventrous, valorous, bold,
Hot on the spur, now in the spur lie cold.
If this deserve a Conquerours praise,
For with a Conquest this may make comparison;
Engirt my temples with triumphant baies:
Against Percie then I led a garrison.
Percie so called; because he pierst the eye
Of the Scots king, and set Northumbers free.
Pressed then I was with John of Lancaster,
Virtues Pyramides, fames imagerie.
We vanquished our foes at Doncaster
With wisdom, not with rash temeritie.
It Is often seen, ill-pleasing accidents
Proceed from rage and hare-braind hardiments.
No day which would not me to wars importune,
No wars, but got palme-crowned victory;
No victory, but brought her handmaide fortune;
No fortune, but enlarged my dignity.
Days, wars, victory, fortune, and renown,
Called me so high, to cast me lower down.
On Sea the mild-aspecting heavens would guide me,
(Whereon who fares may not command his ways;
Cherubs on earth, and Seraphins would hide me
Under their broad gold-flaming winged rays,
On Sea, on Land, the Heavens, and Angels all,
First favored me, at last to make me fall.
Fall, ah! no fall, but honour-climing staire,
Staire, ah no staire; but prince-ascending Throne,
Throne, ah no throne; but Jove's gold-scorning chair,
Chair, ah no chair; but Heaven her self alone:
That no tongue, mind, nor Art, can tell, think, measure,
My crowned, soule-pleasing, sweet, joy, mirth, and pleasure.
The radiant Eos which so brightlie shone,
Whose lamps enlightened all this Hemisphare:
Henry the fourth unto Elisium's gone;
Of whose departure England gins to fear
Her soddain fall; and judged by outward sign,
Henry the fifth would lose his fathers shine.
Look how the Suns approach does ouershade
The lesser stars from intercourse of sight;
But from the worlds quick-ere the Sun conuaide,
The Stars receive from him their former light.
Stars by the Sun; Sun in the stars be graced,
In Sun, in Stars, heavens sun-bright glori's placed.
Henry the fifth even thus did rise, whose shine
Of virtue, dimmed all kings before him quight,
He being barred from his glorious shrine;
Their memory revived, and shone more bright:
Thus they by him, and he in them was graced,
In them, in him, fair Englands glory placed.
Now one, by none, but one makes all illustrious,
One the first mouer of this firmament,
In ruling all her orbs and spheres industrious;
Sun, stars, all plannets are to her obedient;
Like the first mouer as she now appears,
O that she might all England move his years.
When Henry, first injoi'd the imperial Crown,
A blazing Comet in the West appeared;
At which strange vision, pointed streaming down:
The common sort Art-ignorant much feared.
A cause, or sign, some said it was, to portend,
The kingdoms fall, or kings untimely end.
Our sharper wits supposed thus Ovid wrasted
The fable of foole-hardie Phaeton,
When some huge Comet was dissolved and wasted,
Great heat, and dryness following thereupon,
For want of water so the world burned,
But vpside down the Suns carr never turned.
This all-affrighting Comet I have heard
To be the plighted tresse of Meropes,
Or staring hairs within the curled beard
Of Vulcans prentice swartie Steropes.
Be what it will, thus much I do define,
Of kingdoms fall it is neither cause nor sign.
A Comet is an earth-agreeing vapor,
Drawn by the power attractiue of some star,
Fyr'd by the Suns beams, burns like a tapour:
Seen in the supreme region of the air:
Turning those beams, receives form withal,
Bearded, or trest, or stretching forth his tail.
Why should a mist-hung Star-exhaled Meteor
To kings, or kingdoms be prestigious?
Whose cause is not above the power of Nature:
Why should it seem to men prodigious?
Unless we would this Axiom reject,
A natural cause, a natural effect.
In Europe many Comets have we seen
Fore-running kings, nor kingdoms overthrow,
And kings with kingdoms vanquished have been,
When never Comet in the Air did show.
To prophecy from Comets, or divine,
It Is foolerie, they neither cause nor sign.
If ever sheild-shapt Comet was portent
Of Critic day, foul and pernicious:
Then to the Frenchmen, this assign was sent,
Disaster, fatal, inauspitious:
Whose bloody tresses tilting did foreshow,
At Agincourt their blooddie overthrow.
Or else it was (would it had never been,)
But the forerunner of my Tragedy:
And heavens saw (oh had they never seen)
I should solicit nimble Mercury,
To ingraue my words upon the hardest mettle,
Whose Characters in hearts of steel may setle.
Which when heavens saw, (what does not heavens see?
With rain of tears she seems my case to weep,
Using all means, but all means would not be,
From death ensuing danger me to keep.
But hard it is for heavens to prevent,
When destinies for death give once consent.
My Destinies are set in parliament,
Above their heads a curious frame of stone:
Marble below, and during Adamant,
On each side flint, and softer object none,
Save that in chaires of hardest oak they sat,
In steed of wooll-packes near the barred gate.
In scarlet vestments winter-coloured tresses,
Iron their wands, of brass their writing table,
Pens made of tin; for ink strong aqua fortis,
Their paper steel, their carpet Indian sable,
Their countenance like Caiphas, moved to ruth;
For god, religion, valor, age, nor youth.
In Paul's thus sat this universal Sinode
The chief Archbishop Thomas Arundell,
More stern then Minos, Eacus, or Herod,
Like Rhadamanth the grim-fac'd judge of hell:
In the first year of Henry's happy reign,
Last of my joy, and middle of my pain.
First the forsworn Inquisitours sent to them,
Of Wickleues (as they termed them) villainies,
Ouf of whose books they did collect, to shoe them
Two hundred sixty and six heresies;
All stricken dumb, they star'd as if their eyes
Should for an answer then entreat the skies.
To stop the worlds talkatiue wide mouth,
Wherefore they sat upon this convocation,
They hired men to blazon for a much,
It was all for the churches reformation;
Thus mischeife will her vice in virtue mother,
Blearing men's eyes with one deceit or other.
For first the sun dissolve might with his beams,
The icie bulk of way less Caucasus,
On whose snowie mantled top it never gleames,
Then these frost-bitten prelates sembled thus
Would otherwise have all their causes ended,
But as before the Sinode they pretended.
Nay Mercury, if with thy charming wand,
Thou had descended from the' Olimpique spheres,
To plead for pity, at their feet to stand.
With both thine eyelids full of swelling tears,
This sense-beguiling action had but ended,
My judgment as before it was pretended.
Before these deepe-braind all-fore-seeing Doctors,
These reverent fathers purgatory teachers,
I was complained of by the general proctours,
To be a great maintainer of good preachers.
O times untaught, men scorners of sound teaching,
Lovers of plays, and loathers of good preaching.
That Richard, Henry's both I had informed,
Of the clergies great and manifold abuses:
That popish bulls and ceremonies scorned,
Rooms dignity, her rites, and sacred uses,
And that I wished the popes dominion,
Might stretch no surr then Callis O^^an.
That I had caused W^ckleues books be sent,
Fair writ, to Boheme, France, and Germany,
Whereof two hundred openly were brent
By Prages Archbishops great authority,
That I pre^erd up Bills in Parliament,
Where to the King and Lords gave all consent.
Of all the Cleargies villainous abusion,
Which I put up in open Pa^lement,
Writ in a briefe-containing sharp conclusion,
These verses were the summarie content,
Whose souls with sin empoisning hate did anguish,
That they never left me till they law me languish.
Plangunt Auglorum Gentes crimen Sodomorum,
Paulus fert horum sunt idola causa malorum,
Surgunt ingrati Grezite symone nati,
N^m^ne pr^lati, hoc def^nsare parati,
Qui reges esti^, populis quicunque praestis,
Qualiter hijs estis gladios prohibere potestis.
Bewail may England sin of Sodomites,
For Idols and they, are ground of all their woe,
Of Simon Magus a sect of hypocrites,
Surnamed Prelates are up with them to go,
And to uphold them in all that they may do:
You that be rulers peculiarly selected,
How can you suffer such mischiefs uncorrected?
Now least delay bred danger, they were pressed,
For to proclaim me for an heretic.
But one of more experience than the rest,
Such hazard rash proceedings did not like,
Because I was in favor with the King,
It Was best (he thought) to have his councelling.
My life-surmising Bishops swollen in rage,
Ambitiously (high Prelates lowlines)
As if they had vowed sin-pard'ning pilgrimage,
With tapers to Saint Peter's holiness,
Went to the king, made great complaints and lies,
Blemished my name with grieuious blasphemies.
Which when he heard (kings then too much would hear them)
Then he desired (why should not kings command)
In mild-perswading words and deeds to bear them
To me the chiefest pillar of his land,
Unto the church to bring me without rigor,
Respecting knighthood prowesie, stock, and vigor.
And promised them upon his excellence,
(If in pursuit they took deliberation,)
In smoother-edge-rebating eloquence
To conquer me by might of sweet persuasion:
The clergy gone, Henry for Cobham sent,
I came, and showed my self obedient.
Look how some tender bleeding-harted father,
When Is son has vowed a vertue-gaining voyage,
Flint-rock-relenting arguments will gather
All to diswade him from this pilgrimage,
And prays, intreates; intreates, and prayers vain,
At length considers it is for virtues gain.
Yet bout his neck he uses kissing charms,
And down his bosom raines a shower of tears,
Hugges, culles, and clippes him in his aged arms:
This thing he doubts, another thing he fears,
Takes leave, turns back, returns, intreates anew,
Gives over, weeps, and last, bids him a dew.
Even so the king, to stay my voyage tended,
(My vowed voyage to the holy land,)
Ten thousand reasons both begun and ended,
That against the Pope I should in no wise stand:
Then vows, prays, treates; vows, treates, and prayers vain
From prayers, treates, and vows he does refrain.
To whom I answered in humility,
(Because I knew kings were the Lords anointed)
To him I yielded all supremacy,
As Gods sword-bearing minister appointed:
My body, goods, my life, my love, my land
Were his to use, distribute, or command.
Then in a sorrow-sighing ecstasy,
(Seeing my zealous burning true affection,)
Denying to the Pope supremacy,
Yielding to him foote-treading low subjection)
Henry took leave turned back, entreated new,
Gave over, wept, and last bade me adieu.
If tyrants will, usurped authority
Must be obeyed, what reverence me behooved
To give this king, this tyrants enemy,
Feared for love, and for his virtues loved,
Whose honors ensign over the world had spread him,
In wars, and peace, if church men had not led him.
And tyrants tended on with injury,
With murders, rapes, loved only but for fear,
Whose sword and scepter gards iniquity,
Ought to have their subjects reverence to them bear,
As we our selves, so must the common w^^lth,
Some sickness, sometimes suffer, sometimes health.
As some disease, or bed infecting bile,
Whose pricking ach, sharp agony, and stings,
Must be sustaind and suffered for a while,
Till time to his maturitie him brings,
Not rashly then, but as the Surgeon will,
Least sudden handling all the body spill.
Even so a Tyrant (Realms infectious bile,)
Must not be robbed of his regalitie,
Till death him of his regiment beguile:
Or wise men for this grief find remedy:
Not rashly then, for altring of a State
Breeds often outrage, bloodshed, and debate.
Even as the head the body should command,
And all his parts, to peace or warfare lead*
So with a mighty Monarch does it stand,
His subjects parts, and he himself the head:
But if those parts do grudge and disobay,
Head, body, Monarch, subjects, all decay.
A God, a King, are conuertible voices,
Then Kings like Gods should govern and bear sway:
What Giants brood in uproar so rejoices,
That against the Gods his banners will display?
Though with his huge weight Pelion Ossa pressed,
And fought with Jove, he never got the best.
How many blessed Patriarchs suffered wrong
By cruel Tyrants sin-reuenging rod?
And have endured such heavy bondage long,
Accounting it a torture sent from God.
The Tyrant as a man may be rejected,
His place and office yet must be respected.
What punishment for practizing belongs?
But punishment, nor practice will I name:
Men more do follow most forbidden wrongs;
When by forbidding they do know the same.
For Parricide the Romans made no Law,
Least such a sin the people so might know.
Now Arundell resorts unto the King,
By Popish charms inchaunting him thereto,
To send Cytations, fore them me to bring.
(What was it not but Clergy men could do?)
The Sumner came to Cowling, but as one
Afraid, turned back his message left undone.
The Kings doore-keeper (in the silent night,)
John Butler sent for was by Arundell:
For this heauen-martyring deed he doubtless might
In Cerberus place have kept the door of Hell.
With great rewards, and warrantize from blame,
He caused him cite me in king Henry's name.
This kiss-betraying Judas writ I stood,
Who with a lie thus left me in the lurch:
But still the Bishop thurstie of my blood,
Caused writs be set on Rochesters great Church.
In pain of curse commanding me remember,
To appear at Lede^ th'eleuenth of September.
All were rent down. He excommunicates
And cites a fresh with curse and interdiction,
Compels the Lay power: them he animates
T'assist him in Apostataes conviction.
In more reproach and vile contempt to have me;
Such like opprobrious names the Bishop gave me.
At last (thus tossed) I writ my faiths confession,
Unto the four chief Articles answered:
Of Penance, Shrift, Saints, transubstantiation,
Which against me all by Arundell were laid.
I come to Court and written with me bring,
My Swans last funeral dirgee to the king.
Which to receive Henry began to grudge:
(Mark but the power of Clergy men those days)
Commanding me deliver it to my judge
(Here Arundell both sword and miter swaies)
The Archbishop: But with a flat denial,
I did appeal unto the Pope for trial.
But this deny de in presence of the king,
(Without vainglorious ostentation,)
I proffred an hundredth Knights to bring,
Esquiers as many, for my just purgation.
Not once depending on their safe protection,
But to the King show dutiful subjection.
Again I offered in my faiths true quarrel,
By law of Arms to fight for life or death,
With Christ'n, Heathen, Turk, Jew, Infidel:
The king excepted, any that drew breath.
They answered me, I was too valorous bold.
Then in the Tower they laid me fast in hold.
Valor the son of mighty Jove esteemed
Where blooddie Mauors borrows his name,
Of old Philosophers only virtue deemed:
Learnings bright shield, the register of Fame.
Which to express the Grecians could afford,
For Valor, Mauors, Virtue, but one word.
Death scorning Arioth, why is not regarded
Thy Sun-resplendant kingdom conquering power?
Is Mars-amazing Tournaments rewarded
With Traitors meede impris'nment in the Tower?
From bearing Arms valor has me exempted;
Why was my challenge else not then accepted?
Sir Robert Morley then the Towers Lieutenant,
Twice (to be brief) did bring me to appear;
In Plutoes court before this Rhadamant:
The Arguments of my strong faith to hear.
Yet he no faith had, was it not a wonder,
That he was faithless, all the Church Faith under?
In all mine answeares taking great advise,
As a true faith-professing Protestant,
Not superstitious, nor too fond precise,
Whose firm resolve no tyranny can dant.
So with mine answeares as it seemd amazed,
My judgment on the soddaine forth they blazed.
To heavens all seeing light upon my knees,
(The sentence given) humbly did I fall,
With heau'd-vp hands prayed for mine enemies;
In his great mercy to forgive them all:
Bound hand and foot back through the Sluice I Am led,
The gazers eyes like sluices in his head.
Whilst there I lie in midnight-dark immured,
My friends emblazoned forth mine injurie^
Whereby the Priests great obloquie incurred,
Both of the Commons, and Nobility,
In policy, to have this tempest staid,
They to my Bills an abjuration made.
A parliament was called at Leicester,
(Because I had such favor bout the city;
They would not have it kept at Westminster:
This act established was; O more then pity,
That such strange acts should be established ever,
Which man from wife, from goods and lands does sever.
That whosoever in the mothers tongue,
Should read, or hear, the sacred Scriptures scand:
For this so heinous heauen-offending wrong,
From him, his heirs, should lose his goods and land;
Against Heavens, and against the Kings great majesty,
He should be hanged for treason, burnt for heresy.
O murder-poisned ruthlesse Rhadamants,
Blood thurstie Neroes, brainsicke Bacchides,
Earth swallowed Typhons, currish Coribants,
Beare-fostered Dracons, damned Busirides.
Live by your evil, know for evil done,
Lives with the father, dies not with the son.
Now to release my body from the Tower,
(How might the Tower include so old a castle)
Case-altring bribes I used not, strength, nor power;
But with my wit, out of her bonds I wrestle.
The prentice bard of freedom thus adventures,
To break his bonds and cancel his indentures.
Riches in thraldom no contentment bring,
All lordship's lost when liberty is gone,
What vaileth it a lion be a king?
Closely shut up within this tower of stone,
Man was made free, and lord over every creature:
To be in bondage then, is against his nature.
The husband man more glad is at the plough,
That browne-bread crusts, and restie bacon eats:
Then th'imprisoned king that has enough,
Of wastell cakes; and far more lushious meats.
No bird takes solace by her songs in hold,
Although her meat be curds, her cage of gold.
Nor unto me that lay in prison bound,
In music mirth was: or in riches pleasure,
Iingling of fetters had no merry sound,
My grief too much, for joys on earth to measure,
But now I Am free; my keeper he remains
To taste my sorrows; undergo my pains.
Nor can I judge, I being misst the morrow,
His griefe's extreme, though foolishnes it be,
For treasure lost, to wail, or make great sorrow:
When, whosoever greeues in that degree,
Counting his loss, and afterward his pain,
He of one sorrow makes sorrows twain.
But the remembrance of my prisonment,
In little ease fast bound in iron chains,
Did breed more comfort, joy, and souls content,
When liberty had loosenes of the raines,
One by another contraries delight,
Day is delightsome in respect of night.
And though I am escaped from the Tower,
Fear yet my soul in prison fast does hold,
Other mishaps pursue me every hour,
Burnt child dreadeth fire, the prouerb's old,
Who d^eades no danger, in danger must fall,
What fool once at large, would make himself thrall?
Sir Roger Acton, in the priests displeasure,
Of my escape was thought the chief procurement:
Only when it was the night, which gave me leisure,
(Whose shade for freedom, is the sole allurement:)
To think of slight, effecting what I thought,
With both together my escape I wrought.
Night the beginning of this massy round,
The worlds mother, shadow of the earth,
Great Demogorgons issue from the ground,
The ancientest of Goddesses by birth,
Lovers delight; loves fittest time to play,
Venus bright star, and Cupides clearest day.
The ease of care, for ease the sweetest rest,
The peace of mind, the quiet seat of peace,
The soul of sleep, the sleep of souls oppressed,
Desires best mean, impris'nments release:
Above all nights, nights, days, each hour remember,
To solemnize the twenteth of November.
Mounting her chariot of dark Ebony,
Whilst thorn-backt Cinthia held her sennets rain,
Adorned in her winters livery,
Of stars three millions following as her train,
She rockt the world with sense-sure-binding sleeps,
And bade me lanch forth to the Ocean deeps.
Tide for the ship, and ship was for the tide,
Wind for the tide, and tide was for the wind,
For Neptune men, and Neptune them to guide,
Thames wanton-currant stealing on behind,
Night, Neptune, men, ship, tide, the Thames, and wind,
For my escape were all in one combind.
And whilst I cut this dangerous swelling sourse,
The brest-bare-loue-enticing Naiedes,
Play on before me, and direct my course
To the dew-bedangled Oceanitides,
For whose sweet sake I Am entertained a stranger,
And harmless saved from waves, from wind, from danger.
What time the gloomie morning from her bed,
Muffled in mists, and raukie vapors rose,
With watrie locks about her shoulders spread
Regardlessely; because she did suppose
Our quiuering flags and streamers did out-braue
The golden sun, upon the silver wave.
I rode on Goodwins mercie-wanting sand,
Or sea-mans swallowing gulf drunk Hecates,
And like Ulysses to his dearest land,
I scoured the Scillaes and Simphlegades,
Ariuing at my wisht-for haven Dover,
And through Kent to Cowling I came over.
Ship, slice the sea, and be thou deifi'd,
Shine brightest on this starre-bestudded veil,
In heaven more worthy to be stellifi'd,
Than that wherein the Argonautes did sail:
Let frothie waves die over thy pitchie black,
And in Elisiums deep last suffer wrack.
But home, no harbor was for mine estate;
I Am still pursued so with mine enemies,
E're thrice the sun did open his Eastern gate,
I with my household were constrained to slay:
Tossed long upon the Bishops Sea, at last
Near to saint Albones, we our anchor cast.
But by misfortune it was the Abbots land,
Whereas we lay; so by his privy spies,
The fat-backt tumbrell soon did understand,
And unawares a sleep did us surprise,
Three of my men he took, my books, my wife,
Only with one I fled, and saved my life.
My men to treat the Abbot now begin,
My Margarites beauty, streaming on his face,
Fairness no favor in his sight would win,
Their words no pity move, their looks no grace:
Then the began speak, but spoke unto the wind,
Remorse did never lodge in clownish mind.
Dumb stood my dove, and wrung her hands, whilst often
Low kneeling down, tears from her eyes did shower:
Hard is that heart which beauty cannot soften,
Yet mourning beauty had on him no power:
Although her tears were like his crystal beads,
Which melted, wash the place whereon he treades.
Still she intreates, and still the pearls round
Still through her eyes, and well upon her face,
Such honey drops, on roses I have found,
When bright Apollo held the morn in chase:
But both the charms, of tears and sugared words,
For their release no aid at all asordes.
Thus kneeld, thus prayed, thus wept my beuteous Queen,
To see my loving men's imprisonment:
Thus wished she; rather that they might have seen
Her dying day, or endless banishment:
And in remembrance I was mist among,
Her weakened sorrows thereby grew more strong.
But now the limbecke of her blood-shot eyes,
Burnt up with sighs, their springing tears have staid,
No hope of life in her the Abbot sees;
So back to Cowling safe she was conuaid:
She drowps, she faints, she swownds, she comfort flies,
I was her comfort, comfortless she dies.
I travel still, like to the wandering knight
For ladies love, on strange adventures bownd,
As counceller I made the tonglesse night
Of my distress, which all in silence drowned,
Least to the world, day should my grief discover,
I strive, until heart, eyes, sighs, tears, ran over.
Through many bywaies, many countries fled,
In midst of Cheshire now I Am on a river,
By more crookt winding which her current led,
Then I had gone by-ways; her name the Weeuer:
On whose proud bank such entertain I had,
As longer, if I might, I would have staid.
Still do I wander by the banks of Weeuer,
With gorgeous buildings stately rich adorned:
Buildings the banks, and banks outbraue the River;
She swells over banks and buildings, them she scorned:
Limits there be for every thing beside,
No banks can limit in the sea of pride.
Her tumbling stream my guide was to veil royal,
Through all the Wyches unto Ashtons chapel,
Frodsham, Rockesauage, Thus I had a trial,
How she unloaded all her rolling Channel:
With near embracements Weeuer, Mersey met,
And both together the Irish Seas they great.
I will but wade near to this Rivers brink,
And of her deepnesse make this shallow boast:
Her cooling water those dry countries drink:
So she makes fruitful all the western coast;
That no less famous, no less fair a river,
Then the fifth Auon, or third Ouze, is Weeuer.
To Lancashire from hence my journey lies,
Where plenty dwells, where pleasantness of Air
Breathes forth like baulme from rose-strawne Paradies;
At the first blushing of the morning fair:
Where beutie, virtue, love, wit, and the Graces,
Sit all in ^riumph on the weemens faces.
I do salute this climate in my way,
On which the heavens such favors did bestow:
But it was too hot for me therein to stay,
Except I would my self a Papist show:
So there, through many pains and perils past,
I Am safe returned back to Wales at last.
Here Cobham lives, oh do not say he lives,
But dying lives, or living howerly dies^
A living death exilement always gives,
A banished man still on his death bed lies.
Mine high estate is low misfortunes grave,
My power restrained is now a glorious slave.
What in exilement to my sect befell,
Daigne to unfold mellifluous Mercury:
Nay stay, why should thou to the world tell,
That with thy tongue, all eyes abhord to see:
Yet grief kept in ofttimes does grow more fell,
For rivers damm'd, above the bank do swell.
This Act proclaimed and disanuld in many,
Twice twenty hundred souls were martyred:
Out of the land to Spain, and Germany,
Bohemia, France, and Scotland, others fled.
Who would not fly, what patient man can bide,
In Clergy men ambitious hautie pride?
Sir Roger Acton, Brown, and Beuerley,
Knight, Squire, and Preacher, valorous, virtuous, good:
In Chr^stenmas upon Saint Thomas day,
Against certain Priests upon a quarrel stood:
For which so heinous and inhumane wrong,
They were attacht, and into prison flong.
Now was the month which Ianus has to name,
Of old new christened by Pompilius;
And wondrous proud that he had got such fame;
Added feeld-purging Februarius:
Ianus bifronted, one which bids adieu
Unto the old year, entertaines the new.
When Roger Acton, Beuerley, and Brown,
Of Heresy convicted by the Act:
To Thicket feelds upon an hurdle drawn,
Were hanged, and burned (O more then monstrous fact:)
And through the Realm all Artists it would cumber,
By that fore Act the martyrs all to number.
Some two years after was a mutiny,
An vproare, tumult, or rebellion
In Saint Gyles feelds; the which conspiracy
Acton and I, some do affirm begone;
But the Kings power not able to with-stand,
We fled, were taken, burned out of hand.
Which time tree-garnisht Cambriaes lofty mountains
Did ouer-shade me with their beetle brows,
And by Elysiums Nectar-spouting fountains
Acton did march in Saint-triumphing shows:
From Wales return I could not then to fight,
From Heaven Acton would not if he might.
Twice told, two twelve months now the hours have broke,
Their morning slumbers on the Sun to tend,
And bring his horses to the charriots yoke:
Mark now the period of my doleful end:
The Clergy malice (not ore-blowne) will have me,
Though heaven and earth, and all had sworn to save me.
With lordly gifts and kingly promises
They fed Lord Powis (governor in Wales,
He came to me pretending holiness;
To true Religion for a time he falls:
And last, his Judas kindness did bewray me,
Seeking all means how that he might betray me.
Powis his promise feign would have forsaken,
Before the means for my attach he wrought:
I was not one so easy to be taken,
With his own blood his bribes he dearly bought:
But I not able to withstand his strength,
(Not Hercules against two) was took at length.
In greatest grief this one thing made me glad,
(Though hard it is fasten mirth with misery)
That in mine absence Arundell was dread,
Which was resolved before, my death to see:
But seld comes better, he though void of grace,
Yet was a man, the Devil came in his place.
Thus ill at worst does always gin to mend,
And by example good does often gain:
That by degrees so rising in the end,
To perfect goodness it returns again:
So since his time they have so risen still,
Thriuing in good, as they decaid in ill.
Now goodness raised to her highest pitch,
In snow-white robes is sent us for a gift:
The radiant splendor of this Empire rich,
Whose shining luster heavens does enlight:
O that I could a spirit in thee breathe,
Whose life preserues divinity from death.
By Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury,
And Bedford Prorex (oh the King was absent:)
Of Treason I Am condemned and Heresy;
A double crime, a double punishment:
My judgment given; of death, the day and hour
Appointed; I am sent back to the Tower.
Death the pale daughter of black Erebus,
What fashion to appear in does not know:
But council takes of Nox and Morpheus,
What form most terror and amaze will show:
Hell, Sleep, Night, Death, are troubled to devise,
What new found shape might please these tyrants eyes.
Two fyrie coursers foming clottred blood,
Whurries; at last, Death bound in iron chains;
Whilst goblings (gaping like a whirle-poole) wood,
Do lash their goarie sides, with steeled yaines:
Blood and revenge, by in a chariot ride,
Millions of furies scudding by their side.
Which all at once do vomit Sulphur flakes,
Throw scorching brands, which wrapped in brimston, choke
The trembling Audience; that affrighted quakes,
To view the Sun eclipst with steaming smoke:
To hear devils, ghosts, and feends howl, roar, and yell,
Filling the earth, as though they empted hell.
To Thickets feeld thus was Oldcastle hurried,
The gallows built of purpose wondrous hie:
Near to the top of which, (as one lies buried)
In three cold chains mine aged corpse do lie:
The faggots fyr'd, with me the gallows burn,
I call on God, and to the fire I turn.
The Prelates curse, alowd the people cry,
One would rebel, another him aswageth,
One sighs, to view another blubred eye,
One murmuring railes, another inlie rages,
All weep, some howl, some faint, some swound, some die.
Deafing the heavens, darkening the sky.
The bundels crack; with that the mourning Air
Comes whisking round to cool the raging flame,
When he perceiues his breathes but bellows are,
Rather to kindle then to cool the same:
He turns himself to water, and he raines
To quench the fire, and ease me of my pains.
The fire, red-blushing of his fact ashamed,
Clad him in Smoke, the smoke to Air he turned,
That air to water, water earth received,
Earth, like the fire to melt to water, burned:
Earth, Water, Air, Fire, symboliz'd in one,
To quench, or cool, Oldcastles Martyrdom.
But now I gasp, I fry, I drop, I fall,
My Chains do yield, Spectators stand aghast,
To make the which abhorred more of all,
My Boots and Spurs must in the fire be cast.
O death! strange death! which to describe at large,
Would ask sweet Ouids wit, and Nestors age.
If wits pearle-dropping Opobalsamum,
In Amber-streaming Eloquence were dry;
Unto my bleached cindars she might come,
And take a fluent Helicon supply:
Mine Ashes bathed in th'vnguent of her eyes,
A siluer-fethered Phaenix would arise.
Ah no! my bodies snow-white burned ashes,
(Those harmless relics) cast were in the river;
Whose salt-fresh-meeting waves betwixt them washes,
Like Lethe, my remembrance not to live here:
My virtues fame, is like my bodies death,
Kindled with a blast, and burnt out with a breath.
And in this idle age who is once forgotten,
Oblivion dims the brightness of his glory:
Envy is ripe before his bones be rotten,
And overthrows the truth of virtues story:
Despoil's his name, and robs him of his merits;
For naught but fame man after death inherits.
Nor can my soul within the sable night,
When all (but lovers) welcome careless rest:
Like to some subtle shade, or wandering spright,
With goarie sides, and deeper lanched breast;
Holding in tho'ne hand wildfyre, in the other
A torch, to stifle the air with pitchie smother.
With deep sunk eyes, lanke cheeks, and pallide hew,
Dismembered arms, sharp visage, doubtful sight,
Enter some watchful Poets secret mew,
His heavenly thoughts, and quiet studies fright;
With hollow voice: commanding him set forth,
Immortal verse for my entomblesse worth.
Then should the world on brazen pillars view me
with great Achilles, in the house of Fame;
His Tutored pen with Tropheis would renew me,
And still repair the ruin of my name:
But I Am inuirond with the Elisian feelds,
Which for departed souls no passage yields.
But Wickleues soul now bears me company,
And Jerome Prages, within the highest heaven,
(These were my comfort in calamity)
Whose joys ( Rome says) her curses has bereauen:
Thus (if they could) they would deny us to have,
In heaven our souls, as in the earth our grave.
Jews bury him, which railes on Moses laws,
Turks him, which worships not their Alkaron,
Tartarians him, which Cham no reverence shawes,
The Persians him, which worships not the sun,
More rigorous cruel then this Romish crew:
Then Persian, Turk, Tartarian, or Jew.
Their dead in banquets Scithians devour,
Their dead with dogs Hircanians do eat,
Phagi with fish; with foul the Assirian pour,
The Troglodites to worms are given for meat:
More heathenish papists, they deny me to have,
In beast, fish, foul, in man, or worm, my grave.
Becket was wounded in his priests apparel,
In Romes defense; his death was glorious,
I burnt, unburied, drowned for Christ's own quarrel,
My death to most was ignominious;
He praised, adornd, and for a martyr sainted,
Whilst I ( Romes scoff) my rites of burial wanted.
For Beckets sake erected was a tomb,
Like an Egiptian high Pyramides,
Millions of bare-foote pilgrims yearly come,
With tapers burning to his holiness,
Till Henry the eighth by Cromwells good procurement,
Cast down this mocke-ape toy, this vain alurement.
The glorious beutie of this brightest shrine,
The treasorie of euer-springing gold:
Becket is set; now does Oldcastle shine;
Him for a Saint within your Kalends hold.
Thus fools admire what wisest men despises,
Thus fond affects do fall, when virtue rises.
Wit, spend thy vigor, Poets, wits quintessence,
Hermes make great the worlds eyes with tears;
Actors make sighs a burden for each sentence:
That he may sob which reads, he swound which hears.
Mean time, till life in death you do renew,
Wit, Poets, Hermes, Actors, all adieu.
FINIS.

