A Spyrytuall and most precyouse Pearl.

Teaching all men to love and embrace the cross, as a most sweet and
necessary thing, unto the soul, and what comfort is to be taken thereof, and
also where and how, both consolacyon and aid in all manner of afflyccy^ns is
to be sought, And again, how all men should behave them selves therein,
according to the word of God.

Set forth by the most honorable Lord, the duke his grace of Somerset, as
appears by his Epistle set before the same.

JESUS. Uerely verelye, I say unto you, Whosoever believes on me, has
everlasting life. The Contents of this book are contained in the next leaf.

The contents of the most precious and spiritual pearl.
The first Chapter. That all trouble and afflyccyon comyth from God. Fol. i^
The second Chapter. That trouble, afflyccion and aduersyte are sent unto us
of God, even for the ponyshment of our sins. Fol. i^. The third Chapter. All
manner of troubles and afflyccyons, whatsoever they be, are allweys much^ less
and lyghter than are our sins. Fol. v* The fourth Chapter. All manner of
afflyccyons are sent and come from God, of a loving and fatherly mind toward
us. Fol. viij. The fyft Chapter. That only God, for Christ's sake and that of
very mere love and favor does correct and punyshe us. Fol. x The sy^t
Chapter. Symylytudes and comparysons, dec^arynge how and after what manner God,
does plage and chasten us, of very love, mercy and favor toward us. Fo. xii^*
The. vij. Chapter. Trouble and afflyccyons do serve (...) prove and to try us
with all. Fol. xxi. The. viij. Chapter. Trouble and affliccions do help and
further us to the knowledge of our selves and of God also, and specially to
wisdom. Fol. xxv. The. ix. Chapter. Trouble and afflyccyons do help and
further us to the right knowledge of our sins, and to perfyte sorrow and
repentance for them. Fol. xxvi. The. x. Chapter. Trouble afflyccyon and
aduersyte, do help and further us to the exe^synge and increasyng of our
faith. Fol. xxvi^. The. xi. Chapter. Trouble and aduersyte geuyth us occasyon
to pray unto God, and to laud and praise him. Fol. xxxij. The. xij. Chapter.
Trouble and aduersyte do further us to virtue and Godlynes. Fol. xxxiiij. The.
xiij. Chapter. Sorrow and affliccion do help and further us toward the fear
and love of God. Fol. xxxviij. The. xiiij. Chapter. Trouble and afflyccyon is
good an^ profitable to teach man patience, mekenes and lowlenes. Fol. xli.
The. xv. Chapter. Trouble and aduersyte is good to teach men, pyty compassyon
and pacyence toward other. Fol. xlij. The. xvi. Chapter. Trouble and aduersyte
makyth men hard and strong, and teaches them sobernes and temperancy. Fol.
xliij. The. xvij. Chapter. Trouble and aduersyte teachyth men to contemn,
despise and defye the world to be dylygent and feruente in all godlynes and
virtue. Fol. xliiij. The. xvii^. Chapter. Trouble and aduersyte is also an occa
syon and help, of much transytory quyetnes and commodyte in this world. Fol.
x^ij. The. xix. Chapter. Trouble and aduersyte is a furtherance to eternal
life. Fol. xlix. The. xx. Chapter. How and in what respect trouble and
aduersite can be so profitable and of such virtue seeing: that the vnfayethfull
do^ wax more obstynate and peruers^ ^row trouble and afflyccyon. Fol. l. The.
xxi. Chapter. Fellow companyons in trouble and aduersyte. Fol. liiij
The second part of this book.
The. xxij. Chapter. By what natural meanys or ways trouble and aduersyte
may be qualyfyed easyd and ouercomme. Fol. lvi. The. xxiij. Chapter. The best
and suerest succor and comfort in aduersyte, restyth only in the might, power
will and goodness of God. Fol. lix. The. xxiiij. Chapter. Examples of the help
and aid of God. Fol. lxiiij.
The third and last part of this book.
The. xxv. Chapter. We must dyrect our faith, hope and confydence, toward God.
Fol. lxvi. The. xxvi. Chapter. Of prayer in trouble and aduersyte. Fol. lxviij.
The. xxvij. Chapter. Repentance and amendment of life, in trouble and
aduersyte is necessary. Fol. lxx. The. xxviij. Chapter. Christen and godly
persuasyons and examples out of the word of God to move men unto pacyence in
afflyccyon and aduersyte. Fol. lxxi. The. xxix. Chapter. Examples and causes
taken out of natural things and of heathen men, whereby a man may be mouyd
to pacyence in aduersyte. Fol. lxxvi The. xxx. Chapter. By what meanys,
pacyence ma^e be obtained, and gotten. And ones had, how it may be kept and
increasyd? Fol. lxxxiij. The. xxxi. Chapter. The fruit, profit and commodyte
of pacyence as well corporal as spyrytual. Fol. lxxxix. An humble petycyon to
the Lord, practysed in the commun prayer of the whole famyly at Shene, during
the trouble of their Lord and master the duke of Somerset his grace: gathered
and set forth by Thomas Becon, Mynister there. Which trouble began the. vi. of
October, the year of our Lord, M. D. xlix. and ended the vi. of February,
than next ensuyng. Fol. xcvij. A thanks geuyng for his graces delyueraunce.
Fol. xcviiij. A godly prayer and confession of our sins to God our heavenly
father, with the rehersall of the punishments and plages of the same calling
therein upon the mercy of God. Fol. c. A prayer for the kings mayestye and for
peace. Fol. ciij.
Edward by the grace of God Duke of Somerset, earl of hertford vycount
Beachamp, lord Seimour, uncle to the kings excellent majesty, knight of the
most noble order of the garther etc. to the Christian reader Gretyng.
IF they be worthy praise who for a zeal and desire that they have to do
their neighbors good, do wryghte and put in prynte such things as by
experyence they have proved, or by hear say of grave and trustye men they
have learned, or by reading of good and ancient authors they have
understood, to be a salve or medycyne, to a man's body or to a part or membre
of the same, how much more deserve they thank and praise that teach us a true
comfort salve and medycyne of the soul, spyrit, and mind. The which spyryte
and mind the more precious, it is then the body, the more dangerous be his
sores and syknes, and the more thancke worth the cure thereof, For a well
quyeted mind to a troubled body, yet makes quyetnes, and sycknes of body or
loss of goods is not much paynfull, to him that estemeth it not, or ^aketh
it pacyently.

But an unquiet mind, yea to a most hole body, makes health unpleasant, and
death to be wyshed, And an insatiable mind and sore with desire of more,
makes riches, pouertye, and health a syknes, strength an infyrmyte, bewty a
deformyte, and wealth pouertye, wken by comparyng his felycytye with a better it
leseth the grace and joy of that it has and felyth the smart of that it has
not.

The^ to amend this in wealth, and to take away sorrow and grief, where no
just nor apparaunte cause of gryefe is, is a great master of physykes deed,
and worthy much commendacyon, what is he then worthy that can ease gryefe in
deed, and make health where a very sore restyth, I mean that can ease a man
set in afflyccyon, take away the gryefe from him that is persecuted, lose the
prisoner yet in bonds, take away aduersytye in aduersytye, make grievous
syckenes not to be felt, make pouertye riches, beggerye to be reioysed at.

Diverse learned men heretofore by reasons grounded of man's knowledge wrote and
invented great comfort against all kind of gryefes, And so emonge the gentle
and philosophers books, be books of comfort, But whosoever follows but
worldly and man's reason to teach comfort to the troubled mind can give but
a counterfeit medycyne, And as the Surgyon does, which colorablye heals, or
the physycyon, which gives medycynes that does astunyshe and mortyfye the
place, they deceive the pacyent, And peradventure to the outward show they may
bring i^ a certain stowtnes and blind dissemblinge of pain, But the true
healyng of gryefe and sorrow they had not, for they lacked the ground, they
lacked that, that should heal the sore at the bone first, that is true faith
in Christ and his holy word. All medycynes of the soul, which be laid on the
sores thereof, not having that cleanser with them, be but over healers, they do
not take away the ranklyng within, and many times under colors of hasty he
alyng, they bring fourth proud flesh in the sore, as evil and worse as that,
which was furst corrupt.

This man whosoever he be, that was the first author of this book (if our
judgment be any thing) goes the right way to worck, he brings his
ground from Gods word, he takes with him the oil and wine of the Samarytan,
he Luke x. d
caryeth the hurt man from thence as he lay hurt, and brings him to his
right host, where no dowt he may be cured if he will him self aplye him
thereto, It is red in hystoryes that the manner among the old Egyptyans or
Assyrians was when any were syck to lay him abroad, that every man that passed
by might tell if he had been vexed with like syckenes what thing was that, that
did cure and heal him, and so they might use i^ to the pacyente. And by this
means it is thought, that the science of physyck was first found out. So that
it may appear that this redynes to teach an other that thing wherein a man
fealeth ease of gryefe, is not only Christian, but also natural.

In our great trouble, which of late did happen unto us (as all the world
does know) when it please God for a time to attempt us with his scourge, and
to prove if we loved him, In reading this book we did find great comfort and
an inward and godly workynge power much releuyng the gryefe of our mind.
The which thing now calling to remembrance, we do think it our duty not to
be more unnatural then the old Egyptyans were. But rather as the office of a
Christian is to be ready to help all men by all ways possible that we can,
and especyally those that be afflicted.

And hereupon we have required him of whom we had the copye of this book
the rather at our request and commendacyon, to set this book forth and in
prynte, That not only we or one or two more, but all that be afflycted may
take profyt and consolacyon if they will, Yea and they that be not afflycted,
may either see what they should have done in their troble. Or what hereafter
they ought to do, if any like happens, Knowing certeynely, that such is
the vncerteintye of the world and all humayne things, that no man stands so
sure* but the tempeste of afflyccion and aduersyte may overtake (...). cor. x. b
h^, and if the grace of god do not syngularly help him, cast him do^e and
make him fall, Wherefore it is most necessary always to have in redyues such
godly medytacyons and medycynes, as may pacy^ye Gods wrath beginning to
kyndle, and defend in part the bytternes of afflyccyon, whereof this book is
very plentuous and full. Fare you well. From our house at Somerset place, the*
vi. day of May. Anno. 1550.

A spyrytuall and precious Perle: Teaching all men to love and embrace the
^rosse, as a most sweet and necessary thing unto the soul, and what comfort
is to be taken thereof, and also where and how, both consolacion and aid in
all manner of affliccions is to be sought: And again how all men should behave
them selves therein, according to the word of God.
The first Chapter.
That all trouble and affliccion comes from God.

I Call all that, trouble and affliccyon, whatsoever is reputed to be contrary
to ye desire and appetite of man's nature, as the vnquyete suggestio^s of the
flesh, the temptacions of the devil, syckenes of body, a wicked and froward
mate in matrimony, to have disobedient children, unkind and vnthanful friends,
loss of goods, to be depryuyd of any old liberty or privilege loss or
blemish of name and fame, the malice and displeasure of me^, ho^ger, dearth,
pestylens, war, imprisonement and death. And in this regyster do I put al
kinds of crosses and affliccio^s, whether they be bodyly or ghostlye, our own
or our friends, private and singular or universal and general, pryuy and secret
or open and manifest, deserved or undeserved. In all such things, I say, every
Christen man ought first of al to consider the very root, ground, and
beginning, after this wise. That al things whatsoever God sends, we ought to
take and receive the^ patiently. For this is ones true that god is our creator
and maker, and we his workema^ ship, he is our king, our Lord and father. And
like as it is not semyng that the put should murmur Romans ix
against the po^maker, even so is it much less convenient that we should
murmur and grudge against Gods will and judgment To. ix. And although trouble
and affliccion ryseth and spryngeth often times by the wyckednes of enemies and
through the instigacyon of the deuell or else by some other mean, yet ought we
never to ymagyne that it comes by fortune or chance without the permyssyon,
sufferance, demynacyon and will of God, but by and with the fore knowledge,
prouydence, and appoyntement of god. And to speak properly, concerning
safeguard, it is all one (su that we tempte not God) whether we live in
pouertye, or in riches, in the fire or in the water, among our enemies, or
among our friends, seeing that God seyth, knowyth, dysposyth, and rulyth all
things. As wytnessyth the first book i. re. ij. b. deu. xxxij Sa. xvi. c
Tob. xiij
and second chapter of the kings. The Lord brings death, and restores
again unto life, brings into the grave and rai seth up again, puttyth down
and exalts also. And Job also testyfyeth in his myserye, the Lord did given
it, and the Job. iij
Lord has taken it again. And Christ in the tenth of Mathewe, There falls
not a sparrow upon the earth without your fathers will, yea the hears of your
head are all u^mbied.

Seeing then that al our troubles and afflic cions come from God, we ought to
hum ble and submit our hearts and minds unto the obedience of god, and to
suffer him to worck with us according unto his most holy will and pleasure.
Wherefore whenever unseasonable whether shall hurt and peryshe the corn and
fruit of the earth, or when a wicked man shall mysreporte us or raise up any
slander of us, why should we murmur and grudge against the eleme^tes or go
about to revenge us of our enemies? For if we lift not up our minds and
consider, that God lays his hand upon us, and that it is he that stryketh us,
we are even like unto dogs and no bet ter, which if a man do cast a stone at
the^, will byte the stone without any respect who did cast the stone. And
again no man mat. xxv
ought to be unwilling or disco^tent to render again that talent or pledge, yt
was committed to him only, to reserve and keep. It is that God, that gives us
life, health of body, strength, wife, children, friends riches, honor, power,
auctorite, peace, rest and quietness, for a time, so long as pleases him. Now
if the same God will take again some of these things, or al, he takes nothing,
but his own, and even that which we did owe unto him. For yt which cause to
murmur against his will, and to strive against his judgment, it can not be but
an heinous and a grievous sin.

The second chapter.
That trouble and affliccyon and aduersyte are sent unto us of God, even for
the punishment of our sins.

NOw what thing moves or causes god, to send home unto us and visit us with
affliccio^, trouble and ve xacion? concerning this point mark this well.
Whatsoever any man has merited and deserved that ought he to bear and to
suffer willingly and gladly. Let every man ap pose and examine him self
whether he has not deserved to be correct and chastened of god, (if it be not
for any special thing at yt present instant,) yet for other sins committed at
other times. Now will our lord god in all manner of punishme^tes and visitacio^s,
declare yt order of his righteousness and his he up wrath and indignacio^
against sin and wic kednes: for he says in yt. ij. commandment: I yt lord
which am thy god, am a gelous and an ernest god, and I will visyte the sins of
the fathers upon the children, even until the third and fourth generation, if
they hate Exo. xx
and contemn me. And in the. xxviij. chap. of the. v. book of Moises, are all
ye plages rehearsed one after another, which shall be poured out upon the wicked
and ungodly, and in the. xiij. of Luke it is said thus. If ye do not amend ye
shall al perish: and yt we may perceive eue^ before our eyes evidently how that
punishment and plages are the dew re ward unto sin, God temperyth and
framyth the punishment, eue^ like unto ye syn God punysheth syn with like syn.
(...). Re. xi
so that they do both agree together as well in form and lykenes, as in
proporcion and qualyte. As for an example like as David defiled Wrias wife,
even so were his wines defiled unto him again also. He caused Wrias to be
slain and destroyed, and therefore did his son destroy his own brother again,
and stirred a sedicion and vproure, and hunted and drove his father out of his
kingdom, so yt no man can sufficiently express ye great misery and
punishment, yt David and his peo ple suffered, For the shameful wichednes and
abhominacion yt he had committed. Now consider and wey, as it were in a true
balance the righteousness, which god requires of us on ye one side, and again
the whole trade of our life, on the other side. If the generacio^ of mankind
had been comfortable ^n to the law of god, and had not swarued from ye same it
had been altogether thorowlye happy and blessed evermore, and should never have
rottyd and dried away like ye fruit and flowers of ye feld. But it ^waruyd and
fell away, at ye first eue^ from the beginning. Our first parents and
progenitors, did neglect and Gene. iij
despise gods commandments, and so we tho row their fall are corrupt and
infected, our reason, senses, and understanding blinded, and our will (...). We
feel and find in us wicked lusts and affeccions, we seek in the world lust and
pleasure, eue^ against ye holy word of god. And like as if an ass were
trimmyd and decked in a lionsskyn and would needs be a lyo^, yet his long ears
being al ways upward, should easily descrie and bewray him. Eue^ so if we
adourn garnishe and set forth our selves with certain glorious bew tiful works
never so much, so yt no man ca^ say but yt we are utterly innocent and
vnc^lpable in diverse and many points, yet not with standing we have filthy,
unclean and wic ked hearts, full of securite and neglect of god altogether given
to ye love of our selves, and to al manner of dissolutenes. Now therefore if we
be assaulted and visited with sickness, pouer ty, war, sedicio^, we ought not to
ascribe these things, one to ye magistrate, another to ye preacher and minister
of gods word or to the faith and religion it self, and the third to the
elements and stars, or to God in heaven him self, as though any of these
were the occasyon of such plages: Like as no man ought to accuse and blame
the physycyon as though he were the occasyon of the corrupt humors within ye
body, not wtstanding yt he has brought and driven them out, yt a man may
evidently se and perceive them, but the misbehauor and intemperate dies of the
man him self is the very right occasion and the only root thereof: Even so we
ought not to ascrybe any blame or faut unto god, if he send un to us heuines,
pain and troble, but to think that it is a medicine and remedy mete for our
sins, and every man to ascribe the very cause and occasion thereof unto him
self and his own sins, and to refer ye blame to nothing.

And this example did the holy men our godly forefathers in old time show
declare and leave unto us, ascribing always the cause and occasyon of the
cross, and of such heavy affliccyons, as did happen in their time, even unto
their own sins. As Daniel in the. ix. chap: says: By reason of our sins
and of the wicked nes of our fathers, is Jerusalem and thy people destroyed
even of those that dwell Dan. ix.
about us. For the which cause we ought rather to lament and bewail, yea and
tocrye out alas, alas, out, out, upon our sins and wickedness, then either
upon any infirmite sycknes or upon any other affliccion or tribulacyon, which
we suffer by reason of our sins.

For if we should wayle, and be heavy without reason or measure, when God
does nothing, but (...) justice and ryghtuousnes upon his enemies, what were it
else but to myslyke the righteousness of God, and even to love that thing which
God hates? And what is this else, but only the very righteousness and goodness
of God, when he punysheth marterith and utterly subdueth and destroys in us
here in this world his and our greatest enemies, that is to say, our sins.
Therefore to sorrow and mourn without measure in the myddest of affliction and
trouble, is nothing else but to show thy self a frinde unto sin, which is
thine and Gods highest enemy. Wherefore we should rather laud God, and hyghlye
rejoice (not specyallye, because of the myserye and affliccyon) but in the
ryghteous and gracious will of God. Righ teous, I say, because he punysheth
sin. And again gracyous and merciful, for as much as he does punyshed it
much more easelye then we have iust^ye deserved.

The third Chapter.
All manner of troubles and affliccyo^s, whatsoever they be, are always much
less and lyghter then are our sins.

UUhansoeuer a man does give a small and a light ponyshemente unto him yt has
deserved much greater, it is reason that he receive and take it patiently. As
one that has slain and murdered a man, if he be but beaten and whyped out of
a city or town, he takes it in good part, because he knows well enough,
that he has deserved to be hanged. The holy woman Iudyth thinks in the*
viij. Chapter that all these transyto ty ponyshmentes are much less and far
inferyor unto our sins and wickedness ses. Wherefore if thou suffer pouertye,
sy^ nesse or any other aduersyte, consider and think with thy self after
this manner. Well, thy manyfold sins have deserved a thousand, thousand times
more gre nous ponyshment, more heavy sycknes, more horrible war, and more
intolerable imprisonment. And if all the miseries of the world should come
together upon on^ heap unto the, yet you have deserved much worse: For yt haste
well deserved the full power and tyranny of the devil, and eternal da^ nacio^,
which notwithstanding God has kept and taken from the of his mere mercy, only
for Jesus christ's sake. Ite^ he yt has received always good and prosperous
thin ges ought not to meruel nor to wonder, if sometime he receive also some
mysfortune and aduersyte. Even the children of the world can say, that there is
never a good hour, but has also deserved an evil. Now so mercyful is God yt
he suffers no man upon earth unrewarded with one benefyte or other. As well
before trouble as after yea, and also in the very time there of, he gives him
many high and excellent gystes and benefytes, as well bodyly as ghostly,
corporal as spyrytuall.

As for his benefytes before trouble and affliccyo^, we have a notable example
set be fore our eyes in Job, which says, seeing Job. iij.
we have received much goodness of God why should we not be content also to
receive the evil likewise? Plyny the second being an Heathen man, as he would
comfort a fryude of his, whose dear spouse and wife was departed out of ye
world, among other things, he wrote after this manner. This ought to be a
singular comfort unto the, that thou have had and inioyed such a precious
Jewel so long a time. For. ^iiij. years did she live with the, and there was
never anystryfe, brawling or contention between you nor never, one of you ones
displeased the other. Yea but now thou wylt s^y, so much the more loath and
unwilling am I to forbear and to be without her, seeing I lived so long a
time so quyetely with her. For we forget sone such pleasures and commodyties,
as we have proved and tasted, but a little ty me only. But to answer to this,
take thou head that thou be not found unthankful, if thou wylt only wey
and consider what thou have lost, and not remember, how long thou dedest
enjoy her.

And again in the very time and myddest of affliccyon and trybulacyon, God
gives us grace to consider other good and prosperous things which we have
and enjoy still, that through the remembera^s and consyderacyon of them, our
smarte and pain may be eased, mollyfyed and mytygated. As for an example,
thou art a wea ke, impotent, and a dyseased man in thy body, but yet has God
given the reasonable and convenient goods and possessions to sustain ye with,
or else if you have scarsenes and lack of goods and riches, yet thou have no
lack of bodyly health. Now if we will not set and wey the one against the
other, then are we like unto little children, which if any man happen a little to
dysturbe or hinder their play and game, or to take any manner of thing from
the^, they will by and by cast away all the rest also, and will fall on weeping.
Even so were it possible enough for* us to do likewise, when so ever any
misfortune should happen unto us, to wax angrye and displeased, and to have no
manner of lust nor desire to use nor to enjoy it unto that good that still
remains and is left behind. Be it in case that thou werte depryued of all
manner of bodily comfort, but yet in thy breast and heart thou haste the
knoweledge of Jesus Christ which has redeemed the out of hell and damnacyon
that was dew unto the, in respect of the which damnacyon all plages upon
earth are to be esteemed as one little drop of water, against the whole sea.
Besides this also through faith, thou felest a confydens and assurans of
everlasting and eternal joy, As S. Paul does write of the same in the. viij.
to the Roma. saying. I suppose that the affliccyons of this world are not
worthy of the glory that shall be reveled unto us. An example have Luc. xv.
we set before our eyes in the prodigal and desperate son, which did so
humble and submyt him self, that he desired no more to be taken for a son,
but to be put to labor as a day laborer, and an hyered servant, so that he
might but only remain Iho^. viij
in his fathers house, Even so whatsoever God sends, ought we to ta ke
pacyentlye, so that we may but only dwell in the house of God, in heaven with
God everlastingly.

Now if any man should think thus, God does not ponysh other which have
committed much more h^ynos sins, with so great and grievous plages and
dyseases, as he does us, that were irreverently and vnchristenly ymagyned of
God. For what if thou thy self beyst more wicked then any other. But be it so
that other do live more wickedlye and (...) then thou, what wotest thou, how
God does ponysh them? The greatest and most grievous pains and ponyshementes
are the inward sorrows and secret ponyshme^tes of the mind which are not
seen with the outward eye. And although they have no special sorrow nor
singular grief, that appears unto the, and thou know not what God means
thereby, yet ought thou (as a child unto the father to give unto him)
honor, laud, and praise, that he dysposeth all things with such wisdom and
in such order. And when he seyth time, he will reward and consider all such
things as have been wroughte and committed heretofore against his most right
and just laws, according as they have deserved.

The iiij. Chapter.
All manner of affliccions are sent and come from God of a loving and fatherlye
mind toward us.

IT is not suffycient for us to know that all manner of affliccyon comes by
the permyssyon and sufferaunce of God, of his just judgment by reason of our
sins. For in extreme temptacyons and in great necessyties, these are the
first thoughts and ymagy nacyons that come into our minds. (For as much as
I have greuouslye offended God with my sins, therefore is he displeased with
me, and now become mine enemy, and has cast his favor from me). And if we
prevent not, and shyft away such fantasyes and ymaginacyo^s in time, they will
make us to flee from God, to forsake him, and to abhor and grudge against
him, As Saul did, which ymagyned and fully persuaded with him self yt God
punyshed him of hatered and displeasure against him. And therefore Saul's heart
turned from God, and forsook him, and so he began to hate and abhor him as a
cruel tyranne. Wherefore unto such points and articles as are taught
heretofore, this admonicyon does also apper teyne. We ought to receive with
high thankefulnes, what soever God of a fatherly and loving mind and not of
any indygnacyon toward us, sends unto us, whether it be to the flesh
pleasant or grievous. The Forde God vy^iteth us with temporal and transitorye
myserye, eue^ for the very careful and fatherlye heart that he bears toward
us, and not of any hatred or indignacyon against us. For God is reconcyled, and
at one with all Christen men, through his son, and loves them even from the
very ground of his heart. For the which cause, how so ever, or by what manner
of mean it be that God pouysheth and corrects us, he does it because he
hates, as though he would utterly refuse and cast us away: but of very pyty
and compassyon, only to receive us as his children, to keep and preserve us,
to exercise and practyse us, to humble and to bring us down, and to stir
and prycke us forward, that prayer, faith, the ^eare of God, obedience and
other vertuys may ware and increase in us to his honor and our salvation.

Testymonyes for this have we first in the xxxiij. of Ezechiel. As truly as I
live, I have no pleasure in the death of the sinner, but that he turn and
live. Here ^owe does God swear that he does ponyshe, not to destroy but to
allure, reduce and bring us unto penans. Item. Prou. iij. Whom the Lord
loves, him does he chasten, and yet not withstandinge he has pleasure in him,
as a father in his child. This is an euydent testimony, that affliccyon,
trouble, and vexacyon are no tokens of the wrath and dyspleasure of God, but
rather holy tokens of his grace mercy and favor, whereby god assueryth us of
his merciful will and fatherlye heart toward us. Item in the. viij. to the
Romans. We know that un To. viij.
to such as love God, al things serve to the best. And in the. xi. of the. i*
to the Cho rinth. we are corrected and ponyshed of the lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world. All this may thou also mark in the whole
story of Job through out. Likewise Joseph was sold of his brethren, and
delivered unto the Heathen, of very malice and envy by the prouoc^ cyon and
suggestion of the devil. But ye most faithful God turned it to the profit
and wealth both of the house of Israel, and also of the whole kingdom of Egypt.
For so did Joseph him self interpret it, in the. x^v. of Genesis.

Again the church of Christ, that is to say the Christen congregacyon which
is Christ's spowse, must suffer vexacyon and affliccyon here upon earth. But
for as much as God loves this his spowse of his son, namely the
congregacyon of the faithful, and minded to comfort her, and to be most
benefycially unto her, therefore like as he has raised up Christ her
brydegrome, head, and King, from death, even so will he also deliver her
from all affliccyon, and give her a joyful victory of all such things as do
oppress her. But it is the infyrmyte and fault of our weak eyes, that we
can not espy the merciful and loving goodness of God in and under the rod
and scourge. Whansoeuer we are vysyted with affliccyon and miserye, it is our
du^ye in deed first to acknowledge and remember our sins, and again to co^
syder the ^ock and bands of the devil for sin, but we ought not to judge
and ymagyne of such affliccyon according to the purpose and will of the devil
(as he of a malice and a myscheuous mind that he bears us, myndeth toward
us* which seeks contynually nothing else, but the utter destruccyon and
confusyon of all mankind) but rather we ought to esteem and consider of al such
troubles and affliccio^s, according as God means and receives the^, which of
his mere goodness turns them to our wealth and profit, workynge and fynyshing
thereby our perfyght saluacyo^,

And wheresoever the heart can not conceive this comfort that God corrects
and pouysheth for very merciful favor and love toward us, there of necessyte
must the temptacyon and grefe be much the greater and the party at length
fall to utter desperacyon.

The. v. Chapter.
That only God, for Christ's sake, and that of very merry, love, and favor does
correct and pouyshe us.

THe very right and only cause of the merciful and fatherly will of God
toward us, have we in the only merytes of Jesus Christ, unto whom we ought
to lift up our hearts toward heaven, and to behold and consider him with our
minds contynuallye after this manner. Our sins and misdeeds deserve honger,
dearth, war, pestilence, and al manner of plages. Now has Christ ra^somed and
made full satisfaccyon for all the sins that we have committed. He has
redeemed, paid, discharged, and made harmeles unto us al our misdeeds with his
bitter death and victoryous resurreccyo^, and has satisfied his fathers
ryghteousnes, As S. Paul does testifye very comfortably. i. Corin. i.
saying: Jesus is becomme and made unto us, our wisdom, our ryghteousnes our
satisfaccyon and our redempcyon. So that now if affliccyons hurt us only by
reason of our sins and our sins satysfyed and dyscharged through the death
and passion of Jesus, then must it needs follow that all our affliccyons al
so, are likewise harmeles unto us, and can not hurt us.

Yea Christ, with, and through his passion, and affliccyon, has blessed and
sanctyfyed all manner of affliccyons, that they all should serve and redounde
unto all faithful Christians for their greatest welthe, up the ordinance and
prouysyon of God their heavenly father.

He is the true physycyon which after he perceived, that affliccion did fear
us, took upon him self to suffer all manner of trouble, yea the most grievous
sorrows and extremytyes, because he would set and appoint a certain measure and
end unto our sorrows, and also bless and sanctifye, yea and also make
pleasant and delectable very death it self unto us.

Oh if we could feel, behold and co^ syder the heart and mind of Christ,
when he did wyllyngly hang upon the cross, and suffered him self so cruelly
and paynefully to be tormented and ponyshed, for no another cause, but that he
might utterly take away the whole strength of all our sins, sorrow, and
death, and destroy hell, that none of them should hurt us.

And again that he tasted and drank of the cup before us, that we being sick
and weak might the rather drinck and taste of it after him, for as much as no
evil mis happened unto him thereof, but immedyatly rose up again from death.
Oh, if the knoweledge and remembrance of this might remain in our hearts
vprighte, and shine contynually before us, then should we never syncke or
faint, nor yet despair of the mercy and goodness of God, al^ though we should
labor in never so dangerous and grievous a battle, and though we our selves
should taste and feel the dew ponyshmente that our sins have deserved, then
should we be able to stand sty^ felye agayuste the gates of hell. And all
manner of sorrow heaviness, temptacyon, fear, and mysfortune should thereby be
utterly consumed and swalowed up. And ^uen this is the highest and most
special comfort that ever was hard or red of, from the beginning of the
world. He is only alone suffycyent (if we consider him and take hold of him
as we should do) to plant and grafte such a mind in us, that we shall not
only not sorrow nor be heavy, but also tryumphe and rejoice in and of our
myserye and affliccyon, as Paul triumphs excellentlye and hyghlye. Roman.
viij. where he says: if God has not spared his only son, but has given
him up for us all, how should he not give us all things with him? What make
we then with our vain fearfulnes, care, sorrow, and heauynes?

Wherefore (if we will be right Christians) we must with al thankefulnes set
forth, extol, and magnifye this excellent, infynyte, and heavenly grace and
benefyte of God, and the high and singular comfort, which we have by Christ.

For all they that lack the knoweledge of the benefyte that we have by
Christ, and refuse this excellent and high treasure whether they be Jews or
Heathen of Mahometis or of the Popyshes^cte they can not be able to give any
true, perfyght, or halsome conforte, either to them selves or to any other in
any manner of fear or doubt of the conscience or in any other affliccyon and
necessyte.

So long as they are quyete and safe, and neither feel nor consider the pain
of death nor any other grefe or necessite, they may well live securely and
boldly without any manner of fear, but when the evil hour ones comes, that
the wether changes a little, that either through the reuelacyon and openyng of
the law they feel and perceive the wrath of God over them, or else through the
manyfeste and euydent tokens and preaching of the just ponyshmente and
vengeance of God, and through the present taste of some plage they are suddenly
taken and stryken with fear, as than does all their wisdom, counsel, and
polycye, wherewith to withstand any such evil, utterly fail the^, and suddenly
deceive them. The^ fle they from God, and can not tell, whether to run, nor
where to hyde them selves. And how small soever their temptacio^, or plage is,
their heart is dashyd and as sore afraid (as Moses says) of the noise of a
leaf as of a thonderclap. And with such manner persous the whole trade of
their former life, with al their labor, tra uail, and a^ians in their
supersticious, ser uing of God, and in their hard, and strayte life is utterly
lost and spent in vain.

Yea what comfort soever they have sought, beside Christ, it is al nothing else
but an augmentacion of their sorrowful fear and a traynyng of them, toward
desperacion. So that without and besides the Lord Jesus, there is no manner of
comfort, aid nor succor at all to be looked for.

The. vi. Chapter.
Symilitudes and comparisons, declaryng, how and after what manner God does
plage and chasten us, of very love, mercy, and favor toward us.

UUhen as allmightye God for the merits of his son, not of any irefull mind or
displeasure, but of a good will and loving heart toward us, does correct and
punysh us, he may be comparyd and lykenyd unto a father, a mother, a master,
a physycyon, an husband man, a goldsmyth, and such like, after this sense.
Like as the natural father, God a father.
first teaches his dear beloved child: and afterward gyuyth him warning and
monycyon, and than corrects him at last: even so the eternal God assayth
all manner of ways with us, which are well grown and old in years, but young
and teuder in faith. First he teaches us his will through the preaching of
his word, and gyuyth us warnyng. Now, if so be, that we will not follow him,
than he beats and gierketh us a little with a rod, as some time with
poverty, some time with sycknes and dyseasys or with other afflyccyons, which
should be named and estemyd as nothing else, but chylderns roddys or the wandys
of correccyon.

Now if such a rodd or wand will not help, nor do any good, than takyth the
father a whyp or a styck. As in case, his son waxes stubburn, and will spend
his money, and thryfft wantonly and ryotosly at the typplyng hows with evil
company, than comyth the father, pullyth him out by the hear of the head,
byndyth his hands and fete, and beats him till his bones crack, and sendyth
him into prison, or banysheth him out of the country.

Even so when we wax obstynate and stubburne, and care in manner neither for
words nor for strypys, than sends God unto us more heavy and universal
plages, as pestylens, dearth, sedycyon, vproure, casualtye of fire, murder,
war, loss of vyctory, that being taken of our enemies we are sed away
prisoners and captyues etc. And all this he does, to fear and to tame us, as
it were with vyolence, and so to drive and even to force us unto repentance and
amendment of our lives.

Now, truth it is, that it is against the fathers will to stryke his child,
he would much rather do him all the good that ever he could. But through
long sufferance, and over much cheryshyng the children wax rude and forget
all nurture.

Therefore does he punish them, but yet in the mids of all his anger and
punishment, his fatherly heart brea^eth out.

In case that he puts his son away from him, for some grievous fault, yet
he sends him not away altogether comfortles, but gives him some garments
and some comfortable words, and so sen death him from him, not to remain for
evermore in banyshment, but when he is ones a little humbled, mekenyd, and
amendyd, to return home again. And this is only the fathers mind to turn and
keep from his son all such things as might hurt and destroy him, and never
min death to cast away or utterly to forsake his child. Even so certainly, when
God sen death mysery and affliccyon upon our necks, there lyth hidden under
that rod, a fatherly heart and affeccion. For the peculyar and natural
property of God is to be loving and frendelye, to heal, to help, and to do
good to mankind.

Adam and Eve when they were put into paradyse, were they not plentuously
endued with all good things? But they could not order nor use them ryghtly, as
^oue of as all can, but as soon as we have all things, at pleasure and lack
nothing that we could despre, then forth with wax we faint, neglygent and
slouthful.

And therefore God sends us evil, that he may do us good, and yet in the
mids of all affliccyon and punishment he sends some mytygacyon comfort and
succor.

As we may take example by our foresaid first parents Adam and Eve, when as
God was fullye determined upon yt very point, to exclude and banishe them out
of paradyse: First he clothed them against the frost and vyolence of the
wether. And he comforted them also with the promise of the blessed sede, which
makes al manner of affliccion, not only easy and harmles, but also wholesome and
profitable unto us. And this same nature does the immutable god never change
but keeps it co^tynually, he will not utterly forsake us, but only suffer us a
little to smart for the sins, that we have committed, and so preserve us from
sin afterward, that we run not into the danger of eternal pain.

Furthermore, be it in case, that the father has two sons, whereof the one
behauyth him self wyckedly, and yet his father punishes or corrects him
nothing at al, the other for the least fawt is taken up, and correct by and
by. What thing else, is the cause of this, but that the father has no hope of
amendment at all of the one, and therefore myndyth to put him clearly from his
heritage, and to give him no part thereof. For the heritage perteinyth wholly
unto that sun, that is chastenyd and cor rectyd. And yet the same poor
son, that is thus chastenyd, thinckyth in his mind, that his brother is much
more happy the^ he, for as much as he is never beaten nor stryke^. And therefore
he sythes and mour nyth by him self, and thinks thus: well, my brother does
what he will against my fathers will, and without his leave, and yet my father
gyuyth him not one foul word, he suffers him to take his pleasure and to
run where he will: and toward me he shewyth not so much as a good look,
but is ever in my top, if I do but look (...) wrye etc. Here now may thou
mark the folyshnes and ignorance of the child, which has respect only unto
the present grefe, and never reme^bryth nor consyderyth what is reseruyd and
kept in store for him: even such thoughts and ymagynacyons have Christen men
and women also, when as they suffer much trybulacion, and see on the other side
how prosperously it goyth with the wicked and un godly sort.

Where as they ought rather to comfort them selves with the remembrance of the
heritage that is reseruyd for them in heauyn, which apperteynyth unto them as
good and vertuos chyldern. As for the other that hopp and spryng, make merry and
take their pleasure now for a while, they shall be depryuyd of the heritage
everlastingly, as strangers, and shall have no part thereof. And this prouyth
Saynct Paul, Heb. xij. where he says: My son, fear not when thou art
correctyd of the Lord, but receive his punishment thanckfully, and with a good
will. For whom so ever the Lord louyth, him does he chastyse and punysh, and
scourgyth every child, that he receiuyth. Now if ye be partakers of
correccion, than does God offer and show him self unto you as a father. And if
al those that be children, be correctyd and ye without correccyon, are ye not
than bastarde^, and not chyldern? In this words does S. Paul euydentely compare
and lyken the punyshemente of the Lord unto the correccyon of a natural father.

And whom should not these words make to tremble and quake, where as he
says: those are bastardes, and not right and lawful chyld^n, which are not
punished? And again, whom should not this thing rejoice and comfort, where as
he says, they that are punished, are children. Wherefore although the allmighty
Lord shows him self displeased with us, it is nothing else but a displeasure
of a most kind and loving father, which seeks not our destruccyon, and
undoing, but only our reformacion, amendment and wealth. Give over thy self
therefore pacyently unto the will of God thy faithful father. Rejoice in the
correccion of the Lord, for as much as thou art sure and certain thereby, that
he bears a gracyous, and a fatherly heart, mind, and will, toward the.

Furthermore, God is also in this behalf, compared to a mother. The mother
fedyth God is taken for a mother
and norysheth the child, and all the good she can do unto it, that does she,
eve of a tender and motherly heart. And yet through the frowardnes and vnrulynes
of the child is she sometime so mouyd
and prouokyd that she is angry with it, chydyth it, rebukyth it, and beatyth
it. Even so were it the very nature and propertye of God, to suffer no manner of
misfortune to happen unto us, but yet through our manifold sins he is prouokyd
to punysh and chasten us. Now as little as the mother denies, forsakyth or
gives over the child, though she be angry with it and dysplesed it, Even as
little does God forsake or give over us in our need and necessyte, myserye and
afflyccyon though he seem never so much to be dyspleased with us. Scripture
for this have we Esaias. xlix. If a mother can forget her child, than may I
forget the also says the Lord: but if she should forget her child, yet will
I not forget the.

There is never a scholemayster, nor handy crafts man, which takyth any God
a scholemaister.
scholar or prentes unto him to teach, but he will make these condycyons with
him expressly, that the ladd shall not be self wyllyd, nor stubburn, nor
follow his own brain and mind. Butwyth all possible diligence shall mark
and take heed unto that which his master teaches him. And if he will be
negligente or play the troon^, and not give him self unto his business as he
ought to do^, If he being his master, should beat and punish him therefore,
that he be content and take it pacientelye and with a good will.

Now, the master does not correct and punish his scolar or servant, for
any intent to hurt him or for any malice and evil will, toward him, but
only that he should learn better afterward, be more diligent and take
better head. Even so likewise Christ receives no scholar or disciple unto him,
but he makyth co^di cions with him most necessary for every Christen man,
which are expressyd in in the. xvi. chapter of Matthew.

The word of God ought to be the rule, whereby we should be orderyd: but we
had rather to follow our own head and our own brain, by the means whereof
often times we go a w^ye and miss the right way, and therefore the heavenly scho
lemaister ^nappeth us on the fyngers, ^yll we apprehende and learn it
per^ytely.

Likewise the physycion or surgen God a physicyon.
must cut away and burn out the rotten and dead flesh with his iron and
instrument, that the whole body be not infectyd and poisonyd and so perysh.
Even so does God sometime plage our bodies sharply and grievously, that our
souls may be preseruyd and healyd. And how deep soever God thrustyth his iron
into our flesh and bodies, he does it only to remedy and to heal us. And if
it be so that he killyth us, than does he first give us the right life.

The physycyon in making of his ^yakle, occupyeth serpents and adders and
such like poison, to drive out one poison with another: Even so God in
afflictinge and correctinge of us, occupyeth and uses the devil and wicked
people, but yet all to do us good with all. As long as the physycyon has
any hope of the recouerye of his pacyente, he assayeth all manner of meanys and
medycynys with him (...) well sower and ^harpe as sweet. But as soon as ever he
begin^yth to doubt of his recouerye, he sufferyth (...) have, and to take all
manner o^ things, what so ever the pacyent him self desy^ryth. Even so the
heavenly physycyon, as long as he takyth us Christians for his, and has any
hope to recover or to heal us, he restreyuyth us from our will, and will not
always suffer us to have, what we most desire, but as soon as he has no more
hope of us, and geuyth us over, than he suffryth us for a time to have and
enjoy all our own will and pleasure.

This symylytude and comparyson is taken out of the fyst chapter of Job: If the
Lord God does wound, than does his hand heal again, etc.

Furthermore, when the horse breaker gives unto a lustye fresh young
horse, to much of the bridle, he is wyld and wanton, and goyth not well as he
should do, and by chance in a slyppery, and slydynge place he might fall
headlynges over and over: Even so if our creator and maker should suffer us,
over much and give us to large lybertye, we should sone wax wild and proud
thereof, and it might happen, that we should undo and destroy our selves,
therefore he geuyth us a sharp ^ytt in our mouths, and helpyth us to ^rydle,
and to tame our flesh, that the noble and precious soul perysh not.

Again like as the carte^ or foore man yerketh his horse with the whypp, and
strykyth them sharpelye when they will not draw nor goo forward, and yet
fauoryth and sparyth them also that he may enjoy them the longer: Even so God
strykyth and whyppyth us, when we do not right as we should do, and yet
nevertheless sparyth us, and will not make utterly an end of us.

Like as the poor shepard also, when God a shepeherde.
his folyshe sheep straye abroad in the wyld wyldernes among the wolves, he
dryuyth them from strange ways into the right way, and huntyth the^ into their
sure sheep fold, where they may be in safeguard. Even so we likewise for as
much, as we myxe our selves often times among the worldlynges, and have
felowshyppe with those that are enemies unto our Christen and true relygion,
therefore god comyth unto us, and dryuyth us with sorrow and repentance from
them, that we should not be destroyed and perish together with them.

The herd man will suffer such calue^ as are appointed shortelye to the
slaughter, to run and spring about^ in the pasture ^t pleasure, and again
such as are reseruyd to labor, are kept and used under the p^cke: Even so
allmighty God does suffer and permit unto those ungodly parsoons, whose
destruction is at hand, to have all pleasure and lust upon earth, and to
fulfill and accomplish their pleasures and desires, but the Godly whom he will
use to his honor and glory those kepyth he under the pocke, and (...) them from
the pleasante Iusty^ of the world.

A wise and skylfull husband m^ does not cast nor so we his se^de in a feld^
God a husband man.
or ground, that is not broken (...) ^yllyd: as it ought to be, but he (...)
his dren, and goes to the (...)* and cast^ ^p the earth with hy^ plowe share;
and so tillyth and (...) with it, and than first of all, he so with it, that if
any rain (...), the sede may be (...), (...) into the earth, and take hold
and wa^ therein. Even such an husbandman is God, and we are his tyllage i Corin.
iij. And he bestowyth not his spyryte and truth upon such as are wild and
past all fear of god. sa. i.

Moreover, like as the gardener hedgyth his garden round about and fensyth it
with thornys and brerys, that no ^eastys nor noysom catel h^t i^, Even so God
defendyth, hepyth and preseruyth us from euyil company, and from al ma ner of
sin, through thornys and brerys, that is to say, through the cross and through
affliccions, as Ose says in the. ij. cha. I will beset their ways with
thorn^s, and their foot pathys will I hedge.

If the gardener cut of the knobbys, and the crokyd bowys from the treys in his
garden, and loppyth them a little, yet as long as the rotes remain the treys
are (...) the worsse, but ware never the less, and bring forth fruit also:
Even so does God lopp and hew the crabbye old (...), with the cross, not to
the intent to hurt or harm us, but to keep us in (...), and to teach us
godly manners. And (...) as long the rote of faye^h remay^th with (...),
though we be spoiled and (...) of all riches, and of all manner

to serve to prove and to try us withal.

TRouble and affliccions do pr^e, try, instruct, confyrme, and stre^gthen the
faith, provoke and styr^ up prayer, drive and fo^e us to amend^t of life, to
the fear of God, to mekenes, to pacyence, to constancy, to gentleness, to
sobernes and temperancye, and to all m^ ner of virtues, and are the occasyon of
ex ^dynge much good as well transitorye as ^ternall, in this world as in the
world to come.

By affliccyon and trouble will God (...) and assaye, mark and spy how (...)
thy heart has entered with God, how much thy faith is able to suffer and to
bear, whether thou can* forsake Mat. x. xv. man. vii^ Luke ix. xiiij. Ioh.
xij.
both thy self and all other creatures in the world for his sake? In summa to
be short, he will try how thou wylt b^ have thy self, when he takes
utterly from the, and out of the sight, that wherein thou most delyghtest
and have any pleasure upon earth. God knows well enough before, how thou will take it, and behave thy self, but he will show and declare to thy self
and to other also, what is in the. For often times people do ^o extol a man and
make such boaste of him, to be the wysest, most circu^specte, manly (...)
honest man in a country, etc. but wha^ the time of trial comes, there
appears no such thing in him, as was thought and looked for.

A man can not learn to know a lustye and a stout man of war in the time
of pe^ce, but best of all in the time of war when the cruel and fearse ene
myes do invade and assault his capten.

When a great tempeste aryseth in the sea, then does it appear whether the
(...) be conning in rulynge the (...) or (...).

Again, those are the most honest and most chaste matrones, which being
for ^empted, assawlted, and provoked unto wickedness, do nevertheless keep
their ^pows faith toward their (...) undefiled: Even so can noma^ know nor
prove perfytely how the christen church keeps her spoustayth and fide (...)
toward ^er spouse and brydegrome Jesus Christ, ^ntyll such time as Anti
christ assaulteth and tempts her with false doctrine, tyranny and
persecucyo^.

Such trees, as have strong and deep rotes, and suffycyent natural sap, can
^o vyolent heat of the son hurt nor harm. But such as are felled and cut
down, are sone drped up with the heat of the sun, like as the grass also
that is mowne down does sone wyther. (...) ^o likewise such faithful
parsons as are roted in Christ Jesus, can not troubles nor affliccyons hurt,
they grow and war grene not withstanding: but the un faithful do betray them
selves, and show what they are, as soon as they se any heat of trouble or
persecutyon coming.

With one flayle are both the stalks and ears of the corn beaten, and also
the corn it self three shedd and pourged out: Even so with one manner of
trouble and affliccyon are the faithful pourged and provoked to pray unto
God, and to laud and magnifye him, And the unfaithful also to (...) and
curse, and so are they both tried, proved, and known.

When the come is threshed, the (...) uell lies myxed among the cha^, and af
terwarde are they dysseuered a sonde^ with the fa^e or wyndle. Even so the pe
ople in the church do first hear the prea chynge of Gods word. Now some
sto^ble repyne, and are offended at it, and other are not offended, and yet
they dwell together, one with another, but when they are faimed or wyndled, and
when the wind of trouble and affliccyon begins ones a little to blow, then
is it easy to sonder, and to know the one from the other, the faithful from
the unfaithful.

Art thou pure corn? what nedes^ thou then to fear, either the flayle or the
wind? In the threshynge and in the wind thou shall be delivered and sondered
from the chaf, and shall be made more pure the^ thou waste before. Let them
fear that are chafe which are not able to abide nor to continue the wind,
but must be blown away, and cast out.

A rotten and an old weak house stands a while for a time, but as soon as a
wind comes and blows, it appears unto all men how feeble the foundacyo^
and stey of it was. Even so are there such Christen men without ground or
foun dacyon which as long as all thyng^ go well and prosper with them, they
are good Christianis: but in the time of trouble and persecucyon, their
dissimulacyo^ is known, and breaks out.

Sapient. iij. As gold is tried in the oven wherein it is molten, even so
has God tried and pourged them.

Now if thou beyst gold what nedest thou to fear the fire, which does more
profit then hinder or hurt the?

To this purpose does this true proverb serve, In need does a man try which
be his fryndes.

Examples, Almyghtye God did tempte and prove Abraham, and ^ad him offer up,
and kill his only son. Then was Abraham in a great dystresse (...) and
heauynes, he had rather have lost all his goods and possessions, and all that
ever he had upon earth, then he should slaye, his dear son. But pet though
it were against nature, and an intolerable thing, yet he carried his son
forth three days journey to kill him with his own hands, he overcame his
flesh by faith, and would be (...) unto God. Than say^ God unto (...) now I
know that thou fear God, and ha^t not spared thy only dear son for my
sake, Genes. xxij. And Moses says Deuteronomy. (...). remember all the ways through
the which the Lord thy God has led and guyded the these. x^. years in the
wyldernes, because he would chasten and prove the, that it might appear, and
be known what was within thy heart, whether thou would keep his
commandments or ^o. Set Pharao and David together the one against the other,
ij. notable kings. Pharao perseuereth and continues obstynately, stubburnly
and peruersely in his wicked purpos, notwithstanding the ma nyfolde plages that
did fall and lyghten upon him. Exo. vij. viij. ix. Contrariwise how sone did
David give over, and break out with all meakenes, submissyon, pacy^ns, and
acknowleginge of his whoredo^ when as he fled from Absalon, Sem^y rebuking
and reuyling him most shamefullye. ij. of the kings. xvi.

Job was stryken with many grenous (...), that there was nothing sound nor
whole in him. From the soole of his foot to the top of his head, not that he
^ad deserved such he^uy (...) more then other men, but that God would declare
to all the world, his patience and faythfulnes.

But his wife did than show her weak faith and wicked corrupt nature Job. i.
ii.

Who was more faithful and more fervent than Peter? And yet he denied and
forsook Christ before a simple woman. Who ought not therefore to fear him
self, except he has before in the trial been found faithful, stedfalte, and
constant.

In like manner daily experyens teaches us to know the faithful and
unfaithful a sonder in persecucyon and affliccyon.

There are some that cleave to the Gospel for a time: but when they see, they
can not atteyne that they sought and looked for, than they forsake it, and fall
from it again, yea and in the time of temptacyon they fall to blasphemynge of
the ho ly Gospel. But the Godly which have it fixed in their hearts, stand
stedfastlye by God both in life and death.

The. viij. Chapter.
Trouble and affliccion do help and further us to the knowledge of our
selves, and of God also, and speci allye to wisdom.

Besides this it is a profitable and a good thing for a man to know him self
well. Felicyte and prosperyte blyudeth a man, but when he is under the cross he
begins to mark the fray lenes of his body, the vncertentye of his life, the
feebleness of his understanding, the infyrmpte and weakness of man's strength
and power. ^e shall spy and perceive how far he is entered in the way of
virtue, how the matter stands between God and him, whether he be a champyon of
Gods or of the deuyls. For a man thinks himself oftymes to be well grounded
and stablyshed, but in the time of te^ptacyon he feleth, how lightly and
easelye he is tossed and turned of every blaste of the wind.

Item by affliccyon and mysfortune God will put the in remembrance, how many
thousand perels are yet hanging over thy head, which should lyghten and fall
upon the, if he did not keep and preserve the from them And the same God says
thus unto the. The wicked enemy with a notable and infynyte heap of all evil
and myschiefe does assault and lay watch for the to subdewe the, and to
swalowe the up but I have appointed him his bounds over the which he can not
pass.

The longer thou art under the cross The right kno weledge of God.
the better may thou learn all the virtues and goodness of God.

As his just judgment and straythe iu stice whereby he shows his wrath and
displeasure against the wicked and ungodly. And sends upon their necks ter
ryble plages, And the obstinate and vnre pentant he condemns everlastingly.

Item his infynyte power whereby he can help and confortethe in most extr me
myserye and necessyte.

Item his mutable truth, wherebye he does faithfully perform all his promyses,
and brings to pass all his threa tenynges.

Item his exceeding mercy and free grace, whereby he preuenteth all evil to
ward us and will not suffer us to be caught and oppressed with any mysfortune.

Item his eternal and everlasting providence, wherebye like a father he
takes charge and care over us and gouernyth i. Petr. v
oll things most wisely.

Item his glory magnyfycens and lawdes for the forsayde virtues, which do shine
most clearly in affliccyon and aduersite.

For the which cause S. Bernarde writes thus: whereby do we know that he
that dwells above, is among us here beneth? Forsooth by this that we do styke
in trouble and affliccions. For who could be able to sustain, bear and abide
them without God?

A man has need at all times of wisdom, circumspeccyon, prudence and
sobernes. To lear ne wisdom in aduersy te.
Like as prosperyte shuts and blyndeth the eyes of men, even so does ad
uersyte open them.

Like as the salve that remedyeth the disease of the eyes, does first byte and
grieve the eyes, and makes them to watter, but yet afterward the eysyght is
clea rer and more sharp then it was, Even so trouble and affliccyon do grieve
and vex men wonderfullye at the fyste, but afterward it helps and lyghtened
the eyes of the mind, that it is afterward more reasonable, wise, and
circumspecte.

For trouble brings experience, And experyens brings wisdom. Eccl.
xxxiiij. Proverb. xxix. The rod and ponyshmente do bring wisdom. And of
this did these proverbs first spryng up, the more plentyfull land, the more
folysh and wicked people.

And again aduersyte causes men to look well and far about them.

Item there is no man wise, but with his hurt and loss.

Item that man may well learn to swymme, which has the water at his mouth.

David says in the. cxviij. Psalm. O Lord how good and profitable is it unto
me that thou have chastened and humbled me, that I might learn thy
ryghtuousnes and thy commandments?

The. ix. Chapter.
Trouble and affliccions do help and further us to the right knoweledge of
our sins, and to perfyte sorrow and repeutaunce for them.

GOd requires that the knoweledge of our poisoned and corrupt nature and of
the wrath of God should wax and increase in us, whereby we might conceive an
hearty sorrow and repentance for our sins, and so daily amend and wax
better. Now truth it is that in our hearts naturally stpketh a roughe
securenes and carefulnes, whereby we do little regard and esteem the inward
fylthynes of our hearts. And specyallye when we feel no manner of taste of the
cross and affli ction we do not consider the miserable wretchedness of our
sins nor the just judgment of God, and the terryble ponysh meant dew for
the same. But when the hand of God does humble and pluck down some special
persons or an whole congregacyon, then remember we the greatness and heauynes of
sin, that Gods wrath and indygnacyon is not so sore, without some special
and most just causes.

And then break we out into such words as these. O Lord, we have deserved
these plages a thousand ways. O good and most just God, thou rewardest the
mysdeedes and transgressyons of the fathers in the children, if they follow
their fathers steps, even unto the third and fourth generacyon.

Like as the hard copper and sin do melte in the fire, even so in trouble
and affliccyo^ the hard rough and stubborn hearts do melt and fall to
myslyking and loothyng their sins. A trespasser does than first of all
perceive his fautes ryghtely when he is brought unto the judgment to be
ponyshed, and is adjudged and condemned un to death. And for this cause does
God use such rough and hard means with us. And both the common and general,
and also the particular special plages and aduersityes may well be called a
part of Gods law, and as it were Gods preaching which testyfye and declare
unto us, that God is heuyly displeased against all manner of wickedness and
abhomynacyon that reygneth in the world, that all men should humble and
submytte them selves unto God, bewail and lamente their sins unto him with a
sorrowful and a right penitente heart, and despre his grace and mercy.

For an example Genes. xlij. Joseph's brethren in Egypt did than first of all
spy their wickedness committed against their brother, when as very need and
necessi te did vex them in a strange country.

Numer. xxi. When as the Lord did send into the wyldernes among the Isra
elytes, vene mous serpents which did byte them, and set them on fire, then
came they first to Moses and said: We have sinned, for as much as we have
spoken against the Lord and against the.

When the pestylence did rage, then i. Para, xxij. c.
said David unto the Lord, behold it is I that have sinned, what have these
sheep done?

Now therefore if it be so, that know ledge of the sin and an hearty
dyspleasure against it be profitable and necessary, then can we not well
forbear trouble and aduersyte.

The. x. Chapter.
Trouble affliccion and ad uersyte do help and further us to the exercysynge
and increasynge of our faith.

THat our faith is proved and tried through the cross and through ad uersyte,
it is declared before. And now shall it be evidently proved, that our faith is
then first right stablyshed, exer cysed and augmented when aduersyte co^ meth.
The very true Christian faith is grou^ ded only upon the grace, mercy, power
and help of God through Christ.

Which thing can not be right comprehended. With vain thoughts, ymaginacyons
and speculations, but God comes upon the miserable sinners with heaps of
myseryes. Whatsoever they attempt, go about or take in hand it goes
backwarde with them, and their whole life is made bitter with gall unto them
that they can no where find any rest. And why? Forsooth it is dry for this
purpose that they should utterly neglecte and despise all manner of council
and comfort of man, that they should be plucked from all manner of trust in the
polycyes and powers of ye world, and that they should utterly despair of all
help in any creature. And in the stead of that, that they should set and
fyxe their hearts and minds only in God, and that nothing at all should else
remain in them, but only unspeakable syghtning unto God procedyng out of a
true faith, in whose help and mercy only altogether consists.

Testymonyes of scripture, Moses in the. viij. of Deuter. witnesses that God
suffered the Israelytes to be dyuerselye vexed, and to be brooght into great
dystresse and yet preserved the^ wonderfully, for this cause that when they
should come into the land of promise they should not say: Mine own power and
the strength of mine own hands were able to bring this to pass, but thou
should thyncke upon the Lord thy God: For he it is, which gyuyth the such
power, whereby thou art able to perform, and bring any thing to pass.

And so did God deal afterward with the chyldern of Israel, which of their
own brain and wysdom sought help, succor and mayntenance at the king of the
Assyrians, and at the king of Egypt, which the very same were they that after
ward did besyge them, slaye them and carried them away prisoners. And so after
that they felt and prouyd, that there was none that could succor and help
them, but only the Lord unto whom they yeldyd and gave over them selves at
length.

Ierem. x. Ose. ij. iiij. vi. and Paul. ij. Corinth. i. I lokyd for no another,
but that I should dye. But it was done for this purpose, that we should not put
any trust in our selves, but in God, which rayseth up the dead again.

Ite^ whatsoever styrryth up and exercysyth our faith, of that ought we not to
be afraid, but rather to rei^e in it.

When we live in ydlenes in all lust and pleasure, the devil s^appyth us up
quyckly, and blyndyd our own weakness, that we thynck God does not regard us,
all things in the world do happy^ without any workynge or foresyght of God.
But as well in special as in general aduersyteys, there is greater matter and
occasion to practyse and to exercise ye faith.

God sufferyth the to fall into poverty, or thy most dear fryndys to be
taken from the, by death, or some other dysquyetnes to happen unto the.

As than have thou a great occasyon to awake and to practyse thy fayeth: And
first to call to remembrance the promyses of God, contey^yd in his word, and
than to call upon him for his grace and assystens, and so to resyst and
wythstand all manner of natural dowtfulnes and despair, that hangyth in thy
flesh, how grievous soever thy necessyte seem to be, and how soever any man
does ymagyne, that God has wythdrawyn his face from the, and will not help the
at all.

In like manner in all common necessytyes and general, th^s is the right
exercise of faith, and the most holy service of God, yt we first consider and
wey er^estlye all manner of perels and assawtys of the church and of the common
wealth. And after that, yt we pray unto god with a constant and a lively faith,
that he will deliver and preserve the church from false doctrine, supersticion
and hypocrysy, and that he will gracyously rule and govern it. And that he will
alsopreserue the common wealth in good order and quyetnes, and will grant helsom
air and ceasonable whether, And will also restrain and let the wyld and
dissolute behauor and conuersacyon of the ^mon sort of people and will grant,
maynteyne, and preserve a Christian dyscyplyne, behauor and honestye, whereby his
holy and Godly name may be la^dyd and magnyfyed, his kingdom, aug mentyd,
increasyd and co^fyrmyd and the kingdom of ye devil subu^rtyd and co^foundyd.

And remember this also, whansoeuer thou consyderyst thy aduersyte, forgette
not to desire of God, hope and trust for comfort, aid and succor, And look
that thou strive and fight myghtyly and manfully against all manner of mystrust,
and put away al manner of despair how grievously soever thy aduersyte and sorrow
does increase, and thus is thy faith well ryghtly practysyd and exercysyd.

An example: From holy Job was taken all that ever any man might take an^
comfort in wife, chyldern, goods and
friends, and one trouble, sorrow, and heavy message came still in another
neck, and he had not one dropp of blood in his body, that was not consumyd and
wastyd: And he sat in the syghte of all the world, was there laughyng stock,
and so exercysyd and practysyd his fayeth, and ^aue over him self only and
whollye unto God.

Unto Abraham was promised a seed which should be in multitude as the sand of
the sea, and as the stars in the shye, and yet was his wife baren and vnfruit
full, and he alsowaxen old and agyd, that after the judgment of natural
reason it was not possible, that that promise should be fulfilled and come to
pass. By the means where of Abraham did exercise, try and practyse his faith.

And thus did Joseph, Dauyd, Danyel all patryarkys, prophets and apost les as
well in the common and general aduersytes of the church, as in their own
pryuate and peculyar affliccious exercise and practyse their fayeth, and this
was their highest Gods service, wherewyth they honoryd and served god. Wherefore
in our time: also God gyuyth us great and marvelous occasyon, through trouble
and aduersyte to awake, stir up and to exercise our faith. And by such
exercise is the fayeth increasyd and confyrmyd, yea and shynyth more bryghtlye,
and is made more bewtyfull and glorious. For whatsoever a man has prouyd and
tried him self, that beleuyth he afterward the more steadfastly. Now he that
is a Christen man or woman prouyth and felyth in deed, that in the mids of
his sorrow and affliccion he is ruled, defendyd, comfortyd and preseruyd of
God. For hope can not be confounded. Roma. v

And therefore the Christen and the faithful man, through troble and aduersyte
is made more bold and hartye and concludyth with him self, more than ever he
did before, that God has a special regard and consyderacyon of those that are
in trouble and myserye and will gracy^sly help and deliver them out. Like as
one that has sailed often up on the sea, and prouyd and escaped great and
dangerous tempestyes, and has been sore tossyd with ye fearful wauys,
afterward he is the more bold and hardy to goo unto the sea, for as much as he
has ever escaped well, and has had good fortune before.

Even so a christ man, when the cross has often assaulted and exercysed, for
as much, as he has always found comfort, aid and help at God, afterward
he trustyth God, the longer the more, though the same affliccion and aduersyte
come again unto him that he had before.

And to this purpose hear and mark ij. special and u^table examples: One
out of ye old, and another out of ye new testament.

i. Of the kings. xvij. chapt. Dauyd when he preparyd him self to fight
against the valyant giant Golpath, said these words: The Lord which has
delyueryd
me from a lion, and from a bear, shall deliver me also from this Phylystyan.
And again Paul. i^. Corin. i. says: God has delyueryd us from so great a
death, and delyueryth us daily, and we hope that he will deliver us from hence
forth also.

And to this same purpose does this al so apperteyne to consider, that the
cross assueryth those that bear it in the Lord, of the grace and favor of
God, whereby they know certainly, that they are of the number of the elect and
the chyldern of God, for as much as he lokyth upon them fatherly, to reform
and to correct them.

For as much as it is written, Judith. viij. Yea all those that ever did please
God have been prouyd and tried by many and diverse troubles and have been found
constant and steadfast in faith.

Item, ij. Tymoth. iiij. All those that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecucyon and affliccyon.

The. xi. Chapter.
Trouble and aduersyte gives us occasyon to pray unto God, and to laud and
praise him.

Every Christen man knowyth this yt it is very necessary and profitable for
him to pray, and to call upon god most fervently and devoutly. Now wha^ a
ma^lyuyth in all prosperyty tha^ he pray eth very little, or very slenderly and
coldly, he has no great affeccio^ or mind upon it. That prayer that is not
pressed and thrust out with the cross, flowyth not out from the depth and
botom of the heart. But sorrow, heaviness, and aduersite ^yndlyth up the mind and
settyth it on fire, dryuyth, chasyth and huntyth it unto God and compellyth it
to call upon God fervently and ernestly. For at such time we se and perceive
well, that we can do nothing of oureselues, and what great need we have of
God, that he will wot save to govern, aid and defend us.

Like as the water as long as it flowyth and ronnyth over the even plain,
wide and broad feldes, it breakyth not out by no violence, but dyspersyth
and spreadyth it self abroad every where a like: But when it is gathered
together by conning and scye^s and conveyed into a narow roumith, as into a
pype or co^duit, than it springyth and spowtyth out an high. Even so the mind
of man, as long as it is quiet, idle, and without sorrow or trouble, it
walkyth and wandreth abroad at large and at lybertye, but when it is brought
in, restrained and dryuyn a straight and a narowe yssewe through trouble and
aduersyte, it breakyth out a lo^t unto God in heaven with an earnest, hearty
and seruent prayer for grace, aid and comfort: Whereupon there is a common
proverb sprung, Need and necessy te teachyth men to pray.

Esaias. xxvi. O Forde, when trouble and aduersyte is at hand, than do men seek
the, when thou chastenyst and punyshyst them, than call they upon the
lamentably. Examples. i. book of the kings. vij. cha. when the chyldern of
Israel hard of the coming of their ennympes the Philistines, they were afraid
and said unto Samuel, cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for us, that he
may help us out of the handys of the Phylystynes.

Manasses (which all the days of his life was a very blood hound and a tyran)
was bound with chains, and sed away unto Babylon. And when he was in extreme
iiij. Reg. xxi. a i^. Para. xxxiij. a
anguysh and necessyte, he made his humble prayer and supplycacyon before the
Lord his God, and God hard his humble prayer, and brought him again to
Jerusalem. ij. book of the Cro. xxxiij.

Math. viij. When there arose a great tempest upon the sea, in so much that
the shypp was ouerwhelmyd with the wauys, and Christ slept, than the dyscyples
hastyd unto him and wakyd him up saying, Lord help us for we peryshe.

Math. the. xv. the example of the heathen, woman does teach the how the
Lord prolongyth and dysserryth his aid and help sometime for the nonys, that
we should be kyndlyd up to cry the more fervently, and to continue
importunately in ernest prayer.

(...). Austen wrytyth thus. They that are Godly, are oppressyd and veryd in
the church or congregacyon for this purpose that when they are pressyd, they
should cry, and when they cry that they should be hard, and when they are
hard, that they should laud and praise God.

And like as the cross, and aduersyte Co laud God.
does further and prycke us forward unto the first part of prayer, which is
to desire and crave of God, even so does it also further and provoke us also
unto the second part of prayer which is to laud GOD, and to give him
thankys.

The almighty power, wysdom, righteousness, mercy and truth of god, these high
and excellent Godly virtues worthy of all laud and honor do appear in the
cross, afflyccyon and aduersyte of Christen men, when God vysytyth miserable
sinners, comfortyth those that are in dystresse and mysery, helpyth and delyue
ryth them out of all manner of necessyte. At these things do all Christen
people wonder and meruel hyghly, and therefore break they out to magnyfye,
praise and extolle God with unspeakable lauds and praises.

ij. Corinth. iiij. We have such a treasure in earthly vessels, that the power
that lies above, and has the vyctorpe might appear to be of God and not of
us: that is to say, we are weak and miserable vessels, that Gods honor and
glory should be furtheryd and not ours.

For an example take the story of Daniell in the third chapter. How the
imprysonement and captyuyte of the Jews did serve wonderfully to the glory
and praise of God.

John. ix. Our savior Christ shewyth the cause why the man was biynde from
his very natyuyte and birth: namely that the works of God should appear and
be made manifest in him.

Moreover all the Prophets, apostle^ and elect of God, up whom God wrought
wounderfull and marvelous things, were contemnyd and despised, yea and sometime
slain and murtheryd, that all men might spy and perceive that their fayeth
and workynge, which did not shryncke but contynuyd vpryghte, was a work of
God, and no power of man. And therefore that God must be (...) and praised
about all.

The. xij. Chapter.
Trouble and aduersyte do further us to virtue and godlynes.

THe cross and trybulacyon do b^nysh and dryu^ away the former synnys and
hinder and resyste those that are to come hereafter and help to plant,
exercise and increase all manner of virtues, that the ungodly may be prouokyd
and furtheryd to repentance and amen dement, and reformacyon of their lyue^ and
the Godly to further virtue and god* lines. For what afflyccyon soever the
flesh does suffer, it greuyth it very sor^, it would rather be ^ery, at rest and
quy^t. Now every one that has any reason knowyth this right well that he
through his own i^ys and behauor brings much aduersyte and afflyccyon upon
his own neck. And therefore in consyderacyon of that, he begynnyth to bewar
and to take hed^ afterward of all inordynate and dyssolute living, as the cause
ground and occasyon of all myserye and sorrow,
that beside this present afflyccyon he be not plagyd also eternally, Which I
will declare and prove first with symylytudes, secondarylye with testymonyes of
holy scripture, and thyrdly by examples.

A water that is contynually, standing how clear soever it seem, yet it is
corrupt and naught. But that water which has his co^tynuall coursse, the more*
it russyth and strougglith over the stonys and sandys the more lively fresh and
better it is. ^ue^ so a godly man in the absence of the cross is sluggysh dull
and lytherly, but through the cross and afflyccyon he is quycke^yd and
exercysyd and increasyd in all goodness.

The rusty and cankard iron, through the fyle is made bright and smoth. Even so
the old rusty Adam has need of (...) and aduersyte, to ^yle and pourge him
from the cankard rust of sin.

A (...) though it be never so smoth, if it be not used, it wa^eth rusty, and
the same ruste frettyth it and marryth it. But the more that it is occupied,
though it be somewhat worn thereby, yet it is the more bright. Even so
although some parson has a good nature and inclynacyon, if he be not occupied
and exercysed with trouble and aduersyte, he waxes rusty, cankard and rotten,
but through the cross and trybulacyon, though the rust have won somewhat of
him being a man and weak, yet he shall thereby be made more bright, clear and
bewtyfull again.

The seed that is cast into the field must suffer the wynd, rain, snow,
frost and all manner of tempestyes, and yet it waxes and brings forth fruit:
Even so the spyrytuall sede, which is the word of God, being receyuyd of a
devout and a fervent heart, is not destroyed through trouble, but brings
forth right good and profitable fruit.

A (...) tree the (...) it is beaten, the better it is, and not the worsse.
Even so man through many strypes and much aduersyte waxyth good.

For the thyck and hard shynne of an horse or an ass, is nothing better than
a very sharp whyp to gyrke him with. Even so for our stubburne and hawtye
flesh, there is nothing more (...) and profitable, than much sorrow and
vexacyon, whereby it may be stryppyd and pryckyd forward.

Cloth must be often beatyn and brushed, whereupon there is a proverb, Thus must
wollynge cloth be used, that there bread no mothys in it. Even so shall spi
rytuall mothys* and wor^ys, wyckydnes, sin and abhomynacyon have the less
power to bread in us, if we be well brushed and beatyn in time with afflyccyon
and aduersyte.

The flesh that comyth fresh out of the shambles vnsaltyd, waxyth soon
^sauerye, and worms bread in it, but the salt with his sharpenes keeps it
sweet from corrupcyon. Even so does God cast and sprynckle salt upon us
through diverse temptacyons and affliccio^s, that they may byte and ceason us yt
we corrupt nor peryshe not in sin.

That body that is always idle, and never mouyth nor has no exercise, is
easyly subject unto syckenes and infyrmyties. But those bodies that have their
exercise and labor are more lusty and sound and can better continue. Even so
that soul that is well exercysyd and occupied with trouble and affliccyon has
occasyon and cause to be bewtiful sound and clear.

It is a very true saiynge, the sharper that the ley is, the cleaner takyth it
away all manner of fylth. Even so our corrupt and poysonyd nature had need of
a sharp and a bytynge medycyne. The greater and sharper the trouble and
aduersyte is the more fylth and inconuenyence it bytyth away.

For a raw and weak stomach, which is of a naughty dysgestion, bitter
wormwoode is very good and holsom. Even so for the weak and feeble soul is
bitter trouble and afflyccyon very holsom and necessary.

Remember this proverb, After the syck man had recoueryd his sore, he lived
worsse than ever he did before. And therefore sycknes is more necessary for him
yt he wax not worsse and live not more wic kedlye.

Now will I allege scripture, Leui. xxvi. God threateneth to send a plage
seuenfold greater, if a man will not amend at the lyghter and easyer ponishment
that he sent first. Whereby the Lord him self declares through Moses,
that trouble and aduersyte should teach us an alteracyon and amendment of our
lives.

In the. xx. of the Proverb. strokes and wounds do pourge and cleanse out
evil and corrupcyon, and strypes puryfye the inward parts of man.

Hebre. xij., No manner of chastenyng for the present time seems to be joyous,
but heavy and grievous, but afterward it brings a quyete fruit of
ryghtuousnes unto those that are exercysed therein.

i. Petr. iiij. He that suffers in the flesh cease from sin, that from
henceforth (the time that is remnaunt in the flesh) he may live, not after
the lusts of men, but after the will of God.

And this shall examples make more manyfeste. Under Iosue had the children of
Israel many battles, and were dryue^ to fight agayust their enemies, and they
did never fall nor swerve from yt Lord, until afterward that they came unto
rest, and had all things plenty. Iosu. i. Judge. ij. This is an example of an
whole multitude. Now take examples of specy all parsons.

The Prophet Jonas being in the whalles belly, remembered his sins, altered
him self, turned and was obedient unto God. Ion. ij. c


The lost and desperate son did then first, of all r^ne home again unto his
father, when he saw and felt his myserye and pouertye, Luke xv.

Mark the daily experience. We ymagyne often times thus with our selves, Oh, if
I were ones whole and restored again, I would surely behave and order my self
well as I ought to do, and would help and serve every man.

Oh, if I were rich, I would gladly distribute unto the poor people
faithfully. But as soon as we come out of the danger in deed, we have clean
forgotten altogether. As long as we have no manner of need, no man can hinder
nor restrain onre wickedness.

For an example ymagyne, ij. sundry hou ses, whereof in the one is celebrate
and kept a marriage, where there is myrthe, joy, and good chere, And in the
other is one sick on his dead bed. In the bryde house where there is daunsyng,
is used all manner of lightness and dissolutenes, gross and filthy words,
baudy songs and ballets, shameless behauour and manners, and wanto^ and light
appa rel, one leapeth and wynseth like an horse, Another sta^peth like an
ass, The third drinks him self dronke^, And the fourth does nothing that
honest is, so that a man might say the people were become very brute beasts.
But by him that lies on his dead bed, is all still, not a word Eccl. vij
spoken, but honest and semelye. All things are done sadly, demurely and
discretelye. And at that time not only the men, but also the women and
children, and all that are in the house, are godly occupied, they pray, they
comfort, and break out into such words as these: What is man? how tran
sitory and vain are al things that we have here upon earth? but in the life
to come, it shall be far otherwise.

Again from the marriage or brydehouse goes many one home heavy and sad, vex
ed in his mind, and dysdaynefull that he is not so happy and fortunate as
other And suddenly is rauyshed with the bewtye of some wife or maiden, that he
saw at the daunsyng, which has wounded and stryken him to the heart. And when
he co meth home, he looks sowersye on his wit, is froward toward his
children, and teasty against all the household, so that no man can please him.

But he that goes home from the mourning house, thinks him self well bles
Eccl. vij
sed and happy that he him self lies not in any such extreme necessite. If
he has had any sycknes or vexacyon in time paste, now he is able to bear it
the more easily and patiently when he compares it to the grievous and
intolerable pain of the man that lies in the pangys of death. By reason
whereof he is the more pa cyent gentle and fryndely toward his wit, children
and his whole household: yea he takes occasion thereby to reform and amend his
life.

The. xiij. Chapter.
Sorrow and affliccion do help and further us toward the fear and love of
God.

TRouble and affliccyon do engender the fear of God in the^, which suffer it,
and in other likewise which ^o hear and know of it, so that many take
example and instruccyon therebye and afterward attempt not any thing
temerouslye and rasshely against the will and pleasure of God. For he is
lawfullye to be feared and dred which can bring math. (...).
and lay upon us all manner of plages, and also has just cause and right
toward us so to do. Now we being feeble and weak, are in no wise able to
resyste and wythstande the strong and mighty God, no we are not able to
wythstand or put of the least ill day of an agewe, Yea we ca^ not chose but
suffer the least and most contemptuous and feeble creatures to plage and
dysquyete us, as lyse, flees, flies, Exo. vij viij. ix. x
and such like vermyne, which did master and overcome the mighty puysante
king of Egypt.

It is a uery true Proverb. a Burntha^de breadeth the fire, For in the same
sense and meaning spoke Moses unto the fearful people: God is come to tempte
and prove you, that the fear of him may be before your eyes to consider and
remem ber that ye sin not

As for an example, the more the forde bid exercise and hunt about, David, the
more dilygently did he look upon ye lord, and feared him. ij. of the kings.
xv. And ij reg. xv
not only David but other also, when there saw and perceived their myserye and
wretchedness, they took occasyon thereby to fear God more then they did before.
And specially when they saw afterward how God ponyshed David's manslaughter and
ij. reg. xi xiij. xiiij xv. xvi xvij. xviij. etc.
horedom, with sedycion, vprour, murder and with loss of much people.

Holy scripture sets before our eyes diverse like terryble examples, that we
should not esteem the fear of God for a light thing, but should be afraid of
all manner of wickedness, sin, and abhomy nacyon.

When a trespasser is led out to be headed, hanged, burnt or otherwise to be
ponyshed, other that see him do learn to fear and to be war of that thing
which brought him to his last end. Even so when God sends any plage either
upon some special parson or else upon some whole commynaltye, all other ought
so to consider the same, as though they them selves were in the place of the
afflic ted parson, as though his trouble and so row were their own, that
they may the rather fear GOD, and take heed that they fall not into like
vengeance of God.

And in very deed as well the good and faithful as the wicked and unfaithful
have cause to fear. For the faithful can consi Pro. xi d
der thereby, that these tra^sitory plages are tokens and evident testimonies of
the eternal ponyshmentes that are to come, whi che are a thousand thousand
times more i. Petr. iiij. c.
grievous and never have end. Therefore both their own and other men's
affliccyons and sorrows do give them occasyon enough to redress and forsake
that thing whereby all men do bring eternal plages upon their necks.

The wicked and unfaithful, if they Ieremi. xxv. d. and. xlix. b. ^zechiel ix.
d. Prouer. xi. d. i. Petr. iiij. c.
be not utterly obstynate and peruers, but have any use of reason at al, do
also begin to fear God, and to think thus with them selves, If God vysiteth,
scourged, and assauteth with trouble and vexacyon, the good and faithful which
are nothing so wicked as we, how shall it then go with us, which have
deserved, x. yea. xx. times more grievous punishment then they.

Ierem. the. xxv. Mark and behold I begin to plage the cyty whereunto my name
is given, thinck ye then that ye shall escape free and vnponyshed? ye shall not
go quyte and free.

Luke. xxiiij. If this be done in the gre^ n^ wood what shall be done in the
dry?

i, Petr. iiij. It is time that judgment begin at the house of God, seeing
the^ ^at. xi. (...). x* ^xi
it begins first with us, what an end shall they have which believe not the
gospel of God?

An innocent dog that has not offended is beaten before the lion, that the
lion when he knows that he has angr^d and dyspleased his master should be
put in the more fear. S. ^regory wry teth thus, If God stryketh those so sore
whume he favors, how sharpelye and sore will he stryke them which he fauou
reth not?

The crucyfyed and afflicted Christians, do love God the more feruentlye, for
Love of God.
as much as in the myddest of the cross they feel the sweet conforte that
comes from their heau^ly father, of whose merciful will they can not doubt
nor mystrust.

A dog that is of a good nature, if his master stryke him, yet he loves his
master, not withstandyng and ^awnyth again upon him. A good child although it
be beaten, yet it loves the father or mother nevertheless, and des^ereth to
have their favor again. Even in like manner are the true Christians minded
toward their heavenly father, but such children as be wicked, and of an evil
dysposycy^n, when they be a little scourged, they run away from their father,
and murmur against him.

The. xiiij. Chapter.
Trouble and affliccion is good and profitable to teach men, pacyence, mekenes
and lowlynes.

Pride is a dangerous thing, whereof comes no manner of good. Now felycyte
and prospe ^rte al at pleasure, ingendreth pride, and contempt of other
people: But the cross and affliccyon ingendreth mekenes and lon lines, that a
man is not to proud in his own conceyte, but is content that other be
esteemed as well as he, confessing him self to have need of their help and
counsel. Like as men use to clyppe and cut shorter the feathers of birds or
other fowls when they begin to fly to high or to far from them, Even so
does God ^ynishe our riches, possessions, estimacion, honor, (...) toryt^ and
power that we should not pass our bounds and glory to much of such gifts.

Like as the body when it is weryed and consumed with labor and travel
desyereth ease, and rest that it may lie still, Even so the soul being ladyn
and oppressed with trouble and affliccyon, is brought to a narowe ^ssewe, and
then it hastes after rest and quyetnes and nothing, ^exeth it less then
pride.

Nabuchodouosor did glory of his power, victoryous acts, and costly buyl Dan.
iij.
dynges, and was wonderfully proud of them, but after his fall and aduersite
he learned to ascrybe all laud, honor, and glory Dan. iii^
unto God.

Paul. ij. Chor. xij. confesses that a buffet was given him of the messenger
of Satan, that he should not glory out of measure in theabundaunce of
reuelaci^s.

Experiens it self teaches, that when rich, famous, notable, and proud men
are robbed and spoiled of their goods, they are afterward more humble meke
and gentle. For than they perceive the ^ncer tentye and unstableness of
temporal and transytorye things. And so learn the lo^ ger they live, the
less to trust them selves. Therefore trouble an affliccion is often times as
necessary unto men, as meat and drin^ke.

The cross, aduersyte, and affliccyon Mekenes and lowlynes.
makes a man soft, buxom, tame, pa^ient, sober, loving, and frindly both
toward him self, and toward all other also.

A piece of iron or of silver stryken or beaten with an hammer, waxes broader,
thynner, smother, and soffter. Even so the stony and hard hearts of men,
through hea uynes and aduersyte are made more buxom and p^yant, that a man may
wynd them (as a man might say) even round about his finger.

A cursed wild colt has a suaffel put in his mouth, that he byte not him that
handles him. Even so the suaffell of the cross and aduersite does let and
hynder^s, (being froward, furyous, and full of spyte, malice and reuengeaunce)
that we co^ mit the less wickedness, abhomynacyon (...) in our lives.

For an example the furyous ragin^ king, manasses, was meke, still and tame
^iij. ^e. xxi. a ij. Par. xxxiij. a Act. ix. a
enough after that he was onys bound, taken prisoner, and led away captyue.

Paul before Damascus was stryken down, as a ragynge and rauynge wolf, but
he rose up again a meke lamb.

The. xv. Chapter.
Trouble and aduersite is good to teach men pytye compassyon, and pacyence
toward other.

TO have pytye and compassyon of people that are in myserye and Johan. xiij.
(...) Roma. xv. a Gal. v^. Ecclesi. vij. a Mathe. xi. (...)
dystresse is a Christen and a neces saryeve^tu. But he that never felt no
te^ptacyon, aduersyte nor affliccyon him self can have but little pyty and
co^passyon of other. One sick man can tell the lack and necessyte of another,
one poor man likewise another, and also one that is in myserye and affliccyon
him self knows the better the grefe of another, that is i^ like case.

As for an example, why and for what cause can our hye pryeste Christ, hau^
such pytye and compassyon upon us my serable wretches, that we dare be bold
t^ come unto him cheerfully without fear^ and to look for succor, help, and
comfort at his hands: Forsooth even for this cause and by this means, as
says s. Paul, Hebr. ij. v. that he was also tempted and suffered most bitter
pain and grefe him self.

And very experience does teach even the self same thing also, For whosoever
has ones lain sick in a spyttell house him self, can hau^ the more
compassyon of other that are in like case afterward, and is ever after the
more ready and pro^pt to help those that be in such case.

The noble and precious virtue called Pacyence.
pacyence, has no place to put her head in in the time of prosperyte. When a
man has been a long ceason helthfull and with out any manner of sycknes, he
cannot take sycknes by and by so patiently as he ought to do. And likewise he
that never felt any affliccyon or aduersyte, whenever any happen unto him,
he is sore vexed with impacientnes. But aduersyte teaches me^ pacyence, and
practyseth therein. First when a man seyth yt all goes backward, and against
him, and that it will be no better, but rather worsse and worsse. What does he
but of this ^ecessyte makes a virtue, and so is content, and at a point,
howsoever it goes with him. Seco^darely when a man is continually used to
trouble and affliccio^, this same use and custom makes it light and easy unto
him, specially consyderyng yt God will also help, aid and comfort him.

Paul says, Roman. v. Trouble or affliccyon brings patience, and pacyence
brings experyence, etc.

The desperate and lost son, Luke. xv. learned such patience in his miserye
and affliccyon, that he said to his father, Take nor use me not from
henceforth as a son, but as an hired servant, I desire no more but that I
may remain in thy house. Even so ought we also to suffer all things
wyllingly and patiently, what soever they be, so that God will not banish and
put us out of his house.

Unto that noble Hethen man Socra tes did his cursed and shre^de wife serve for
this use and purpose, that he learning pa ciens at home, might the better
suffer, and the more patiently bear the people that he had to do with,
abroad.

Trouble and aduersyte makes men hard and The. xvi Chapt.
strong, and teaches the^ sobernes and te^pera^cy. ANnxe gets him self
harder hoofys upon rough stubble and crabbed ground, and is able to draw and
to labor better, then if he were fed in rank pasture. Those children that
are nursed, by fre^^d men's fyres are for the most part more hard and
strong then they which are day^tyly brought up in all excess, and wan
tonnes, and superfluyte in their own fathers houses. Even so the wits and
minds of men through pleasure and abundance wax tender and weak and
effeminate and wild, but being restrained through some payneful necessyte and
affliccion, they wax harder, stronger, and more manly and sober. For an
examyle. The dear holy Apostles the more persecucyon and affliccio^ they had,
the more bold, strong, and constant were they, as the acts of the Apostles
do testifye thorowout.

Paul. ij. Chor. xi^. says: I am content and think my self well, in
infirmities, in rebukes, in persecucyons, in anguyshes for Christ's sake. For
when I am in such weakness, then am I strong.

The phisycion when he perceyueth that his pacyente will eat over much, and
Temperancy and measure
will wax to fat, he measyreth and restrayneth him, and by breaking somewhat
from him he restores him to his health again and so saves him. Even so when
we do shamefliy misuse wine, corn^bread and drink and other gifts and
creatures of God, to maintain dro^kennes, surffet tyng, excess and riot, then
does God pu nyshe us with honger, dearth, penury and with other plages, that we
should lerane there by to be temperate and to keep me a sure and to use his
benefytes thanckfully. Jesus syrach. xi, says, The hour of punishment and of
correccyo^ makes us to forgette all manner of pleasure and lust. As dauyd soune
forgate his lusty pleasures ij. re. xiij xiiij. xv. xvi. xvij. xviij. etc.
and wantonness utterly, when Absalon drove him out of his kingdom

The. xvij. Chapter.
Trouble and Aduersyte teaches men to coutemne despise and defye the world,
and to be dylygent and fervent in all godlynes and virtue.

THe cross and aduersyte takes f^ us the love of the world, and dry ueth
away all manner of dangerous and delycious lusts and pleasures. of this
transytory life, we would feign be rich, but God gives us pouertye. we
desire health of body, but God gyuet us sycknes, And so murteryth and murseth
us in mysery and with affliccyon that we can no more tell what a delycous and
ten der pleasant life in this world means, and thus begin we to contemn and
looth all tra^sytory things and to desire an other more better, precious and
an eternal life, where all manner of mysery shall have an end.

He that takes a yourny in hand and goyth into a strange contry, when he
comyth into a pleasant town where he metyth merry company and good compa
nyons, parauenture he spendyth away the time and taryeth to long among them
and so forgettyth his household and things at home. But if one hard mischaunce
after another happen unto him, than he makyth the more haste home again to his
wife and chyldern, where he has more rest and quyetnes. Even so when these
transytorye things, as riches, health, bewty, much prosperte, honor and
dygnyte happen unto us, if we will ones gape upon them and delyght so much in
them that we do the less regard and esteem the heavenly life, than will God
make the way roughe and crabbyd unto us here in this life, that we should not
take and esteem this transytorye life in this world for our right natural
country toward the, which we take our yourneye.

For example. The chyldern of Israel had little lust to sing and to play upon
any pleasant instruments, when they sat as prisoners by the ryuers in
Babylon. Psalm. cxxxvi.

And this may a man see and prove by those that are in any dangerous sycknes,
or in any hard prison, or in any anguishe and mysery, how fond they are, upon
eating, drynckyng, gallant apparel, dansyng, toyeng, playnge and gaming or
upon any manner of worldly felicyte. I sup pose the cross and their heaviness
have wyped away and lyckyd of, all such thin ges, as clean as the hoote sun
lyckyth and meltyth away any snow. Furthermore they that be poor and in
dystres and heaviness they are always redyer to forsake this world and are more
desyeros to depart hence to god, than those that have riches, health and
felycyte at pleasure.

And therefore S. Austyn in his book de symbolo wrytyth thus. Behold how god
has replenyshed and fyllyd the world with so many affliccions, and with so
much troublesome aduersyte. It is bitter, and yet is it louyd: It is ruynose
and ready to fall, and yet it is inhabyted. Oh thou my dear derlynge world:
what should we do, if thou weryst sweet, stable and permanente, seeing we do
this now? O thou foul and unclean world, if thou art bitter and yet
deceyuyst and begylyste us, whom woldeste thou not deceive and begyle if thou
werest sweet.

And the cross does not only drive and set us forward to all mauer of virtue
Dylygence and feruency
and puttyth us in mind of al Godlynes, but it quyckenyth and kyndelyth also a
diligence and feruencye in us, to proceed and goo forward in all goodness
lustyly, stowtly, earnestly, manfully and not lytherly or sayntly.

Like as a man sometime must spur his horse, although he be a good and a
quycke horse, that he may goo and run the faster and spedyer: Even so we can
not goo forward in our vocacyon and callyug so spedyly, nor so well as we
ought to do, except we be (...) forward with sharp spurs and scourges,
when the master stryketh his slothful dull and s^epy servant, then he
labors the more ^ylygentlye, and is more profitable unto him. Even so we all
for the most part, of us have the nature of such slouthful and sluggyshe
servants which will do nothing well except, we be driven by co^pul^yon and
^uen whyped and beaten unto it.

Although those be evil seruaunte^ which will do nothing well unless a man
be ever upon their bon^s with a ^udgel, and yet then will do nothing well
neither, yet notwithstanding must a m^ never cease dryuinge and forsy^ge of
the^ until such time as they begyne to amend and to serve willinglye and
with a good heart: Even so although no compel led service, that is vyolently
wrong ou^ of a man, does please God, yet the contynual invringe and exercysing
in goodne^ may make it at length so pleasant and delectable unto us, that we
shall have a delyght therein.

The. xviij. Chapter.
^rouble and aduersite is also an o^casyo^ and help, of much transitorye
quyetnes and commodite in this world.

Hitherto have we taught of the spyrytuall profit of aduersyte, whereby the
soul of man is i^de wed and garnyshed with wisdom and all kinds of virtue,
now let us see what tra^ sytorye commodities do o^e accompanye or follow
after, trouble and aduersyte.

Such as dwell in valeys and in deep and low habytacions are not lyghtlye Su^.
hurt by any lyghtning, Eue^ so that state of life that is low and mean,
keeps and maynteyneth it self most sure and with least danger against all
manner of stor^es.

Like as precious and costlye spe^yes and odours do smell, and savor best,
(...).
when they are brosed, broken or set on fire Even so the praise and
commendacion of virtue through co^tynuall use and exercise and through aduersite
is sprede wide abroad and made manifest and known every where.

For an example what an excellent and singular honor, renown, praise and
co^mendacyon what it is unto Abraham ^t length, that he went out of his natu
rall country into banyshmente, and there Ge. xx. a xxvi. xi^. Exodus v. Exo.
xiii^
suffered great trouble and much aduersyte, The childern of Israel were sore
kept un der and oppressyd in Egipte: But they were led out and set free again
with such glory and renown as never was hard nor red ye like.

The banishment of W lisses for the space of. x. years, was an occasyon unto
him, to exercise and practyse his wisdom and other virtues, in the mean time,
so that he obteynyd thereby an immortal name among all the heathen.

And to speak after the common practyse and experyence, There is no exceadinge
Joy.
yoye or tryumphe, but some sorrow or heaviness goyth before it. The spryng time,
following and coming immediatelye upon the rough and hard winter is the more
acceptable, pleasant and welcome unto us.

In battle, the sorer our ennymyes do assault and fight against us, the
greater is the joy and triumph at the victory and overthrow of them.

He that has kept his bed a long time and lain syck a great ceason, afterward
when he is recoueryd health is a more precious treasure unto him, tha^ ever it
was before that he felt what syckenes was: And also such as mour^yd and were
sorry for his sycknes, do receive an infynyte joy and an exceadyng rejoicing at
his resto ryng unto health again. Even so does God depryue us for a time, of
riches, wealth, prosperyte, our natural ^outry, bodylye health and such other
transytorye benyfytes, For this purpose that wha^ he geuyth them again unto us,
we may the more rejoice and be the gladder of them.

An example have we of the lost sheep and of the lost and desperate son, for
the which Mathe. xvi^. (...) Lu. xv. (...)
there was such joy at the finding of them again as never had b^ne, if they
had not have been lost, where as before there was never thought nor sorrow
taken for them.

Now in case we never find nor have restoryd unto us again here in this world
that thing which we have lost, yet our conscience is both quiet and also
joyful in God. Which quyetnes and joy far exceadyth all the pleasurys of
the whole world.

In summa, to be short after trouble and aduersyte folowyth al manner of
goodness welfare and ^ely cite.
and felycyte. First, for as much as God here in this world does plentyfullye
and ^ychelye reward and recompense, godly ues, pacyence, and godly
constancye. Se condarelye, for as much as this is the nature and propertye of
God, to throw down that he may raise up again, and Deute. ^xxij. f (...).
re. ij. v Psalm. cxij. a Sa. xvi. Co. xiij.
to bring unto death^ door, that he may restore unto life again.

Roosys which are the most pleasant flowers, do spring and wax out of
thorns. Even so of hard and great travel springs the most pleasant fruit.

The little be gathers the most swea test honye out of the most bitter
blomes and flowers Even so men of wysdo^ and understanding receive much
vtylytye and fruit of the present sorrow and affliccyon.

For example. Joseph was hated of his brethren, and sold of them into a
stran^ige and foren countreye. Which banyshme^t of his turned to his great
honor, wealth, ^eue. x^xvij. xxxix. xli.
and profit, for as much as he was sord and gouernou^e over the whole kingdom
of Egypt.

The more the great tyran Pharao went about to oppress and rydde the
children of Israel out of his land, the more did they prosper and increase
to an infynyte number. Exodus i.

The devil lefft nothing unto the godly man Job, but depryuyd and spoiled him
of all that he had, but the Lord restoryd him all again doble, even in this
world.

He that markyth and consideryth well, shall perceive that some time a man being
of no reputacyon at home where he is known, is banyshed away and commyth to
other people, which do hyghly esteem him, and make much of him, yea and
hyghly honor him. So that often times a man's aduersyte has turnyd to his
syngular commodyte and wealth.

The. xix. Chapter.
Trouble and aduersyte, is a furtheraunce to eternal life.

THe trouble and aduersyte of the Godly do give an exceadynge great testymony
unto them of im mortalyte, of a general judgment, and also of an everlasting
life. For it is impossyble that the best creatures only should be ordeynyd
and created to all ^ow and travel, and the most wicked and ungodly to escape
and remain vnponished. It were dyrectly against the righ tuousnes of God. Now
it is evident, that here upon earth apperyth no difference ve twene Paul and
Nero, having respect to the reward of them both. Yea the most godly and
virtuous have most comonlye worst luck and least reward, wherefore of necessyte
there must needs be another life to come, where every one shall receive ac
cordynge to the demerytes of his life here upon earth.

And again the cross way is poynted to be the very right way unto eternal
life. Like as the corn is first, thresshed, faunyd and rydd from the chaff,
and than laid Ps. xliiij To. viij. ij. cor. iiij
up and reseruyd in the barn or in the spyke, even so Christen men upon earth
are beaten, mishandled, evil intreatyd, whereby they are purgyd and ryd of
many wild and light mauers and so are brought into the everlasting barn or
spyke of the kingdom of heaven.

Like as no man can triumph or be crowned, except he has foughten and warryd
manfullye, which can not be without great danger, labor and travel, Even so
can no man atteyue to the crown eternal life, except he has first suffered
much trouble, sorrow and aduersyte.

The man that is sick, must receive the purgacyon and medycyne, how sour or
bitter soever it be, that he may recover again and not dye: Even so when we
suffer the hand of God to rule and order us, being content and pacyent
therewith, allthough it smartyth and greuyth us, yet it shall profit and help
us to everlasting health and sowndnes.

Testymonyes and wytnes of scripture to prove this. Math. v. Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall be comfortyd.

Math. vij. Narowe is the gate, and strayte is the way that leadyth to life.

Luke. vi. Blessed are they that weep here, for they shall laugh. But woo unto
you that be rich etc. Act. xiiii. We must enter into the kingdom of god
through much trouble and afflyccyon.

Roma. viij. If we be childern than are we heirs, namely, the heirs of god
and fellow heirs of Christ, so that we suffer with him that we may also be
glorified together with him. By these words does Paul euydently declare that he
that will reygne with Christ, must also ron^ through the fire with him. i. Co.
xi. Wha^ we are judged we are chastenyd of ye lord yt we should not be co^demnyd
with ye world.

The. xx. Chapter.
How and in what respect trouble and aduersyte can be so profitable and of
such virtue, seeing that the unfaithful do wax more obstynate and perverse
through troble and affliccion.

Hitherto have we entreated of the corporal and spyrytuall, temporal and
eternal profit and com modyte, which Christen men receive by the cross,
trouble and aduersyte. Which is not to be take^after this sense as though the
cross or aduersyte of it self, and of her own nature could bring and work such
high commodytyes: For than should Pharao and other wicked parsons in their
trouble and aduersyte have been co^uertyd, and so sauyd also: but the spyryte
of God restyth secretly and lies hydden in the faithful under the shadow and
back of the cross and pourg^th, reformyth, comfort and strengh^yth them and
^rkyth all these foresaid commodyteys in them.

Now like as the holy scripture attributyth a certain reward unto our good
worckes, which worckes not wythstandyng, it is not we that work them, but the
Lord only, which vsyth us as an instrument of his, Philip. (...). ij. Corin.
iij. Even so is the cross an instrumente of God, whereby he subduyth our
flesh, kepyth us in the schole of correccyon, and forcyth us as it were, by
vyolence from evil to goodness? Now wheresoever the holy ghost will take his
resting place, for the must part he sendyth before his puruyors and
forronner which are, sorrow and affliccyou, trouble and aduersyte, that they
may vere, comber, humble, meken, and utterly overthrow and bring down the
heart of man, whereby the holy ghost may find the more place and so work all
goodness therein. And therefore whatsoever is hither to spoken, specially of the
spiritual commodyteys of the cross and aduersyte it is, and so remaynyth all
true, so that it be understand of the faithful and godly which are induyd with
the spirit of God, to whom all things turn to their comfort and salvation.

And now on the contrary partfo^ the better understanding of ye matter, I will
declare and show, what the cross works in the unfaithful and ungodly,
which lack the spyryte of god. The unfaithful do ascribe their prosperyte and
felicyte to The cross of the unfaithful
their own wysdom workyng and pollycy and not to god. And their mysfortune and
aduersite, they ascrybe to blind fortune, As though fortune had a certain power
to work of her self without the workyng of god.

Take Sermachery^ the lord and ruler of ye Assyrians for an example, which by
the sufferance of god brought ye whole world in manner, in (...). Which thing
he ascrybed to his own power and polycye and not to god. For he did both hate
and blaspheme the very true god of Israel. But shortelye after did God send
an angel which slew in one night an. C. iiij. score and five of his men. And
here would he not confess that it was god that did it. But parauenture he
thought that it was (...) ne, mischance or some other thing yt was the
occasyon. For if he had knowledgy^ this punishmente to have comme and been sent
of god, he would not afterward have worshipped and done his devotion in the
ydolatres temple of the false god and ydoll Mesrach. i^. ^e. xix. as he did. In
like manner, when any mysfortune hapnyth to the ungodly, they put all the f^t
only in the next mydle, or mean yt they fantasy them selves, or else very
wyckedly they ascrybe it unto all those that are not of their faith and sect.

As for example, When as it raynyd not for the space of. iij. years and. vi.
months in the time of Achab the king of Israel. iij. reg. xviij. The king
(...) the cause unto the godly Prophet ^elpas.

Likewise in our time when any tempest hurts the co^n, wine and other fruytes
of the earth, many there are that cry, This may we thancke this new lernyng
and this new fangle faith etc. As though they the^ selves were so holy that god
durst not or ought not to punish them. It can be none but the poor sheep yt
disturbyth the wafer that the wolff can not drynck, ye po^re ^hepe comyth not
nerer to the river, but only to the very drynck, but at the very brynck of the
river thereof, and there drinks. Yea even they also which have some taste of
the gospel, can not well bear aduersite patiently, nor confess them selves
gyltye, but would feign shy^the fault from them selves, and would lay it
either upon the rulers or the preachers, or else upon some other thing. And
although their sins be an excedyng heap, and that God would feign dry ue
them to repentance by ponyshyng and chastisyng of the^, yet can not they
consider the heavy burden of their sin, nor spy the clear day of the
ryghtuousnes of God, which can suf fer no sin vnponyshed. And therefore for
as much as they will not take this small and light ponyshment thanckfullye,
but would goo free and have no manner of plage at all, if they might chose: for
that cause does God send unto the^ afterward plages and paynfull ponyshmentes
by heapys, so that it happenyth unto them as it did unto the ass, whose s^yn
being put over a dromm or a taber, as he wyshed and Lack of faith is the
mother of all blasphemies and abhomina cyon.
desyeryd was beatyn and stryke^ more than ever it was before, as Esope says
in his fables. And for as much as through incre dulyte and lack of faith (which
is the mother of all blasphemies and abhominacio^,) they will not consider nor
call toreme^berance, who it is yt has laid his hand upon the^: Or else knowing
yt it is yt hand of god, yet will not take it in good worth, nor amend no
otherwise, but as sour ale in somer, by this meanys they become like unto
desperate children, which will neither turn and amend with threatenynge, nor
yet with beatinge.

And therefore the scripture testyfieth very well, Proverb. xvij. that one
sharp word of reproach does more good to him that has understanding than an
hundredth strypes to a fool.

As for example. The longer and the sharper yt God ponished Pharao the more
obstinatelye did he swerve and declyne from him.

The wicked and ungodly do not on lie take no manner of occasyon to reform and
amend their lives by their cross and sorrow, but also they spew out all
manner of impacientnes, bytternes, and spytefull poison against the righteousness
of god, saying: their cross is greater then their transgressyon, and that
they have wrong and are ponyshed to sore, as for an example of this, we have
one of the thieves ha^ging upon the cross with Christ, which blasphemed Lu.
xxi^
Christ very spytefully saying: if thou beist Christ, help both thy self
and us. By the which words he declares that he judges him self, even as worcester
thy of help, as Christ the son of God, even as though God must forget all
his ryghtuousnes and help by and by euerre blasphemous wretch, and look
through the fyngers upon the wicked world. Which is one of the greatest
blasphempes unto God that can be.

When they have tumbled and waltered in their misery (For God will not help
them because they have no trust nor confydence in him) And have sought help hy
creatures i. Reg. xxviij.
both in heaven and earth, and found none, then begins their cross and
aduersyte to open their eyes so wide, that they must needs spy and acknowledge
yt wrath and hand of God over them. And then does this outward cross and
sorrow even kyndle in them an inward trembling and doutfulnes, out of the
which spryngeth i. Reg. xx^i. ij. Reg. xvij.
the highest desperacyon, in so much that they cry out to the devil to
help them, if God will not. For although they be brought to the knoweledge
of their sin and also to sorrow and repentance for the same through the
cross, as Layn and Judas also ge. iiij. b Matthew. xxvij. (...)
were, yet have they no trust nor confidence that the same sin shall be taken
from the^ and forgeuen them, but rave and rage and give them selves over to the
devil, and so depart wretchedly out of this world: of whose destruccyon yet
and confusion these commodities do insewe. First that they must of force
cease any longer to make any distur bance by the wicked example of the life in
the church and regiment of God. Secon darely, that they which remayue alive
after them may learn by their terryble example, to repent and amend by
times. So that by this that we have hitherto de clared every Christen man may
know in his trouble and aduersyte, whether he be a marter of God, or of the
devil, And what great profit and singular common dyte all those that are Gods
martyrs do receive by the means of their cross, tro ble and marterdome.

The. xxi. Chapter.
Fellow companyons in trouble and aduersyte.

UVhy should any man show and behave him impaciently in sufferynge that thing
which he ca^ by no polycye, council, nor laufull mean a^oyde, alter, turn,
remedy orame^d? He yt is wise, makes of such a necessyte as ca^ by no remedy
be avoided, a very vertew. Now trouble and aduersite does so happen unto man,
that he can not help nor avoid it, though he would turn it up se down, or
the inward side outewarde. Man must needs suffer trouble and aduersyte upon
earth, there is no remedy. And again why should any man without mea sure
becomber him self about that thing which is common unto all men, or to the
most part, and not to him alone. By na turall reason, that burden is lighter
which many do bear together. Now is the life of man a very miserable and
lamentable thing. When another man prospers, so that all things go well with
him, yet Psalm. c. iij. b. lxxv^ij d xc. a Esa. xl a Ecclesi. xiiij. b. i. pet.
i. d ^ac. i. v.
it fares with him even as with a bloome or a flower in the field, which
florysheth for a while, and is pleasant and delecta ble to look upon, with in
a little while af ter it dries up, and fedeth away.

As long as we are upon earth we are, as it were in a camp, or a sege, where
we must ever be skyrmysshing and fyghting, and know neither who shall break
out and give the onset against us, nor where Job. vij.
nor how, nor when. Sometime a man is attached and assaulted in his body, in
his goods, in his name and fame Sometime happen unto him common myschancys as
dearthe, pestylence, war, which some time continue very long, so that he
may well say, No mysfortune comes alone but brings one or other companion
with him. If not at that present, yet hereafter it may. And there is no
mysfortune so great, but may happen and light upon any of us all. At least
ways we must all look for death, as it was said long a go unto our first
parents, Genes. iij.

To rehers examples it were but folpe and superfluous, for as much as there is
no man, but may laufullye complain of one thing or other. And although some
things happen after our minds yet it is not without some sower sauce. Mark
well.
And specially at this present, how are al Christen realms compassed with
sorrows troubles, and myseryes on every side? Look but upon our own
countreye?

There is neither good nor badde, godly nor ungodly, but has one cross or
other. And although some thereby that can shyfte for a while, and can make
prouysyon for themselves for a time, by craft and dissimulacion, or by some
falshede in fellowship, as they call it, yet they bring themselves at length
into the highest dau^ ger, confusyon and shame both in this world and in the
world to come.

And saying that all the troubles and aduersiteys To. viij c i^. Cor. iiij. b.
i Johan. iij. a Matthew. xxv. d esa. xxx. f Dan. vij b. ij. Cor. v (...).
in this world are a thousand times lyghter and easyer, yea nothing, in
respect of the eternal vnque^chable fire which is prepared and already
kindled for the unfaithful and wicked enemies of God: all faithful and godly
parsons ought to bear and suffer their transitory affliccyons and
aduersyties, the more pacyentlye, willingly, and thankefully, con syderynge and
remembryng all the dear beloved fryndes of God, which were wo^ derfullye vexed
and plaged of their enne myes. Abraham of the Chaldeys. Lot of the Sodomytes,
Isaac of Ismaell, Jacob Genesis xij xx. Genesis xix Ge. xxxij xxxiij. Numer. xx. etc.
of Esan, Moses of his people, David of Saul, and of his own son. As for
Job had not one drop of blood in his body unconsumed.

John Baptist the holiest that ever was naturallye borne of a woman, was
without any manner of form or order of i. Re. xv. Job. ij. b
law, right or reason beheaded in the pry son, as though God had known
nothing at all of him.

We have many thousand fellow martyrs and companyons of our myserye and
aduersyte, in respect of whose impri sonement, rackynge, chains, fire, wild
beasts, and other means wherewith they are tormented, all that we suffer, is
but a wind or a pastyme.

But specyallye this is to be consyde red above all other in our trouble and
aduer syte, that we have Jesus christ for a fellow and companion with us
therein, which suffered upon earth in his body al manner Esa. liij. Matthew.
xxvij. Mar. xv Math. x Ioh. i. to. viij. v i. Cor. i c v. a Galiiij a Ephesians. i. b
of smarte and pain. Now is not the servant above the master. What reason
were it that the natural son of God be ynge utterly innocente, should be so
cruelly entreated and myshandeled, And we which are his children not by nature,
but by adopcion and eleccyon, and in all poin tes gyltye, should escape quyte
and free? Therefore now whosoever is ashamed of the cross, and aggreued
therewith, the same is ashamed, and aggreued to have Christ for his fellow and
companyon, and therefore shall the Lord Jesus Christ be ashamed of him again
at the latter day.

The second part of this book.
The. xxij. Chapter.
By what natural means or ways, trouble and adueriste may be qualyfyed,
eased and ouercomme.

First and formest no man ought to meddle with other men's matters, which
appertain nothing unto him, nor to cast him self into perell and danger
without any need. For that were as much as to tempte God, and were clean
contrary to the examples both of our sauyoure Christ, and also of the holy
Apostles, which by the commaun dement of Christ, Math. x. did sometime flee
and avoid perels, and dangers. But a man can not always honestlye and
conveniently avoid them.

Therefore for the second point, like as a waterman will never set out his
fail so far, but that he may sone pull it in again: Even so every man as
long as all things stand well and upright with him, let him foresee and
prepare in time for the contrary. For the which cause the Math. xvi. c xvij. d
xx. b. Mark. viij. d. ix d. x. d. Luc. ix. c xviij. d.
Lord did tell his disciples of his cross, death, and passion before, that
they seeing him, suffer anguishe and sorrow, might the less quayle and shr^ke
at it. In like manner did he also declare before unto the^ that they must be
persecuted, and suffer trouble that they might look for it, and ve the more
hardye, bold, and strong in per secucyon, whenever it should happen.

Thyrdly a great weight and substance of the matter depends and hangs upon
this point, that a man conceive a right judgment and opynion of all things
that happen and chance. For every thing appears so unto us, even as we in
our thoughts and minds do fansy ymagine and conceive it. If a man esteem
worldly goods for a light thing (as they ought in very deed to be esteemed)
then ca^ he forbear the same with the less grefe and pain. Contrariwyse if
he make a God of them, and esteem them hyghly, then he trembles, quaketh, and
taket^ on vnmea surably when he is spoiled and depryued of them.

In like manner in other things, a man of times fansyeth and ymagyneth in him
self, that he can abide and suffer no manner of misfortune, when as if it were
well considered, it should sone seem but a tryfle and no mysfortune, but rather a
blessing or a good turn. And though it be not light and small in deed, yet
let it be esteemed and taken for light, for as much as it comes alone, and
brings not. ij. iij. or an hundredth companyons with him. For it is a wonder
and a syngular miracle of god that among such infynyte and innumerable
perels, as the world and Satan i. Pet. v.
have ready prepared, and even bent over us, that we are not utterly
headelynges overwhelmed and suddenly destroyed of them all. And yet God sends
and myxeth all ways some goodness and comfort between. As thou have parauenture
a syckly and dyseased body, but yet thy mind and heart is sound and strong.
Or thou art vexed and combered in thy mind, yet haste thou an whole and a
sound body, Or parauenture thou art robbed, spoiled and depryued of thy
temporal and worldly goods and other transitorye pleasures, yet thou haste
many and diverse Christen virtues and syngular gifts of grace, wherein is a
thousand times more felicyte then in all health, bewty, strength, riches,
frendshypp, wife, children, honor, dignite, or power. For it is not written in
vain in the, ciiij. Psalm. O Lord the earth is full of thy goodness. Here
should an heart and mind that is vexed and combered cease, and leave of from
the consyderacyon of the present myserye and affliccyon, and call to
remembrance what other benefytes of God do yet remain, or what other we have
had, or at least what are yet to come, and to happen to all faithful
Christians. And therefore there is an old common proverb good to be remembered.
In aduersyte remember prosperyte, and again in prosperyte thyncke upon
aduersyte.

Again often times many a loss and myschaunce wereth lightly away again, and is
sone remedyed another way. As if some specyal frind of thine be taken from you
by death, you may happen upon another as good for him, or else some other
benefytes may happen unto the for yt loss within a And be it in case that thy
miserye and misfortune continue a long while, yet is all manner of trouble,
that we suffer upon earth, transitorpe, euerpassynge away, and not durable
nor perpetual.

The length and process of time does mytygate, ease, assuage, and lyghten all
manner of smarte, pain and grefe, if the mind be a while used unto it, and
somewhat exercysed and waren hard in it. Yet such as be wise, ought not to tarry
till smarte and greafe wear and fret away of it self, but to preuente the time
by such means as we have hitherto taught, and here after shall follow.

Fourthlye ordinarye means are not to be contemned, despised nor refused. Like
as a shypmayster being upon the water and foreseynge a tempest to be at hand,
calls upon Gods aid and help, and yet for all that he has also a Ac xxvij
sure eye to the ster^e to rule, that as hansomlye and connyngly as he can.
Even so in all manner of necessyties and perels it is laufull, and men ought
also to use all manner of honest and convenient means, As physyke and medycynes
in sickness, labor and Ge. iii. d ^at. ix. (...)
travel with the sweat of our brow^sin pouer tie, the power and auctoryte of the
magistra te in wrong, injury, debate, and dissensio^: ij. Reg. x i. Match iij.
iiij. v. vi. vi^ viij. ix. etc.
battle array against the enemies of our country, and such like, so that no
man build, nor trust in any manner of thing saving in the very living God
only which can help, deliver and remedy al things without any myddell or
mean if there were none at hand.

Fysthlye when a man wayteth, tends upon, and serves his honest craft,
sciens, vocacyon, or office, whereunto God has called him, and studyeth to
execute, perform, and follow it diligently as he ought to do, it dryueth
away many ^uyl and vain fansyes from a troubled mind that is combred with any
grefe or afflicci on. Sixthly like as weak tender, and diffe ased eyes are
refreshed and quickened with grene and fresh pleasant colors. Even so co^vered
and troubled minds are wonder fully, refreshed, reuyued, and restored to
strength through semely honest and measurable mirth and pastyme: As through
hearing of instruments of musyke, By walking abroad, by altering and
chaunchynge of the ^yer, and by going out of such places as be obscure and
dark, into such as be very lightsow. And specially for a man in his troble to
visit his special frindes: or to be visited of them, brings a doble comfort
and ease^t unto his sorrowful and unquiet mind. First in declarynge thy grefe
and disease unto thy frynd and opening thy whole heart, and pouring out thy
whole mind before him, thou fyndest a singular easement in thy mind thereby. And
again a true and a faithful frynd, through his pytye and bemonynge of the,
helps the, as it were, to bear thy burden, and although he can take away no
part of the substau^ ce of thy sorrow, yet his good heart and will and fryndly
words are a great comfort unto the.

The xxiij. Chapter.
The best and sue^st succor and comfort in aduersyte, rests only in the
might, po were, will, and goodness of God.

NOw will I open and declare, that God both can, may and will help and succor
sufficietly for Christ's sake, in respect of whom he promyseth us al manner of
help aid and comfort, and performs it. And I will also show by what means,
and in what measure he works the same. God seyth and looks upon us, how we
styke and wrestle in perell and danger, and he knows best of all how and
when to remedy help and deliver us, that his glory and our welthe may be
most furthered. And he is not one that ^nelye knows al things, but he is
also almigh ty, and can worck and bring to pass al thin ges. And if our
affliccio^, and aduersyte wax and increase from day to day, the lo^ ger the
worsse, yet is God always a thou sand times myghtyer and stronger then it.

But so mighty can not God be, but he is as gracious and merciful also, and
has a greater lust and desire to show and declare his true heart and love
toward us, then we can wyshe or desire. And although he seems in our sight to
take utterly away all manner of light of his grace out of our eyes, yet he
remains gracyous and favorable toward us pryuy ly, and as it were in secret,
and certainly he will not forsake us, gene us over, nor suffer us to styke and
continue in such heauynes and danger. And it is not our good works, merytes
and deserts that move him thereunto, but the infinite and endless merit and
desert of Jesus christ, which has purcha sed unto us through his bitter death
and passyo^, remyssyo^ of our sins, the hea^ ly gifts of the holy ghost and
mitigacio^ or easement of al our ^roubles and adversities. And it is not
possible that any man that To. viij. Psalm. xxxiii^. xxxvij. and cx^v. (...)
Proue^. xxiiij. c
takes hold of Christ, and has him can be oppressed or overthrown either of
sin, the devil, the world, or of all the creatu res in heaven and earth,
but shall continue and remain for ever under the wynge and defense of God.

Furthermore, almighty God being pacifyed and reconcyled with mankind, The
promise of God to aid and help us.
through Jesus Christ, has promised b^the unto the children of Israel, and to
all that be in any dystresse and vexacyon through his mynysters evermore from
time to time, help, succoure, and comfort.

Psalm. xxxiiij. The Lord is nigh unto them yt are of a contrite and broken heart,
and will Psalm cxlvij. a.
help the^ that have sorrowful and humble minds. Ps. xci. He despreth me, and
has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him. I am by him and with him
in his trouble, I wyllbring him out, and set him in ho nor etc. Oh how
comfortable a thing, and what an high honor is it to have such a mighty and
so faithful a felow^ companyon which will so louinglye stand by us, and aid
us.

Now as for the time, God will help in dew and co^uenyeut ceason, and we must
suffer him to take his time and leyser. When god will help.
For like as God seyth the trouble and affliccion of his church, how it is
ve^ed, even so has he appointed a iu^e time how long he will suffer the
wicked to take their pleasure, and how far they shall goo and attempt.

And when that is erpyryd, no longer nor further can they goo. As the captyu^te
of Babylon was appointed to continue. ij. Para. xxxvi. d. Ierem. xxv. (...)
lxx. years. Ierem. xxix. and than to cease. Yea wh^ the sorrow and heuines is
(...) the highest, and every one of us thynkyth that God has utterly forsaken
us, tha^ is God most ready to help us and his ayd^ is most nygh unto us.

Y^a and to speak certainly as ye truth is, God comfortyth us contynuallye in
Ps. (...). Math. (...). c. Ioh. xiiij
the myddys of all our trouble and heaviness and is never from us. For the
faithful man has in his heart, the spyryte of God, the fountayn and spryng of
the hea neuly water, of the which he is evermore moysteryd, reuyuyd and
refreshyd to his syngular comfort. Ioh iiij. How God hell pyth.


And the more that our sorrow and aduersyte augmentyth and increasyth the
greater aid and assystence shall we find and perceive. i. Cor. x. God will not
suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but together with your
temptacyon, he will make a way out that ye shall be able to bear it. By these
words does Paul teach very comfortably that God will not tempt, taste nor
assaye us harder nor sorer than we may away with, and be able to bear.

ii Cor. i. As the affliccyons of Christ are plentyfull and abundant in us,
even so is the co^solacyon through Christ also plen tyfull and abundant.

For example. The holy Apostles were so stre^gthnyd that they reioysed that
they Acto. iiij v. etc.
might suffer any thing for Christ's sake. And at this present day, god sends
more comfort than all deuyls and all the world are able to send heuines, sorrow
and disco^fort.

Like as a captain in war, geuyth his God helps and comfortyth through his
word and spyryte.
sowdgers that are under him a great courage by speaking manfully and
comfortably unto them: Even so God will have his comfortable word daily to be
publyshed and proclaimed abroad to the intent to incorage his sowdgers that
fight under his baner. And yet he is not so satisfied that we should be
incoragyd with bare and simple words, but he him self is present Matthew. xxviij
by us with his spirit. which spiryt as a sure warant and an ernest penny,
certifyeth and assueryth our hearts, of the grace, favor and To. viij.
aid of god. And thus he comfortyth and reioysyth our hearts unfeignedly, and
gives us wysdom, boldness and strength to skimmysh and fpght against al manner
of envy myes, as well ghostly as bodyly.

Although in winter the trees seem and appear not only vnfruytefull, but
also utterly dead, yet the son with her coming, when the winter has taken
her leave, does so mollifye resolve and warm both Mathe. xxiiij.
the earth it self, and the trees that they bud out again, wax grene and
bring forth fruit: Even so when the faithful are esteemed and seem as though
they were depriuyd and destitute of al help and utterly forsaken, yet does ye
heavenly spirit of god hyghte^, warm and strengthen their hearts to all goodness.

Like as the young infant is not able to goo of him self for very tenderness and
lack of strength, but must be sustained, holden up, and led with the hand of
the norse, And like as a syck woman wekened (...) much and long sycknes is not
able to go one stepp, but some whole and strong women must take her under the
arm, guide and lead her that she may goo with them: Even so are we not able
to go of our selves. There is some kind of sorrow and marterdome, that we
tremble and quake for fear, when we do but hear of it, much less were we
able to suffer and to bear it, but God with his mighty hand and present power
strengthnyth, susteynyth and preseruyth us. To. viij. The spyryte succouryth
and helpyth our weakness and infirmityes. And if the devil through his spyryte
does drive and move the people, that they are ready and willing to all
wyckednes and abhomynacyon though it cost them their lives, why should not God
through his spyryte make us as lusty and wyllyng to all goodness, whatsoever
sorrow or affliccyon we suffer.

Sometime God mytygatyth and easyth the ponyshmentes, that men may the more
easyly overcome them.

The captain gives sometime his sowdgers lyberty to take their reast, ease
and pastyme, that they may somewhat refresh them selves, and afterward fight
the more manly and freshly: Even so our spyrytuall captain grantyth often times
unto his Christians a certain recreacyon, case and rest whereby they may
refreshe and reuyue them selves, that they may afterward handle them selves
the more valiantly in their spiritual affairs. And sometime he dischargyth us
utterly of al mauer of trouble and unquietness, and re storyth all our lossys
and hynderances again, and deliueryth us to our singular preemiuence praise and
commendacyon and kepyth and sauyth us from all manner of mysery and unquietness
in time to come.

And to perform this thing God vsyth not only his spirit, but also other
means, Psalm. ciiij. Heb. i. b
as the angels, the stars, the elemen tes, beasts, men and all manner of
creatures.

Like as a man of war has a lust and a courage to fight having diverse
valyant servants about him, which will suffer him to take no wrong, Even so
the ps xxxiiij iiij. Reg. vi. xix. Iosue. (...)
holy angels do compass us about and defend us that in all manner of
affliccion and aduersite we are bold and able to stand and continue valiantly.

In the, iiij. of the kings. vi. Helyseus said to his boy, be not afraid. For
they that are with us are moo than they that are with them. etc.

The red sea and the flood of Jordan Ex. xiiij. Iosu. iij.
wythdrewe them selves that the childern of Israel might goo over dry, and
never wett their fete.

The son and moon stood still for Iosu Iosu. x
es pleasure and never mouyd until such time as he had slain the five kings.

Helias was wonderfullye fedd of the iij. Reg. xvij. Hest vi. vij. viij. ^c.
ravens.

Through the hand of a woman the Israelytes were delivered from a terrible and
cruel host of their eumyes. Iudyth. x.

And commonly god comfort and delyuereth man through other men.

And specyallye this is a comfortable thing, that all faithful and holy
Christyans upon earth have felowshypp and partycypacyon together in all manner
of things, both good and bad, as well one as other. And therefore whansoeuer I
suffer any smart, pain or sorrow, both christ and all true Christyans suffer
with me. For in the. xxv. of Mathewe. The Lord says not, they were hongry,
and thyrsty, Esa. lviij eze. xviij.
etc. But he says I was hongrye and I was thyrstye, etc. And furthermore the
whole congregacyon of Christ does help me to bear my burden, For they that are
the members of one body take care and Gal. vi.
sorrow one for another. If the sole of the foot be hurt, does it not grieve the
whole body?

Now Saint Paul callyth all Christen men one body. i. Corinth. vi. and also one
bread and one cupp. And therefore all other faithful Christians have
compassyon and are heavy and sorrowful for me, And whatsoever is light unto
them is also light unto me.

Take a manifest example by the godly prophet Jeremy, Which complaynyd so sore,
and was in such distress when for no another cause. But that the Jews his
country men were so evil handelyd and vexed.

The. xxiiij. Chapter.
Examples of the help and aid of God.

TO this end and purpose ought we to consider and to call unto mind the
examples both of the old and new testament. If God had ever forsaken his
faithful elect in their trouble and need, than might we have a just and
lawful excuse to mistrust him. But for as much as none that ever sought upon
God was forsaken of him sought not that to comfort Psalm. xxxvij. d
and strengthen us, that he will also mercpfully stand by us in all our need
and necessyte?

Gene. vij. The Godly man Noe with his sons and sons wives were preserved
of God through an Arc or a ship where as the whole world beside were destroyed
with the sin flood. Now if we with Noe believe in the blessed sede, so shall
we also with him be reputed for virtuous and good before God and be preserved
as he was.

Loath was also delivered from the plage and punishmente of the Sodomites Genes.
xix.

Jacob was feign to flee from his bro ge. xxxij xxxi.
there I sau and to suffer great wrong and injury of hyps fatker in law Laban,
and yet he was nevertheless blessed and preseruyd of God.

Joseph being sold of his brethren: because Genes. xxxvij.
he would not commytte fylthynes and abhominacyon with his masters wife, was
cast into prison, but God delivered ge. xxxi^
him and exalted him to high honor.

King Pharao threatenyd Moses ve ry sore, and the chyldern of Israel also Ex.
xiiij. xvi. xvij.
them selves would have stonyd him to death, but god preseruyd him under his
proteccyon.

Unto the chyldern of Israel God gave water out of an hard rock of stone,
and Nu. xx. Exo. xvi xvi^. Number. xx
bread from heaven and quaylys and other necessary things for the comfort of
their necessyte, wonderfully in the wyldernes.

How graciously did god preserve king David and Ezechias in their trouble and
i. Re. xix xxiiij. xxvi xxviij. ij. Para. xxxij. d Dan. vi. i. Mac. ij Act.
xxiij Romans xv
necessyte: And also che prophets Ezechiel and Danyel among the heathen.

And likewise Judas Machabeus with other at that time. Forty men had made a
solemn vow neither to eat nor drynck till they had killed Paul, but god did
not suffer it to come to pass. These and other like examples are written for
this purpose, that we should give like judgment, and have like opinion of
other like examples which are not expressyd.

Beside this, it is also euydente and has been markyd, that sometime such as
have been the most tymerous weak and fearful, afterward being stre^gthuyd
in faith through the might and power of god, have suffered marterdom,
banishment and death most wyllyngly and joyfully, and also have ^omforted
boldly such as have suffered with them, even agayust the nature and
disposycyon of the flesh of man. Yea there is never one of us all, but have often
felt and prouyd the help, proteccyon and apt of god. For who can make his
boast that he him self did help any thing at all to the matter when he was
formyd in his mothers womb? Of the which matter David speaks Psalm cxix. Who
has kept us hitherto while we have been a sleep? Who has sorowyd and taken
care for us, when we have labored or taken our Psalm. cxxvij.
pastyme, or else done some other thing and never took thought the least moment
for our selves. It may well happen that god may sometime suffer us to swym, but
he will never suffer us to synck or to drown.

To be short if there were not so many examples before our eyes, if we would,
but look a little backward and consider, how we have passed and avoided the time
yt is past, which surely has been alweys full of great perels and dangers,
whether we will or will not me shall be compelled to confess and grant yt the
merciful goodness of god has borne us in his bosom, and has preserved us from
diverse dangeros perels over and above al yt ever we could thynk, ymagyne or
dyuyse. Now if god has thus helped and delivered us many and diverse ways
without any la bor or study of our selves, yea with out any mauer of care or
sorrow of our parts, wha^ as we neither knew nor thought that he was present
with us, we must needs be very obstinate, dull and mad, If we do not from
hence forth in any manner of troble or Ps. iv. (...) Mat. vi Lu. xij. (...) i.
Pet. (...)
necessyte cast our sorrow upon him and suffer him to care for us, but wy
begin to dowt and fear least he has allredy forsaken us or will from
henceforth give us over.

Item if God of his natural love benefycyalnes and free lyberalite geuyth here
in this transytory life, health, strength, ry ches, wealth, frendshyp, power,
auctoryte and honor and such like, eue^ unto the wicked and ungodly: Why should
not we determine and conclude upon the same yt he will deal and di stribute a.
M. times higher and greater be^yfites unto ye godly and right faithful
christians, although they neither see nor receive those gifts at that present
instant?

Besides this the Lord also comfortyth ^u. xii. c
us Math. vi. If God take care for the fowls of the air and the flowers of
the feld, and prouydeth norishmente and clothinge for them, truly he will
deal as faithfully with us men, which excel Math. x
many ways the fowls of the air and grass of the field.

The third and last part of this book.
The. xxv. Chapter.
We must dyrect our faith, hope and confydence, toward God.

Hitherto has it been declared, yt the very right and true help succor and
comfort restyth in God through Christ and for his sake: now shall it
consequently be taught, how we should order and behave our selves again with
faith, hope, prayer, repentance, amendment of life, and pacyence, that God
man party^ypate dystrybute and extend his grace and mighty merciful hand
toward us.

First of all although we must utterly despair of all manner of help and succor
of man, and can in no wise diuyse or yma gyne what way or after what sort God
will or may help and aid us, yet not withstanding we must utterly resyste and
banysh all manner of heavy, sorrowful and desperate fansyes and ymagynacyons of
the mind, and give no place unto them, but conceive stedfastlye this sure
trust and confydence in god, that he both knowyth and will take and hytt the
right time measure and means to help us and will valyantly and gloriously
deliver us. Let us commyt altogether yoyfully and boldly without fear unto
god, and let his mercy and gracyous goodness more rejoice and comfort us than
all the mysery and sorrow under heaven, upon earth, or in hell may fear us.
Yea we need to care and sorrow for nothing so much as for this yt we be not to
careful and sorrowful for our selves as though god had given over all his
care and sorrow for us. For like as the gouerner fa there, or good man of the
house takyth al ye care and sorrow upon him self how he shall find feed and
sustain his famyly, and the household servants ough^e to love their masters,
to have a good trust and opinyon of them. And also to labor and ^o do such
service as they are appointed unto, faith fully: Even so all manner of care and
sorrow for us belongyth unto god, And our parts and duty is no more, but to
trust and believe in him, and to serve in that vocacyon and condycyon of life
whereunto we are called and appointed of god, faithfully.

Now if god be most victorios and inuyn^ible, and his dear beloved son also
an everlasting strength that can never fayl^ against the devil and the world:
and again both Christ and god him self, through faith, are ours and dwell in us,
Ephe. ii^. Tha^ is there no cause why the faithful Christen man should fear
neither his own feeble fle^h and body nor his weak and impotent age, nor yet
the whole power of the devil though he be armed and weaponeth (...). Pet. v
with a thousand thousand crafts and suttel^yes. For if so be that in god be
all manner of joy blessedness and felycyte, And we through faith do prove and find
him a gracious and merciful god unto us, than may we lawfully rejoice in god
even in the myddest of the highest sorrow and aduersyte that can be:

To wy^esse* Psalm. xxv. There shall none be confounded and put to shame, that
hops in the.

Psalm. (...). Cast thy care and sorrow upon the Lord, and he shall defend and
sustain the, what can be thought or ymagyned more sweet or comfortable?

For example. Math. xv. The heathnish woman of Ca^any all hope and comfort in
the remedy and concell of man set apart, des^ryth help and succor of Christ,
And although the lord gives her at the first rough and sharp answers yet she
is nothing abashed nor will not so be answered: Even so hold thou on likewise
with the heathnysh woman, saying and cryeng Mat. x^
still, O thou son of dauyd, have mercy upon me: And so shall thou hear at
length this comfortable Gospel and absolucyon, Thy faith is great, be it unto
the as thou desyeryst.

S. Barnard she with very comfortably what a faith he had, in these goodly
words. O lord it is much better for me to suf fer trouble, so that thou only
may be by me* than to rule and live pleasantly and costly without the. It is
better and more pleasant unto me to be in an hot burning and flaming oven with
the, than to be even in heaven without the.

And who did ever trust in the Lord, whom he ever forsook.

Besides all this, almightye god commands Hope.
that we should hope, trust and look for help at his hand. Which hope
brings with her a mytygacyon and easement of the smart and sorrow. Psalm. xxvi.
I hope in the lord, therefore shall I not fall.

Psalm. xxviij. Hope thou only in God, so shall thou be helped.

Roma. v. Hope is never confoundyd nor put to shame.

The, xxvi. Chapter.
Of prayer in trouble and aduersyte.

THe holy scripture teaches us, in all manner of necessytyes as well bodylye as
ghostlye, to call upon god and to flee unto him. And here does it profit very
much if one be myndefull of another (...) his prayer.

But what should a man pray for? First and most specially for remissyon of his
sins. For when we have ones obtained of god pardon of our sins, than
certainly shall the sycknes, aduersyte or ponyshme^t either clearelye cease, or
else through the gracyous will and goodness of God it shall redounde to the
furtheraunce of our salvation.

Secondarelye, we must also pray either that God will help and deliver us
not after the deuyse and fansy of our own brains, but after such wise as shall
seem unto his godly wisdom, or else that he will mytigate and ease our pain
and po nyshment, that our weakness may not utterly faint and sinck down to
the bottem.

Like as a sick parson although he doubt nothing of the faythfulnes,
honestye, and tenderness of his Phisycyon or surgen toward him, yet for all
that, he desyereth him to handle his wound, and to dress him as easily and
tenderly as is possible for him. Even so in like manner may we call upon God,
that if it be not against his honor and glory, he will vouch save to give some
mytygacyon and easement of the pain. And specyallye let us desire of him, to
grant us strength that we faint not nor be ouercomme with the fear or
greatness of our sorrow and gre^e, whereby we might forsake him, and fall to
some wickedness, but that we may rather, after the example of the holy
ma^ters, To. viij,
suffer death, and most intolerable torments, then either to forsake and
deny ^ure faith, or el^ to (...) any manner of thing against the will of
God. And it is very expedyent for us to pray with the lost and desperate
son, Luke x^. I am no moreworthy from henceforth to be called thy son, make
me as one of thy hyered servants. I will gladlye with all my heart have
sorrow and trouble upon earth, even as an laboring servant that goth for his
hyre, so that thou will but suffer me to dwell and remain in thy house for
ever. But now how should we ^ray? Z. Iame^ in his first chap. teaches us,
that (...). xxi c. (...). xi c
we should pray in faith without waueryng and nothing doubt, but yt God does
mercifully hear us. We must continually look upon the promise of god, and have
that always before our eye^, that we do not only ^ke help and remedy at his
hands, but also hope and look surely for it, committynge both body and soul
with a good will, unto him. Psa. l. call upon me in thy ^ede and I will help
and deliver the, and so shalt thou praise me. Psalm. xci. Let him call upon
the, sh will I hea^ him, I am by him in his trouble, I will deliver him out,
and bring him to honor.

John. xvi. Verily verily I say unto Ioh. xiii^ b. xv. (...)
you, whatsoever you shall pray for, unto the father in my name (that is to
say in ye trust and confidence upon my merytes) he shall give it unto you. For
example. When Moses held up his hands unto God and prayed, his enemies the
Amalechytes were overcome. Exodus x^ij. The. ij. blind men which did cry after
the Lord, Oh son, of David have mercy upon us, were heard. Math. ix. Of
such like examples are the Gospels full.

Item in trouble and aduersyte we ought to praise God, and to give him
thanckes yt Praise or the kes geuyng to God.
he has not forgotten us, but through his fatherly vysitacyon calls and
draws us unto him, and graciously helps us to bear all manner of burdens.
Even so did Paul in his aduersyte praise God, ij. Chor. i. praised be God the
father of our Forde Jesus Christ, the father of mercy and God of all
consolacyon which comfort us in all our troubles and affliceyons.

The. xxvij. Chapter.
Repentance and amendment of life, in trouble and aduersyte is necessary.

Now there must go with all this repentance, heauynes, and sorrow for the
sins which we have committed in time past, amendeme^t of life, the love of
God, yt fear of God, al virtue and god^yues. Manasses was sorry and penitent
iiii. Reg xxi. ij. Para. xxxiij.
for his wicked life and cruel tyranny, and therefore did God deliver him out
of the bands and captyuyte of the king of Ba bylon, and restored him again
to his kyngedome in Israel. By Jonas was it preached and proclaimed unto the
great city of Nyniue, that God should destroy Ion. iij.
and overthrow it within. r^. days. The Ninevites believed this proclamacion
and preaching, and began to repent and amend their lives with a great and a
syngular humblenes and submyssyon, And so God of his mercy spared them. Nu.
xi. e Esa. l. a lix. a
Now is Gods merciful heart nothing diminished, if we do as the Nynyuytes
did, he both can and will pardon and spare us as he did them.

The. xxviij. Chapter.
Christen and godly persuasions and examples out of the word of god, to move
men unto patience in affliccyon and aduersyte.

Among all other virtues, in aduersyte, pacyence is most necessary. Not
such a pacyence as to suffer all things to pass, whether they be good or
bad, right or wrong, settinge all on six and seven, but when we are in troble
and aduersyte, and can avoid it by no lauful mean, where as after the desire
and lust of our flesh, we would mur^ur, forsake and give over both God and al
manner of ryghtuousnes, then to resist and strive against our ryghtuousnes and
affeccyons and sorrowful thoughts, and as a man would say, to spear up, and
to captyuate and subdewe our natural eyes, wit, and reason under and unto
the obedience of god yeldinge and submitting our selves unto him, sufferinge
whatsoever it be, with a good and redye will, even though it were most bitter
and cruel death rather then we would swear ufrom the word of God: Luke. ix
yea and moreover to praise God, and to give him tha^ckes, that he will
vouchsaue so fatherlye to vysyte us, and that he has not forgotten us: This is
called a right Christen patience. For it is Gods precept and commandment,
that we should not murmur or grudge against him, when he chasteneth us, but
that we should submit our selves most humbly unto his holy will, and after a
certain manner to wyshe, yt is to say, willingly to suffer and bear such
ponyshment and correccyon, whereby we re main and continue obedyente unto his
godly ryghtuousnes. i. Chor. x. murmur not as certain murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. Number. xxi. Wherefore we ought to show patience in
all things as a poyut of our deuty. And it is a grenous sin to murmur and
grudge against the judgment of God, and to resist and strive against Gods
will.

And God does not only command patience, but also is him self paciente and
long sufferyng, which destroys not at Deuter. xxxij. e
^s the hore^ouger, the extorcyouer and other such like wicked and damnable
people with a lyghtnyng or thonderbolt, although, his holy and straight ryghtu
ousnes requires no less, He gives time and space suffycyent for the man to
re pente and to return to grace again. Roman. xij. Do thou despise the
aboundaunt riches of his goodness, his pacyence and long sufferynge? know
thou not, that the goodness and geutylnes of God calls the to repentance?
According unto this Godly example, though it be so that we must suffer
somewhat against our will, and contrary to our minds and affeccyons, yet
should we not murmur and grudge, but amend our ly ues, and patiently look and
wait for bet ter.

And specyallye the unspeakable fydelyte and love of God toward us ought
laufully to move and persuade us to suffer God to work with us even according
to his will and pleasure. For by this meanys we give God this honor, that he
does us no wrong nor injury, but dysposeth all things most wise ly and will
dyrecte them to a good end. On the contrary part the vnpacyente man
murmureth and grudgeth against God, and is angrye with him, as though his
judgments and works were not just and right, for as much as the wic ked
and ungodly live in pomp, pleasure and all dissolutenes and the virtuous and
Psalm. xxxvij.
Godly in pouertye, sorrow, and myserye. He may parauenture fansy and ymagine
with him self, that God ouercharged his faithful children to hard and will
suffer the^ to remain in perell necessite and dan^ger, and will not hear the^.
And thus he is so poyso ned with bitterness and obstinacy that he begins to
hate and to blaspheme God in heaven and seeks unlawful means to help and
remedy him self, like as Saul i. Reg. xxviij.
did, runnynge after wytches and sothsai ers, Wherefore let every christian man
take heed that no such rauyng fearsenes and bitterness come upon him, or at
least that it remain long by him, but in such temptacyon let him fight
manfully as in the face and sight of the heavenly captain, which both seyth
and knows all thing, and also most faithfullye rescueth his sou dyers and is
as it were, a fellow and one among them, and will recompense all their labor
and travel a thousand fold in the life everlasting.

Moreover, we have an euydent and perfect image and spectacle of all patience
in our Lord Jesus Christ, as he An example of Christ.
him self poynteth us unto himself, Math. xvi. saiynge, whosoever will follow
me, let him forsake him self, and take his cross upon his back, and follow
me. When his unspeakable marterdom and passion began, he prayed:

O father if it be possybyle, take this M^th. ^xb. mar xiiij Luk xxii John. vi
xvi^. Esai. liij
cup from me, but thy will and not mine be done. Where did he ever ones
murmur or grudge, or cast out so much as one untoward and vnpacyente word,
when he was mocked and scorned, scourged and beaten and most cruellye
mysordered and dealt wythall? Prynt this well and surely in thy mind, that he
did pray upon ye cross for his greatest enemies, and said, Father, forgive
them, for they know not, what they do. John. xix.

If he through his heavenly and dyuyne might and power had rydde him self of
all his pain, sorrow, and danger, And that we in our sorrow, anguysh, and
necessite had not felt any heavenly strength nor power from God, then could
we not have comforted our selves at all with our sauyoure Jesus Christ. But he
would not put of his bitter passion through his almyghtye power, but rather
overcome it through weakness. Now then, if he Ps. xc^ ciiij. a
whom all angels and creatures in heaven and earth do behold and look upon,
yea Hebr. i. (...)
whom they all must serve and fear, both suffer innocentlye undeserved with all patience and mekenes more then ever any chri sten man was attempted with, it
ought laufully to make even an heart of stone or iron to yerne and melte, and
to take these small affliccyons well deserved most patiently and wyllingly, and
to suffer and bear them most mekelye.

And this practyse did the holy elect of God in ye old time not only inculc^e
and Examples of the holy fathers and saints.
teach with words, but also express and perform in deed. It was an heuye
cross unto Abraham to slaye, and offer up his most dear son, and yet he
would with all pacyence show him self obedyent un to God therein.

And Isaac perceiving, that it stood upon his life, and that he should dye, we
trade not that he did resist, nor ones open his mouth against it Gene. xxij.

Joseph when he was delivered of Genes. xxxvij.
his brethren unto the Hethen, which were fremde and strangers unto him, yet
he forgave it his brethren, and did the^ good Gene. xlv. etc.
for it.

Moses being reuyled of the Isra elytes, as a deceyuer and a betrayer, pet
Exodus ^ij.
had he such compassyon of them that he prayed for them. Exo. xxxij. saying:
O Lord either forgive them, or else wipe me out of thy book. Here is he
wyllyng To. ix. (...)
and ready to take all the Israelytes sins and offenses upon him self, yt
God should ponyshe him for them.

David was feign to be a banyshed i. Reg. xviij. xix xx. xxi. xxij. xxiij xxvi.
xxvij. etc ij. re. xv. xvi. xvij. xviij.
out cast a long time, and to flee every where from Saul, whom
notwithstanding he might ones as easelye have destroyed and killed as he might
have eaten a bytte of bread. i. Reg. xxiiij. And after that he was put to
flight of his own son, and yet he said pacyentlye, ^f I synde grace and
favor before God, then will he restore me again. But if he say, I have no
pleasure nor delight in the, behold here I am, let him make with me, as
pleases him best. Job, the spectacle of pacyence, Job. i. (...)
being full of sorys, in his body, spoiled of his goods, and deprived of his
children, said thus, God gave it, and God has taken it again, the name of
the lord be praised.

Item in the. xiij. chap. If he should kill me yet will I put my trust in him.

Mathathias in the very highest perell and danger of his body and life, at
such time as they would have compelled and forced him unto Idolatry he (...).
Mac. ij
made this answer unto the servants and mynisters of Antiochus, We will not
swerve nor depart from our faith, neither to the right hand nor to the
left.

The Apostles, Acts. v. did rejoice that they were worthy to be scourged,
beaten and reuyled for the name of Jesus.

We should learn to cry with Paul I am sure, that neither death nor life, ney
there heygth nor depth nor any other creature To. viij.
can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

After the time of the holy Prophets and Apostles, many thousand marters
(among whom were diverse notable (...), chaste virgynes, and other young
people) did suffer most grievous torments and affliccyons for the truths
sake.

But now here might some man obiecte and sa^e, It i^ no meruell that the holy
saints did suffer joyfully, and boldly, for they did suffer innocently,
unworthily, and without deserte, But as for me, I must needs complain that I
am a wretchet sinner, and that which I suffer, is for my desertees and sins,
so that I suffer worthylye. And therefore my cross and affliccyon can in no
wise be compared or lykened unto the cross of the holy saints, etc.

This obieccyon may be answered in few words. The holy saints, every one
of them, concerning them selves, and their own nature, were miserable sinners,
but again they were holy and rightuous through Jesus Christ, which had
dystributed and given unto the also, through true faith, his holiness and
righteousness. Furthermore, these. ij. virtues, true Faith helps to pacyence.
faith, and Christen patience are so nighe of affynyte, and so annexed and
kuptte in feloweshyppe together, that always the one helps the other. Faith
is stirred up, exercysed, put in ure and practyse, and receives increasement
and more strength tho row patience in sorrow and affliccion, when as we, for
Christ's sake, ^o both desire and also wait for help and strength of God
against our nature, which can nothing, but doubt and despair, and als^
against the weakness of the flesh, against the temptacyon of the devil, and
against the assawltes of the world. And again, patience is exercised, proved
and made stronger through true faith. For whosoever knows, and is fully
persuaded, that he has a gracyous and a mer cyfull God with whom, after this
miserable life, he shall live euerlastinglye: The same shall suffer all manner
of trouble and aduersyte pacyently, Christenlye To. iiij. v. vi. viij Gal. iiij
Ephe. ij.
and thankefullye. Again, through faith in Christ, we are set at one, and
reconcyled with God, and assured of his grace mercy and favor for Jesus
Christ's sake, and the merytes of his passion. For example. David, for as much
as he believed truly and stedfastlye in God, he spoke boldly with a courage in
the. xivi. Psalm. God is our hope and strength, a very present help in all
the sorrows and necessytes that have assaulted us, Therefore will we not fear,
though the world should syncke, and though the hills should be carried away
in the myddeste of the sea etc. Yea every Christen man ^f it were possible
(should be content to lose a thousand bodies and lives, if it were for no
another thing, but that he has hard, tasted, and believed the holy Gospel.
But for any man to be impaci ^nt, and so to remain, It is an euydente token,
that the same parson never had any true faith, or else, if he had, that it is
que^ ched and gone again. For impacyencye falls unto murmuring and disobedy
ence against God, and begins to hate God, and to blaspheme him.

Also Christen prayer is a great help and furtheraunce to pacyence. For in
Prayer helps to pacyence.
prayer we desire the sanctyfycacyon of the name of God. Now is the name of
God most praised and sanctyfyed, when we being in the highest danger and
necessite do depend and hang upon God (through faith and patience) as upon one
that will dyspose all thing well and to a good end. Again in prayer we desire
that the king Mat. vi Luke xi.
dome of God may come unto us. Now if God will confound and destroy in us
the kyngedome of the devil and of the flesh^, or else would utterly lead and
draw us into his godly and heavenly kingdom through the cross, were it not
as much as to pray against or use Iues, if we should be impacient under the
same? We pray ly kewyse, that Gods will be done. Now if Mat. vi Luke xi.
it be Gods will that we should have sorrow, trouble and aduersite upon earth,
how dare or can we resyst or grudge against his will?

The. xxix. Chapter.
Examples and causes taken out of natural things, and of Heathen men,
whereby a man may be moved to pa cience in adversyte.

IF there were no holy Scripture at all, yet might a man of his own reason
take example of brute beasts, of natural things, as of the body and soul
and the natural parts unto them belonging, Also of hethen men, Jews and
handycraftes men, and of all manner of states and degrees of men, and likewise
of the angels, and of the devil, whereby they might conclude and learn, that
they ought to be have them selves patiently, boldlye and manfullye in
aduersite and mysfortune.

A lamb or a sheep is led unto the Examples of
slaughter, and never cry, nor open the mouth, but suffer and abide it
pacyentlye brute cre atures and natural things. Mat. v.
and mekely. Even so ought the holy elect of God, when they are cursyd and
reuyled, not to curse or reuyle again, when they are smytten not to smite
again, but to suffer all manner of smart and pain, and not ones to blere or to
open their mouths against it.

Our body is but very worms meat: And if we could bestow the same to the
honor of our redemer and sauyor Christ ought we not to be glad and to rejoice
if we might so do?

Like as they that are syck and dyseased can be content to suffer and abide any
of their members of their body to be cut of, and to be burnte so that they may
be any thing releuyd and easyd thereby of their great smart and contynuall
pain, (which is yet but transytorye) and be made whole and sownd again: Even
so ought we gladlye and wyllyngly to suffer our Lord god, and to be still and
quiet, when he sends us aduersyte, whereby we may be releuyd and discharged of
eternal pain and obtain health, bless and salvation for our souls.

If thou can consider the order and course of nature that is naturallye
written in thy heart, thou shall thereby learn and conclude that a man ought
to be so strong and steadfast that he ought not to be moved by any smart,
pain or other temptacyon to do any thing that is vnsemyng or against honesty.

And out of this honestye wronghte and Examples of the heathen.
planted in nature, spronge the learning and examples of the wise and notable
heathen men, which we call Philosophers, Among whom this was a common proverb
and sentence, Bear and forbear:

The fy^ste word where of teaches that we should suffer the cross pacyently,
Bear
and to be still and meake when we are vysyted therewyth.

And the second sygny^yeth that we should hate, flee and avoid all manner of
^orbeare
examples, words or deeds that might give any manner of occasyon to any
evil.

Aristotle in his book of manners teatheth that felycyte and blessedness
consysteth not specially in health of body, in abundance of goods, or in
worldly honor, dignyte and estymacyon, but rather in the exercise and practyse
of virtue: Out of the which it folowyth that a man that is virtuous may be
blessed though he have never so much trouble or aduersyte. And he reckenyth and
takyth troble and aduersyte for the very matter and occasyon, whereby virtue is
most styrryd up and exercysed and wherein it does most shine and appear. And
the same Arystotle also comparyth an honest and virtuous man unto a good capten.
For like as a good capten leadyth and orderyth his host, according as the occa
syon requyryth: Even so a virtuous man behaueth him self pacyentlye and well
in aduersyte and makes the best of it.

The Stoykes did teach playnelye that it was not to be rekenyd for an evil
thing to live in pouertye, syckenes and myserye, but this only to be evil, to
forsake virtue, and show any point of dishonestye.

Lycero one of the most notable and excellent Romans writes thus, Remember
and persuade this with thy self, that besides sin and dyshonestye, nothing
can happen to a man, where at he ought to be astoynyd or abashed.

And according to this example did one heathen man often comfort another by all
manner of circumstances of things, as these following and other. It besemyth not
a man to weep and wayle like a child or a woman. And Seneca writes thus. It is
easyer to subdewe and overcome an whole ^acyon than one only man.

Item: Thou art no more a child of a year, but thou have age and years, And
therefore more is required of the, than of a child.

Thou haste been brought up and instruct from thy youth in godly wisdom and
knowledge, the same must thou now practyse and show forth.

Before this time thou couldeste comfort and give good council unto other: Do
not therefore now like the evil phy sy^yons, Which boost and pretend that they
can help other men and can not help them selves.

Before this time hitherto thou haste showed and behauyd thy self manfullye,
therefore be now like unto thy self and goo not backward. It were an vnsemyng
thing to wa^e from day to day worsse, and weaker: and such like.

Although this doctrine of the heathen men in this and such other points is to
be commendyd, yet the stories do make mencyon of many unseemly acts that
they did. As this yt Coriolianus for desire of reuengeaunce did war against
his own natural contry. Also Cato and Antonyus for sorrow and heaviness did kill
and murder them selves. But the very reason of man can dyscer^e and judge
that such things are against nature and against all virtue and honesty. But the
very right and the most notable heathen men have commended and set forth
pacyence not only with words, but also have showed the same in example and
deed.

Among the greciaus Arystides an excel lent virtuous man, being banyshed out
of his country did take and suffer his mysery very manfully and pacyently.

Among the Romans Camyllus and Attylyus Regulus were hyghly commen ded and
praised for their excellent pacyence and stowtenes, which they showed in
aduersyte.

Scypio could have defended and revenged him self of the sedycyous rebels
with force and strong hand. But of an excellent pryncely heart, he went onte of
the syghte of his enemies for a time, and suffered much trouble and iniurye of
them, for the profit of his land, less he should give them occasyon to more
bytternes and fearcenes.

Yea we read of certain women, as of Cornelia, which in afflyccyon and aduer
syte did show manlye hearts and great stowtnes.

But we must alweys mark the right dyfference between the heathenysh and the
Christen pacyence. As Socrates in his aduersyte did wonder of the
unrighteous of men, and thought that it was but a chance and fortune that he
was afflycted. But david knew and confessed that his visitacion and afflyccyon
came from God. ij. Reg. xxiiij. (...). pa. xxij


Socrates for as much as he sufferyth innocently and without a cause, he can
not find by his reason, that he should wysh and desire ponyshmente and
afflyccyon, But Dauyd (after a certain manner) wysheth and i^. Reg. xxiiij.
desyeryth the cross, for he knowyth that it is Gods will to testyfye, and to
open manyfestly, through the cross and aduersyte, his wrath and dyspleasure
against sin.

Socrates in his manly sufferance and ^cyence, neither desyeryth, nor lokyth
for any help, comfort or mitigacyon of his afflyccyon, from God. Yea the nota
ble Cato, hearing that Pompeius being a good man, was ouercomne and subduyd of
Iulyus, which was a wicked man he began to dout and to despay^e. But David
in his pacyence and obedyence calls upon God for help and delinera^nce,
Psalm. (...).
and is certain and sure that the allmighty lord does assyst him for the ho ly
and blessed seeds sake, whereof the Genesis iij.
heathen have no knowledge nor understanding. Thus by comparynge the one to the
other, we shall find and perceive that the doctrine of the Gospel is more
pleasant and acceptable, and mouyth us unto more thanckfulnes toward the go
spell of Jesus Christ, through whom and by whose means we obtain an whole and
a perfyte comfort.

Now from the old ethnykys and heathen men, let us descend and come to the
turks, Jews and to other degreys of men. Many (...) Turk and Jew would
suffer him self to be marteryd and tormented most cruelly ^ather than he
would deny or forsake mohemetys relygyon and his perverse and naughty faith,
And why should not a chri stian, than much more be content to suffer stowtly, if
need should require. for the chri sten relygyon and fayths sake?

A merchant man, makes far vyages and great journeys and venteryth body and
goods, and nothing is to hard and sour for him, only for worldly and
transytory gain and luker, And yet his hope is uncertain, whether his chance
shall be good or evil. And though he hapnyth ne uer so well, yet he brings
home nothing but frail and transytory goods which shall have an end. Now al we
have a long vyage to make, also even from earth to heaven. And should not we be
as well content as prompt glad and willing to suffer al ma ner of perels and
dangers that may happen by the way, seeing that we have an infallyble and sure
hope of eternal and everlasting riches for Jesus christ's sake.

A wayfarynge man that goes from home, although he passes many pleasant
houses and goodly meadys, yet minding altogether homewarde again, all such
things d^ nothing tempte nor grieve him. Even so whansoeuer we have not all
our pleasure and delyght here, let us comfort our comfort and delyght our sell
ues with our country and habytacyon in heaven.

When a man of an high and noble birth is contemned and myshandled in a strange
land, where he is not known, it greueth him nothing so much as if the like
should happen unto him at home in his own natural contry. Now is our
natural contry in heaven, upon earth we Heb. xiij Phi. iij c i. Pe. i. i^
are but strangers and pylgroms. Therefore we ought the rather to suffer all
thin ges pacyently here, only that we may have rest among the inhabytantes
in our right eternal land and contry.

A man of war prepares and weapo neth him self with all manner of things
apperteynyng to warfare, and though his enmye be never so strong, yet he
forgettyth all fear, and never ones thynckyth upon the strokys and woundys but
only upon the victory and triumph, and goyth his way and fyghteth manfullye
like a giant against his enemies only for worldly glory and luker: Which
thing may redound to the great slander and shame of Christen people. If they
for the honor glory and pleasure of god should not as promptly, wyllynglye and
manfully
fight against their ghostly enmyes for higher and greater triumph, luker (...)
commodyte. A plowman or an husbandman goyth to the feld, dougeth, plowyth,
sowyth and harrowyth his ground, and has much sorrow therew^h and wayteth for
fruit and profit thereof. By the same Iam. v.
example does the holy Apostle S. James move and exhort us unto patience.

Turn a four corneryd stone how thou wylt, and it will allweys stand right up.
Even so howsoever a right Christian be tempted and assaulted, he will ever not
wythstandyng remain vpryghte.

When a man plays at the tables, he can not alweyes cast what he would have,
but whatsoever he has cast he must make
the belte of it. To (...) ^ame does Pla to lyken our life. Wherein happen
many things contrary to our will, which we must take and turn al to the best,
and never despair.

Wha^ (...) child that can scarselye god, chausyth to stomble upon a stone, he
falls down by and by in the same place and there lies still weeping and
cryenge till some body take him up. But people of reason and understanding
must not do like chyldern, but must use and endeavor them selves what syknes
or inconuenyence soever happen, by and by (so far as is possible) to heal,
ease and remedy it.

A virtuous child will not forsake his father in his need or troble, nor an
honest Ec^
wife her husband and spouse, nor yet a faithful servant his master: And
why than should we forsake God our father, or Christ our spouse and heavenly
Lord and master in trouble and aduersyte.

Such as are coueto us money marchantys, ambycyous and vain glorious,
for^ycators, whoremongers and murderers, care neither for shame nor for any
thing else, and spare no labor or travel, so that they may bring to pass
their wicked lust and desire. And yet often times they mysse also. And why than
should not a right godly man be constant paynefull and pacyent in honest and
good things: As Saynct Barnarde writes very well, saying, What a fayntnes,
sluggyshnes and dullnes is this that such as are wicked and ungodly should be
more seruent to wyckedues and abhomynacyon than we should be to honestye and
goodness? Yea that they should ro^n more swyftly to the devil and to death,
than we should to god and to life?

Furthermore thy fearefulnes and impacyency is a great pleasure and comfort to
thy^ooes, and a great heaviness and dys comfort to thy fryndes. For dowtles all
that wyshe the good, do rejoice in thy strength and constantnes.

Thynck also that thou fyghtest in the The angels.
presence of the holy angels, which by the prouysyon and appoyntmente of god
do dwell with the, and move and exhort the to^sted fastnes, And they rejoice
when thou co^tynuyst steadfast in goodness. i. Co. iiij. And again we should to
the uttermost of our power flee and abhor all such The devil.
things as might delyghte and rejoice the devil, For he is the deadly arch
enmye of God, and of all mankind. i. Pet. v.


Now this is the very purpose of his temptacions and suggestions and all that
he sekyth, that we, when we are poor, should steal, and when we are syck,
that we should murmur against god, And in war, afflyccyon and aduersyte that
we should forsake our Christen faith and relygyon. Constantnes, faythfulnes and
stedfastnes toward God and the Christen church, does grieve and displease
him. Therefore we to rejoice the angels, and to grieve the devil ought yt rather
to be con stant and pacyente in the myddest of all aduersyte.

The. xxx. Chapter.
By what meanys pacyence may be obtained, and gotten. And ones had, how it may
be kept and increased?

NOt wythstanding that we know and perceive that pacyence is so profitable and
fruyteful a thing unto us, yet we feel in our flesh a certain myslykynge, and
grudge toward the cross. Who can be content and glad to see him self depryuyd,
of his life, honor, estymacyon, goods, chyldern or wife? The rememberance of
the pleasure and prosperyte that we have had in times past, does so grieve us,
that with Loths wife we syghten and look back after Sodoma. Genesis xix. And with
the children of Israel, we lust after the fleshpottes in egypt. Ex. xvi.

And like weakness do we also find in the noble king and prophet Dauyd, as he
him self says, Psall. lxxvi. Many say unto my soul, he has no god, My
soul would receive no comfort, my spirit is waxen weak and feeble.

Item our savior Jesus in his innocent flesh, did show and declare the fear
fullnes and angwysh of the flesh, when as he knelyng upon the mount Olyuete,
considered his passion and marterdom Luc. xxij
that was coming and at hand, and swett for sorrow and angwyshe, so that the
drops of his swett gusshed upon the earth like drops of blood, and he
prayed unto his father, that if it were his will, that cupp might be taken from
him. In like manner being upon the cross he said, my god, my god, why have Ps.
xxij a Mathe. xxvii. e.
thou forsaken me, how long wylt thou thus deal with me.

But it is not to be understand as though Christ did dowt of his fathers favor
and grace, but the weakness of his flesh could have been content to have
suffered no more. Now like as the spyryte forepasseth and ouercommyth the
flesh in Christ, Even so must it do in us also, that we have more respect
unto God and unto the life everlasting than unto this wormeeten flesh. And
therefore now will we declare by most sure and infallyble reasons, by what
means and ways a man may master and overcome his flesh in the time of the
cross and afflyccyon and so show and declare true and perfyte pacyence.
Which virtue (like as all other) has her first beginning and increase of the
grace, power and spyryte of God, without whom we can work nothing that good
is, neither yet resyste or overcome any evil.

i. Macha. iii. it is written, The vyctory consists not in the multitude of
men, but the power and strength comyth from heaven.

Item Paul says Philipp. iiij. I am able to do all things through him that
makes me mighty, which is Christ. Wherefore allthough my fleshlye reason
synckyth, waueryth and fails never so much, yet does God contynuallye
preserve and uphold my spyryte that it do not utterly faint, but contynewe
prompt and willing till such time as it may be delyueryd and eased. But now,
how should we order and behave our selves that God may grant us his
strength, and true patience and boldness? Forsooth through faith, hope, prayer,
love, truth, faythfulnes, virtue and godlynes we may obt^yne it of god.

First we must fur^ysh and comfort Faith workyth pacye^ce.
our hearts and minds with fayeth toward god. For whosoever does know
perfytely and is certain that god which is the lord of al happes and myshappes,
of prospe^te and aduersyte is pacyfyed and reconcyled with him, and that he for
that cause ca^ot be depryued of eternal salvation: the same shall be able to
contemn and to defye all worldly honor pomp and lusts. And again there can
be no pay^ so bitter, sharp and grievous unto him that can bring him out of
pacieuce. In o^r Christen faith we confess and believe an holy universal
church and that we have fellowship and partycypacyon with all saints and
elect of god, and also we confess and believe remissyon of synnys,
resuerec^yon of the flesh, and life everlasting. And Christ gives unto every
one that has faith, this absolucyon. Ioh. (...). Whosoever hearyth my word and
believes him that has sent me, the same has everlasting life, and comes not
to judgment, but passes through from death to life. Wherefore through faith a
man obteyneth power, strength, pacyence, constancye, and stedfastnes in all
goodness.

If strong and mighty enemies should come upon the assault and belege the, and
thou had on thy side one whom thou
knew certenlye to be Lord, and to have power over al thine enemies, thou
migh test laufully be bold and wyth^t fear. Now have we (through faith)
Christ on our side, which is Lord over all Lor des which has full power
over all fortune and mysfortune, prosperyte and aduersyte. Therefore thou must
not long thyncke and look upon the weakness of thy flesh, but thou must
stir about with thy faith, that is to say, thou must earnestlye and
dylygently consider the might and true love of Jesus Christ, which both can
and will comfort and rejoice the more, then all mysfortune is able to
dyscomforte the, or to make the heavy.

Peter says. i. Petr. v. Your enemy the devil goes about like a roaryng
lion, and se^yth whom he may devour, whom resp^ ye steadfastly with faieth.

Item S. James says that your approuyd faith works (...). Iam. i.


The holy and faithful apostles did euydentlye declare that according to the
inward man, it was a joy and (...) comfort^ unto them to be (...) and scourged
for the lords sake. ^ct. ii^. v.

Again all troubles and afflyccyon^ are grievous by reason of ^ure weak faith,
which is yet but little exercysed, and has not well and fullye talled the
riches and treasure of the chyldern of God. Yet not wythstandynge no man ought
to despair, though he have not a perlyghte strong fayeth. It happenyth often
times, that the faith being little and weak in the time of necessyte and
afflyccyon draws back, and is like to a b^and and (...) that has but a little
fire upon it, which the lord Jesus ^yll not quench but increase, so that we
do but pray with the dear Apostles and say. O Lord strengthen our^ Mar. ix.
faith.

But wha^ a man is utterly destytute of faith, as he that knows of no another
nor of no better life than this, it is no meruell at all though he despair at
length.

Yea the more he trustyth in him self or in any worldly or transytorye
thing, the more unable is he to resyste and contynewe in trouble and
aduersyte. For there is no right comfort nor su^or in any manner of thing
besides the Lord Ac. iii^. (...)
Jesus.

There are two kinds of hope, the one is of nature, and the other commyth Hope
makyth men (...) cye^e.
of fayeth. The natural hope is a special gift and benyfyte of God, which
after a certain manner, do^th help and comfort a man that is troubled and
(...), that he do not viterlye despair, but in the myddeste of all aduersyte,
hops, that it will, within a while, be better, and so way^th and (...) till
the aduersyte be ouerblowen. Now if this na turall h^e have such a strength and
virtue, should not the other hope, which the spyryte of God does newly inspyre
tho^we sayrth, work a (...) greater and perfyghter pacyence and strength, that
a man in the myddeste of his cross, shall hope and wait for heavenly
comf^rte and aid of God for Christ's sake? And although the natural hope does
of^ and many times fail and deceive, and is always uncertain, yet this
Christian hope does never fail nor deceive.

The husband man consydereth not on lie his labor and travail, and what tem
pest and myschaunce of wether may for tune, but for as much as he trusts
and hops that the fruit shall wa^e and come forth when the time is, therefore
he laboreth stowtely and with a good will. Fue^ ^o in the spyrytuall vyneyarde
under the yock of the Lord, the hope and trust of honor and reward makes
men pacyent and willing, and gives them courage. Roman. vi^. If we hope for
that thing which we see not, we wait for it through pacyence.

Furthermore, we must seek upon God feruentlye and without ceasynge, Prayer
(...) to pacy^. Math. xxiiij.
through prayer, that he will give us a bold and a strong spyryte to suffer
all things, and to contin^e steadfast unto the end. Thus doing he will surely
hear v^ (...) according to his promise, and faithfully give us his spyrituall
gystes, most specyallye. When a man makes his complaynte, and opens his
need and grefe unto his specyal friude, he seeks a certain ease afterward, so
that his pain and grefe (by the rehersynge thereof) is after a certain manner
releued, remedyed and taken away: Much more comfort and ease shall we
receive by telling and opening our grefe and complaynte unto God. For man is
sone weary and yrk of our complaining. But if we should spend the whole day
in prayenge, cryeng and complaynyng to God, he would love comfort and
strengthen us the more, Luke xviij.

Again, to search, hear and learn the word of God, and for a man to
exercise To hear ye word of God, helps to pacyence.
him self therein, is a great furtheraunce and help to pacyence. For God has
not reveled and opened his word in vain unto us, but has showed and set
before us in the same most sweet and loving promises and comfortable examples,
that we might lear^e thereby, his goodness, faith fulues and loving kyndnes,
and so com forte and strengthen our selves by the same, in all manner of trouble
and aduersyte.

For an example, does the holy word of God sownde. In the world ye shall Ioh.
xvi
have sorrow and trouble, but be of good comfort, for I have overcome the world.

Ite^ God is our hope and strength. O Lord thou forsakest not them that Ps.
xxv^ xxxi. a Esaias. xxviij. To. ix. d
seek the etc.

Many such god lie promyses and excellent comfortable sayings have we,
which we ought to seek and to fetch, though it were even from Jerusalem,
upon our kneys, and never to cease, lauding and praysynge of God, that he in
these latter days has made us partakers of the eternal and infallyble
comfort of our sowlys in his word and gospel. Which word is nothing (...)
pure virtue and life, as all faithful ha^ tes do ^le and perceive: And it
ough^ no another wise to be received of (...), but as though we heard the ve^
^yce of GOD him self from (...) uen (...) all such things (...) ^e hear
(...) o^ the old and new (...).

Again the love which waxes Love inward God, works patience.
and spryngeth out of faith works pacyence in aduersyte, and constan^ye and
(...) fastnes in goodness.

Jacob served seven yearys for the damsel Rachell, Gene. xxix. And by reason
of the hartye love that he bare unto her, the ty^e was but short unto him:
And the days that he served for her semyd but few unto him. Even so
whosoever louyth God, shall bear and take pacyentlye whatsoever GOD lays
upon him, and whatsoever he sufferyth for Gods sake. Now syckenes and other
plages do not happen unto us without the will and prouydence of God:
Therefore if we love God hartylye (as we ought to do, for as much as he is
our merciful father, and we his childern and heirs) we can not mur mur
against his vys^tacyon, no^ be dyscontente with it, but we shall rather run
after him through all manner of ways be they never so roughe and shall contemn
all things, be they never so hard and grievous and evermore prease unto him
through thycke and thynne until such time as we come to perfyte rest in him,
according to the example of the holy Apostles and martyrs whose love toward
God did mytygate and ease all their sorrow, cross and aduersyte.

Item to give alms, and to exercise The exercise of virtue, works pacye^ce.
Ecclesi. xxxv. Matthew. xxv.
al kinds of virtue and godliness works pacyence, and that specially for these
two causes. First because God does increase his spyrytuall gifts in them,
which do well use and bestow them. For to him that has, shall more be given.
And secondarelye, whosoever behaueth him self godly and vertuouslye, the same
has a better and a more quyete conscience, and so much more boldness and
confidence, but yet only buyldyng and steynge upon the ryghtuousnes of Jesus
Christ.

Item like as a soudger, (first for fear of prison and of the shameful death
which he should suffer if the battle should be soste: And again in hope of the
high reward and excellent honor and reudwne if the vyctorye go on his side)
will fight the more boldelye and lustelye. Even so every true Christian is
styrred and pro noked to more faythfulnes and pacyence, when he consydereth the
exceeding profit and commodyte of pacyence, and again the great hurt and
dyscommody te of impacience.

The. xxxi. Chapter.
The fruit, profit and com modyte of pacyence as well corporal as spyrytuall,
Cap. xxxi.

LAst of all, pacyence serves to the honor and glory of God, and to the wealth
and profit of man, both in soul, body, and in transiturye goods and
possessions, and also in worldly honor and commendacyon. For the faithful do
resist and wythstande their pain and smarte, and pacyently without any
gradgynge suffer the lord to deal with them, according to his own will: Not
for any vain glory nor for any worldly or transitorye gain or luker, but
only and specyallye to she we them selves obedyent to God, and to land and
praise him.

As for example, God was as hyghlye praised and gloryfyed when the. iij.
companyons of Danyell suffered them selves By paci ence god is gloryfyed.
so pacyently and manfully to be cast into the hoate burning oven, as he was
by the excellent wysdom of daniel, which he declared in that he could open unto
the king, his dream. danye. ij. iij.

Furthermore, the pacyent is less syck, and when he is syk, he is sooner whole
again: pacye^ce is profitable for ye body and goodys.
Where as through impacyency the heart is pressyd, vexed, guawen, consumed and
eaten up. Prouer. xvij. A merye and a quyete heart is an help and furtheraunce
to health, but an heavy and sorrowful mind makes the marye and natural
strength to consume. Proverb. xxv. Like as the motthys do hurt the garments,
and worms the wood, even so does sorrow and he uynes hurt the heart of man.

When a child being corrected and ponyshed of his father, suffers it
pacyentlye, his father has the more pytye upon him, and holdyth his hand, and
ceasyth the sooner: But if the child show him self froward, cry any thing
loud or murmur and grudge against him, than is the father the more angrye and
fearse over him and beats him the more sharply. Even so the heavenly father
ponysheth the pacyent man the more easylye, and heals him soon again.

But toward them that murmur against him, he shewyth him self sharp and
fearse. Proverb. xv. A gentle and fryndlye answer does still and pacyfye
wrath, but rough and stubborn words do provoke to anger and dyspleasure.

The pacyent man Job obtained his Job. xlij.
goods doble again, and was plentyfully recompensed of the Lord, even here in
this life. The fayethfull have experyence and proof in very deed, that it is
good for them to be pacyente, and to suffer the Lord to work his will. And
again many by reason of their impacyencye and murmuring, do loose that
thing, that they should else have had. paci^ce is profitable for ye soul and
mind and a furtherans to al ver tues.


Proverb. xiiij. Sufferance and pacyence is a token of wisdom unmeasurable
heaviness is a token of folyshnes, wha^ we weep and complain like chyldern
saying: I would never have thought, I would never have believed that it
should have come thus to pass, and such like. Item impacyencye intanglyth
and insnaryth the mind, and makes a man sometime dull, and at his wits end.

When a man submittyth and geuyth over him self humblye unto the will of God,
although his aduersyte can not be remedyed, yet it shall be easyer and lyghter
unto him. Yea there is nothing so bitter, sower, hard or terryble to a man,
but by this means, shall be easy, sweet, light, and comfortable unto him.
And again so long as a man does not utterly give over and yield him self to
the good will of God, and will not suffer him to work his pleasure with him,
co^ tente whatsoever he sends, his grefe is the worsse, and the more hard
and bitter unto him, his mind never cease gnawynge and frettynge, and of one
sorrow he makes. iij. or. iiij. yea he makes his own life bitter and sower
unto him with infyuyte sorrows and unquietness.

Like as the bird that is caughte (...)
with the lyme rode, the more it stryueth to deliver it self, the more do the
feathers cleave and hang to the lyme: And in like manner the more the fyshe that
is caughte in the net, seeks to come out, the more it wyndeth it self in,
And again he that is bound with chains or fetters of iron, the more he
strayeth abroad, the morehar me he does to him self: Even so such as are
froward and impatient do increase their sorrow, and hurt them selves the more.

He that has an heavy burden upon his back, the more he shuttlyth and
moves the same, ye more does it grieve him. Even so the more froward and
impatient a man is under the cross, the more gre uous and paynefull is it unto
him.

It is not unwisely spoken of the hethen man Plyny which says. A good heart
in aduersyte, takes away the half thereof. And it is a common proverb of the
hethen men, The fear of aduersyte and pain, before it comes, is worsse then
the pain it self.

Al manner of ponyshment and aduer syte which, according to the merit and
deserte of man, should be unto him a taste and beginning of everlasting pain
and dampnacyon: the pacyente man takes and uses it for an occasyon to
exercise thereby all kinds of virtue, whereby the spyrytuall gifts of grace do
wax and increase more and more. For they that are paciente do keep the true
faith toward God, cry and call upon GOD through feruente prayer, honor, laud
and praise God, not only for that he rulyth and dysposyth all things, but
also that he bryngyth all things to a good end and success, and that he will
so contynuallye do. And thus through pacyence, is pacyence increased.

And contrary wise the vnpacyente man decays daily in all kyndys of vertuys,
and is daily more and more spoiled and depryued of all goodness. For whosoever
is content and can suffer him self to be provoked of the devil and of the
flesh, and gives place unto them, the same forsakes fayeth, prayer and
obedyence toward God, and sufferyth them to depart, and so is unthankful to
his true and fayethfull GOD, whom he can not be content to suffer, and to
commytte him self unto him for a while, that he may the more defend and
preserve him afterward. He thynckyth that God does not regard him, and that
it is in vain to trust and to wait for help, comfort and delyuerance of
God. He ymagyneth with him self nothing else, but that God is utterly wrath
and dyspleased with him. And can find in his heart to curse and to blaspheme
God, as though he were a cruel, unmercifully and an vnryghtuos God, showing
more love and favor and doing more good to the wicked than to the godly.

And by this occasyon he sekyth for aid help and comfort at creatures, and
makes vows unto saints, and to pylgrymagys, that is to say, to chapels of
Idolatry and of false gods, and makes wicked comuantys agrementes and
promyses against God. Some, for fear, do forsake and deuye the Christen
faith, and receive the wicked popysh relygyon consenting to manyfeste
Idolatrye, and make God a liar as though he could or would not help any more
in this or that thing, accyrdyng to his manyfolde promyses in the old and new
testament.

Furthermore impacyencye is augmen ted and increased through impacyency, so that
a man that is vnpocient is every day more sorrowful and desperate then other,
fleyth and shows where he should stedfastlye continue, and fyndeth neither
rest case nor quyetnes in his heart. And many one because he will not suffer
and abide pouerte and other like extreme necessyte, he falls to naughtynes,
murder, whoredom, lyenge, stealing, extor cyon, riot, cuttynge of pursys,
and to such other detestable abhomynacyon.

Item they that be impatient do envy and dysdayne at others me^nes wealth and
prosperyte, for they ymagyne that to be the cause of their cross and sorrow,
and they frette against it enuyenge dysdaynynge and hatynge oftymes, the inno
cente without any cause, yea they rage and rave runnynge headelonge, to
revenge them selves. By the reason whereof oftetymes (as many stories do
testyfye) contencyon, hatred, war, vproure, sheddynge of blood, decay and
destruc cyon of the church, of relygyon, and of the common welthe, have risen:
As Coriolianus, to revenge him self, as an enmy did procure war against his
own natural contry.

Besides this, it is an high honor and commendacyon before men, before the
angels, pacie^cy is a comendacyon and honor before men.
before the holy saints, and also before god him self, when a man shewyth
pacyence, boldness and strength in aduersyte. And again when a man behauyth him
self unseemly, vnpacyentlye and desperately, it is a shame and a dyshonor for
him both before all creatures, and also before the creator him self. For it is
no high nor hard thing for a man to show a bold and a strong heart, and to be
content with Gods workyng, when all things happen prosperouslye and according
to his mind: But this is a virtue and a point of conning when a man's mind is
not mouyd nor broken in aduersyte and mysfortune, Job. i.

Like as in a schole or a place of fence, he that has showed the most manly
tow che, and has won the victory, has great commenda^yon and high honor:
Even so is it much more commendable and a greater honor to overcome and to
subdue our spyrytuall enemies and to have the vyctorye against the assaultys
of the fleth and the devil. Be that forsakes his bodyly master without a
just cause, is taken before the world for a man that lacks faith, truth and
honesty: And should it not than be a greater point of dyshonestye and of
unfaithfulness, in the time of afflyccyon under the cross to forsake Christ and
his word and through impacy ency to work and to do against the same?

Prouer. xij. Be that subdewyth the te^ptacions of the mind is to be preferred
and more to be commendyd than he that has beseged and overcome a strong city.
For the which cause as well among the Christians as among the heathen diverse
notable parsons have gotten high commendacyon and praise for their trustines
fydelyte, and excellent constancy, which they have showed at an hassarde and
at the time of need.

And specially the example of our sauyor Jesus Christ is to be consyderyd,
whereof Paul makyth mencyon. To. viij. to this end, saying: If Christ after
his afflyccion and obedience even unto death was exalted to high honor and
glory, It shall be a furtherance likewise unto us to great honor, if we take
our cross daily upon us and follow him boldly and manly.

Experyence teaches also when a man will shyft a way the cross from him by
unlawful meanys, and will not with honesty and to his commendacyon suffer it,
for gods sake, often times he is compellyd and driven by force to suffer as much
or more with shame and dyshonestye for the deuyls sake, and to have great
dyshonor and confusyon thereby.

Moreover vnpacyente people do shorte^ their own lives. Iudyth in the. viij.
chapter patience is profitable for the lengthning of a man's life.
declaryth the stories of the. xi. and. xxi. of the book of nombers and says,
They that have not taken their cross and temptacyon in the fear of god. But
through murmuryng and grudgyng against god have showed themselves impatient,
they were destroyed of the destroyer, and were murtheryd of serpents. And some
through unmeasurable sorrow have fallen into grievous dyseasys and deadly
sycknesses, And gnawe and frett them selves to death, or else murder them
seluys as king i. re. xxxi
Saul did.

Item whether a man do suffer worthly or innocentlye if he contynewe in
murmuryng and impatient, it seruyth to his Patience may further a man to
everlasting life.
eternal dampnacyon. And again whether a man suffer worthyly or innocently,
if he take it pacyently as he ought to do it is merytorios unto him, and a
furtherance to everlasting life. And all the sorrows and pains upon earth in
respect of the bless and salvation that is to come are but as the bytynge of
a gnat or a flea, which is easy to overcome.

When men in warrfare lyeng in camp will play ye sluggards and be slouthful, and
not resyst the enemies stowtly and manfully their feldes are destroyed, their
houses spoiled, their vyllages set on fire, their man's parsonnes murtheryd
and stayne, and their wives and daughters defiled and rauyshed, and all goyth
to hauock and is full of mysery. Even so in the spyrytuall warrfare and feld,
if we yield unto the flesh and the devil, and resyste them not manfullye and
constantlye, we cast our selves into perpetual danger, mysery and unquietness.
But if we fight against ephesians. via
the ghostly enemies stowtely and pacyently, we may atteyne to perpetual rest
and quyetnes.

He that is syck, if he will not receive the medycyne, because it is bitter and
sour, or if he have a sore or a wound and will not suffer it to be searchyd
and cut and the corrupt flesh to be cut away, because it is very paynefull, It
is no meruell nor won der if the same man perysh in his sycknes and disease:
But if he would suffer him self to be handled after the mind and coun cell of
the physycyon or surgen, he might overcome the smart and pain and have good
hope to be curyd and remedyed and to be restored to his health again: Even so
all right and faithful Christyans that are pacyent in aduersyte may conceive a
much more steadfast and sure hope yt they shall atteyne to everlasting
restitucion and health of body and soul: Where as contrary wise they which
remain and continue in their frowardnes and impacyencye against god the
heavenly physycyon, must smart for it euerlastyngly, both in body and sowl.

Scripture to confyrme and prove this, houe we. Iac. i. Happy is that man which
sufferyth temptacyon. For after that he Job. v. (...) Pro. iij (...) Ose. vi a
i. Pe. ii^ Heb. xij (...)
is prouyd, he shall receive the crown of life. But no man may gather or
conclude upon this, that we merit or deserve eter nall salvation for our
pacyence, which thing only Christ alone has done, And yet shall we be
rewarded for our pacyence and aduersyte, and they shall profit us
euerlastyngly.

^ast of al, pacyence is profitable and brings syngular commodyte, not only
to him that has the same virtue, but also to other people. For when another
perceyuyth thy constant truth, fydelyte and stedfastnes, he takes example and
occasyon to exercise like pacyence and stedfastnes.

It is manifest by diverse true and cre dyble stories when as the Christians
have dyed manfullye and boldlye for the Christen fayeths sake, that certain of
the persecutors and enemies of Christ have wonderyd so sore there at, that
they by that and no another occasyon were conuer tyd and turnyd to the faith and
relygyon of Christ.

Item, pacyence and stedfastnes have wroughte peace and quyetnes in common
welthys, in the church and in many nations, cyteys and townys. As Scipio a wise
and noble ruler, for as much as he did resrayne him self and would rather
forsake the cite of Rome than to subdewe and oppress his enemies with force
of arms, it turnyd to the syngular wealth and commodyte of the whole common
wealth. And contrarywyse a bitter, cruel and vnpacyente mind, bryngyth,
workyth and occasionyth infynite harm, destruction in common welthys and
heresies in the church of god. For Marius as he came again to Rome, and could
not refrain him self, through his vnpacyentnes, wrought great tyranny and
showed much cruellnes, causynge diverse of the pryncypall people of the
contrary part that held against him, most cruellye to be murtheryd and put
to death, whereupon did follow and insewe much inconnenyence. Also Arrius,
because he could not obtain his purpose nor bring his dyuyse to effect, for
very frowardnes and impacyency he vexed and dysquyeted the church of Christ
with horrible heresies. In like manner through our vnpacyentnes in the cross and
aduersyte we give occasyon to them that be weak in the faith to dowt, whether
our faith and relygyon be the true fayeth and relygyon or (...), when we
confess and say of god that he is our comfort and refuge both in this world
and in the world to come, and yet we show our selves so desperate and heavy in
aduersyte as though God had vt terly forsaken us and as though there were no
better life after this.

Wherefore we ought to arm and prepare our selves to all manner of aduersyte in
time, while we are here in good wealth and prosperyte, and not to depend and
hang over much upon transytorye goods and prosperyte, that whansoeuer need
shall re quyre, we may be content with patience to forgoo and forbear them and
continue steadfast in the true faith, wherein whosoever shall continue unto the
end, shall be sauyd, Mat. xxii^. x

AMEN.
To god only be al honor and praise.
A humble peticyon to the lord, practysed in the commune prayer of the whole
famylye at Shene, during the trou ble of their Lord and master the duke of
Somerset his grace: gathered and set forth by Thomas Becon, Minister there.
Which trouble began the. vi. of October, the year of our Lord. M. D. xlix.
and ended the. vi. of Februarye than next ensuyng.
O Lord father of mercies, and God of all consolacyon, which rulest and dis
posest all things after thyvnsearcheable wisdom, and workeste in thy
creatures according to thy blessed will (which is always good and godly,
howsoever blind and frail flesh judges of it) we thy ^nprofitable servants
know and unfeignedly confess thy om nipotencye and almightye power. We know
that thou art able to do whatsoever thy good pleasure is. We know that
thou bryngeste down to the grave, and fetcheste up again. Thou punyshest
with pouertye, and makeste welthy again. Thou bringeste low, and lifteste
Deuter. xxx^. i. Reg. ij Sap. xvi Job. xiij
up again. Yea thou (O Lord) kil^est and make alive again. O^ wonderfully
do thou work in all thy creatures, specially in them whom thou haste
appointed to be vessels of mercy, and inheritours of thy eternal glory. If
they at any time grievously offend thy divine majesty, (as we be al sinners
and ready at every moment to fall) thou do neither long wink at their
wickedness, nor yet for ever cast them from thy favor: but like a loving
phisicyon, with some emplastre or salve (although bitter to ye flesh, yet
holsom to the soul) thou healeste the^. And like a tender and ientle father
correc test them with some temporal punishment, that by the means they
escaping everlasting punishment, may repeute them of their ungodly behavior,
confess their wickedness, flee unto thy mercy, and for ever after be the more
cyrcumspect in trea dyng the paths of thy holy law. On this manner dyddest
thou handle the Israelytes when they offended thy fatherly goodness. On this
manner dyddest thou deal with king Dauyd and prophet Jonas for their
dysobedyence, with many other, whom not wythstandynge (for thy mercyes sake)
after they had knowledged their offenses and called upon thy holy name, thou
wonderfully delyueredst and broughtest again, as it were into the heaven of
quyetnes. We therefore thy poor and sorrowful creatures, perceiving in the
holy scryptures so large fountaynes of thy great mercyes plenteously issuyng
out toward al them, that be of a contryte and broken heart, are Esa. lxvi
bold at this present (for thy promise sake) to come unto the: most humbly
beseching the, that as thou delyueredst Jonas out Iona. i^. Dan. vi A^tu. xij
i. Re. xix Da. xiij
of the whales bellye, Danyell from prison, Peter thy Apostle out of ward, Da
uyd from the hands of his enemies, Susan from the power of her adversaries,
with diverse other: so in like manner thou wylt deliver and set at lybertye thy
serruaunt our Lord and master, y^a and that on such sort, that it may be to
thy glo rye, to his honor, and to the comfort of al us his fayethfull and true
servants. And although we for our imperfeccyon be not worthy to crave and
enjoy so great and comfortable benefyte at thy merciful hands: yet we doubt
not but for thy ^rely beloved son Jesus Christ's sake thou wylt most
fauourablye hear us, most fatherly pytye us, and most bounteously grant us
this our humble request. And we again receyuyng this benefyte of our Lord and
masters delyueraunce at thy hand, shall not be unthankful: but contynually
magnytye thy holy and glorious name, which dealest so favorably with thy
servants, when they call upon the, in the name of Jesus Christ, thy only
begotten son, and our alone medyatour and advocate: to whom with the, and
the holy ghost be all praise and honor for ever and ever.

Amen.
A thanks geuyng for his graces delyueraunce.
SO often as we consider thy wonderfully worckes (O blessed and heavenly father)
which thou worcester kest of thine own good will, for so many as in their trouble and
aduersyte flee for refuge unto thy holy name, as unto a strong hold and mighty
fortress, we can not but confess and acknowledge thy sin gular kindness and
unspeakable good will, which thou contynually (through thy fatherly goodness)
bear toward thy servants. And for the same, not merited of any man, but
freely of thy mere mercy ge uen, we render unto the (according to our most
bounden duetye) most hartye praises and entier thanks. In consyderacion
whereof, the children of Israel b^ynge in miserable captyuytye, lamentably
lamen tyng before the their to much sorrowful state, by hearty prayers, after
that thou had delivered them from that land of servitude, brast out into
exceeding great praises, glorifyinge thy most holy and blessed name, for their
sweet and comfortable delyueraunce. The cytezens of Bethulia Iud. vij viij. ix.
x. xi. x^. xiij. xiiij. xv. xvi.
likewise being in great dystresse, called upon thy glorious name, and thou
most mercyfullye delyueredst them. And they again with merye voices, and more
joyful hearts, song unto the most hearty thanks. In like manner, after thou
had Genes. xxxvij. xli.
delivered Joseph, danyell, Peter, and many other thy servants from their so
rows and calamities, ah who is able to express, with how ready and glad
minds they magnifyed the and thy holy name. We therefore sinful wretches,
excyted and styrred up with the godly examples of these thy seruautes, knowing
how greatly thou delightest in the sacrifice of praise confessyng also (such is
our beggary) that we have no other thing worthy to offer unto thy dyuyne
majesty, are at this present gathered together to celebrate thy great mercyes,
to magnyfye thy blessed name, and to render unto the most humble thanks and
immortal praises, that it has pleased the (of thy exceeding goodness) the
rather at the contemplacyon of our prayers. to show thy favorable mercy, in
the delyuerance of thy servant our Lord and master, unto our syngular joy and
great comfort. For thye thy benefyte (most benefycyal father) we so heartylye
thank the, as heart can think, most entyerly beseching the, that thou wylt
give us all grace, never to be vumyndfull of this thy benefyte, nor to commit
any thing hereafter, that should offend thy fatherly goodness, or provoke thy
wrath against us, lest (through our disobedience) we after this feel more
bitter tokens of thy heuye dyspleasure than hitherto we have done: but in all
our enterpryses so to behave our selves according to thy blessed will, that
thou may delight in us, as a father in his children, and vouchsafe to bless
us with all spiritual blessyng, to enryche us with the knowledge of thy
heavenly word, and to work in us a life con formable to the same, that other
seeing our godly manners and Christian conversation, may be encouraged to
embrace thy blessed word, to magnyfy thy holy name, and in all points to frame
their life according to the rule of thy holy commaun dementes, through the
inspyracyon of thy blessed spirit, to whom with the and thy derely beloved son
Jesus Christ, be al honor, praise and glory, for ever and ever.

Ame^.
A Godly prayer and Confession of our sins to god our heavenly father, with
the rehersall of the punishments and plages of the same calling therein upon
the mercy of God.
LOrd god of heaven, great mighty, Neem. i. ij. Para. xxxvi.
terryble god, fearful and dreadful is thy name, whom all creatures do fear,
and tremble for the power of thy face for intolerable is the threatenyng of
thine indignacion over the sinner.

We are not ashamed to knoweledge Eccl. iiii
and to confess unto the our trespasses (...) sins, for we have sinned above
the ij. Par. xxxvi. iij. Reg. vii^. Psalm. l Job. 33. Dan. iij.
number of the sand which is in the sea. Yea, Lord we have sinned, offended,
and have been ungodly, and knowledge our transgressyons, and our sins are
ever before us, we have sinned in deed, and departed from the, we have neither
heard nor yet kept thy commandments, ney there we have done as thou have
commanded us. Lord thou have known our weakness and infyrmytye, that neither
our Deu. ii^ Actu. xv Ga. iiij.
fathers, nor yet we have been able to hear al thy commandments, laws and
ordynaunces, which thou haste given us by thy faithful servant Moses,
wherefore thou have had mercy upon us, and in the fullness of thy promised time,
haste sent us our sauyoure, and redemer, thine Ephe. ij.
only son, whom thou have put under the law, that he might redeem us from
the heavy burden of the law, and without Iere. iij. Esai. liij
our deseruyng freely given us the ryghteousnes, so that only we would
knowledge our sins, and believe that the same are forgeuen thoroughe thine
only son Ielus Christ. But we unthankful Joan. iij (...). Ioa. i.
sinners do nothing belonging to repentance, and have also after our
stubburne and impenitent hearts hoorded Mat. iii^ Luc. xiij Romans ij. i. Esd. ix
up a treasure of thy wrath in the day of thy wrath, and of the declaryng of
thy ryghteous judgment, for our sins reach unto heaven, we have sinned
greuouslye unto this day. Yea father we Luce. xv i. Esd. ix
have sinned against heaven and before the, and are not worthy to be called
thy children, we be ashamed to lift up our eyes unto the Lord, for we
knowledge that we have offended the very sore. For ps. lxxiij.
our sins sake is thine indygnacyon descended over us the indygnacyon of
thine vnmercyfulnes, which thou ha^t sent into us by the wicked Angels. Hon
ger, famyne and dearth have thou heaped ps. lxxvi^ Le. xxvi Deuter. xxviij
Esech. v Am. viij
over us, and have destroyed our prouysyon of bread to the expyracyon of our
children and brethren: But among us that are a live for our unthankfulness
sake have thou sent, honger not only of the bo dely bread, but the honger of
the spyritual bread, and we have gone, and run hither and thither, seeking
the same, but Tree. iiij
have not found it, and our young children have also sought the bread, but
there was none to break it unto them. Thou Esec. vi.
have brought upon us the sweard of the un beleuynge, and given the carcases of
our children into destruccio^ before the face of their fathers, our towns and
villages are Ie. xlviij
conf^med with fire, our cities are wasted and few inhabitours left in the
same, Iere. xx.
our friends are fallen by the swords of our enemies, and their bodies are
become meat for the fowls of the air, and for Deuter. xx^iij.
the wild beasts, of the earth, alas this have our eyes seen.

Lord thou have plaged and stricken us with more buyles and sores, and with
dyseases Deuter. xxviij.
which have not ben heard of before, that we could not be healed, more
pestylence have we had than ever our fathers knew of.

Al these plages have thou Lord brought upon us, our children and our
brethren, Luc. xxi
and they are not yet at an end, for these are the days of thy vengeance.

But Lord thou art our God our refu ge and strenght, our help in the great
Psa. xlv
afflictions, which are come upon us, a meke true long sufferinge, and
pacient god a God of mercy and all conforte, which Sap. xv ij. Lor. i. Ephe. ij.
conforted us in all our troubles. Thou art also rich in mercies, in the which
thou orderest all things, for inco^prehensible and vnseearcheable is the mercy
of thy promise, Thou art the most hyeste god ou^r all earth, thou wylt not the
destruccyon of the soul, for thou have according to thy Esechie. xxxiij.
goodness promised us repentance for the remissyon of sins saying. That thou
have no delight in the death of the ungodly, but would rather that he should
turn from his ways, and live, and than should his sins, which he has
committed never be vpbrayed unto him. Moreover thou have said by thy
Prophets. Turn and Esech. xviij
repeute for all your sins, and the same your sins shall not be to your
destruccyon. Return unto me, for I will not have the death of the sinner.

Therefore hear lord in heaven from the seat of thine habitacio^, our prayer
and calling, iij. Reg. viij.
let thine ears be attentyfe to the prayer of thy servants, which desire to
fear thy name, and be gracyous unto the people, which has sinned against
the, open thine eyes to our prayer and hear us, open the same and behold,
for the dead which are gone to their gra^es, Baru. ij.
whose souls are out of their body^, give the o Lord neither praise nor
instifyenge, but the soul that for the multitude of her sins is afflicted
she walks being troubled and weak, whose eyes are weak, yea, such a
hungry soul laudeth and prayseth thy mercy and righ teousnes.

Lonuerte us lord unto the, and we shall C^eu. v
be converted, and if thou shall convert us than shall we repent, and thou
shalt have mercy upon us, and we shall be as Ier. xxxi Sach. x.
we were before thou dyddest reiecte us.

Grant us that we may come with boldenes unto the seat of thy grace, that
Hebr. iii^
we may obtain mercy and find grace ij. Lor. ix
in the time of need. For thou a^te able to make us rich in all grace, that we
in all things having always suffycyent, may be plenteous to every good
work. For Sap. iiij
thou art gracyous and merciful and haste respect to thine elect. Give us a
true i. Tim. i Hebr. xi.
fayeth, without the which we can not please the, by the which we may know
the, the only true God, and Jesus Christ Ioh xvij
whom thou have sent and may thorough him fulfill thy will in heaven, and in
earth, Grant Lord, that we may only in the Ps. lxvi Hebr. iij. Psalm. xc
keep steadfast the confydence, and reioysyng of hope unto the end. For thou
art only our God, our refuge and strong defense, our god in who^ we put our
trust. Colo. iij Ios. xxiij Joan. xv Romans xij


Give us above all things a true christian love, which is the band of
perfeccyon, that we may most dylygently endeavor our selves to love the our
God above all creatures, and evermore continue in the same love, and that we
may Mat. v. Gala. v i. Ioh. iij
through the samevnfaynedly and without dissymulacyon love all men from the
heart, and also by mouth not only friends, but also our enemies, and may also
declare the same toward them by our works. Ba. ij. Dan. ix.


Turn away thy wrath and indignacyon from us, for very few are there left
because of the same.

Give us this day our daily bread, Ioh. xi.
for thou art only he that gives sede unto the sower, and also geuest bread
to eat, ij. Co. ix
which also have given to our fathers in the deserte bread from heaven in
their Ex. xvij.
honger, and have also plenteously powered out water out of the rock when
they Mat. vi John. i. Psalm. ^xviij. Ecles. i. Pro. xxx
where thursty. Feed us also o Lord with thy most hossame bread of thy word,
which is the lantern of our fete, and the true light of our paths, a well
of high wysedom, and a fyery shyld to them that put their trust in the.

Refreshe us with the lively water of the fountain yt springs into
everlasting Ioh. iiij.
life, yt we may never thyrste. That we may know by thy truth, yt a man
lives (...)* viij. Mat. iiij
not only by bread but by every word, which proceeds from thy mouth. But
vanities and words of vanite let be far from us o Lord. Pro. xxx


A prayer for the kings mayestye and for peace.
O King above all kings, and Lord i. tim. vi Apo. xix
above all lords, grant unto our king with his people vyctory against the
enemies of thy name, for thou Iud. xi
art our god and our conqueror, for thou art only he that gives victory
I^d. vij. iij. es. iiij.
unto the people, that we with one accord may land and praise thy victorious
hand for we believe, and do also know Sap. x i. mac. iij
that the victory consists not in the mulmultitude of people, but that ye
strenght is given from heaven, and thou geuest the vyctory according to thy
pleasur. Thou have also promised us, that if we will turn ij. ma. xv Iere. xxx
from our sins, unto the thou will bring all our enemies into captiuyte, and
that all they which waste us shall also be wasted, and that all they which
spoil us, shall also be spoiled.

Put away from us the multitude of our hurtful infirmityes, and grant us
perpetual Sa. xvi. i. Reg. ij Deuter. xxxij. Tob. xiij Job. (...) Ier. xvij
Joan. iij
health of body and soul. For thou art he yt has power over life and death
which bring into the gates of death, and leadest out again. Thou kyllest
and quyckenest again, heal us o lord, and we shall be whole for thou art our
praise, and mighty God.

O mighty god and bountyful father, grant us these prayers thorough thine
only son our lord Jesus Christ, who^ thou have sent into this world, not
to con demne us. But that we by him should be saved. He came into the world,
that he i. Tim. (...)
should save us miserable sinners. In him have we obtained the redemption,
namely Ephe. i.
the forgeuenes of sins, according to the riches of thy grace, which thorough
him thou have powered upon us, and thorough the sheding of his blood have washed
Hebre. i. Apoc. i.
away all our sins, to the intent that we might be thy sons and heirs,
and also fellow To. viij.
heirs with the same Jesus Christ for ever.

Amen.
Imprynted at London for Gwalter Lynne, dwelling on Summers kaye, by Byllynges
gate. In the year of our Lord M. D. L.

And they by to be sold in Poules churchyard, next the great schole, at the
Sign of the spled Eagle.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


