THE SOVLES PROGRESS To the Celestial CANAAN, or Heavenly JERUSALEM.

By way of godly Meditation, and holy contemplation: accompanied with diverse
learned exhortations, and pithy persuasions, tending to Christianity and
humanity.

Divided into two Parts.

The first Part treats of the divine Essence, Quality and Nature of God, and
his holy Attributs: and of the creation, fall, state, death, and misery of an
unregenerated man, both in this life and in the world to come: Put for the
whole scope of the Old Testament.

The second Part is put for the sum and compendium of the Gospel, and
treats of the Incarnation, Nativity, Words, Works, and sufferings of Christ,
and of the happiness and blessedness of a godly man in his state of
Renovation, being reconciled to God in Christ.

Collected out of the Scriptures, and out of the writings of the ancient
Fathers of the Primitive Church, and other Orthodoxall Divines: by John Wells,
of Beccles in the County of Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. and are to be sold by Henry Shephard in
Chancery Lane, at the sign of the Bible, between Serjeants-Inne and
Fleetstreet, near the Kings-head-Taverne. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr. JOHN HOBART, Of Blickling in the County of
Norfolk, Knight Baronet, one of his Majesty's Deputies Lieutenant, Justice of
Peace and Quorum, Captain and Colonel of part of his Majesty's Forces there:
Prime Heir of the Right Honorable, and reverend Judge, Sr. Henry Hobart,
Knight and Baronet, Lord chief Justice of his Mties Horable Court of Common
Pleas. John Wells Wishes much increase of Honor, and all true comfort in
this life, a blessed end, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
I Have presumed to dedicate these my labors unto you, Right noble sir, the
offspring and undoubted Heir of my noble friend your father deceased; and
inheritour of his Lands and Livings, and the chief of that great and renowned
family. And as you do inherit his Lands and Livings, so my prayer is, that you
may inherit him in his integrity, zeal, and wisdom. I speak not this out of
doubtful fear, but in officious love; and herein take notice, I beseech you,
of this happiness and blessing of God, cast upon you, not only to be the
chief of this great and worthy family; but also take notice of the true cause
of the worth and greatness of your Ancestors, and imitate them therein, and
then inheriting their worth together with their wealth, you shall also most
undoubtedly enrich your self with the obsequious attendance and hearty
affection of your native Countrymen, and so grow in grace and favor with God
and man. For which cause I have presumed to present you with this Tractate, and
to publish the same under the protection of your name, hoping of your courteous
acceptance; and beseeching you to grant it your favorable protection and
Patronage: which though it be but indifferently contrived, yet strongly
warranted, for it has the undoubted truth of God for its authority. There may
be many Tractates found tending to these ends; but all that I have seen of
others, though they may be more pithy, yet certain I am, this is more plain;
I trust not unpleasant, nor unprofitable. God give all grace to make right use
of it. And so commending my labors, with all the desired good that may be unto
your good Worship, and both you and it to the special grace and protection of
the Almighty, who is abundantly able to fill your heart with grace, to crown
your days with blessing, and to finish them with eternal comfort, life, and
glory, Amen. I rest, a true desirer of your best good,

And your Worships in all Christian duty to be commanded, JOHN WELLS.
October 22. 1638.
The Authors Preface to the READER.
GEntle Christian, friendly Reader, and loving countryman; about ten years
since past, at spare hours, as my daily employments would give me leave, I
first began to collect and gather out of Scripture, and other godly and learned
Authors, many principal and special notes worthy observation and remembrance.
When I first began, I had not thought to bring it forth to the worlds view, but
only for my own private commodity, to the comfort of my mind; the more I
gathered, the more I was ravished, and being thus in holy contemplation, the
matter being holy, excellent and heavenly, I was incited, and stirred up by
godly motion, to undertake a work so excellent, which through want of
learning, I knew my self altogether unable to perform what my heart desired;
yet yielding obedience to the holy motion, and humbly craving, and earnestly
praying the power divine to assist me with his holy Spirit, to accomplish that
which I had a desire to finish, Phil. 4.13.
and had already begun; knowing, as Saint Paul says, that I am able to do all
things, Phil. 1.12.
through the help of him that strengthens me. And praying for his blessing,
to bless my endeavors, and then in the name of God, Prove. 16.3,
with cheerfulness of heart, I persevered in my purpose, committing the
success unto him, Eccles. 8.
in whose power it is to bless with his grace; whatsoever business is
intended to his glory: For fithence Solomon himself says, that man's wisdom
is unperfect, and his knowledge in each Science uncertain, therefore I being
utterly destitute of that wisdom, and but of slender knowledge, neither may, 2
Cor. 3.5. 2 Cor. 4.5.
do, nor will I presume to think that by any means I am able of my self, to
perform my desired enterprise, as of my self, or bring to perfection so
weighty a matter, and so intricate: 1 Cor. 4.4.
For though I may say with Saint Paul, I know not what I have mistaken, or
wherein I have erred; yet will I not dare to report, or be encouraged to
affirm that my work is perfect, or that I have fully performed my long-wished
attempt; and for that cause, standing in doubt, whether I have concealed many
truths, or adventured to report some errors, which by my weakness of
judgment, or slacknesse of consideration, have happened in this Treatise, but
through his divine assistance, have here accomplished what my soul desired to
bring to pass, I mean, this poor Tractate, named the Souls Progress to the
celestial Canaan; divided into two parts; the first part treats of the
divine Essence of God, and his holy attributes, and of the creation, state,
death, and misery of man, put for the whole passage of the old Testament; the
second part is put for the sum and compendium of the Gospel, and treats of
the words, works and sufferings of Christ, and of the happiness and
blessedness of a godly man, in his state of renovation, being reconciled to
God in Christ: which poor mite I do cast into the worlds treasury, knowing
that the great learned orthodoxall Writers out of their superfluous abundance,
have cast in much, but like the poor widow in the Gospel; Luke 21.4.
I out of my want, do cast in, even all that I have, beseeching the Lord to
give it a free passage in its progress, and that it may take that good effect
in men's hearts, as is by me desired, to the glory of God; for whose sake, my
souls comfort, and the good of my country, and Christian brethren, I
undertook this work; take it in good worth; if it be not as it should be,
impute it to the want of learning, and not to the want of a loving heart to do
my country good: For the places of Scripture cited in the margent are right,
take them on my word; but howsoever it be, trouble not thy self, gentle
Reader: For if it be good that is said, and agreeable to Scripture, make use of
it, and be not solicitous to know from whose works it is drawn. The manner is
plain and simple, and craveth pardon for what is amiss. Thus committing the
work it self to thy courteous acceptance, and judicial reading, and both it
and thee to the Lord, desiring him to honor thee with his grace, that you may
so know him, as that you may be known of him, what remains, but that I pray
unto God, that both you and I, and all them that shall read this Book, may
profit by it, by the assistance of his holy Spirit, to the furthering of their
salvation, to the glory of his Name, through Christ Jesus our Lord: in
Christian love I take my leave,

JOHN WELLS.
October 22. 1638.
The Authors admonition to the Reader.
I Do right well understand, Christian Reader, that many learned men have
hertofore written and set forth many excellent works touching religion:
whereupon it may seem, perhaps, a matter both vain and superfluous for me to
travel any further therein, for as much as it is beyond all hope, that any of
my doings can be comparable or near so good, as that which is already done by
others: but like as I think their travel and labor in holy exercises well
bestowed, which have written therein before me; so shall not I mislike them
neither, which shall enterprise to do any thing in the like case after me:
the very endeavor it self, being good, is always to be born withal, and not
to be misliked: such is my judgment of the writings of others, therefore I
stand in this hope, that others also may judge the like of mine; because they
may all turn the diligent Reader unto some profit, if it be reverently used,
and may much profit all faithful Christians, toward the understanding of holy
Scriptures, and the exercise of godly life, it may so fall out that those
points which be to seek, and wanting in this work of mine, may be found in
others. Again, it is possible that some things which be not once touched by
any one of my Authors, may be found expressly noted down by me: and, that matter
by them handled in their works is somewhat intricate, and not in the weak
capacity of simple people to comprehend, for whose Christian good these pains
of mine were principally undertaken: which is by me in a brief and compendious
manner expressed and set down, that the weakest capacity may rightly
understand the true sense and meaning thereof, to the glory of God, and to the
consolation of their own soul. Again, many people that cannot spare much
money, to buy many books of great volumes of sundry Writers, may spare a
little to buy this little tractate, wherein is comprised the substance of their
works tending to my purpose, sufficient to salvation; wherein thou may behold
the back-parts of God thy maker and creator, and see the glory of Christ thy
Savior and mediator, Psalm. 34.8.
and taste of the sweetness and consolation of God the holy Ghost, thy
Comforter and sanctifier, with the duties of Christianity and Humanity, civil
and moral government, with many singular and excellent things of special
note, worthy remembrance. The manner is plain, but the matter is holy,
excellent and heavenly: and if it be heedfully read, rightly understood, and
carefully followed, and effectually applied, it will conduct thee in thy
progress with alacrity, through this vale of tears, this worlds miseries, in
the Scriptures narrow path to heaven, the desired Port, the celestial Canaan;
for this is but our sea, but eternity is our haven: but have a care that thou
do not crowd with the godless multitude in the broad way to hell; Wisd. 5.
take heed, walk charily: for the way is dangerous, craggy, and irksome, full
of windings and turnings out, and many allurements in the way to hinder thy
passage: about the midst of thy progress, in the later end of this first part,
thou shall find the meditation of the description of Hell; which if by faith
unfeigned, and hearty repentance, thou shall escape the danger prescribed; Esaias
40.4.
all difficulties are then removed, Luke 3.5, 6.
the valleys shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill laid low:
whatsoever is crooked shall be made straight, Baruch 5.7.9.
and the rough shall be made plain; go on with a godly and Christian courage,
and thou shall attain to the end of thy progress; but take heed to the first
step of thy youth: for the first step thou set out of the way in thy youth,
thou steppest into the suburbs of Hell; and if thou go on in thy sins to
the next step of thy middle age, thou art at the very brinke; but if thou
perseverest and go on to the next step of thy old age without the mercy of
God, and true repentance, thou art plunged in the very depth of hell, the pit
of perdition, Matthew. 22.13.
the bottomless gulf, the fiery lake; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth; therefore in thy youth have a careful and heedfull care to thy life and
conversation, that thou do not step out of the right way: for if thou be
once out, it is a hard matter to find the way in again, without the grace of
God assist thee, and his providence conduct thee: For the soul of man is
dearly beloved of God her father; yet for her sundry good graces, she is often
and many ways tempted of the devil by three diverse means, In youth with
lechery, in manhood or middle age with pride, in old age with covetousness,
three pernicious sins.
at three several ages in this mortal life; if she resist and overcome the
same, she is thereby adopted to the full fruition of eternal happiness,
through Christ our Lord, which God of his mercy conduct so many as appertain
to his kingdom in the right way to their lives end, and in the end bring them
to the end of their progress, thy everlasting kingdom, the celestial Canaan,
the haven of happiness; now the Lord prosper this work, direct our hearts
aright, and bless the labors of his servants, to the glory of his name,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

Thine in the Lord, JOHN WELLS.

Psalm. 40.12, 11.
I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, but have declared thy
righteousness to the great congregation. Deuteronomy. 32.1.3.
Hear, O ye heavens, and I shall speak, and let the earth hear the words of
my mouth, for I will publish the name of the Lord, and ascribe honor unto our
God. Acts 13.26.
Ye men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham; and whosoever
amongst you fears God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. Psalm. 34.
Come ye children, and hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together. A
perfect Table to find readily all the branches contained and treated of in the
first and second Part of this Book.
OF the Essence of God; what God is in his Essence, and how he is to be
understood in his holy attributes, so far as he has revealed himself in
holy Scripture; for otherwise no man is able to define what God is. page 1 Of
the majesty, greatness and quality of God. page 19 Of divine directions,
declaring the variable state and misery of man, from the time of his creation,
to the time of the Gospel, or the new Covenant of Grace. page 30 Of the
creation of the world. page 34 Of the Angels, their nature, their office, their
fall. page 40 Of man his first beginning. page 51 Of the state of man's
innnocency before his fall. page 58 Of original sin, the fall and apostasy of
man. page 64 Of the Devils trecheries, and how to prevent him. page 74 Of the
moral law of God, the ten commandments. page 77 Of the purity of conscience.
page 89 Of the accusations of conscience. page 91 To avoid security. page 102
Of the knowledge of man's corruption and state of misery in this world, and the
miserable state and condition in the life to come, without we be renovated by
Christ. page 105 Of the meditation of the misery of the body and soul in this
life. page 109 Of the meditation of the misery of man after death, which is the
fullness of cursednesse. page 116 Of the meditations of the grievousnesse of
the torments of Hell. p. 120
The Branches contained in the second part of this Book.
OF the Covenant of the Gospel or the Covenant of grace. page 127 Of the
incarnation of the word, Christ. page 141 Of Christ's Nativity. page 150 Of
Christ Jesus, the sum or compendium of the Gospel. page 154 Of the Cross of
Christ, and his holy sufferings, for our sins. page 164 Of repentance, or
sorrow of the soul for sin. page 168 Of the two Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper. page 182 Of the Lords Supper, the institution of Christ. page 184
Of the preparation to the receiving of the holy Communion of the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ. page 199 Of the ordinance of Christ, concerning the
translation of the holy and blessed Sabbath. page 205 Of Christ's ascension.
page 208 Of the coming of the holy Ghost. page 210 Of the love of God. page
213 Of the properties of Charity, and true love to our Christian brethren. page
217 Of Gods eternal election, and predestination. page 222 Of mortification.
page 234 Of Regeneration. page 246 Of Sanctification. page 255 Of
Justification. page 262 Of Faith. page 267 Of Hope. page 294 Of Patience. page
301 Of Prayer. page 313 Of Afflictions. page 326 Of general rules directing a
Christian in a godly life. page 336 Of Gods glory. page 347 Of the uncertainety
of man's life, and the expectation of death. page 351 Of temporary death, and of
the several state of salvation and damnation. page 355 Of a sweet
contemplation of the beatificall joys of Heaven, and of heavenly things* and
the blessed state of a regenerated Christian. page 364 The Conclusion. page 373
Esaias 40.3.
A Voice cries in the Wilderness of this wicked world; prepare the way of the
Lord make straight the path of our God in the Desert.

Esaias 58.1.
Cry now as loud as thou can, leave not off, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet,
and show my people their offenses, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Psalm. 36.1.
My heart shows me the wickedness of the ungodly, that there is no fear of
God before his eyes.

Verse. 4.
He imagines mischief upon his bed, and has set himself in no good way,
neither does he abhor any thing that is evil.

Esaias 59.2, 3, 4.
But your mis deeds have separated you from your God, and your sins hid his
face from you, that he hears you not: for your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with unrighteousness: your lips speak leasing, and your
tongues set forth wickedness. no man regards righteousness, and no man
judges truly; every man hops in vain things and imagines deceit,
conceives weakness, and brings forth evil.

Verse. 7.
Their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed innocent blood: their
counsels are wicked counsels, harm and destruction are in their ways.

Ierem. 9.8.
Their tongues are like sharp arrows to speak deceit with their mouth: they
speak peaceably to their neighbor, but privily they lay wait for him.

And like as a net is full of birds, so are their houses full of that which
they have gotten with falsehood and deceit: Ier. 5.27.28.
hereof comes their great substance and riches, hereof are they fat and
wealthy, and are more mischievous then any other; they minister not the law,
they make no end of the fatherless cause, yea they judge not the poor
according to equity.

They are corrupt, Psalm. 53.2, 4.
and become abominable in their doings, there is not one that does good, no not
one.

For though they can say the Lord lives, yet they swear to deceive. Ier. 5.2.


Their throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 14.5.
with their tongues have they deceived, the poison of aspes is under their lips.

Their mouths are full of cursings and bitterness, their feet are swift to
shed blood. Verse. 6.


For when ye have stolen, Ier. 7.9.
murdered committed adultery and perjury, when ye have offered unto Baal,
following strange and unknown gods, shall ye be punished.

Have they no knowledge that they are all such workers of mischief, Psalm.
14.7, 8.
eating up my people, as it were bread? destruction and unhappiness is in
their ways, and the way of peace have they not known.

Should I not punish these things, Ier. 5.29.
says the Lord, should I not be revenged of all such people as these be?

Hear thou earth also, behold I will cause a plague to come upon this people,
Ier. 6.19.
even the fruit of their own imaginations, for that they have not been
obedient unto my words and to my law, but abhorred them.

Psalm. 28.4, 5.
Reward them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their
own inventions, recompense them after the works of their hands, and pay them
that they have deserved.

Eccles. 8.11.
Because now that evil works are not hastily punished, the heart of man gives
himself over unto wickedness.

Esaias 5.14.
Therefore gapeth hell mavelous wide, that their glory, multitude, and wealth,
with such as rejoice in her shall descend into it.

Thus has a man a fall, and is brought low; and the high looks of the proud
shall be cast down: Verse. 15. Psalm. 36.12.
there are they fallen all that work wickedness, they are cast down, and
shall not be able to stand.

To the Reader.
IF thou would understand the Deity;
Behold the mystery of the holy Trinity:
An Essence divine, eternal, infinite is he,
Spiritual, and of wonderful magnanimity,
Of power, of might and majesty,
Of goodness, greatness and excellency,
Of glory, continuance and quality;
And is perfectly good unchangeably,
From everlasting and perpetually,
And is every where present repletively,
Essentially, potentially and vertually,
Which is seen by his admirable works apparently,
With our eyes and mind continually,
From age to age universally.
This Almighty God incomprehensible,
Omnipotent, invisible and incomparable,
Immortal, incorruptible and unspeakeable,
Dwells in light inaccessible;
And is coequall, coessentiall and coeternall,
Of one substance, immutable and unsearchable.
This high blessed Heavens Creator,
Is the earths creatures Conserver,
Increaser, nourisher, repairer and governor
By his omnipresent power.
Although he dwells in Heaven principally;
Yet he is, and dwells on earth effectually;
In the faithful his elect especially,
In his wisdom, grace and mercy.
Therefore be praised evermore the Trinity,
Father, Son and holy Ghost in unity;
This to believe is godly charity,
Saving faith and holy piety;
For speaking of Gods simple verity,
Naught more beseemes then true simplicity.
If further thou would understand his Majesty.
Go in, behold and see his excellency;
For what I know of his all-knowing worth,
With single heart I have simply here set forth;
Thus wishing that my labors may,
To heavens rest thy soul convey.
No attributes can sufficiently express the essence of God, but the attributes
which be given unto God, be taken out of the usage of men's speech, and so
applied unto the nature of God, to the end that those things which cannot be
properly expressed by any tongue nor language, may yet at the least wise be by
the figures of men's speeches in some sort shadowed; whatsoever therefore is
spoken of God, is so in God, as it serves to help our weak understanding, to
conceive in our reason, and to utter in our speech, the majesty of his divine
nature, quality and essence; for of himself he is infinite and ineffable, in
his essence, might, power, and working.

THE SOVLES PROGRESS TO THE Celestial CANAAN.
Of the Essence of God, and how he is to be understood in his holy Attributes
so far as he has revealed himself in holy Scriptures; for otherwise no man
is able to define what God is.
ALL men are by a certain instinct of nature desirous of knowledge, and
account ignorance evil and unseemely: like a defective body or lightlesse
house: for knowledge is the eye of the mind: the light of the soul: the
ornament of grace and nature: and is a collection of understanding, gathered in
the grounds of learning; by the instruction of wisdom: Eccles. 1.
she is the exercise of memory, in the actions of the mind; and the imployer
of the senses in the will of the Spirit: and such Riches, as will swim with
the master, when he suffers shipwreck; and sees his whole estate sink before
his eyes: Now the more excellent a thing is, the more worthy it is of our
knowledge: for it is discommendable and uncomely for anyman to be ignorant of
himself; especially of the causes, the means and manner of his eternal
Salvation and Redemption from horrible and intolerable Misery. To further this
knowledge, my purpose is, out of the Scriptures, and by the help of sundry
learned and orthodoxall Writers, briefly to show and set forth how God is to be
understood: and so we shall, as in a glass behold, what course the Lord has
in his wisdom taken to manifest his grace unto us: and to make us partakers
of his glory.

3 Means to know that there is a God.
Touching this matter; there are three ways whereby God does manifest and open
himself to the knowledge of man: the first way, and most general, consists
in his working, where the Majesty of God sets himself to be seen in all
his works throughout the compass of all the world, in Heaven as well as in
the earth: Romans 1.20.
this way is most general, because it is so set forth to all people of all
Nations; that no man can excuse himself for not knowing God. Verse. 19.
It cannot be denied but that there is in us a certain quickness of
understanding and strength of reason, Wisd. 13.
as might be the eye of our mind, whereby we may know in Gods Works, God
himself the worker thereof: but unless the brightness for the works of God
were so great, that they did set forth the Majesty of the worker to be seen
throughout all the earth, our reason should have had no cause or means to have
known that there had been a God. Therefore the first cause of our knowledge
of God, is attributed to the light and brightness of the Works of God;
whereby the Philosophers did acknowledge the Majesty of the invisible God, Romans
1, etc. How the Philosophers knew God by his Works.
as the Apostle witnesses. For first they did observe in the Works of God, an
exceeding great Majesty; an infinite multitude; a wonderful variety, a most
constant order; a seemly agreement; an endless continuance; a pleasant
vicissitude, or intercourse of things coming and going: briefly, Wisd. 13.
such wisdom in creating, governing and bestowing of things; and in
conserving of them such power and might, that they could ascribe the whole
workmanship of all things, Heavenly and earthly, to no other nature, but to
the Nature of God. Besides this, they tasted indeed of the wonderful goodness
of God, by the infinite number of commodities growing unto them, both from
Heaven and earth, which the Apostle rehearses saying: Acts 14.17.
Verily he left not himself without witness, doing good and helping them
from Heaven, giving rain, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with
food and gladness. Thirdly, they felt a mavelous terror of lightning,
earthquakes, Math. 24.
pestilences, gapings of the ground, strange sights and apparitions from
Heaven, in the Sun, Moon, Stars and Comets, the fore-shewers of great
mischiefs and slaughters: and withal that the prophesies of things to come,
such as were Sibyls, Job. 37. Job 38.
and of the Prophets were so certain and true, that they plainly pass the
limits of man's foreknowledge, and proved the power of the Godhead to govern
all things in the world.

They that be so unfaithful and gross, Some believe nothing but what they
see with their eyes, as the Stoics and Epicures.
that they cannot apply their understanding and credit to things invisible, be
so affected for the most part, that they believe nothing neither of the life,
felicity and glory of Heaven; neither of the angels, spirits and devils of
hell: because they suppose there is nothing farther and besides that which is
seen with our eyes; and so they acknowledge not God in their hearts, for that
he is not seen: neither, they consider not that there be also some other
things invisible, which for all they see them not, yet they cannot deny them to
be: who ever saw a voice? who has seen the wind? who ever saw a savor?
these things indeed are invisible, but yet notwithstanding, no man of any
perceivance, will deny them to be: and whereby are they judged to be? but by
the perceivance of their efficacy and working: the voice is not seen, yet is
it heard: the wind is not seen, yet is it perceived by feeling; and his
working and violence, in that which it brings to pass: a savor is not
seen, but by smelling is perceived most effectually: who ever saw at any time
his soul? The faculties of the soul.
yet no man is so unwise to deny that his soul is within him, by whom he
perceives he has life; sight and hearing, smelling, feeling, tasting, and
power to move from place to place: who ever saw his own mind? and is there
any man so void of reason, that he will say, he has none, because he sees
none? and yet thereby conceives, understands, and judges: no man ever saw
the power of his will and heart, God is known by his creatures and workings.
yet there is no man but perceives he has such a power, whereby he loves,
hates, desires and envieth, mourns and rejoices: Romans 1.20, 21.
why judge we not likewise of God? he is indeed invisible of himself, but
through his working virtue, and goodness he declares himself, so that the
mind of man, except it be altogether blinded, may easily judge by the godly
works, that there is a God, by whom all things are made, and by whom all is
governed; so that any man of understanding must needs grant that he does not
understand God in his mind, by his works only, but also that he sees him
with his eyes, Job 13.1, etc.
hears him with his ears, and perceives him in his smell and feeling; and
the faithful man surely makes trial of God even in his taste, Psalm. 34.8.
so the Prophet says, Taste and see how sweet the Lord is. Unless Honey be
tasted, ye cannot know how sweet it is; even so, unless you taste of God, ye
shall not know how sweet he is; the taste of his sweetness is the
understanding of his goodness perceived by faith.

The second way whereby God does manifest himself unto men, consists in the
Word, God is known also by his Word.
for so God has opened himself to our fathers, by word and speaking, even
from the beginning of the world, until the days of the new Testament, whereof
the Apostle speaks, saying, Hebr. 1.1, 2, 3.
Diverse and many ways has God spoken to our fathers by the Prophets; but last
of all, he has spoken unto us by his Son: this is a special way: for it
happened not so to every Nation; as it did by a special grace happen to the
Israelites: Psalm. 147.
he that declared his Word to Jacob, his Righteousness and his Judgments
unto Israel, he did not so unto all nations; and yet this Word, and Christ
also, is the only Son of God.

The third way is by inspiration, God is opened to the Elect by inspiring.
and the secret revelation of the holy Spirit, and this is called most special
for a difference from the other two, that be indifferent to good and evil; and
this may pertain to the elect only, who beside the light of works, and the
declaration by word, gets almost certain knowledge of God, yet rather a
feeling, and a taste of him, Ephesians. 3.5.
by the lively and effectual inspiration and revelation of the holy Spirit of
God; by these three ways man may certainly know there is a God.

What God is in his Essence, and how to be understood in his holy Attributes?
Secondly, it seems that this question has troubled many men's minds; also,
who it is that is God: Certainly known by so many manifest and many
testimonies of godly works: Further, to know what God is; God is a divine
Essence, and Incomprehensible, Immutable, Indivisible, Impassible,
Incorruptible, Immortal, 1 Timothy 6.16. 2 Cor. 3.17.
Unspeakable, perfect and everlasting, dwelling in Inaccessible light,
spiritual and infinitely perfect; whose being is from eternity to eternity.
In the Godhead there are three divine persons, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; these three persons are not three several substances, but three
distinct subsistences, or three diverse manner of beings; of one and the same
substance and divine essence; so that a person in the Godhead, is an
individual understanding, and incommunicable subsistence, absolute of it
self, and not sustained by any other.

The persons in this Mystery, or divine Essence, are but three: there is
another, and another; but not another thing, and another thing: the divine
Essence in it self is neither divided nor distinguished; but the three persons
in the divine Essence are distinguished amongst themselves by their names, Mat.
11.27. Mat. 3.17. Esaias 63.16. Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
by their order, and by their actions: in this manner: the first person of the
glorious Trinity, is named the Father, first in respect of his natural son
Christ: secondly, in respect of the elect; his adopted sons, not by nature,
but by grace: Christ the son is the second person of the glorious Trinity;
and the only begotten son of his Father, not by grace, but by nature; Hebr.
1.3. Esaias 36.10. Ioh. 20.21, 22. 1 Pet 1.15. and These. 1.2.
the third person is named the holy Ghost; first, because he is spiritual
without a body, secondly, because he is spired, and, as it were, breathed,
that is, proceeds from them both; because he is holy in his own nature, and
the immediate Sanctifier of all Gods elect people.

Hence it is, that for as much as the Father is the fountain and original of
the Trinity, the beginning of all eternal working; the name of God in
relation, and the title of Creator in the Creed, Ioh. 14.1.
are given in especial manner to the Father, our Redemption to the Son, and
our sanctification to the Person of the holy Ghost, as the Immediate agents of
these actions. Romans 8.3, 4. 1 Cor. 15.24.


This divine order excepted, there is neither first nor last, neither
superiority, nor inferioritie among the three persons: for nature, they are
coessentiall: Ioh. 1.1.
for definitie, coequall: and for time, coeternall: For the essence does not
beget an essence, but the person of the Father, begets the person of the
Son, Ioh. 5.19.
and so he is God of God, and has from his Father the beginning of his person
and order, Romans 8.9.
but not of essence and time: And the holy Ghost proceeds equally from both
the Father and the Son, by an eternal and incomprehensible spiration: for,
as the Son receives the whole divine essence by generation; so the holy
Ghost receives it wholly by spiration: Romans 11.36.
But because the Father created, As Redemption. Act. 20.28. and Sanctification.
and still governs the world by the Son, in the holy Ghost; therefore these
external actions are indifferently, in the Scripture often times ascribed to
each of the three persons; and therefore are called Communicable and divided
actions; 1 Pet. 1.23.
so that when we say that the divine essence is in the Father unbegotten, in
the Son begotten, and in the holy Ghost proceeding, we make not three
essences, but only show the diverse manner of subsisting; by which the same
most simple, eternal and unbegotten essence subsisteth in each person, namely,
that it is not in the Father by generation, that is in the Son communicated
from the Father by generation, and in the holy Ghost communicated from both the
Father and the Son, by proceeding. These are incommunicable, and do make not
an essential, accidental or rational, but a real distinction, betwixt the
three persons: And because the divine essence common to all the three persons,
is but one; we call the same Unity: But because there be three distinct
persons in this one indivisible essence, we call the same Trinity: So that this
Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is a holy Mystery, rather to be
religiously adored by faith, Job 11.7.
then curiously searched into by reason.

That God is one in Trinity
1. These things be manifest, and must with a simple and clear faith be
believed: that God is one in essence, nature, Godhead, will, moving and
working, three in three persons, of which every one has several subsistence
and property; which for all that be so in God, that the Essence, Nature,
Godhead, Majesty, working, will, power, honor, and continuance for ever is
common to them all, all coessentiall, all coeternall; The Appellations of the
persons.
for we see that these three persons are called in holy Scriptures, God, the
Word, the Spirit, but more plainly by Christ, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Spirit.

Matthew. 28.19.
We see that the faith of this holy Trinity is not meant to be three Gods, but
three unsearchable subsistences or persons in one true God, set forth to man
for the better knowledge of Christ, his only begotten Son, and for the increase
of his glory, according to the measure of his revelation: A Similitude.
For, as two diverse and sundry natures joined together in one man, do not make
two men, but both do still conserve the unity of one person, so that it
remains still one man, made of soul and body, why then should it not sink
into our heads, that three subsistences in one God, neither in being, neither
in nature be diverse, but altogether equal and even, do not let but that the
unity of God remains still one.

A Similitude of the Sun.
Who is so weak of judgment, or so foolish of understanding, to believe that
there are three suns, being indeed, but one, because there is three qualities
or effects in the sun: First, as it were, a fountain of light, Note.
never ceasing: Secondly, the clear shining brightness which comes thereof:
Thirdly, the heat breathing out and proceeding from them both: The similitude
of man.
who is so mad to determine or Imagine, that a man has three spirits, because
there are found three, as it were diverse substances, the soul, the mind, and
the will: the soul whereby man lives and moves; the mind whereby he
understands, judges and discerns: the heart or will whereby he wills or
wills not, hates or loves, is sorry or glad, becomes good or evil? these
things are manifestly found in our selves: whereby we may be led as by the hand,
to know the one and true God in this holy Trinity of Persons, and in Trinity a
perfect unity of Godhead; how may it be rightly understood, Job 11.7.
how the soul breeds the mind, and how the will comes of them both? By
what way then can we understand the divine birth of the Word of God; and the
proceeding of the holy Spirit? thus in brief I thought meet to note,
concerning this question, what God is: for the simpler sorts sake, to the
intent they may understand how far forth the use thereof may do them good
that be desirous to apply their knowledge and understanding to God, to the
study of true godliness, and not unto curiosity. John 1.1, 2, etc.
And take this by the way, that as the natural son of man, is naturally man;
so is the natural Son of God naturally God, and of one Essence with his
Father; but this knowledge of the holy Trinity, was somewhat hidden till the
revelation of the Word that took flesh. When the holy Spirit began more
especially to work, then this mystery of the Trinity in God was openly set
forth by Christ, when he said; Go teach all People, Math. 28.19. The
revelation of the holy Trinity.
baptising them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
and then conferred his grace upon them, whereby the ministry of the holy
Trinity began to be opened unto the world; should be a manifest witness to
the people; that whosoever should be received into that grace, should in the
Sacrament of the first admission, confess themselves to be sanctified in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Thus far of the
diverse manner of being in the divine essence: Now of the Attributes thereof,
and first of the Nominall.

The Attributes of God are of two sorts: either Nominall or Real. The Nominall
attributes are of three sorts: the first which signify Gods Essence. Secondly,
the Persons in the Essence. Thirdly, those which signify his essential
works. The first is named Exodus 6.3, etc. Exodus 15.3, etc. Psalm. 83.18 Esaias
48.11.
Jehovah, which signifies Eternal being of himself, in whom is being without
all beginning; all other beings both begin and end: he is named Jehovah, not
only in respect of being, and causing all things to be; but especially in
respect of his gracious promises, which without fail he will fulfill in his
appointed time, and so causes that to be which was not before: Esaias 55.7. John
14.2, 3.
and upon our true repentance he will assuredly pardon and forgive us all our
sins, at the time of death receive our souls, and in the resurrection raise
up our bodies in glory to life everlasting: therefore this Name is a golden
pledge unto us, that because he has promised, he will surely perform unto
us.

Exodus 3.14. Verse. 13.
The second Name denoting Gods Essence is Eheieh, but once read, and of the same
root that Jehovah is, and signifies, I am that I am: for when Moses asked God
by what name he should call him, God then named himself, Eheieh Ascher:
Eheieh, I am that I am, or I will be that I will be: signifying that he is an
eternal unchangeable being, and all other creatures are temporary and mutable.
This name in the New Testament is given to our Lord Christ, Apoc. 1.8.
when he is called Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is,
which was, and which is to come: the Almighty: for all time past and to come is
aye present before God. And to this name Christ alludeth, Before Abraham was, I
am: John 8.58.
this Name should teach us likewise, to have always present in our mind, our
first creation, our present corruption, and our future glorification.

The third Name is Jah, Psalm. 112, etc. Psalm. 113.1, 2.3, 4, 5.
which as it comes of the same root, so it is the contract of Jehovah, and
signifies Lord: because he is the beginning, and being of beings. This Name
is ascribed unto God: so when this Name is absolutely given to God, it
answers to the name Jehovah; and so translated by the seventy Interpreters:
for God is so a Lord, that he is absolute of himself, and Lord of all. This
Name should always put us in remembrance to obey his Commandments, to fear
his Judgments, Mala. 1.6.
to submit our selves in all things to his blessed will and pleasure, saying
with Ely, It is the Lord, 1. Sam. 3.18.
let him do whatsoever seems him good.

The fourth is God, 600. times used in the New Testament, which signifies, To
burn or kindle; for God is light, and the Author both of heat, light, and
life, in all Creatures: either immediately of himself, or mediately by
secondary causes; but when it is properly and absolutely used, Note.
it signifies the eternal essence of God, being above all things, and through
all things, and sees all things in all places; giving life and light to all
creatures, and preserving and governing them in their wonderful frame and
order: therefore let us take heed every where what we do in his sight: thus
far of the names which signify the Essence of God.

The Name chiefly which signifies the persons in the Essence, is Elohim.

Elohim signifies the mighty Judges; Genes. 3.22. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
it is a name of the plural number, to express the Trinity of persons in the
unity of Essence: the mighty God, or all the three Persons in the Godhead.
Math. 21.37.
It is derived of Alah, he swore: because in all weighty causes, when
necessity requires an oath to decide the truth, we are only to swear by the
Name of God, which is the great and righteous Judge of Heaven and earth: as often
therefore as we read, or hear this name Elohim, it should put us in mind to
consider that in one divine Essence there are three distinct persons, and that
God is Jehovah Elohim.

Now follow the names which signify Gods essential works, which are these
five especially:

Math. 27.46. Math. 25.31. 2 Chro. 32.8.
The first, El: which is as much, as strong God, and teaches us that God is not
only most strong, and fortitude it self, in his own Essence: but also that
it is he that gives strength and power to all creatures: therefore Christ is
called El Gibbor, the strong, most mighty God: therefore let not Gods children
fear the power of enemies, for El, our God, is more strong then they.

Secondly, Shaddai, that is, omnipotent: by this name God usually styled
himself to the Patriarchs; I am El Shaddai, the strong God Almighty; because
he is perfectly able to defend his servants from all evil, to bless them
with all spiritual and temporal blessings, and to perform all the promises
which he has made unto them for this life, and in the life to come. This Name
belongs only to God himself, and to no creature, no not to the humanity of
Christ. This may teach us with the Patriarchs, to put our whole confidence in
God, and not to doubt of the truth of his promises and the performance thereof.

Thirdly, Adonai, which is, My Lord: this name Analogically is given to
creatures, but properly it belongs to God alone; it notes unto us the
mystery of the holy Trinity: if I be Adonim, Lord, Malac. 1.6.
where is my fear? this name is given to Christ, when he says, Cause thy face
to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate, Dan. 9.17, 18.
for Adonia, the Lord Christ his sake. The hearing of this holy name, may teach
every man to obey Gods Commandments, and to fear him alone, to suffer none
besides him to reign in his conscience, to lay hold by a particular hand of
faith upon his Word and Promises, and to challenge God in Christ to be his God,
saying with Thomas, Thou art my Lord, and my God.

4. Helion, that is most high; this name Gabriel gives unto God, telling the
Virgin Mary, Psalm. 9.2. Dan. 4.17.24.25. Act. 7.48. Luke 1.32.
that the child that should be borne of her, should be the Son of the most
high. This teaches us, that God in his Essence and Glory exceeds infinitely
all creatures of heaven and earth, and that no man should be proud of any
earthly honor or greatness, but to desire true dignity, and to labor to
have communion with God in grace and glory.

5. Abba, signifying Father; Romans 8.15. Esaias 9.5. Jam. 1.17. 2 Timothy 6.16.
for God is Christ's father by nature, and Christians by adoption and grace:
Christ is called the everlasting Father, the prince of Peace, because he does
regenerate us under the new Testament: God is also called father of Light,
because God dwells in inaccessible light, and is the ^^thour, not only of
the sons light, but also of all the light both of natural reason, and of
supernatural grace: this name teaches us, that all the gifts which we
receive from God, proceed from his mere fatherly love, and that we should
love him again as dear children; and that we may in all our troubles be bold
to call upon him as a father for his help and succor; thus should we not
hear of the sacred names of God, but that we should thereby be put in mind of
his goodness unto us, and of our duties unto him; and then we should find how
comfortable a thing it is, to do every thing in the name of God, a phrase
usual in every man's tongue, but the true comfort thereof through ignorance
known to few men's hearts, it is a great wisdom, and an unspeakable matter
for the strengthening of a Christians faith, to know, how in the mediation of
Christ, to invocate God by such a name, as whereby he has manifested himself
to be most willing, and best able to help and succor him in his present need
and adversity. The ardent desire of knowing God, is the surest testimony of
our love to God, and of Gods favor to us. Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my name; he shall call upon me, and I
will hear him, yea, I will be with him in trouble, and deliver him, and bring
him to honor, and show him my salvation. Thus far of the nominall Attributes:

The real Attributes are of two sorts, either absolute or relative: the
absolute Attributes cannot in any sort agree to any creature, but to God alone;
these are two, Simpleness, and Infiniteness.

Simpleness is that whereby God is void of all composition, division,
multiplication, accidents or parts compounding, either sensible or
intelligible; so that whatsoever he is, he is the same essentially: it hinders
not Gods simpleness that he is three, because God is three, not by
composition of parts, but by co-existence of persons. Job 11.8.
Infiniteness is that whereby all things in God are void of all measure,
limitation and bounds, above and beneath, before and after. From these two do
necessarily flow three other absolute Attributes.

Act. 7.48, 49. 1 King. 8.27.
1. Unmeasurablenesse, or Ubiquity, whereby he is of infinite extension, filling
heaven and earth, containing all places, and not contained of any space, place,
or bounds, and being no where absent, is every where present; he is
universally present, repletively every where, inclusively no where; Psalm. 19.1.
by which God is said to be in heaven, because that there his power, wisdom,
Hos. 2.21. Esa. 40.22, etc.
and goodness is in a more excellent manner seen and enjoyed; as also because
that usually he does from thence power both his Blessings and Judgments upon
us.

2. Unchangeablenesse, whereby God is void of all change, both in respect of
his Essence and Will.

3. Eternity, whereby God is without beginning of days, or end of time, and
without all bounds of precession. Thus far of the absolute Attributes: now of
the Relative, or such as have reference to the Creatures:

Those are five: 1. Life. 2. Understanding. 3. Will. 4. Power. 5. Majesty.


1. The life of God is that by which, as by a most pure and perpetual act,
Psalm. 36.9.
he not only lives of himself, but is also that ever and overflowing
Fountain of life, from which all creatures derive their lives, so as that in
him they live, move, breath, and have their being; and because his Life only
differs not from his Essence, therefore God is said only to have Immortality:
the second, Tim. 6.16.
is Understanding or Knowledge of God, and is that whereby, by one pure act, he
most perfectly knows in himself all things that ever were, are, or shall be,
yea, the thoughts and imaginations of men's hearts.

2. This knowledge of God, is either general, by which God knows simply all
things eternally; the good by himself, 1 King. 8.39. Psalm. 139.2, etc.
the evil by the good opposite unto it, imposing, first, things contingent,
the lot of contingence, and to things necessary, the law of necessity; and thus
knowing all things in and of himself, Luke 16.15. Hebr. 4.22.
he is the cause of all the knowledge that is in all, both men and Angels:
secondly, the special knowledge, called the knowledge of approbation, Rom
11.33.
by which he particularly knows, and graciously acknowledges only his
Elect for his own. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Understanding also contains the wisdom of God, by which he most wisely
rules them to serve his own most holy purpose and glory.

3. The Will of God is that whereby of necessity he wills himself, as the
sovereign good, and by willing himself, wills most freely all other good
things which are out of himself; though in it self the will of God be but
one, 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 9.15, 16,
as in his Essence; yet in respect of the diverse objects and effects, it is
called in the Scriptures by diverse names. 17, 18. 1 John 3.1.
The first, Love, whereby is meant Gods eternal good will, whereby he
ordains his Elect to be freely saved through Christ, Psalm. 45.8. Ephesians. 1.11.
and bestows on them all necessary graces for this life, and in the life to
come, taking pleasure in their persons and service. 2 These. 1.6.
The second, Justice is Gods constant will, whereby he recompenseth men and
Angels, 2 Timothy 4.8.
according to their works' punishing the impenitent, according to their
deserts, called the justice of his wrath, Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10.
and rewarding the faithful according to his promise; called the justice of
his grace. The third mercy, Psalm. 145.7, etc.
which is Gods mere good will, and ready affection to forgive a penitent sinner,
notwithstanding all his sins and ill deserts. Mat. 16.18, 19.
The fourth, goodness, whereby God willingly communicates his good, with his
creatures; Psalm. 146.6, etc.
and because he communicates it freely, Numb. 23.19, 20.
it is termed grace. The fifth, truth, whereby God wills constantly those
things which he wills, 2 Pet. 3.9, 10.
effecting and performing all things which he has spoken, in his appointed
time. Romans 2, 4.
The sixth is patience, whereby God willingly forbeares to punish the wicked, so
long as it may stand with his justice; 1 These. 4.3.
and till their sins be ripened. The seventh holiness, Heb. 12.14.
whereby Gods nature is separated from all profaneness, and abhors all
filthiness: 1 Pet. 1.5.
and so being wholly pure in himself delights in the inward and outward
purity and chastity of his servants, Esaias 6.2.3.
which he infuseth into them. The eight Anger whereby is meant Gods most
certain and just will, Psalm. 106.23.29 40, 41.
in chastning the Elect; and in revenging and punishing the reprobate, for the
injuries they offer to him and his chosen, Reve. 19.1, 2.
and when God will punish with rigor and severity, These. 1.1.10.
then it is termed wrath; temporal to the Elect, and eternal to the
reprobate.

Fourthly, Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 115.3. Math. 11.26. Math. 8.2. Ephesians. 1.11. Math.
3.9. and 20.34. Romans 9.17, 18.
the power of God is that whereby he can simply and freely do whatsoever he
will, that is agreeable to his nature, and whereby, as he has made, so he
still rules Heaven, and earth, and all things therein. This almighty power of
God is either absolute, by which he can will and do more than he wills or
does: or actual, by which God does indeed whatsoever he will, and hinders
whatsoever he will not have done, Psalm. 115.3.

Fifthly, Majesty is that by which God by his absolute and free authority,
reigns and rules, Chro 29.11.12 2 Samuel 7.22. Apoc. 5.12.13. Romans 9.15. Luke
19.27. Psalm. 2.9. and 110.1.
as Lord and King over all creatures, visible and invisible; having both right
and propriety in all things; as from whom, and for whom are all things: as
also, such a plenitude of power, that he can pardon the offenses of all, whom
he will have spared; and subdue all his enemies whom he will have plagued and
destroyed; without being bound to render to any creature a reason or account of
his doings; but making his own most holy and just will, his only most perfect
and eternal Law; from all these Attributes arises one, which is Gods
sovereign blessedness or perfection. Blessedness is that perfect and
unmeasurable possession of joy and glory, which God has in himself for ever;
and is the cause of all the bliss and perfection, that every creature enjoys
in his measure.

Of these Attributes we must hold these general rules.
No Attributes can sufficiently express the Essence of God, nor declare what he
is; because he is infinite and ineffable: whatsoever therefore is spoken of God
is not God; but serves rather to help our weak understanding to conceive in
our reason, and to utter in our speech, the Majesty of his divine Nature, so
far as he has vouchsafed to reveal himself unto us in his Word. All the
Attributes of God belong to every of the three Persons, as well as to the
Essence it self; with the limitation of a personal propriety: as, the mercy
of the Father, is mercy begetting; the mercy of the Son, is mercy begotten;
the mercy of the holy Ghost, is mercy proceeding. Again, the essential
Attributes of God differ not from his Essence, because they are so in the
Essence, that they are the very Essence it self; therefore in God there is
nothing to be found, which is not either his Essence or Person: to speak
properly, there are not in God many Attributes, but one only which is nothing
else but the divine Essence it self: but in respect of our reason, they are
said to be many different Attributes; for our understanding conceives by the
name of mercy, a thing differing from that which is called Justice: Gods
essential Attributes are not therefore really inseparable, for the Essential
Attributes of God are not parts or qualities of the divine Essence, nor
accidents in the Essence, as in a subject; but the very whole and entire
Essence of God: so that such Attribute is not an other, and another thing, but
one and the same thing. There are therefore no quantities in God by which he
may be said to be so much, and so much; nor qualities, by which he may be said
to be such and such: but whatsoever God is, he is such and the same by his
Essence. By his Essence he is wise, therefore wisdom it self: by his Essence
he is good, therefore goodness it self: by his Essence he is merciful,
therefore mercy it self: by his Essence he is just, therefore justice it
self, etc. in truth, and in a word, God is great without quantity; good, true,
and just, without quality; merciful, without passion; an act, without motion;
every where present, without fight; without time, the first, and the last; Iam.
1.17.
the Lord of all creatures, from whom all receive themselves, their being, and
all the good they have.

Of the Majesty, Greatness and Quality of GOD.
THe question here is not of any bodily quality, How the question is of Gods
quality, and what manner of thing the quality of God is.
but of the Majesty of God: for he is wonderful, not in body, which he has
not; but in godly Majesty: which appears in his goodness, wisdom, power,
glory, and eternity: the quality of Gods Majesty is such, that it cannot be
expressed, though a man would say, his goodness, his power, his wisdom and
glory is the greatest of all; for these words superlative, because they do
include a certain comparison of other that be good, wise and strong, do agree
better with men than with God, unto whom they cannot be attributed, but so
that they shall seem to diminish his divine Majesty and excellency; chiefly
because he is alone good, alone wise, and alone strong; therefore when we
consider the quality of the goodness, wisdom, strength, glory, and
continuance of God, we must forbear all comparisons, and acknowledge that his
goodness, wisdom, greatness, majesty, power, and glory, is incomparable,
passing great, and his continuance infinite: and this infinite excellency of
Gods goodness we must observe, Romans 1.
and honor in his creation, disposition and providence, wherewith he has
made, disposed and governed all things passing well; chiefly in his loving
kindness, that he sent his Son into the world for our salvation, the
excellency of his strength and power appears in his word, whereby he made
Heaven and earth, and all things of nothing: his infinite wisdom is to be
seen, as well in his creation as in his mavelous ordering of all things. Let
this be sufficient to have touched somewhat pertaining to this matter, now of
the works of God.

After those things that we have briefly noted of the Essence, Persons, Nature
and Majesty of God, the next is to look into his works: for it is best known
by his works, both, that he is, what he is, and of what quality he is, and
how great he is. Wherefore every godly heart, will yield all his endeavor to
look continually into the works of God, with the eyes of faith, that he may
be perfectly instructed by them, what he ought to judge of him: God he works
continually, and without ceasing: Christ says, My Father works even till
now. John 5.17.


God is every where present, both essentially, and potentially, and vertually;
for God is infinite, as well in his Essence, as in his Might, Power, and
Working: For as the Apostle says, Acts 17.24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
God works all in all; for all things be not only of him, and by him, but in
him, and through him also; he is therefore generally present every where, and
in all, and so preserves, directs, and governs all things, but especially
touching his special majesty and glory, he is, and dwells in Heaven; but
by his goodness and grace, he is, dwells and abides in his elect and
faithful people on earth; such as do love and obey him, whom he does
especially love, preserve, defend, and keep; which is called the presence of
his grace. Therefore what surer safeguard can there be unto man, subject to so
many dangers, afflictions, miseries, and calamities, than to have his God
present with him by a certain special grace and favor, but in the wicked and
the ungodly, he is in them in his anger and wrath, Psalm. 78.31, etc.
whom he does abhor as reprobate and cast off. For the presence of him which
is the maker, preserver, For as much as the Essence of God is contained in no
place yet it cannot be said, that it is no where, so that of necessity it is
every where.
and governor of all, cannnot be idle, but works all in all, and with the
power, might, and working of him, all things should lie dead, and to no effect;
so that of necessity, God in his Essence and working is every where; like as
if a man should say of the soul, that it is contained in no certain place of
the body, yet for all that, it is in every place, and in all parts, and does
fill the whole body; so like as if our body were destitute of the operation of
the soul, it were dead, therefore the soul is certainly present in the whole
body, and every part thereof essentially and vertually, but more especially in
the Memory, Will, They are the faculties of the soul.
and Understanding: so every man by his contemplative and imaginary presence
is every where: as when we do set before us as present, Ephesians. 1.18.
those things which by considering we do see within our mind in diligent
contemplation and imagination; and by this we do present unto our minds, both
things far off, past, and to come, 1 Cor. 5.3.
and this spiritual presence is that whereby we be present in spirit, though
far off absent in body. Again, God is present every where in his might,
power and working: For, as an earthly king is royally present in every place of
his kingdom and dominions, by his Officers, Magistrates and Ministers, though
not in his corporal presence, and this kind of presence is more fit and
convenient for the majesty of a king, Eccles. 17.
then if he were every where present in his person; so it is with God, for
though he is, and dwells in heaven principally in his majesty and glory, 1
Cor. 12.6.
yet by his might, Ephesians. 4.6.
power and working, he is every where present on earth, and works all in all,
and through all; for it is not in man's power to order his own ways, or to rule
and govern himself, Jerem. 10.23.
his steps and goings.

It is not here meant, nor determined, that the quality of Gods nature be that
wherein consists the habit, disposition, natural power, or lack of power,
affection, God is three ways to be considered and distinguished, that is to
say, of what quality he is in his Essence, what in Person, and what in Nature.
form, fashion, and the like, which the Logicians consider in quality, but
the same which has his greatest property to distinct the nature of God, which
distinction is made from all others which be made of him, according to the
which, God is of that quality as agrees only to himself, which passes all
things else, not only in excellency, worthiness, and majesty, but also that
by his wisdom, might, power, and great goodness, he makes, governs,
preserves and nourishes all things; for look of what quality the works of
God and the holy Scriptures do set forth and declare him to be, of such
quality we may well say is his nature, for he is such in the quality of his
nature, as he is tried and found to be in his working. Eccles. 8.17.
It is neither necessary or possible, to find and search out exactly the
quality of his majesty and worthiness, Job 11.7, 8.
much less of his Essence, but it is sufficient for the godly man to adore the
Unity of his Essence, and the exceeding and incomprehensible highness of his
Majesty and worthiness in spirit, Wisd. 12.
and to seek the quality of his nature in his works, and in the holy
Scriptures, and so content himself with the testimony of them both. And
thereby, and therein, let him learn, understand and know, that the nature of
God in it self, is to it self all-sufficient in all points, and that it is
everlasting, infinite, unsearchable, incomprehensible, and Almighty, toward
those things which he has made, Jer. 32.20, 21.
and that he has might, power and authority over all things, and rules,
preserves and governs all things that be in heaven, earth and waters; and
that he is good, favorable and loving toward men, gentle, Wisd. 11.
and merciful, foreseeing, and fore-knowing all things, present every where,
slow unto anger, true, wise, just, judging every man rightly, according to
their deserts, which is reported and set forth of him in holy Scriptures; and
thereby we may be assured of what quality Gods nature is. And seeing these
things be peculiar, and natural unto him, and in him, it follows, that they
are perpetual, voluntary, accustomable, and very ready in him, without any
moving cause in us; therefore, when we do consider that universal providence
and sufficiency of God, whereby he provideth for the necessity of all his
creatures generally, that be in heaven, earth and waters, that thereby they may
live, increase and continue, that one and the same God is the bottomless
fountain of all things that be created by him, he his alone sufficient to
all, and whatsoever is in heaven, earth, or waters, is of him, Jam. 1.17.
both whatsoever has, or be without life, heavenly, or earthly creatures, and
living in the waters, reasonable, Colos. 1. Jerem. 32.17, 19, 20, 17.
or unreasonable, having soul, or without soul, is of him all matter,
substance, essence, nature, life, sustentation of life, food, powers,
qualities, both of spirit, soul, or body; all-sight, hearing, understanding, 1
Cor. 12.4.11. Wisd. 13.
wisdom, knowledge, foresight, all strength of imagining, reason, judging,
remembering, loving, hating, desiring, refusing, strength and motion, is of him,
yea, whatsoever things else, which do outwardly happen, or come, either by
Angels, men or beasts, or otherwise is of him: For as Saint Paul says, That
of him, through him, Romans 11.36.
and for him, are all things. The holy Scriptures do manifestly teach, Who can
magnify him so greatly as he is to be magnified?
and almost point out unto us, as it were, before our eyes, not only what, and
of what quality Gods works be, but also what his Spirit, intent and purpose
is toward mankind, wherein, no doubt, the nature of God is sufficiently
declared unto us; wherefore it is needful, and to great purpose, to join the
lessons of the holy Scriptures unto the works of God; for as much as in them
both we are instructed of the nature of God, but the knowledge of his works is
more general unto us: For as much as the visible points of Gods nature, his
everlasting virtue and Godhead may be seen in them, in the understanding of
man's reason, if diligently we consider and ponder them in our hearts; by those
things which have been done, and be daily done by him universally. Psalm.
107.43.
That God through the brightness of his works, does rebound upon the minds
of wise men, and so does open and manifest himself unto them, by the daily
experience which the long and continual order of Gods works does yield and
set forth unto them of understanding, Wisd. 13,
but the knowledge which is obtained and gotten out of holy Scriptures, must
have faith, whereby to credit and believe the testimonies of the holy Spirit.
Thus by experience and faith, the Elect and faithful may to their salvation,
attain to the knowledge of Gods nature, Romans 1.18, etc.
which the Reprobates pervert to their own judgment.

God cannot work, but according to the quality of his Nature.
But he cannot work but according to the quality of his nature, for as one
said, as each man is, such is his saying and doing: which though it be
verified of men, yet it may be better verified of God, and applied to him, then
to man: for man's wit is so perverse, that by counterfeiting, and dissembling,
one may easily deceive and abuse another; having one thing secretly hid in his
heart, when outwardly he says and does the contrary: upon that is grounded the
saying of the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 17.9.
The heart of man is overthwart, and who shall know it? but there cannot be
such a perversity and dissimulation, ascribed unto God: but when he works,
he declares the quality of his nature in his working; so that his works may
be most assured testimonies by which the hearts of the faithful may be
persuaded of his goodness and will: Esaias 28.
and although he seem sometimes to work contrary to his custom, yet that is
done to the intent that it shall come to that end which he has appointed.
This is to work truly and verily according to the quality of his nature, and
to declare openly to the world, the testimony of his good will or anger, by
word and deed.

Now there are five kinds of working. One is, Five kinds of working.
when things be wrought according to the strength of their nature, without any
governance of understanding or will; as in the working of fire, water,
medicinal herbs, precious stones, and such other things, whose working, if
it be guided by any reason or will, it is not their own; but by some outward,
either by Gods or man's directions.

The second kind, is of those things which follows the drift of nature in
their working, but not without their own will: though the mastery of reason be
lacking in them; yet such is their working, that sometimes it is forced against
their will: and so work the bruit beasts.

The third kind, is of men which do also work according to the quality of
their nature, and join theirs unto the governance of reason or will, but wrong
and corrupt: and also subject and under a greater power: either of man, either
of God, and under this is also comprised the working of evil spirits.

The fourth is of good Spirits, which we call Angels: they work also
according to their nature, and that with understanding and will, but without
any depravation thereof: wherein they differ from men, and from evil spirits,
but they are also subject to a superior power, by whom their doings be
directed.

The fifth and last kind of working, is also according to the nature of the
worker, Eccles. 42.15. etc. and 43.
with understanding and will, and that pure and incorrupt, and is not subject
unto the wisdom or will of any superior, but is most free, wise, mighty,
good, and infinite; upon whom all other things depends. This is the working,
of one very God; the beginning, increase, keeping, repairing, the rule and end
of all things: most good, most free, willing, infinite, everlasting, perfect,
needing no other help, No man is able sufficiently to praise God; for he far
exceeds all praise
necessary and profitable: not to the worker, but to the works, whose
incomprehensible ways, infinite multitude and unsearchable consideration no
man may seek to know; whose infinite Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Majesty and
Glory, all Angels and men must have in admiration and worship.

Though the Multitude, Variety, Majesty, and Excellency of the Works of God
be infinite and incomprehensible, that neither the reason, nor number of them
can be comprehended by any man's imagination or industry, Eccle. 8.17.
even as Ecclesiasticus said. Yet among all the Works of God, Among Gods
works, the work of Creation is first.
we ought first to understand the works of the Creation: and herein we must
leave the consideration of those works that are of the Father toward the
Son, and of the Son toward the Father, and of both of them toward the holy
Spirit, and of the holy Spirit toward both of them, which are unsearchable and
not necessary to know, nor belonging to Creation. But it is even enough, if the
creature do acknowledge, honor and glorify the works of his Creator, in
that, that he is the Creator, Encreaser, Conserver, Repairer, Governor, and
Perfecter of all: when we say, the Father created all things, the Word must not
be excluded, neither the holy Spirit; because that by the Word, and with the
Spirit, all things were made and created. When we say, the sun nourishes and
gives light unto the earth, we exclude not his heat, nor his brightness,
without which he does not accomplish his work. Again, when we say, all things
are created of God; we must not include those things that be evil, in respect
they be evil; for they be not of God, John 8.44.
but of satan, the father of all evil: this is the plain description of our
true and only God, from all false gods and idols.

To possess our hearts, with greater awe of his Majesty, whilst we admire him
for his simpleness and infiniteness, adore him for his unmeasurablenesse,
unchangeablenesse and eternity: seek wisdom from his understanding and
knowledge, submit our selves to his blessed will and pleasure; love him for his
love, mercy, goodness, and patience, trust to his word, because of his truth;
fear him for his power, justice, and anger; reverence him for his holiness;
and praise him for his blessedness; and to depend all our life on his
faithful promises, who is the only Author of our life, being, and all the
good things we have. Ephesians. 5.
Let us therefore stir up our selves to imitate the divine Spirit in his holy
Attributes; and to bear, in some measure, the Image of his wisdom, love,
goodness, justice, mercy, truth, patience, zeal, and anger against sin; and
strive that we may be wise, loving, just, merciful, true, patient, and
zealous, as our God is; and that we may in our prayers and meditations,
conceive aright of his divine Majesty, and not according to those gross and
blasphemous imaginations, which naturally arise in men's brains: Psalm. 90.2.
Romans 1 23, etc.
as when they conceive God to be like an old man sitting in a chair, and the
blessed Trinity to be like that tripartite idol, which Papists set up in their
Church windows. When therefore thou art to pray unto God, let thy heart speak
unto him, Psalm. 90.2. 1 King. 8.27. 1 John 5.7.
as unto that Eternal, Infinite, Almighty, Holy, Wise, Just, Merciful Spirit,
and most perfect and individual Essence of three several substances, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; who being present in all places, rules Heaven and
Earth, understands all men's hearts, knows all men's miseries, and is only
able to bestow on us all graces which we want; and to deliver all penitent
sinners, that with faithful hearts seek for Christ's sake his help, out of
all their afflictions and troubles whatsoever.

If therefore thou do believe that God is Almighty, why do thou fear
devils or enemies? Confidently trust in God, and crave his help in all
troubles and dangers; if thou believe that God is infinite, how dare thou
provoke him to anger? If thou believe that God is simple, with what heart
can thou dissemble and play the hypocrite? If thou believe that God is the
Sovereign good, why is not thy heart more settled upon him then on al worldly
goods? If thou do indeed believe that God is a just Judge, how dare thou
live so securely in sin without repentance? If thou do truly believe that
God is most wise, Romans 8.28.
why do thou not refer the events of crosses and disgraces unto him, who
knows how to turn all things to the best, unto them that love him? If thou
art persuaded that God is true, why do thou doubt of his promises? and if
thou believe that God is beauty, and perfection it self, why do thou not
make him the chief end of all thy desires and affections; for if thou love
Beauty, he is most fair; If Riches, he is most wealthy; If thou seek
Wisdom, he is most wise; whatsoever excellency thou have seen in any
Creature, it is nothing but a sparkle of that which is in the Infinite
perfection in God. Application.
Therefore love that one good God, and thou shall love him in whom all the good
of goodness consists; he that would therefore attain to the saving
Knowledge of God, must learn to know him by love; 1 John 4.8. Ephesians. 3.19.
for God is Love, and the knowledge of the love of God passes all
understanding; for all knowledge in the world, besides to know how to love God,
Eccles. 1.2.17.
and to serve him only, is nothing upon Salomons Creed, but Vanity of
vanities, trouble of mind, and vexation of spirit; Kindle therefore in me, my
good God, Charity, Romans 5.9, 10. Joh. 17.3.22. 1 Cor. 15.28.
the love of thy self in my soul, especially, seeing it was thy good
pleasure, that being reconciled by the blood of Christ, we should be brought
by the knowledge of thy grace, to the communion of thy glory, wherein only
consists our sovereign good and happiness for evermore.

Thus by the light of his own Word, we have seen the back parts of Jehovah
Elohim, the eternal Trinity, whom to worship, is true Piety, whom to believe,
is saving Faith and Verity, and unto whom, from all Creatures in heaven and
earth, be ascribed, all Praise, Glory, Honor, Might, Majesty, Power, and
Dominion, for evermore, Amen.

Of divine Directions, declaring the variable state and misery of Man, from the
time of his Creation, to the time of the Gospel or the new Covenant of Grace.
Of the general Knowledge of God.
When first I began to understand of God, I had this imagination, that God was
a general power, within whose circle all things are, without whom nothing, by
whom all things were made, and to whom all men ow their service. This learning
was taught me by the wisdom of my natural soul, and by the common example
of Christians; for all men acknowledge a God, and all Christians their duties;
this is the common knowledge of men, but not the profitable, more commendable
in Philosophers than Christians, being without use, without application; I have
therefore better endeavored my self, and studied to know God, my God, to know
him in his divine nature, in the trinity of persons, and in their offices; for
thus to know, and then to apprehend and apply, is salvation. To know God in his
nature, we must know, His Attributes.
and rightly understand God in his said Attributes; all which may be reduced to
these two generals, Justice, and Mercy, in all which, we must consider him to
be Infinite in wisdom, Infinite in favor, Infinite in power, The Trinity.
and Infinite in time. The Trinity is the distinction of persons, without
denying the substance or nature of God, the Father, Son and holy Ghost;
though they be three distinct in name, they are one in power, without division,
without inequality; the Son begotten as ancient as the Father, the Holy Ghost
prooceeding from them both, is equal with them both; no priority in their
Omnipotency, but all of them being alike able in all things, and always
conspiring one end without discord: The foundation of Religion.
this divine mystery is the foundation of Christian Religion, without which,
there is no faith, no salvation.

It is further necessary to know the Trinity in their several offices; for
though the Godhead be so undivided: as that no one person in the Trinity does
work without cooperation, the Father, Son, Several offices in the Trinity.
and the Holy Ghost, conspiring in every act of every several person, yet in
the wisdom of their own decree, they have determined to the several persons
of the Trinity, several executions of offices, wherein the whole Trinity
conspire, yet some one person in the Trinity has the name of principal;
therefore we say, God the Father made the world, God the Son redeemed it,
God the Holy Ghost does govern it. The creation of the world is ascribed to
God the Father, The Trinity conspire in every work.
yet he made the world, and the works therein by his Word. This Word was God,
the second person in the Trinity, who did cooperate and work with God in the
Creation: the Holy Ghost also moved upon the waters to divide the seas, and
distinguish light from darkness; all of them jointly and severally executing
the decrees of their own divine counsel. Jer. 10.12, 13.
The work of our Redemption, is properly ascribed to the Son, the second
person of the Trinity, who descended from his Majesty; 1 Cor. 5.55.
and in his own person came to make a conquest of sin, hell, and death; The
Holy Ghost does govern the world, the Father and the Son assisting.
yet in this most gracious work, the Father and the Holy Ghost were not
absent, but gave divine assistance to our blessed Savior, Jesus Christ; when
he ascended, left the Holy Ghost to be a patron to the Catholic Church, the
which in all occasions does support every member of the same; yet the Father
and the Son have their hands of providence, at all times working with the
Holy Ghost in this divine government: therefore howsoever they have their
several assignments by themselves appointed, yet they all conspire in every
work of holiness, all of them participating one work, one honor. Thus to
know God is needful for every soul that desires happiness, One labor, one
honor in the Trinity.
or that coveteth to have part in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, without
whom there is no salvation.

God being then of a nature infinitely good, infinite great, it ought to move
in every foul a double affection, Men ought to live in Gods imitation.
love, and fear; to fear him, because he can destroy, to love him, because he
will not: It ought also to provoke all men to an imitation of God; that such,
to whom God has given greatness, they use it with moderation of mercy, which
only is able to make the great good, and the honorable in place, honorable
in condition: for as God is, so good men, their souls are his images, and
their actions his imitations. Again, God is a power, distinguished in three
persons, the power is not divided, every person in the Deity equal and in just
comparison, all of them but one God, and every person God, all of them
conspiring the same ends from eternity to eternity; this ought, but is not the
condition of men: Princes, and the great on earth, Psalm. 82.6.7.
are called gods, these ought like God to combine themselves in holy action,
and to bend their power against the enemies of God and man, sin, and the
sinful, and not with implacable displeasure, Such are merely politic and
respect greatness, without goodness.
to destroy themselves and their estates, with civil disagreements; for though
God say, they are gods, he says they shall dye like men; and if evil men,
they are then no gods, but devils, enemies to God, enemies to the good; and as
in the nature of God, mercy does triumph, and has pre-eminence; Mercy the best
proof of goodness.
so in all the godly, there should be a gracious pity, with which they ought
to be most affected, and God himself best pleased.

When I had thus considered the nature of God, his Omnipotency, his Mercy, and
other Attributes; The cause is every man's duty.
it caused me to question my own life, and to search the records of my own
actions, whereby I understood the truth of my miseries, that I was guilty and
deserved death and torments, Man's desert.
as if the Justice of God had given sentence against me: then was the
knowledge of Gods Majesty a terror unto me: I conceived in my fear the very
forms of his indignation, and I began to feel in my soul the very terror of
condemnation, as if God had given sentence, Mercy gives hope in greatest
extremity.
and my soul in the sense of execution. In this astonishment I remembered
mercy, and that God was so delighted in the use thereof, as that he carefully
watches cause and opportunity to give it: Acknowledgment most necessary.
I did therefore acknowledge and submit my self to favor, God did descend his
greatness, accepted my acknowledgement, and gave me the allowance of his
mercy: then I reduced to memory what my Savior had done for the Redemption of
mankind, The promises only belong to the faithful and penitent.
what he had promised the faithful, what the penitent; I believed, received
strength, and had my hope established, and growing bold with these
encouragements, I desired and obtained the Son of God, to restore me; the
Spirit of God, to continue me restored, reformed: How to judge of good and
evil.
then could my soul receive content in divine meditations, then could I
despise the profits of the earth, and the vain pleasures of men; then could I
justly value the honors of this life, weigh them with vanity, and esteem them
lighter; then could I discern virtue in poverty, and holiness in a
contemptible degree of fortune: The benefit of patience.
then I could see the patient bear their load with alacrity, and secretly
scorn at the base estimation of the earth. Thus a reformed Judgment can teach
to know and love, know and hate: let me love and be beloved of God; let me
hate, and be hated of the World.

These and many other things attributed to God in Scriptures teach us, of what
manner his Nature is: that is to say, good, loving, kind, merciful, faithful,
true, upright, just, liking the humble, and abhorring the proud, The things of
nature in God be everlasting
slow to revenge, wise, and foreseeing; and being so, not by other help, nor
by chance, but naturally and of himself; it follows that the like nature
must for ever and unchangeably keep in him: which thing brings unto the
faithful an incredible comfort. But in case we find any other in him than
this, we must understand that it is by some special sufferance, and only for
a time; and yet for all that, the quality of his Nature in no point altered,
though some time he seems contrary to himself: Psalm. 18.
but that is, to the ungodly perverse, and to the destruction of them; but the
good and godly find him always such as his nature is. The fire at Babylon
seemed to have lost his nature, A similitude.
when it saved harmless the three Children cast into the Oven; but yet it
used the strength of his nature toward them, Dan. 3.20. etc.
which made the fire: even so, we must think of God, and always mark what
he does by sufferance, to punish the malice of the wicked, and what also he
does according to the quality of his Nature. Romans 11.33.
O the deepenesse of the riches, of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God: how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Of the Creation of the World.
THe Creation of the World, has been the admiration of all men that knew not
God, nor believed Scripture; Wisd. 13.
because their understanding was darkened, wanting divine light, they were not
able to comprehend the knowledge of so high a secret. Therefore the
Philosophers have vainly and diversely disagreed in their several
constructions of the beginning of the World, The vain opinion of Philosophers.
some denying that the World ever had beginning, but that it was derived by the
power of nature, from all eternity, and eternal perpetuity: to maintain which
absurdity, they would demand how God made the world, what instruments he used
in the building of so wonderful a frame: and withal holding that God could
work no otherwise, then the order and means of secondary causes would bear
and lead him unto. But the truth is, God is free in operation.
God is free in operation, and not tied to any second cause, or secondary
means, without which he can do what he will, and that which he does by them,
and can alter and change them at his pleasure: wherein may appear their gross
misunderstanding of God his Nature, that he, like man, If we cannot conceive
Gods wonderful works, much less his unsearchable wisdom.
could not work without the help of means and instruments. Others more true,
more learned, concluded that of necessity, the World must have a beginning, and
that there was a Power Eternal, which made, moved and governed all things: and
the reason that the World was not eternal, had this sufficient argument, That
the World did suffer detriment and decay in it self, and the Elements had lost
the purity of their nature which they had in the beginning: the moving of the
spheres and celestial bodies, which of all things in the World are most
constant, had endured some alteration: so that nothing in the World, All
worldly things subject to alteration.
but did suffer a change, which could not be if it were eternal. This grounded
reason did convince the common opinion of the Worlds eternity, and did prevail
with them that could not be persuaded but by the power of reason. This is not
to persuade Christians, but infidels and epicures, The judgment of reason.
that they who deny the judgment of Divinity, may be judged by reason, and the
wisdom of nature, which alone is able to convince all oppositions and
gainsayers: but to Christians I will only set forth what God says, for that
may serve to inform and satisfy all and every faithful Christian; Genesis 1.1.
etc.
Moses the servant and witness of God Almighty, being inspired by the holy
Ghost, has left recorded to all posterities the manner of the Creation of the
World, The scripture is only able to satisfy all doubts.
to which authority, not only my self, but every faithful Christian does
confidently adhere, utterly disclaiming all contradiction, all diversity of
opinion.

In the Creation is principally considered, the Creator God; and the creatures
the works of Gods Creation. In the Creator is considered, his power, his
purpose: his power, in being able by his word to finish such a work of
admiration: his purpose, The world was made for man, and man for God.
not that he needed any such thing that he had made, to supply any defect in
his Divinity; but for the use of a creature, man, which afterward he was to
make; to whom he gave the Heavens, the earth, and all the host of them for the
service of man; reserving only man for the service of himself. In the
creatures is considered, their original or matter of their creation: The
matter of the creation.
for some things he made of nothing, some of fire, some of air, some of earth,
some of water, some of flesh, of nothing he created the Heaven, the Earth, and
the Sea, whereunto as is supposed, may be joined the heavenly Spirits, but
under correction of others; of earth he made and shaped the first man Adam our
father: also of the earth he made beasts, and all kind of plants, and herbs:
of the air he made wind, and blasts: The order God observed.
of the waters he created fish, and foul; of flesh he created Eve, the first
mother of our kind. Next the order wherein they were created: this original
was nothing, for God created all things by the power of his Word, without
matter; there being nothing whereof to make any thing: the order observed in
the creation was, that God determined the World, and the works therein for the
service of man, would, before he made man, store the World, man's mansion house,
with very needful providence; that man, at the very instant of his beginning,
might know himself to be in the fullness of Gods favor, nothing wanting which
might either administer to him profit, pleasure, or serve his necessity.
Again, in the creatures themselves God observed a special order: First, he
created light, without which the works of his greatness had not been
visible. Secondly, he created Heaven, giving that priority, Apoc. 4.11. Of the
Celestial bodies.
for the excellency and dignity of the place. Next he made a separation of the
Earth and Waters, and gave the Earth a generation of all Plants and Trees
bearing good seed. Then he placed in the Firmament the Planets, and fixed the
Stars, and Celestial bodies: the which serve not only for light, to
distinguish times and seasons; but also by their influence, for the generation
and government of all living creatures. Then God furnished the two elements of
Water and Air, with creatures of that kind. Last of all, he stored the Earth
with the creatures which live on that element; and when he had finished the
creation of all things, he then made man after his own similitude, and gave
him the possession of the World, and the creatures he had made; giving him
interest in all, and power over all, without exception of any. This knowledge
of the Creation is necessary in the understanding of every Christian of
careful conscience: with which knowledge the less learned may satisfy
themselves, avoiding the curious search of such nice questions, as may distract
the simple, and avail not unto salvation.

The knowledge of the power of God in creating the World does admonish and
remember all men, that seeing God created all things by the power of his word:
The maine interest of all things is in God.
therefore the maine interest and principal claim to all things created,
remains to God only, he being the absolute owner, without competitor; and how
man has only the use and communication thereof, and that only with condition
and limitation of time; Note.
it does also persuade a reverence to the Majesty of God, and a fear of his
displeasure; for that God, who is able by his Wod to create of nothing any
thing, is able also by his Word to destroy any thing, and make it nothing, or
worse than nothing. The purpose of the creation of the world by God, being for
the use and service of man, does remember all men, that the measure of the love
of God to mankind is infinite, The infinite measure of Gods love.
who of his own election, did please to make a Creature of such nobleness, as
to be called his Resemblance and Image, giving him a soul of such divine
nature, as nothing but God can be more, Every thing created, is either for use
or ornament.
for whose sake God made the world, and stored it with the plenty of all things
which might (...) fit either for use or ornament; all which God has given man,
only requiring acknowledgement and thankful service, which condition if man
perform, God will then a thousand-fold double his favors, and whereas these
are but transitory and passible pleasures; God will make them eternal, and
unexpressable, both in number and worth; John 1.
for he that proves a faithful servant, God will make him a son, and crown
him with the glory of his Saints in the kingdom of glory, where there is a
perpetuity of all happiness. Again, the purpose of Gods creating the world
for the use of man, Man must use Gods Creatures with reverence and moderation.
does admonish all men to use the Creatures of God with moderation, reverence
and Christian judgment; not to despise them, because they are Gods Creatures;
not to adore them, because they are but Creatures, but so to use them, as they
may supply that purpose for which God created them.

Thirdly, seeing God created the world for mankind in general, it does
remember us, not to appropriate the Creatures of God to our own private ends,
but to communicate the use of them, with all such as shall need them; for God
gave not the world to Adam only, but to his posterity also; therefore every
man is lawfully interested in the enjoying of Gods Creatures, Matthew. 25. God
gave the world to mankind in general, and not to any particular.
if by lawful and allowable means he can attain them. Again, if a
Christian man's necessity require relief and favorable supportation, he has
a righteous claim to some part of the superfluous possessions of others, and
he that shuts up his compassion against such necessity is guilty of
injustice, and must answer the fault at the bar of death; for God he makes
his Sun to shine upon all indifferently, and he has given the world, and
the Creatures therein to mankind generally, and not to one man, one family, or
one kingdom; this may both teach and judge the merciless, who can see, and
not relieve the extremities of men, distressed men their brethren.

The meditation of this power, of this love of God, in creating a world of
Creatures for the service of man; and seeing it has pleased him to make a
reasonable soul, and a sharer of these infinite blessings, I have resolved
with my self, to declare my self in all dutiful demonstrations to my God,
and to use the Creatures he has given me with moderation as he has
commanded. I have made a covenant with my soul, that I will not appropriate
that to my private, which God has made common. If God give me abundance, I
will open my liberality; Luke 16.2. How to employ Gods Talents.
I will give as God does, to all, but carefully to the wants of faithful men
distressed; I will remember, that what I have, I must use, what I use not, I
must bestow, lest Gods talents be without employments, and so God discharge me
of trust; if God give me wisdom and knowledge more then some others, I will
not be silenced, How to occasion an holy meditation.
I will not obscure the grace and gift of God, I will not deny my God, I will
not deny the world my service; but in whatsoever God shall enable me, in that I
will be industrious, if I can do nothing of desert, or common profit, yet will
I spend my hours in holy meditation; I have resolved I will still travel in
holy exercise; when I cannot profit generally, I will pray generally: we are
all the Creatures of one God: the Word of God gave form to every Creature;
therefore every thing that presents my eye, shall move my holy meditations.
When I shall behold the wonderful frame of heaven, I shall revise on the
creation, and admire God his Mercy, his Majesty; I shall remember the
happiness of heaven, and refresh my self in adversity with hopeful
confidence. Where to repose our confidence.
When I consider the earth, I shall remember the baseness of my beginning,
what I was in sin, what I am in grace; this shall teach me to deny my self,
and wholly to depend on the favor of my God. When I see unreasonable, noisome
and evil Creatures, I shall have cause of acknowledgement; for God might have
made me so, or worse. Lastly, when I shall see wicked men pride themselves in
their vanities, Pity can respect our enemies.
I shall both pity and glory; pity the misery of their souls, and glory in the
fortune of my own; and thus, with these, and such meditations, my soul shall
breath content.

Of the Angels, their Nature, their Office, their Fall.
Moses of purpose did leave to speak any thing of the creation of Angels,
because of the disposition of the people bent to Idolatry. It is supposed, they
were Created the first day of the Creation, as appears, Job 38.
THat the Angels were created, is most certain, the time of their creation is
not certain, but doubtfully and diversely believed; many men have spent their
judgments in conjectures, all such are more curious than wise, because the
truth thereof cannot certainly be determined; neither if it could, the
knowledge thereof were not necessary or material to salvation; for whatsoever
knowledge is necessary for the happiness of our souls, is by God himself
taught in the testimony of holy Scriptures. This knowledge of the time of the
creation of Angels, being not taught by God, does make the search thereof
unprofitable, unlawful; for God does nothing at peradventure, but all things
in judgment, and with the advice of his divine wisdom; God having denied this
knowledge, does forbid the search of this unknown, unprofitable knowledge;
that which I desire to know, which I desire to make known, is contained in the
testimony of holy Scriptures, the which denying me this knowledge of the
creation of Angels. I forbear to search the knowledge of Gods secrets, and
rather to be thought ignorant, than audaciously bold with forbidden knowledge.

That which is needful to be known of Angels, is their nature, their office:
in their nature must be considered, what they are in substance, what in
quality; they be heavenly and invisible Creatures, pure and spiritual, of the
substance and nature of our souls, eternal in respect of ending, without
corruption: in their quality, is considered their power, being at all times,
and upon all occasions, able and ready to perform the excution of Gods
service; their office is, that they are Gods messengers, their employment is
either in Judgments or Mercies; this Compendium is the knowledge of them all
in general, The good and evil Angels were all created in one nature.
before the fall and apostasy of Angels. The Angels, and those that now are
devils, being at the first creation of one quality, of one power, and one
excellence of nature, after the fall of Angels, who for their unsupportable
pride, were cast from the presence of God into eternal darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4.
and damnation: the Angels divided themselves, the better part keeping their
first estate, kept their entertainment with God, Math. 18.10.
and continued his favor and service: Jude 6.
the worst dividing themselves, left the service of God, and the fellowship of
good Angels, and bend their whole endeavor against God; and against his
blessed Angels, and against the Saints that love and serve him: this apostacy
and division of Angels, have divided them in their nature and in their offices:
The full opposition of the good and evil Angels.
the good Angels ever laboring the good of men: the evil angels to hinder,
and prevent the goodness of God, and his good Angels; laboring by all means
to bring mankind to their own condemnation. In their offices likewise they
disagree, for God does commonly employ his good Angels in his works of mercy,
and favorable protection: the devils he imployeth in the execution of his
judgments, and corrections; not that he needs their service, but that he
forces them against their will to his obedience. God can enforce the devils in
works of his own glory.
These several employments of the good and evil angels, are not always of
necessity, though very common, for God when he pleases, makes good Angels
destroy and inflict vengeance, and the devils he can and does use in his
works of greatest mercy: and this the devils do, not with consent, but are
either forced by the unresistable power of God, or else deceive themselves in
the end of their own working, God making that which they intend for evil, to
tend to a good end; far beyond and contrary to their purpose and expectation.

Jude 6.
The good Angels have both liberty and pleasure in the service of Almighty God,
and they labor with content and alacrity: the devils have neither liberty nor
pleasure, but being fettered with limitations, cannot do what they would, but
what they are licensed to do. The Angels are Gods servants, the devils are his
slaves; both labor in his work, but with great inequality: the testimony of
Scripture does set forth a number of authorities which because they are
frequent, I will produce only some few, Psalm. 104.
which may satisfy doubt: the Prophet admiring and praising God for his
wonderful creating and governing the World, says, God made the Spirits, that
is the Angels, Messengers, and a flaming fire his Ministers. Verse 4.
For when they be sent, they be Angels; when they be spirits, they be no
Angels; for Angel is the name of the office, and not of nature: for respecting
that whereof it is, he is a Spirit; and in respect of that which he does, he
is an Angel. Again, who to prove the preheminency of the Son of God, says,
Heb. 1.6.
that all the Angels worship him: and proves by the testimony of the Prophet,
Verse. 7.
that Angels are but messengers or ministers; and that they are of a substance
like fire or pure air: by which testimony is proved both the nature and office
of the Angels: their nature, that they are spirits, like fire; their office,
that they are ministers or messengers: are they not all ministering spirits,
Verse. 14.
sent forth to minister for their sakes that shall be heirs of salvation? by
which is declared, the purpose of their ministration and service, that is, for
the good and benefit of the Elect of God, both to prevent the enemy, and to
further them in their holy exercise. To prove the power of Angels, we may
remember in Exodus, what God by an Angel did for the Israelites, Exodus 14.
when he brought them out of Egypt by an Angel: and by an Angel God
destroyed in the host of Senacherib in one night, 185000. 2 King. 29.35.
The Scripture is full of demonstrations, of their powerful acts, God working
his admirable effects, by the service of his Angels. Again, if we reduce to
memory the most admirable of all Gods mercies; we shall find that in the
execution thereof, his Angels are either Ministers or Messengers, and often both:
to omit many other particulars, and come to the most worthy, most meritorious,
and most happy, the Redemption of mankind, by the birth and by the death of
Jesus Christ; were not the Angels continual workers in that administration?
God sent his Angel Gabriel to bring the first news thereof to the blessed
Virgin Mary: Luke 1.26.
again, as soon as Christ was borne of the Virgin, Luke 2.9, etc.
the holy Angel did publish and preach it to the Shepherds, and multitudes of
heavenly Soldiers, praised and magnifyed God for so great a benefit. How often
did the holy Angels visit and comfort our Savior? Math. 2.13. Math. 4.11.
an Angel bids him fly into Egypt: the Angels wait upon him in the desert:
Luke 22 43, 44
the Angels ministered unto him in the holy ministry of his preaching: an
Angel was present with him at the agony of death: Math. 28.2. Acts 1.10. Math.
24.31.
an Angel appeared at his resurrection: the Angels were present at his
ascension: the Angels shall attend him when he returns to judgment. So then,
as the Angels waited upon Christ, Note.
in the days of his flesh; so are they now solicitous for all them that are
incorporated into Christ by faith: as they served the head, so do they also
serve the members; they rejoice to serve them here, whom they shall have their
companions in Heaven; they do not deny their ministry unto them, whose most
sweet fellowship they hope for hereafter. There appeared to Jacob camps of
Angels in the way to his Country; Genesis 32.1, 2.
so in this life, which is the way to our heavenly Country, the Angels are
Conductors, and made Keepers of the holy ones. The Angels defended Daniel in
the midst of the Lions; Daniel 6.22.
so likewise they defend all the godly from the treacheries and cruelty of the
infernal lion the devil. Genesis 19.15, etc. 19.
The Angels preserved Let from the fire of Sodom, so the Angels do defend the
faithful, by holy inspirations and gracious protections, against the devils
tentations, the Worlds incantations, and the fire of hell. Luke 16.22.
The Angels carried the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom: and so they
translate the souls of the Elect unto the Palace of all heavenly happiness:
Acts 12.8, 9.
the Angel lead Peter out of prison; so he does deliver the godly out of most
apparent dangers. Great is the power of our adversaries, but the guard of holy
Angels is able and will defend the faithful from them: and doubt not but they
will be with them present, Exodus 25.20. Esaias 6.2.
to aid them in all places, at all times, and in all dangers: the Scripture
describes them with wings, under the figure of Cherubin and Seraphin; because
thou may know assuredly, that they will come with incredible celerity, to
bring aid and succor thee: make no doubt but they will be thy protectours, in
all places, in all dangers, because they are most subtle spirits, which no
body can resist; all visible things give way unto them; and all bodies, though
they be solid and thick, by them are made penetrable and passable. Math.
18.10. The looking-glass of the Deity is no argument of the Angels knowing all
our necessities, for that specular knowledge is but dispensatory.
Do not doubt thou faithful soul, but these spirits know thy dangers and
afflictions, because they always behold the face of thy heavenly Father, and
are always ready pressed for his service, and thy safeguard: know also thou
devout soul, that these Angels are holy, therefore study and endeavor
holiness, if thou would enjoy their fellowship: accustom thy self
therefore to holy actions, if thou desire to have the holy Angels thy
keepers, in every place and angle; stand in awe and reverence of thy Angel,
and do nothing in his presence, that thou would be ashamed to do in the
sight of man. These Angels are chaste, therefore they are driven away by thy
impurity and filthy actions; for filthy and lamentable sins, drive away the
Angels, the keepers of our life; if by thy sin thou deprivest thy self of
their tuition, how can thou be safe from the devils trecheries, and the
worlds tyrannies; if thou be'st destitute of the Angels protection, how can
thou be safe from the invasions of many imminent and ensuing dangers? Hebr.
1.14.
if thy soul be not guarded by the Angels defense, the devil will overcome it
by his deceitful persuasions. The Angels are Gods messengers, sent unto us
from him; therefore if thou will have an Angel to be thy keeper, thou must be
reconciled by faith and true repentance; where the grace of God is not, neither
is there the guard of Angels; the Angels are as Gods saving hands, which are
moved to no work without his divine direction. The Angels rejoice in heaven
over a sinner that repents; the tears of the penitent, are, as it were, the
wine of the Angels, but an impenitent heart puts to flight the Angels our
keepers: let us therefore repent, that we may cause the Angels to rejoice; the
Angels are of a heavenly and spiritual nature, let us therefore think upon
spiritual and heavenly things, that they may remain with us, and take
pleasure in our company. The heel, which is the extreme part of our body, and
the last term of our life, the wicked Serpent lies in wait for at the time of
death, therefore in that last agony of death, the Angels guard is most necessary
and needful, that they may deliver us from the fiery darts of the devil and
carry our soul when it is departed out of the prison of our body, into the
heavenly Paradise. Luke 1.11, 12, 13.
When Zachary was in the Temple busy about his holy function, the Angel of
the Lord came unto him; so, if thou do likewise delight in the exercise of the
holy Word and Prayer, thou may rejoice to have the Angels thy protectors.
Thus we may see by the testimony of Scriptures, what the Angels are, what
their office, and how they are affected, of so gracious a disposition, and so
inclinable to the good of men, Luke 15.7.10.
that they have consolation, and joy in heaven among themselves at the
conversion of a sinner; ^oby 12.15.
therefore in all respects of nobleness and excellency, they are the
sovereign of all Creatures, whom God has ordained to be continual waiters in
his holy presence, and workers of his blessed Will and Pleasure.

It is by many doubted, by some demanded, Apoc. 22 8, 9.
lest thereby we take divinity from God, and give it to his Angels; they are
therefore dangerously deceived, who for giving the holy Angels demonstration of
thanks, give them adoration and divine worship, and so coveting to please,
displease both God and his holy Angels that attend on them, this is one
extremity. There is another, and that is remissness, when men acknowledge no
reverence, no respect to the dignity of holy Angels. The holy men in all ages,
at the sight of an Angel, Gen 18.2, 3.
would use extraordinary respect of humility and reverence: as Abraham, he
bowed himself to the ground, in reverence of an Angel, and called him Lord:
so likewise, in the example of all the godly, though in these times the Angels
do not present themselves, as in the old world, in visible forms; therefore
they need no reverence, yet they are often present in their spiritual
natures, which though we cannot discern them with our corporal eyes, yet a
spiritual judgment by holy contemplation may discern them with the eye of
faith; for if there be a duty of reverence to men, with whom we converse,
doubtless there is a reverence also due to the holy Angels, which do
converse, and are conversant with us.

This Doctrine of the Creation, the Nature, the Power, and the Office of
Angels, does admonish and remember all men, to make these and such like
profitable uses, to put us in remembrance of the mighty power of God, and that
in a double respect: first, being able by the power of his Word, to create a
Creature of such excellence, and power of nature, in nature excellent, in
number infinite. Secondly, being served and attended by these infinite number of
powerful creatures, one whereof is able, if God please to command, to destroy
the world, and all the generations on earth; God then being of such infinite
power in himself, in his servants the Angels, it ought justly to move all men,
to a reverence of so great a Majesty, and fear to provoke a power so able and
infinite. Again, the apostasy of those Angels that fell from their obedience
and first state of happiness, does admonish all men, that seeing the Angels of
such power, of such excellence, and so near God in his favor and presence,
were tempted to fall from so great happiness. Let no man therefore be secure,
or presume in the confidence of his own trust, but daily beg and crave, wholly
to rely upon the mercy and providence of God, without whom there is no safety,
no security, the greatest power in the world being but weakness without the
strength of his supportation: For, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5.6.
if God spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down to hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness to be kept unto judgment, neither
spared he the old world, Genes. 7.
but saved Noah the eight person, a preacher of righteousness, and his family,
Genes. 19.
and brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly, and turned the Cities
of Sodom and Gomorah into ashes, overthrew them, and damned them, and made
them an ensample unto those that after them should live ungodly, neither will
he spare the transgression of men, that of knowledge and purpose offend him;
for the Angels are far exceeding greater then men, both in power and might.
If God spared not the better, he will not spare the worse, but cast them
likewise into chains of darkness, to be kept unto the judgment of
condemnation. Again, though the Angels were of this excellency and dignity of
nature; and though many fell from their state of innocence, as Adam afterward
did, yet the Redeemer of the world, Christ Jesus, Heb. 2.16, 17, 18, etc.
did not vouchsafe to take their nature and redeem them, but left them in the
judgment of condemnation; undertaking and finishing the work of Redemption
for man only, and not for Angels: for as much as there was no recovery, no
turning, no hope of salvation for these wicked and traiterous angels: there was
also no cause why their sins should be set forth and declared, as was the
sin of man, Verse. 15.
which had not only a punishment laid on him immediately, but also a promise
made for his relief and remedy: in that respect the Apostle said, that Christ
took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; for he came
not to save the angels that had fallen, but men: yea rather to destroy the evil
angels and their power; and therefore they cry, Mark. 1.24.
What have we to do with thee Jesus of Nazareth, art thou come before the
time, to destroy us? and that they shall never be saved, it is plain enough
by the words of Christ, Math. 25.41.
Go ye cursed to the everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and
his angels. Therefore this ought to provoke all men to a zealous affection of
love toward God, who gave his only beloved Son for the redemption of men;
preferring them in his love, before the angels that had offended him: and, that
Angels in their spiritual natures are sent to minister, Heb. 1.14.
for their sakes that shall be heirs of salvation. It does remember us first,
the wonderful love of God toward mankind, in sending his choice servants the
Angels that wait in his presence, near the person of his Majesty; to be
employed about men in the service of their salvation. Secondly, it ought to
move men to a precise reverence in the common behavior of their lives, that
they forbear not only the committing of gross and capital sins; but all
unseemlinesse both of words and actions, as St. Paul says, For the reverence
of Angels: for as devils are banished and driven away from the possessed, 1
Cor. 11.10.
by prayer and holy exercise: so the good Angels then leave our company, when
we delight in wickedness and unseemely behavior: therefore consider thou
devour soul, how great the goodness of God is toward thee, Math. 1.
who has made his Angels thy keepers; and has sent his own Son to redeem
thee: Note.
the Son of God is made flesh to save us, the holy Ghost is sent to sanctify
us, Acts 1.
the Angels are sent to protect us. So then, all the Court of Heaven, does as
it were serve us, and convey their benefits unto us; therefore no wonder that
all inferior creatures were made for the use of man; seeing the Angels
themselves, creatures far more excellent, do not deny their ministry unto us;
the Angels themselves are present with us, and do refresh and ease us, when we
are weary with the burden and heat of temptations, and calamities: therefore,
O most merciful God, thou that leadest us through the desert of this World; by
the conduct of thy Angels grant that we may at length be carried by them into
thy everlasting Kingdom of Heaven.

This knowledge of the Mercy and Power of God in creating the Angels, and
appointing them to Minister to all the children of grace, shall bind me in the
most assured bonds of duty and thankful acknowledgement to my God, To repose
in God, is assurance of safety.
I will also confidently repose in the trust of Gods promises, being assured
that himself, that his holy Spirit, that his holy Angels are my supporters:
therefore I will never despairingly fear the power of adversaries, evil men
or devils, or what evil power so ever; because I know the guard of Angels are
my supporters: I will therefore reform the errors of my life, and watch my
own behavior; I will endeavor to avoid both sin and unseemelinesse in all
my actions, that the holy Angels may love and not loath my company. I will so
endeavor that my conscience may assure me, that I am thine appointed to
salvation: therefore in the protection of Angels, I shall also receive content,
and pleasure unexpressable. The holy Angels have joy in heaven, at the news of
man's Salvation; holy and blessed Spirits, Heb. 1.14. Luke 15.7.
they are so delighted with the use of mercy, as that they rejoice and
congratulate the prosperity of men, hoping to enjoy their fellowship. O my God,
I will acknowledge thy greatness and thy goodness in the creation of Angels:
The Saduces deny that there are Angels.
I will condemn their infidelity that believe it not, thou have said it, who
dare question it? I will therefore believe it, acknowledge thy power, praise
thy mercy, and with reverence remember the office and ministration of thy holy
Angels.

Of man his first beginning.
WHen God created the World, he said, Gen 3, etc.
Let there be; and all things were: and by his word he gave being and
proportion to all creatures, save man. That he might conclude his labor with
a work of extraordinary admiration; he then made man, giving him the
possession of the world: in this wonderful work of God, is to be had these
three considerations: First, the advice and deliberation of the Trinity in
determining this work. God said, Verse 26.
Let us make man after our own Image, according to our likeness. Secondly,
God made man of a preexistent matter, not creating him of nothing as he did
the other creatures, Genesis 2.7.
The Lord God made man of the dust of the ground. Thirdly, God gave man the
rule and government over all creatures, giving him liberty over all, to use
them in their kind with moderation: and let them rule over the Fish of the Sea,
Genesis 1.26.
and over the Fowls of the Air, and over the Beasts of the Earth, and over
every thing that creeps and moves on the earth. Fourthly, the end of man's
creation was for the honor and glory of God that made him, Esaias 43.7.
Every one shall be called after my Name, for I formed them, made them, and
created them, for my own glory. Though no man can be able to give a reason of
the secret will of God, yet this may be imagined that seeing the world and all
the creatures therein, save only man, have a general respect to the honor of
God: therefore they were by the general power of Gods divinity created, but
man being determined in the counsel of God, that man should be an occasion
that the whole Trinity should have divine exercise, in the government of his
life, and every one in their several assignements, A supposed reason of Gods
secret will.
as should please themselves to appoint: therefore God in the Trinity of
persons made man; because afterward in the Trinity of persons, he was to
govern him: God gave man a Law, which he being not able to keep did condemn
him: Christ the second person, moderateth the Law, and gives the Gospel,
promising Salvation to all them that will believe in him, the holy Ghost moves
in the hearts of Gods Elect, and gives them grace to apprehend by faith, the
means of their Salvation. Thus are they personally busied in the government
and preservation of man; The holy Ghost moves grace.
thus were they personally at his Creation. The second consideration, is the
matter of man's creation, which in a double respect is considerable in the
person of God. First, when God formed other creatures, he required no matter,
but gave them being by his Word, but when he formed man, he first prepared his
matter, then gave the form, Note.
and created man, wherein God does use a double care, a double diligence; not
that he could not create man of nothing, as he had done the rest of his
Creatures, but he did it in the wisdom of his divinity, for respect and
causefull consideration, for to express his double, or rather his manifold
affections to the creature, man. Secondly, to prevent the proud imagination man
might have of the nobleness of his nature, it being yet in the pride of man's
flesh to boast his descent, and to derive his families from antiquity and
greatness. The third consideration is, the distinguishing form of man, his
reasonable soul, whereby God does distinguish him from all the creatures on
earth, giving him Reason and Discourse to help him, for the service of
himself, and the government of the world: this is also considerable in these
respects: first the order God observed in the creation. God first made the
world, afterward made man, and gave him the possession prepared for him. So
when he made man, Note.
he first framed the body, then formed the soul; for he made not the body and
the soul at one instant, but in their times and order; for when he had made
the house, he then put in the Tenent, and not before. Secondly is considered,
the excellency of our souls; for God neither made nor created our soul, but
inspired it, by the virtue of his divinity, Genes. 2.7.
The Lord God made man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrills the breath of life, and man became a living soul. There was both the
matter of his body, and the nature and excellency of his soul, being the
breath of Almighty God, divine, spiritual, and eternal; for before God
inspired the soul, man was only framed, and not formed, his reasonable soul
being that which does distinguish him from all other creatures. Man's soul,
being in respect of reason and eternity, Note.
a resemblance of Gods divinity. The fourth consideration is the rule and
government God gave man over all the creatures. God giving man this authority
over all his Creatures, does not dis-inable himself of the government of his
own works, 1 Cor. 10.26.
but does reserve to himself the sovereign regality, giving man only a
stewardship and superintendence over all. Psalm. 24.1.
Holy David says, The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the round
world, and all that dwell therein. Secondly, in that it is said, God gave them
rule, so the power is derived upon all: For God communicates his power to
mankind in general, and not upon one, or any number of certain particulars.
Again, these words, he gave them, have relation to the words, he created them.
God created man in his own Image, Genesis 1.27. and 5.1.
in the Image of God created he them, male and female; so he gave them the rule
and government of the world, that is, the man and the woman: For as God did not
divide them in their natures, neither would he divide them in the use and
government of his Creatures; but whatsoever is lawful to the one, is lawful
to the other, both of them having equal and indifferent rule and power in the
use of Gods Creatures. Lasty is considered, the end of man's creation, which is,
that God may be glorified and honored in a double respect: first, in
acknowledgement, when men have a thankful remembrance of Gods mercy, in the
creation, preservation, and in the redemption of mankind; this acknowledgement
is declared in holy Meditations, Prayers, Thankesgiving and Reverence to the
Name, the Memory, and the Majesty of God: as Moses acknowledging Gods mercy, in
their deliverance out of Egypt, the Lord is my strength and praise, Exodus 15.2.
and he is become my salvation, he is my God and my Fathers God, and I will
exalt, or honor him: the Prophet David has it common in his holy Meditations,
he does honor God in his acknowledgements, and condemns the hypocrisy of
evil men, Mark. 7.6.
that honor God with their lips, Gal. 6.14.
and have their hearts far from him; and Saint Paul in the heat of his
zealous affection, calls this glory his rejoicing, and disclaimeth every
other object of glory, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Secondly, God is
honored in the personal services of men, that is, when they carefully travel
in the exercise of such Christian duties, as he has commanded them, this has
relation to the conditional proposition of our Savior Christ: If you love
me, Joh. 14.15. Our actions witness our affections.
keep my Commandments: For if we do neither keep his Commandments, nor
endeavor to keep them, we love not God; and whom we love not, we cannot
honor, as Christ says of himself, The works which I do bear witness of
me; so the endeavors of our lives witness what we are, and whether we love
and honor God, or not. The consideration of these matters, whereby, though we
understand not the causes of all his works, yet we may partly observe, what
he has done for us, and make some difference of them, and withal, enter into
contemplation of such things, as we may in some degree, with admiration
consider, and apply according to the measure of the gift of God. God wills us
to be lookers on, wonderers, and praisers of his works and glory: wherefore
he does also give so much understanding herein to his elect, as may be
requisite to the establishment of them in the faith, of the providence,
goodness and and might of God, to the glory and service of his Creator.

The general use of this Doctrine, is a general acknowledgement of duties
that all men owe to God their Creator, who of his own accord, Man made noble
out of baseness.
has been pleased to make man so noble a Creature of so base a a matter, and
to endowe him with a soul so near the nature of his divinity, to give him
such rule, and to ordain him for such an end, equal to the honor of Angels,
equal to their happiness; this should put them in remembrance, what God has
done for them, what God does expect from them; it may also remember all men,
what they were, what they are, what they shall be, and what they should be;
this knowledge may both remember, admonish, and prevail in all the hearts of
the faithful, that have the best movings of Gods holy Spirit in them: For he
that knows this, and is not moved at the consideration thereof, does both
declare and judge himself to be reprobate, who failing in the purpose of a
Christian life, does not only dis-inherite himself of Gods gifts on earth,
but of the kingdom of heaven, which he would give, and does by that act of
disobedience, both deprive himself of Gods favor, which is happiness, and
purchase to himself a state of damnation, infinite in time, infinite in
torment; and seeing man was made of so base a matter, of the dust of the
ground, the basest part of the basest element, it should disgrace and abate the
pride and ambitious spirits of men, Note.
who vaunt themselves in the nobleness of their descent and birth, or in the
prosperity of this worlds happiness, which many call fortune: For God has
given one and the same beginning to all men, Jerem. 4.2.
the honorable and the base, the rich and the poor, being all derived from one
first matter, earth, a matter so base, that nothing could be more, being the
refuse and off-scourings thereof, which we were before our creation, and which
all of us shall be in our graves, where we shall be all reduced and brought
back to our first matter earth: Genes. 3.19.
this being considered, how vain a folly is it, for man to pride and boast
himself in his prosperity, and disgracefully to repute men, for their
difference of fortunes? Pride the vainest folly in man's nature.
for the best man, is but base earth, and the basest man is created of God in
his own Image, all of one nature, and in one office, and all to one end
ordained: therefore in a Christian judgment there is no difference of men, but
the difference of good, and of bad men; and this inequality is not in their
nature, The difference of grace and fortune.
but in the corruption and defect of their nature, and the best and safest way
to esteem men, is to compare them in their gifts of grace, and not of fortune:
Note.
for with God the least Spirit of grace, though in the lowest degree of
fortune, is of more value and esteem, then the greatest of the world, if not
gracious.

This knowledge of our creation should remember us in our dutiful obedience to
God, that seeing his hand has fashioned us, and that his mercy has made our
body a Temple or Sanctuary for his holy Spirit to dwell in, 1 Cor. 3.17.
therefore let us carefully keep the temple of our bodies from the filth of
sin: and endeavor our selves in such holy exercises, that our souls may
have the perpetual fellowship of the holy Ghost, without which there is no
happiness nor salvation: let us therefore refrain to accompany with the
leprosy of sin, lest we run into their danger in defiling our bodies, the
Temples of the holy Ghost with diseased company, let us hate the imitation of
men's vices: let us not be tempted with their fellowship, because we know that
when we profane our bodies the temples of the holy Ghost, we shall banish
that sweet society, frustrate our hope, and wound the quiet of our conscience.
O God of all goodness, of base earth thou made us noble creatures: we had no
life, no soul, before thou inspiredst it: thou gave us reason and
understanding, to enable us for thy divine service, and worship: thou have
given us thy favorable entertainment, continue us we beseech thee, in this
service; God that gave grace can only continue it.
let our souls, let our bodies, let every power, let every part thereof, have
their employments therein, we desire no change: we are thine from the
beginning, O continue us thine for ever; thy self, good God, inspired our
souls; it is thy breath, and therefore precious, it was thine before we had
it, help as to keep it, in the time, and in the danger, of this our
progress, in this our pilgrimage, through this sinful and wicked world, and
when thou shall call it home, we may gladly breathe it back; for with thee
there is only safety, How and where to repose our confidence.
with thee there is happiness, infinite, without time, without measure: in the
mean time keep us from the danger of leesing, let us walk in the directions
of thy holy Spirit: we are not able to walk; to move our selves, in any holy
course: if thy hand lead us not, we shall either faint or wander. O keep us
from both, that we may travel in the passage of this life, with alacrity and
spiritual profit, that this earth, our bodies of earth, may pass to the grave
in hope, and that this breath, A needful care.
our soul, may return from whence it came, with confidence: this is the
happiness for which I will only endeavor, for which I will always pray, O my
God, make me resolute in this my intended course.

Of the state of Man's Innocence before his fall.
THat man was created, good, holy, and innocent is evident by the testimony of
Scripture, neither is it doubted of the Christian world; for when God had ended
the Works of his Creation, Genesis 1.31.
the holy Ghost says, That he viewed all that he had made, and lo it was very
good: for God being the father and fountain of all goodness, Nothing but ^ood
can be derived from God. Eccle. 15.14, 15, 16, 17.
it was not possible that any thing that was evil should be derived from him;
but like himself, so his works were perfectly good, without blemish, without
defect: it is therefore generally to be believed, that Adam at the first
creation was holy and innocent, no defect of nature, no corruption of sin,
and that God gave him liberty and power, of freewill, if so he would, to
continue his estate and happiness, for Adam in the estate of his innocence had
this condition of happiness. First, he was in the full favor of God, a joy
unexpressable. Secondly, he had the world and the creatures therein for his
use and pleasure, which then were perfectly good, he had power also given him
of God to continue this happiness, to himself and his posterity for ever, for
the gifts both temporal and spiritual, which God gave him, do well declare
the infinite measure of Gods love to him, God giving him all that was created,
Note.
and enduing him with a divine soul, and with that such endowments of grace,
as made him both excellent and happy: that God gave him the possession of the
world both for his use and pleasure is already proved: yet more, God for an
extraordinary demonstration of his favor to him, planted a garden in Eden, Gen
2.8, 9.
of admirable variety, both for use and ornament. For out of the ground, made
the Lord to grow every tree pleasant to the sight, that was for ornament, and
good for meat: the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the
tree of Knowledge of good and evil. These were there both for the beauty of
the place, and for the trial of man's obedience, Verse 16, 17.
and God gave Adam liberty to eat of every tree thereof freely, only
prohibiting him to taste of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil. These
benefits, this bounty was large, yet does God still increase his favor to Adam
and devises to make him an help fit for him: for he said, Genesis 2.18.
It is not good for man to be alone: as if God had labored his invention to
devise for the good and for the help of man; 1 Timothy 2.14.
then God made woman, and gave her for the consolation of man. Thus did God
derive his blessings by degrees upon man, still enlarging the measure of his
bounty and goodness toward him; so as there wanted nothing, which in the
wisdom of God was thought fit for man's prosperity. Lastly, to all these
favors, God yet gives one more then all, and that was a free will and power
in himself to derive these infinite blessings upon himself and his posterity
for ever: no mixture of grief to distaste them, no death to deprive them, but
themselves and these pleasures to be infinite and unspeakeable, and all these
pleasures and continuance, was given upon such easy condition, as in our
imagination, could hardly tempt a reasonable man, to a small forfeiture: an
Apple perhaps no better, or not so good in taste, as many other in the garden,
whereof Adam might have freely eaten, without fear, or forseit; all this does
witness Gods infinite love to his creature, man, who gave him so great a power,
and had purposed so inestimable a reward for so small a service.

This is the sum of this place.
But so great is the mischief, strength, and working of sin, that it has
bereft all mankind, in the very beginning, and first entry of our nature, from
the purity of good conscience, trust in God, straightness of justice, liberty
of will to do good, quietness of life, the honor of being the Image of God,
of our governance, and from the incorruptnesse also of nature, and immortality,
and has infected it with wicked hypocrisy, and brought us into danger of all
evil, made us slaves of sin, subject to the wrath of God unto corruption, to
innumerable calamities, and unto death, Apulaus.
not only of body, but everl^sting. So that the scholar of Plato, when he
describes man: Man, says he, dwelt upon earth, glad of reason, able to
talk, having a soul immortal, Jerem. 4.2.
members subject unto death, of light and careful minds, brutish and servile
bodies, not like in conditions, but like in errors, of peevish boldness,
stiff in hope, vain in labor, brickle of fortune, every one mortal, and yet
together continuing ever their whole kind, by mutual succession of their brood
changeable, their time ever fleeing away, long ere they be wise, soon dead, in
their life never content, this says Apulcius, which it seems he marked well
the corruption of our nature, though he knew not the beginning thereof: thus
it is better to speak to man's understanding with profit, then be vainly
curious.

This, as does the former, remembers all men, how surpassing the love of God is
to mankind, who notwithstanding, man was made of a matter so base and
unworthy, as nothing like him, yet does God descend his Majesty to dignifie his
baseness, and did heap such honor, such favor upon man, as made him the
most excellent and most happy of all the creatures of God, giving him felicity
and power to continue it, which of all the blessings of God was the greatest:
for that is thought to be the greatest misery, To have been happy is a misery.
to have been happy, and to fall from that happiness; and the greatest
happiness, is to be able to continue happy, which power God gave to the
liberty of man, to be, or not to be happy for ever. This extraordinary degree
of favor to our first father, Adam, does deserve a thankful acknowledgement
from all men, because the favor did reach to all the generations of Adam, even
to us, and to them that shall succeed us for ever. All men being then in Adam,
and Adam the Compendium of all men, the honor and the grace being conferred to
every man in general without exception of any.

Seeing God has thus honored our father Adam, and enlarged his benevolence
unto him above the rest of his creatures; and seeing this was not given unto
Adam only, but to his posterity for ever, even to us, being the sons of
Adam, and derived from his beginning. Let us therefore acknowledge our selves
in as great a debt of beholding to our God, as Adam our father was, to whom God
gave these blessings by name, and in special manner, we being interested in
the benefit as well as Adam; but as his sin made himself and us his
posterity both alike miserable: so if he had continued constant in his
innocence, he had made himself and us alike eternally happy, without fear,
without hazard, without forfeit, without interruption; let us therefore advise
and remember our selves, what honor, what thanks, what service is due from
Adam and his posterity unto God: Let us compare the infinite greatness and
goodness of God to Adams nothing: let us measure them in the infinite distance
of their worth: let us study to know what desert, what moving cause of ours
could provoke God to these degrees of favor: let us search this desert in the
excellency of man's nature, doubtless it is not there to be found, though we
search with diligence. Let us then resort to the mercy of God, and there
inquire, there we shall rightly understand this knowledge; For thy self, O
God, did move thy self to these effects, Note.
thy Mercy did move thy Majesty, thy favor did move thy Power, thy goodness
did persuade thy greatness, thy greatness did effect what thy goodness
caused; thus was God tempted by himself to dignifie our Father Adam, therefore
Adam could be no cause of his own honor, because it was in Gods decree before
Adam had being; therefore Adam had greater cause of thankfulness, that God
did please without cause thus to advance him, and to multiply his infinite and
abundant favors upon him; Adams honor was ours, Adams duties are ours,
Resolution.
we are as strictly bound in our dutiful obligation to God, as our father
Adam was; let us therefore his posterity, be constant in that duty wherein he
failed, and though Adam has disinherited us his posterity of that power, which
he had to performed his divine acknowledgements; yet let us by our best
endeavor, strive with our nature to reform our errors, to imitate so near,
as we can, Adams innocence: thus let us ever be resolved to contend against
the corruption of our nature, and with a holy ambition, to covet, to equal, or
exceed the honor and happiness of our father Adam, in his innocence, and
seeing God did make us so wonderful in our frame, so excellent in our nature;
let us therefore with modesty and reverence to God esteem our selves; let us
understand and remember our selves, that God has made us creatures of note and
excellence, ordained for holy ends, and made us Masters of infinite other
creatures; let us remember that our soul is the divine breath of God, our
bodies the temple of the holy Spirit; let us therefore bend all our endeavors
to fashion the government of our lives in some proportion, to ^his excellency
of our nature; let us hate the company of the wicked and imitation of evil,
because God has created us good; let us value the posterity of our soul
before the possession of the whole world; let us be jealous of our selves, and
careful to fear to give entertainment to any evil cause that may move,
deprave, or corrupt us; let us love our own salvation above all but God,
because God did honor us above all but himself in our creation. Thus may we
lawfully with religious modesty endeavor and esteem of our selves; God did
grace us in our creation; but then God will double that grace in our salvation:
for this I do earnestly entreat, I pray, I hope.

Of original Sin, the Fall and Apostasy of man.
When man was in the height of his prosperity, having all things requisite to
make him both happy and great, and wanting nothing that might minister the
fullness of content to his desire; Man did degrade himself.
he then suddenly by himself, cast from these pleasures into a state most
miserable, depriving himself and posterity, not only of the pleasures, but
the useful necessaries of this life, Gods favor the highest benefit.
and that which is infinitely more worth than the rest, the blessed favor and
presence of God, which of it self, without addition, is able to make the
enjoyer most happy and absolute in his felicity. Thus in a trice, was man, the
glory of Gods workmanship, by sinful disobedience spoiled of his innocence, A
strange alteration.
which when he lost and wanted, his very nature endured alteration, and he
that but lately was made Lord of all the world, is now made subject to all
extremities; this one touch of sin, being of that infectious nature, that
like a leprosy, A general decay.
it spreads over all his whole nature, his body, his soul, his works, nay,
his very affections are infected with this venom, his holiness, his
innocence, and all his divine graces abandon his nature; disdaining to consort
with the fellowship of sin: God also, who had made him, and had so
wonderfully enriched him with benefits, takes off the majesty and ornaments he
had given him, and in stead thereof investing him with poverty and extremity of
fortune; What bitter effects sin causes. Genes. 3.
and whereas before he had made him immortal, he now makes him subject to the
stroke of death; and in this array, thus altered, he excludes him his sacred
presence. This sin branding not only Adam with this disgrace, and these
deformities, but himself and his posterity for ever, being all disgraced from
their innocence, and also degraded from their excellency of nature: now to
describe Adams grief in this alteration, Anunutterable measure of grief.
the power of man's invention is not able to do it: there are not words, nay
imagination has not thought to conceive it; for to fall from the happiness of
prosperity, is a strange degree of grief, but to be deprived from that
felicity is a torment, which without extraordinary patience, no man is able to
bear. In the fall and apostasy of man, is principally to be considered these
particulars: First, from whence he fell. Secondly, to what he fell. From whence
he fell, was from the favor of God, considered in the excellency and
innocence of man's nature, in his large endowments of grace, in his power, and
in his possession of pleasure, in which respect, Adam the first man, was so
abundantly favored, as that his soul could desire no enlargement; God having
given him so many and so great demonstrations of his love and favor toward
him as nothing could be more, this is abundantly proved before. Secondly, to
what he fell, Genesis 1.2. chapt.
this is familiarly known in the experience of every man's life, being full of
the marks of this misery, as you may read in Ecclesiasticus, a catalogue of
man's misery: Eccle. 40.
what Adam was in his sin, and the miserable change he endured by the
alteration of his fortune, The miseries of this life.
does give us a particular knowledge of our own condition; Adam our father by
generation was the father also of our corruption, and we his generation,
deriving our substance and nature from him, have with him derived his sin and
punishment, the which as they were inseparable in the nature of Adam at and
after his fall; so are they necessarily descended down upon us his posterity:
the trespass being in him, from whom we are all derived, makes that we are all
guilty of the sin of Adam, and are all deservers of the like punishment: Romans
5.12, etc.
this is St. Paul his judgment, Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, so death went over all men, for as much as all men
have sinned. As Adam was, so are we; 4. Esd. 4.48.
such a father, such children: the best way to understand our nature, is to
consider it in Adam; but to understand his fall and the miseries thereof, it is
palpably evident in the knowledge of our own particulars: the torments of our
transitory life are sufficient arguments to persuade and resolve us thereunto;
for the extremities of fortune and her variable turnings, remember all men the
miserable conditions of sinful man, Ier. 4 2.
all men being at all times subject to all extremities, and sometimes taste the
bitterness thereof: in the book of Ecclesiasticus, as aforesaid, there is a
Catalogue of the miseries of man's life; all which happened to us for sin of Adam,
who by his sin, not only did deprive himself of the inestimable worth of Gods
favor, but also brought the like condemnation upon his seed, and their
posterity for ever, and by his one sin, overthrowing the blessed estate of many
millions of people, as if at one blow he had cut off the heads of a world of
people, and doubtless but the sorrow for leesing the favor of God, Adams
sorrow.
Adam could not have a greater then this, because there is nothing, does more
move grief and pity in gentle minds, then a compassion of general calamities,
especially then when they are caused by their misfortune, Ier. 2.3.
that have the grace to pity them. To undertake to rank the calamities
incident to sinful life were intricate: N^te.
therefore we will omit the greater number, and somewhat insist upon the
greatest in the number, that is the displeasure of God, which is damnation; a
misery infinite in time, infinite in torment, a judgment denounced against all
men, for the sin of one man: because at the committing of sin, all men were
then present in Adam, and with him did both combine and conspire in the
trespass. Adam then by his sin did bring a general destruction on his
nature, and thereby made himself and all men, not only subject to death, but
to an everlasting death and damnation, to inflict eternal and unexpressable
torments; on the bodies, on the souls of men. It is not in the capacity and
power of man, to describe the torments of damnation: for as they are infinite
in time, No man can describe at full the torments of damnation.
so also in number and greatness, there is misery without hope, torments
without number, without measure, without end, they are above our strength,
above our patience to bear them, they are not utterable for number, nor
sufferable for torment: the very soul though eternal, is continually wasted
with that affliction: neither could it endure and last in such extremities, but
that God has made it eternal. Again, it is not only infinite and eternally
great in personal sufferings, but also in grief, and spiritual
discontentments and vexations: the soul that is damned grievously afflicting
it self with rage and intestine displeasure, Discontent the sickness of the
soul.
when it considers from what dignity it is fallen, and the honor and felicity
it might have had, if it had continued in the favor and presence of Almighty
God; it will also enviously remember the prosperity of others, what glory, what
happiness they enjoy for their constancy in their godly conversation, and holy
travel, The nature of envy.
and that it self and the damned should have had the same degrees of
happiness, if like them, they had continued constant and faithful in their
duty and service to God: and this is a greater torment to the damned, then that
which they shall endure in their personal afflictions; the remembrance whereof
does so distract the very powers of their souls, as that desperately they
inflict their own vengeance, and execute upon themselves, Note.
the punishment of their own condemnation: for in our nature, we have less
patience, and more affliction, when by our own defaults we loose prosperity,
then when for our deserts we endure any personal punishment: this is the
reward of Adams disobedience, that did by sin, disinherit himself and his
posterity of the infinite treasure of Gods favor, and did thereby purchase a
life, whose days are consumed in vexations and miserable change, and whose end
does not end his misery, Death is the life of torment to the damned.
but renew and enlarge it with an addition and perpetuity of torment.

This is the plain and necessary knowledge of the fall of man from the state
of innocence. In which argument the overcurious wits of men have traveled in
the search of many intricate questions; I will therefore forbear to relate the
number of men's opinions.

The fall of man from the first state of his innocence, does remember all men
what the miserable condition of our nature is, what glory we have lost, and
into what degree of adversity we are fallen: we that were the most excellent of
Gods creatures, are now the most miserable; provoking, not only God, to be our
enemy, Genesis 3.14.
but the creatures of God also, to hate and dread us. Because for our
disobedience, God did curse them, and that for our annoyance God did suffer the
goodness of their nature to be altered, in so much as that they which before
sin entered our nature, were our servants, are now become our enemies; and we
that then were their Lords, and had power to command them, are now in bondage
of fear, and dread their power, A miserable alteration.
for that supremacy, power and government, which Adam had over all the world,
was conferred to us that are his posterity. He had it, and lost it by sin, we
should have had it but are prevented by sin, sin being the cause both in him
and us, why we are degraded from our dignity, Ierem. 14.2.
and cast into this contempt and disgrace of fortune. Whenever therefore God
shall please to punish any man's prosperity, and to tempt his patience with the
burden of adversity, his care must be, to search the cause of his affliction,
and when he has found the cause, to labor by all means to remove it: For
diseases are not cured before their causes be both known and removed. And as
diseases of the body are not engendered without their corrupt cause, no more our
spiritual afflictions are not inflicted without their evil cause, which is
sin, the original and continual cause of all our evil. Thus ought
Christians to judge of themselves, and to understand the miseries of their
life, to inquire at their own hearts, and to search their own actions, and
their own transgressions; for there, and but there, Note.
shall they find the true cause of all their misery, and not as does the
foolish and wicked, who when they have extraordinary discontents, or
misfortunes, blame their nativities, Psalm. 34.
and search the motions and conjunctions, falls and exaltations of the stars
and celestial bodies; as if by their influence and constellation, their
grievous alterations were occasioned; such fondness is ridiculous, and to
little purpose, and they are much deceived who seek for that far off, which
is to be found only at home, even in their hearts, in their sinful natures,
and in their sinful actions. Again, the fall of Adam from his innocence
because of sin, does instruct every man in the knowledge of Gods divine
nature; for God is so respectively holy, that he will not entertain
familiarity and neerenesse with any creature that has the least touch or spot
of sin; The nature of holiness.
therefore did he banish the Angels out of his presence, though they offended,
as some think, but in thought: Adam also, though it was his first sin, and
not of his own election, but doubly tempted by his wife and the devil, Genes.
3.
yet could not the holy presence, of God endure him, but cast him out of
Paradise into misery and tribulation; therefore ought all men to make
conscience of all sin, and to fear the committing of the least, because
there is no sin, be it never so little, that God will dispense withal, but
as himself, All sin is in Gods hatred.
so is his affection. He is holy without stain, without imputation, and his
favor is toward them only, that with all their power, endeavor themselves
in all the works of his Commandments.

Now, if the over-spreading of sin, whereby this mischief passed through,
infected, corrupted, and made subject unto death all mankind, we must harken
unto the Apostle, who appointed this over-spreading, neither to the devil,
Romans 5.
neither to the woman, but unto Adam: For the devil did not convey over sin
unto Eve, Ephesians. 2.
nor Eve unto Adam by propagation or increase of kind, but only by
entisement: For the Serpent corrupted the woman, and the woman the man by
intisement. 2 Cor. 11.3.
But the man being corrupted with sin, did by increase of nature, shed out
his poison into all the posterities of the world, descending from him,
therefore though the beginning came of the devil, and Eve seduced by him,
finned before Adam; yet the nature of mankind had not been so infected with
sin, that the evil thereof should have corrupted all his posterity with the
increase of all flesh, and made it subject unto sin and death, if Adam had
not sinned: for the increase and succession pertains not to the woman, but
unto the man; Note.
yet because he did harken to the voice of the woman, and did eat, he became
a transgressor of Gods Commandments; the accomplishment of the sin, began
in the devil and the woman, the spreaders abroad of the whole mischief, Gen
4.10, 11.12, 13.
whereof there was a most manifest argument declared in Caine, his first
begotten son: also the misery, corruption and decay which followed the fall
of our first parents, and invaded all mankind, does set forth the power and
virtue of Gods providence, to be much greater unto us: for that we are repaired
and renovated by Christ after our fall, to a far more blessed estate then we
were created in before we fell, 1 Cor. 15.53.
like as in the day of resurrection, when we shall be all raised up out of the
dust of the earth, and the corruptible put on incorruptible, and the mortal
put on immortality, and the virtue of the power of God shall be declared much
better than if we had still lived and continued in this life without corruption
and death. And further, whereas by the sin committed, mankind perished, and
fell into so great corruption, It was not Gods fault that man sinned and lost
his innocence.
depravation and death, it is not such, that it ought to be imputed unto God,
but rather such as the justice of God may appear therein; therefore it was
meet and needful, that Christ should not be conceived and borne in the womb
of the Virgin, of the seed of man, lest he should be borne partaker of sin, but
only by the working of the Holy Ghost. Lastly, seeing the sin of Adam, by the
intisement of the woman, did so deface the excellence and innocence of our
nature, as that the corruption thereof did descend from him to all posterities,
this ought to abate the pride of man, that no man dignifie or exalt himself in
the pride of his nature; for all men are of one and the same nature, and all
men in one and the same condemnation, there being no power in man's nature to
raise himself to the dignity of Gods favor, that being only in the power of
him that first created us holy and innocent, who again will restore us, if we
faithfully spend our endeavors in holy actions. Again, it ought to move all
men to bear indifferent favor to all the children of God, and not to despise
any, either for the defect of nature or fortun, but to pity and commiserate
the common calamities, because there is no judgment or punishment inflicted
upon any man, How to judge calamities.
but it is generally caused by all men: all men having offended God with Adam,
and all men for that sin of Adam being subject to all misery: for those
calamities and greater, are due to us, though other men endure them; and those
benefits which some enjoy, Gods favor is not by desert, but by benevolence.
and others want, they have them not of desert, but of benevolence from the
favor of God, who gives them according to the pleasure of his will, without
respect of persons.

Seeing that Adam, who had such extraordinary indowments of grace, and whose
nature God had so adorned with excellence, that he delighted in his company;
and seeing he was innocent, and his nature unstained with corruption or
infirmity, We far more easy to be tempted then Adam.
did notwithstanding, run in contempt of Gods Commandment, and thereby did
purchase Gods indignation: Let us therefore be extraordinary careful to
withstand all provocations that may tempt us to any sin; for our nature is
much more easy to be tempted than Adams was, his being innocent and holy, ours
in corruption stained, he having power in himself to withstand his tempter, we
having no power in our nature to resist, but rather an appetite and affectation
to evil, naturally inclined to neglect that grace, which should make us able
to resist temptation, and to withstand the assaults of the devil, The
depravednesse of nature.
and because our nature is thus depraved, and that our own blind directions
would but lead us to condemnation; let us therefore with humble confidence
implore the favor of God, How to prevent the power of temptation.
that by his spirit he would give us directions, and that by his mighty hand
he may support us against the power of all temptations; for we know our
strength is but weakness, and if God take his hand of favor from us, If we
will affy in God we must deny our selves.
we shall fall into the hands of our tempters, and remain their spoil: for
if Adam in his innocence was vanquished, we in our sin cannot be able to
withstand them: therefore let us not trust in our own strength, but deny our
selves, and repose our whole confidence in the strength of his arm, for it is
thou, O God, that savest and defendest us from and out of the hands of our
enemies, and put them to confusion that hate us. Thus let us practice
against our spiritual tempters, and thus we shall prevail.

Again, seeing God has not spared Adam, nor the Angels that sinned, who in
their natures were much more excellent then we, but for their sin, gave them
over to condemnation: 2 Pet. 2.4.
how much less will he spare us if we continue in the committing of sin,
and not endeavor our selves with all diligence in godly exercise? Assuredly
this should make us fearful to commit any sin, with consent or knowledge.
Let us therefore fly all sin, The wages of sin in death.
as we would death, because the earnest of sin is certainly rewarded with
death; sin and death being inseparable in fellowship: for the soul that
sins must die the death, and no soul dies but the sinful. Therefore let
us resort our prayers to the holy presence of God, Resolution.
let us earnestly entreat, that his providence may direct us in an holy course,
to an holy end: let us avoid all acquaintance with sin; let us hate it in our
selves, Charity will pity misery.
let us hate it in others, pity their misery, and pray for their amendment; let
up prove our selves vowed enemies to sin, and practice in that profession:
thus let us persuade, thus let us resolve. Again, seeing Adam and his
posterity, were not cast into condemnation, Man was not condemned without hope
as the angels were.
without hope, without mercy, as the angels that sinned were; but had hope
given him to be again restored to the favor, and blessed presence of God, by
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; this admirable degree of
love and favor of God to mankind, should keep all our actions in awe, and
make us carefully fear to offend our God, who has so far exceeded to us in
the favors of his love: therefore let us not only fear him because he has
power to destroy us, but let us fear him for the reverence of his love, and
prefer his love even before our souls: our meditations cannot present to our
souls a greater Heaven of joy, To meditate God and his favors.
then to understand our selves to be beloved of God; neither can we have more
delightful action, then to meditate his love, and to love him again for his
love to us: for to love him for the safety of our own souls, is most
necessary; but to love him for his love only, is more commendable, and
declares a notable degree of Christian zeal. Thus did Moses love the
Israelits: Exodus 32.30.31, 32.
thus did St. Paul the Jews; and thus will I my God, by whom I was created, by
whom I am restored, and in whom I will always trust. Amen.

Of the Devils trecheries, and how to prevent him.
Seeing the Devil is so apt and ready to assault and tempt the faithful, and
the elect of God, consider therefore thou devout soul in what danger thou art,
because the devil thine adversary is always lying in wait for thee: he is an
enemy for boldness, most ready, for strength most powerful, for subtilty most
cunning, for engines well stored, in sight indefatigable, into all shaps
changeable, he intiseth us into many sins, and having enticed us, he
accuses us before Gods judgment seat; 2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 11.14.
he accuses God to men, and men to God, and one man to another: he exactly
considers every ones inclination, and then he lays for them the snares of
temptations: for the devil when he assaulteth the soul of man, first sets
upon that part he finds softest and best affected for his purpose, for him the
easier to work upon; and if he once be withstood, and overcome, he does not
presently remove nor give over, but comes again to tempt with greater force,
that so he may by tediousness and neglect, overcome those whom by violence
and force of temptations he could not overcome. Against whom will he not be
bold to use his subtle tricks, when he was so bold to set upon the Lord of
Majesty himself with his craft and subtilty, Math 4.2, 3.
when he had fasted forty days and forty nights? what Christians will he
spare, when he sought to winnow Christ's Apostles like wheat? He deceived Adam
in his nature instructed, whom then can he not deceive in his nature
corrupted? he deceived Judas in the school of our Savior, Luke 22.31.
and whom will he not deceive in the world, Genesis 3.4, 5.
the school of errors? in all states the devils trecheries are to be feared.
In prosperity he lifts us up with pride, in adversity he drives us down to
despair; if he sees a man delighted with frugality, he intangleth him in the
fetters of insatiable covetousness: if he sees a man of an heroical spirit,
he sets him on fire with flaming anger: if he sees a man somewhat merrier then
ordinary, he incites him to burn with lust: those whom he sees to be zealous
in religion, he labors to entangle in vain superstition: those whom he sees
exalted to dignities, he pricks them forward with the spurs of ambition:
when he allureth man to sin, he amplifieth Gods mercy; and when he has
cast him headlong into sin, then he shows and amplifies Gods justice: first,
he will lead a man to presumption, and afterward he labors to bring him to
desperation; sometimes he assaults outwardly by persecutions: sometimes he
assaults inwardly, by fiery tentations, sometimes he sets upon us openly and by
force, sometimes he sets upon us secretly and by fraud: in eating he sets
before us gluttony, in generating luxury, in exercising sluggishnesse, in
conversing envy, in governing covetous extortion, in correcting rage, in
dignity pride; he possesses the heart with evil cogitations, in the mouth he
puts false speakings, in the other members wicked actions, when we are awake
he moves us to evil works, when we are asleep he moves us to filthy dreams:
so then at all times, in every place, and in every thing we must beware of the
devils trecheries, we sleep, but he watches, we are secure, but he goes
about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Consider therefore thou faithful soul, the trecheries of this most potent
enemy; and seek the aid of spiritual arms to defend thee from his
subtilties: let thy loins be girt with the girdle of truth, Ephesians. 6.14.
and covered with the breast plate of righteousness, put on Christ's perfect
righteousness, and thou shall be safe from the devils tentations: John 14.30.
as Satan has no power over Christ, neither has he power over the faithful
his members. Let thy feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
so the fiery darts of the devil shall not hurt thee: take the shield of faith
to defend thee from the assaults of this most wicked enemy. Ephesians. 6.15. Math.
17.20.
Faith is that which removes Mountains, which is to be understood, the
mountains of doubts, persecutions and tentations: if thou have faith, neither
shall any thing be unpossible unto thee. Verse. 20. Exodus 12.17.12.13.
The Israelites whose door posts were figured with the blood of the paschall
Lamb were not smitten with the destroying Angel, so likewise those whose
hearts are by faith sprinkled with the blood of Christ, shall not be hurt by
this destroyer: faith relies upon Gods promises, in the mercy of the Almighty;
and Satan cannot overthrow them that believe; faith is the light of the soul,
and has a bright eye, a holy ear, a clean heart, and a sure foot, she is
the strength of hope, the trust of truth, the honor of amity, and the joy of
love, and Satan cannot prevail against it, and the tentations of this
malignant spirit are easily discerned through this light. Mich. 7.19.
By faith our sins are thrown into the profound sea of Gods mercy, and in that
the fiery darts of the devil shall be easily quenched, we must likewise put on
the helmet of salvation, that is, Ephesians. 6.17.
holy Hope, endure tentation, and expect an issue thereof by hope, and thou
shall find comfort thereby: For God is an Assister of them that contend, and
the crown of them that overcome; Verse. 19.
we must also take the sword of the spirit, that is, the Word of God: For the
consolations of the Scripture will prevail against the contradictions of the
devil; Nazianz.
for by the Word Christ overcame all Satan's temptations, Math. 4.4, etc. 11.
and still the faithful shall overcome the devil and all his subtilties. To
conclude, by prayer thou have great aid against tentations; for as often as the
little ship of thy soul is ready to be overwhelmed by the waves of tentation,
awake Christ by thy prayers: we overcome visible enemies with striking, but we
overcome our invisible enemies by pouring forth prayers unfeigned; fight thou, O
Christ, both in us, and for us, that so through thee we also may overcome our
deadly enemy with victory, that in thee, and through thee, we may triumph
gloriously.

Of the Moral Law of God, the ten Commandments.
THe Law of God, The moral Law of God and the Law of nature is all one.
though it was not given to man with solemn promulgation, before the time of
Moses, yet was there a general sense thereof given to Adam in his creation:
For when God gave him his nature, and endued him with the use of reason and
discourse, he gave him capacity to understand his duty, the which duty is
nothing else, but the observation of the Law of God; and therefore, when Adam
had transgressed the commandments of God, and had eaten the forbidden fruit,
the reason of his natural soul could tell him his offense, and then his
conscience judged him; he was afraid, and hid himself from Gods presence. If
therefore we compare his sin to the Commandments of the Law, we shall find
it to be a direct breach of some, and a consequent breach of all: For Gods
first Commandment says, Exodus 20.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Adams sin by the eating of the
forbidden fruit, by the temptation and persuasion of the devil, does
contradict the Commandment of God, and says, Nay, but my wife and I will both
be gods. Genesis 3.5.
Again, Caine, the second man, he committed murder, and thereby directly
broke the sixth Commandment, which when God and his conscience made him to
understand, Genesis 4.8.
he made a most desperate acknowledgement of his sin: Verse. 13.
so that the Law being nothing but a reasonable duty, which the creature owes
to his Creator; there was therefore a general knowledge of this Law in the
reasonable nature of man at his creation, and so to the succession of them of
the old world unto the time that the Law was given to Moses by the ordinance of
Angels: Gal. 3.19.
the old world then from Adam to Moses, were not lawless and free from the
service of the Law, but had the law of nature for their direction, which being
grounded upon reason, was even the very same with the law of the ten
Commandments, and the law of the ten Commandments before it was given to
Moses, was in the ages before going commonly transgressed; and that law did
both judge and condemn them, the which law God gave man when he gave him his
nature; every man having the knowledge of this law in the natural use of his
reason. This was the state of the old world before Moses, all sinned, and all
were judged by the law of nature. Now, when iniquity began to reign, and be
strong in the hearts of men, and that their conscience became senseless of sin,
neither would they admonish and judge their transgressions, then God thought
convenient to publish to mankind this law, binding the consciences of men to a
strict and dutiful observation of every particular statute of the law, Baruch
4.1.
denouncing the judgment of condemnation to all them that transgress against
the least breach and particular of those Commandments.

A second reason why God ordained the Law, Gal. 3.19.
it was added because of transgressions, that by the Law men might know wherein
they have transgressed.

A third reason of the ordination of the Law, is, 4. Esd. 9.31.
his days, nay, his life, in the careful service of his God: For behold, I
sow my Law in you, that it may bring forth fruit in you; and that ye may be
honored by it for ever.

Fourthly, the reason that the Law was given, is, that by the severity thereof,
we might be disciplined, and made fit for the mercy of the Gospel; for the
judgment of the Law will humble us, make us understand our misery, Gal. 3.24.
and provoke us to implore mercy; for by the documents and directions of the
Law, we are led to salvation in Jesus Christ; wherefore the Law is our
Schoolmaster, to teach and bring us to Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith in him.

Lastly, the Law was given for the glory and Majesty of God, that all the world
might judge of his infinite mercy to mankind. In this respect, that
notwithstanding all men are judged and condemned by the law of nature, and by
the Law of his Commandments; yet in the greatness of his love, he is content
to forgive the trespass, and the judgment therefore due unto mankind, Gods
admirable mercy.
and finally, to entertain these transgressors his enemies, into the bosom of
his mercy, giving them Mercy in stead of Justice, and eternal life, Romans 5.20,
when they deserved death and damnation. 21.
Moreover, the Law entered thereupon, that the offense should abound;
nevertheless, Where Sin abounded, there Grace abounded much more, that as
Sin had reigned unto death, so might Grace also reign by righteousness unto
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and this is an admirable degree
of love in God, that he will decline, or lay by his Majesty, and to miserable,
wretched, nay, sinful creatures exercise his Mercy, in restoring and advancing
us, that have so highly offended his Majesty, and abounded in transgressions;
for these causes was the Law given and delivered to man; Deuteronomy. 27.26. The
matter of the Commandments.
God thereby commanding every man's absolute obedience, upon forfeiture of his
soul, to the pains of everlasting condemnation. In the Law of the ten
Commandments, is to be considered the substance, which is the matter of the
Law, and the circumstance which is the manner of the delivering it. The matter
is contained in ten Commandments; the first four teaches us directly our
duty to God: the six last, our duties to our neighbor. In the manner of giving
the Law, we may principally consider these circumstances: First the principal
giver of the Law, God. Secondly, the servants attending this office, the
Angels. Thirdly, to whom it was given, to Moses. Fourthly, for whom it was
given, for the children of Israel, who were then the people of God; and by
consequence to every people that profess themselves the servants of God: these
are the maine particulars in the circumstance of giving the Law. First, Exodus
20.1. Exo. 19.18. etc.
God was the principal author of this work, to give it countenance and
authority; for who dare quarrel his work, and the operation of his hands:
therefore did God himself speak all the words of the Commandments, he also
spoke in a fearful and terrible manner, to gain the business a fearful
estimation, Verse. 9.
he spoke in the hearing of the people, that they might know it was Gods own
act, and to prevent the distrust they might have in his servant Moses.
Secondly, the Angels attend this holy service, to declare the most excellent
Majesty of God, who in all his occasions is served and attended by an infinite
number of that excellent nature. Again, the Angels were there because they are
most desirous of the good of mankind, Heb. 1.14. Luke 15.7, 10.
and do willingly attend the service of our salvation, having joy among
themselves in Heaven at the conversion of a sinner; they were also, to be
witnesses, between God and his people, that the covenants might remain
established for ever: therefore S. Paul says, The Law was ordained by the
Angels, Gal. 3.10.
by the hand of a mediator: not that the Angels did principally give the Law,
and appoint the covenant, but that there service was to attend, by the holy
ministration. Again, the Law was given by God, by the hand of Moses, in the
presence of the Angels, to give unto the Israelites, because the Spirit of God
had so sanctified Moses, that he was able to stand in the presence of God,
Exodus 20.18, 19
the which the host of the Israelites could not do, but became astonished and
exceedingly afraid, at the voice of Gods thunders, and therefore they desired
Moses to negotiate between God and them, they being not able to endure the
presence of his Majesty. Again, it was given by the hand of Moses, because God
would honor him above the rest of his brethren, he having been most
industrious and constant in the service of God, and therefore as God had by the
hand of Moses given them deliverance out of Egypt, so by the hand of Moses he
would give them the covenants of his everlasting love, Note.
and deliverance out of the bondage of sin, which grace was promised to all
them that would live within the compass of these laws, and is now given to
all them that faithfully endeavor them, though they fail in the maine
performance therein: John 1.17.
For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
Lastly, the Law was given by name to the Israelites, but in the purpose of God
to all men, all men being under the bondage of the Moral law of God, the Law
being able to judge and condemn all men. Again, God gave it by name to the
Israelites, because they were then the choice and select people of God, for
whom he had done his wonders, and to whom he had promised a fair
inheritance, it also derived down upon us, and upon all posterities, all men
having entered into covenant with God, to endeavor themselves in the faithful
keeping of his Commandments: these circumstances are all necessarily
considered in the manner of Gods delivering the Law. From this may be generally
observed, that God in all his actions has principal respect to holiness, and
that no profane circumstances assist him in his actions, but as himself is
most holy, so his delight is in holy actions, and hates all profanation, both
in matter and circumstance. In the Law may generally be observed an
impossibility in the precise performance and keeping thereof, no man being
able, An impossibility in the strict performance of the Law. Acts 15.10.
without favor to give a true account, and to make an even reckoning with the
Law, the law being able to conclude us all under sin: it is an argument of
Saint Peter: now therefore why tempt ye God to lay a yoke, that is, the
performance of the Law, on the disciples necks, which neither our fathers nor
we were able to bear? Gal. 2.16.
Saint Paul also to the Galatians, concludes an impossibility to be justified
by the Law. By the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified, so that no man
ought to repose his Justification in the Law; Gal. 3.22. All men are judged by
the Law.
yet every man ought to endeavor therein his utmost performance. Secondly, men
are judged by the Law, to be guilty, and deservers of everlasting damnation.
This general judgment of the Law against all flesh, does concl^de all men in
the state of damnation, no man being able to deliver himself from this
judgment, before the Law be fully satisfied, which could not be done by other
means, then by the righteousness and death of Jesus Christ, Gal 4.5.
the Son of God, and Redeemer of the World.

Seeing, the severity of the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 5, 2. etc.
that no flesh can be saved by the works of the Law; therefore at the
delivering of the Law, when the Israelites promised Moses that they would do
whatsoever God should command them, God seems to express a passion of his
love, and to require less then the Law; for the Law requires a precise
performance upon pain of damnation, but God promised the blessing of his
favor to all them that zealously endeavored to keep the Law: Verse. 19.
for howsoever no man can observe the ordinances of the Law, Gal. 3.11.
as thereby to be righteous, and to deserve the promise, yet did God accept the
faithful endeavors of men, and supply their defects by the grace and
operation of his holy Spirit. Therefore God says to Moses, O that there were
such an heart in them, to fear me, and to keep my Commandments, that it
might go well with them, Deuteronomy. 5 29.
and with their children for ever. God is merciful in his severest justice.
This does prevent an objection, which the wicked disobedient children might
make against God, and his Law, seeing the Law of God does require a greater
duty then is in any man's performance: and seeing that the Law does condemn all
them that fail in the least particular duty of the Law; wherefore God might
seem to be merciless in the severity of his justice, God that made the Law
is above the Law.
and their labor fruitless to attempt that which was unpossible, both which
are wickedly false: for though the Law condemn every man, yet God that made
the Law is above the Law, and does often grant his dispensation; and pardon
them whom his Law condemns. Secondly, though no man can perform the Law, yet
all men may endeavor it, the which endeavor being faithful and industrious,
is accepted of Ood, as if it were performance: and this does take from all men
all matter of argument whereby they would excuse their disobedience, He that
endeavors the Law has the promise.
and neglect in their dutiful service to God; for as is said, though no man be
able to do the Law, yet all men are able to endeavor it: and this does
necessarily admonish all Christians in these times, who presume over boldly on
the liberty of faith, that because Christ Jesus the Savior of the world, has
satisfied the justice of the Law, Man must nor presume on the liberty of faith.
and wrought righteousness to all them that faithfully believe, and apprehend
his merits: therefore they despise the works of the Law, holy and charitable
exercises, and repose themselves on the bare confidence of faith only, the
which being altogether fruitless in the works of the Law, A fruitless faith
profits nothing.
is but presumption and vain confidence, and will dangerously deceive all them
that affie therein; for though Christ Jesus, has abolished the ceremonial
Law, and satisfied the justice of the moral Law, the which is availeable to
all them that shall be heirs of salvation, yet his righteousness in observing
the Law, Christ has not destroyed the Law, but qualified it.
does not destroy the substance of the Law, and make it fruitless and
useless, but does rather command our imitation, that as he has performed the
Law in all sincerity and righteousness, so we should endeavor a strict
imitation of his virtuous doings; for such faith only has the benefit of the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, as is proved by the testimony of holy life,
Works the testimony of faith.
and has the witness of virtuous living: therefore it does needfully behove
all men carefully to endeavor in the exercise of the Law of God: for though no
man can be justified by the works of the Law, so no man can declare and
approve himself to be justified, but by the works of the Law; for it is God
that does justify effectually, faith does justify apprehendingly, and good
works do justify declaringly. Again, By the Law we may judge our selves.
the knowledge of the Law of God may give every man a true understanding of the
state of his life, whereby to know in what condition he stands, whether in
the favor, or displeasure of Almighty God; for the Law is the revealed Will of
God, to which all men owe conformity upon pain of grievous forfeit; and
therefore, whosoever shall examine the behavior of his life, and compare his
several committings and omittings, with the duties of the Law, for all ought
so to do, shall be well able to understand, and judge himself; The Law a
pattern to a Christian life.
for the Law is the pattern of our lives, to which we ought to square our
actions. So then, when we find a dissimilitude betwixt the Law and our lives,
we cannot but judge our selves to be disobedient, and rebellious to God and his
Laws, and consequently, to forfeit our souls to the state of damnation. This
judgment ought to cause humiliation in all men, and so it will in them that
God shall make gracious, who, when they know themselves to be in the disease of
sin, How the Law does humble us.
and that the Law does wound their consciences with guiltiness; and that
themselves have a natural pronenesse, rather to cause then to cure their
infirmities; this makes them to deny themselves and their own power, which is
but weakness, and with humbleness to resort to the mercy and merits of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, and the Physician of our souls, Christ the Physician
of our souls.
who only has been able to satisfy the justice of the Law, and who only
has been able to work the Redemption of mankind, and to repossesse them of
Gods favor who had lost it by their transgressions; and this our Redeemer has
done by assuming our nature, Christ has fulfilled the Law for us that could
not.
bearing our sins, satisfying our contempts, and finishing our neglects, who in
our nature has fulfilled the Law for us that could not, who has triumphed
over sin, and made conquest of hell, and by his death has slain death, which
but for him, had seized our souls into everlasting condemnation. Thus will the
knowledge of the Law admonish us; and thus it will remember us.

This knowledge presents our souls with matter of serious meditation, wherein
we may have a full view of the miserable condition of our life, what strength
is in our nature, what endeavor in our actions; for when we find an
impossibility of our dutiful and strict obedience to the Law, we shall then
acknowledge our defects, and the corruption of our nature, when we examine the
particulars of our life, and compare them with our duties, we shall acknowledge
the neglect of our endeavors, and that we have failed, not only in the maine
performance of the Law of God, which our nature could not perform, but in our
desires and careful endeavors, to do well, The effects in the Reprobate
issuing from the meditation of the Law.
which our nature might. And from this meditation does necessarily follow, one
of these two effects: in the Reprobate and graceless, it causes desperation,
and a hopeless distrust of their salvation; for when the devil and their
consciences expose before them the justice of God, the severity of his Law, and
the infinite measure of their offense, the extreme terror and sense of their
wickedness, do so confound their understandings, that often they execute upon
themselves torment and death, despising and despairing of the mercy of Jesus
Christ; in whom, if they had reposed trust, The effect of grace in the
Regenerate.
believed and apprehended his righteousness, their sins had not been imputed,
neither had their souls perished. But in the children of grace, this
meditation does produce a contrary effect; for when they by the Law understand
the misery whereinto their sins have brought them, it causes in them a
wonderful degree of fear, but not desperate; for though the devil presents
their sins in most ugly forms, and urge them to a desperate apprehension,
yet the Spirit of God in the^, does withstand this temptation, God supporteth
the Elect against temptation.
and gives them holy motions, to devise the means of their salvation,
presenting them in their spiritual sorrows, with the mercy and merits of
Jesus Christ, then giving them grace to understand the mystery of his death,
and the promise of the imputation of his righteousness, which when the grieved
sinner understands, he allayeth and mitigateth his sorrow, and affieth in the
mediation and merits of Jesus Christ his Redeemer. The diverse effects of the
Law.
Thus the Law produces contrary effects in contrary spirits; it damneth the
Reprobate without hope; it condemns the Elect, but not damneth them, but
instructs and gives him hope: them it judges without mercy, these it
teaches, admonishes, and brings them unto Christ; therefore, though the Law
condemn us, Resolution.
let it not condemn our hope; for though we cannot our selves perform the
righteousness of the Law, yet there is one has done it for us, our Lord and
our Savior Jesus Christ, in whom let us confidently repose our hope, and
respire new life, The work of Faith.
because we know that his righteousness is ours by imputation, and that our
sins were nailed upon his cross, and suffered death with him, when he wrought
our redemption. Let us therefore enlarge our love without limits to this our
Savior, who for our salvation, has been pleased to undergo so great a
travel. Let us admire the admirable degree of his love, that for our sakes did
descend from his Majesty, to take and dignifie the baseness of our nature;
Christ has freed us from the judgment of the Law.
let us with unspeakable joy, meditate his most holy sufferings, whereby we are
released from the condemnation of the Law; let us despise our selves and our
own righteousness, and apprehend him the only staff of our confidence; let
us never despair, because we know our Redeemer lives, the hope of our
salvation; but in all the extremities of our life, and in all the sorrows of
our conscience, To whom repentant sinners should resort.
let us resort to Jesus Christ, the Physician of our souls; let us enquire for
him at the mercy of his Father; let us enquire at his own righteousness; let
us seek him in his holy sufferings; let us seek him at the cross of his
death, and when we have there found him, let us expose our grief, and implore
his favor; let us show him what the Law has done unto us, what wounds, and
how dangerous it has given our souls; How to implore his favor.
let us therefore confess our sins, and profess our faith; let us also
promise to correct the errors of our life; let us carefully endeavor every
circumstance he has commanded us, and being thus rectified in our resolution,
let us reach our particular hand of faith to our salvation, How to apprehend
Christ.
apprehend him and apply him to our wounded conscience, and by this blessed
means, satisfy the justice of the Law, and restore our souls.

Of the purity of Conscience.
IN every thing thou take in hand, have a care of thy conscience; if the
Devil incites thee to any sin, stand in fear of thy conscience, for thy
conscience within thee condemns thee; if thou art afraid to sin in the
presence of men, let thy conscience much more deter thee from sinning; the
inward testimony of thy conscience is of more efficacy then the testimony of
men: for though thy sins could escape the accusation of all men, yet can they
never escape the inward witness of thy conscience: Reve. 20.12.
the register of thy conscience shall be in the number of those books that
shall be opened at the day of judgment: the conscience is a great volumne in
which all things are written by the finger of truth. The damned cannot deny
their sins at the day of judgment, because they shall be convinced by the
testimony of their own conscience; they cannot fly from the accusation of
their sins, because the tribunal of the conscience is at home and with them,
a pure conscience is the clear glass of the soul, in which she manifestly
beholds God and her self: this book of thy conscience should indeed be
written according to the copy of the book of life; Christ's Gospel is the
book of life, Reve. 13.4. Phil. 4.3.
let the profession of thy faith be conformed according to the rule of Christ's
doctrine, and let the course of thy life be conformed according to the rule of
Christ's life; thy conscience cannot but be good, if there be purity in thy
heart, truth in thy tongue, and honesty in thy actions; these will avoid the
judgment of thy conscience, in which one and the same shall be both
defendant, and plaintiff, witness, judge, tormentor, scourge, and executioner:
what escape can there be, where it is the witness that accuses thee, and
where nothing can be hid from him that judges thee: what does it profit thee
to live in all abundance and plenty, and to be tormented with the whip of
conscience? the fountain of man's felicity and misery, is in his mind, what
then does it profit a man in a burning fever to lie in a bed of gold? what
does it profit a man to enjoy all outward felicity, and to be tormented with
the firebrands of an ill conscience? as much as we regard everlasting
salvation; so much let us regard our conscience, for if we have not a good
conscience, we have not faith; and if we have not faith, we have not the grace
of God: and if we have not the grace of God, how can we hope for everlasting
life? as the judgment of thy conscience is, such judgment thou may expect
from Christ. Sin whilst it is in the action, does blind the mind, and like a
thick cloud does obscure the brightness of true judgment: but at length the
conscience is roused and gnaweth more grievously then any accuser. There are
three judgments, the judgment of the world, the judgment of thy self, and
the judgment of God; and as thou can not escape the judgment of God,
neither can thou escape the judgment of thy self: although thou may
sometime escape the judgment of the world; nothing can hinder thy conscience
from seeing all thy actions. What excuse then can save thee, when thy
conscience within thee does accuse thee? Note.
the peace of conscience is the beginning of everlasting life: for by Gods
judgment and thine own, thou shall be either saved or fall everlastingly: the
conscience is immortal, as the soul is immortal; and the punishment of hell
shall torment the damned, as long as the accusation of conscience shall endure:
no external fire does so affect the body as the inward fire does inflame the
conscience: the soul tormented is eternal, and so is the fire of conscience
eternal: no outward scourge is so grievous to the body, as these whips of
conscience are unto the soul. Avoid therefore the guilt of sin, that so thou
may avoid the torment of conscience: blot out thy sins, out of the book of
thy conscience, by true and hearty repentance; that they be not brought forth
and read at the day of judgment against thee; that so thou may avoid the
fear of Gods dreadful sentence against thee: mortify the worm of
conscience, by the heat of devotion, that it do not devour thee, and beget
eternal horror: extinguish the heat of this inward fire by the tears of
repentance, 2 Timothy 4.7.
that so thou may attain to the joys of heavenly happiness. Grant, O Lord,
that we may fight this good fight, keeping faith and a good conscience, that at
length we may come safe and sound into our heavenly Country to our eternal
joy, and endless comfort.

Of the accusation of Conscience.
EVery man that would prevent the dreadful danger of Gods general judgment,
must in this life while he has time arrest his own soul, examine his
particular actions, and by the evidence of his conscience judge himself and
his transgressions against the Law of God: 1 Pet. 4.17. Prove. 11.3, etc.
for as Gods judgment does begin at his own house, because his principal
care is for his own, the Elect: so should men judge themselves, and have
principal care to examine their own particulars, and as Saint Paul says,
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32.
because we should not be condemned with the world. So likewise, we must
judge our selves, lest we be condemned with the world: for as the Israelites,
because they wanted judges became idolaters; Judges 17.6. Eccle. 18.19.
so our lives, when they are not examined and judged by our consciences, we
become remiss, disobedient, idolatrous, and desperately run on with
licentious and lawless appetite, in the common and curious committing of
sin. And this necessary judging of our selves, is well known to our
reasonable souls, who when we have committed sin, provoke our conscience to
accuse and judge us, as if without this judging of our selves, we could not
prevent the judgment of God, By judging of our selves we prevent the heavy
judgment of God, the manner how to judge our selves.
which would prove much more terrible unto us: the manner of this judgment is
thus: when the Spirit of God moves in any man's heart, a desire to understand
themselves, the soul assembles the powers, of his understanding and exercises
the several faculties in several assignements, and within himself, by
serious meditation, can frame the order of a court; the man, body and soul,
he is the prisoner at the bar, he is also both the witness and the judge:
the matter of his indictment is sin, his conscience is his accuser,
Conscience is our accuser.
his memory does produce the witnesses, his judgment does pronounce the
sentence, and the devil attend the execution, thus are the faculties of the
soul disposed in judging of it self, the soul against the soul, producing
the Law, proving the forfeit, and urging the penalty. Now that which has most
busy care in this spiritual and most serious examination and judgment of our
selves, is the conscience by which the soul has true intelligence and
understanding in what condition it is, 1 Cor. 11.31.32
and by whose authority the judgment of that spiritual Court is swayed, the
conscience giving testimony of all our actions, good and evil, whereby our
judging part is directed, without error, and to make a just proceeding without
all parriality, and therefore says the wise man, Eccles. 14.2.
Blessed is he that is not condemned in his own conscience. For if there be
any just matter of condemnation against us, there is no favor can bribe our
conscience, for that will to our selves, accuse our selves of every sin, and
reduce to memory many our sinful actions, which but for our conscience, we
could not remember, and therefore the Scribes and Pharisees that brought the
woman taken in adultery, to Christ, John 8.9.
and demanded what judgment she deserved, were remembered and accused by their
own conscience of their own guilt of sin, whereof they seemed to be
innocent or ignorant, when ^s Christ said, Let him that is without sin, Verse.
7.
cast the fi st sto^e at her: so that they that were so busy in the
c^^^demnation of another, were condemned themselves by the testimony of their
own conscience, their conscience making them apply their accusations to
themselves, which but then they had urged against another.

And doubtless, The spiritual power of the conscience.
it is a wonderful degree of power the conscience has in the spiritual
trial of our souls, in two respects. First, it knows all our sins, both
secret and open, no man being able to hide them from the knowledge of his
conscience. Secondly, it spares no man, neither any sin, but without respect
of any, it urges all against all men, yea, the very sins of our thoughts are
not privileged, but are even in the knowledge and hatred of our conscience;
therefore says Saint Paul, Romans 2.15.
Their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another; and Almighty God, when he shall gather together all flesh to
judgment, and expose before the Saints and Angels, the several actions of
every man's life, whereby they may be judged accordingly, either to mercy or
justice; He has devised in his wisdom, Our conscience shall reprove us in
the day of judgment.
that every one should have a witness in himself, which is their conscience,
the which in our life time does register both our good and evil actions, and
at our judgment, does both witness and declare them, and at that day the
book of every man's conscience is opened, wherein is writ a true circumstance
of every particular action of every man's life; and these records, these
consciences, are they that give evidence, for, and against our selves at the
day of Gods general judgment. Rev. 20.12, etc.
And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God, and the Books were
opened, that is, all men's consciences, wherein was writ the report of all their
actions. Thus we may see what the office of our conscience is, both in respect
of our own spiritual judgment, which is our reformation, and in respect of
the general judgment of God which must be to every one, The manner of the
accusation of conscience.
either eternal salvation, or damnation. Now, the manner that conscience uses
in this administration, is worth our consideration, that all men generally have
a conscience, the which God has united inseparably to our reasonable natures.

And therefore, not only they that are of Christian belief, and have the
rules of Religion to teach them, but men merely natural and ignorant of
divine worship, do suffer the affliction of their wounded conscience; which
though it be in a far inferior degree of that of understanding Christians,
yet it does in some proportion exercise a judgment on the soul, and does both
remember and terrify them that grossly offend against the Law of nature,
which to them is the Law of reason and Religion; this is proved by the same
place of Scripture before alleged, that the Books of all the dead were
opened, Rev. 20.12.
the word all excludes none from them the accusation of conscience, all are
then afflicted by conscience, but not all alike effectually. The Infidells that
know not God, The difference in the conscience of Christians and Infide^ls.
but only as they are taught by the wisdom of nature; their conscience does
but remember the offender his great sins only, and that sparingly, and with
favor; a Christian conscience is more severe, for it remembers all men, all
their sins without favor, without exception; there is this difference also;
that of Infidels and wicked men does often remember the offender his sin, but
afflicts him not, A Christian conscience has grief.
neither provokes him to repentance; but the conscience of Christians does
fearfully remember the sinner his sin, and does wound the soul of the
offender with sorrow and spiritual grief, making him pursue the means of his
reformation, and hate the cause for which his conscience does so afflict him;
The difference of conscience among Christians.
this is the difference betwixt the conscience of a Christian, and an infidel.
There is also great difference of conscience amongst Christians: for as in the
common sort that profess the Christian Religion, the greater part is by much
the worse, and the choice particulars being the true worshippers of God are but
few, drawn out from an inf nite number of people: so also though all that have
a Christian name profess to have a Christian conscience, The conscience of a
Reprobate.
yet their conscience is no better then their Christianity, only a bare name,
whereof they have no spiritual use nor comfort. Conscience in the Reprobate,
is either silent, or outrageous; the silent conscience in the Reprobate, is
when custom and long continuance of sinning does dull the sense of conscience;
Look to your conscience what conscience ye have, for conscience will damn,
and conscience will save.
and this is when men give themselves over to commit sin with affectation, and
greedy appetite, and oppress their conscience with the multitude of their
committings; so that such conscience does not remember us our sins for the
outrageous conscience in the Reprobate, is when the conscience of the Reprobate
has for a time been silenced, and has given the sinner an unchaste liberty
in his ungodliness; yet so, as that once apprehending the knowledge of his
sin, and knowing the state of condemnation wherein it is, it breaks out into
violence, which wanting moderation, urges the sinne^ to execute upon himself
some desperate vengeance; such was the conscience of Judas, the traitor, which
slept all the time he was plotting and practicing his treason, but when his
sin was brought into act, then his conscience, though evil, did upbraid his
sin with such violence as made the grief unsupportable; and the traitor, not
able to endure the torment of his conscience, thought, as Caine, that his sin
was greater then the mercy of God, and so despairing of mercy, he desperately
hanged himself; Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.
such is the conscience of the Reprobate, their conscience is sleepy, and does
reprove but seldom, yet when it does reprove, it is then most terrible and
without all comfort; and though conscience in this life never afflict for sin,
but seem senseless and dead in its appointed offices, yet in the day of
judgment, Rev. 20.12.
when the book of every man's conscience shall be opened, then will their
consciences that in this life have been most silent, be most loud and terrible
in their accusations, denouncing judgment, Wisd. 17.9, 10, 11.
and inflicting a greater torment on the soul, then the damned can have
patience to bear; this is both the office and end of an evil conscience.

A good conscience.
Now, the conscience of the child of grace is in full opposition to the
conscience of the Reprobate: for when God shall please to call his servants to
the knowledge of themselves, How God moves the conscience.
and to a detestation of their sin, the grace of his holy spirit moves in the
hearts of such: and first awaketh the conscience, and gives it sense to
understand the calamity of the soul, and spirit to reprove and admonish it in
needful directions; and this grace of God, giving the conscience sense to
understand sin, and spirit to reprove it, is the first degree of our
reformation, and a preparation to our spiritual conversion, God himself being
the prime and principal author thereof: When God does stir our conscience,
it continues that holy motion to our reformation.
for when our conscience is once touched with this godly desire to examine the
errors of our life, God does not then leave us, but gives us assistance
continually, to finish that needful care without despair, without fainting:
the conscience being once instructed by grace understands that the soul is
in danger of Gods judgment: this knowledge causes a desire in the soul, to
examine the particulars of our life; then does it compare our several actions,
The manner how a good conscience works.
with the several duties of the Law, and thereby is made manifest the many and
great defects and transgressions of our life, and that therefore our souls and
bodies are guilty, and stand in the danger of condemnation. From this knowledge
does arise the grief of a wounded conscience: for the statute Law of God
condemning us for the trespass of our lives, The cause of the grief of
conscience.
the conscience then whose office is to excuse or accuse, upbraideth our sin,
and denouncing the judgment of the Law against us, which is eternal
damnation; neither can we free our souls from these extremities, until God,
who is the judge of all the world shall please to offer mercy, and the benefit
of his clergy, which is nothing else but the story of the meritorious
sufferings of Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, which is in spiritual characters
upon the cross of his death; and this book being the testament, and writ with
the blood of Christ, the most righteous God presents to all the world: all the
world in respect of themselves, being guilty and condemned by the Law, does
promise remission of sins, How to quiet the trouble of ^ grieved conscience.
a general pardon, to all them that with their eyes or faith shall be seen
and read in the book of life, and apprehend and apply Jesus Christ, the
contents thereof to their salvation.

Thus, and but thus it is possible to quiet the trouble of a grieved
conscience: the conscience being never satisfied for sin, before the justice
of God be satisfied by the apprehensive righteousness of Jesus Christ; Romans
5.1.
and therefore, says Saint Paul, Being then justified by faith, we have peace
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: for before we can live to God, we
must die to our selves; neither is there a spiritual regeneration, where there
is not first a spiritual mortification: and where grace would enter, sin
must avoid; for he that would follow Christ, must deny himself: therefore let
no man presume to apprehend the mystery of the righteousness of the Cross of
Christ before he has reformed his actions, quieted the clamor of his
conscience, and utterly denied the strength of his own nature: for how shall
he bear the Cross of Christ, No man can be able to apprehend Christ before
his conscience has thus prepared him.
that is laden with his own infirmities, or how shall he be benefited by the
promise of the Gospel, that does not first judge himself by the Commandments
of the Law, for he that knows not his disease, seeks no physic, and
Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

This does admonish all men carefully to watch the behavior of their lives;
Revel. 20.12.
for if the conscience of every man be a book, wherein is writ the records of
all his actions, good and bad; and that seeing this book must be read at the
day of judgment, in the audience of all the world, before God and his Angels
and Saints, what manner of men ought all to be in godly conversation? This
ought to move in every one a double care: First, that they avoid carefully all
ungodliness both in thought and action, whereby they may suffer disgrace,
before God and all his creatures at the general day of judgment, when the
book of their conscience, shall be opened to every ones eye. Secondly, it
does persuade a diligence in all godly exercise, and that all men contend with
a holy emulation to exceed in godly actions, whereby they may receive applause
and general reputation in the general assembly of God and all creatures, for
as in earthly affairs, men covet most desirously to gain reputation and a
general good name, There is no ambition lawful but the covetous desire of
heaven.
because it argues an extraordinary degree of desert in him that has it: so
in contending for this spiritual garland, Heaven, it cannot but be an
extraordinary degree of content, and spiritual pleasure, to be named in the
rank of best deservers. And as malefactors that suffer public punishment for
their offense, esteem the shame more then the pain of their corrections, so
ought all men to fear the shame they must endure, The book of conscience
cannot be defaced, but only by the precious blood of Christ.
when their conscience disgraceth them before so great a presence, as will be
at the general day of judgment. For let all men be persuaded, that all their
faults are so written in the book of their conscience, that there is no means
to obscure their knowledge, and to raze them out: neither will the conscience
though it be our own, be corrupted to connive and dissemble with God, but
even to our own faces it will produce all our sins, whose memory is not
blotted out by the righteous blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God: 1 Pet.
3.21.
and seeing the witness of our conscience is the evidence, whereby we are all
judged either to life or death: we all ought most carefully to avoid the doing
of ought that may offend our consciences, Not to offend our conscience.
but rather to live in fear and awe of conscience; because our eternal state
depends upon the report and accusation of our own conscience. This ought to
prevent all unconscionable actions in us, and to move a dread in us, to have a
detestation of every sin, because when we have committed sins, we have hired
so many witnesses against our own souls, to urge our eternal condemnation.
The silent conscience will be most terrible and loud at the day of judgment.
Customary sinning duls the sense of conscience.
Lastly, seeing that, that conscience which in this life is most silent, will
notwithstanding at the day of judgment be most terrible and clamorous, it
admonishes all men not to rebel against their conscience, and to run on
without check in the committing of sin, but rather to yield themselves to
the correction of their conscience, left by their customary sinning, they dull
the sense of conscience, and so run on the race of all unlawfulness: for
though the reproof of conscience be very terrible to him that rightly
understands it, yet ought it to be carefully apprehended, and respected as a
moving cause to reformation and repentance, and let no man encourage himself
with common example, that because the common sway of men's actions, respect
greatness more then goodness, and craft more then conscience, that this can
warrant any ones imitation, but rather wheresoever we see unconscionable
dealing; if in our friends we ought to admonish them, and tell them of their
fault; if in our enemies, we must hate the sin, but pity the sinner, and labor
if it be possible, The office of charity.
his conversion, but not his imitation: and this direction is both wisdom and
charity; for he that is wise shall be armed, and not harmed by ill example: and
he that is charitable will do all the good he can, and wish the good he cannot
do.

Let us therefore constantly endeavor, to reduce to memory the several
actions of our life past; let us then compare them to the duty of our
conscience, Good conscience is in hatred with sin.
and thereby understand in what degree of sin we are; what our conscience
shall approve, let us continue; what it condemns, let us hate, be it our
pleasure, be it our profit, be it our nearest, or our dearest sin, if our
conscience call it sin, let us despise it; let there be nothing shall make us
alter or suspend this resolution; let us be constant in the love of conscience;
what we have done amiss, let us reform it by conscience; what we have to do,
let our conscience judge it lawful before we do it; if our conscience
presents us profit, let us despise it, if it be not honest; if pleasure, and
not lawful, let us loath it; let us undertake no action, nor entertain no
favor, but by the direction of conscience; in every judgment, and in all our
actions, To consult with conscience.
let us consult and be led by the rule and voice of conscience; if the world
commend a sin, and our conscience condemn it, let us condemn the world, and
commend our conscience, let us credit our conscience more then common example,
because our conscience must judge us, and not example; if our conscience
accuses us secretly of sin, we shall certainly know there is cause; let us
not silence our conscience from all reproof, let us only avoid the cause of
reproof, sin, and that carefully; when our conscience shall urge us, the Law,
our sins, and the condemnation of the Law we have deserved, let us not despise
our conscience, nor despair mercy, but direct our hearts and our eyes of
faith, to Jesus Christ, the strength of our salvation, Romans 5.1.
by whose favor we shall both satisfy the Law and our conscience; the hope
and comfort we have in his righteousness, will quiet the trouble of our
conscience; and he that has reconciled God and us, will also reconcile us to
our conscience, Conscience that did accuse, will comfort.
and make it that was our accuser our comforter: This direction I propose to my
self, and do persuade all men as I propose and purpose, that in all our
actions and consultations, we judge nothing convenient, that is not lawful,
and nothing may be thought lawful, but that which has the warrant of a good
conscience.

To avoid Security.
COnsider, thou devout soul, what a matter it is to be saved, and thou shall
easily shake off all security: at no time, and in no place is there security,
neither in Heaven, nor in Paradise, much less in the world. Genes. 3.17.
An Angel fell in the presence of the divinity, and Adam fell in the place of
pleasure. Adam was created after the Image of God, and notwithstanding, he was
deceived by the trecheries of the devil. Solomon was the wisest of men, 1
King. 3.12. and 11.3.
and yet his wives turned away his heart from the Lord. Judas was in the
School of our Savior, and did every day hear the saving Word of that chief
Doctor, Luke 22.3.
and yet was he not safe from the snares of Satan; he was plunged headlong
into the pit of covetousness and desperation, and so into the pit of
perpetual punishment. David was a man according to Gods own heart, 1 Samuel
13.14.
and was unto the Lord a most dear son, and by murder and adultery, 2 Samuel
12.6, 7.
he became the son of death. Where then, and when is there security in this
life? Rely with an assured confidence of heart upon the promises of God, and
thou shall be safe from the invasions of the devil; There is no security in
this life, but in the life to come.
there is no securi^^ in this life, but that which is infallibly promised in
Scripture to those that believe, and walk in the (...) of the Lord; but when
we come unto the future happiness, promised unto us, then shall we have full
security; for in this life Religion and fear are coupled together, neither can
the one be without the other; therefore think upon the grievous spots of thy
sins, and fear him that according to justice will judge thee for the same.
What are the afflictions of the godly, but bitter arrows, sent from the sweet
hand of God for their correction? many that escape unpunished in this life, God
thinks them unworthy of punishment, whom notwithstanding he reprobateth for
ever. Outward felicity is often times a sign of eternal damnation; nothing is
more unhappy than the happiness of sinners; and nothing more miserable, then
he that knows no misery. Augustine.
Whatsoever thou beholdest with thine eyes, thou see cause of grief: which
duly considered, are remedies against security. Behold God above whom we have
offended; think upon hell beneath which we have deserved; think upon the sin
behind, the which we have committed; think upon the judgment before, which
we dread and stand in fear of; think upon the conscience within, the which
we have defiled; and think upon the world without, which we have too much
loved; consider whence thou came, and be ashamed; consider what thou art, and
be sorrowful; consider whither thou go, and tremble. Let a man therefore
lament and grieve, and shake off all security, lest in the just and secret
judgment of God he be forsaken, and left in the power of the devil to be
destroyed; if thou have grace, so delight thy self in it, and acknowledge it
to be the gift of God, and that thou do not possess it by any hereditary
righteousness of thine own. Security is a pernicious sin.
Happy shall thou be, if thou labourest with all care and diligence to avoid
security, the mother of all evil: God will not forsake thee; but take heed
thou do not forsake him; God has given thee his grace, pray thou earnestly
unto him, that he would also give thee perseverance in that grace. God bids
thee be certain of thy salvation, but he bids thee not be secure; therefore
thou must fight valiantly, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
that thou may at length triumph gloriously: thy flesh within thee fights
against thee, and the enemy, the nearer he is, the more to be feared; the world
about thee fights against thee, and the greater the enemy is, the more to be
feared; the devil about thee fights against thee, and the more potent the
enemy is, the more to be feared; through the power of God fear not to
encounter with these enemies; through the power divine, thou shall be enabled
to obtain the victory; but thou can not overcome these so great and potent
enemies by security, but by assiduity in fighting: then do the enemies most
gather their forces together, when they seem to grant truce, they are vigilant
and watchful, and thou sleepy and sluggish: they make themselves ready to
assault and hurt thee; make thou thy self ready therefore to resist. Many
faint by the way, and never come home into their country: Deuteronomy. 1.35.
how many Israelites did there die in the wilderness, and never came to the
promised Land of Canaan? how many spiritual sons of Abraham do perish in
the wilderness of this world, and never come to enjoy the promised inheritance
of the Celestial Canaan? Let it be therefore our only desire to attain to
the glory which is in heaven; we live in security, as we were past the snare
of death and the day of Judgment. Matthew. 24.44.
Christ says, he will come to judgment at such an hour that we think not
of, this says Truth it self. And again, he repeats it, hear and fear; for,
the Lord will come at an hour we think ^o of. We have therefore great cause
to fear, that we come not to judgment unprovided; for how shall we be able to
endure the strict examination at the day of judgment. Seeing we cannot recover
for ever, that which is lost in this one moment, in the shortness of this one
moment judgment shall pass either to mercy or condemnation, what we shall be
for all eternity: in this one moment, life and death, damnation and salvation,
punishment and eternal glory shall be appointed to every one: Lord, thou that
have given us grace to that which is good: give us also grace to persevere in
that goodness, least we fall into the ensuing danger prepared for the
reprobates and the ungodly, which is hell and damnation, and the torments
thereof.

Of the knowledge of man's corruption and state of his misery in this world, and
the miserable state and condition in the life to come, without we be renovated
by Christ: which Lord God grant us all grace so to be.
O Wretched man, where shall I begin to describe thy endless miseries, who art
condemnable, as soon as conceived; liable to eternal death before thou wast
born to a temporal life. A miserable change happened to all posterities, by the
fall of Adam.
A beginning indeed I find, but no end of thy miseries: for when Adam and Eve
being created after Gods own Image, and placed in paradise, that they and
their posterity might live in happy and blessed estate of life immortal,
having dominion and rule of all earthly creatures, and only restrained from
the fruit of one tree, as a sign of their obedient subjection, to their
Almighty Creator, though God forbad them this one small thing under the penalty
of eternal death; yet they believed the devils word before the Word of God;
making God, as much as in them lay, a liar: and so being unthankefull for all
his benefits, which God bestowed upon them, they became malcontent with their
present state, as if God had dealt enviously or niggardly with them, and
believed that the devil would make them partakers of far more glorious
things, then ever God had bestowed upon them, and in their pride they fell into
rebellion, and committed high treason, against the most high Almighty, and
disdaining to be Gods subjects, they affected most blasphemously to be gods
themselves, equal unto God their maker: hence till they repented, loosing Gods
Image, they became like unto the Devil; and so all their posterity like a
traitorous brood whilst they remained impenitent like them, Math. 13.42.
are subject in this life to all cursed miseries, and in the life to come to
everlasting fire and damnation, prepared for the devil and his angels.
Consider therefore, thou faithful soul, the miserable condition of man, and
thou shall easily avoid all temptations: man is vile in his ingresse, miserable
in his progress, and lamentable in his egresse; he is assaulted by devils,
provoked by tentations, allured by delights, cast down by tribulations,
entangled by accusations, bestripped of virtues, snared in all evil customs,
and drowned in all manner of vices.

Lay aside then for a while thy doting vanities, and take a view with me of
thy doleful miseries, which duly surveyed and truly considered, I doubt not
but that thou will conclude with me, that it is far better never to have
natures being, then not to be by grace a practitioner of religious piety:
consider therefore the miseries in thy life, and first of thy infancy.

Of the wretchedness of man, being conceived in sin, brought forth in
uncleanness and his days miserable.
What wast thou being an infant, but a bruit, and a lump of sinful flesh
conceived in the shape of man? and thy body conceived in the heat of lust, the
secret of shame, and stain of original sin? and thus wast thou cast naked
upon the earth, all imbrued in the blood of filthiness, filthy indeed, so that
thy mother was ashamed to let thee know the manner thereof. What cause then
have thou to boast thy birth, which was a cursed pain to thy mother, and to
thy self: the entrance into a dangerous and troublesome life? the greatness
of which miseries, because thou could not express in words, thou did show
forth as well as thou could in weeping tears. Secondly, of the miseries of
thy youth.

What wast thou in thy youth, but like a wild and untamed beast? all whose
actions are rash and rude, not capable of any good counsel when it is given
thee, and Ape-like delighting in nothing but toys and baubles, foolish and
vain things? therefore thou no sooner begannest to have a little strength and
discretion, but forthwith thou wast kept under the rod of correction, by fear
of parents and masters, as if thou had been borne to live always in
subjection, and discipline of others, rather than to be at the disposition of
thine own will: no tired horse was ever more willing to be rid of his burden,
then thou wast to get out of the servile state of this bondage. Thirdly the
miseries of manhood.

What is man's state, but a sea wherein as waves one trouble arises in the
neck of another, the latter worse than the former? no sooner did thou enter
into the affairs of the world, but thou wast enwrapped about with a cloud of
miseries: The miserable state and condition of man in his midle-age.
thy flesh provokes thee to lust, the world allures thee to pleasure, and the
devil tempts thee to all manner of sins: fear of enemies affrights thee,
suits in law do vex thee, wrongs of ill neighbors do oppress thee, cares
of wife and children do consume thee, and disquietnesse twixt open foes and
false friends do in a manner confound thee, finne stings thee within, Satan
lays snares before thee, within thy conscience accuses thee, thy sins past
dog behind thee; now adversity on the left hand frets thee, anon prosperity
on thy right hand flatters thee: over thy head Gods vengeance due to thy sin,
is ready to fall upon thee; 2 Cor. 11 25, etc.
and under thy feet hell mouth is ready to swallow thee up; and in this
miserable estate, whither will thou go for rest and comfort? the house is full
of cares, the field full of toils, the Country of rudeness, the City of
factions, the Court full of envy, the Church full of sects, the Sea of Pirates,
the Land of robbers, that thou can be no where safe, or free from danger: or
in what state will thou live in, seeing wealth is envied, and poverty
contemned; wit is distrusted, and simplicity is derided; superstition is
mocked, and religion is suspected; vice is advanced, and virtue is disgraced,
Oh! with what a body of sin and misery art thou compassed about in a world of
wickedness? what are thine eyes, but windows to behold vanities? what are
thine cares, but floodgates to let in streams of iniquity? what are thy
senses, but matches to give fire to thy lusts? what is thy heart, but the
anvill whereon Satan has forged the ugly shape of all lewd affections? Art
thou Nobly descended? thou must put thy self in peril of foreign wars, to
get the reputation of earthly honor, often times hazard thy self in a
desperate combat to avoid the aspersion of a coward. Art thou borne in mean
estate? Lord what pain and drudgery must thou endure, both at home and abroad,
to get thee maintenance; and all perhaps, scarce sufficient to relieve thy
necessity, and to supply thy want; and when after much travel, service and
labor, a man has got something, how little certainety is there in that which
is gotten? seeing thou see by daily experience, that he who was yesterday
rich, to day is a beggar: How sudden is change of state
he that yesterday was in health, is to day sick: he that a yesterday was
merry and laughed, has cause to day to mourn and weep: he that yesterday
was in great favor, is to day in as great disgrace: he that yesterday was
alive and in health, is to day dead: and thou know not how soon and in what
manner thou shall dye thy self, and who then can innumerate the losses,
crosses, griefs, disgraces and calamities which are incident to sinful man:
and to let pass the death of wife, children and friends, which seems
oft-times to be far more bitter unto us then present death it self.
Fourthly, the miseries of old age.

What is old age, but the receptacle of all maladies? The condition of old age.
for if it be thy lot to draw thy days to a long date, in comes bald-head^d
old age, stooping under dotage, with his wrinckled face, rotten teeth, stinking
breath, testy with choler, withered with dryness, dimmed with blindness,
obsurded with deafenes, overwhelmed with sickness, diseased and pained with
bone-ach, decrepid with age, and almost bowed together with weakness, having
scarce use of any sense, but the sense of pain, which so racketh every member
of his body, that it never eases him of grief, till it has thrown him down
into his grave; for the earth is the womb that has bred us, and the earth is
the tomb that must receive us. Thus ends the miseries of the body in this
life.

Of the Meditation of the misery of the body and soul in this life.
Sinfulness in man, is an universal corruption, Ephesians. 2.3. Genes. 6.5. Romans
12.2. 1 Cor. 2.14. Phil. 2.3. Romans 3.12. Romans 7.19.
both of nature and actions; for by nature we are infected with a pronenesse
to every sin; continually the mind is stuffed with vanity, the understanding is
darkened with ignorance, the will affects nothing but vile and vain things,
all her actions are evil; yea, this deformity is so violent, that oftentimes
in the regenerate soul, the appetite will not obey the government of reason,
and the will wandreth after, and yields content to sinful motions. How great
then is the violence of the appetite and will in the Reprobate soul, which
still remains in her natural corruption? Hence it is, that thy wretched soul
is so deformed with sin, defiled with lust, polluted with filthiness,
outraged with passions, over-carried with affections, pining with envy,
overcharged with gluttony, surquedred with drunkenness, John 8.44.
boiling with revenge, transported with rage, and the glorious Image of God
transformed to the ugly shape of devil, Genes. 6.6.
so far forth, that once it repented the Lord, that ever he made man.

After that the aged man has conflicted with long sickness, and having
endured the brunt of pain, should now expect some ease, in comes death,
natures slaughter man, Gods curse, and hells purvey or, and looks the old man
grim in the face, and neither pitying his age, nor regarding his long endured
dolours, will not be hired to forbear, either for silver or gold, but batters
all the principal parts of the body, summons him to appear before the
terrible Judge of heaven and earth. Now the miserable soul perceives her
earthly body to begin to dye; for as toward the dissolution of the universal
frame of the great world, Mark. 13.24, 25, 26.
the Sun shall be turned into darkness, the Moon into blood, and the
Sta^res shall fall from heaven, the air shall be full of storms, Luke 21.25,
26.
and flashing meteors, the earth shall tremble, and the sea shall rage and
roar, and men's hearts shall fail and tremble for fear; so toward the
dissolution of man, which is the little world, his eyes which are as the Sun
and Moon, lose their light, and see nothing but bloodguiltinesse of sin, the
rest of the senses, as little stars, do one after another fail and fall;
his mind, reason and memory, as heavenly powers of the soul, are shaken with
fearful storms of despair; and first, flashing of hell fire, his earthly
body begins to shake and tremble, and the humors, like an overflowing sea,
roar and rattle in his throat, still expecting the woeful end of his dreadful
beginning.

Whilst he is thus, The soul summoned to appear at the tribunal. Zach.
5.2, etc.
summoned to appear at the great assizes of Gods general Judgment, behold, a
quarter sessions and goal delivery is held within himself, where Reason sits
as Judge, the Devil puts in a bill of indictment, as large as that book of
Zachary, wherein is alleged all thy evil deeds that ever thou have committed,
and all the good deeds that ever thou have omitted, wherein is written,
lamentations, and mourning, and woe, Ezech. 2.10.
and all the curses and judgments thar are due to every sin; thine own
conscience shall accuse thee, and thy memory shall give bitter evidence against
thee, and death stands at the bar ready, 1 John 3.20.
as a cruel executioner to dispatch thee. If thou shall thus justly condemn
thy self, how shall thou escape the just condemnation of God, who knows all
thy misdeeds better than thy self? Feign would thou put out of thy mind,
the remembrance of thy wicked deeds that trouble thee, but they flow faster
into thy remembrance, and they will not be put away, but cry unto thee, We are
thy works, and we will follow thee; and whilst thy soul within thee is thus
out of peace and order, thy children, wife and friends, trouble thee as fast,
to have thee put thy goods in order, some crying, some craving, some pitying,
some cheering, all like flesh flies, helping to make thy sorrows more
sorrowful. Now the devils, who are come from hell to fetch away thy soul,
begin to appear to her, and wait as soon as she comes forth, to take her and
carry her away: stay she would within, but that she feels the body begin by
degrees to dye, and ready, like a ruinous house, to house, to fall upon her
head, fearful she is to come forth, because of those hell hounds which wait
for her coming. Oh, she that spent so many days and nights in vain and idle
pastimes, would now give the whole world, if she had it, for one hours delay,
that she may have space to repent and reconcile her self unto God: but it
cannot be, because her body which joined with her in the actions of sin is
altogether now unfit to join with her in the exercise of repentance, and
repentance must be of the whole man.

The dolor of the soul.
The soul now sees that all her pleasures are gone, as if they had never
been, and that but only torments remain, which never shall have end of
being: who can sufficiently express her remorse for her sins past, her anguish
for her present misery, and her terror for her torments to come? In this
extremity she looks about every where for help, and finds her self every way
helpelesse; thus in her greatest miseries desirous to hear the least word of
comfort, she directs this or the like speech unto her eyes, saying; O eyes,
who in times past, were so quick sighted to behold the vanities of the world,
can ye spy no comfort for me, nor any way how I might escape this dreadful
danger: but the eye-strings are broken, they cannot see the candle that burns
before them, nor discern whether it be day or night: the distressed soul
finding no comfort in the eyes, speaks to the ears; O ears, who were wont to
recreate your selves with hearing new pleasant discourses, and musicks sweetest
harmony, can ye hear any news or tidings of the least comfort for me to
escape this dreadful danger? the ears are so deaf, that either they cannot
hear at all, or the sense of hearing grown so weak, that they cannot endure
to hear his dearest friends to speak; and why should the ears hear any glad
tidings of joy in death, who could never abide to hear the glad tidings of the
Gospel in his life, the ears cannot minister no comfort. Then she intimates
her grief to the tongue: O tongue, The reprobate soul can find no comfort in
her extremity.
who was wont to make bold challenges with the best, and brag it out with the
bravest. Where are now thy big and daring words, now in my greatest need, can
thou speak nothing in my defense? Can thou neither daunt these enemies with
threatening words, nor entreat them with fair speeches? Alas, the tongue two
days ago lay speechless, that it cannot in his greatest extremity either
call for a little drink, or desire a friend to take away with his finger the
phlegm that is ready to choke him. Finding here no hope of help, she speaks
unto the feet: where are ye, O feet, which sometimes were so swift and nimble
in running to all manner of lewdness? All places are penal unto the reprobate
which do always carry torments and vexation about them.
can ye carry me no where out of this dangerous place? The feet are stone
dead already, that if they be not stirred they cannot stir. Then she directs
her speech unto her hands. O hands, who have so often been approved for
manhood, in peace and in war, and wherewith I have so often defended my self
and offended my foes; never had I more need then now, death looks me grim in
the face and kills me: hellish fiends wait about my bed to devour me, help
me now or I perish for ever: Alas the hands are so weak, and do so
tremble, that they cannot reach to the mouth a spoonefull of supping, to
relieve languishing nature. The wretched soul seeing her self thus desolate,
and altogether destitute of friends, help, and comfort; and knowing that
within an hour she must be in everlasting pains, retires her self to the
heart, which of all members is the first that lives, 2 Samuel 22.5, etc.
and the last that dies; from whence she makes this doleful lamentation, with
her self: O miserable caitife that I am, how do the sorrows of death compass
me? how do the terrors of Belial, make me afraid? how have the snares both of
the first and second death overtaken me at once? Oh! how suddenly death has
stolen upon me, with unsensible degrees, like the Sun which man perceives not
to move, and yet is most swift of motion? How does death wreake on me his
spite, without pity? What joy remains now of all my former fleshly pleasures,
wherein I placed my chiefest delights? those foolish pleasures were but
deceitful dreams, and now they are all past like vanishing shadows: but to
think of those eternal pains, which I must endure for those short pleasures,
pains me as hell before I enter into hell: yet justly I confess, as I have
deserved I am served; that being made after Gods Image, a reasonable soul,
able to judge my own estate; and having mercy so often offered, and I
entreated to receive it; I so wilfully neglected Gods grace, and preferred the
pleasures of sin, before the religious care of pleasing God, leudly spending
my short time without considering what account I should make at the last day:
and now all the pleasures of my life put together, countervaile not the least
part of my present pains: my joys were but momentary, and gone before I could
scarce enjoy them; but my miseries are eternal and never shall have end. Oh!
that I were now to begin my life again, how would I contemn the world and the
vanities thereof! how religiously and purely would I lead my life! how would I
serve my God, frequent the Church, and sanctify the Lords day! if satan should
offer me all the treasures, pleasures, and promotions of this world he should
never entice me to forget my God, and these terrors of this last dreadful
hour. Esaias 66.24.
But, O corrupt carcass, and stinking carrion, how has the devil deluded us?
and how have we served and deceived each other, and pulled swift damnation
upon us both! now is our cause more miserable then the beasts that perishes in
the ditch: for I must go to answer before the righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth, where I shall have none to speak for me; and these wicked fiends who
are privy to all my evil deeds, will accuse me: and I cannot excuse my self,
my own heart already condemns me: I therefore must needs be damned before
his judgment seat, and from thence be carried by these infernal fiends, into
that horrible prison of endless torments and utter darkness. Oh! Math. 22.13.
where shall I lodge to night, and who shall be my companions? O horrors to
think! O grief to consider! Oh! cursed be the day wherein I was borne: how is
it that I came forth of the womb to endure these hellish miseries and
sorrows, and that my days should thus end with eternal shame! Cursed be the
day that I was first united to so lewd a body: oh, that I had but so much
favor as that I might never see thee more! our parting is bitter and doleful,
but our meeting again to receive at that dreadful day, the fullness of our
deserved vengeance will be far more terrible and intolerable. But what mean
I thus by too late repentance and lamentation to seek to prolong time? my last
hour is come, I hear the heart strings break, this filthy house of clay
ready to fall on my head; here is neither hope, help, nor place of any longer
abiding: The separation of the soul from the body.
and must I needs be gone? thou filthy carcass, with fare ill, far well, I
leave thee. And so all trembling she comes forth, and forthwith is seized upon
by infernal fiends, who carry her with violence torrenti simili to the
bottomless lake, that burns with fire and brimstone, where she is kept as
a prisoner in torments, till the general judgment of the last great day.
Apoc. 21, 8. 1 Pet. 3.19.
The loathsome carcass is afterward laid in the grave; in which action, for
the most part, the dead bury the dead: that is, they who are dead in sin,
bury those who are dead for sin. And thus the Godless and unregenerated
worldling, who made earth his paradise, his belly his god, and his lust his
law; as in his life he sowed vanity, so now he is dead and reapeth misery: in
his prosperity he neglected to serve God, now in his adversity God refuses to
save him; and the devil, whom he long served, now at length pays him his
wages: detestable was his life, damnable his death; the devil has his soul,
the grave has his carcass. In which pit of corruption, den of death, and
dungeon of sorrow let us leave the miserable caitiffe rotting, with his mouth
full of earth, his belly full of worms, and his carcass full of stench,
expecting a fearful resurrection, when it shall be reunited with the soul;
that as they sinned together, so they may be tormented together eternally. Thus
far of the miseries of the soul and body in death, which is but cursednesse
in part: now follows the fullness of cursednesse, which is the misery of
soul and body after death.

Meditations of the misery of man after death, which it the fullness of
cursednesse.
Luke 8.28.9. and 16.23. These. 1.10. Math. 23.33. Luke 16.22, 23, 24.
THe fullness of cursednesse, when it falls upon a creature not able to bear
the brunt thereof, presses him down to that bottomless deep of the
endless wrath of Almighty God, which is called the damnation of hell, and the
torments thereof. This fullness of cursednesse, is either particular or
general: particular, is that which in less measure of fullness, lights upon
the soul immediately as soon as she is separated from the body; 1 Pet. 3.19.
for in the very instant of dissolution, she is in the sight and presence of
God; for when she cease to see with the organes of her fleshly eyes, she
sees after a spiritual manner, like Stephen, who saw the glory of God, Acts
7.55.
and Jesus standing at his right hand, and there, by the testimony of her own
conscience, Christ the righteous Judge, who knows all things, makes her by
his omnipresent power, to understand the doom and judgment that is due unto
her sins, and what must be her eternal state, and in this manner standing in
the sight of heaven, not fit for her uncleanness to enter into heaven, she is
said to stand before the throne of God, so forthwith she is carried by the
evil angels, who came to fetch her, with violence into hell, where she is
kept as in a prison, 1 Pet. 3.19.
in everlasting pains and chains, under darkness, until the Judgment of
the great day, Luke 16.23. Matthew. 13.42.
but not in that extremity of torment, which she shall receive at the last day.

The general fullness of cursednesse, is in a greater measure of fullness,
Joh. 5.28.29. Luke 16.24. Luke 1.31, 32. Apoc. 11.18.
which shall be inflicted upon both the soul and body, when by the mighty
power of Christ, the supreme Judge of heaven and earth, the one shall be
brought out of hell, the other out of the grave, Dan. 12.1.2. Apoc. 20.13.14
as prisoners to receive their dreadful doomes, according to their evil
deeds; how shall the Reprobate, by the roaring of the Sea, the quaking of the
earth, Mat. 24.29, etc. Luke 21.25, 26.
the trembling of the powers of heaven, and terrors of heavenly signs, be
driven at the worlds end to their wits end? O what a woeful salutation will
there be betwixt the damned soul and body, at their re-uniting at that
terrible day!

O sink of sin! O lump of filthiness, will the soul say unto the body, how
am I compelled to re-enter into thee, The damned souls apostrophe to her body
at the second meeting.
not as into an habitation to rest, but as into a prison to be tormented
together with thee, would God thou had perpetually rotted in the grave, that
I might never have seen thee again; Oh, how shall we be confounded together,
to hear before God, Angels, and men, laid open all those secret sins which we
committed together! Oh earth, would thou would open thy mouth and swallow us
up, Numb. 16.
as thou did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, that I might be seen no more. O
damned furies, would ye might without delay tear me apieces, on condition
that ye would tear me unto nothing; but whilst thou art in vain bewailing
thy misery, within thee, thine own conscience, more then a thousand witnesses,
shall accuse thee, and the devil, who tempted thee to all thy lewdnesses,
shall with thy conscience, testify against thee; and on the other side, shall
stand the holy Angels and Saints, approving Christ's Justice, and detesting so
filthy a creature; behind thee an hideous noise of innumerable fellow damned
Reprobates tarrying for thy company; before thee all the world, burning in
flaming fire; above thee an irefull Judge, of deserved vengeance, ready to
pronounce his sentence against thee; beneath thee, ^he fiery and sulphurous
mouth of the bottomless pit gaping to receive thee: in this woeful estate to
hide thy self will be impossible, to appear will be intolerable, and yet
thou must stand forth, to receive with thy fellow Reprobates, this thy deserved
sentence, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, Matthew. 13.42. and
25.41, etc.
prepared for the devil and his angels. Depart from me, there is a separation
from all joy and happiness, ye cursed, there is a black and direful
excommunication, into fire, there is the cruelty of pain, everlasting, there
is the perpetuity of punishment, prepared for the devil and his angels, here
are thy infernal tormenting, and tormented companions. O terrible sentence,
from which the condemned cannot escape, which being pronounced, cannot possibly
be withstood; against which a man cannot except, and from which a man can no
where appeal, so that to the damned nothing remains but hellish torments,
which knows neither ease of pain, nor end of time: from this Judgment Seat,
thou must be thrust by Angels, together with all the damned devils, and
Reprobates, into the bottomless lake of utter darkness, that perpetually
burns with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 21.8.
where there shall be such weeping, woes, and wailing, that the cries of Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, when the earth swallowed them up, wap nothing comparable to
this howling, nay, it will seem unto thee a hell before thou enterest into
hell, into which bottomless lake, after that thou art once plunged, thou shall
ever be falling down, and never find a bottom; in it thou ever shall lament,
and none shall pity thee, Apoc. 14.10. Matthew. 22.13.
thou shall always weep with pain of the fire, and yet gnash thy teeth with
the extremity of cold; thou shall weep, to think that thy miseries are past
remedy; thou shall weep, to think that to repent is to no purpose; thou shall
weep, to think, that for the shadow of short pleasures, thou have incurred
these hellish sorrows of eternal pains; thou shall weep, to see, how that
weeping it self can nothing prevail; yea, in weeping, thou shall weep more
tears, than there is water in the Sea; for the water the Sea is finite, but
the weeping of the damned shall be infinite.

Of the grievousnesse of the torments of Hell.
Think, O devout soul, upon the grievousnesse of hell torments, and it will
draw thy affections from wicked pleasures, and thou shall thereby easily get
the mastery of thy sins; in hell there shall be the presence of all evil, and
the absence of all good; there shall be the heat of fire to burn thee, Matthew.
22.13.
and the freezing of cold to pinch thee, perpetual darkness, continual
tears, terrible fights, lamentable howlings and cryings for ever; Hells cloudy
darkness is mavelous: the bitterness of pain unmeasurable and infinite,
everlastingnesse of all miseries.
there shall be dryness, thirst and stink of brimstone; there shall be the
worm of conscience, which shall sting worse than an Adder, for sins made
manifest to all; there shall be envy, hatred and sorrow, and want of the
vision of the divine Essence, and the beatificall glory and loss of all hope
of good and goodness, and by the power of God, the light of the fire shall be
separated from the burning quality, the light shall serve to rejoice the
Saints, and the burning quality to torment the damned. And not as an object of
comfort, to see it and rejoice, but to the increasing of their misery, that
they may see it and grieve the more; Mat. 13.42.
there shall be weeping for grief, and gnashing of teeth for madness; they
shall be by the worm of conscience tormented in the flesh; every fin there
shall have its proper torment: for if in this life, by Gods permission, the
devil does so grievously afflict the Saints, how muchmore grievously shall he
then afflict and torment the damned which are given up to his power for ever?
There thy lascivious eyes shall be afflicted with the fight of ghastly spirits,
thy curious ears shall be affrighted with hideous noise of howling devils, and
gnashing teeth of damned Reprobates; thy dainty nose shall be cloyed with the
noisome stench of sulphur: thy delicate taste, shall be pained with
intolerable hunger: thy drunken throat, shall be parched with unquenchable
thirst: thy mind shall be tormented, to think how for the love of abortive
pleasures, which perished ere they budded; that thou so foolishly lost heavens
joys, and incurred hellish pains, which last beyond eternity: how shall the
understanding be racked, to consider, how for momentany riches, thou have lost
the eternal treasure, and changed heavens felicity, for hels misery: where
every part of the body without any intermission of pain, shall be alike
tormented continually. In these hellish torments? thou shall be deprived of the
beatificall sight of God; wherein consists the sovereign good, Math. 25, 10.
and life of the soul: for when the Virgins that are prepared are entered in
with the Bridegroom, the gate shall be presently shut against the reprobate and
damned; that is, the gate of indulgence, the gate of mercy, the gate of
consolation, the gate of hope, and the gate of holy conversation: the damned
shall hate all the creatures of God, they shall hate one another, they shall
hate the holy Angels, and the Elect of God, and even God himself; but not
properly in his own nature, but in the effects of his justice. All the evils
present in this life are single and by degrees; one is troubled with poverty,
another is tormented with sickness, another is oppressed with grievous wrongs,
another with hard servitude, another over-burthened with calamities, and
another contaminated with reproaches; but there, all at once shall be tormented
with all evils, the pains there shall be universal, Every member for his
sins shall have his proper punishment.
in all the senses and members of both body and soul: in this life hope of
release mitigateth all troubles, but there is left no hope of deliverance,
there is no hope of mitigation or ease, not so much as for one moment; but the
punishment of hell is eternal: there shall be no order, but horror; no voice,
but blasphemers and houlers; no noise, but of tortures and of the tortured; no
society, but of the devil and his angels; who being tormented themselves shall
have no other ease, but to wreak their fury in tormenting their fellows
damned: there shall be punishment, without pity; misery, without mercy; sorrow,
without succor; crying, without comfort; mischief, without measure; torment
without ease; where the worm never dies, nor the fire never quenched: Mark.
9.44. Esaias 66.24.
in which flame thou shall be ever burning, and never consumed; ever dying, and
never dead; ever rowing in the pains of death, and never rid, nor knowing no
end of those pangs: So that after thou have endured them so many 1000 years,
as there is grass on the earth, or sands on the sea shore, thou art no nearer
to have an end of thy torments, then thou wast the first day that thou wast
cast into them: yea, so far are they from ending, that they are ever but
beginning: but if after a thousand times so many thousand years, the damned
soul could but conceive a hope that those her torments should have an end,
this would be some comfort, to think that at length an end will come: but as
often as the mind thinks of this word never, it is another hell, in the midst
of hell.

Therefore, O devout soul, think upon the eternity of hell torments, and thou
shall the more truly understand the grievousnes thereof. Oh! eternity, not to
be termed: O eternity, not to be measured by any space of time! O eternity, not
to be conceived by any humane understa^ding! how much do thou augment the
punishment of he damned after innumerable thousands of years they shall be
compelled to think that then is but the beginning of their torments. Oh
eternity, eternity, it is thou alone beyond all measure that do increase the
punishment of the damned: grievous is the punishment of the damned, for the
cruelty of the pain; yet it is more grievous for the diversity of the
punishment; Math. 21.13.
but it is most grievous for the eternity of the punishments: that life shall
be mortiferous, The damned shall seek death and shall not find it, because
they had life and lost it.
and that death shall be immortal: if it be life, why does it kill? if it be
death, why does it always endure? What eternity is, is not perfectly known;
and it is no wonder: for what created mind can comprehend that, which cannot be
measured by any time? but if thou will guess what the space of eternity is,
think upon the time that was before the world was created; if thou can find
Gods beginning, then may thou find when the punishments of the damned shall
have end, and not before, hence shall arise their doleful, woe and alas, for
evermore. Oh, Lord Jesus, which by thy passion, have made satisfaction for our
sins, deliver us from eternal damnation.

This is the second death, the general perfect fullness of all cursednesse and
misery, which every damned reprobate must suffer so long as God and his Saints
shall enjoy bliss and felicity in heaven for evermore.

Thus far of the misery of man in his state of corruption, unless he be
renewed by grace in Christ.

This is the portion, this is the state of the evil disposed wicked wise men
of this world; and are here adverrised of their greedy groping after the sweet
temptations of the devil; wherein such do rejoice and take their pleasure,
till death coming suddenly upon them, then fall they into the horrible pit of
desolate darkness, due unto their sins and wicked deserts.

Thus far I have proceeded in the first part of this tractate of the divine
essence of God, and how he is to be understood in his holy attributes: and of
the state, death, and misery of man put for the whole passage of the old
Testament, from the creation of man to the incarnation of the Son of God, which
does humble us with the knowledge of our own unwor^hines, and thereby does
prepare us, and make us fit for the mercy of the Gospel, and to apprehend and
apply the righteousness of Jesus Christ to our Salvation. Thus ends the first
part of this tractat.

Now let us see how blessed and happy a godly man is in his state of
renovation, being reconciled to God in Christ.

Esaias 40.1, 2.
COmfort my people, O ye Prophets, comfort my people, says your God: Comfort
Jerusalem at the heart, and tell her that her travel is at an end, and that
her offense is pardoned.

Esaias 43.1, 3, 11
Now the Lord that made thee, O Jacob, and he that fashioned thee, O Israel,
says thus: Fear not, for I have redeemed thee: for I am the Lord thy God, the
holy one of Israel, thy Savior: I am, even I am the only Lord: and besides me
there is no Savior.

Esaias 54.8.
When I was angry, I hid my face from thee for a little season; but through my
everlasting goodness have I pardoned thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Verse. 10.
The Mountains shall remove, and the Hills shall fall down, but my loving
kindness shall not move, and the bond of my peace shall not fall from thee:
says the Lord thy merciful lover.

Esaias 55.6, 7.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh: and
let the ungodly man forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord; so shall he be merciful unto
him: and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive.

The Lord allows the righteous, Psalm. 11.6, 7.
but the ungodly, and him that delights in wickedness does his soul
abhor; and upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm
and tempest; and this shall be their portion to drink.

But if that people, Jerem 18.8.
against whom I have thus devised, convert from their wickedness; I will
repent of the plague that I devised to bring upon them.

For mercy and wrath is with him, Eccles. 16 11.
he is both mighty to forgive, and to power out displeasure: like as his mercy
is great: even so is his punishment also, and he judges a man according to his
works.

Therefore fear the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25.
and serve him in the truth, and with all your hearts, and consider what great
things he has done for you: but if ye do wickedly, then shall you perish.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, Psalm. 107.31, 43.
and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men; who so is wise
will ponder these things, and they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord.

But who so despises wisdom and nurture, Wisd. 3.11.
is unhappy; and as for the hope of such, it is but vain, their labors
unfruitful, and their works unprofitable.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Psalm. 106.46.
from everlasting, and world without end; and let all the people say, Amen.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SOVLES PROGRESS, Leading the way to the Celestial
CANAAN, or Heavenly JERUSALEM. A divine Direction in the way of Life, Declaring
the Order and Causes of man's happiness, attained by the imputation of the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ our Salvation.
Of the New Covenant of the Gospel, or the Covenant of Grace.
THe whole Scripture of the Bible is divided into two Testaments, The Gospel.
the Old and the New, which Books be of diverse natures; some Legal; some
Historical; some Sapientiall, and some Prophetical. The Old teaches by
Figures, Shadows and Ceremonies; Exodus 20.
that the Law was given terribly in lightning and thundering, to induce the
people thereby to the observance thereof by fear. The New Testament, all
Mercy, or the Covenant of Grace, came in more gloriously, with the gentle name
of the Gospel and good tidings, to induce the people to the observation
thereof by love.

The Story of the Bible, from the first beginning, to the birth of our Savior
Jesus Christ, does for the most part declare the miserable condition of
mankind, how he has fallen from the innocence of his nature, which God gave
him in his first creation, and how he has continued in sin, and the curse of
God for sin, having no power in himself to satisfy the justice of God, How to
use and apply the Scriptures.
or to reconcile himself to his favor; therefore did God give the Law of the
ten Commandments, the particulars of his revealed Will, both to provoke men to
endeavor in the exercise of all godliness, and also that by the knowledge of
the Law, men might know their own defects of nature, and the frailnesse
thereof, and by their humiliation might be prepared and made fit for the mercy
of the Gospel: for though Jesus Christ, Genesis 3.15. and 12 3. Romans 1.1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
the substance of the Gospel, was in the counsel of God from all beginnings,
determined to be the Redeemer of mankind, being also promised to our first
Parents, and by whom all the faithful before his incarnation, had the pardon
of their sins, apprehending by faith, the promise of his righteousness, yet
was not this grace declared unto them in such plain and direct evidence, as
now it is to us in the preaching of the Gospel, Hebr. 9.
it being then delivered only in Shadows, Ceremonies, Prophesies, and in the
mystical sense of Allegories, so that few had capacity and grace, rightly to
understand them, all which difficulties are now vanished in the preaching of
the Gospel; the Gospel presenting us in most familiar and easy
demonstrations, the Substance without the Shadows, and the Truth without the
Figure, withal, giving directions and infallible rules, not only to know the
means of our salvation, but how to make it ours, to apprehend and apply it to
our own particular comfort, The great favor and liberty of the Gospel.
and this grace does the Gospel give with such favor, as that the necessary
doctrines exceed not the understanding, of men of meanest capacities, but that
all that will, without respect or exception, may reach their hands of faith to
the cross of Christ, and freely apprehend the means of their salvation, which
is the Lord Jesus, triumphing at the conquest of his death, over sin, hell and
damnation.

This is a blessed alteration in the state of the world; for in the time, A
happy alteration.
when the grace of the Gospel was hid in the clouds of the Ceremonies, the
observers of the ceremonial Law, did seldom understand the mystical sense of
the Ceremony, which did always allude to some particular grace in the Gospel.
Therefore, The ceremonies of the Law did allude to the grace of the Gospel.
though God was pleased to accept of their careful endeavors in the religious
observing the Ceremony, which indeed was but a Figure of the Truth included in
the Ceremony, yet they wanted a great part of that spiritual comfort, which
we have in the observing the Covenant of grace, the Gospel, the grace of God
appearing to them, Tit. 2.11, etc.
as God himself did to the Israelites their fathers, at the delivering of the
Law in clouds, in fire, in smoke and thunders, Exodus 19.16.
but to us he does appear more familiarly by Jesus Christ his Son, the most
lively representment of himself, assuming our nature; and conversing with us,
did wound our sin, and healed the wounds sin had made in our souls; whose
words taught salvation; whose actions wrought it. This is the difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel; What the Law commands, and what the Gospel.
the Law commands to do and live, if not, to die; the Gospel all mercy,
requires to believe only, and live; and this is a wonderful degree of Gods
favor, that because we are not able to keep the covenants of the Law, is
pleased therefore to yield to our infirmities, to alter our obligation, and
enter new covenant with us; the covenant of grace, The wonderful love of God
toward us.
whereby God does indent with man, and binds the justice of the Law, in the
bonds of his mercy, promising salvation to all them that faithfully believe in
the merits and mediation of his Son Jesus Christ. Thus does God allure us by
easy means and fair promises to everlasting life, which the Law denies to
all men; no man being able to satisfy the justice of the Law. If it be
objected then that the grace of the Gospel does destroy the works of the Law,
because that mercy is given of grace, and not of desert: it is answered, that
the Gospel does not destroy the works of the Law, and the substance thereof;
but only does mitigate the rigor and severity thereof. As God when he
preserved Daniel in the Lions den, he did not destroy the Lions, but only
shut their mouths, and bound their power, that they might not hurt Daniel:
Dan. 6.16.
so he did not destroy the Law, but only restrain the violence thereof from
hurting his Daniels; that is, his faithful servants: and as when King Darius
took Daniel from the den, and cast in his accusers, the Lions power was no
longer shut up, Dan. 6.24.
but had the mastery and devoured them, their wives, and children; no more
shall the reprobates avoid the condemnation of the Law, notwithstanding the
promise of the gospel, and the new covenant of grace. Because no man has the
benefit of mercy, but he that first is the child of faith; therefore the great
King of all the world shall take his faithful Daniels his Elect, from the
power of the Lions, the Law, but leaves the reprobate in the state of their
destruction. Thus much in general of the Gospel, and the difference between
that and the Law, and them that lived under the bondage of the Law, and us that
now live in the liberty of the Gospel: the purpose of the Gospel, is the
salvation of man.

And therefore the Angel that was the first preacher of the gospel, told the
shepherds, that he brought them tidings of great joy: Luke 2.10.
indeed a greater could not be, then to bring them tidings of their salvation.
The matter of the gospel is the life, the death, and the doctrine of Jesus
Christ: for they are the only means by which we attain to the favor of
salvation: Esaias 43.11.
his doctrines were directions, his life examples, and his death was, and is
life eternal, to all them that apprehend him by a lively faith. In the
circumstance of the gospel is principally considered: First, God who of
himself, and of his own election, without any cause in man, did enter this
covenant of grace; being moved only by the pleasure of his own most holy
will, and by his own gracious love to his creatures: for so says the Holy
Ghost, God so loved the world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life. Whereby it is evident that the love of
God was the only cause that moved him to this effect: for God can glorify
himself as well in the damnation, Gods love to man is the moving cause of the
covenant of grace.
as in the salvation of men. For he needs no addition of honor, that is
infinite both in greatness and goodness: but as his mercy is most eminent,
over all his attributes; so in this new covenant of the Gospel, he does give
us the greatest demonstration of his mercy that can be, in giving his only
begotten Son to die on the Cross for the redemption of mankind. In every word
there is a passion of love, infinitely beyond all comparison, wherein it
seems that God does, as it were, put off his Majesty, and descend himself in
his care to pity; and redress the ruined state of sinful man, his enemy.
Secondly, in the person of Christ, who is the cause both moving and finishing
the covenant of the Gospel, there is matter of most worthy and admirable
consideration. For Christ is not only to be understood, as the isntrumental
cause whereby this covenant of grace between God and man was effected; but
also as the first moving cause and deviser thereof, it being impossible to
assign him offices without his appointment; he being equal to God the
Father, and the holy Ghost, and they having all but one divinity undivided.
This the unbelieving Jews could not comprehend, and therefore they derided
Christ when he said: Before Abraham was, John 8.58.
I am: not knowing that he was God, equal and coeternall with the Father; and
was begotten before all beginning. It is therefore most wonderful in the
person of Christ, that he being Lord of all the world, that he would leave the
bosom of his Father, and for a time to put off the presence of his divine
Majesty, and to take our nature upon him in humility, Strong witnesses of the
love of Christ toward us.
and in a base estate: to undertake not only to satisfy the Law, and to make
good our defects; but also to bear the displeasure of his Father, and to
suffer the malice of wicked men to prevail against him, even to his death: and
that he has endured all this for the sins and good of man; a creature that
by sin had brought himself in disgrace and heavy displeasure with God: and
which is most of all, that he has done all this by his own appointment,
without either command or direction, there being no power above him by whom he
could be commanded. This incomparable love of God, is able to astonish a
Christian meditation, and to make a man admire, and say with holy David: Lord,
what is man that thou have such respect unto him, Psalm. 144.3.
or the son of man that thou so regardest him? This does strongly relieve our
faith against all diffidence; showing that our salvation hangs not like a
meteor in the air, but is firmly fixed upon the love of God in Christ: Iere
31.3. and 32.40. 2 Timothy 2.19.
and it furthereth our spiritual joy, in that it teaches us, that the love of
God is constant; and his decree concerning our welfare eternal. And it also
eclipseth the pride of the heart, showing that Gods dignation, and not man's
dignity; his favor, not man's faith; his mercy and not man's merit, is the
fountain and foundation of man's felicity.

Thirdly is considered, The Ministers ^n the office of the Gospel.
the officers in the holy ministration of the gospel, by whose faithful
endeavor and vigilance, the spiritual graces of the gospel are distributed
to the children of faith, for whose sakes the covenant of grace is given: the
first officers in this kind, were the twelve Apostles; of purpose chosen by
Christ Jesus himself, that they might be the faithful witnesses of the whole
passage of his life; and that after his ascension they might plant in men's
hearts a knowledge of the gospel, by their prayers, preachings, and godly
exhortations; to dispose the holy seed of grace in their hearts, whom God
should make capable to entertain it with profit. These holy laborers being
assisted by the holy Ghost, traveled in Gods husbandry with such alacrity, as
that the Gospel in their times spread it self into very large limits, and
building upon the foundation of the rock Christ; they have erected such a
frame as shall remain to all posterity; these holy Ministers were the
conducts, whereby God did confer his spiritual waters of life into all the
parts of the world, who spreading themselves in their painful travels over all
the known world, spread the Gospel as they went, and left in every place where
they came, a memory of their Lord and Master, Jesus Christ. After them
succeeded others in their example, who both taught the Gospel, and confirmed it
with the testimony of their death, these are the holy officers in the
administration of the Gospel, and all that live in the Church, and are truly of
the Church of God, in their office and in their example, shall with them
receive the wages of faithfulness. Lastly, is considered to whom the benefits
of the Gospel appertain, and that is to the Elect, namely, such as are most
industrious in the faithful execution of the Law: For, as it is said, God has
not given the Gospel to destroy the Law, but to preserve it and revive it, that
men may be allured by the sweet promises of the Gospel to endeavor with
alacrity and hope in the exercise of the Law; Joh. 14.15.
and therefore Christ himself says, If you love me, keep my Commandments,
that is, endeavor to keep them with all diligence; for he that is careless
in the service of God, is not to hope that God will be careful of his
salvation: this is proved in the Parable of the laborers in the Vineyard, the
Master of the Vineyard is God, the Vineyard is the world, the laborers are the
faithful and painful Christians, Mat. 20.1, etc.
their wages is the benefit of the Gospel; so that not the lookers on, but the
laborers in Gods Vineyard shall receive the wages of everlasting life. These
considerations are most weighty in the general understanding of the Gospel, to
which is added this admonition, that it behooves every man carefully to esteem
worthily and reverently of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, because God does judge
the contemners thereof to be guilty of the deserved and eternal damnation; 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12.
and that if God present them the means to communicate with the benefit of the
Gospel, that they then neglect rather all the profits in the world, then the
rich treasure of the Gospel; for it is that one thing, that is only necessary
and availeable to salvation, and that pearl of price, for which we are
advised to sell all that we have to purchase it; for he that has that
precious Jewel, Mat. 45.46.
has sufficient wealth, and he that has all things but that, has nothing,
if he has not that: for if one man had that all men have, he nothing had,
unless he also had a soul; alas, what will it advantage a man, to win the
whole world, and lose his own soul? and what enlargement can he desire, that
has the hidden treasure of the Gospel in his heart, whereby he has
continual comfort, and thereby is led in the path to his Salvation?

This does generally remember all men the admirable degree of Gods favor to
mankind, that notwithstanding our apostasy from the favor and service of God,
and our continual trade of sinning, which might incense the justice of God, to
destroy us at once, and for ever, yet does he continue himself in his own
kind a loving God, and a father compassionate, 2 Pet. 3.9. Pity in God is most
natural.
who inclines rather to pity, then to punish our infirmities; therefore did
the Almighty God take from man the burdensome condition of the Law, and
promise him everlasting life, upon much more easy conditions; the which grace
and love of God does challenge from all men a dutiful thanks to God, who has
taken from their necks the unsupportable burden of the Law, giving a greater
liberty and ease in the work of their salvation. Secondly, it does admonish
all men carefully to apprehend the grace of the Gospel, and not to neglect the
present, and the precious opportunity, that God has given them, because he
that shall break this Covenant of grace, shall doubtless forfeit the estate
both of body and soul unto eternal damnation; for this Covenant of the
Gospel, as it is the greatest of all the favors of God, so it is the last, and
that being neglected, there is no other to be hoped for. Thirdly, seeing the
Gospel does not destroy the substance of the Law, but only mitigateth and
sweetens the severity thereof, by a gracious dispensation from the extremity of
justice; it behooves all men to be equally as careful in the performance of
the duties of the Law, as if there were no other Covenant but the Law to judge
them: The Law makes us fit for the Gospel. Gal. 3.24.
for there is no man fit for the grace of the Gospel, but he that is first
disciplined and schooled in the Law of Gods Commandments; therefore is the Law
said to be a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ by faith, because it does
humble us in the knowledge of our infirmities. Fourthly, seeing the purpose of
the Gospel is the salvation of man, it behooves all men to respect the Gospel,
as they would their salvation, and labor by all means, not only to advance
the prosperity thereof, but also to resist the cause that may occasion the
slander or disgrace of that sacred Word and Profession. Fifthly, seeing the
matter of the Gospel is the story of the words and works of Jesus Christ our
Savior, while he was upon earth, it does bind every man's conscience to have a
reverent and confident opinion of the truth thereof, and that all men labor by
all convenient means to maintain the memory and reputation of those sacred
writings, the which are only able to guide us without error in the right way
of our salvation. And seeing that God of his own favor, without any deser^ of
ours which were fallen from him, enters this Covenant of grace, binding himself
in the surety of his most sacred Word, to give salvation, upon the easy
conditions of the Gospel, to all those that walk in the sincerity thereof,
through the merits of Jesus Christ, who did please to appoint himself to take
our sins upon him, and to descend his Majesty in great humility, to establish
our salvation in the merits of his holy works, this should move all men to
give thanks for so great benefits, and to live in godly conversation. Sixthly,
seeing the officers appointed and chosen by Jesus Christ himself for the
ministration of the Gospel, were the holy Apostles, and after them the godly
and reverend Martyrs in the primitive Church, by whose diligence the Gospel
spread it self over all the known world; this does admonish all them that
either are Ministers of the Gospel, or that have power to make them, what
choice and care is to be had of their uprightness and godly conversation, and
what diligence is required of their spiritual travells; all which ought to
fashion themselves as near as they can, to the example of the holy Apostles.
Lastly, The promises of the Gospel belong to the faithful only.
seeing the promises of the Gospel belong to the faithful only, that is
industrious in the service of the Law; this ought to provoke all men to contend
in godly exercise to exceed one another, and to stir up their frozen and
dead desires with the hope of the promise of the Gospel; and that they think
not the Law burdensome, being now made easy by the grace of the Gospel, and
therefore to travail in the duties of the Law with alacrity and spiritual
comfort; having their confidence and eyes of faith upon the promise of Christ
made in the Gospel. Thus if men dispose themselves and their affections, they
shall find the great and happy difference betwixt Mount Sinai and Mount Sion;
the Law, and the Gospel: The difference between Mount Sinai and Mount Sion.
in both which the gracious may find comfort, but with great inequality, for
unless we be thoroughly persuaded that our salvation does flow from the
fountain of Gods mercy, and acquaint our selves with eternal election, which
God has set forth in the holy Scriptures, the school of the holy Ghost:
wherein as nothing is omitted, necessary to be known, so nothing is taught
but that which is expedient for man to know. The ministers of Gods Word, must
therefore beware, that they do not keep the faithful from that which the
Scripture delivers unto them; lest they seem maliciously to defraud them,
Ephesians. 1.
of that which God does afford unto them; or reprove his Spirit, as if he had
revealed things, fit, for some considerations, to be revealed. The Word is a
sure rule, to direct our understanding, and it is the chiefest point of
sobriety in us, when we learn, to make God our schoolmasters; and then to
leave learning, when he leaves teaching; and when he leaves speaking, we
should leave inquiring: he which curiously pries into Gods secrets, runs
himself into an inextricable labyrinth, and finds not that wherewith his
curiosity may be satisfied.

Religion is not an indifferent thing, but wholly to be embraced, and
constantly professed.
The Gospel therefore being a covenant between God, and our souls; our care
should be rightly to understand this covenant, lest by misunderstanding and
false construction, we break the covenant of grace, and so run our selves
into a dangerous hazard. Let us therefore search the sense of the mysteries of
the holy gospel, and if they exceed our understanding, let us compare them
with the holy writings of the Prophets and Apostles: if they exceed our
capacity, let us consult with the learned expositions of reverend fathers of
the Church: if all these satisfy not, let us daily resort to the servants of
this ministration, and by diligent observing their sermons, expositions, and
spiritual exhortations, we shall both learn what is the covenant we have
entered with God, and the means we must use to keep that covenant, and when we
have obtained this forwardness, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.
and hope of better knowledge: let us carefully avoid the dangerous
inchauntments of heretics, schismatiques, and all false teachers: let us
beware and not taste of their poison, though they present it in cups of gold:
let their bayte make us suspect their hooks, and their fair and holy
pretenses, their foul and wicked purposes; for having found the Lord Christ
which is all truth, and has sealed his covenant with us, let us preserve that
truth from defacing; and laying that for our foundation, let us build thereon
the whole frame of our life, and fashion all our actions by the rules of the
gospel, as the example of Christ has commanded us; that so we may keep
covenant with our God, and obtain the promise of the gospel, which is the
salvation of our souls: and then with holy Jacob, Genesis 45.28.
let us boast of our happiness, and say unto our soul, we have enough, we
desire no enlargement. Again, when we meditate the matter of the gospel,
that is the words and works of our Savior Christ, then it should move us to a
reverend esteem of the story of the gospel, and make us delight to exercise
our time in the often reading and conferring thereof; for if they that have
estates of temporal possessions, be most careful to prefer such evidences
and writings as is delivered them for their security and assurance, and often
times spend a great part of their wealth and labor to confirm and continue
such estate and such evidence: shall we not then much more, spend our best
diligence, and means to keep covenant, and understand rightly the writings of
the holy Gospel, which are the deeds and evidences between God and us,
touching the everlasting state of our soul, and carefully to keep such
covenants as give us claim and interest in the possession of a Kingdom? Shall
men give their substance to Lawyers, to maintain their beggarly possessions on
earth, beggarly indeed in respect of Heaven, though it were the possession of
the whole earth; and shall we neglect the covenants of everlasting life, and
may have Law, without money? let us never do it, Note.
let us never give testimony of such madness, let them labor their earthly
possessions that will, but let us labor the possession of Heaven; let them
waste their substance on Lawyers, we can have Law and Lawyers much more
reasonable. Let the Prophets and Apostles be our Counselors, their hands will
not be corrupted, their judgment cannot err: let us therefore affy in their
confidence, and endeavor as they direct us. Lastly, when we meditate upon the
particulars of the story of the Gospel, let us despise all other histories in
comparison of them, and the old Testament: for the writings of men commonly
labor, vain, vile and unworthy arguments; and those of them that travel in a
good cause, yet are they defective either in matter or form: but the Gospel,
and other holy Scriptures, being written by the direction of Gods holy Spirit,
they are nor only holy in their matter, but excellent in their form, and most
able to give the desirous Reader infinite variety of content. Therefore when
we desire to read of Majesty, and great action, of Empire, war, conquest,
government, policy, and infinite other of this kind, that depend on greatness;
we may find both stories, and examples in the Scriptures, many and
unmatchable. If we desire to read the stories of mercy, love, peace, humanity,
civil action; and the rest that depend on goodness; every page in the Gospel
can furnish us either with some story or some example of that kind: if we
desire to read of wonders and miracles, of most admirable credence, they are in
the Scripture most frequent, yet most true; in other writings, not common, yet
commonly false. Therefore let the holy Scriptures, and especially, the holy
Gospel, which is the covenant of our salvation, be our continual exercise:
let us exercise our pleasure in reading, and meditating the excellent variety
of matter and Majesty of the phrase in the Gospel, being the rhetorique and
eloquence of the holy Ghost: let us also exercise in studying, rightly to
understand the covenant of our salvation: to keep which covenant, we shall
therein often be admonished, by promises, threats, entreaty, and by examples;
in all which the knowledge and meditations of the Gospel will instruct us. This
doctrine is very useful and solatious, and may be applied to many notable
purposes; for it shows us the true causes of all our happiness, it also
confuteth the Pelagians, who ascribe salvation to men's own strength and
merits; and it serves to correct the course of those that hinder their own
happiness, by their own presumption, diffidence; incredulity, profaneness,
sensuality, and other irregular, and irreligious courses. Lastly, it proves the
deity of Christ; for in that he has elected his faithful unto eternal life;
we conclude that he is very God: for these respects and reasons, let us enter
covenant with our souls, to be careful in keeping our covenant with God.

Of the Incarnation of the Word, Christ.
IT is necessary and meet to show something of the Incarnation of Christ; for
because that the same does chiefly belong to the work of our Redemption, we
will note those things only which shall seem to help toward the stay of the
purity and certainnesse of our faith, and to cut off all curious and
unprofitable questions, it is needful for them that will consider the mystery
of the word Incarnate. Not of man's word, but of Gods Word.
For as much as this Incarnation is reported not of every word, but of the Word
of God; it is first needful for the confirmation of our faith, that we do
hear the testimony of holy Scripture, that the word is in God, it is declared
even in the beginning of Genesis, wherein the History of the Creation of all
things is so oftentimes reiterated, Genesis 1 etc.
and God said, let it be, and it was done: he said, and they were made, he
commanded, and they were created, and in another place, By the Word of the
Lord, the heavens were fastened: in the beginning was the Word, John 1.1.
and the Word was God, and God was the Word: Paul says, By the virtue of his
Word, and the brightness of his Glory, Hebr. 1, etc.
upholding all things by the word of his Power. Again, By faith we
understand, that the worlds were framed by the Word of God: Hebr. 11.
so that our faith is confirmed in this by the testimony of holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, that we do believe the word to be in God, of which
thing there be found sufficient testimonies also in the writings of the
Ethnickes, which did attribute unto Godhead the Mind, the Word, and the
Spirit; wherefore we Christians may so much the more steadfastly stand unto our
faith, because that those things which we do believe of God the Father, and
his Word, are so certain and manifestly true, that they be approved, not only
by the infallible testimonies of holy Scriptures, but of Ethnickes also, Act.
7.51. etc.
and does openly reprove the blindness of the unhappy Jews: but how the word
is in God, no Christian man must be too curious, to search those things which
be spoken of God, which be so attemperate unto our capacity, that they be
spoken upon some likeness, rather then according to any exact property of Gods
Nature and Essence. And because we should not think of God, to be only but an
Essence, but as a most high and excellent Essence, dissevered and separated
from all others, as well spirits as bodies; he is called Jehova, Ebrew word.
as existent every where, in all places, and making, Greek.
preserving, and governing all things; and is called God, which is piercing and
passing through, and to signify that he is the same to the end of the world: as
the mind is in man, they called him the Mind, the Word, and the Spirit, to
give us to understand, that the same infinite Essence in Godhead, does not
altogether rest in it self, and keep his virtue, goodness, and wisdom to
himself alone, but rather set it forth and reveal it: even as the mind of man
cannot be idle, but does express in word, whatsoever it does conceive in it
self, by the mean of the spirit, which is, as it were, the Conduit whereby
the word is brought forth from the deep secret parts of the mind: Similitude.
As for example, Imagine that God the Father were like as a lively and endless
Fountain, and his Son the Word, to be as a River, continually flowing out of
this Fountain, and that the holy Spirit might be the very moving and flowing
out, whereby the water flows out of the compass of the Fountain, which
moving cannot be without the moving of the air. The Word is the Son of God.
Now, whereas this Word is called the Son of God, it is like as if a man
should call the River the son of the Fountain, and our word that we do
speak, the son of the Mind, but all this is but by way of accommodation to
our weakness; for no Angel were able to utter, nor no man able to understand
him, if he did only speak of the Nature and Essence of God, as it is in it
self.

What we ought to judge of this Word of God, no man is able better to set it
forth, then the holy Scripture did express by the Evangelist Saint John, where
he says, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was
the Word, John 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
the same was in the beginning with God: all things were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made; In it was life, and the life was the
light of men, and the light shined in the darkness, and the darkness
received it not, and a little after, Verse 14.
and the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among u^, and we saw his Glory, as the
Glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and Truth.

Now, touching the Incarnation, it is said, 1 John 4.3.
that the Word was made flesh, which is nothing else, but the Word was made
man; now whereas he says that the Word was made man, of which he said now
before, that it was God, he does without contradiction, say, that God was made
man, or flesh; and though the Apostle says, God the Word is made flesh, it is
not said of the Father, neither of the holy Spirit, but the Word to be
Incarnate, not only for that, that he is the Son in Godhead, and that by him
the world was made, but for this cause also; chiefly, because the Word is that
Counsel coeternall with God the Father, purposed to save mankind, in whom
our Redemption is predestined even from everlasting; in whom also we be
chosen into the adoption of the children of God, as we may see in the first to
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.4.
wherefore the work of our Redemption was not ordained to be brought to pass,
but by this Word, this way being agreeable with the eternal predestination of
the Will of God.

The Word is made flesh, for Christ is the Incarnate Word, God and man, to
admonish us whereof Christ is, that is, of the Word and flesh; so that we must
consider, that in his nativity there is not only the nature of man, but the
nature also of God, joined together personally with the nature of man:
wherefore we must use, and hold most firm and steadfast this circumlocution of
Christ, Christ takes the manhood into his Godhood.
as is expressed by the holy Spirit; for though it is said, the Word is made
flesh, he does not mean simply flesh, but the soul and spirit, with the
flesh also, that is, the whole man; for by the word of flesh, there is not
meant that man only, whom the Virgin did bear, was received of the word into
this conjunction, but the very nature of mankind, for the redeeming and
restoring of which, this Incarnation of the Word was predestined from
everlasting; so that we must judge that the Word was made not only the Son
of the Virgin Mary, Luke 3.
but surely also the son of Adam and of Eve, which is diligently expressed by
Luke in the genealogy of Christ: The weakness of man taken upon the word.
the word flesh also signifies man's weakness, that we may also know, that the
Word of God is not so made man, that it took those things only upon it, which
pertain to man's spirit and foul, but it took the infirmity of our flesh
also, saving sin only, Mat. 21.18. Mar. 14.33.34.
which is sufficiently expressed in the very race of his dispensation, when he
hungered and thirsted, ate and drank, was made merry, slept, wept, was made
sorry, and after suffered death: all which things were not fained by him by
counterfeiting, but truly declared according to the truth of man's nature. What
can be more conjunct and more united, then that everlasting Trinity in the
Godhead of the Persons? yet it cannot be said, that the Father is made the
Son, or the holy Spirit; or the Son the Father, or the holy Spirit; An
excellent note to be observed.
or the holy Spirit the Father, or the Son, as it is here spoken of the Word,
that it is made flesh. Why? because the unity of the holy Trinity, is of godly
nature, and not of person, that is to say, consists not, Ephesians. 5.31. The
communicating of nature does consist in getting and bearing, and not in
creating and making.
of one and the self same person, but of one selfsame nature. Again, the
man and the woman be so joined, and united by wedlock, that they do become
into one flesh: for says the Apostle, They be not two, but one flesh: and yet
no man can truly say, that the man is made the woman; why? because the man and
the woman be not coupled into one selfsame person, but in wedlock they be
two persons joined together into one flesh and nature: but it may be said,
that the word was made flesh, though it did not simply take our flesh, but
joined it self unto it in unity of person, Personal unity.
and the condition of personal unity: that albeit it do comprehend diverse
natures, yet it is reported of the one, that it is the other; as in this cause
it is reported of the word, that it is made flesh: he does not say that the
word was changed into flesh, but the word was made flesh; for then this change
must have had an alte^ation of nature, which cannot be, or take place in
Christ; for the word is not changed, but still retains his nature; neither,
it receiving flesh, It is not possible God can leave to be God.
left his nature; it is not possible that God can leave to be God; the nature
of God suffers neither change nor end, for it is immutable and infinite,
neither could the dispensation taken in hand, bear it, that the nature of man
joined unto the nature of God, should loose those things which be proper unto
it, for so it might be inferred that Christ were not true man, nor truly
conceived, nor borne of the Virgin Mary, did not suffer, dyed not, nor rose
again from the dead, which notwithstanding the holy Scriptures do manifestly
ascribe all these things unto him. Wherefore the whole universal Church do
hold firmly and rightly, that God was made man, he took upon him that which
he was not, and lost not that which he was: neither does the unity of person
require the change of natures, but does retain them both perfect and sound. A
similitude. The soul and spirit is heavenly immortal and incorruptible, but
the flesh is earthly mortal and corruptible. The testimony of the Godhead, and
manhood of Christ cannot be vain. Coloss. 1.
The person of man being one, does consist of a soul and body, personally
joined together, the soul is of a heavenly nature, and beginning; the body of
an earthly: the soul is immortal, and not suffering corruption; the body is
mortal and corruptible: and yet they be joined together, without confusion,
that in both remains still his own nature.

The testimonies of the Godhead which be given unto Christ in holy Scriptures,
should be altogether vain, if the word were changed into flesh. And again,
if the flesh had been changed into the word, then all those testimonies and
writings, which the Evangelists do set forth of the true manhood of Christ,
were not worthy to be believed. The Apostle says, that all things are by
Christ, and that there dwells in him bodily, all fullness of the Godhead:
take from him the nature of the word, and this testimony of the Apostle is of
no weight. The Evangelists and Apostles do witness of him, Math. 1.1. Romans
1.3, 4.
that he is of the seed of Abraham and of David, according to the flesh: the
fruit of the womb of Mary conceived in her body; and, according unto the
fullness of time appointed to women with child, borne, and such other things as
they do make mention, of the course of his dispensation: to manifest unto us,
that he was true man, Ephesians. 5.30.
passing over that which the Apostle witnesses of him, that we are bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh: therefore, all these things shall be false.
if the flesh of him lost that her nature by the conjunction of the word, and
turned it into godly nature. Wherefore we must diligently look to our selves,
in this matter, for because of false Doctors, which do bereave Christ of the
true nature of our flesh; because he says, The word was made flesh. Thus
briefly to note, of the beginning of the flesh of Christ; whereby it is
manifest enough how wicked an opinion they had, which denied the truth thereof,
which they do also, which do fondly devise it to be conceived of the nature
and substance of the holy Spirit, for like as Christ said unto Nicodemus, John
3.
The same which is borne of the fl sh is flesh; and the same which is borne of
the Spirit is Spirit. If Christ be borne of the substance of the holy Spirit,
and not of the substance of the Virgins flesh; it follows, he is a Spirit,
and not flesh: for the substance of any thing that is borne, is most rightly
deemed to be of the substance of it from whence it is, and has his beginning.
Adam was called earthly, because he was taken out of the earth; Thou art
earthly, says God, Gen 3.19.
and shall return into earth again. But if we do say, Christ is a Spirit, in
as much as he is borne of the Virgin, what do we else, but deny that he is
man, and so do bring to nothing, all his dispensation which he took upon him
in the flesh, and withal the whole hope and certainety of our redemption which
God forbid: it appears clearer then the Sun, of the very birth of the flesh
of Christ, wrought by the holy Spirit, by the power of the highest, in the
womb of the Virgin, and by the promises which went before, and of those things
which he suffered, spoke, and did, that he is true man, yea the very son of
man; which can not be true, unless he has the truth of our flesh. It is very
hard to find out how the natural child is conceived, quickened, nourished,
and grows in the mothers womb, of the seed of man, after the accustomed
course of nature; much more how this unwonted and wonderful incarnation of the
word was perfected, it passes the compass of man's understanding to yield a
reason thereof, Romans 11.33, 34.
otherwise then was answered to the blessed Virgin her self, by the Angel;
which is, that it does consist of the seed of man, but of the virtue and
operation of the holy Spirit: for the Angel says unto her, The holy Spirit
shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest st^ll shadow thee: Which was
conceived by the holy Spirit
the blessed Virgin wondered, saying, she had not touch^d a man, how then
should she bring forth a child? the Angel does open the matter unto her; that
it shall not be by the accustomed course of nature, by the seed of man, Luke
1.26, etc.
but by the singular working of the virtue of God: for the virtue and power of
the highest, is the holy Spirit, wrought in the womb of the Virgin, and
forming the son of man of her flesh and blood, and performing this
incarnation of the word without any seed of man; but the same man which the
Virgin did bear, was not only man, but through the conjunction of the word,
was both God and man. And whereas it is holden by some, Apollinaris Bishop of
Laodicea. Math. 26, 38. John 12.27.
that the word took upon him flesh only, and not soul; against such opinion,
mark what Christ said, My soul is heavy, even to death: and in John, Now my
soul is troubled. By which words certainly he witnessed, not only that he
had a soul, but such a soul also, as was subject unto heaviness and trouble:
which thing can in no wise be attributed unto the nature of the word, in it
self; wherefore it must needs be understood of the soul of man, which he
took upon him. Mark again, Luke 23.46.
what Christ says, who speaking of his Spirit, Father I commend my Spirit into
thy hands: and Jesus crying with a loud voice, Math. 27.50.
gave up his Spirit. These places cannot be understood, as spoken of the Word
of God, nor of the holy Spirit; but in any wise of the spirit of man, which he
took upon him. By the consideration of these matters it is manifest, Man's
spirit is subject to passion, and not Gods.
that the word is not so incarnated in the womb of the Virgin; that it took
upon him either the bare flesh without the soul, either the flesh and soul
without the spirit of man, but that this incarnation was so made, that therein
is comprehended both the soul and the spirit; that is, that the word took
upon him the whole man, As the soul is the life of man so is God the life of
the soul.
with flesh, spirit, and soul; of whence it comes, that some had rather call
this conjunction of the word and flesh, to be man rather then flesh: for that,
that the fullness of the taking upon him of man, or of man's nature, is more
expressed in the word of humanation then of incarnation. Lastly, is added also
the cause of this incarnation: the general and summary cause is, that mankind
should be redeemed from sin, the Kingdom of Satan, and everlasting
condemnation, and that he might abolish him by death, which had the dominion of
death, that is the devil; and to make them free, which through fear of death
were subject unto bondage: for he took not upon him the nature of Angels, but
the seed of Abraham: Joh. 3.16.
For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life;
therefore the Apostle says he ought to be made in all points like to his
brethren; For both he that does sanctifi^, Hebr. 2.11.
and they which are sanctified be all of one. Again, that he should be a
merciful and faithful mediator for his people, Hebr. 2.17.
concerning those matters which were to be wrought wi^h God the Father, to
cleanse the sins of the people which concern our salvation. Last of all, he
says, he was borne for us, to the intent that he which granted to us, that we
should be; might grant to us also, to continue in his favor and grace: or
rather to the intent that as we through the malice of the Devil, fell from the
state of innocence might be by his incarnation renovated again by the coming
of Christ unto men, is that we may return again unto God, and putting off
our old man sin, may put on the new man Jesus Christ, and that like as we
dyed all in Adam, so we may live in Christ, be borne with Christ, 1 Timothy 3.6.
crucified, buried, and rise again also with Christ to glory everlasting.

Of Christ's Nativity.
LEt us withdraw our minds awhile from temporary things, and let us contemplate
the holy mystery of the Lords Nativity, ^al. 4.5.
the Son of God came down from heaven unto us, that by him we might obtain
the adoption of children. God made man, that man may be made partaker of divine
grace and nature; his birth was pure and holy, to sanctify our impure and
polluted nativity; he is borne of a Virgin betrothed to an husband, to honor
both Virginity and Matrimony which was Gods institution; he is borne in the
darkness of the night, Luke 2.7.
because he was the true Light which illuminateth the darkness of the world;
he is laid in a manger, because he is the true Food of our souls; he was
borne betwixt an Ox and an Ass, that men which were become as beasts,
beastly, might be restored to their former dignity; he is borne in Bethlehem,
which is the house of bread, because he brought with him the most plentiful
food of divine benefits; he is the first and only begotten of his Mother upon
earth, 2 Cor. 8.9.
because he was according to his divine narture, the first and only begotten of
his Father in heaven; he is borne poor and naked, yet to purchase for us
celestial riches; he is borne in a stable, Luke 2.10, etc.
yet to bring us to his royal palace which is in heaven: the Angels from
heaven brought the first message of this great Joy and benefit, because no man
on earth understood the greatness thereof. And further, it was meet that the
messenger of celestial gifts should be celestial; the armies of the Angels
rejoice, because we are by the incarnation of the Son of God, made partakers
of their heavenly happiness. To the Shepherds first is declared this so
wondrous and great a miracle, because the true Shepherd of our lost souls came
to bring back the lost sheep into his fold. The quire of heaven which became
sorrowful for the sin of our first father, does now sing and rejoice: the
brightness and glory of that Lord and King appears now in the heavens, whose
lowliness men despised here on earth; joy was declared from heaven, because
the Author and Giver of Joy was borne; joy is commanded, because the enmity
between the just God and sinful man, the cause of all sorrow is removed,
glory in the highest is rendered unto God, which our first father Adam, by his
unlawful transgressions of Gods Commandments had taken away; true peace is
obtained by his nativity, because before, men were enemies unto God and their
own consciences; true peace is restored to the earth, because he is overcome
which held us captive. Joh. 8.5, 6.
Abraham rejoiced when he saw the Lord in an humame shape, assumed for a time,
and appeared unto him; and shall not we rejoice, seeing Christ has coupled and
taken upon himself our nature, by an everlasting and inviolable covenant? Let
us here admire the infinite goodness of God; let us also admire the infinite
power of God, who of two things most different and distant one from the other,
I mean, the divine and humane nature, could make one so nearly, that one and
the same should be God and man. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Let us admire the infinite wisdom of God, who could find out a means to
work our salvation: when men nor Angels could find no means of reconcilement;
the infinite goodness of God was offended, and an infinite satisfaction was
required; man had offended God, and of man was satisfaction required; neither
could an infinite sati^faction be made by man; neither could Gods justice be
satisfied without an infinite price, therefore God was made man, that both he
which had sinned might satisfy, and he which was infinite might be paid an
infinite price. Let us admire this wonderful temper of Gods Justice and Mercy,
which no creature could find out before God did manifest it unto him, neither
could any fully perceive it after it was manifested; let us admire these
things, and not curiously pry into them; let us desire to understand this high
and secret mystery, though we cannot rightly conceive all; let us rather
confess our ignorance, Luke 2.10.
then to deny Gods Omipotence. I bring tidings of great joy unto you, says the
Angel at our Saviors Nativity; of great joy indeed, such as passes man's
understanding. It was a very great evil and dangerous, that we had incurred
the wrath of God, and were held captive under the power of the Devil, and
under eternal damnation: but it was yet greater, because men knew not it,
neither could eschew the danger thererof; or else did wilfully neglect the
means of their own salvation. But now great joy is declared unto us, because
he that delivers u^ from all evil, is come a Savior into the world; he is
come a Physician to the sick, a Redeeme^ to the captive; he is the Way to the
wanderer, Life to them that were dead in sin, and Salvation to them that were
condemned. Exodus 3.10.
As Moses was sent from the Lord to redeem the children of Israel, which were
the select people of the world, from the servitude and bondage of Egypt: so
Christ Jesus was sent from his Father, to redeem all mankind, from the
slavery and bondage of the Devil, and to preach peace, and the reconciliation
of man with God; therefore we have great cause to rejoice, and conceive great
things of the goodness and mercy of God; for he which loved us so being his
enemies, that he did vouchsafe to assume our nature to be united to his
divinity; what will he deny us, Romans 5.10, etc.
being joined unto him by participation of our flesh. An infinite goodness was
offended, and none could intercede but a Mediator of infinite power; and what
is infinite but God? therefore God himself reconciled the world unto himself:
2 Cor. 5.19.
God himself redeemed mankind by his own blood: God himself became
Mediator for us: who can conceive the greatness of this mystery? the chief
Creator was offended with sinful man, Acts 20.28.
and the creature sought not with diligence to appease God, or to reconcile
himself unto him. So he that was offended, assumed the flesh of the creature,
and becomes reconciliatour: man had forsaken God, and turned himself unto the
Devil, Heb. 2.14, 15.
the enemy of God and man; and he that was forsaken, makes diligent inquisition
after the forsaken, and incites him most bountifully to come again unto him,
and when man had departed from that infinite good, and fallen, into that
infinite evil: then that same infinite good, by giving an infinite price of
redemption, delivered the creature from that infinite evil. Is not this
infinite mercy of God, far exceeding all the finite understanding, and
thought of man? for our nature is become far exceeding and more glorious by
Christ, then it was debased and dishonored by the sin and fall of Adam; Romans
5.20, 21.
we have received more in Christ then we lost in Adam: for where sin did
abound, Gods grace does much more abound: in Adam we lost our innocence, in
Christ we have received perfect righteousness. Ephesians. 2.4.5.
Let us admire Gods power, but his divine mercy, is yet more to be admired:
although power and mercy are both equal in God, for both are infinite. Let us
admire our creation, but rather let us admire our redemption: although creation
and redemption are both acts of infinite power in God. It is a wondrous great
thing to create man; having deserved nothing, for as yet he had no being: but
it seems to be yet greater, to take upon him to satisfy for the debt of man,
for the sin of man: and to redeem him when he had deserved evil and
condemnation; but it is more wonderful, that God would become flesh of our
flesh, and bone of our bone. Ephesians. 5.30.
Be thankful therefore, O devout soul; give praise unto God who created
thee, when thou wast not: who redeemed thee from sin and misery, when for
sin thou wast condemned; and who has prepared for thee the eternal joys of
Heaven, if by faith thou adhere to Christ and his righteousness: which the
Lord of his goodness give us grace evermore to do.

Christ Jesus is the sum or compendium of the Gospel.
Christ the sum of the Gospel.
IN whose actions and holy sufferings, the maine execution of the Gospel, was
only and wholly finished: for he being the seal of the covenant of grace, the
covenant was only promised, but not performed, until Christ himself came in
our nature, who did first discharge our former debts, Why the Gospel is called
the new Testament.
we ought the justice of God, before he did seal and ratify the new covenant
of the Gospel: therefore is the Gospel called the new Testament of our Savior
Jesus Christ; because the title and interest of salvation, could not be derived
on the children of God, but by Christ the testator, his sufferings and death,
in his humane nature. It is also called the last will of Jesus Christ, Why the
last Testament.
because God has fully determined that this Testament, this covenant shall
remain unalterable to all posterity, there being no purpose in God, no power
in man to alter, repeal, or change the form of this covenant, being
determined by the whole Trinity, from before all beginning; to be the last
refuge for sinful man, and the only and most safe means of their
spiritual deliverance: The Gospel is the last refuge for sinful man.
it was also in the fullness of time, perfectly finished by Christ, as it was
before determined in the Counsel of the Trinity: and from this doctrine does
issue this foundation of Christian religion, that the covenant of grace was
purchased only by the righteousness of Jesus Christ our redemption, who in
our nature satisfying our contempts, and in our nature working our
righteousness, did in our nature, and in our behalf, indent with God, and
enter these covenants with him for us and our salvation. And lastly, to ratify
all, he did die in our nature, The foundation of Christian Religion.
and with the blood of his most sacred hand subscribed and sealed his
testament, our covenant, whereby it is made unquestionable true, and
unalterable to all times and posterities. It is evident then that the matter of
the Gospel, The words and works of Christ, the matter of the Gospel.
is wholly contained only in the words and works of Jesus Christ; and that
Christ is the contract compendium of all such particulars as are contained in
the covenant of man's salvation, and that therefore the Canons and decrees of
Counsels and Ecclesiastical States: nay the very writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, add not any matter to the substance of the covenant of grace, but
rather to be understood as interpretations, and plain expositions of such
secrets as the wisdom of Christ Jesus, thought good to fold inallegories and
dark sentences; for Christ left not his work defective and imperfect, whereby
it might require correction of any, but in a most exact performance: therefore,
says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 14.
Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is already laid; which is
Christ Jesus. And he assures a reward to them that build upon this foundation,
and not to them that build a new foundation, or alter this which is already
laid, Christ: then the foundatlon of Christian regligion, and the substance of
the Gospel, did execute his divine office with a double diligence, his word,
his work: by his word is understood such spiritual doctrine as he daily
delivered to his hearers, whether it were direction, admonition, reformation,
or interpretation; in all which our Savior has so abundantly traveled, as
that not only the Apostles, but the Catholic Church also may receive ample
and sufficient direction, The words of Christ give all men sufficient divine
direction.
both for divine doctrine, and spiritual discipline. By his works is
understood every act, and all the passages of his temporal life, from his
incarnation to his death upon the Cross: in all which time he was continually
working somewhat that was availeable and necessary to the redemption of
mankind, Thus is Christ generally to be understood, A general understanding
of Christ.
as that he was the principal matter of the Gospel, and the only working
means of our savation.

Now to make this doctrine both familiar and profitable to Christian men of
easy understanding, this double care of Christ, is subdevided into these
particulars. The duties of the soul.
The words of Christ in the time of his incarnation did instruct us the duties
of our souls, and the duties of society: the duties of the soul are all those
things that are needfully required in the state of Christianity, whether we
respect the necessary faith of the Church, the necessary orders in the Church,
or the necessary obedience to the Church. The duties of society.
The duty of society is civil action, and humanity, that is, a loving,
charitable, and orderly conversing of Christian men one with another; and this
our Savior Christ called, the great Commandment: great indeed, and of great
consequence because; without this duty of humanity, we cannot perform unto
God our duty of divinity; 1 Ioh. 4.12, 20.
For he that loves not his neighbor whom he has seen, cannot love God whom
he has not seen: and this society and duties of the soul comprehend
generally, the substance of such doctrines as Christ Jesus himself has
delivered and left behind him for our examples. Also the matter of the Gospel
are the works of Christ, and therein such things are comprehended as were
necessary to be done by Christ, Heb. 10.9, 10.
and necessary to be known and believed of us; being the price of our
redemption, without which it was impossible we should be reconciled to Gods
favor, and by which the Covenant of the Gospel, is both obtained and confirmed
unto us, which works of Christ be reduced to these principalls: to his birth,
to his life, and to his death, what he did by assuming our nature, what he
did and suffered by living in our nature, and what he did by suffering when he
died in our nature; What he did in being borne.
this is the most orderly understanding of the works of our Savior Christ:
for when Christ did assume our nature, and was borne of the blessed Virgin, he
did an act of wonderful great love, and of great humility; of great humility,
in that he deigned to descend his Majesty, and to take our nature into his
divinity, Hebr. 2.9.
whereby he became subject to a temporal death, and in that respect a little
inferior to the Angels, his own creatures.

Secondly, The respect Christ had of sinful man.
it was an act of wonderful goodness and love, because the end thereof had
not respect to any means that might enlarge the honor and felicity of Christ
himself, in whom all true honor and happiness consists in an infinite
measure; but had only respect to poor and sinful man, that by this means he
might repossesse the favor of God, from which he cast himself by his own
disobedience and rebellion. 2 Cor. 5.21.
that Christ took our nature, nay, all our nature upon him, yet not those
stains, Christ took our nature, but not the corruption of our nature.
nor that corruption wherewith sin had deformed our nature: for though sin be
derived naturally upon us, yet is it not of the Essence of our nature, but a
defect of our nature, and an accidental deformity, which happened to our
nature since our first creation, and not given to us when God first gave us our
nature, but after it was given, and all those stains and deformities which are
naturally bred in us in the womb, and at our conception, were all voided and
absent; at the incarnation of our blessed Savior, the holy Ghost sanctifying
and preparing the sacred Virgin, Mat. 1.18, etc.
ordained for that holy office and purpose, whereby she was only made able to
derive her nature with her issue, Immaculate without sin, without spot, without
corruption, but not without infirmity; and this sacred deriving of a sanctified
nature from the blessed Virgin, is not to be considered as the act or power of
the holy Virgin, but of the holy Ghost, who being God coequall with the Father
and the Son, The holy Ghost the principal mover in sanctifying the blessed
Virgin.
was able to separate our nature from corruption, and so to sanctify the
sacred Virgin, that her nature might be derived as innocent and spotless as
God had created it; therefore it is necessary and infallibly true then, that
Christ took our whole nature upon him, even our infirmities, and avoided only
sin, which accidentally did happen to our nature; the which being not of our
nature, Ephesians. 5.30.
but in our nature; and there^^^e the holy Scripture says, that Christ Jesus
was like (...) all things, sin only excepted.

Secondly, is to be considered, what Christ did and suffered, whilst he lived
in our nature, which was the time of his personal and visible conversing with
men here on earth, What Christ did suffer for us.
is comprehended in this, that he lived righteously in the duties of the Law,
and in exact obedience to the Commandments of God, and this was necessary in
the office of our redemption, which Christ had undertaken to finish for us; for
it was not possible to make God the Covenant of grace, Christ did satisfy our
contempts.
before our contempts against the Law were satisfied, which Christ by his
active and passive righteousness did fulfill for us, when he lived in a
precise conformity to the Law of God; by his passive righteousness, when he
suffered punishment for the sins of his people, whereby the Law and the Justice
of God had satisfaction for all our former contempts committed against the
divine Majesty of God and his Laws: The Gospel is the only true history of
the life of Christ.
it shall not need to report the particulars what our Savior Christ did and
suffered in the time of his conversing with men on earth, the Scriptures of the
Gospel is best able to give satisfaction, wherein is registered, not all his
life, but so much as the wisdom of God has thought convenient for a
Christian knowledge, wherein is evident, The power and patience of Christ.
that Christ continually did both exercise his power and his patience; his
power was exercised in doing good, his patience in suffering evil; what he
did, it was for the redemption of man; and what he suffered, was for the sin
of man. Christ both dyed and suffered, that man might not suffer.

Thirdly, it is to be considered, what Christ did by suffering, when he dyed in
our nature. What Christ did by suffering for us.
Christ when he dyed in our nature, did by death, overcome death, and by
suffering, did an act of admirable power, and infinite glory, both his power
and his glory were declared in the conquest he made of sin, hell and death,
enemies to our nature, and had wasted the sons of Adam but now themselves
wasted and vanquished for ever by one son of Adam; 1 Cor. 15.54. The Victory
of Christ over sin, hell, and death.
death and hell are the servants of sin, the original or first cause thereof
is sin: whom sin marketh, death destroys his body, hell tormenteth his soul,
yet is sin, death, and hell swallowed up in victory by one Christ, who in the
form of man offering up himself a sacrifice to God his Father, has
reconciled God and man by his own righteousness; God and man leading into
perpetual captivity the ancient enemies of our nature, sin, hell, and death,
sealing the new covenant of grace with the cross of his death, whereby he has
opened the gates of heaven, and removed all difficulties that might let and
hinder us in our passage or progress to everlasting happiness.

This Doctrine whereby to know the son of God in his two natures; his
Divinity and Humanity united in one Christ, is most necessary in the knowledge
of every Christian, it being the maine foundation of Christian religion, The
necessity of knowing Christ.
whereupon all piety and faith is grounded; for he that understands not
Christ in his natures, and offices, cannot apprehend and apply him for his
salvation, because his assuming our nature, and the execution of his offices,
are the only means of our salvation, without which, God would not be pleased,
neither could the Law be satisfied, and therefore this general knowledge does
generally belong to all men, and that upon necessity. Secondly, seeing the
Son of God was content for our sakes to undergo so great a travel, and for
our sakes to unite our far unequal and most unworthy nature to his divinity;
we ought for his sake to refuse no travel that may advance his honor, or
express our thankfulness for his infinite favors done for us, and by whose
only means our souls have deliverance from eternal captivity and torment.

Thirdly, seeing Christ Jesus is the matter of the Covenant of grace, between
God and man, it does also most nearly concern all men to endeavor all means
possible, A most needful care is to be had of all men.
and by their eyes of faith to apprehend Christ, who is only to be apprehended
by faith, and so to receive the form and impression of his sacred Image,
whereby they shall be truly interested in the possession of heaven, when those
that want this shall be rejected of God with this answer, Away from me ye
wicked, for I know you not, because ye have not the Image of my Son.

Fourthly, seeing the whole matter of the Covenant of grace is fully contained
in the words and works of Jesus Christ, and that all things necessary, both to
a civil and Christian life, are contained in the Story of the holy Gospel, it
behooves all men to give that sacred Word pre-eminence, and that no man, All
directions must be conformed to Scripture.
neither any state or fellowship of men whatsoever, presume to decree or
ordain Canons, or Statutes Ecclesiastical or civil, which is any way
repugnant, or may prejudice the directions of Jesus Christ, delivered and set
forth, in the most holy Gospel; but as Christ our Prince, our Priest, and our
Prophet, has given us, either by doctrine or example; Eccle. 18. Reve. 22.18,
19
which needful directions are necessary and of lawful use, either in a
Christian Church or State: so no Christian Church or State should presume to
innovate or alter those directions, which Christ our high Priest, and great
Prince, has left established unto us: but in all directions both in Church and
State, there must be needful care, that every particular have relation to the
truth of holy Scripture, and be conformed to the example of Christ; for
whatsoever direction, whether it concern the soul or society, if it be not
either necessarily grounded, or agrees with the Word of God, is altogether
unlawful in a Christian Church and State, How to square every particular
action.
neither can dispensation make it lawful or tolerable. Therefore by the
square of the Scriptures all men ought to measure the Lawfulness of every
action, and direction, and that whatsoever shall disagree from God, and the
holy Scriptures, may be judged error and intrusion of disorder; and therefore
of necessity to be spewed out of every Church and State of Christian men.

The meditation of this doctrine, and these duties, should make us serious in
our Christian care: let us not now content our selves to have only a general
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Redeemer, To consider God in his Majesty only is
terrible.
but let us labor to understand him in his double nature; for if we consider
him in his divinity, as he is God only, it is a terror to our remembrance:
but if we consider him in his double nature, it gives us hope and alacrity; for
the Majesty of God is terrible to sinful man, but his mercy is comfortable,
and supporteth the falling spirits of our souls, which would faint and die in
despair, if the grace of God did not succor and give supply to such
extremities: therefore as God does most delight himself in the use of his
mercy, so let us delight our souls most in the holy contemplation of his
mercy; and as Christ Jesus is the most lively character of his mercy, Christ
Jesus is the character of Gods mercy.
so let our cares be most busy in the meditations of Christ: his Gospel is
the book of Gods mercies, we have eyes of faith, and can both see and read
the stories of mercy; let us therefore direct our labors and endeavor our
studies in the most happy knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ, Note.
and in him we shall find all goodness, and infinite variety of matter: in
him we shall find the cause of our redemption; Where to find the cause of
man's redemption.
we shall find it in his will: we shall find it in his working: he did
cause our good, he did effect it also; in his will was the cause, in his works
was the effect. This godly meditation may kindle a zeal in them that were dead
in sin, and provoke holiness where it is not; to see the infinite
greatness, Ier. 4.2. Psalm. 34.20.
the infinite goodness, of God omniscious, of God omnipotent, to yield
himself to such a wonderful difference of fortune: he that had all happiness
in the highest degree, breathing unutterable pleasure in the bosom of his
Father, and he that made the heavens, and the earth, should descend from heaven
to earth, and there assume the form of wretched man, and in that form work
such righteousness as might satisfy God, satisfy the Law for the sin of
man: and in that form to be borne in poverty, to live in contempt, and die in
disgrace; and all this to be done by the only begotten Son of God, for the
good of man, a creature that was become apostate, a traitor to God, a rebel to
his laws, and the very cause and actor of his disgrace, death and Tragedy. O
that I had but words to express the imaginations of my soul, what forms of
mercy we may see in our Savior Jesus! what slackenesse, what scantinesse, We
must meditate what we cannot express in words
nay what foulness of desert we find in our selves; his good and our evil
are infinite, therefore what we cannot express in words or works, let us
devise it in our thoughts; let us learn to believe and know our Savior to be
infinite good; though we cannot express his infinite goodness: what we can
do to his glory, let us by all means endeavor it; what we cannot do our
selves, let us persuade others; let us endeavor any thing, that may add any
thing to the honor of our Savior, for in gaining his favor, we shall have
the fullness of all favor: and in losing his favor, we have naught but
tribulation and misery: he is the seal of the covenant of grace between God
and as; if we want our seal, we shall want our assurance and so lose the
favor of God, A dangerous forfeit.
and forfeit our eternal estate in Heaven. Therefore let us esteem the favor
of our Savior before all things; let us esteem all things nothing in respect
of him; if he subscribe not to our pardon, we are but dead; the Law has cast
us, without him there is no grace, no hope of favor, no hope of pardon: let us
direct our eyes of faith unto him upon the bended knees of our heart, and when
we have found him whom our soul loves, let us resort to him in daily prayer;
win his favor by endeavor in faithful and careful serving him, and make
him the sole end of our desires, who has wrought who has effected our
salvation. Thus by the assistance of his grace I purpose to do in my own
particular: Thus I wish to all in general.

Of the Cross of Christ and of his holy suffering for our sins.
BEhold thou faithful soul, the grief of him that suffered, Romans 3.24, 25,
26.
the wounds of him that hanged, the torments of him that died on the Cross:
that head at which the Angels tremble, is crowned with thorns: that face which
was most beautiful above the sons of men, is defiled by the spittings of the
ungodly: those eyes which were more brighter then the Sun, are darkened in
death: those ears which were wont to hear Angelical praises, did ring with
the proud speeches and derision of wicked men, Mat. 27, 29, etc.
sinners: that mouth which taught the Angels, has no other drink but Gall and
Vinegar: those feet which are to be adored; those hands, Job 9.8.
which stretches forth the Heavens, are stretched forth and nailed on the
Cross: that body which was the most sacred Temple of the Deity, is whipped,
and wounded with the spear: John 19.34, 37.
neither remains there any part in him whole, save only a tongue, and that to
pray for them which crucified him: Christ declared himself to be the Son of
God three manner of ways. First, by his power or working of miracles.
Secondly, by the holy Ghost appearing in visible signs.
he that reigns with the father in the Heavens, is grievously by sinners
afflicted on the Cross. God suffers, God dies, God powers forth his blood
upon the Cross; and all for the redemption of man: judge therefore the
greatness of the danger, by the greatness of the price; judge the danger of
the disease by the value of the remedy. Surely those wounds in sinful man,
were great and dangerous indeed, which could no otherwise be cured, but by the
wounds of the everliving and quickening flesh of Christ: and the disease most
dangerous, which could not be c^red but by the death of the Physician.
Consider thou faithful soul the heavy and fierce displeasure of God against
us after the fall of our first Father Adam and his posterity after him, that
nothing could appease his anger for our sins, but the ignominious suffering of
his dear and only begotten Son upon the corsse. Christ his eternal and well
beloved Son, became suter to God his Father for us; yet his anger was not
turned from us; he by whom the world was made, Hebr. 1.2. Thirdly, by his
resurrection from the dead.
interceded for us, became our advocate, and took the cause of us miserable
sinners upon himself, and yet his anger was not turned from us; our Savior
took upon him our flesh, that by the glory of the divinity communicated unto
the humanity, he might expiate and purge our sinful flesh, Ephesians. 2.13, etc.
that by the saving virtue of his most perfect righteousness communicated unto
our nature, he might wipe away that venomous quality of our sin, which cleaves
so fast unto us, and in stead thereof, confer grace upon us; Esaias 9. 2 Cor.
5.21.
and yet the anger of his father was not turned away from us: our sins, and the
punishment due unto them, he takes upon himself; his body is bound, whipped,
wounded, pierced, crucified, and buried, Matthew. 27. Luk 22.44.
his blood like a dew most copiously distilled down all his members; at his
passion his most holy soul is made sorrowful above measure, even unto death;
he feels the pains of hell, the eternal Son of God cries out that he is
forsaken of God; so great was his anguish, Verse. 46.
so great was his bloody sweat, that he that comfort the Angels, stood in
need of an Angel to comfort him; he dyed for us sinners, who is the author
and giver of life to every living thing: 1 Pet. 3.18.
If God be so highly offended with the most just and holy One, what shall
become of us sinners? how will God punish us for our sins, who is so wrathfully
displeased with his own Son, for the sins of others? and if his Son was so
grievously punished for us, shall we his servants think to escape unpunished?
what shall the Reprobate suffer, if such be the sufferings of his best beloved?

Surely, if our hearts be not harder then the Adamant, and more flinty than a
stone, they must needs be wounded, and bleed within us, to think how Christ
was wounded for our sakes: For Christ truly took our infirmities upon
himself: Esaias. 53.4.
and bare our griefs, and healed our sicknesses: that which in us merited
eternal punishment and condemnation, Mat. 8.16.17.
thou Lord Jesus tookest upon thy self, that burden which would have pressed
us down into hell; thou tookest our sins upon thy self, Romans 3.24, etc.
and bestowedst thy righteousness upon us; death which is due unto us, thou
undertookest thy self, and conferredst life upon us; we cannot therefore by
any means, doubt of thy grace, or despair by reason of our sins; therefore,
if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.9, 10.
and believe in thine heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved; for by faith we apprehend that Christ has given satisfaction for us, he
bare the iniquities of those that are his; he suffered for the sins of many; he
interceded for the transgressors: Note. 4 Esd. 4.66. etc.
for he should have had very few just, unless in mercy he had received
sinners, and remitted the sins of the unjust. How then shall Christ judge
according to severity the sins of the penitent, which he has taken upon
himself; how shall he condemn him that is guilty of sin for whom he dyed?
Joh. 15.13.
will he condemn those whom he loves and calls his friends? will he
condemn those for whom he has entreated? will he condemn those for whom he
dyed? no: Lift up thy self therefore, Psalm. 42.14. and 43.5. Ezech. 18.22.
O devout soul, and forget thy sins; for the Lord has forgotten them, has
forgiven them: whom then do thou fear, as the punisher of thy sins, but the
Lord, who himself has made satisfaction for thy sins? if any other had paid
the price of my redemption I might have doubted, Esaias 53.
whether the just Judge would have accepted of that satisfaction; if either man
or Angel had satisfied for my sins, yet still I might have doubted, whether the
price of my redemption were sufficient; but now there is no place for doubt,
all doubt is taken away and removed from the faithful and penitent sinner; how
can it be, that he will not accept of that price which himself has paid;
Psalm. 25.9. Psalm. 43.15. Psalm. 42.6.
how can that but be sufficient, which is from God himself? Why, art thou yet
troubled, O devout soul! all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, just
is the Lord, and just are his Judgments. Why art thou so troubled, O my soul!
let both the Mercy and Justice of God raise thee up; if God be just, he will
not exact double satisfaction for one offense; for our offenses he has smitten
his Son; how then can he smite his servants for them, how can he punish our
sins in us, for which his Son has already given satisfaction. Psalm. 117.2.
The truth of the Lord endures for ever: as I live, says the Lord, I will not
the death of a sinner, Ezech. 33.11.
but much rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, Come says
our Savior, Mat. 11.28.
unto me all you that are heavy laden, and I will refresh you: shall we then
make God a liar, and labor with the weight of our sins, to bear down his
mercy? to make God a liar, and deny his mercy, is a greater sin then all the
sins of the whole world: Mat. 27.5. Romans 5.20.
therefore Judas sinned more in despairing of Gods mercy, then the Jews in
crucifying Christ: but rather where sin has abounded, there grace has also
much more abounded, and overweigheth our sins by infinite degrees: Jude 21, etc.
for sins are but the sins of men, but grace is the grace of God; sins are but
temporal, but the grace of God is from eternity to eternity: 2 Cor. 5.18, etc
satisfaction by Christ has been made for our sins, and the grace of God is
repaired in us by the death of Christ, and is established in us through him for
ever.

Of Repentance, or sorrow of the Soul for sin.
When Christian men have understanding by the Law of God, of their miserable
estate, in respect of sin, Joh. 15.22.24. Repentance.
what they were in innocence, what they are in sin, and what they shall be in
judgment; it brings a general sadness on the souls of men, dulleth the
spirit and delight they have had in their prosperous fortunes; for when God
gives grace to any one to examine his life, God gives the first grace to
repentance.
and to view his own deformities, consider his neglect in his dutiful and
obedient service which he owes unto God: the first knowledge thereof and
apprehension of his misery is most terrible, because his conscience does
forcibly check the former proceedings of his life, and violently hale him
against the current of his own affections: for as rivers are not forced
against their ordinary stream, but by the tide, which is more forcible than
the stream it self; so our sinful actions, The difficulty of repentance.
being in all men common and natural motions, is not reformed in us, but by
the spirit of God, a power above our nature, yet it is done with such
contention and strife in our flesh and nature which for the time does
wonderfully distract the soul of the party repenting, and needs it must: for
he that has wasted and spent his time in the delicacie of fortune, The reason.
glutting himself with variety of pleasures, and in the hight of his vain
prosperity, is admonished that he has fed on poison, and thereby run himself
into a desperate hazard, will, doubtless, hardly endure the extremity of grief
which sudden fear and amazedness can lay upon him: for so it is with sinful
man, who not regarding the danger of their soul, before they are warned and
admonished by God and their conscience, are taken unprovided with sudden
grief, which does always inflict an unexpressible measure of sorrow, The sorrow
of a repentant soul.
and often times death and desperation, when being taught by the Law to know
our sins, our miserable condition, and the diseases of our souls; so the
Gospel teaches us the cure, both what and how to administer physic to our
sick and diseased souls: for else the knowledge of our sins were extreme
misery without profit, The sudden grief is violent.
if we should not also know the means of our recovery, and to know also how
to administer and apply them to our souls comfort: for virtue has no virtue
but in use and that physic which the sick patient receives not, cannot
profit him be it never so excellent, or stands never so near him: and as in
corporal so in spiritual sickness, the disease must first be known, the
physic then administered; for he that ministers before he knows the
cause; or knows only the cause, and administreth not; or administreth and
takes not away the cause of the disease, can never recover his patient, be he
never so skillful or industrious: so in repentance and sorrow for sin, which
is a sickness of the soul, What must cure diseased souls.
must necessarily be considered these two particulars; the cause, the cure.
The cause is either the material cause, or the moving cause: the material
cause is sin; The cause of repentance.
that being the matter of our offense, for which we so sorrow and grieve at
the time of our repentance. This is proved in the examples of all men, that
have had the grace of true and unfeyned repentance: every penitent child of
grace having sorrow and affliction in his soul, because of his sin by which
he has provoked his God and his Creator against him. Thus did Job, and thus
did David repent them: and so do, and will do, all that would profit by their
repentance. Job 42.6. 2 Samuel 12 13.
And here is necessarily to be considered and observed, that though our
repentance have respect to the benefits of our own estate as being a most
necessary service in our salvation, yet the maine respect we ought to have to
God, whose glory we must prefer, God must be respected before our souls
even before the salvation of our souls; making him the principal, and our
selves but secondary respects of our repentance. And herein appears the
difference between true and false repentance: for the false and Godless
repentance sorroweth for their sin, only because God does punish and afflict
them for their sin; Exodus 9.27. 1 Samuel 15.24, 25 King. 21.27. Math. 27.3, 4.
and therefore their sorrow is chiefly for the punishment, and but respectively
for their sin. Thus did Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and Judas, repent them; and so
do all false and feyned repenters, that fear God for their own respects, and
not themselves for God. Note.
A true and godly repentance sorroweth for sin, because it is sin, and not
because it deserves punishment: and here the maine respect is to be had to
God, and to our selves only for Gods sake: for though the fear and dread of
punishment be sufficient to move any man's repentance, yet we must not make
that the cause of our spiritual sorrow, but much rather because we have
offended so gracious a God, who has declared himself to us in so many and
great demonstrations of his love to mankind: this ought to be more sensible to
our wounded souls then the horror we have of our condemnation: thus are holy
men moved in their grief and passion of their repentance: the maine difference
then between true and false repentance is this: Note.
true repentance is caused by reverence we have of the love of God; false
repentance by the fear we have of Gods justice, and the punishment due to our
sins: the one is the office of a son; the other is the office of a slave:
both of them repenting one matter, but for diverse respects. Sin then is the
material cause of repentance; the moving cause is God, who moving by his holy
Spirit in the hearts of his Elect, presents them the ugly forms of their
sins; God is the moving cause in every office of grace.
awakes their consciences, and stirs them to a serious cogitation of their
sins, and wretchedness; giving them still such proportion of grace as the
degrees of their repentance and spiritual sorrow shall require, and that God
is the first moving cause to godly repentance is evident by many places of
Scripture: namely, the second of Timothy, where Saint Paul advising Timothy to
instruct them that are contrary minded, he gives this reason, 2 Timothy 2. Verse.
25.
Because ye shall thereby prove if God at any time will give them repentance,
that they may know the truth. Here repentance is called the gift of God, which
does utterly bar man from all cause of boasting his own ability in this
necessary duty, for says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
You are saved by grace through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast himself. Also in the
Acts of the Apostles, proving Jesus to be Christ, and God, coequall to his
Father; Acts 5.31.
uses this argument before the counsel of the Jews: that God made him a
Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins:
where the power of forgiving of sins, and giving repentance, is made a proof
of his divinity, interposed between his office of Savior and his power of
forgiving of sins. These places out of many sufficiently prove that God is the
first and principal moving cause of fruitful repentance: Note.
now God moves not repentance in all them that repent for sin, but only in
them that truly repent, his chosen Elect.

Now of the cure or means of deliverance from spiritual grief. In the curing
is considered: first, the preparing and dressing of the wounded soul, whereby
it is made fit for curing. Secondly, the matter to be applied to the soul.
Thirdly, the manner of applyment. In the preparing of the wounded soul, there
be four things necessary: First, a spiritual sorrow for sin; that is ascent
of sorrow in the soul, caused by a cogitation of sin and guiltiness, and this
is a necessary preparative in a repentant soul: for that soul cannot desire a
spiritual refreshment, that has not first a sense of sorrow, and feeling of
present calamity. This preparative to repentance was in the Jews that were
hearers of holy Peter, when he declared before them their sin in crucifying
the Lord Jesus; Acts 2.37.
for the text says, When they heard it, they were pricked in their hearts, and
said, what shall we do? as if the present sorrow and anguish did so astonish
them, as they knew not what to do, nor how to advise themselves. Humble
acknowledgement.
The next preparative, is an humble acknowledgement of the soul, of the misery
it is in, and an exposing of such particular griefs as we find in the
register of our conscience: this is also necessary in the preparing of our
souls. For though God, the Physician of our sick souls, understand our
sins better then our selves, and can remember them better then conscience;
yet it is great reason, that he which desires the health of his soul, should
declare so much of his grief as he can remember; not to instruct or help the
knowledge of God, but to confess and acknowledge our selves, and our dutiful
desires. This acknowledgement of sin was common in the custom of holy David,
The example of holy David. Psalm. 32.5, 6.
how often has he confessed his sin and exposed his grief before God? for
God is so desirous of our good, as that then he readily helps us, when we do
but carefully desire it. Therefore says the Prophet David, I said I would
confess my sin unto the Lord, Verse 6.
and so thou forgavest the wickedness thereof. David did but say he would
confess his sin; God takes his word, and forgave him his sins: and
certainly humble and unfeyned acknowledgement in our repentance, is an
undoubted testimony that God does give us grace, and that he will without
question give us his favor. The third preparative consists in holy action,
that is, No man can satisfy Gods justice for sin.
when we endeavor a reformation, and declare our repentance in a conscionable
discharge of our duty: for though no man can satisfy the justice of God for
sin, yet ought all men so much as they have by the power of grace given them
to satisfy men: For example, he that steals or defraudeth, be it by force,
or of fraud, is of necessity bound to make restitution, if he be able. And
this the reformed Publican Zacheus well understood, who professing before
Christ his reformation and repentance, to witness it to be true and unfeigned,
he gave this infallible token: Behold Lord, Luke 19.8 9.
says he, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken from
any man by force, or forged cavillation, I restore him fourfold, and the Text
says in the next Verse, that then salvation was come into his house, and so
Zacheus endeavoring that he could not, did at one time entertain both his
Savior and his salvation; therefore, though no man can satisfy the Law, yet
every man must endeavovr it: otherwise his repentance is idle and but vain,
neither can he have part in the righteousness and redemption of Jesus Christ.
Psa. 25.1, 2, etc.
The last preparative is prayer, that is, a lifting up of the heart to God with
faith unfeigned, and hopeful confidence; in the exercise of prayer, there is a
double office: First, we must expose our grief; next, we must implore his
favor: for as in ordinary cures in surgery, Note.
the patient must first suffer his wounds to be ripped, launst and searched,
before the remedy can be applied to the sore; so must we rip and search the
wounds of our soul, avoid and empty the infectious matter, and when we have it
out, 2 King 19.14, 1^, 16.
we must use it as Hezekiah did the blasphemous letter of Rabshakeh, spread it
all before the Lord, and then with earnest humbleness implore his favor, lay
open our sins unto him, and confess that these are they that have wounded our
souls, troubled our conscience, for which we grieve, for which we pray; when
our soul is thus prepared, there is joy in our repentant tears, pleasure in
our grief, and hope in our spiritual sorrow, and then, and not before, are
we made fit to apprehend and apply Christ Jesus, the salvation of our soul.
The matter of the cure of our soul.
The second thing in the cure of our souls, is the sovereign matter by which
the diseased soul is cured, the most sovereign balsome, the sacred blood of
the Lamb of God, of the Son of God, shed for the redemption of mankind; 1
Pet. 2.24.
for so says his holy Apostle Saint Peter, who his own self bare our sins in
his body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live in
righteousness, by whose stripes we were healed; our sins are taken from us by
his bearing them; our wounds are cured by his wounds; our eternal death
prevented by his temporal death: for but the Son of God, No physic but the
blood of Christ can cure a wounded soul.
Christ Jesus, there is no Empyricke, no quintessence, no physic, can cure a
wounded soul, so venomous is sin, and so incurable are the wounds that sin
has made; only the blood of the holy Lamb is altogether able to deliver and
heal them, and that is both so certain and present in virtuous operation, as
that one drop rightly applied, is able and sufficient to cure the wounds of a
world of souls. The last thing in the cure of our soul, is the manner of
applying this most sovereign medicine, The manner of applying Christ. Hebr.
11.6.
Christ Jesus, and that is by a true and lively faith: for without faith it is
impossible to please God, and without faith, it is impossible to apprehend the
Son of God; neither let this seem strange to a Christian judgment, that we
should be able by faith to apprehend Christ, and to apply him to our repentant
souls; for he himself has taught us, that whatsoever we shall ask in
prayer, Matthew. 21.22.
if we believe, we shall have it, whereby he makes faith the covenant and
condition of prayer, and promises, that such prayer that is directed to him by
a living faith, shall only, and always prevail, No resistance against a true
faith.
against which there is no resistance; therefore to apprehend and apply Christ
to our wounded souls, we must reach with our hands of faith to his Fathers
bosom, take him from the altar of his cross, and by faith apply his precious
blood, nay, his bloody body, to our wounded souls, for he that does it
faithfully, does it effectually, and shall doubtless find assurance in
himself, that the wounds of his soul are cured, and that sin is for ever
dis-inabled from hurting him that has Christ fully applied: for, where he is
in mercy, there is assurance and safety of divine protection; and this is the
order that all Christians should take in repentance and spiritual sorrow:
First to prepare their souls, then to apply Jesus Christ their salvation, Note.
in whom there is safety, without whom none. To declare the manner and the
causes of godless sorrow, and false repentance, we will avoid them; for their
number and variety, let the true judge the false; and let this true form of
repentance here prescribed, teach the Christian Reader, to avoid all
dissimulation and hypocritical sorrow for sin, Hypocritical sorrow is in God
hatred. 2 Cor. 7.10, 11.
and remember that godly sorrow causes repentance, not to be repented of, but
worldly sorrow causes death. But gentle Reader, let me admonish thee, that we
despise not Christ, because upon his cross he hanged between two thieves,
neither that we honor thieves, Mat. 27.38, 39.
because they hanged upon the cross with Christ, for that which is but mere
truth, is no truth, and the best virtue is ever placed between two extremes.

This Doctrine of Repentance and spiritual sorrow, does remember all men very
needful admonishments. First, seeing that sin is the cause for which we repent
us, and by whose poison our souls are so grievously infected, and so foully
deformed and wounded; it ought to move all men to a loathing and detestation of
sin, by which we are grieved in our selves, and brought in hatred and
displeasure of Almighty God; Note.
for if we so carefully avoid all such annoyances as bring any little taste of
grief to our bodies in this temporal life, we ought much more to avoid sin,
which causes such extremity of grief in our souls, and does both deprive us
of Gods favor, and brings an everlasting destruction upon us. Secondly,
seeing there is no repentance profitable to salvation, but that which is caused
in us by the moving of Gods holy Spirit; it behooves all men to be serious in
their repentance, and not to content themselves with a slender examination of
their sins, and then return again to their former remissness and
disobedience, but to be heedfully careful to repent them of all sin, and to
be constant in that care, without alteration, without interruption; and that
our repentance respect rather a shame and grief, to have offended so gracious
a God, then any fear of temporal or eternal punishment, Saul and Ahabs
repentance.
lest, as did Saul and Ahab, by such false and feigned repentance, they lose
their souls. Thirdly, seeing the soul cannot be cured but by repentance,
neither can apply or apprehend Christ Jesus, unless it be first prepared and
made fit by the exercise of these duties, and not to satisfy themselves with
the exercise of one or two of them; but to endeavor them all, because they are
all necessary to repentance: for as in the Commandments of the Law, he that
fails in one breaks all; so in these duties of repentance, he that
neglects one, The danger of presumption.
profits by none, but annihilateth the purpose of his spiritual sorrow. Let
no man therefore flatter himself with this presumption, that if he has been
an extortioner, a thief, or a godless person, that his repentance will
suffice, though he be sorry for his sins, and acknowledge them to God; though
these be very needful and necessary duties, yet they are not all the duties of
our soul in our preparation to repentance; therefore if he has extorted,
Luke 19.8.
or as Zacheus did, taken by forged cavillation from any man, that is, by
indirect or dishonest course or means, Verse 9.
he must repent as Zacheus did, and make restitution, as far as he can,
otherwise salvation can never come to his house; therefore, as they are all
necessary, so are they all jointly necessary, every man being bound to all
these, as God and grace shall enable him. Fourthly, seeing Christ Jesus is that
Physician, and that only salve which is able to cure a wounded soul; and that
without him there is no working, no cause, no means of spiritual deliverance
from sin, We must sell all to purchase Christ.
and grief of a wounded conscience. Therefore it most nearly concerns all
men to endeavor all means to purchase this Christ their salvation and
righteousness, and to despise all things in respect of him their Savior; and
the only sovereign salve to heal their wounded conscience.

And seeing we have Jesus Christ proposed us to be our salvation, The
willingness of Christ, to be apprehended of the faithful.
who is always willing and ready to be apprehended and applied to our souls,
by whom we only enjoy the peace of conscience, and the hope of Heaven:
therefore no man ought to affy and have any confidence in the pardons of Popes,
dispensations, indulgences, and such trash and merchandise; whereby the
besotted and blinded people of this world is wonderfully delighted: for such
dangerous pedling stuff, Note.
must not be thought to have equal virtue with the blood of Christ, or that
they have any power in the cure of souls: but on the contrary, they surfeit
the conscience, and poison the souls of them that trust in them; enlarging the
wounds both in number and grief, Dangerous Physic.
and makes the soul incapable of cure, and most unfit to have the precious
blood of Christ Jesus applied unto it. Lastly, seeing there is no means to
apprehend and apply this Christ, the physic and Physician of our souls, but
only by a true and lively justifying faith: Christ cannot be apprehended, but
by a true faith only.
therefore it most necessarily concerns all men, to have this means of
apprehending Christ; because, as it is said, The salve, though most sovereign,
cannot profit the sore, unless it be applied by faith, that being the maine
act of our spiritual health: all other offices and duties, being but
circumstances to assist and forward this act. Moreover the faith by which we
apprehend Christ, must be more then a general faith, for it profits not to
our health and salvation, to know only that Jesus Christ is the present cure
of our souls; unless we also by a confident and a lively faith apprehend, and
apply him to the sore of our souls. Again, seeing Christ is our only
salvation, and seeing faith is the only means of apprehending him; we ought
not to seek or appoint any other means or matter of salvation; neither any
other manner of applying it: and therefore no man ought to ascribe
righteousness to himself or his works, or to the supererogating works of
his friends, but only to Jesus Christ: and that this Christ is only
apprehended by a saving faith: for by faith we live, Note.
by faith we walk, by faith we are justified, and our hearts purified; by it
we vanquish the world; and without it it is impossible to please God.

Let us therefore often meditate this doctrine of repentance: what fear, what
care, what affliction is in the soul at such occasion? let us practice it in
our selves, and pity it in others: let us condemn sin to be the greatest
cause of such misery; and let us condemn our selves to be the greatest cause
of that sin. When we exercise this spiritual office of repentance, let us
be carefully busy in the duties thereof; A necessary resolution.
let us search the wounds of our souls, expel and empty the rottenness and
putrefaction thereof: search and dress them, search them by a serious
examination of our sins; and dress them by an humble and hearty
acknowledgement: How to dress the wounds of our souls.
let us also examine the actions and particulars of our lives; let us compare
them with our duties, and those that proportion not thereto, let us call them
our errors and our sins, and the wounds of our souls: let us by means of
faith and prayer, refer our defects to be supplied to the most absolute
satisfactory righteousness of our Savior Jesus Christ: The righteousness of
Christ must supply all our defects.
what we find sin let us call it sin; let us not flatter our errors, nor
smooth our deformities, and defects in our selves: let us not pretend health,
when we are dangerously sick; nor safety when we are mortally wounded: We
must not foster nor favor no sins.
let us not favor our sins; be it a sin of profit, or a sin of pleasure, in
this cause let us despise both; let us be sorry for all, acknowledge all, and
earnestly pray for the remission of all: if we have gained possessions, and
wealth by theft, extortion, or forged cavillation; let us restore as our
present estate shall enable us; let us be ashamed that Zacheus the Publicane
shall restore his extortions fourfold, and we not to restore the principal.
Shun all such sin as the plague or leprosy, because we know that salvation
will not come to the house that is so infected, but as of necessity all sin
must be cured, All sin of necessity must be cured.
otherwise there is no cure in our repentance: let us hate all sin, without
dispensation of any; otherwise we repent not, but flatter our selves in
presumption, and vain confidence: and because nothing can apprehend and apply
salvation to our souls, but only by the hands of saving faith: let us
therefore be sure that our faith be lively and steadfast faith; let us try it
by the evidence of our works, they will bear us witness and testify what it
is, and of what nature: Works must try our faith.
for as our faith in Christ does justify us before God; so the works of our
faith do justify us in the sight of men. If the fruit of our faith be good,
our faith it self then must needs be good, and availeable to apprehend and
apply Jesus Christ our salvation. Let us therefore be plentiful in the
exercise of good actions, that our conscience may testify our faith, and that
our faith may be able to execute the holy office assigned it: We must be
plentiful in good works, and why.
when we have the assurance of this faith, let us then with steadfast
confidence look up to Heaven; let us seek him whom our soul loves, and when
we have found him, let us expose before him the calamity of our souls, and our
present condition we are in: let us lay open our sins, discover our wounds,
declare our endeavor, and report our faith: when we have thus done, we may
assure our selves that our Savior will rejoice at our recovery, be glad of our
conversion and return, and will show us his righteousness, and will also
willingly yield himself unto our faith, and give us free liberty in the use of
his righteousness. Apprehension of Christ.
Let us busily apply our cares to apprehend him in his righteousness, and
stretch our hands of faith, to the altar of his Cross, and with a wonderful
degree of comfort apply his sufferings, his wounds, and his death, to heal the
wounds which sin has made in our souls, Note.
and infuse his most precious blood into them, and with that blood shall enter
the spirit of health, and everlasting safety. Thus in an instant shall we
find, the happy alteration of our souls, and we that but then were in
spiritual grief, The happy alteration of our souls.
anguish, and tribulation, shall now find joy and strength in our souls: and
our souls that were before wounded, deformed, and full of the marks of sin,
shall now have the marks of righteousness of Jesus Christ, whereby we shall
be distinguished from the ungodly and unrepentant sinners, and have the seals,
and assurance of everlasting salvation, and eternal happiness.

The fruit of true repentance.
The foundation and beginning of holy life, is saving repentance: Heb. 10.17,
18.
for where there is true repentance, there is remission of sins: and where
there is remission of sins, there is the grace of God; and where there is the
grace of God, there is Christ; and where Christ is, there is his merits; and
where his merits are, there is satisfaction for sin; and where there is
satisfaction for sins, there is righteousness; and where there is
righteousness, there is joy and tranquillity of conscience; and where there is
tranquillity of conscience, there is the holy Spirit; and where the holy Spirit
is, there is the sacred and holy Trinity; and where the holy Trinity is, there
is eternal life; therefore, where there is true repentance, there is eternal
life; where there is not true repentance, there is no remission of sins, nor
the grace of God, nor Christ, nor his merit, nor satisfaction for sins, nor
righteousness, nor tranquillity of conscience, nor the holy Spirit, nor the
holy Trinity, nor eternal life; why therefore do we defer our repentance,
and why do we procrastinate it from day to day? God bids thee repent to day,
thou can not promise thy self to morrow; and to repent truly, is not in our
power, without the grace of God moves us thereunto; and at the day of
Judgment, we must not only give an account for to morrow, but for the present
day. Therefore repent whilst thou have time, Note.
for to morrow is not so certain unto us, as the utter destruction of the
impenitent sinner is certain; for every day does the flesh heap sin upon
sin; let therefore the Spirit every day wash them away by hearty repentance.
Christ dyed, that sin might dye in us; and shall we suffer that to live and
reign in our hearts, for the destroying whereof the Son of God himself
dyed? Matthew. 3.
Christ enters not into the heart by grace, unless John Baptist first prepare
the way by repentance. Esaias 57.15.
God powers not the oil of mercy, but into the vessels of a contrite heart:
God does first mortify us by contrition, that afterward he may quicken us by
the consolation of the Spirit: 1 Samuel 2.6.7.
he leads us first into hell by serious grief, that afterward he may bring
us back by the sweet taste of his grace: in like manner terror goes before
the taste of Gods love, and sorrow before comfort; God binds not up our
wounds, unless first we lay them open and bewail them, by confession unto
him; he pardons not, unless thou first acknowledge thy sins; he justifies
not, unless thou first condemn thy self; he comforts not, unless thou
first despair in thy self and thine own merits; this true repentance God
grant unto us, and by his holy spirit work in us.

Of the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper; and first of the fruits
of Baptism.
Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration, cleansing or washing, admission,
sanctification, incorporation, whereby they which do repent, and profess the
faith and religion of Christ, are incorporated into Christ, and joined unto his
Church, that being washed from their sins, they may walk in newness of life,
and the outward sign of the invisible grace, which the Spirit of Christ does
work in the hearts of the faithful elect. Remember therefore, thou faithful
soul, the grace of God conferred upon thee, in the saving laver of Baptism,
which is the fountain of regeneration, Tit. 3.5, 6.
and renewing of the holy Ghost, which is shed on us richly through Jesus
Christ our Savior; at the first creation of all things, the Spirit of God
moved upon the waters, and gave a vital force unto them; so in the water of
Baptism, the holy Ghost is also present, and makes it a saving means of our
regeneration; and there was in Jerusalem, about the sheep market, a poole,
into which at a certain time, the Angel of the Lord descended, Joh. 5.2. and
Verse. 4.
and troubled the water; and he that first descended into it after the
troubling of the water, was made whole of what disease soever he had; the water
of Baptism is that poole, which heals us of every disease of sin, when the
holy Spirit descends into it, and troubles it with the blood of Christ, Matthew.
3.16.
who was made a sacrifice for us: at the baptism of Christ, the heavens were
opened unto him; so as our baptism the gate of heaven is also opened unto us;
at the baptism of Christ, the holy and sacred Trinity was present: so are they
likewise at our baptism; for by the word of promise, which is annexed unto the
element of water, faith receives the grace of the Father adopting, the merit
of the Son cleansing, Note.
and the efficacy of the holy Ghost regenerating. Pharaoh and his host was
drowned in the red Sea, the Israelites passed through safe, secure and sound: So
in baptism, Exo. 14 27, etc.
all the host of vices are drowned, and the faithful safely attain to the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven: in the Church, the spiritual Temple of
God, the saving waters of baptism do spring forth, into the profundity
wherein our sins are thrown; Mich. 7.19.
whosoever come unto it, shall be healed and live: Baptism is the spiritual
flood in which all sin of flesh is drowned. The impure crow goes forth like the
Devil, but the holy Ghost like the Dove, brings the Olive branch, that is,
Genesis 8.11.
peace and tranquillity unto our minds. Remember therefore thou faithful
soul, the greatness of the grace of God conferred upon thee in Baptism, and
render due thanks unto him.

The more plentiful grace is conferred upon us in Baptism, the more diligent
and careful must we be in the custody of the gifts conferred. We are buried
with Christ by Baptism into his death; therefore, as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of his Father; so we also should walk in newness of
life, to the glory of our Redeemer, John 5.14.
by whom we are made whole: let us sin no more, lest a worse thing happen
unto us; we have put on the most precious robe of Christ's righteousness, let
us not therefore defile it with the stains of sin; Ephesians. 4.23.
by baptism we are regenerate and renewed in the spirit of our mind;
therefore let not the flesh dominere over the spirit; by spiritual
regeneration we are made the sons of God, let us therefore live as the sons
of such a Father; we are made the Temple of the holy Ghost, let us therefore
prepare a thankful seat for such a guest; we are received into Gods Covenant,
let us therefore beware we do not serve under the Devil, and so fall from the
covenant of Grace: for our conversation according to the old man is corrupt,
Ephesians. 4.22.
according to the lusts of errors; therefore beseech God, that he will ^^^per
and moderate it in us, by the grace of his holy Spirit, and grant that we
swerve not from the right mark, the truth of his righteousness: and the holy
majesty of the mysteries of God, that be so miraculous and wonderful, effect
in us all these things. O blessed Trinity in Unity, thou that have conferred
such grace upon us in Baptism, give us also the grace to persevere in a godly
course according to thy testimonies.

Of the Lords Supper and Institution of Christ.
1 Cor. 11.23* 24.
THe Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my body which is
broken for you; this do ye in remembrance of me.

The sum of these words, is the Institution and the use of the Lords Supper,
which is a witness of Gods promises, 1 Ch^o 35.4. etc.
a remembrance of Christ's death, and a seal of our adoption; therefore, as the
Levites under the Law were bound to prepare their breth^^^ before they came to
the passover, so should all men prepare themselves before they presume to come
to the supper of the Lord. After he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave
unto them, and said, take, eat: for when he had given than ^s to God, then it
was sanctified and blessed, and lawful to eat: So, when we have served God,
then it is lawful for us to use Gods blessings, and not before, then may we
eat and drink, as Christ did; for these things were created to serve them
which serve God: therefore if thou do not serve him for them, thou
incroachest upon Gods blessings, and stealest his creatures, which are no more
thine then thou art his; This doctrine intends not the exclusion of
worldlings from tithe to their goods, as usurpers over the creatures. Math.
26.26, 27 Genesis 27, etc.
for the good God created all things for good men, as the devils possessions
are reserved for evil men. It follows This is my body; here is the fruit of
his thankes-giving, before he prayed that the Bread and Wine might be
blessed, and they were blessed: As Isaacks blessing showed it self upon Jacob,
whom he blessed, so Christ his blessing appears straight upon these
mysteries, because his blessing did sanctify the Sacrament, and infuseth
virtue into it, and ever since has he given this blessing its efficacy, and
sanctified it unto us, as well as it did to the Apostles; for before it could
not be said, this is my body. Now you shall see, by what a mystical
resemblance Christ is united unto us: First, Romans 2.17.
as Christ in the supper took Bread to feed us, so in his birth, he took our
flesh upon him to save us. Secondly, as Christ when he had taken the bread,
blessed it to make it a spiritual food unto us; so Christ when he had taken
our flesh, poured forth his most rich and precious graces into it, to make it
food of life eternal unto us. This is my body, is a figurative speech,
Confutation of the Papists.
and must not be construed I t^rally; then where are the Papists, which say,
that after the words of consecration, the Bread and Wine are transubstantiated
into the very Body and Blood (...) Christ, really and substantially: they may
as well prove that Christ is a door, John 10.7, 9. John 15.1.
because he says, I am the door: or a Vine, because he says, I am a Vine:
for his sayings are like figurative speeches, and must not be construed
literally.

This is my body. Math. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24
Now may we see whether these words do prove that the Bread is turned into
Christ's body. Paul says, Jesus took bread; well then, yet it is bread: when
he had taken it, then he blessed it; what did he bless? the bread which he
took; well then, yet it is bread when he had blessed it, then he brake it:
what did he break the bread which he blessed? well then, yet it is bread:
when he had broken it, then he gave it; what did he give the bread which he
brake? well then, yet it is bread: when that he gave it, they did eat it:
what did they eat the bread which he gave them? well then, yet it is bread:
when they did eat it, then he said, This is my body; what did he call his
body the bread which he gave, which they did eat? well then, yet it is bread:
if it be bread all this while, when he did take it, and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it, and they did eat it; Math. 22, 34.
when then is it turned into his body? here they stand like the Saduces, as
mute as fishes: now see whether their argument has either face or force.
Again, it is not only we that say, it is bread and wine, Math. 26, 27, 28
29. Mark. 14.25.
after consecration; but Christ himself does call it bread and wine after he
had given it, as he did before: and in Mark says, I will drink no more of
the fruit of the Vine. Here Christ says, that it was the fruit of the Vine
which he drank; but his blood is not the fruit of the Vine; therefore he
drank wine, and not blood. For if Christ's body were offered in the Sacrament,
then were it no Sacrament, but a Sacrifice; which two differs as much as
giving and taking: for in a sacrifice we give, and in a Sacrament we receive:
and therefore we say our Sacrament, Ephesians. 3.16.17.
and Christ's Sacrifice; as Christ dwells in us, so he is eaten of us, but he
dwells in us only by faith, therefore he is eaten by faith only. Again,
none can be saved without the communion of the body of Christ, but if all
should communicate with it corporally, then neither infants; nor the Patriarks,
our Fathers, nor any of the Prophets should be saved, because they received
not so; John 3.36.
for Christ was not then come in the flesh: Saint John says, He that believes
in the Son shall be saved. The Cup is called the new Testament, because it
signifies the New Testament: so the Bread and Wine are called Christ's body,
because they signify Christ's body: no more is the Lamb the Passover, though
Christ called it the Passover; nor Circumcision is not the Covenant, though God
called it the Covenant; that Baptism is not the Regeneration, He calls the
sign the thing which it signifies.
though it be called Regeneration: neither is the Cup the New Testament,
though Christ called it the New Testament; the Sacrament is the sign which
presents the thing signified: when this Sacrament was instituted, and Christ
said, This is my body, he had not then a glorified body; therefore it is
demanded whether they received a mortal or glorified body, Demand of the
Papist.
because one of these two bodies they must needs receive: if they say a mortal
body, that cannot profit them; for mortal food is but for mortal life:
neither now has Christ a mortal body to communicate to them, because it is
changed to an immortal body; therefore they cannot receive his mortal body.
And if they say, that they receive his glorified body, they must fly from this
text; for at that time Christ had not a glorified body: if they received then
the same body which the Apostles received, as they say they do, they cannot
receive a glorified body, because then Christ's body was not glorified;
therefore they could not communicate with his glorified body. Thus are they
hedged in with rocks and the sands on every side of them: they received a body
neither mortal nor immortal; it seems it was a fantastical body: if Christ
had such a body, let all men judge: here they are at a stand, Dan. 4.5.
like one that cannot tell on his tale. Nebuchadnezzar dreamed a dream, and
knew not what it meant, and so do they.

How absurd and heretically do these Papists hold in their opinions? and this
surpasses them all; that Christ must be applied like Physic: as though his
blood cannot profit us, unless we drink it, and swallow it like a potion: is
this the Papists union with Christ? is this the manner whereby we are made one
flesh with Christ, John 1.
to eat his flesh, and drink his blood? nay, when he took our flesh unto
him, and was made man, then we were united unto him in the flesh, and not by
receiving his body: Christ took our flesh and nature, we took not his; but
believe that he took ours: now if you would know whether Christ's body be in
the Sacrament, it is said unto you, as Christ said unto Thomas, touch, feel,
and see: in visible things God has appointed our eyes to be judges: For as by
the Spirit we discern the spiritual objects; so our sense discerns
sensible objects: as Christ taught Thomas to judge of his body, so may we, and
so should they, if they were not, as it were hood-winked through error and
mis-beliefe: Christ's saying to Thomas was that he would have him believe it to
be his body, John 20.27.
for my body says Christ, may be seen and felt; and thus transubstantiation
is found a liar.

It is showed before, that every Sacrament is called by the name of the thing
which it does signify and present. The reason why the signs have the name of
the things which they represent and signify, is to strike a deeper reverence
in us, Note.
to receive this Sacrament of Christ; reverently, sincerely, and holily, as if
Christ himself were there present in body and blood. This is the reason why
Christ calls the signs of his body, his body; to cause us to take this
Sacrament with fear and reverence: because we are apt to contemn it as the
Jews did their Manna. Number. 12.6.


The worthiness of the Sacrament is to be considered three ways: First, by
the Majesty of the Author ordaining it ^^condly, by the preciousnesse of the
persons whereof it consists. Thirdly, by the excellency of the ends for which
it was ordained. The Lords Supper is a pledge and a symbol of the most near
and effectual communion which Christians have with Christ: The cup of blessing
which we bless, Cor. 10.16, 17.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread of Christ which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? That is dwelling in our
hearts, abiding in us.
that is a most effectual sign: and pledge of our communion with Christ, and
has diverse similies set forth in holy Scriptures: First, of the Vine and
Branches: Secondly, of the Head and Body: Thirdly, Joh. 15.5.
of the Foundation and the Building: Fourthly, of one Loaf confected of many
grains: Fifthly, Colos. 1.18.
of the Matrimonial communion betwixt man and wife, and is threefold betwixt
Christ and Christians: the first is natural, betwixt our humane nature, and
the divine nature of Christ in the person of the Word: the second is mystical,
Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
betwixt our person absent from the Lord, and the person of Christ, God and
man, into one mystical body: the third is celestial, betwixt our persons
present with the Lord, and the person of Christ in his body glorified; these
three conjunctions depend each upon other. The mystical communion chiefly here
meant, is wrought betwixt Christ and us; by the Spirit of Christ apprehending
us, and by our faith stirred up by the same Spirit, Note.
apprehending Christ again: this union he shall best understand in his mind,
Every one receives, but few understand what they receive.
who does most feel it in his heart; but of all other times this union is best
felt, and most confirmed, when we do duly receive the Lords Supper; for then
we shall sensibly feel our hearts knit unto Christ, and the desire of our
souls drawn by faith and the holy Ghost, as by the cords of love, nearer and
nearer to his holiness. This union betwixt the faithful is so ample, that no
distance of place can part it; so strong, that death cannot dissolve it; so
durable, that time cannot wear it out; so effectual, that it breeds a fervent
love between those that never saw one another faces: and this conjunction of
souls, is termed the communion of Saints, 1 Cor. 12 12, 13. and 27.
which Christ effects by six especial means: First, by governing them all
by one and the same holy Spirit: Secondly, the enduing them all with one and
the same faith: Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
Thirdly, by shedding abroad his own love into all and every one of their
hearts: Romans 5 5. Tit. 3.5.
Fourthly, by regenerating them all by one and the same baptism: Fifthly, by
nourishing them all with one and the same spiritual food: 1 Cor. 10.17. Colos.
1.18.22 Note. Acts 4.32.
Sixthly, by being one quickening head, of that one body of his Church, which
he reconciled to God his Father in the body of his flesh. Hence it is, that
the multitude of believers in the primitive Church, were of one heart, and of
one soul, in truth, affection and compassion; and this does teach all
Christians, to love one another, seeing they are all members of the same holy
and mystical body, Ephesians. 4.3.
whereof Christ is the head; and therefore they should have all a Christian
sympathy and fellow-feeling, to rejoice one in another joy, to condole one
another grief, to bear one with another infirmities; Ephesians. 4.2.
and mutually to relieve one another wants; to this end he bestows upon
them all saving graces, necessary to eternal life: as the sense of Gods love,
the assurance of our election, with Regeneration, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Justification, and grace to do good works, to feed souls; John 15.5.
therefore of the poor and faithful, is the assured hope of life eternal:
For, as it is said, this sacrament is a sign and a sure pledge unto as many as
shall receive the same according to Christ's institution, Joh. 1.16.
that he will, according to his promise, by the virtue of his crucified body
and blood, as verily feed our souls to eternal life, as our bodies are by
bread and wine nourished to this temporal life; and to this end, Christ in the
action of the Sacrament, really gives his body and blood to every faithful
receiver.

1 Cor. 11.24. and 2.5.
Christ is verily present in the Sacrament, by a double union; whereof the first
is spiritual, twixt Christ and the worthy receiver: the second is
sacramental, twixt the body and blood of Christ, and the outward signs in the
sacrament; if you look to the things that are united, this union is
essential; if to the truth of this union, it is real; if to the manner how it
is wrought, it is spiritual, it is not our faith, that makes the body and
blood of Christ to be present in the Sacrament, but the spirit of Christ
dwelling in him and us; Note.
our faith does but receive and apply unto our souls those heavenly graces
which are offered in the Sacrament; the other being the sacramental union, is
not a physical or local, The Word and the Sacrament are the two briefly
wherewith our Mother the Church does nourish us.
but a spiritual conjunction of the earthly signs which are bread and wine,
with the heavenly grace, which is the body and blood of Christ, in the act of
receiving; as if by a mutual relation, they were but one and the same thing:
hence it is, that in the same instant of time, that the worthy receiver eats
with his mouth the bread and wine of the Lord, he eats also with the mouth
of faith, the very body and blood of Christ; not that Christ is brought down
from heaven to the Sacrament, but that the holy Spirit, by the Sacrament, lifts
up his mind unto Christ, not by any local mutation, but by a devout
affection; so that in the holy contemplation of faith, he is at that present
with Christ, and Christ with him; and thus believing and meditating, how Christ
his body was crucified, and his precious blood shed for the remission of his
sins, and the reconciliation of his soul unto God; his soul is hereby more
effectually fed in the assurance of eternal life, than bread and wine can
nourish his body to this temporal life.

There must be therefore of necessity, in the Sacrament both the outward
signs, to be visibly seen with the eye of the body, and the body and blood of
Christ to be spiritually discerned with the eye of faith. But the form how the
holy Ghost makes the body of Christ, being absent from us in place, to be
present with us by union: Ephesians. 5.32.
Saint Paul terms a great mystery, such as indeed our understanding cannot
worthily comprehend. The sacramental bread and wine therefore are not bare
signifying signs, but such as therewith Christ does indeed exhibit and give to
every worthy receiver, not only his divine virtue and efficacy, but also his
very body and blood, as verily as he gave to his Disciples the holy Ghost, by
the sign of his sacred breath; Joh. 20.22.
or health to the diseased, by the Word of his mouth, Mar. 6.56.
or touch of his hand or garment; and the apprehension by faith is more
forcible, than the exquisite comprehension of sense or reason. To conclude this
point; this holy Sacrament is that blessed bread, which being eaten, Luke
24.30.31.
opened the eyes of the Emmauites, that they knew Christ: 1 Cor. 12.13.
this is that Lordly cup, by which we are made to drink into one spirit; this
is that rock flowing with honey, 1 Samuel 14.27.
that reviveth the fainting spirits of every true Jonathan, that tastes it with
the mouth of faith; Judge. 7.13,
this is that barley loaf, which tumbling from above, strikes down the tents
of the Midianits of infernal darkness. Eliahs angelical Cake and water, 1
King. 1^.7, 8. Psalm. 78.25, 26.
preserved him forty days in Mount Horeb, and Manna, Angels food, fed the
Israelites forty years in the wilderness: Exodus 16.15. Joh. 6.32, 35.49.50,
51.58.
but this is that true bread of life, and heavenly Manna, which if we shall
duly eat, will nourish our souls to eternal life, and does bind all
Christians, as it were, by an oath of fidelity, to serve the one only true
God, Deuteronomy. 8.19.
and to admit no other propitiatory sacrifice for sins, but that one real
sacrifice, which by his death, Christ once offered up for all true believers,
Hebr. 9.
and by which he finished the sacrifices of the Law, and effected eternal
redemption and righteousness for all them that faithfully believe in him, and
so to remain for ever a public mark of profession, to distinguish Christians
from all sects and false Religions; and seeing that in the Mass there is a
strange christ adored; not he that was born of the Virgin Mary, but one that is
made of a wa^er cake: and that the offering up of this breaden God, is thrust
upon the Church as a propitiatory sacrifice, for the quick and the dead:
therefore all true Christians that have sufficient information, and have means
to escape invincible ignorance, are to account the pretensed sacrifice of the
mass, Note.
as derogatory to the all-sufficient world saving merits of Christ's death and
passion: for by receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we all swear that
all real sacrifices are ended by our Lords death: and that his body and blood
crucified and shed for us, is the perpetual food and nourishment of our soul.
The bread of the Lord is given by the Minister; but the bread which is the
Lord, is given by Christ himself. Therefore when thou take the bread at the
Ministers hand to eat it, then ronze up thy soul to apprehend Christ by a
lively faith; and to apply his merits to heal thy miseries; Note.
and as thou eatest the bread, imagine that thou see Christ hanging upon the
Cross, and by his unspeakeable torments fully satisfying Gods Justice for thy
sins, John 19.
and strive as verily to be partaker of the spiritual grace, as of the
Elementall signs, for the truth is not absent from the sign: Neither does
Christ deceive when he says, this is my body; but he gives himself truly
and indeed to every soul, that spiritually receives him by faith. For as ours
is the same supper, which Christ administered to his Disciples; so is the same
Christ verily present at his own Supper: not by any papal transubstantiation,
but by a Sacramental participation, whereby he does truly feed the faithful
unto eternal life: not by coming down from heaven unto thee, but by lifting
thy heart unto Heaven, The duty of the redeemer.
where he sits at the right hand of God. And when thou see the wine
brought unto thee apart from the bread, then remember that the blood of Christ
was as verily separated from his body upon the Cross, for the remission of thy
sins; and that this is a seal of the new covenant, which God has made to
forgive the sins of all penitent sinners, that faithfully believe in the
merits of his bloud-shedding.

John 6.54.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, says our Savior Christ,
shall live forever. Exceeding great was the bounty and goodness of our
Savior, in that he did not only assume our flesh, and exalt it to the Throne
of celestial glory, The saving participation of the body and blood of Christ.
Verse. 56.
but also feeds us with his body and blood, unto eternal life. Oh the saving
delicates of the soul! Oh the Heavenly and Angelical food to be desired
above all the delicates upon earth! for He that eats the flesh, and drinks
the blood of Christ, dwells in Christ, and Christ in him. This is meat
indeed; when we eat it we are changed, not into the nature of our body, but
into the nature of it: we are the members of Christ, By it we are sanct^fied.
and are united by his Spirit, and fed with his body and blood. This is the
bread which came down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world; he that
eats thereof shall never hunger: this is the bread of grace: Psalm. 34.10.
John 6.58.
this is the bread of Life, whosoever shall eat thereof shall live for ever:
neither is it only heavenly, but thou that eatest thereof art heavenly: that
is, they that eat it savingly in the Spirit, shall become heavenly. This is
the true Fountain of life, be that shall drink of this water, John 4.14.
shall never thirst; but it shall become in him a fountain of water springing
up unto eternal life. Esaias 55.1, 2, 3
All ye tha^ thirst, come unto these waters: and ye that have no silver make
haste, come, buy without money: let them that thirst come, and come thou soul
that ^rt vexed with the raging heat of sin; and if thou want the silver
of thy merits, make haste the rather: if thou have no merits of thine own,
make haste the more ardently to the merits of Christ, Verse. 1.
Make haste therefore and buy without money or money-worth; here is Christ the
habitation of the soul, from which let not thy sins deter thee, and into
which let not thy merits enter; for what can be our merits? our labors do not
^^tiate; neither is the grace of God bought with the silver of our merits.
Therefore, hear O ye devout souls, and eat that which is good, and thou
shall be delighted with fatness. John 6.63.
These words are spirit and truth, and the word of eternal life, the cup of
benediction, 1 Cor. 10.16.
is the communion of the blood of Christ; 1 Cor. 6.17.
and the bread which we break is the participation of the Lords body: we
cleave unto the Lord; therefore we are one Spirit with him. For we are united
unto him, not only by the communion of nature, but also by the participation
of his body and blood: John 6.^
let us not therefore with the Jews say, How can this man give us his flesh to
eat? let us not pry into his power, but let us admire his benevolence; let us
not examine his Majesty, but reverence his goodness: the manner of his
presence I know not, but his presence I believe; and am certainly persuaded,
that it is inward, and near unto us: for we are members of his body, Ephesians.
5.30. John 6.56.
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: he dwells in us, and we in him.
My soul desires to dive by cogitation into the secrets of this most profound
abyss, but cannot find, with what words to set forth and declare that
infinite goodness; and therefore am altogether amazed at the sight of the
greatness of the grace of the Lord, and the glory of his Majesty.

In this Supper of the Lord, there is set before us, a mystery to be trembled
at, and by all means to be adored of us; there is the treasury and treasure of
divine grace. Genesis 2.^.
We know in Paradise there was a tree of Life planted by God, whose fruit might
have conserved our first parents and their posterity, by the fertility, and
felicity thereof. There was also placed in Paradise, a Tree of knowledge of
good and evil, but even that which was appointed by God, for their life and
salvation, and for to exercise their obedience, became unto them an occasion of
death and condemnation, Ezech. 47.12.
while they obeyed their own desires, and the devils allurements. Here is also
prepared a Tree of Life, whose wood is sweet, whose leaves are for medicine,
and whose fruit for meat; Revel. 22.1, 2.
the sweetness thereof does take away the bitterness of all evil, yea of
death it self. Unto the Israelites was given Manna, that they might be fed
with heavenly food, here is that ^r^e manna of our souls, which came down
from Heaven to give life unto the world: John 6.51.
this is the heavenly bread, and Angelical meat, of which whosoever eats,
shall never hunger: Col. 2.3, 5.
here is the true Arc of the Covenant, that is, the most sacred body of
Christ, wherein the treasures of all science, knowledge, and wisdom, are laid
up in store for all penitent souls, that faithfully believe in his merits:
here is the true Mercie-seat in the blood of Christ, Romans 3.25.
which makes us happy and beloved in the most dear and beloved Christ; Genesis
28.15, 17, 12.
here is the gate of heaven indeed, here is the Angel sladder. Can heaven be
greater than God? can heaven be more united unto God, than the flesh of humane
nature, which he has assumed unto himself? Heaven indeed is the throne of
God, but in the humane nature assumed by Christ rests the holy Spirit. Esaias
11.2.
God is in heaven, but in Christ dwells the fullness of divinity. Col. 2.9.
Certainly this is a great and infallible pledge of our salvation by assuming
our humane nature into the fellowship of the most holy, and blessed Trinity, in
which all heavenly good is laid up in store for us: how can he forget those
unto whom he has given the pledge of his own body? We are dear unto Christ,
how then can Satan be able to overcome us? because Christ bought us at so dear
a price: we are dear unto Christ because he feeds us with his most dear and
precious body and blood: we are dear unto Christ, because we are flesh of
his flesh, Ephesians. 5.2, 3.
and members of his body; this is the only sovereign and precious Balmesome of
all spiritual diseases; this is the only sovereign medicine of immortality:
for what sin so great, that Gods sacred flesh cannot expiate? What sin so
great, that the quickening flesh of Christ cannot heal? What sin so mortal,
that is not taken away by the death of the Son of God? What fiery darts of
the devil, can be so mortiferous, that they cannot be quenched in the
fountain of divine grace? What so great a stain of the conscience, that his
blood cannot purge? Here is not felt the fire of Gods fury, but the heat of his
love; here is the Son of righteousness, Malac. 4.2.
the present light of our souls; our first Parents were brought into Paradise,
that most sweet and fragrant garden, Genesis 2.8.
the type of eternal beatitude: behold, the penitent conscience is here
cleansed by the blood of the Son of God, and by the body of Christ are
nourished, the members of Christ the head; the faithful soul is fed with
divine and heavenly dainties, the sacred flesh of God, which the Angels adore
in the unity of person, which the Archangels reverence; Psalm. 18.
at which the powers do tremble, and which the virtuous admire, is the
spiritual food of our souls. Let the heavens rejoice, Psalm. 96.11.
let the earth be glad, but much more the faithful soul, upon whom such, and
so great benefits are bestowed.

Our most bountiful God, Matthew. 22.4.
has prepared a great feast, hearts that be hungry must be brought unto it, he
that tastes not thereof, feels not the sweetness of this heavenly feast; to
believe in Christ is this heavenly feast: but no man believes, Note.
unless he confess his sins with contrition, and repent him of the same.
Contrition is the spiritual hunger of the soul, and faith is the spiritual
feeding. God gave Manna, Exodus 16.4.
the bread of Angels, to the Israelites in the wilderness. In this feast of
the new testament, God gives us the heavenly Manna, that is, his grace and
forgiveness of sins, yea, his Son, Christ Jesus. The Lord of the Angels is
that spiritual bread which came down from heaven, to give light and life unto
the world. The desire is the food of the soul, and the soul comes not to this
mystical feast, unless it desires to come thereto; Matthew 25.8. Verse 10.
and it cannot desire the heavenly sweetness, if it be full of this worlds
comforts; at the coming of the Bridegroom, the Virgins that had no oil in
their lamps, staying too long, were shut out; so they whose hearts in this
world are not filled with the oil of the holy Spirit, shall not be admitted by
Christ, to the participation of the joy of this holy feast, but shall have the
gate of indulgence, the gate of mercy, the gate of consolation, the gate of
hope, Romans 5.20.
the gate of grace, and the gate of good works shut against them. Our Savior
Christ has yet another kind of calling, and happy is he that hears and obey
it. Christ often knocks at the gates of our heart by holy desires, Note.
devout sighs, and pious cogitations; and happy is he that opens unto him:
as soon therefore, as thou feel in thy heart any holy desire of the
heavenly grace, assure thy self that Christ knockes at thy heart; make haste,
let him in lest he pass by, and presently shut the gate of his mercy against
thee: as soon as thou feel in thy heart any spark of holy motions or godly
meditations, persuade thy self, that it is kindled by the heat of divine grace
and love, that is, of the holy Spirit; cherish and nourish it, 1 These. 5.19.
that it may grow to be a fire of love in thee; and take heed that thou quench
not the Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.17.
and hinder the work of the Lord; our heart is the Temple of the Lord; he
that destroys the Temple of the Lord, shall feel his severe judgment, and
he destroys it, whosoever refuses to give place to the holy Spirit, inwardly
calling him by the Word. In the old Testament the Prophets could hear the Lord
speaking inwardly in them; and so all the true godly do feel those inward
motions of the holy Spirit drawing them unto goodness; Ephesians. 4.3.
therefore all men must endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace.

A preparation to the receiving of the holy Communion of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ.
THere is a hearing, and a preparation before hearing; there is a praying, and
there is a preparation before praying; and there is a receiving, and there is a
preparation before receiving, which if it be wanting, the receiver receives
uncomfortably, the prayer prays vainly, and the hearer hears unfruitfully;
like those which do eat before hunger, or drink before thirst; this
preparative before hearing, praying, and receiving, for the health of our
souls, does signify the rules of physic; for preparatives are ministered
always before physic: Note.
and as the preparative which goes before makes way to the physic, or else
it would do no good, but hurt; so, unless examination go before the
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.
we seal up the threatenings which are pronounced against us, in stead of the
promises which are made unto us; for the Sacrament is a seal, and seals good
or evil, as every other seal does; therefore all men ought carefully to
examine themselves; but they that are suspected of a crime, do not examine
themselves, but are examined of others, lest they should be partial in their
own cause; but a faithful Christian should examine himself of his crime,
Verse 31.32. Note.
and be his own judge, his own accuser; and his own condemner, for no man
knows the spirit of man, but the spirit which is in man, which will condemn
him, if he be guilty, and tell him all that he has done, and with what mind
he did it, and what punishment he deserves for the same; this is the close
sessions, or private arraignement, when Conscience sits in her chair to
examine, accuse, judge and condemn her self, Eccles. 18.19.
because she will escape the just condemnation of God.

Thus have holy men kept their sessions at home, and made their hearts the
foreman of the Jury, and examine themselves, Note.
as we examine others. The fear of the Lord stood at the door of their
souls, to examine every thought before it went in; and at the door of their
lips, to examine every word before it went out; so should thou sit in
judgment of thy self, and call thy thoughts, words and actions, to give in
evidence against thee, whether thou be a Christian or an Infidel, a son, or
a bastard, a servant, or a rebel, a sincere believer, or an hypocrite; if upon
examination thou find not faith, nor fear, nor love, nor zeal in thy self,
let no man make thee believe thou art holy, that thou art godly, Note.
that thou art sanctified, that thou art a Christian, that thou art a believer,
because thou art worse then thou seem to thy self to be; therefore, if my
heart tell me that I love God, whom shall I believe before my self? 1 Cor.
2.11.
No man can search the heart of another man; so Paul says, No man knows the
spirit of any man, but the spirit which is in man, that is, no man feels the
heart of man so well as himself; and yet himself, though he has lived with
it, ever since he was borne, does not rightly know his own heart, unless he
examine it narrowly, no more then he knows his own bones or his veins,
sinews, arteries, or his muskles; how they are in his body, and where they
lie, or what they do; this may seem strange, yet it is true: for Christ says
to his Disciples, Luke 9.55.
You know not of what Spirit ye are, that is, you think better of your selves
than you are, and know not what the clock strikes within you; for there is a
zeal without knowledge, and a knowledge without zeal: there is faith without
obedience, and there is obedience without faith: there is love without fear,
and there is fear without love, and both are hypocrites. Judge. 16.18.
Therefore as Delilah searched where the strength of Sampson lay, so let every
one search, where their own weakness lies, and strengthen themselves by
faith; and always be filling the empty gap, by endeavoring to supply the want
of their own defects.

Holy and godly men are distinguished in their ends: for the children of God,
propose the glory of God, and level all their thoughts, speeches and actions,
as if they were messengers sent to carry him presents of honor. Thus did
David, when he said, Psalm. 103.
All that is within me praise the Lord: but the children of this world, without
fear or reverence, extol themselves and their own worthiness, and set up
their own glory for their mark: like Nebuchadnezzar, which said, Dan 4.30.
For the honor of my majesty. Therefore they speak, and look, and walk, as
if they did say to their tongue, eyes, and feet, and apparel as Saul said to
Samuel, Honor me before this people. 1 Samuel 15.30.


The ungodly when they have received the Sacrament into their bellies, think
all is well, and have done all that they went for: as Micah, when he had
received a Levite into his house, Judge. 17.30.
thought that God loved him for the Levites sake: but as the Levite did not
profit him, because he received nothing but the Levite; so the Bread and Wine
does not profit them, because they receive nothing but Bread and Wine, for want
of faith. Marvel not then, if you have not felt that comfort after receiving
of the Sacrament, which you looked for, because you did not receive it as you
ought: for it yields comfort to none, but to them which prepare their hearts,
and examine themselves before, and apprehend Christ by a lively faith, and
apply his merits to heal their miseries; John 13.30. Some receive the outward
sign without the spiritual grace, as did Judas: some receive the spiritual
grace without the outward sign, as the Saint thief on the cross; and all the
faithful who dying desire it, but cannot receive it through some external
impediments. But the worthy receivers to their comfort receive both: the bread
of the Lord, and the bread which is the Lord. But some receive the bread of the
Lord, but not the bread which is the Lord.
for it is not the mouth but the heart which receives comfort: now there is
many which bring a mouth to receive, but not a heart to believe; these go away
from the Sacrament to despite Christ, as Judas went from the Lords Supper to
betray him: but the faithful believer goes away like one which has received a
cheerful countenance from his Redeemer; and his thoughts are joy and
gladness, as one which has received the hope of salvation. As he that has
eaten sweet meat, has a sweet breath; so they which have eaten Christ, with
the mouth of faith, all their sayings and doings are sweet; like a perfume to
men, and incense to God: their peace of conscience, and joy of heart, and
desire to do good, will tell them, nay resolve them, whether they have
received the bare signs, or the thing signified: for every one which receives
this Sacrament of the Lord, shall either feel himself better after receiving
it, like the Apostles; or find themselves the worse after it, like Judas: to
conclude, examine your selves, before you presume to come to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Adam the first man, was forbidden to eat of the fruit of one tree which was
fore-shewed to be mortal; and he did hasten to eat thereof: we the children
of the second Adam, are commanded to eat of the lively and saving fruit, the
body and blood of Christ to our Salvation; yet how slack are we to partake
thereof, and to prepare our selves thereunto? The first step therefore of
true preparation, is to search the Scriptures, which teaches the mystery of
this Communion, and the institution of the same: and also the signification of
the outward signs which are bread and wine; and the things signified, the body
and blood of Christ, shed for all true believers: 1 Cor. 11.25.
the end the receiving thereof is to retain the remembrance of the death and
passion of Christ, which he suffered for our sins: by the true receiving of
this Sacrament, we are united unto the love of God, in and by the death of
Christ, and are made heirs by adoption of eternal salvation, in, Note.
by, and with Christ. The true receiving of this blessed Sacrament, must be in
sincerity, with a penitent heart, and faith unfeigned: but sinners, who come
thereunto unworthily, eat and drink their own damnation. Therefore we must
before we come thereunto, 1 Cor. 11.27.
cleanse our souls from all sin, which cannot be done without diving into
our own souls, with an impartial search to find our own corruption, and
truly repent us of our sins: Verse. 28.
it is not fit to come to this holy banquet abruptly, as men do to their
ordinary feasts, where they ceremoniously and pharisaically will wash their
hands before they eat; but to this most holy Supper we must not presume to
come without inward washing of our souls from sin: for if unwashed hands
profane the meat for the belly, how much more unwashed hearts, the sacred
Sacrament, the food of the soul? Let us therefore by inward examination,
Ecclus. 18.19.
impartial accusation, and absolute condemnation of our selves for sin, make
our selves fit to come to this holy Table. This caveat is no inhibition, but a
terrifying of the soul, not to presume to come to this holy Table without
purification, and sanctification, Note. Math. 7.6.
and not with polluted hands and hands full of bribery, and extortion; or to
take it with lips defiled with blasphemy, cursing, and lying; or to put it into
a stomach gorged with drunkenness, gluttony, and with a heart fraught with
envy, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
making no difference of the Lords body. We must therefore lay aside all our
old sins, and put on the new man, a righteous, a holy, Note.
and Christian conversation and disposition; we must be holy and heavenly
minded toward God; we must be friendly and loving to our neighbors; slow in
taking advantages, renewing or revenging of wrongs? we must be humble and
lowly in our own eyes, meek and sober in all our actions; and because herein
are exhibited and offered things of such wonderful value and price to the
worthy receivers, we must be cleansed of our spiritual leprosy, before we
presume to communicate in the company of Saints. We must therefore assure our
selves that we are in the number of those, to whom these holy things do
appertain; for whosoever is profane in his person, and an unsanctified
creature, let him forbear to come to this holy banquet, till he have first
used the means of better assurance by repentance for his sins, and amendment
of his corrupt and sinful life, let him often call upon God by zealous and
faithful prayers, for the remission of his omissions and transgressions, let
him earnestly crave the assistance of his holy spirit to assist him in the
mortifying and beating down of sin, and that his heart and conscience may be
sanctified and made fit for so holy an exercise. When he is thus cleansed, let
him show himself to the Priest his Pastor, and let him take knowledge by his
outward confession of his inward contrition. And then in all reverence and in
the fear of God let him come to this holy Table; let him eat the body and
drink the blood of that Lamb that takes away the sins of all penitent
sinners, and will present him pure unto the Lord: for the Lords eye is pure and
can abide no wickedness; the Sacrament is holy, touch it not rashly: if thou
have not the wedding garment of sincerity, come not thereto, Math. 22.11, 12 13.
for the Lord will find thee out, and thrust thee forth out of his presence,
among the unbeleevers, whose portion shall be with the devil and his angels,
Let us therefore search and examine our ways, let us lift up our hands with
our hearts unto God, and feed on this holy mystery, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26
the life of our souls, in remembrance that Christ died for us, until his
second coming. Bless me, O Lord, so that my sins may wholly be remitted by
thy blood, my conscience sanctified by thy Word, my mind enlightened by thy
Truth, my heart guided by thy Spirit, and my will in all things subdued to thy
blessed Will and pleasure. Bless me with all graces which I want, and
increase in me those good gifts, which thou have already bestowed upon me.

Of the Ordinance of Christ, concerning the translation of the Sabbath.
THe Primitive Church had far greater reason to celebrate Sunday in memory of
Christ's resurrection, then to keep the Sabbath; because that by his
resurrection from the dead, Isay 65.17. and 66.12.13.
there is wrought a new spiritual creation of the world, without which, all
the sons of Adam had been turned to everlasting perdition and destruction,
and so all the works of the first creation, had ministered no consolation unto
us. In respect of this new spiritual creation, 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Rev. 21.1.
Gal. 6.15. 1 Pet. 2.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Colos. 3.10. Matthew. 26.28. 2 Pet. 3.13.
Isay. 66.12.13. Chro, 4.9, etc.
the Scripture says, that old things are passed away, and all things are
become new: new creatures, new people, new men, new knowledge, new Testament,
new Commandments, new Heaven, new Earth; and therefore there is in stead of
the old, a new holy day to honor and praise our Redeemer, and to meditate upon
the works of our redemption, and to show the new change fo the old Testament,
because that on this day, Christ rested from all the sufferings of his passion,
and finished the glorious work of our redemption. If the finishing of the
work of the first creation, whereby God mightily manifested himself unto his
creatures deserved a Sabbath for to solemnize the memorial of so great a work,
Esaias 58.13.
to the honor of the worker, and therefore God calls it mine holy day; much
more does the new creation of the world, effected by the resurrection of
Christ, whereby he mightily declared himself to be the Son of God, Romans 1.3,
4.
deserve an holy festival for the perpetual commemoration thereof to the
honor of Christ; and therefore most worthily called the Lords day: Apoc. 1.10
for as the deliverance out of the captivity of Babylon, being greater, took
away the name from the deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt; Jer. 23.7, 8.
and 16.13.
so the day whereon Christ finished the redemption of the world, did more
justly deserve to be kept holy than that day wherein God ceased from creating
the world: Genesis 2.2.
as therefore in the creation, the first day wherein it was finished was
consecrated for a Sabbath; Lev. 23.32. Neh. 13.19.
so in process of time, after our redemption, the first day wherein it was
perfected, was dedicated to a holy rest. The Jews kept their Sabbath on the
last day of the week, beginning it with the night, when God rested from
finishing the work of his creation, but Christians honor the Lord better, on
the first day of the week, when the Lord arose. They kept their Sabbath in
remembrance of the worlds creation, but Christians celebrate it in memorial of
the worlds redemption; Matthew. 28, 1. Acts 20.7 and 2.46.
yea, the Lords day being the first day of the creation, and redemption puts us
in mind both of the making of the old world, and redeeming of the new world.

Many godly Writers do record many memorable things, which were done upon the
first day of the week, as so many types that the chief worship of God should
under the new Testament be celebrated upon this day: Exodus 31.
as that on this day the cloud of Gods Majesty first sat upon his people;
Aaron and his children first executed their Priesthood; God first solemnly
blessed his people, the princes of his people first offered publicly unto God
the first day, wherein fire descended from heaven: the first of the world, of
the year, of the month, of the week, all shadowing, that it should be the
first and chief holy day of the new Testament; Genesis 17.12.
and circumcision being commanded on the eighth day, which was foreseen by the
holy Fathers and Prophets, to be a type of the Lords day, Esaias 58.13.
that the Sabbath should cease, and give place to the eight or first day of the
week. If this mystery were so clearly seen by the Fathers and Prophets,
under the shadows of the old Testament; 2 Cor. 4.4.
surely the God of this world has deeply blinded their minds, who cannot see
the truth thereof under the clear shining light of the Gospel. This change of
the Sabbath under the new Testament, was nothing but a fulfilling of that which
was solemnly prefigured, and fore-prophesied under the old; 1 Cor. 14.36, 37
therefore all true Christians, according to the Lords mind and Commandment,
and the direction of the holy Ghost, should keep the holy day upon that Lords
day or Sunday, Apoc 1.9.10.11.
agreeable to the practice of the ancient Church, and worthily solemnize it on
the first day of the week, in memorial of the worlds redemption, to the
honor and praise of the Lord Jesus, who rose from death to life upon that day.
This should stir up all Christians to a thankful remembrance of their
redemption by Christ his resurrection from the dead. Hebr. 2.5. and 2.11. and
5.9.
And note that with the day, the blessing of the day is likewise translated to
the Lords day, because all the sanctification belonging to this new world is in
Christ, and from and by him conveyed to Christians; and because there cannot
come a greater motive or cause then the new creation of the world, therefore
the worship of God is fitler solemnized on this day then on any other.

The holy Sunday is the Lords market day for the weeks provision, Esa. 55.1, 2,
3.
wherein he will have us to come unto him, and buy of him without gold or
silver, the bread of Angels, and water of life, the wine of the Sacraments, and
the milk of the Word, to feed our souls, tried gold to enrich our faith; Apoc.
3.18. Genesis 2.2, 3. Exo. 20.10, 11.
precious eye salve to heal our spiritual blindness; and the white raiment
of Christ's righteousness, to cover our filthy nakedness.

Of Christ's Ascension.
MEditate upon thy Saviors ascension, by a holy contemplation, Joh. 20.29.
thou faithful soul; for Christ withdrew his visible presence from the
faithful, to exercise their faith, by holy contemplation; and blessed are they
that see not, Mat. 6.21. Act. 8.21. Colos. 3.2.
and yet believe: where our treasure is, there let our heart be also; Christ
our treasure is in heaven, let our hearts therefore be set upon those things
that are heavenly, and meditate upon those things that be above; let us put our
confidence in the pledge of the holy Spirit which the Lord left unto us at his
departure; let us put our confidence in the body and blood of Christ, which we
receive in the mystery of the holy Sacrament; and let us believe that our
bodies which are filled with this incorruptible food, shall at length be raised
up again, and that which we now believe in faith, we shall then see with our
eyes; and our hope we have now in Christ, shall then be real fruition to our
souls; the Lord is present unto us here but in part; Colos. 3.4.
but in the mansion of his heavenly kingdom, Act. 1.9.10.11, 12.
we shall behold him in his glory, and know him as he is, which is our life:
our Savior ascended up from the Mount of Olives, the Olive is the sign of
peace and joy; therefore not without great cause he ascended up from Mount
Olivet, because by his passion and holy sufferings, he has purchased peace and
tranquillity, for amazed and terrified consciences; not without cause did he
ascend up from the Mount Olivet, for the court of heaven exceedingly rejoice to
receive him: the Mount does not only put us in mind, but does also call and
invite us to heavenly things; and seeing we cannot follow him with the feet of
our body, let us follow him with the feet of our holy desires; The disciples
stood lifting up their eyes, Verse. 11.
and looking toward Heaven, so let all the true Disciples of Christ, lift up
the eyes of their heart to behold, and desire heavenly things. Sweet Jesus,
what a blessed and glorious alteration followed thy passion! Oh happy and
sudden change! how did thou suffer on Mount Calvary, for our sins? and how
do I now behold thee in the Mount of Olives! there thou wast alone, here thou
art accompanied with many thousands of Angels: there thou did ascend up to
the Cross in disgrace, Luke 24.52.
here thou did ascend up into Heaven in a cloud and in glory: there wast thou
crucified between thieves, here thou do rejoice amongst the company of
Angels and Saints: there thou wast nailed to the Cross as a condemned man;
here thou art at liberty and do deliver those that were condemned; Ephesians. 5.23.
and 30
there suffering and dying, here rejoicing and triumphing: Christ is our head,
and the Savior of the body, we are his members. Rejoice therefore, and be
glad, thou faithful soul, for though our sins do hinder us, yet the
communion of nature does not repel us; where the head is, there shall the
members be also; our head is in heaven, therefore the members have just and
great cause to hope for entrance there, not only so, but they are assured
already that they have possession there. Christ descended from Heaven to
redeem us: and again, he ascended up into heaven to glorify us: unto us was
he borne, Note.
for us did he suffer, and for us did he ascend; our charity is confirmed by
Christ's passion; our faith by Christ's resurrection, and our hope by Christ
ascension. Let us strive to follow Christ our Bridegroom, not only with our
ardent desire, but also with our good works; Acts 21.27. Acts 1.10.
for nothing that is defiled, shall enter into this heavenly City. The Angels
that came from heavenly Jerusalem appeared in white robes; by purity and
innocence is figured, that no pride can ascend with the Doctor of humility;
nor no malice with the Author of goodness; with the lover of peace there
ascends no discord; and with the son of the Virgin, there ascends no
uncleanness; after the parent of virtue, there ascend no vices; and after the
just person, there ascends no sins. Therefore he that desires to see God face
to face; let him so live here in this world as in his sight; and he that hope
for celestial things, let him contemn terrestrial things. Our Savior Christ
promised unto his Apostles, that after his departure, he will send unto them
from his father a comforter, John 14.26. and 15.26. Luke 24.47. Verse 47. John
24.17.
the holy Ghost the Spirit of truth to testify of him, and to teach them all
things: and to endue them with power, to preach repentance, and remission of
sins in his name among all Nations, saying, Peace I leave with you, my peace
I give unto you. Therefore let not our hearts be troubled, neither let us
fear, but that our Savior which redeemed us will also through his merits and
mediation glorify us in Heaven, O sweet Jesus draw our hearts unto thee,
whether thou art gone before, and that in the mean time we may immitate thy
goodness mercy, truth, and patience, and follow thee in the same. Amen.

Of the holy Ghost.
OUr Lord Jesus ascending up into the Heavens, and entering into his glory, Acts
2.4. Verse. 1. Exodus 10.11.
sent the holy Ghost upon the Apostles on the day of Penticost: as in the old
Testament, when God proclaimed the Law in Mount Sinai, he came down unto
Moses. So when the Gospel was by the Apostles to be propagated throughout the
world, the Holy Ghost came down upon them, there was thundering and lightning,
and the loud sound of the trumpet, so that all the people were afraid; Verse. 16.
because the Law does thunder terrible things against our disobedience, and
makes us subject to Gods indignation. But here is the sound of a gentle wind,
where the Lord from heaven does power out his Spirit upon all flesh; Acts
2.2.17.
for the preaching of the Gospel does lift up the souls that are cast down
with despair by reason of their sins: there was fear and trembling of the
people because the Law brings wrath; Romans 4.15.
but here the whole multitude do flock together to hear the wonderful
things of God: for by the Gospel we have access unto God; their God descended
in fire, but it was in the fire of his wrath, therefore was the mountain
moved, and did smoke: but here the holy Ghost descended in the fire of his
love, so that the house is not shaken by the wrath of God; but rather
replenished, Exodus 19.18. Acts 2.3.
with the glory of the holy Ghost. What wonder is it that the holy Ghost be
sent from the Court of Heaven to sanctify us, seeing the Son of God was sent
from Heaven to redeem us. But the holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, when they
were assembled together in prayer with one mind; for he is the Spirit of
prayer, which moves us to pray, and is obtained by prayer. Wherefore, John
20.19, 22. Zach 12.10.
because he is that bond by which our hearts are knit and united unto God, as
he does unite the Father with the Son, and the Son with the Father; for he
is the mutual love of the Father and the Son. This our spiritual
conjunction with God, is wrought by faith in Christ, but faith is the gift of
the Spirit; and is obtained by prayer, but true prayer is made in the Spirit.
In the Temple of Solomon, when Incense was offered unto God, 1 King 8.10, 11.
the Temple was filled with the glory of the Lord; so if thou offerest unto God
the sweet odours of prayers: the holy Ghost shall fill the temple of thy heart
with glory. Let us here admire the grace and mercy of God: Psalm. 50.15. Romans
8.34, 35. Gal. 4 6.
the Father promises to hear our prayers; the Son intercedeth for us; and
the holy Ghost prays within us; the Angels of Heaven carry our prayers unto
God, and the Court of Heaven is open to receive them. God of his mercy does
give unto us the effect of prayer, because he gives unto us the Spirit of
grace and prayer; and does always hear our prayers, if not according to our
desire, yet according to that which is most profitable for us. The holy Ghost
came when they were all met together with one accord in one place; Acts 2.1.
for he is the Spirit of love and concord, Note.
that joyneth us unto Christ by faith; and unto God by love; and to our
neighbor by charity; because he is the Author of all goodness, and the
fountain of all grace and mercy. Now the Spirit of God effects in man such
motions as himself is; for as the soul gives unto the body life, sense and
motion, so the holy spirit makes man spiritual; seasons his mind with divine
saltness, Note.
and directs all his members to the performance of all good duties toward God,
and toward his neighbors, and proceeds from all eternity: he came in the
type of breath, and affords unto the afflicted conscience, quickening
consolation, because we live according to the flesh by the reciprocal
breathing out and sucking in of the aeriall spirit, he came under the type of
spirit and breath, because he gives us to live according to the better part:
The wind blows where it lusts, John 3.8.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not whence it comes,
nor whither it goes. So is every one that is borne of the Spirit: it was meet
that he should come in the type of breath, because he proceeds from both the
Father and the Son, by one incomprehensible breathing from eternity; it was a
powerful breath, because the grace of the holy Ghost comes with power, and
moves the godly in whom he dwells to all that is good, and so effectually
moves, and strengthens them, that they neither regard the threats of
tyrants, nor fear the trecheries of the Devil, nor the hatred of the world;
Psalm. 19.3.4.
he conferreth upon the Apostles the gift of tongues, because their sound was
to go into all lands; and so the confusion of tongues which was the punishment
of pride and rashness in the building of the tower of Babel was taken away,
and the dispersed nations, Genesis 11, 7, 8, 9.
by the gift of the holy Ghost, through the diversity of tongues, were gathered
together into the unity of faith. Again, it was meet that he should come in
the figure of tongues, because holy men of God did speak as they were inspired
by him: For he spoke by the Prophets and Apostles, and puts the Words of
God into the mouths of the Ministers of the Church; therefore the Prophets in
the old time, came not by the will of man, 2 Pet. 1.21.
but were moved by the holy Ghost; for these great gifts, blessed and praised
be the holy Ghost, together with the Father and the Son, now and for ever.

Of the Love of God.
THis love of God is commanded by God, to the Israelites, by the mouth of
Moses, being then the select and peculiar people of God, saying, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might: and Christ himself in the Gospel does allege this
Precept to the Doctor of the Law, which tempted him, saying, Master, which is
the greatest Commandment in the Law? He answering, Matthew. 22.36, 37, 38, 39.
said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self: this does
teach all Christians, that without the knowledge of this love of God, they can
never attain to the saving knowledge of God; and without the love of God, all
knowledge is unprofitable: For love is the life of Nature, and the joy of
Reason; in the Spirit of grace, where Virtue draws affection, the concord of
sense makes an union unseparable in the divine apprehension of the joy of
election; it is a ravishment of the soul, in the delight of the spirit, which
being carried above it self into inexplicable comfort, feels that heavenly
sickness, that is better then the worlds health. When the godliest of men in
the swounding delight of his sacred inspiration, could thus utter the
sweetness of his passion; my soul is sick of love; for love is a healthful
sickness of the soul, it is a pleasing passion in the heart, a contentive
labor in the mind, and a peaceable trouble in the senses.

Wherefore love exceeds all the knowledge of all other mysteries, and cannot
be but in the godly. The reason why our love of God is not perfect in this
life, because the measure of our love is according to the measure of our
knowledge; 1 Cor. 13.12, 13.
now in this life we know God but in part, as in a glass, but then shall we
know him face to face, and then shall we be perfectly blessed; and because we
shall then perfectly know him, therefore we shall then perfectly love him; but
no man can hope to have the perfect love of God in the world to come, Note.
which begins not first to love God in this world. The kingdom of God must
begin in the heart of man in this life, or else it cannot be consummated in the
life to come; without the love of God in this life, there is no desire of
eternal life. How then can that man be partaker of the chiefest good, which
seeks it not, which desires it not, which loves it not? such as thy love
is, such art thou, because thy love transformeth thee into it self; for love
is the chiefest couple, because the lover and the thing beloved, becomes one.
What has conjoined the most just God and wretched sinners, being infinitely
distant in worth, Note.
one from the other, but the infinite love of God? And because the infinite
justice of God might not be weakened, the infinite price and love of Christ
interceded betwixt sinful man, and the infinite justice of God. Again, what
has joined together God the Creator, and the faithful soul created, things
infinitely distant, but love? In the life which is eternal, we shall be
joined to God in the chiefest degree, because we shall then love him in the
chiefest degree: love uniteth and transformeth, therefore he that loves
carnal things shall be carnal; if thou love the world, thou shall become
worldly, 1 Cor. 48.49, 50, etc.
but flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does
corruption inherit incorruption, but if thou love God and celestial things,
thou shall become celestial. Note.
The love of God is the Chariot of Elias ascending up into heaven; the love of
God is the joy of the mind, the Paradise of the soul; it excludes the world;
it overcomes the Devil; it shuts hell; it opens heaven unto us, and
pleads mercy, in the justice of the Almighty; the love of God is that seal,
with which God seals his servants the elect. Rev. 7.3, 4. Ephesians. 4.30.
At the last judgment, God will acknowledge none to be his, but those that are
sealed with this seal: For faith it self, the only instrument of our
Justification and Salvation, is not true faith, unless it do demonstrate it
self by true love; for there is no true faith, unless there be a firm
confidence; and there is no firm confidence, without the love of God, and that
benefit received, is not acknowledged for which we do not give thanks; and
we do not give thanks to him which we do not love. If therefore thy faith
be true, it will acknowledge the benefit of our redemption wrought by Christ
Jesus; it will acknowledge and give thanks; Note.
it will give thanks, and love that gracious God, who has bestowed all these
saving benefits upon us; the love of God is the life and rest of the soul:
when the soul by death departs from the body, then the life of the body
departs; but when God departs out of the soul, by reason of sins, then the
life of the soul departs. Again, God dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians.
5.17. Romans 5.5.
God dwells in the soul by love, because the love of God is infused into the
hearts of the elect, by the inspiration of the holy Spirit; there is no
tranquillity of the soul, without the love of God: the world, the flesh and
the devil do much disquiet it, but God is the true rest of the soul, Ephesians
3.19.
and the fullness of the knowledge of Christ, is the fullness of the knowledge
and love of God; there is no peace of conscience, but to those that are
justified by faith in Christ; there is no love of God, but in them that have a
filial confidence in God. To conclude, in the praise of this peerless
virtue; love is the grace of nature, and the glory of reason, the blessing of
God, and the comfort of the world; therefore let the love of the world, the
love of our souls, and the love of the creatures die in us, that the love of
God may live and abound in us, which God of his grace begin in us in this
world, and perfect in the world to come. This love of God, is wrought by the
means of the same spirit, dwelling in Christ and the faithful, and
incorporateth the faithful as members unto Christ their head, Romans 8.
and so makes them one with Christ, and partakers of all the graces, holiness,
and eternal glory which is in him, as sure, and as verily, as they hear the
Word of promise, and are partakers of the outward signs of the holy Sacrament.
Verse 39.
What then can be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord?

The properties of Charity, and true Love to our Christian brethren.
CHrist Jesus our Savior gave himself for us, to redeem us from all our
sins and wickedness; Titus 2.14.
and to purge us a peculiar people, followers of good works. To this purpose
we are admonished of the Lord, Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, Math. 5.16, etc.
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore whilst we have time,
let us do good toward all men, and especially toward them of the household
of faith. To this use the holy Scriptures were given unto us: for all Scripture
inspired from God, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17
is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God be perfect and instructed to all good works. It is clear
then, that we be not so justified by faith, that we should be unprofitable,
barren, and unfruitful of good works, but rather that giving our selves
continually unto good works, we should advance the glory of Gods grace, and
show it before the eyes of all men, as the light of our new creation. for we
are regenerated in Christ, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
and thereby we do declare our selves to be justified before men. Therefore
let us not only show our selves to be Christians in name, but to become good
of evil, and to declare that goodness received of Christ by good works; for
they be as certain fruits of our life, witnessing the goodness of our mind;
and declaring the nature of our heavenly Father. Good works be the works of
faith, which works by love; they be the works of God, which he works in
us, and by us, but it must be considered with what mind those things be
wrought which be of themselves good, whether of the affection of love and
mercy, or for some other cause; Let us not love in word neither in tongue but
in deed and verity. 1 John 3.18.
for he is not worthy straightway to have the commendation of good works,
which does bestow meat, drink, and clothing, upon the poor, not of the
desire to do good, but rather to hunt and hawk for glory and praise in the
sight of men; wherefore all be not immediately good works which be esteemed to
be good, unless they be such as do profit their neighbors, and that they do
proceed from a good and faithful heart, and the affection of charity: thereby
our faith is exercised, fed, increased and strengthened by good works, and
that we be assured by them in our consciences of our election and calling, in
that we do daily more and more feel the grace and virtue of Christ
increasing in us by means thereof: like as on the contrary part, evil works
do express and show forth more and more the malice and wickedness of our
hearts. Therefore Saint Peter admonishes us to make our election and vocation
sure: 2 Pet. 1.10.
Eccles. 28.10.
for like as the fire, by wasting much wood waxes greater and stronger, so is
godliness and faith fed and maintained in Christian men, by the study and
use of good works: even so by use and exercise of vertuousnesse, men do come
to a perfect habit of the same, and so by imitation of their good works
others be stirred up to the like desire of godliness, when they do see some
lively examples in their neighbors, that by the applying of good works, to
the relief and necessities of the poor, Jam. 1.27. John 3.17. Hebr. 13.1, 2,
3, 16.
needy, widows, fatherless, prisoners, sick folks, and all other
distressed; which kind of goodness does resemble the very disposition of God
himself; for the goodness which we are created unto, is not determined in
the works of mercy only, but it does extend unto our whole life and common
trade of living together, Amity is the true bond of all humane society.
wherein one man is so knit unto another by mutual love, aid and service, even
as the very members and parts of our body do service, one to the necessary use
and aid of the other, wherefore they be not men, but vain shapes of men, John
5.5.
which do vainly and idly spend all their life, as though they were borne
to no other intent and end, but to waste and consume upon themselves without
regard to their Christian brethren, or relieving and supplying their wants and
necessities in time of need, to which end they were chiefly and necessarily
ordained of God, next then to do him service and divine worship: for Saint
Paul admonishes all men to walk worthily in the sight of the Lord, Col. 1.10.
to please him in all points, being fruitful in all good works: for he that
is fruitful in all good works, does please the Lord in all things, if they be
done with a pure and sincere faith, for they be the fruits of faith: for good
works are pleasing to God, Good works be done by the Spirit of God.
because they be done by his Spirit; for he does work in us both to will and
to perform according unto his good will and pleasure: therefore forasmuch as
they come from him, it cannot be, but that they must be liked of him, That
which is just and good, is loved of God.
as the author and beginner of them. Such is his justice, that he loves the
same which is just and good, being himself of all other most just, and the
rewarder of all good works that proceed of faith: but we must not assume the
reward of our good works to proceed of our own deserts, but unto the
goodness of God, who does work the effects of godliness and charity in them
that believe.

True and sincere love is an inseparable property in the godly: no Christian
without faith, John 15.17.12, 13, 14.
and no faith without charity: where there is not the brightness of charity,
neither is there the zeal of faith: Note.
take away the light from the sun, and thou may as well take charity from
faith. Charity is the outward act of the inward life of a Christian; the body
is dead without the spirit, James 2.26.
so faith is dead without charity. He is not of Christ that has not the Spirit
of Christ, and he has not the Spirit of Christ, Gal. 5.22.
that has not the gift of charity; for charity is the fruit of the Spirit, and
the bond of perfection. Col. 3.14. Note.
As the members of the body are knit together by the Spirit, that is the soul:
so the true members of the mystical body of Christ, are united by the holy
Spirit in the bond of charity. 1 King. 6.21, 22
Salomons Temple was all covered with gold within and without, so let Gods
Temple be all beautified with love and charity both within and without; let
charity move thy heart to compassion, and thy hand to contribution; for
compassion is not sufficient, unless there be also outward contribution;
neither is outward contribution sufficient unless there be also inward
compassion: 1 John 4.7, etc.
faith receives all from God, and charity gives again unto our neighbors.
God is love, and by faith we are partakers of his divine nature, no man
believes in Christ, which loves not Christ; and no man loves Christ, unless
he love his neighbor: neither does he apprehend the benefits of Christ with
true confidence of heart, that does deny his neighbor the office which he
owes unto him. That is not truly a good work which proceeds not from faith;
Romans 14.13.
neither is it truly a good work which proceeds not from charity: charity is
the seed of all virtues, it is no good fruit which springs not from the root
of charity, for charity is the spiritual taste of the soul; for unto it alone
is every good thing sweet and pleasant, every hard thing sweet; yea, all
troubles and adversities sweet. 1 Ioh. 13.34, 35
It profits not to give all that one has unto the poor, if he has not
charity: for the outward action is done in hypocrisy, if there be not inward
love: Rivers of bounty profit not, unless it spring from the fountain of
charity. Charity is patient, for no man is easily angry with him that he
loves: charity is bountiful, for he that by charity has bestowed his heart,
which is the chief good of the soul, how can he deny his outward goods to his
neighbor, which are of far less worth: Charity envieth not, because he
that has charity looks unto another good as upon his own: Charity thinks
no ill, 1 Cor. 13.1, etc.
but loves truly and from his heart: Charity is the bridle of anger, Charity
is simply, greater and more excellent tha^ either faith or hope, because it is
more necessary to the life of man, and also in^iuturnity, because it never
dies, nor has any end, and so extends further. Walker.
and keeps a man from doing hurt unto his neighbor: Charity seeks not
those things which are her own, because that she loves her neighbor, and
prefers his good before her own: Charity is not provoked to anger: Charity
imagines no mischief: Charity rejoices not in another iniquity; but Charity
condoles another grief, and makes another misery to be her own: Charity
suffers all things, believes all things, endures all things, and hopes of good
issue in all things: Charity refuses not to do unto others, as she desires
that others should do unto her: for Charity is not partial in her own cause;
tongues shall cease; prophesies shall cease; Sciences shall be destroyed, but
Charity shall never cease, but remain for ever; the perfection and fruition
thereof shall be complete in the life to come. Think upon these things, O
devout soul, Note.
to study and endevor godly charity, the maine ground of Christian amity.
Whatsoever thy neighbor be, Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
yet he is one for whom Christ dyed; why do thou then deny to show thy
charity unto thy neighbor, whom God has commanded thee to love? Christ laid
down his life for him, why should thou then deny thy love unto him? If thou
truly love God, thou must also love his Image. We are all one spiritual
body, let us therefore have all one spiritual mind. Why should those souls
live at variance here upon earth, which one day must live together in heaven?
Whilst our minds agree in Christ, Ephesians. 4.5, 6, 7.
let our wills also be conjoined in one; we are all members of one body, let
us not live at variance, but cherish one another; that member of the body is
dead, which has not a feeling sense of another grief; neither let him judge
himself a member of Christ's mystical body, who does not grieve at the misery
of another which suffers; we have all one Father, that is, God, whom Christ
has taught us to call upon daily, Matthew. 6.9.
saying, Our Father, and how shall he acknowledge thee to be his Son, Hatred
stirs up strifes, but love covers a multitude of sins. Matthew. 6.14.15.
Eccl. 28.1, etc.
unless thou again own his sons to be thy brethren: love thy brethren
which God has commanded thee to love; if he be worthy, do it, because he is
worthy; if he be not worthy, yet for his sake who has commanded thee, and whom
thou ought to obey, if thou love him that is thine enemy, thou show thy
self to be a friend to God, and in his favor: do not mark what man does
against thee, but what thou have done against God, whom by thy sins thou have
offended in a far more grievous manner; observe not the injuries offered thee
by thine enemies, but observe the infinite benefits God has conferred upon
thee in Christ, Ephesians. 5.2.
who commands thee to love thine enemies: by the condition of our earthly
nativity, we are neighours; and by the hope our celestial inheritance, we are
brethren. Mark what Christ says, Matthew. 5.44.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that hurt and persecute you; therefore let us love one
another in a brotherly love; Psalm. 133.1.
kindle in us, O God, the fire of true love and charity, by the operation of
thy holy Spirit.

Of Gods eternal Election and Predestination.
OF the eternal decree of God, concerning Predestination, surely no man of
Christian belief, does make doubt thereof. The consideration whereof does
commend unto us, Ephesians. 1.3.
the wonderful power and purpose of God, wherein he determined with himself
upon our salvation before the world was made: Esa. 43.11.13.
For what else is it to choose and elect men that be not, but to foresee and
appoint unto them their salvation before they were borne; and it is an
incredible matter, how great an assurance of salvation there rises in the
hearts of the faithful, to understand and believe, Romans 4.16. etc.
that God had a care of them before the world was made, and that they were
chosen by him unto salvation before they had being; hereupon the faithful
Christian may gather confidently and most assuredly, that God cannot forsake
them after they be made, and are existant, whom he choose and appointed unto
salvation before they were existant, and before the world was made. God elects
the faithful unto salvation before they had being.
No man will deny that God has not liberty to do with his own what he
lists; for seeing that he is the Maker, Creator, preserver, and conserver of
all things, and Lord of heaven and earth, it followe^h, Rom 9.18. Esaias 45.8, 9.
that he has power upon all things; for, he has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens: when he made the world, he made it after his own
will; when he dissevered those things that he had made, he disserved them as
he would; the heavens from earth; fire from water; darkness from light;
beasts from beasts; plants from plants; times from times; seasons from seasons,
and man from man; therefore we may assure our selves, and stand in this, that
God has power to determine at his own will of the salvation of man; either
else we must utterly deny him to be God, and say, that he has not power over
all his creature. O man! Esaias 43.13. Romans 20.21. Read the whole Chapter.
what art thou that thus disputest with God? shall the work say to the
worke-man, why have thou made me on this fashion? Has not the Potter power
over his clay, even of one lump to make one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor; who is able to resist his will, Joh. 36.23.
albeit he did know before what we should be; yet for all that he found
nothing in us, whereby he should be moved to choose us; we are all by nature
borne the children of wrath; he knew before we should be such, wherefore he
had cause to refuse us, rather then to choose us; The free election of God is
the efficient cause of our salvation, the material cause is Christ's obedience,
the formal cause is our effectual calling, and the final cause is our
sanctification.
neither can we boast, that he chose us in respect of our godliness and
justice that was to come; for if there be any godliness and justice in us, it
is in us; not as a cause, but as the fruit of election and grace of God: for as
is said, he chose whom he would of his free mercy, not because they would be
faithful, but because they should be faithful; and he gave them grace, not
because they were faithful, but to the intent and end they might be made
faithful; wherefore it appears, that the choice or election of us, is made
by no manner of respect of any quality of ours; neither does God elect any man
for his birth or beauty, or for any prerogative or excellency in his person;
Romans 2.11.
for God is no accepter of persons, and these things are not before election,
but come after it; for that which Moses says of the general election of all
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 7.7.
may be as truly said of the special election of all faithful Israelites,
that God has not chosen them for their multitude, but of his own love; nor
for any dignity, Genesis 4.3.
but of his own mercy; we see God respected not the older-ship of Cain, but
chose Abel; he regarded not the riches of Nabal, the wisdom of Achi^ophel, 2 Samuel 17. 2 Samuel 18. 1 Samuel 28. 2 King. 9.10.33.
the beauty of Absalom, the comeliness of Saul, the princely blood of Jezabel;
neither were all the seed of Abraham elected as was Abraham; it is God that
has chosen us, and does make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints, and not any prerogative or dignity in us. We call Christ our
Savior, because he by his dignity and merit, has deserved our salvation of
God for us.

Therefore in no wise must we attribute our election unto any respect of our
quality and worthiness, but unto the only respect, will and purpose of God,
and that we can give no reason for it, The respect of our election is to be
sought in God himself. Psalm. 8.4. etc.
but only his (...) and infinite goodness was the cause of it, for the
perceiving of our own unworthiness and depravation does drive us not this:
for says David, Lord, wh^^^ is man, that thou art so mindful of him, and the
son of man, that thou so visitest him? Psalm. 444. Ephesians. ^^ and^
The Apostle does so expound this cause, that he does wholly attribute it u^^^
God, and nothing at all unto us; he does turn the respect of our election unto
the good pleasure, will purpose and grace of God, according unto the good
pleasure of his will, according to the riches of his grace, and according to
his good pleasure which he purposed in himself; therefore he predestinates
according to his purpose. So that we must believe, that these be the causes of
our election and choice, for all men should know that there is a supernatural
cause which is the cause of all things, and that the cause of the cause, Esaias
43.13. God has chosen us because it has so pleased him.
is the cause of the thing caused. Therefore God has determined it, who can
alter it; he has chosen us, because it so pleased him; he would do so because
he purposed in himself so to do: we must rest here and seek (...) other
cause of these causes; therefore we must not rashly and ungodly, search and
travel, why it has so pleased him, and why he would and purposed so to do,
but we must impute it wholly and only unto the infinite goodness and riches
of his grace: our Savior Christ; when he said, I thank thee, O Father, Math.
1^.25, ^^
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the prudent
and wise, and have revealed them unto ^abes: He did refer the cause hereof
to nothing else, but to the good pleasure and will of God his Father: add (...)
and saying, Even so, O father, for so was it thy g^od pleasure. Romans 9.15.
And the Apostle when he disputed of election and refusing, he does openly and
steadfastly refer the causes of both refusing and electing unto the will of
God, saying, He has mercy on whom he will, and ha^d^eth whom be wi^^ h^^e
hardened. Therefore we must consider and certainly ground our election and
salvation upon his good pleasure, will, and purpose; whose will is most free
interest and right, most highest over all things, truth ^^^^^^ble, his pleasure
steadfast for ever, his purpose most effectual, and power not to be withstood,
Job. 36.5.
and without let or hindrance, all which do agree with the nature of Gods
goodness, whose property is ever to have mercy and to do good; there, it is
no^ possible that the election of us, made according to his pleasure, Esaias
43.1, 3.
will and purpose, should be altered or made void, but stand firm and stable
for ever.

For like as reprobation does exclude all manner of conjunction, of them that
he refused with the refuser God; so does election join the chosen with the
chuser: which knitting together of two most sundry natures of God and man,
could not be made without the closing up of some mediator. Hot and cold cannot
be united, but in some mean, which may receive b^^ their is much less
possible that man, which is colder then Ice, Heb. 12.29.
should be united with God, who is a consuming fire. This cause is most
clear, to all of reasonable understanding, saving only to them which neither
considering the highness of Gods wrath, 1 Pet. 1.20. The mediator betwixt God
and us.
nor the baseness of man's weakness and corruption, do think they may be
joined unto God without a mediator; now who that mediator is, in whom God
has chosen us before the feding of the world, and has joined us unto him in a
perpetual conjunction, the Apostle does diligently express to the Ephesians
saying: Ephesians. 1.1.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in
all manner of spiritual blessing in heavenly things by Christ; according as he
has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world. Therefore we are
chosen by God the Father in Christ his Son, in an everlasting election,
before times and seasons, when the world was made. Wherein we do see that it
was so determined for ever, that we should be saved by Christ the Son of God
our mediator, and it was so predestined, that the same eternal Word should
be borne at his time in our flesh; so that by the same through which we should
be created by, in him, we should be chosen also to be redeemed and saved: and
this our faith in our Mediator and Savior Christ has a most ancient
foundation, that is to say, eternal before all times, The foundation of our
faith is most ancient.
and laid before the world began. In this wise also we were in Christ before
the world was made, by the strength of this eternal election as his chosen;
but he did choose us to the intent that we should be in him and be saved by
him. For Christ was made the Mediator, head, and Savior of the Elect, before
the nativity of his flesh, but he was appointed so by the Father for evermore;
Romans 9.
and we were chosen in him, before we were borne, at the same time when God
determined upon the head and Mediator of them that should be saved; and did
also determine upon them that should be saved by him as his members; which
determination the Apostle does call the election made in Christ: wherefore we
must consider of this mystery of our election as it is whole and sound, with
both the parts of it joined together with sincere faith, with all devotion,
honor, and thankfulness in Christ our Mediator, Head, and Savior, and for
the confirmation of the certainty of our salvation in our hearts: we must
ponder also in our selves, how that the election and choosing of us is grounded
and builded upon the same purpose and counsel of God, 1 Pet. 1.20, 21, 22.
in the same eternity, yea and the very same certainety that the mystery of
Christ is: but concerning those which be chosen of God, they be chosen
generally to this purpose, to be made happy for evermore. To this point of true
felicity those things do belong, which be rehearsed particularly by the
Apostle, Psalm. 32.
for what can we make of it else but to be holy and blameless, then to be
adopted to be the children of God? to be beloved, redeemed, and favorably
pardoned of our sins, to be lightened with the wisdom and knowledge of Gods
will and purpose, to be called to the portion of inheritance, and to be signed
with the holy Spirit, as the earnest-penny of our inheritance; but to be made
happy forever, and to be the heirs of God, and coheries with Christ, and to be
taken into the glory of his children. If the Prophet pronounce him happy whose
sins be forgiven, Verse. 1, 2.
how much more are they to be counted happy, which be chosen to that intent
from everlasting, that they should be adopted the children of God, made holy
and blameless, and partakers of the heavenly inheritance this grace of Gods
election is incomprehensible, and therefore can never be so esteemed of us, as
it ought to be.

This certainty does beget exceeding joy in the elect, for what can raise a
greater joy in faithful hearts then this, that we know and believe verily
that we shall see the infinite good pleasure of the Lord, Psalm. 27.15. The
infinite joy of the faithful.
in the Land of the living, and shall have an inheritance not earthly, but
eternal in the heavens; and what greater joy can any man desire to enjoy, then
to believe himself to be elected to eternal joy? This assurance in the elect,
is the more excellent, Note
considering the woe of the reprobates which want it; and the wearisome sighs
and inexplicable terrors of such as are swallowed up: in despair* This
privilege is the more to be accounted of, because we may enjoy it daily
thoroughout our life, and that the longer we be partakers of it, the sweeter it
is unto us: for this assurance is infallible so long as we have true faith in
us, Romans 4.20. Heb. 11.1.
by which we come to Christ, approach to the Father, and hasten to Heaven, for
faith is an undoubted certainty or persuasion in us* and an enemy to doubting
and incredulity. This election of God is most free, without obligation,
compulsion, external instigation: For, has not the Potter liberty over his
clay, etc? Who can compel the Almighty, who can resist his power, Romans 9.21.
or what is before his will? for the election of God is constant, perpetual,
immutable, inviolable, and unresistable; Esaias 43.13.
it is firm grounded, stable and unmovable; for those things which be
contingent, mutable, and uncertain, are barred and utterly excluded from being
an original cause or ground thereof. Now, the decree of election, is the
foundation, and scaturidge of salvation, and is certain, steadfast, and
unchangeable; therefore God the author of election, Jam. 1.17, 18. Mal. 3.6.
does seriously and effectually separate and elect the faithful unto himself,
and the reprobate unbelievers; therefore his decree must be fulfilled* the
Scriptures are manifold and evident in avouching this truth. In the beginning,
says the Lord, I show the end of things, Esa, 46.10.11.
and I tell before things that are not yet come to pass; my device stands
steadfastly stablished, and I will fulfill all my pleasure, as I have spoken, so
will I bring to pass; as soon as I devi^^ thing I do it. The foundation of
God, says Saint Paul, remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.
having the seal, the Lord knows them that are his. Therefore this decree of
election is the foundation, because it is the wel-spring and beginning of our
salvation, and of all the means tending to salvation, and is sure and firm,
and never shaken, but remains immutable for ever; for whosoever are elected,
shall still remain elected, and shall never be rejected: Joh. 6.39.
This is my Fathers will, says Christ, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, John 13.1.
those whom he ever loved he loves for ever: For neither any of those can
perish whom God has predestined unto the kingdom of heaven, nor that any of
those can come, whom he has not predestined unto life; neither does God
offer the least injury to any; though he does not choose all, because he is not
tied to choose any; his Lordship is above all, Romans 9.18.
his authority is absolute, he may do with his own what he will, who can
hinder him? the doctrine of election does manifest the glory of God; These. 1.
for it shows that we are elected to the honor of God, and to the praise of
his glorious grace, and it argues and illustrates his essential properties: as
his omnipotency, omniscience, eternity and mercy, and does both demonstrate and
defend the free grace of God against all contrariant heresies and errors, and
will arm us against impetuous enemies of the truth; therefore it is worthy to
be learned. Now the love of God is the ground of election, and Gods love is
best known by his best gifts; the best things he reserveth for those he best
loves: as Joseph sent unto Benjamin more messes of meat, Genesis 43.34.
and gave him richer gifts, and more costly apparel than to the rest of his
brethren: Genesis 45.22.
So the Lord bestows the best gifts upon the elect, his own children. Now
the graces of regeneration and spiritual gifts of faith, hope, and love, are
without comparison the most principal; therefore he that has faith, hope and
love, may assure himself of Gods love, and that he is in the number and rank
of Gods elect, these being infallible tokens and undoubted effects of election,
and forerunners of eternal life. Now, this knowledge in God, brings ^orth
another knowledge in us, Gal. 4.5.9.
whereby we know God to be our God, and this election of God works in the
elect another election, whereby they choose God for their God; and the love
whereby God loves us, works in us another love, whereby we love God; for
Christ first apprehends us, and this apprehension of his, Romans 4.20.
works in us the apprehension of faith, whereby we lay hold upon him and his
promises. If these things therefore be in us, we may conclude infallibly, that
we are the elect of God: for they are the fruits of his love, and the works
of his spirit, and therefore irrefragable testimonies and tokens of election;
the Sun by his light shines upon us, and by the same light we view and
behold the Sun again: a man may be elected, though for a time he live
unconverted, Acts 9.1, etc. Luke 23.40, 41, 42, 43.
and in his sins, as we may see by the examples of Saint Paul, and the thief
upon the cross; for it is true, that whosoever is converted, is elected; yet
whosoever is not converted, the same may be elected, because the elect may be
aliens for a time from God, Ephesians. 2.1. Cor. 6.10.11. Colos. 2.13. 1 Pet. 4.3.
and unregenerated, as were the Ephesians, Corinthians, Colossians, yea, all
men are such by nature: so one good and constant motion or resolution of grace
is sufficient to prove a man's election unto glory. By this we may know that we
belong to God: if we find the impression of the grace of God constantly in
us; there is yet matter of true comfort: but if all these signs be wanting,
that a man shall not always find all these things in himself, yet must we
not despair, but commend our selves to the grace and mercy of God, and use the
best means of our salvation; therefore, O devout soul, Romans 4.25.
as often as thou do meditate upon thy predestination, behold, and think on
Christ hanging upon the cross, dying for the sins of the whole world, and
rising again for our justification: Begin from Christ lying in a manger,
Ephesians. 1.4, 5, etc.
and so thy disputation of predestination shall proceed orderly; God the Father
elected us in Christ before the foundations of the world were laid; if
therefore thou art in Christ by faith, do not doubt but that election
belongs unto thee: if with a firm confidence of heart thou adherest unto
Christ, do not doubt, but that thou art in the number of the elect; but if
thou go further beyond the limits of the Word of God, and wilt search into
the profundity of predestination, it is greatly to be feared, that thou will
fall into the profundity of desperation: God by the voice and severity of the
Law accuses all, without Christ's satisfaction; take heed therefore that thou
drawest not the mystery of predestination out of the Law; search not into the
reasons of Gods secret Counsel, lest thy cogitations do much seduce thee. God
dwells in the light that no man can attain unto; 1 Timothy 6.6.
presume not therefore to come unto it rashly; but God has revealed it unto us
in the light of the Gospel; in this thou may safely inquire into the doctrine
of this secret; Psalm. 36.9.
and in this light thou shall see true light: search not into the profundity of
this eternal decree, made from eternity, but convert thy self to the
clearenesse of the manifestation of the Gospel, which was made in time; and in
the glass of Justification, thou may behold thy election made without time;
out of the Law take notice of the wrath of God for sins, and repent; out of the
Gospel take notice of the mercy of God through the merits of Christ, and apply
that unto thy self by faith; take notice of the nature of faith, and show it
by thy godly conversation; take notice of Gods fatherly castigation in crosses
and endure through patience; then at length thou shall come to the doctrine of
predestination: Note.
but in this mystery there are always three things to be observed: the mercy
of God loving us; the merit of Christ suffering for us, and the grace of the
holy Ghost by the Gospel sanctifying us. Gods mercy is universal, because he
loved the world; Psalm. 33.5, 6.
the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord, yea, his mercy is greater then
heaven and earth, for he has promised, Ezech. 33.11.
as truly as I live, says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner, but
much rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, yea, he has
confirmed it with an oath; if therefore thou will not believe him for his
promise, yet believe him for his oath. The merit of Christ is also universal,
because he suffered for the sins of the whole world; therefore doubt not of
the universality of Christ's merits; Christ dyed, and suffering prayed for them
that crucified him, and shed his most precious blood for them that persecuted
him: the promises of the Gospel are universal, because Christ says unto all
them that labor and are heavy laden, Come unto me, and I will refresh you.
Math. 11.28.
God denies his grace unto none, but to them that think themselves not worthy
of it, by thinking that their sins are greater then the mercy of God is able
to pardon and forgive, and so despairing of mercy, desperately cast away
themselves. Consider therefore thou faithful soul, these three props of
predestination, and rest upon them with a firm confidence of thy heart.
Consider also the benefits of Gods grace and wonderful mercy toward thee that
are past; and thou will not doubt of his final perseverance toward thee: for
when as yet thou wast not, God created thee; Romans 1.16.
when by the fall of Adam thou wast condemned, he redeemed thee: when thou
livedst in the world out of the Church, he called thee by his word: when thou
wast ignorant of the truth he instructed thee: when thou wentest astray out of
the way, he reduced thee home: when thou sinnedst he gently corrected thee:
when thou wast fallen he lifted thee up; when thou came unto him he most
graciously received thee; 2 Pet. 3.15.
his long suffering appeared in that he expected thee, and his mercy in that
he pardoned thee. Gods mercy prevented thy destruction, hope therefore firmly
that his loving kindness and mercy will also follow thee. Consider thou
faithful soul, Psalm. 23.6.
that we were elected of God in Christ by faith: faith shows it self by love,
and love has hope of the promise: therefore, where there is not love, neither
is there faith; where there is no faith, neither is there apprehension of
Christ; and where there is no apprehension of Christ, there is not election;
and where there is no election, there is no hope of salvation.

Of Mortification.
HE that is resolved to endeavor his godly repentance, and labor the
reformation of his sinful life, Note.
must labor two things principally, and of necessity. The first is
mortification, the next is regeneration: he must first destroy his sinful
estate, before he can obtain the estate of grace; for God and the gifts of
God are so absolutely holy, that they cannot admit any mixture or cooperation
with sin and wicked actions. For as in curing of bodies infected with
poisonous diseases; Note.
the Physician by severity and strict diet brings down the body of his
patient to extreme poverty and leanenesse, and then in that extremity, helps
the weakness of nature, and by restoratives and requisite diet, brings a new
flesh, wholesome and without disease; the former diseased flesh being utterly
wasted and consumed with the extremity of Physic: How to mortify our
diseased actions and affections.
So he that is resolved in his repentance, and has a loathing and detestation
of his sins, and desire to free his soul from the contagion of sin, must
also resolve to endure such bitter physic and strict diet, as the judgment
of spiritual physic does prescribe him; whereby all the evil depraved and
corrupt affections of his soul may be utterly wasted, that thereby his soul
may have new and fresh endowment of grace without taint, without disease,
without grief. This was figured in the manner of Gods calling Moses to his
Princely and Prophetical office: for when Moses made offer to come near the
presence of God in the bush; Exodus 3.5, 6.
God forbad him saying, Come not hither: put thy shoes off thy feet: that is,
before thou presume to approach my presence, thou must put off thy sinful and
corrupt affections: for he that has base and vile affections, is not fit, is
not worthy the presence of God. It was also commanded of God, in the
ceremonial Law, that they that were polluted with the touch of any unclean
thing, Levit. 15.2.
were for a time prohibited the Sanctuary and the presence of God, and had a
time limited to cleanse themselves, before they were allowed and admitted for
clean persons: all which ceremonies do but note unto us the nature of
holiness, how impossible it is to be reconciled with sin: for as the two
contrary elements, fire and water, cannot possibly be in any one substance,
without intestine strife; No peace between God and Belial.
so God and Belial, grace and sin, can never conspire in any one particular
subject in the same respect; but what is gracious cannot be sinful; and what
is sinful cannot be gracious, there being in them a full opposition of nature
not to be reconciled. Phil. 2.12.
Therefore it is necessary and needful, that before we entertain the graces
of Gods holy Spirit, we must first discharge and abandon our sins, which have
had so long entertainment in us, and before that we can be regenerate and
made the sons of God, we must mortify our sinful affections whereby we
were made the servants of sin.

Saint Paul admonishing the Colossians to the imitation of Christ and his
holiness; advises them first to mortification, as if without that means the
other were impossible: Mortify therefore, says he, your members, Col. 3.5, 6.
which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, etc. And he gives a
reason of this direction, in the Epistle to the Romans, For if ye live after
the flesh, ye shall die; Romans 8.13.
but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. By
which place we are taught what mortification is, and of what necessity it is.
Mortification is the abolishing of the deeds of sin in our flesh, What
mortification is.
by the grace and operation of Gods Spirit. By the deeds of the flesh, is meant
not only our evil actions, but our desires and carnal affections. Saint Paul
in the place before alleged, Col. 3.5, 6.
calls them members of the earth: Mortify therefore your members which are
upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil
concupiscence, Luke 5.6.
and covetousness, which is Idolatry; for which things sake the wrath of God
comes upon the children of disobedience. In which he comprehends not only
our sinful actions but our affections also; nay, the very natural
concupiscence and depravednesse of our nature: To endeavor exactly is exactly
to perform.
not that any man is able exactly to perform these duties, but sincerely to
endeavor them: and that our defects may be in our power, but not in our
purpose and endeavor: therefore you must mortify your sins of action, your
sins of affection, and your sins by descent; and seeing mortification is an
office of the Spirit, Note. Phil. 2.13.
not that our own spirits is the cause of our mortification, but being first
caused by the holy Spirit of God, it is entertained and continued by the
exercise of our own reformed spirits, our spirits having no such strength in
their own nature, but as they are prepared by the grace of the holy Ghost. For
as in casting a stone, or running of a boule, though the strength of the arm
give the first motion to the boule or stone, yet afterward is the motion
continued a competent time; as well because of the powerful moving of the
arm, as also because of the aptness or fitness of the thing moved: so in the
office of mortification, Note.
and in all other divine offices of the soul, though the soul move not it
self to these holy actions, No soul can move it self to divine action.
yet by reason of the spiritual nature of our souls, when it is once moved by
the holy Ghost, it then continues such motion toward perfection, so the prime
honor of the holy exercise of mortification, and so of all other spiritual
offices is wholly to be ascribed to the power of Gods holy Spirit, which moves
in our hearts every act, and every purpose of well-doing, and he does also
illuminate us by his holy Spirit, infusing a new and heavenly light into our
minds, being so blind before, as that it neither saw, nor could see the things
which do belong to the Spirit of God: 1 Cor. 2.14.
the natural man, faith Saint Paul, perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God, neither can he know them through ignorance; in like manner also in the
will, which is altogether perverse, and wholly fallen from God; he works an
uprightness, and in all the affections a new holiness. Hence proceeds that
new man which is created after God in true holiness and righteousness, Ephesians.
4.24.
and causes us being enlightened and thus changed, to apprehend his mercy, to
desire and affect our amendment, and to answer his call like David: For when
God had pierced David's ear by his Spirit, he answered, Lo, I come. Psalm, 27.9.
There is also a necessity of mortification imposed upon every man, upon pain
of condemnation; this is showed in the words before alleged by S. Paul: for,
says he, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye mortify the
deeds of the body, Romans 8.13.
ye shall live, whereby the Apostle proposes life and death before the
Romans, admonishing them that of necessity they must choose one, either to
mortify the flesh and live or pamper the flesh and die, there being no means,
no cause of avoydance of this necessity; and S. Paul has admiration at their
simplicity that cannot apprehend this mystery, who in the Allegory of seed
proving the resurrection of the body, proves also the necessary mortifying of
the flesh: O fool, says he, 1 Cor. 15.36.
that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die; for as the blade of
seed corn cannot appear, before the grain be first rotten in the earth; and
as there cannot be a resurrection to life, before there be first a separation
and rottenness by death: so there cannot be a regeneration by grace before
there be a mortification to sin, for new birth is gotten by the death of sin,
and mortification is the predecessor and next parent to regeneration, they
being necessary Relatives; for where one is, both are, and where both are not,
neither is; therefore it is generally necessary, all men being bound to
mortify all sin, without favor or dispensation of any. Lastly, it is moved in
us by the Spirit of God, but it is exercised by our own reformed spirit. Note.
God first kindling the fire of zeal in our hearts, which when it is kindled,
burns of it self, but not without divine assistance; for when it shall
please the Almighty God by his grace to call us out of the grave of sin, by
hearty and serious repentance unto newness of life by faith in Christ, and by
the motion of his holy Spirit cause in us a loathing and a detestation of our
sins, then we may assure our selves, that the gracious goodness of God will
not give us over, but will assist us with his holy Spirit, and support us with
his divine grace, so that we shall never fall away, except we prove voluntary
revolters from him: for by the promise of God made to his elect in the covenant
of grace, Ierem. 32.38, 39, 40, 41, 42.
he says, They shall be my people, and I will be their God. And I will give
them one hearts and lead them in one way, that they may fear me all the days
of their life. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, namely, that I
will never cease to do them good, and that I will put my fear in their
heartt, so that they shall not depart from me, yea, I will have a lust and
pleasure to do them good, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul; even
so will I also bring upon them, all the good that I have promised them; and
mark our Intercessour and Mediator, Christ, Ioh. 17.11.15.20.
who has prayed effectually unto his father for our preservation and
conservation in the world, because we are his subjects and members, who is a
most puissant and gracious Prince and Advocate, and a most perfect and blessed
head; and therefore we may be sure that he will protect and preserve his
subjects, profligate and extirpate their sins, their enemies, and by his Spirit
convey spiritual sense and motion into all his members.

To conclude, this calling is an argument of admirable power in God and of his
infinite mercy to us: for as he showed his power in creating and making of
things to be, that before were not; even so he manifests his power in his
effectual calling men that were dead in sin, and worse then nothing by their
own deserts, to live the life of grace, and in breathing into them the breath
of new life, which was utterly expired by their fall in Adam, yea, the Lord may
seem to exhibit more power or mercy when he calls men out of their sins,
then when he did create them: For, at his creation there was none to hinder
him, but at his vocation there were many hinderers, and great impediments,
though all inferior unto God; there is the Devil and his suggestions; there
is the world and her incantations, scandalls and allurements; and there is our
own flesh, the rebellious corruption of the heart; all these God must vanquish
and overcome, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and persuade and incline our hearts and wills; and of nillers make us willers
to come unto him, before he perfect and accomplish in us this his glorious and
thrice happy work of grace; indeed there is more goodness showed, more grace
exhibited in restoring of man out of his grievous and intolerable misery, and
in curing him of his cursed blindness: then giving him a being, Psalm. 27.1.
having none before, and in making him to see, which before in spiritual
things was blind; to raise a dead soul from the death of sin unto a
supernatural life is a greater work of mercy, than to raise a dead body from
bodily death to live a natural life; Joh. 11.43, 44.
when Christ had cried to Lazarus, being dead, and said, Lazarus come forth,
he forthwith revived, and came forth of the grave: So when Peter had said to
dead Tabitha, Acts 9.40.
Tabitha arise, she immediately opened her eyes, and sat up; even so when God
shall please to vouchsafe to call a man with his powerful voice, and shall
effectually speak unto the heart, and say, Arise thou that sleep in sin,
come forth of the grave of iniquity, stand up and walk in the ways of
righteousness; his voice is so mighty, and his Word so powerful, that the man
to whom he does so speak, must needs awake, arise, come forth and walk. The
voice of the Lord, Psalm. 29.
says David, it mighty in operation, the voice of the Lord breaks the
Cedars, it divides the flames of fire, it makes the wilderness to tremble.
The voice of the Lord is a glorious voice, that makes the thunder, these are
the effects of that voice; likewise the voice which God speaks to the ear of
the soul in his effectual calling is so mighty and so glorious, Heb. 4.12.
as that it rendeth the heart, and makes it tremble; Ioh 6.20.
it discovers the soul, and pierces into the most secret parts of it; and
look as at the sound of the seven trumpets, the wall of Jericho fell flat
down, and as at that efficacious voice of Christ, saying, I am he, Ioh. 18.6.
his enemies that came to apprehend him, went backward, and fell to the ground:
even so, when Gods voice shall sound in a man's ear, and when Christ shall
speak effectually unto the heart, the walls of hell shall reele and totter,
the fortresses of iniquity shall be ruinated; the castles of sin shall be
cast down; our spiritual enemies shall be driven backward; the strong man
Satan shall be fettered, and his cursed works dissolved; these are the
admirable effects of his glorious voice; Romans 11.16.
these are the worthy and wonderful works of Gods effectual calling; we may
therefore justly say: The voice of the Lord is mighty, the voice of the Lord is
glorious, and brings wonderful things to pass: this inward vocation is an
infallible pledge of salvation to the Elect.

The necessity of mortification, does require in every one an exact diligence
in that Christian office, for seeing the hazard of eternal life depends
upon the death or not dying of sin: and that necessarily, there is no man of
that simple understanding, but will think it expedient, nay necessary
wisdom, rather to destroy his sin, then himself; for one of the two must
of necessity be mortified, suffer death, and die: and if any man think to
devise a means to save both himself and his sin, and in the reformation of
himself to over-leape the duty of mortification, as a duty too precise and of
grievous performance, and shall think that mortification is not of necessary
substance, but rather a severe circumstance which may be safely avoided: to him
may be said, as Saint Paul says to the Corinthians with admiration, O fool!
1 Cor. 15, 36.
that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: and let him be sure,
that if he either fail or faint in this endeavor, there is no endeavor can
purchase him the favor of God, and the salvation of his soul. Therefore, it
most nearly respects all men, not to esteem their sin, which is their
enemy and would destroy them, more then God which is their friend and would
save them; nay more then their souls, and their salvation. Therefore let every
man make war upon himself and his own flesh; To subdue our own sinful
affections, is the greatest conquest in the world.
and let him be valiant to conquer himself, and triumph in the spoil and
death of his sinful actions and affections: for there is no war can gain
our names a greater glory, then to victor our selves; and he is most redoubted,
and most valiant that can conquer his own affections; the which all men must
do before they can have the garland of holy victory from the hand of God.
Again, seeing that in our mortification there is no respect of favor had to
any sin, but that all sin must die, the sins that have gained us either
our profit or our pleasure, for all sin being in hatred with God, all sin
is therefore commanded to die, without dispensation, proviso, or exception of
any. It therefore behooveth all men to hate as God hates, even all sin,
because all sin is in Gods hatred; lest they provoke God as Saul did, and
with Saul to declare themselves reprobates. God commanded Saul to destroy the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.1. etc.
a sinful and God-lesse people; Saul performed his Commandment but in part,
for though he destroyed many, yet he spared some; for which God cast him from
his favor, and rent his Kingdom from him. Our sins are those Amalekites;
God has commanded us to destroy them utterly; if therefore any man presume
against Gods Commandment to spare any, God will certainly cast him with Saul
from the hope of salvation: This does admonish all to avoid the common custom
of men, that commonly hate the sins and infirmities of others; but flatter
and feed their own with saturity: the usurer, he condemns the prodigal;
the prodigal condemns him; the drunkard condemns the glutton; Every
contrary despises one another.
the glutton he condemns the drunkard: age and youth have each their
particular sins, yet do they despise one another, and so do every
particular his contrary: so that many can abhor those sins to the which
they are not naturally addicted, but few do mortify them that are nearest and
dearest unto them. These are they that our Savior Christ calls hypocrites,
Math. 23.
that point at little sins in others, but flatter and foster maine ones in
themselves: this evil custom is far short of the duty of mortification,
which requires a loathing and detestation, nay a death, not of some sins,
not of other men's sins, but of our own sins, and of all our own sins
without exception of any: and seeing that the holy Ghost does move this grace
in our hearts, and does give us spiritual power in the office of
mortification. It behooves all men to address their prayers to God that he
will give them the direction of his grace, to guide them in so needful a
performance, and that when they find in themselves a desire to mortify their
sins and sinful affections; Titus 1.12, etc.
then let them assure themselves that they are called by the divine and
efficatious power of God to the performance of that duty, that then they yield
their endeavor, with all diligence, to do as the holy Ghost directs them,
lest by neglecting the admonishments of Gods Spirit, they bring upon themselves
a greater condemnation. The life and soul, as it were thereof, is the
illumination and reformation of the mind and an efficatious bending,
conforming and working of the heart and will, whereby it becomes obedient to
the voice of God, and returns, as it were, an audible and lively echo into
their ears: the end thereof is first the glory of God, and the commendation of
his mercy; to whom we must ascribe both grace and nature; and of whom we have
received our souls and bodies, yea, and the very soul of our souls, which is
his spirit. The second end of this vocation is our deliverance and translation
out of ignorance, infidelity, sensuality and rebellion, The soul of our souls
is the Spirit of God. 2 These. 2, 14.
unto spiritual grace and glory: for we are called out of darkness into
light, that we might walk in light, and no longer serve the Prince of
darkness: we are called out of the world unto God, to the end that we should
relinquish the lusts of the flesh, the pleasures of the world, and to serve God
in newness of life, that walking uprightly before him in this world, we may
live and reign with him for ever in the world to come.

The meritorious cause of this effectual calling, is Christ and his merits;
for Christ has merited in our behalf, and has promised that the holy Ghost
should had sent into us, John 15.26. and 16.7, 8.
even the Spirit of truth, to illuminate and adorn our hearts with his graces,
and is wrought in us by a special powerful and inward work of the holy
Spirit. For like as when a skillful Musician, has once strung, tuned, and
struck his instrument, it sends forth many pleasant and sweet sounds; so when
the Lord has once breathed his spirit of life into the nostrils of our so^les,
and when he has once tuned the jurring strings of our sinful hearts, and
has touched them with the finger of his spirit, he makes them send forth many
delectable and harmonious sounds, Tokens of mortification. Romans 1.6. and 6.17,
18. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
wherein he takes delight. So then it as with the Romans we perform hearty
obedience to the Word of God; if with the Corinthians, we be rich in
spiritual graces, and have purged our hearts by true repentance from our
former iniquities, and if we be mortified, and renewed in the Spirit: And if
like those good Thessalonians we receive and believe the Gospel, and
entertain the word with joyfulnesse, notwithstanding all afflictions; 1 These.
1.5, 6, 9. and 1.3, 4.
if we turned God from all our false Gods, our own delights and vanities, to
which we have wedded our hearts: and if our faith increase and our love
abound, and if we have faith and patience as they had, in all our crosses and
afflictions, then may we assure our selves that we are effectually called, as
they were, John 10, etc.
out of the vast^ wilderness of this woeful world unto Christ our Shepherd;
for our Savior Christ says, that his sheep know him, hear his voice, and
follow him. If therefore we know, acknowledge and embrace Christ; if we hear
and hearken unto his voice, and do it; if we study to resemble, imitate, and
follow him in love, meekness, patience, humility, justice, fidelity, truth,
confidence and compassion, then we may confidently assure our selves, that we
are his sheep, effectually called home into his fold.

Mortification being of such necessity in the ordinary means of our salvation,
as that we cannot be regenerate before we carefully discharge this office of
mortification: let us therefore endeavor this duty with all diligence; let us
denounce a bloody and general war against all our sins; let us entertain
favor and correspondencie with none: but let those sins that have been our
delight be in our hatred; let us not love them for their profit, because
transitory; We must not foster our sins, neither for profit nor pleasure,
neither fear them for their number. If sin overcome us we are their slaves.
let us not favor them for their pleasure, because moment any; let us not
fear them for their number, though infinite many; nor for their strength,
though they have conquered a world of people; let us have confidence in God,
because he is on our side, and has a care of us: when sin got the upper hand
of us, and we victoried by them; we were then their servants, their slave:
when we overcome and have victoried them; let us make them our slaves
perpetually; let us bind them in chains, cast them in prison, and for ever
utterly destroy their evil power: Let us have no pity, no favor, Note.
no compassion on sin, because when we were overcome by sin, sin was merciless
against us: let us not as did Saul, spaire any for their dignity or worth, but
with David, let us mortify and destory all; let us hate the sins of youth, and
despise the sins of age; let us not be partial in our own particulars; let
not prosperity alter us, neither let poverty tempt us; but having undertaken to
war with sin, let us be full in opposition against it; let us not end our
war without victory; Let us strive to overcome sin with a constant resolution.
let us not interrupt it by truce, but let us be resolute in our purpose, and
constant in our resolution, and at all occasions, and in every distress; let
us resort to the throne of Gods mercy, and crave the assistance of his holy
Spirit: he is our Conductor, he is our Commander, and the General in this
spiritual war; let us consult with that Oracle, and by it receive direction;
let us fight with the arm of his might, and win the garland of holy victory:
for having God on our part, whom then shall we fear? and if he be with us, who
can be against us? his policies cannot be prevented, nor his power with victory
opposed. What we want of spiritual power in our selves, Psalm. 18.1. etc.
shall be abundantly supplied by the infinite power of the holy Ghost; for by
him we shall be able to overthrow an host of sin, and by the strength of our
God, Note.
we shall overcome all extremities and avoid all dangers; he is the end of
our hope, and the maine battle of our power; we are but the rear, he is our
General: Hebr. 12.2.
we are his soldiers; his holy Cross is our colors; his holy Word our
weapons. And being thus appointed, we dare confront all the enemies of our
soul, the Devil, our sins, and all that does oppose us; we dare undertake
their conquest, spoil their power, discipline their errors; and by the
perpetual death of our sins, obtain a perpetual quiet of our conscience, and
the everlasting peace of our souls.

Of Regeneration.
When all things was first created, every thing was perfectly good, no defect,
no blemish, no need of correction; Adam to fall from his integrity, and suffer
him and his sons to revolt and fall into sin, and did not hinder the fall,
which he could have done, if it had pleased him? unto himself; in the mean,
let no man think that God was injurious, for he was not indebted to us, Job 36
23.
to confirm us by his grace, and to keep us from declining; but this fall was
permitted by God, for the greater benefit of his elect: for their glory
procured by Christ, Esa. 46.10, 11.
does far exceed and surpass the glory which was given them in their
creation, which had never been if man had never fallen by sin; great are the
evils which we suffer by reason of that first offense: but what faithful man
would not endure far greater, rather then to want so great a Redeemer; God
not bound to let, did permit this fall, yet it is not to be ascribed unto him,
as the cause thereof, but to man's own will: for he did not incline Adams
heart unto sin, nor did he infuse the least corruption into his soul, Jam.
1.13, 14, 15.
neither did he withdraw any grace from him before he inspired into him, but
he fell by his free will, through his own default at the persuasion and
suggestion of the Devil; man was therefore the cause of his iniquity in his
own proper will, and not from Gods predestination: As God brought man into the
state of life, so man brought himself into the state of death.
for if any man decline from piety and justice, he runs headlong of his own
will, he is drawn by his own concupiscence, and is beguiled through his own
persuasions: the Father has no hand in this fall; the Son is no agent of
this sin, Note.
the holy Ghost is no worker of this wickedness; therefore the fault of man's
choosing of that which was forbidden, is not by any means to be transferred,
or ascribed unto God; for God punished the sin of Angels in their own
particulars only, for they were to derive their natures to posterity by
generation and natural descent, because they were ordained for the service of
God in certain particular offices assigned them in the government of his
creatures, the creatures not being ordained for the service of them, but man,
for whom all things were made, and from whom was to be derived a world of
people; when he sinned, God himself punished him and his posterity, and the
creatures he had made, and had given him: For, as the sin of man had infected
the whole world, man's house, so the curse of God, and the work of his
displeasure was seated on that house, the world; all things then being subject
to alteration and evil change: from this curse, is the inecessity of
regeneration; all things being now in their own nature, in the state of
corruption and death; therefore Saint Peter says, When Christ shall come to
judgment, 2 Pet. 3.10.7.
the heavens shall pass away with noise, and the elements shall melt with
heat, and the earth, with the works therein shall be utterly burned up, and
there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, according to the promise of God,
Verse 13.
wherein dwells righteousness. What manner of persons ought we then to be
in holy conversation and godliness of life; Verse 11.
seeing that all these things shall perish; so that nothing shall be able to
abide the glory of Gods presence, but that which is reformed and regenerate;
not the elements, nor earth, no, nor heaven it self; but as all have endured
for sin the bad alteration, so must they endure by grace the good alteration;
all were transformed by the sin of one man Adam; all must be reformed again by
grace in Christ, or else remain still in their deformity. Saint Paul is
peremptory in this opinion; Gal. 6.15.
for he says, in Christ Jesus, neither circumcition avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature, that is, a regeneration by a lively faith
in Christ, is only necessary, at many ^n walk according to this rule, peace
be upon them, and me^^y upon them that be of God, Verse 16.
all ceremonies being insufficient, and not effectual: and our Savior Christ
preached to Nichodemus the necessity of regeneration, and affirms his
doctrine with a double asseveration, saying, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
John 3.3.
except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, if not to
see the kingdom of God, we cannot inherit it. This may suffice to persuade the
necessary knowledge; and the necessary care of regeneration; being that without
which it is impossible to be saved: now to know what regeneration is; it is an
act of the holy Ghost in Gods elect, whereby they are admitted and entered into
a constant and faithful exercise of godly life, for as it is said before, all
grace is the gift of God, Iam. 1.17, 18.
and every motion to good is caused only by the spirit of God, of his own
good will he begat us by the Spirit of truth, our selves being merely passive
in the first action of grace, God himself being the actor and principal mover
thereof; for the holy Ghost by whose directions we learn the use of all
spiritual exercise, does move both our capacity and power to understand the
knowledge and use of necessary and Christian performance without which we
should never be able to comprehend the rudiments and first elements of divine
learning: regeneration being then a Christian office of most necessary
performance, it must needs then be caused in us by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost, who is the first mover of every grace. This Doctrine Saint Peter
concludes in express words: saying, Blessed be God, 1 Pet. 1.3.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his b^^^den mercy
has begotten us again, unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead: so that we are regenerate and new begotten by God in
Jesus Christ, at the motion and instance of his abundant mercy cowards us.

Regeneration or sanctification, is the gift of God, whereby our corrupt nature
is renewed to the Image of God by the operation of the holy Ghost, or it is an
inward change of man justified, Hippocates.
whereby the Image of God is restored in him: for as one says, that physic
is an adjection and a substraction; an adjection of things wanting, and a
substraction of things redounding in the bodies of men. Even so is
sanctification a removing of the corrupt humors of our souls, and adjection
or infusion of spiritual graces which are wanting in us: Greenham.
for in every generation there is a corruption, and we see that the seed sown
is much changed, before it grow up and bear fruit; then it is needful in
generation, that there be a corruption of sin: so that as the seed in the
ground, so sin in our mortal bodies must decay, that the new man may be
raised up, by the Spirit of God taking possession of our souls.

Heb. 12.14.
This transformation of man is very requisite to salvation, for without
holiness no man shall see God. Therefore if we will not live to God by grace
upon earth, Ezech. 18.30, 31, 32. Romans 6.23.
we shall not live with him in glory in the Heavens: if we will not die to sin
in this world, we shall not escape death the wages of sin in the world to come:
if we do not live to God in holiness in this life, we shall not live in
happiness with God in the life to come: it is not only necessary to him that
is to be saved that sin be abolished by remission, but that it be likewise
mortified by regeneration: our regeneration must then of necessity be wrought
in the whole man according to both soul and body, Albeit our sanctification be
the work of the whole Trinity, yet it is immediately performed by the holy
Ghost.
yea and like also. This act of regeneration is caused by the holy Ghost in the
hearts of the Elect; and Gods labor is never fruitless, but what he wills
to attempt is finished, there being no resistance of his power, nor any greater
then himself to countermand him; as holy David says, The Lord has done
whatsoever pleased him. By this act of grace, they are entered and admitted into
the exercise of godliness, which does promise us an extraordinary degree of
hope, that we are in Gods favor, yet have we then our best assurance, when we
are adopted his children by regeneration; for then we bring our holy purpose
of reformation into act, and faithfully endeavor those duties which before we
had only determined; we are then made fruitful, and the Sons of God, and
not before: for we are then Gods first fruits, because we are then first made
fruitful: we must therefore be constant and faithful in the exercise of good
works, because that not those that faint in the race of godliness, but those
that go on with hope and alacrity shall obtain to the ends of their progress
and have the garland, for so says Saint John, Revel. 2.26.
He that overcommeth and keeps my works to the end, to him will I give
power over Nations. Not he that endeavors the beginning, the middle, or a
part of his life; but he that endures to the end, he shall be saved. This
salvation by Christ Jesus, is the crown of glory for which all men strive,
which none can gain; but he that runs the race of his life faithfully and
constantly: 1 Cor. 9.24.
therefore Saint Paul says, So run that ye may obtain: that is, endeavor
your strength with your time to the utmost; for though ye begin well, it is
nothing, unless ye also end well; for as the tree falls, so it lies, Note.
and as men die, so shall they rise to judgment: for the grave can give no
holiness, no perfection, but does only continue us in the state it found us,
earth and corruption.

The manner of regeneration, is how the children of God be borne a new, and
how it is caused by the secret working of Gods holy Spirit in the children of
grace: John 3.8.
he gives an instance by the moving of the air: that is, when we hear a
whistling of the wind, we know it blows, yet do we not know from whence it
comes; so in the act of regeneration, when we feel in our hearts the motion
of Gods holy Spirit breathing salvation into our souls, and when our works
and consciences give us an undoubted testimony, that we are regenerated and
borne of God: it is then as vain a care to search into the secret working of
the Spirit of God was to enquire of the mind, from whence it comes or whether
it goes: this thing is not necessary, though regeneration is most necessary,
and not to be neglected upon pain of condemnation.

Seeing regeneration is of such absolute necessity to salvation, John 3.5.
that Except a man be regenerate, and borne anew of water and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: neither be sons, nay the servants
of God, though we never so much endeavor in the service of other Christian
duties. This does admonish all men to have principal care to labor all means
possible to have faithful and sufficient witnesses both from their
consciences, and by testimony of their works, that they are the adopted
children of God, established in the assured hope of their salvation, being
known and sealed of God with the mark of regeneration: for it must needs be
sufficient to resolve a conscience of Gods favor, when we know we are his
children, it is a grounded cause to make us hopeful and confident in the trust
of Gods mercy. And seeing regeneration is an act of the holy Ghost, every man
ought so to rectify and reform the errors of his life, as that the Spirit of
God may not take loathing to enter our souls, but rather that by mortification
and holy exercise, we may be prepared to entertain that sacred guest into
our hearts, least when he comes he find us, as God will find the
reprobate in the day of judgment, unprovided, careless, and secure; and so
not seal us for his sons, but mark us the children of death, and the
friends of Antichrist. Again, seeing the regenerate are made the children of
God, it ought therefore to be a principal care of every man to be regenerate,
because regeneration is the undoubted witness of the child of God. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore Saint Peter admonishes all men, to give diligence to make our
calling and election sure, which can be no way better assured us, then by
assuring our regeneration, which is the certificat and testimony of our
election; and seeing the works of regeneration must be both constant and
faithful; by constancy is meant perseverance; by faithfulness a choice of
lawful particulars: therefore every man ought to exercise his devotion and
zeal in lawful argument, and that he run in the spiritual race which God
has proposed him, and not in the by ways of error, of false and self
opinion, and that in this course he faint not in his spiritual courage, but
that he hold out the race of his life with alacrity and hopeful confidence to
win the garland of salvation, which all shall both win and wear, that
constantly and faithfully endeavor themselves in godly actions. The ordinary
outward means to bring us to holy and godly action, 2 These. 2.14.
is the preaching of the Gospel; Saint Paul says, whereunto you are called by
the Gospel to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Law
serves to prepare our hearts for grace, but it is the oily drops to the Gospel,
by the power of the Spirit, that do soften and mollify the heart, and makes
it supple and pliable, and like Balm, it does revive and comfort the heart and
senses, and makes them pliable to that which is good and godly: Romans 1.16.
the Gospel is the power of God, that is, the instrument of Gods power unto
salvation to all them that believe: also good examples, afflictions, losses,
crosses, want, sickness, and the like, are by the blessing of God, 1 Pet. 1.23.
good preparatives to grace; but the preaching of the Gospel is the proper
instrument of the Spirit, for the effecting of grace: for by the word of the
Gospel, God speaks to the ears of the soul, and by it, as by a pipe, he
conveyes his graces into the cisternes of our hearts.

Regeneration then being of such infinite and excellent worth, and of absolute
necessity; let us take off our cares and endeavors from worldly occasions, and
apply them to this holy purpose; for being regenerate, we shall avoid the
danger both of sin and death, and live in the favor of God, and be graced with
the honorable title of his Son; then let us remember them that proudly vaunt
and boast their pedigree, and their descent from honorable parents; let us pity
their error, and despise their vain glory; let us compare such honor with
the honor of Gods regenerate children, we shall find an infinite distance of
their worth: theirs to be transitory passable and of short continuance, vain
and full of bitter mixture, this without comparison to be eternal and
infinite, infinite in worth, infinite in time: let us therefore despise that,
to gain this; let us desire no other honorable title, then to be called the
children of God, To be the child of grace is the greatest honor in the world.
that will give us the most sufficient and greatest reputation that can be; for
that in the least degree will exceed and out-glory all earthly honor in the
highest degree; let us not care how base the world repute and esteem us, nay,
though the world persecute us, let us not faint nor fear; for we know that
our Saviors kingdom is not of this world, neither is the glory of his
children of this world; but in him that has begotten us by the grace of his
holy Spirit is our glory, and by him we are made honorable; let us therefore
despise the world and the vanities thereof, to gain this honor, and for to
gain this honor; let us spend our hours, spend our actions, and our
endeavors; nay, let us spend our honors and all to make this purchase; let us
run our spiritual course with alacrity; seeing this honor is proposed us,
when we have it let us esteem it precious; it was given by grace, it cannot be
redeemed by nature; let us esteem it as it is worthy; and having once obtained
the honor to be the child of grace, nay, the child of God; let us carry that
honorable title to our grave, and with that we will present our selves in the
day of judgment before God our honorable Father, and before the honorable
company of Angels and Saints, and then it will appear by direct evidence
before all the world, whether our honor in being the child of God, regenerate
and made the son of God, which the world despised, Jerem 4.2.
or their transitory honor and prosperity of fortune wherein they gloried and
proudly exalted themselves, be of better proof, worth, or esteem, when God
shall call us his sons, and bid us enter the Kingome of our joy, and call
them reprobates, and bid them enter their prison, bonds, Matthew. 25.46. John
5.29.
and pains perpetual; this will be the blessed privilege our honor will
then give unto us; therefore to be regenerate thereby, to have God our Father
and our friend; let us not care what neglect, what scorn, and what disgraces
the world cast upon us: for as those will vanish with time, yet so will our
honor be, as God our Father is infinite in joy, infinite in worth, infinite in
time; let us therefore infinitely esteem of it, and by all means strive to
attain it, Amen.

Of Sanctification.
SEeing that he which is regenerate, is also sanctified and made holy, but it
is not derived to us from our parents. Ephesians. 2.10.
But Almighty God is the fountain and proper efficient cause of our
sanctification and holiness, whose worke-manship we are, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, Colos. 1.13.
who in mercy has translated us out of the kingdom of darkness, and has
delivered us from the power of the Devil, and made us fit for the Kingdom of
his beloved Son, Ephesians. 2.4, 5.
in whom he has quickened us through his love and riches of his mercy,
together with Christ, even when we were dead in sins, him has God lifted up
with his right hand, Acts 5.31.
to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance unto his chosen, Hebr.
2.4.
and forgiveness of sins; and albeit our sanctification be the work of the
whole Trinity, yet it is immediately performed by the holy Ghost, because he
does set us on fire, and inflame us with a zeal of Gods glory, with a care of
our duty, and with a love of all men: Sanctification is the very translation
and alteration of the heart and life of man, or a spiritual reduction and
conversion of a man from his wickedness unto God, and from the uncleanness of
sin, to true purity and Christian sanctity. The persons sanctified, are such as
are elected, Romans 8.30.
called and justified; therefore the Apostle says, that whom God
predestined, called, and justified, them also he glorified: these are truly
sanctified whom he makes to be the temples of his Spirit. Sanctification of
the body, is that whereby the members thereof are made fit instruments for the
soul regenerated to work the works of God with, it being become obedient to
the mind illumined, 1 Cor. 6.19.
and the heart reformed, through the work of the Spirit, who now has made it
the temple of his holiness, whereas before it was a slave to the flesh, and a
shop of uncleanenesse and iniquity.

Ephesians. 2.8.
It is a most gracious and free work of the Lord without all obligation or
merit of ours; for the Spirit of God blows with the blasts of his grace,
both when, how, where, and on whom he lifts; and the Apostle teaches us,
Verse 4, 5.
that we are quickened together with Christ, through whose great love and
grace we are saved: this is the virtue of Christ's resurrection, by the power
of his Godhead, raising up his manhood, and releasing him of the punishment
and tyranny of our sins, by which virtue and power we are quickened and
restored, that we might live unto God in holiness and newness of life. Note.
Now the sanctification of the soul consists in the alteration of the mind;
the renovation of the will, Note.
the sanctification of the memory, and the regeneration of the conscience: in
the alteration of the mind, whereby ignorance is by little and little
abolished, and the mind enlightened to know the true God, and his mercy in
Christ, and to know and understand a man's self, and his secret corruptions
against the Law of God, and to know how to behave himself toward God and man,
as also to prove the things of God, and to mind and meditate on things
spiritual and celestial. The renovation of the will is when God gives a man
grace truly to will good, as to believe, honor, fear, and obey God: the
sanctification of the memory, is an aptness by grace, to keep, and to be
mindful of good things, especially of the doctrine of our salvation, and such
like: the regeneration of the conscience is when it is fitted to give true
testimony to a man's heart of the remission of his sins, and of the
carfulness of his care to serve God, and to do other good duties concerning
our Christian brethren; it consists also in the spiritual transformation of
the affections, as joy, love, sadness, fear, anger, and such like, whereby a
man that is justified does so temper them, by his reason refined, and by the
light of the Law, with the help of the holy Spirit, that they do not break
out, as in the wicked, that give the reins to their lusts, but are held in
some good order; howbeit in this life, this is not done without much strife and
reluctation of the flesh and Spirit, and is rather affected then effected. Here
we must observe that sanctification does not alter the substance of man; but
only his corrupt and sinful qualities, it rectifieth affections, but
abolisheth them not; it corrects and moderates mirth, sorrow, anger, and such
humane passions, but takes them not quite away; it tunes the jarring strings of
a man's heart, but breaks them not in pieces. As the fall of man did not
abolish a man's essence, but corrupt his faculties; even so, the raising up and
renovation of man does not alter his very substance, but does only change his
corrupted qualities and powers: this visible reformation of a man is, when he
dedicates himself unto God and good duties to his neighbors, whose sins be
abandoned which before reigned in his heart. This work of the Spirit is
wrought in the whole man, but it belongs chiefly to the faithful and elect of
God, for civil moralities and outward formalities, and such graces, as do
only bridle and repress sin, may befall the reprobate: but Christian
virtues, and such graces as do supplant and suppress sin in our souls, and
do revive and restore Gods Image in us, such works of the Spirit, Heb. 2.11.
are constantly to be found only in true believers. This new birth of
regeneration or sanctification in man is so needful as that without it we
cannot be saved. The Kingdom of grace is the suburbs of the Kingdom of
glory: he therefore that walks not through the suburbs shall never enter into
the City. A man must first walk in the Kingdom of grace, or else he shall
never be admitted into the Kingdom of glory; no grace, no glory; no holiness,
no happiness; John 3.
no heaven, no heavenly honor; Except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God: neither in this woeld, or in the world to come.
Sanctification is an unresistable act of the Spirit; for when the holy Ghost
does intend to sanctify a man, he does so work upon him with his power, that
he shall willingly yield to the holy Spirit, how unwilling so ever his will be
by nature: for the body must first rot before grace shall reign without
disturbance. Note. Titus 3.5, 6, 7.
It is true indeed, that the corruption of our nature is abolished in baptism
in respect of guilt and condemnation, but not in regard of existence and being
of it: but in that it shall be no impediment of salvation to them that are
baptized with water, and the holy Ghost; for it is to such no Prince, but a
rebel only, neither shall it dam^e them, nor dominere within them, yet so
long as we live, sin will not die in us, nor be utterly abolished; Greenham.
for before there be an universal cleansing, there must ^e a dissolution of
nature, and death must end the conflict between the flesh and the Spirit.

And although those that are regenerated may be termed just and perfect, yet
it is only in comparison of the wicked, who are in bondage under sin, and
for that they are perfect in respect of imputative righteousness, because,
Psalm. 32.1, 2.
like infants they have all the parts of a Christian, though not the perfection
of those parts: all the seeds of saving graces are sown in their hearts; but
they have not the full growth of them in this life: sin will still remain
within us, but it shall not reign over us, and albeit holiness and sin be
contrary, yet may they be both in one subject, as night and darkness in the
air at the twilight, be remisly there, and neither of them predominant or
absolute victor: but remaining in continual combat. Now why the Lord does not
finish sanctification in man in this life, the reasons may be these, that we
might seek diligently after perfection, and more earnestly and ardently to
covet and desire it more and more, that in despising this world and the
vanities thereof, we might the more earnestly affect and contemplate our
heavenly Country and life, as knowing that our perfect sanctification shall not
be wrought till we come in Heaven: Vrsine.
and that thereby we might be humbled and exercised in faith, patience, hope
and prayers, and that contending and skirmishing with the flesh and the lusts
thereof, we might not wax proud with conceit of our own perfection, but daily
pray, Psalm. 143.1. Math. 6, 12.
Enter not into judgment with thy servants, O Lord, forgive us our trespasses:
and that we may exercise our selves in repentance all the days of our life,
knowing that there is no end of this warfare but in death. Thus does the Lord
continue us in his service, that we might exercise our spiritual wisdom,
Revel. 5.6.
Christian fortitude and magnanimity in defeating the wiles of sin, and the
plots of the devil, and like courageous Captains to contend against all our
spiritual adversaries, and finally in disdaining to give way and place to the
flesh, that abominable and filthy wretch. The Lord by this does show his
absolute authority over us, that he is not bound unto us, to perfect his
graces in us in this life; for then were it injustice in him not to do it:
Psalm. 145.17.
for God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and cannot
offer the least injustice: but God does this to manifest his mercy to us, and
to teach us thankfulness to him, who pardons our weak obedience, and
accepts of our poor endeavors, unperfect holiness, and imperfect
righteousness and perfection, our weak resolutions, our imperfect desires,
motions, and meditations; if they be faithful and entire, and directed to the
right ends, he for his Christ's sake does pardon all our defects, which argues
mercy on his part, and claymeth gratitude on ours. In this the Lord does
demonstrate his wonderful providence and power in protecting, defending and
conserving us against so many puissant and pernicious enemies, as we are
begirt with, notwithstanding our great unworthiness, weaknesses and
imperfections. Romans 11.29.
This work of the Spirit is never clean extinguished, and the gifts of God
are without repentance. The graces of God in his children are not as morning
mirts, but as well built towers to withstand the assaults of their enemies: let
us be persuaded in our selves, Phil. 1.6.
that he which has begun this good work of sanctification in us, will
continue, perform, and end it: for what should hinder? his good will is most
constant, and his might is over all, sin, Satan, and all the enemies of our
souls, must yield their power to his obedience; his eye is waking and all
seeing; his wisdom is infinite; his Essence every where; his power divine
without resistance, and his mercy endures for ever. What then can, what then
shall hinder his work of grace? he has joined us to Christ, Hos. 2.19.
who shall dis-joyne us? he has wedded us unto himself, what can divorce us?
he is with us, who can be against us? Christ is our King, we are his
subjects, we need not therefore doubt of his favor and protection toward us;
Matthew. 16.18.
he has built us upon a rock that hell gates shall not prevail against us;
by faith we believe in Christ, that faith is a rock, fixed and inviolable; 2 Timothy 1.1.
it will shine like a star in the night of adversity; it makes the elect
joyful under the show of sorrow, and quickens them under the show of death;
it heals them under the show of sickness, and enricheth them under the show
of poverty, and savours most like Camomel when it is trodden upon; and hope is
the anchor of the soul; it will endure both winds and waves, Hebr. 6.19.
and this worlds storms, and love is as strong as death. Know ye not, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.16.
that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
Know you not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you,
whom ye have of God, bought with the price of redemption? therefore glorify
God in your body, and in your spirits, 1 Cor. 6.19.20.
which are Gods: Examine your selves, prove your selves: know you not your
owneselves; how that Jesus Christ is in you, 2 Cor. 13.5.
except ye be reprobates? Thus we may assure our selves of our sanctification
by the undoubted testimony, and inward suggestion of the holy Ghost, assuring
our spirits of the same, and also by certain undoubted testimonies and tokens
of it; 2 John 3.8.9.
if therefore we do not commit sin with full consent of will, if we do not
continue in sin, to be led wholly by it, but when we do sin, Mark. 14.72.
to recover our selves, as Peter did, by true and hearty repentance, then we
may know, that we are not in the slavery of the Devil, Goade.
but the children of God; for he that believes that Jesus is Christ, and
borne of God, it is a certain token of his regeneration: 1 John 5.1.
hereby shall ye know the Spirit of God; for, every spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, 1 John 4.2.
the Son of Mary, and is the anointed King, Head, Priest, and Prophet of his
people, which God raised up for the salvation of the souls of the elect of
God; he that striveth to keep the Commandments of God, overcome and vanquish
the vanities, the vain allurements, and alluring enchantments and obstacles of
the world, and keep a constant course in piety, he is undoubtedly the true
child of God; he that keeps continual watch and ward over his heart, and is
circumspect in his walking, and fearful to offend God, and rather forsake the
world then God, he does plainly show, that he is the child of Grace, and
belongs to God and his Kingdom, and not to this world; to grieve for sin,
because it offends God, and hurts his own soul, is a notable sign of a
mortified heart.

A sanctified man does manifest the grace of his heart by sanctifying the name
of God, and by conversing with sanctified men; as also by seeking the
sanctification of others: Note.
For, a good man does love to communicate his goodness, and not to keep it
locked up in his own breast; it is also a notable and infallible sign of
holiness, when a man does more and more contend against his own sins and
wickedness, and labor continually to draw nearer unto God by holiness.
Lastly, when we feel the inward corruptions of our hearts, and a desire to be
dis-burthened of them, and avoiding of the actions of sin, and an anger against
our selves for sinning, do evidently show, that the Spirit of God has taken
possession of our hearts, and has begun to work a most happy change within
us. Where these graces are, there is also the God of grace, the Spirit of
grace; a man of grace; a true dying unto sin, and a living unto God: sin is
dismounted, the sinner is renewed; for Gods Image is restored. He that is thus
truly sanctified, is also glorified; for glorification is the communication of
true holiness, and happiness to them that are elected, called and justified:
For glory comprehends in it both holiness and happiness, holiness is one
degree of happiness, and happiness is the highest degree of holiness; no man
is holy but the same is happy; and no man can be happy, but he must be holy:
grace is the inchoation of glory, and glory is the consummation of grace; he
that sits in the throne of grace, is truly entitled to the crown of glory:
and it is one point of glory to be a man of grace, for a gracious man may
rightly be styled a glorious man.

Of Justification.
Justification is a gracious forgiving of sins, by the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
and Gods gracious acceptance, whereby he does for the merit of Christ's active
obedience, by faith received of us, account us just and pure, and honors us
with the crown of life; and in this respect we may be truly said to be just,
perfect and holy, because we stand clothed with the most perfect
righteousness of Christ, which is reputed ours, in which appearing before our
heavenly Father, we do receive a blessing, as Jacob did of Jsaak, Genesis
27.15.27.
having on his elder brothers garments; this may seem strange unto us, that
we should be accepted righteous for the righteousness of another: for albeit
this righteousness is Christ's primarily, and by way of inherence, yet it is
ours by Gods free donation, and by the application of faith, the head, and the
faithful his members, is all one mystical body; Romans 4.2.
and therefore the satisfaction of Christ pertains to all the faithful, as
to his members: the form or formal cause of Justification is not faith, love,
nor other virtue; neither is it an infused quality or habitual sanctity
inherent in us; Phil. 3.9.10.
but the righteousness of Christ considered, as it is reputed of God, is the
form of Justification, or the proper and only true form of Justification, is
the free imputation of the righteousness of Christ, by which the merits and
obedience of Christ are applied unto us, by virtue of that near communion
whereby he is in us, and we in him. Now God is said to impute righteousness
into a man, when he does adjudge, decree, and give it to him, and account and
reckon it as his own, and for the merit and worthiness thereof, does pardon,
acquit, and repute him righteous. Saint Paul expostulateth this doctrine with
the Galatians, whom he calls foolish for doubting it, Gal. 3.2.
saying, This only would I learn of you, receive ye the spirit by the works
of the Law, or by hearing of faith preached? Verse. 3.
Again, are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the Spirit, ye
would now be made perfect by the deeds of the flesh? where he admireth their
simplicity that seek righteousness in the flesh, but rather, and only by the
means of faith in Jesus Christ, because our justification is spiritual, and
not of the flesh; and this doctrine he concludes by an invincible argument,
Verse 26.
saying, that seeing ye are the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; we
are therefore also justified and made the servants of God by faith: For, says
he, we are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; and if faith be able
to make us sons, it must be also able to make us servants: for that which is
able in the greater performance, is able in the less. O sweet exchange! O
unsearchable worke-manship! O benefits surpassing all expectation, 2. Cor. 5.21.
that the iniquity of many should be covered in one just person! now Christ
bears our sins, and was made sin for us which knew no sin, not as if our
sins had been infused into him, and had been inherent and inhabitant in
him: but because they were imputed to him, and reputed his; as if they had
been committed by him, he supplying our place, as our surety, and mediator:
even so his righteousness is made ours, not as though his were infused, or
translated into us, as a thing inherent and inhabiting in us: but because it is
reputed ours, and imputed freely to us, as if we our selves, Note. We are the
righteousness of God in him, as he is sin in us, by imputation.
had wrought it in our own persons: for justification and remission of sins
are all one and the same, for to justify is for God not to impute sin unto us,
but to accept us for righteous, and to pardon, absolve, and pronounce us just,
for the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us. For so soon as the elect are
absolved from their sins, they are forthwith adopted into the right and
privileges of the children of God; the effect of justification, is peace of
conscience; that is, when we perceive our selves to be delivered from our
sins, before Gods Judgment seat, and the judgment of our own consciences:
Romans 8.1. Romans 5.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: and being justified
by faith, we have peace with God: Even that peace which passes all
understanding, whereas there is no true peace to the wicked, but they are like
the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up nothing but mud, filth,
and mire: Esaias 57.20, 21.
even so the wicked has no peace, says God. Again, our justification makes
us have free access to God by prayer, with confidence to be heard for Christ
his sake; for sin was the makebate and wall of partition betwixt God and us.
Now our sins are done away when we are justified, and therefore with
boldness we may approach unto the throne of grace, Romans 8.15, 16.
For we have now received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry Abba Father:
the Spirit it self bears witness to our Spirit, that we are the sons of
God. By which we conceive very great good hope in him, to whom we pray like
suppliants, that he will in his fatherly affection toward us, and in his good
time give us those things whereof we stand in need: justification also begets
patience in afflictions, and makes a man rejoice in the midst of his
tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces patience, Romans 5.3, 4.
patience proof, and proof hope, through the persuasion of our reconciliation
unto God, and our assurance that all things how bitter and grievous soever, do
work for the best unto them that love God, Romans 8.28.
and are pleasing unto him in their good actions. Now glorification is an
inseparable companion, and a notable effect of justification being freed from
sin, and made the servants of God; Romans 6.22, 23.
we have our fruit in holiness, and the end is everlasting life; for the
reward of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The obedience of Christ by grace imputed to us, and by faith
received of us, Note.
works in us a desire, care, and endeavor to obey God, and his death for
which our sins are remitted, works in us another death, whereby we die to sin;
and his glorious righteousness, wherewith we are invested, and made to be
reputed righteous, does purchase and merit for us eternal life and glory.

Remission of sins is a gracious act of God, whereby for the merits and
satisfaction of Christ, he does perfectly forgive both the fault and
punishment. Therefore Saint Paul says, That by him we have redemption, through
his blood, Ephesians. 1.7, etc.
even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace: Romans
8.1. Heb. 1.3.
and that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; who has
by himself purged our sins, and by whom the father has reconciled us unto
himself. Therefore it were absurd to think that the punishment is retained,
when the sin is remitted; for if the proper cause be defaced, then the effect
thereof must needs be abolished: if the body be removed, the shadow thereof
remains not: so if sins be pardoned, the punishment is remitted; as for the
crosses which the faithful suffer, they are not to be reputed as curses or
penalties of vengeance inflicted of God, as of an irefull and direful Judge;
but they are to be esteemed only as trials or as punishments of castigation
imposed of God: as a loving father desiring the welfare and weldoing of his
children, Revel. 3.19. Heb. 12.6.
As many as I love, says the Lord, I rebuke and chasten; he scourges every
son which he receives. The Lord tries us by afflictions as gold is tried
with fire in the furnace, he keeps us by the cross within our limits, as
water is held in with banks, Note.
and with the thorny hedge of troubles and vexations he keeps us within our
bounds and walks, being given by nature to break out and stray; therefore
David says, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy
word: Psalm. 119.67.
It is the Lord, which sends crosses to his children to save them, that they
perish not with the wicked world: Augustine.
Augustine says, that sorrows before pardon of sins are punishments of
sinners, but after pardon, they are trials and exercises of just men, and so
for death it self; the sting and strength thereof which is sin, 1 Cor. 15, 56,
57.
is abolished by the death of Christ upon the Cross, and therefore it is to be
reputed but as a trial or chastisement, whereby the Lord does humble us, and
teach us humility and the flight of sin, and does exercise and prove our faith,
fortitude, and patience. Note.
Justification is a most free act of God, and performed freely by God, without
coaction, or the least inducement by any dignity present, or foreseen to be in
us hereafter; for being absolute Lord of all, he may show mercy on whom he
list, Ephesians. 2.3.
for we are by nature all the children of wrath, and the vessels of the devil,
destitute of all true grace, Romans 5.
and subject to the curse of the Law: remember then that it is free in regard
of us, that did not, nor could not no way deserve it, and free also in respect
of God, who did freely devise and dispose the means thereof, and freely
works faith within us, by which we do apply it to us, and is justly
performed in regard of Christ, who by his all-sufficient merits did deserve it,
and by desert did acquire it for us.

Justification is also one absolute, entire, and individual act, it is only
acted in this life, although it be diverse times renewed and applied afresh in
us, as when the person justified does fall into sin, and repent: now though it
be a most perfect and plenary work of God, yet we come to the full persuasion
of it, but by degrees, and though God at once forgive a man his sins by an
absolute act, which admits neither increase nor decrease, yet that man receives
his pardon by such a faith, or such a persuasion of faith, as is not always
one, but is sometimes stronger, and sometimes weaker, ebbing and flowing like
the salt waters, sometimes appearing, and sometimes hidden; like the sun,
with a thick mist, or a duskie cloud. Now our justification may be perceived
and known three ways: First, by the suggestion of Gods Spirit. Secondly, by
faith, which is a certain assurance of persuasion of Gods love in Christ. Now
a man may assure himself of faith, if he love God for God himself; 1 Timothy
1.5.
and his neighbor truly as himself; for love accompanies faith, as the light
does the sun, indeed it proceeds from faith: for as one says, Gregory.
Such as is our faith, such is our love; a man may assure himself of a
justifying faith, if he do strive against his doubtings, and with an honest
heart do will to believe and unfainedly desire to be reconciled unto God, and
withal do use constantly the good means that God has ordained to beget and
increase it in himself: Gal. 2.16, etc.
for God accepts the will to believe for faith it self, and the will to repent
for repentance; the reason hereof is plain, for every supernatural act
presupposes a supernatural power or gift; and therefore the will to believe
and repent, presupposes the power and gift of faith, and repentance is in the
heart: for a man may come to be assured of his justification by certain
infallible signs and tokens of it: as when we see our selves by the
righteousness of Christ, of the free grace of God redeemed from death,
delivered from hell, and freed from the fearful condemnation of the wicked,
there is a joy most unspeakeable and glorious, wherewith our hearts must needs
be ravished: The second is the peace of conscience: while sin and the guilt of
sin remained, there was no peace nor quietness to be found, but fear
within, terrors without, and troubles on every side. But when our sins are once
nailed to the cross of Christ, and forgiven us, Note.
then the winds are laid, the waves are settled, the sea is calmed, the soul
is quieted, and imparked within the pales of peace. Again, we may know that
our peace is good, and that our justification is past with God; if we shall
find a promptitude and nimblenesse in our selves to do that which is good: For
when a man does find favor from God for the forgiveness of his sins, then
the love of God constrains him that joy which he receives, and puts new
life into him, Greenham.
and enforces him to the performance of those things which are pleasing unto
God; then his understanding is enlightened, his judgment is reformed, his
affections are bettered, his joys are in heaven, his desires are to
Christ-ward, his progress to Canaan, his course to Jerusalem, and his anger is
consumed upon his own corruptions: For we must know, that when God does
impute righteousness unto us, to prevent our damnation by sin, then he does
also infuse righteousness into us, to hinder the domination of sin; therefore
Saint Paul sath, 1 Cor. 1.30.
that Christ is made unto us righteousness, wisdom, sanctification and
redemption; and he tells his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11.
that they are washed, sanctified and justified: so then he that circumciseth
the foreskin of his heart by true repentance, he that warreth against his
own lusts, and truly striveth to serve the Lord in all his precepts, he may
know for certain, that God has cut the cords of his sins, and buried them all
in the blood of Christ; but let the ungodly and uncircumcised heart know, that
so long as they addict themselves to their known enormities without
repentance, they are not of the Kingdom of Christ, neither are they clothed
with the robes of his righteousness, but covered with the rotten rags of their
own wickedness; for those that are in Christ, Romans 8.1, 2.
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: they that are his, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof; Gal. 5.2.
but to live and continue in sin, is to take sin down from the cross, and to
put life and spirit into it: Luther.
For as one says, that a man may try and know whether he be incorporated into
Christ or not, by this; that as a man feels his heart cheered and sweetened
by the sense and feeling of Gods promises and favor, grounded and settled in
his heart; so such a man as no man is, but he that is justified, has forthwith
regard of his neighbor, Note. Lev. 19. Jam. 2.8.
and helps him, as his brother cares for him, lends him, gives him,
comfort and counsels him, yea, he is grieved if there be none toward
whom he may be serviceable; he is patient, tractable, and truly friendeth
all men; he does not esteem the temporal pleasure and pride of this life; he
judges no man; he defameth no man; he interprets all things for the best;
and when he sees not the matter go well with his neighbor, as that he
faints in faith, waxes cold in love; he prays for him; he reproves him;
he is sorely g^ieved for him, for any thing committed against God or his
neighbor; and all this proceeds from the root and juice of Gods grace: for
that the bountifulness, love and goodness of Christ, has sprinkled and
replenished his heart with sweetness and love, that it is a pleasure and a joy
for him to do good to his neighbor, and is grieved for his sins, as Samuel
for Saul's: 1 Samuel 15.35.
by these and such like works of grace, a man may come to a certain knowledge
of his justification, which how well worthy it is of our knowledge, they can
best tell, which feel most the comfort of it; and let no man think it
impossible to be discerned by man, because it is performed by God without man:
For, though it be acted by God in heaven; yet it produces many notable graces
in man upon the earth, by which it may be perceived as a Vine by her grapes; or
as a Lamp by her light.

Besides. Regeneration and Justification, have such relation and neerenesse one
to another, as that they seem to be almost but one act, caused and effected at
one instant of time: for when we are regenerated, then are we justified; and
when we are justified, we are then regenerate, and not before. These two
offices in our salvation being distinguished, rather by their names, then by
any special mark of difference in their several executions. Again, the
Apostle in his Sermon at Antioch, Acts 13.38.
concludes, saying: Be it known unto you, ye men and brethren, that through
this man Christ, Verse. 39.
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses: by him every one that believes is justified; so
that he absolutely denies the power of Justification to be in the works of
the Law, and does absolutely ascribe it to the power of faith in Christ; and he
gives a reason of this doctrine: for, says he, If righteousness be by the
Law, Gal. 2.21.
then Christ dyed without cause: So then the very cause why Christ died, was,
that righteousness might be imputed and apprehended by faith to all them that
believe; seeing that by works it is impossible: and therefore says the
Prophet David, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, Verse 2.
and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no
sin: so he thinks them most righteous, that have their unrighteousness
forgiven them, and them most holy, that have not their sins imputed unto them:
Romans 4.
The fourth to the Romans, the whole Chapter, is an earnest and sufficient
proof of this argument and doctrine; where the Apostle labors by direct
evidence to satisfy all doubt, as if he had fore-knowne the stiff and
unreconcileable oppositions of these times, against this doctrine of
Justification, in which Chapter he makes Abraham his instance, in whom there
was as much cause of boasting, and as much righteousness as in any other
particular, save Christ Jesus only; yet he there proves, that Abraham, upon
whom God had founded his peculiar people, was not justified by the
righteousness of his works; but that this faith was imputed unto him for
righteousness, and for proof alleges Scripture, Genesis 15.6.
And Abraham believed the Lord, and he accounted that to him for
righteousness: so that the matter of our justification is the righteousness
of Jesus Christ only; and the means of apprehending it, is only by faith.
This doctrine howsoever it is made strong and unresistable by many testimonies
of holy Scripture; and though it be zealously maintained by men of great
learning and religious judgment, yet it has endured violence, and suffered
disgrace, both by ignorance and envy; this age maintaining such oppositions of
error, as the ignorance of former times first occasioned; therefore at this day
this argument of justification is one of the maine controversies of the world,
the one maintain justification by faith only, the other by works; that
defending truth, this opposing it: and though a faithful man would be willing
to quarrel in defense of faith, Note. Psalm. 91.4.
faith being our shield of defense against all gaine-sayers, sin and the dwell;
yet know not how to give addition of strength to them that have already
exceedingly traveled in this manifest truth, and whose faithful pains have
maintained this quarrel, with valor and victory, against all opposition;
neither is it in the purpose of this business to dispute questions of truth,
but to deliver truth, as it is, by admonitions and plain teachings, to men of
simple and easy understanding, for whose Christian good these pains are
principally taken; whose simplicity might most easily be confounded in the
intricate search of cunning arguments, for these respects. And because all
contention and strife of words is in the hatred of my nature, I will as I find
it written down sparingly deliver my self in a large argument and strike
only one blow at the enemy of faith, that I may be known to be an enemy of
that enemy; and that by a familiar proof I may instruct the knowledge of them
that are less learned: For they that deny justification by faith, and approve
it by works would frame this argument from the testimony of Saint James, Jam.
2.17. etc.
who speaking of a general faith, does utterly disable it from the office of
justification: and therefore he says, that Faith without works, is dead in it
self; for as the body without the spirit is dead, even so faith without works
is dead also. Therefore, say they, that the Apostle concludes, that of works
a man is justified, and not of faith only. To this is answered, it is most
true that fruitless faith is dead, neither can justify, and that good works
are the spirit and soul of a living faith; for as the body without the soul,
is not a living man but a dead carcass; so faith without works is not living,
is not saving, nay, is not true faith, but only bears a general name: and
with Saint James we may conclude against all such faith. But if there be a
faith that has a necessity depending of good works, as necessarily as the
soul to the body, and the fruit to the tree, and that this faith declare it
self to be plentiful in good actions, the fruits of a living faith; we may
then with Saint James conclude against them: for he does not as they do,
disinable all faith in the work of justification, but only that faith which
is dead, Note.
and without works. So both opinions imply a necessity of works; the one as
the cause of justification, and the other as an effect in them justified.

It were easy to be large in numbering authorities, and in reporting such
distinctions and shifts as the deceived use in supporting their erroneous
opinions: they are but inventions, therefore without respect we will pass
them over, Note.
but advise the Christian Reader to beware of both extremes, and modestly and
moderately to understand the means of his justification, that his zeal carry
him to no extremity, but to the virtuous mean only, and not to ascribe all to
faith, and naught to works, but to give them both their necessary respects:
for as we are not justified but by faith, so our faith is not justified but by
our works: for if our works be not faithful, and our faith working, we are
not justified, neither can be saved. For when it is said, that faith only
justifies, it is meant and not denied that charity is joined with that faith
which justifies, being inseparably united unto it; but that only faith, and
not charity is the means by which we embrace Jesus Christ, our justification
and righteousness. As for example, the fire has heat and light, which
qualities cannot be severed in that subject; Note.
yet the fire burns by heat only, and not by light: now if they will reason
and say, if the heat of the fire only burn, Similitude.
then it burns without the light of the fire, but that it cannot do: such is
their reason against justification only, because it cannot be separated from
charity. Likewise, though the parts of man's body be joined together, and one
is not without another in a perfect body, yet the eye only sees, and the ear
only hears, and every part has his distinct office; and so has faith and
charity. Thus may the seeming difference between Saint Paul and Saint James
be reconciled: Heb. 11.
but such faith and works as Saint Paul means, justify us before God; but
such faith and works as Saint James means justify us before men; but God
does justify effectually, faith does justify apprehendingly, and good works
do justify declaringly; that is, we do declare our selves by our works unto
men to be justified: therefore good works do not precede a man to be
justified, but follow him being justified, as the effect and fruit of faith:
that is, our works shall be our witnesses what we are in heart, and what we
are in faith: Romans 4 22.23. Ephesians. 2.10.
but by faith we are justified and made righteous in the sight of God. Saint
Paul says not, that we are the creatures of God in Christ through good
works, but that we are created of God in Christ to do good works. Again,
you are saved by grace through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God; Verse. 8, 9.
not of works, least any man should boast himself. Math. 9.22, 29. Mark
5.34, and 10.52. Luke 7.50. and 8.48. Acts 26.18. John 1.12.
Our Savior Christ as it is in sundry places of the Evangelists recorded,
says often, thy faith has saved thee, only believe: believe only, and thou
shall receive remission of sins, and inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in me: as many as believe in me, to them has God given
power to become the sons of God: whosoever believes in me, shall not be
condemned, shall not perish, but have everlasting life; these be the words of
our Savior Christ: now Saint Paul says, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
Acts 16 31.
and thou shall be saved: Gal. 3.8. Romans 4, 3, etc.
God does justify through faith, we are blessed by faith: we are the children
of Abraham, yea, we are the children of God by faith; the righteousness of God
comes by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. If
therefore thou confess with the mouth of the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, for with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 3.24, etc.
and with the mouth man confesses unto salvation. We are freely justified by
his grace through faith, but justification is only proper to Gods children, so
that all profane and ungodly people are out of possibility to be justified
and made righteous in the sight of God: this is proved by Saint Paul to the
Romans, Romans 8.3.
Whom he predestined, them also he called, and whom he called, them also be
justified. And again, justification is a righteousness in the sight of God;
that is, such as have a true, a living, and a saving faith: and by faith we
do apprehend the righteousness of Jesus Christ. God is content to accept of
such in the righteousness of his Son, and to obscure their sins, and to make
them to appear, and stand before him, as actually and verily just, by his
imputative righteousness, as if they had wrought it personally, in the
practice of their own lives. If any make demand, how can these things be; I
answer with the Apostle, Verse. 33, 34. Romans 5.1.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? Therefore being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus far Saint
Paul, whereby we may see, that if justification and salvation should be
attributed to the merits of man's good works: it would occasion boasting and
glorying in the flesh, and challenging of our justification and salvation, as
due to the merit of our good works, and so much ab^te and abase the glory of
Gods grace, that grace should then no more deserve the name of grace; The
Scripture is full of proofs in this argument, look, Gal. 2.16. Romans
3.21.22.28 30. Act. 13.38. Romans 1.29.30, 31.
but if Justification and Salvation be as it ought to be, wholly given and
ascribed unto Gods grace and mercy promised unto us in Christ Jesus, which we
do apprehend and lay hold of only by faith, as the only isntrumental cause
under Gods grace, then is all the glory and honor of our justification given
only unto God, without any merit of man; and so as it is said before, is
concluded, that we mean not by faith only, to exclude the doing, but the
meriting of good works.

Seeing that none can be saved but those that are first justified, and seeing
none can be justified, but they that have a true, living and a working faith.
It behooves all men to have a principal care to have the assurance of this
faith, that so they may be sure to be justified, that they may be sure to be
saved. And because all men are naturally prone to deceive themselves with
flattery and favorable opinion of themselves and their own actions; because
Saint James, and so the Scripture, James 2.
in many places, does utterly dis-inable an idle dead and a fruitless faith,
from the office of Justification: it therefore nearly concerns all men,
seriously, and without private respect to examine their faith, and compare
their faith and their works together, that their works being good, those
works may justify their faith to be a living and a saving faith, and that
they content not themselves with a bare and common historical faith, the which
the Devil and the damned souls may have; but that their faith may be approved
good; by the sufficient testimony of their good works, without which their
faith cannot be good: For as the tree is known by his fruit; and as it is
impossible to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles: even so is our
faith judged by our works; and so it is impossible that good works should
proceed from an evil faith; or that a good faith should not produce good
works, good works being a necessary dependence upon a good faith. This ought to
provoke all men to an emulation of godly exercise, to contend to exceed in holy
actions, and to square and fashion all their works by their faith, Note.
and to make every act of theirs, a testimony that they are truly faithful:
For he that is not with us, is against us, and those works of ours that
witness not for us, will be witnesses against us, and will condemn us in the
sight of all men, that our faith is not good, or not at all; and that therefore
we are not justified, neither can be saved. This may judge all those actions
of men, that disproportion a good faith and a good conscience: For though men
flatter themselves, and promise peace to their souls, and think to be
justified and saved by a bare acknowledgment of God, and their common
historical faith; yet in a time, when they think not on it, Note.
their ungodly works will make war upon their souls, and bring upon them a
sure and a sudden destruction. Again, seeing justification is a means
ordained by God to bring us to salvation, this ought to move all men to a
faithful acknowledgement of Gods love, who only is the principal and first
moving cause in every circumstance of our salvation, and that we do
acknowledge our selves in great humility, to be altogether defective and unable
in the work of our own salvation, and that every grace in us, is both caused
and continued in us by the secret power of God, our selves being merely
passive, and moved to divine exercise by the only direction of the holy Ghost;
and therefore, that we do ascribe the honor of every good action to God, by
whom it is caused, and utterly disgrace our selves in our own estimation,
because Gods grace does lead every man to every particular action of
goodness. Note.


Again, seeing that by faith in Christ, God does both cancel and abolish our
sins, and repute us righteous in his presence; it does remember all men the
admirable degree of Gods favor, and the powerful operation of faith: First,
Gods favor toward us, he being pleased to forgive us our sins and deserts of
condemnation, and to give and impute the most absolute righteousness of his
dear Son, Christ, to all men upon this easy condition of faith, that such,
who have a true faith to apprehend him, shall be accepted in his favor as
sons, and shall appear in the presence of God as equally righteous, as if
themselves had actually performed righteousness in their own particular
persons: Secondly, Heb. 11.1, etc.
we are taught the powerful operation of true faith; that it is able to enter
heaven, and to apprehend and apply Christ and his righteousness, to reconcile
the favor of God unto us, and to satisfy his displeasure, to wash off the
leprosy and spots of our sins, and to put on us the garment of righteousness,
even Jesus Christ the Son of God, by whom, and through whom, we are
justified in the fight of God, and by whom also we shall be saved.

Let us therefore carefully endeavor our selves in a constant exercise of all
godly actions, not that we repose our justification in the virtue or merit of
our own works, but that by the testimony of our good works we may approve our
selves to be faithful; and that our faith is more than a common or a general
historical faith, even a living and a saving faith, which is, and must be the
only means of our apprehending Christ, who is the all-sufficient and only
matter of our justification; and let this be the only glory and pride of our
well-doing, that this witness of works shall gain us the reputation of Gods
servants; and that Gods faithful children here on earth shall esteem and
repute us to be of their fellow-brethren, then which, let us never desire a
greater cause of boasting; and this judgment of good men, must needs rise from
the testimony of good works, because there is an inevitable necessity of
consequence, and necessary dependence between faith and works, they being as
inseparable as the heat from the fire, and as necessarily depending as the body
and the soul; let this provoke us to a zealous forwardness of all godly
actions, because thereby we shall conclude the assurance of our justifying
faith, and thereby satisfy the desire of our own souls, and that doubt which
otherwise might justly be had of us in the common opinion of men: From this
argument must needs follow this conclusion, that seeing we have the fruits of
faith, Note.
good works; therefore we have also the cause of works, true faith; and that
therefore this faith thus working, is a tree of Gods own planting; this is
that use, this is that comfort and consolation which we shall understand and
find in the nature of our best deserving works; thus let us esteem them, and
but thus; let us therefore avoid and abolish that dangerous opinion of meriting
by works, because it is far better to want honor, then to force it from God
by violence; nay, let us rather disgrace our selves, then to dis-inable our
Savior Jesus Christ: for if righteousness be from our selves, it is not only
from him, and then would follow that absurd and blasphemous conclusion, that he
is not the only Savior; neither has perfected the work of man's salvation;
let us therefore do all the good we can: Note.
but let us repute our deeds, though never so good, to be the effect, and not
the cause of goodness in us; let us also confidently hold, that nothing is
able to merit salvation, but only the righteousness of Jesus Christ; let us
therefore utterly disclaim our selves and our own power, which is nothing but
weakness, and wholly ascribe all virtue, and all power to our Savior Christ,
for it is safer to give him honor, then to take it from him; and it will far
better become our Christian modesty to acknowledge our weakness and
infirmities, then proudly to boast and advance our selves above our deserts,
and worthiness. If therefore God by the moving of his holy Spirit, do incline
our hearts unto godliness, he will also give us grace to continue in the
same, and give us a desire and power in godly exercise; which when it makes us
grow plentiful in the demonstration of holiness, let us ascribe the glory
thereof unto God to whom it is due only; and only acknowledge our selves to
be that instrument, whereby his holy hand of grace is pleased to work with to
our salvation.

Of Faith.
FAith is the ground, the foundation, and the pillar of the truth, 1 Timothy 3.
and it is the constant assent of the heart unto those things which be taught
and promised by the word of God; for to believe is to assent unto the same
which we do hear: it is also a certain and sure persuasion of the heart,
What it is to believe that there is a God.
whereby we do believe certain things of God, as that there is a God, and
that there is but one and none other besides him: that he is omnipotent, the
creator of heaven and earth: that he is just, doing good to the righteous, and
punishing the wicked: that he is good, gentle, and merciful to them that do
amend their sinful life: that he is true, and keeps promise; that he is able
to perform what he has promised; that he is everlasting, and many other
things that be reported of him in holy Scriptures; and to believe also of
Christ; that he is the only begotten Son of God, the word of God, made
flesh, true God and true man, our only Lord, redeemer, Savior, and Mediator;
he was crucified, dead, buried, and rose again, taken up into Heaven,
touching his manhood; and that he sits at the right hand of the father; and
that he shall come at the end of the world to judge the quick and the dead;
and many other things set forth in the Evangelists and Apostles: and to believe
of the holy Spirit, that he is of the same Godhead equal with the Father and
the Son: that he is of the light giver of the minds, the comforter, teacher,
reliever, renewer, sanctifier and governor of the elect of God, this makes a
great matter to the salvation of man, how it be grounded in their hearts.
Secondly, To believe God.
that we do believe God also: that is to credit and to believe his word, as
the word of God, of whose truth being a thing altogether infallible, it were a
wicked matter to doubt: that we do believe also Christ the Son of God, as
when we do believe his Word to be the Word of the only begotten Son of God,
sent unto us from his Father: for Christ says, He that believes in me shall
have life everlasting; John 6.40, etc. Verse. 29. 1 John 3.23.
this is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. To believe
him as Christ the anointed of God, is to believe him in all points, his words,
his actions, and not to doubt any whit of any his sayings; we should not only
believe of God, and God, but also in God; and to believe in God is to direct
all our hope unto God, and with sure confidence and trust to depend upon his
goodness. This third degree of faith rises upon the first two; for whosoever
do believe of God, and believes God also aright, cannot choose, but assuredly
and with all his heart depend upon the truth and goodness of his promise, for
otherwise it is no Christian faith, but a false faith, which is not faith, but
opinion: John 14.1, 11, 12.
for Christ says unto his Disciples, Let not your hearts be troubled: ye
believe in God, believe also in me. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me. Verily, verily I say unto you, h^e that believes on me, the
works that I do, the same shall he do also. By which words he requires
belief and trust in him as well as in God the Father. This Christian faith is
only true and necessary to the obtaining of everlasting salvation: but we must
understand that the nature and disposition of God is such, that no unfaithful
person can please him; for how should the unfaithful person please him, who is
the most true and faithful of all? thereupon comes that saying to the
Hebrews, Heb. 11.6.
that without faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore no man can be
blessed without faith; for how can he be blessed, which pleases not God? but
such that have no care for their everlasting salvation, they be not compelled
by any necessity to believe, for they may perish without faith. But they that
do desire to be saved must of necessity think upon faith, John 3.16.
without the which they cannot be saved. Our Savior said, that God so l^ved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to that end, intent and
purpose, that whosoever do believe in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. It is also necessary for every Christian man to know that
Christ the Son of God is sent into this world from the father, to redeem and
save sinners: Christ says, This is everlasting life, to know God the Father,
John 17.
and Jesus Christ the Son whom he has sent. This knowledge is so
incomprehensible to man's understanding, that it seems unto him mere
foolishness, because the wisdom of the world is not capable to comprehend it:
therefore it is necessary that it be attained by faith, by the power of the
spirit, By this me know that Christ is the Son of God. John 6.29.
We ought likewise to believe all those things which do concern the
resurrection, the ascension, the Priesthood, and everlasting Kingdom of
Christ; and that he sits and rules at the right hand of his Father, and for
his coming again to judge, with the rising to judgment and life everlasting
to come, all which matters cannot be comprehended without faith.

Romans 4, 5, and 6. chap.
We are required also of necessity to believe those things which the holy
Spirit does work in our hearts to our salvation: when as Christ does forgive
us our sins through faith in his blood, and so does justify us, and when he
by his grace makes us the children of God by adoption, 1 John 1, etc. Acts 15.
Gal. 5. Romans 10. 1 Pet. 5. Romans 5. Heb. 10.
when he does purify our hearts, and makes us able to do good works, and
to love our Christian brethren; when he stirs us up by godly motions to
call upon our Father by prayer, to withstand Satan, to be constant and
persevere also in troubles; all those things be so wrought in the Elect of God
by the virtue of the grace of Christ, that none of them can be done in any man
unless he has Christian faith: this is a great point of wisdom in man to
know from whence these gifts do come. This consideration does admonish us,
that they which do lack true faith, must cry unto him who does only work the
same in our hearts by the operation of his holy Spirit: Faith is the gift of
God, and we do receive it into the soul by the instrument of the body.
for so wonderful great is the grace, and the lovingnesse of God toward us,
that he does not only promise everlasting life and salvation unto us wretched
sinners, if we do believe in him; but he does also give them this gift, that
they may believe in him: therefore it is a clear matter that we have nothing
in our flesh whereof we may glory. Let them therefore which have but a weak
and a small faith, pray with the Apostle, Lord increase our faith. Let them
which be strong in faith, acknowledge the gift of God, and magnify his grace:
if they do see any that do lack the same gift of faith, let them pray to God
for them, the author and giver of faith, that he will vouchsafe to give them
also the spirit of faith. It is manifest that true faith is the gift of God,
How Gods gifts be given.
and Gods gifts are bestowed two manner of ways: some he gives immediately,
without any ministry or help of man; as the soul, life, understanding, will,
appetite, and those things which do help toward the sustentation of our
life, love, hatred, fear of evil, power to see, to hear, to smell, to taste,
and to touch; and those outward things, as the Sun, Moon, light, day, night,
air, summer and winter, etc. and some things the attained by the means of
man's ministry and industry, as a secondary means: as the body, the nutriment
of the body, corn, bread, wine, clothes, and such other like, yea, civil
government, public quiet, by true justice in the magistrate, arts, sciences,
tongues, usage and experience of things. Again, some things be so given of
God; that he which receives them, does not perceive that he receives them;
as when the soul is joined to the body, and life put into it, and some things
are received with perceivance of man's understanding, as those things be which
are given to men of ripe and good years, and they may be perceived either in
body, as corporal gifts, either in spirit, as spiritual gifts. Whether faith
be given without measure.
Consequently, we must consider also that all and singular gifts of God, as
well corporal as spiritual, whether that they be given immediately from him,
or by some mean are bestowed in a certain measure; for no man in all points
has granted unto him such a perfection of any gift, but that he may be made
more perfect in the same gift: for whosoever is wife, is so wise in measure,
that he may yet be made wiser in that; of that sort is the gift of faith, and
all other the gifts of God granted unto men: this the Apostle witnesses,
saying, that no man esteem of himself more then he ought; Romans 12.
but so esteem himself, that he behave himself discreetly according as God
has dealt to every man the measure of faith. Again, the Apostle says, that
there is given to some a greater, to some a lesser measure of faith; Ephesians. 4.
yet there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, One selfsame, but
not all one measure.
one Father of all, which is above, and through all, and in you all. Wherefore
the faithful be not alike in those things which do grow upon faith, and do
follow the same, as in knowledge, in love and fear of God; also in hope, love
to our neighbors, patience, and study of godly life. Again, Measure of faith
sufficient to salvation. 1 Cor. 12.
the measure of faith is so divided by the providence of God, that to the elect
there is no less given him then is sufficient to salvation: For he gives a
sufficient proportion to every one; for he that has the greater, has never a
whit the greater salvation, nor he which has the less has never the less
salvation; the truth thereof is set forth in Exodus, and they gathered Manna,
some more, Exodus 16, 17, 18.
some less, and unto him that gathered much remained nothing over, and unto
him that had gathered little, there was no lack. True faith whereof we do
speak is not given unto all men; therefore it is that the Apostle says, 2
These. 1. Romans 10.16. Esaias 65.12.
all men have not faith, all men do not believe the Gospel; for Esaias says,
Lord, who has believed our sayings? To obey the Gospel, is to assent unto it
with true faith, and to repose our selves in it, with a good and assured trust;
therefore the true faith of Christ is not in all men, that is to say, it is
none of those common gifts of God, which are commonly given unto all men; but
it is one of the special graces, which are only given unto some few, by the
providence of God: of this kind be also the heavenly and spiritual gifts,
which be necessary unto true and everlasting felicity; such as faith, hope,
charity, patience, the study of godliness, and the fear of the Lord, and the
like.

No doubt, this gift of faith is a singular gift of God, but it is not enough
for a man to have it, When it is once gotten, it must be nourished when we have
it.
unless that after he has it, it be continually conserved, increased and
practiced throughout all our life: for faith is of the same nature that the
virtues be, which be naturally powered into us, and be necessary for the
conservation of this present life, which it is not sufficient to have received
them, unless they be also furthered, amplified and increased in us: as for
example, the power of reason, which we received at the first birth of our
flesh, which must always be nourished, advanced, and exercised to the
necessary uses of our life: Note.
So this Christian faith, which is, as it were, a certain reason of our second
birth and new man in Christ, must like an infant, be fed and furthered, to the
spiritual life; the increase of faith, is when it grows and increases in
the hearts of the faithful, whereby it waxes stronger and stronger by the
grace of God, that we be now able to believe those things, which before we
could not believe, although they were never so true, and set forth in the Word
of God, that Christ is the Savior of the world. 2 These. 1.
The Thessalonians increased in faith abundantly: this increase of faith does
depend upon the increase of the knowledge of Christ; so the faithful be
admonished of Saint Peter, that they should increase in the grace and knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Pet. 3.
the increase of faith may be perceived in the mutual love toward our
brethren in their patience and suffering of troubles: So the Apostle meant when
he said, For as much as your faith increases, 2 These. 1.
and the charity of every of you one toward another abounds; so that we our
selves do glory of you in the Church of God, for your patience and faith in
all your persecutions and tribulations which you do suffer, on the other side
staggering and careful fear, does argue a weakness of faith; so it was said
to Saint Peter, Why doubtest thou, O thou of little faith? Mat. 14.30, 31.
and they which do start back in the time of temptation, persecution,
affliction, or tribulation, are tried to be weak in faith, and do prove
themselves so to be: so the faith of St. Peter was weak, Mat. 26.71, 72.
when he was proved by the maidens word, and denied his Master. And seeing that
there is given to all the elect of God, a measure of faith from the Lord, and
that the same is not all one, in all men, and yet sufficient for every one unto
salvation; and is such, that it is not perfected in any certain space of time,
or years, but that we must travel in it, and endeavor it as long as we
live in this world: as soon as faith is conceived by the gift of God, Faith
breeds true repentance.
it produces and brings forth, as her daughter, true repentance, and that so
soon, that it seems to bring it with her from heaven, as her waiting maid,
whereof there be many examples in the holy Scriptures: Zach^us, as soon as he
was come to the faith of Christ, said, Luke 19.8.
Lo, Lord, I do give the one half of my goods to the poor, and in case I
have beguiled any body, I do restore, four times as much; which words do
manifestly declare the judgment of true repentance; and when a great sort of
people began to believe the saying of St. Peter, Acts 2.37.
they had remorse in their hearts, and brast out, saying, What shall we do
brethren to be saved? and many of them that began to believe, came to the
Apostles, and disclosed their doings, moved, no doubt, by the spirit of
repentance.

The true knowledge of God.
Faith does take hold of the true knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ his
Son, which the world here cannot attain unto. The holy Spirit does kindle a
light in the hearts of the faithful, so that they may most certainly know
those things to be most true, which they do believe in faith, so Saint Peter
said, to whom shall we go? Joh. 6.68, 69.
thou have the words of eternal life, and we are sure and believe, that thou
art Christ, the Son of the living God; and Christ said unto them which
believed in him, John 8.
if you abide in my word, you be verily my Disciples, and you shall know the
truth; thereof comes that assuredness of faith, Note.
whereof mention is made before. In Gods case and Religion, all things are
blind and doubtful to man's natural reason, but unto faith they be certain
and clear, and thereby we know, that we be the children of God; faith does
take hold of the gifts of God, which we do request of him in prayer, the
attainment of the which, cannot be hoped for, nor trusted upon without we ask
in faith; James 1.6.
wherefore Saint James says, Let him ask in faith doubting nothing, for he
that is doubting and wavering, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed to and f^owith
the wind, and carried with violence. And Christ says, Verily I say unto you,
Mark. 11.23 24
whatsoever you request in your prayers, believe that you shall obtain it, and
it shall befall unto you. Again, faith does work in him that is justified, a
peaceable, quiet, good, and contented conscience toward God through Christ: so
the Apostle testifies saying, Therefore being justified by faith, Romans 5.
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: without this faith it
is impossible that we should have a quiet conscience toward God; for as is
said before, that by faith we do apprehend the grace of reconcilement and
justification, purchased for us in the blood of Christ: faith must needs
therefore work in us the invocation, adoration, Romans 10.
and worship of him whom we do believe in. How shall they call upon him,
says the Apostle, in whom they have not believed? and the blind man which our
Savior made to see, when he had said, Lord I do believe, John 9.38. The
confessi^n of truth.
he worshipped him immediately in whom he believed. For by faith we do
confess the truth that is once believed and known of us. So the Apostle does
join faith and confession together, for to believe with the heart justifies,
and to acknowledge with the mouth makes a man safe, having the selfsame
spirit of faith. At the point of death we do by faith commend our souls and
spirit unto the Lord. So did the thief upon the Cross, Math. 27. Acts 7.59.
and Saint Stephen also when he was stone: this is the last work of faith
toward God; for after the yielding up of the Spirit once, there is no longer
place nor use of faith. These be therefore the works of faith toward God,
first the love of God, a good conscience toward our neighbor, hope of things
to come, a boldness to repair by prayer to the Throne of grace, invocation,
adoration, and worship, confession of the truth, obedience, perseverance, and
the yielding up of the Spirit to go immediately unto God, the faithful are
comforted in the Lord by the benefit of faith: whereupon Christ also when he
admonished his Disciples from whence they should seek their comfort in
adversity, he said, John 14.1, etc.
Let not your hearts be troubled; believe in God, believe also in me; for there
is in none greater goodness, in none greater mercy, in none greater knowledge
of those things wherewith all our hearts be tormented, in none more knowledge
and power to help and aid then is in God himself; 2 Cor. 1.3.
so that he is justly called the father of mercies and God of all comfort. For
he that is faithful does apply himself to the goodness of God, and by it we
do perceive the efficacy and sense thereof, and it brings comfort unto the
troubled heart. By faith we do believe the promises of grace, and do by it
embrace those things which be spoken of God, in his word: faith does also
mortify the concupiscence of the flesh, and makes a man's mind humble and
lowly, and works many other notable matters in the hearts of the believers.
This excellent and rare jewel, is faith, the excellence whereof is surpassing
precious, wherewith we must of necessity be endued to become perfect men. Heb.
11.
Saint Paul says, that Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things which are not seen. This is a special jewel, and happy is
the man that has it but in quantity comparable to a grain of Mustard seed: it
is the ground of things hoped for; as if it were said, whatsoever cross or
calamity vexes us, if we hope for relief and ease, we must ground it upon
faith, otherwise our hope is no hope: It is the evidence of things not seen,
Note.
it is the patefaction or laying open as it were, of the very thing, though
far from our sight, which is expected and longed for in hope, the thing hoped
for through it, is as it were, Ephesians. 1.
evidently seen, and laid before our eyes, we may upon this ground build so
certain a foundation of hope of the joys to come, as if we were settled in
Heaven it self with Christ. It is indeed the assurance of all our comforts in
the promises of God; and whenever we lay this evidence before the celestial
Judge by prayers, for therein it appears to be faith, or not to be; he cannot
but allow it so current, lawful, and effectual, as that whatsoever we ask,
though we see nothing to answer our hope, yet we may assure our selves that
we shall obtain our desires at such time, and in such sort, as shall be most
fittest for our necessities; in so much as we may be bold to say, we are
already partakers of that we look for before it come, Psa. 34.8, 9, 10.
because coming it will come: and our faith which is the ground and the
evidence of things hoped for, shall not be in vain: and therefore, in what
danger so ever we are, we must open this evidence, even our faith unto the
Almighty in humble suit and hearty prayer, that as his promises are manifold,
for the relief of his children, and his means infinite; so will he accept of
our faith, Psalm. 91.
wherein we stand assured that he is God all-sufficient, full of mercy and
truth, able and willing to grant what we ask: and first we must consider, that
there is no dissembling with God; neither can we brag of this rare jewel,
and yet bring forth the fruits of infidelity, which then appears when we
show our selves impatient at the chastisements and corrections of the Lord, and
when we grudge to stay the Lords leisure for help; and when leaving the means
commanded by God we run to worldly and forbidden means; these things can we
not shroud nor cloak under any color or pretense: for he that searches the
heart, finds every dissimulation: Acts 5.
he found out Ananias and Saphyra in their hypocrisy, and gave them the reward
of death; because they would seem to have faith, and dissembled. Learn of the
good King Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.5, 6.
whose success of his faith was such, as it effected what he desired; namely,
in his sickness he recovered health, and had fifteen years added to his
life, after the Lord said by his Prophet that he should dye. This is a
comfortable example to be applied to the case of him that is deeply diseased
within with sin, and without with crosses and calamities, wherein if he seek
the Lord in this lively and working faith, he will offer himself unto him,
The efficacy of faith.
and make him see the issue of his hope, even delivery out of all his troubles.
The prayers of the faithful are of wonderful effect; for thereby God shows
himself to be a God of great compassion, and exceeding in mercy toward all
believers; and at an instant he hears and in his good time for Christ his
sake, he grants our desires, as is seen in this example of Hezekiah, whose
prayer no sooner issued out of his mouth, but his petition was granted, and the
Lords mercy came to meet, as it were, the Kings miseries: whereby we may
learn that the faithful soul being in distress has God as present as if
Heaven and earth were conjoined together. No distance of place, or process of
time can prevent God to perform his will in a moment of time: but where prayer
is, and faith the ground of it, there is the presence of God, Esaias 49.
who gives presently, or delayeth for a time, according to his will, always
for the best, and good of the faithful petitioner. God delayed to grant David's
request a long time, suffering him to live in banishment, and in the
wilderness, crying; yet at the last, in an acceptable time, he delivered him
and made him King over Israel: Genesis 41.1, etc.
so Joseph made long suite and prayed unto the Lord being in prison, and no
doubt the Lord heard him, yet in two years he gave him not his liberty: but
when the time was come, wherein occasion was administered for his advancement;
he then not only gave him freedom, but also made him viceroy, as it were,
over all Egypt; thus does God often try our faith, whether it be sound or not,
and after proof thereof by patience, then it has the reward. Infinite
examples might be shown of the force of faith, Hebr. 11.
how it stopped the Lions mouths, how it qualified the heat of the fire, and
how faith gave David the victory over Goliath; but let these suffice. And since
that faith and humble prayer are so effectual; 1 Samuel 17.46, etc.
let us not rest dissolute and careless to seek it, but with all diligence
and carfulness, let us ask it of the Lord, and he will give it us
abundantly, so shall we be able to perform and bring mighty things to pass
beyond humane expectation; the examples in the Scriptures are common, they are
infinite, which may confirm our faith: seek therefore the Scriptures, the
sweet Manna of our souls, they will show us the admirable things which have
been wrought by lively faith; let us therefore assure our selves, that this
God, who has done for us wonderful things, will be present also at our
prayers; and if we ask faithfully, he will bring such things to pass for us,
as shall seem mavelous to the eyes of men. Now, since this excellent sweet
and surpassing jewel is the gift of God, and that he gives all his rich
blessings freely and for naught; let us not fear to frame our prayers unto him
in all humble obedience, and go freely to the throne of Grace, and he will
give us at large, what we shall desire in faith. In brief, faith is the hand
of the soul, which lays hold of the promises of Christ in the mercy of the
Almighty; she has a bright eye that pierces heaven, a holy ear, a clear
heart, and a sure foot standing upon a rock; she is the strength of hope, the
trust of truth, the honor of amity, and the joy of love; she is rare among the
sons of men, and hardly found among the children of women, but to the sons
of God; she is the assurance of their inheritance, and in the children of
grace, she is the promise of their portions; she looks toward heaven, but
lives in the world, in the souls of the elect, to the glory of the Electour;
she was wounded in Paradise by a dart of the Devil, and healed of her hurt by
the death of Christ Jesus; faith is Gods blessing, and man's bliss, reasons
comfort, and the glory of virtue.

Of Hope.
AFter the knowledge of God, which is by faith, there follows hope, love,
patience, invocation, and fear of God, obedience, and such other like, which
do belong unto true godliness; wherefore like as before is noted those
things, which a godly person ought to consider of God, and to conceive by the
knowledge of him, and his Son Christ: So it is meet to speak of those things
which do follow in the knowledge of God in us, without the which, true
godliness can take no place; for those things which be recited before of God,
cannot do us any good, unless we do depend upon him in sincere faith, hope,
charity, patience, invocation, reverence and obedience: for as of true faith is
said sufficiently before, What is the hope of Christian men. Romans 1.24, 25.
it is not amiss likewise to note something touching hope; for the definition
of hope, it is an expectation of things to come: for the Apostle says, that we
are saved by hope, but hope which is seen is no hope, but if we hope for that
we see not, then do we with patience abide for it, looking and hoping to be
adopted the children of God, and to look for the delivery of our bodies which
is to come, by the resurrection and glorifying of the children of God;
therefore the hope of true Christians, is the assured and unmovable
expectation of those things which be promised unto us in Christ Jesus, 1 Pet.
1.13.
Hebr. 6.17, 18, 19, 20.
whereof nothing does appear to us in this life, but we shall have the full
fruition of our constant hope in the world to come, at the coming of our
Savior to deliver us, and to bring us out of the midst of evil, the rising
again of our bodies to glory and life everlasting, salvation and felicity, the
fellowship of Angels, yea, of Christ himself, and the perfect sight and
knowledge of God besides, that which neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor the heart of man conceived, which is provided for the elect of God:
Christian hope is bred of faith, and comes of the knowledge of God, because
we do know that God is in creating Almighty, in governing wise, in preserving
just, in helping good, and in his promises true and sure, and we do credit
his promises, and the same which we do credit and believe in faith, that we
do look for also with a fast and a firm hope; for the Apostle says of
Abraham that he believed in hope against hope, Romans 8.
because he knew that God is so mighty, that he is able to perform,
whatsoever he promises; faith comes not of hope, neither does knowledge come
of hope, but hope is bred of the faith of the promises and knowledge of the
might of God, the Prophet says, They shall hope upon thee, O Lord, Psalm. 9.
which have known thy name; for that thou do not forsake them which do
seek thee, and do hope upon thy mercies in Christ.

But for as much as it is not possible, that the heart of a sinner, which is
troubled for his sins, and afflicted for Christ, should be faithful without
hope, whilst he is in the very temptations and sufferings of his troubles,
the beginning of hope cannot come of proof; wherefore that which the Apostle
says, Romans 5.3, 4.
that proof breeds hope, is to be understood, not of the beginning, but
rather of the increase of hope, and makes up and perfecteth it: for the
Apostle means not that troubles laid upon men for Christ's sake, should decay
the hope of the glory of the children of God, God is our hope and strength, a
very present help in trouble.
but enforces it the more, making it thereby more supreme and fast: so then the
beginning of hope comes of faith, and the knowledge of God. For as much as hope
is of things invisible and to come, and not of things visible and present; it
falls out oftentimes, that the hearts of them which live in hope be sore
assaulted, and their hope so impaired in their troubles; miseries and
afflictions, that they need aid, succor and strength, whereby it may be
cherished and encouraged, lest it do utterly decay and perish, yea, the very
tarrying in the deferring of those things which we do hope for, is so
troublesome, irksome and loathsome, that though there be no temptation at all
joined with it, yet it is alone sufficient to drive a man's hope unto
desperation, unless it be upholden by the divine assistance of Gods grace;
Prove. 13.12.
this Solomon meant, when he said, the hope which is deferred and prolonged,
does afflict and torment the soul: who does not see what great need we have
of the helps and ratifying of Gods grace, especially, if we do consider the
weakness of our flesh, ready to mistrust and despair, and the understanding
of our own sins and unworthiness, according unto the which we do esteem
our selves, as the refuse and cast-awaies of the people, the very shame and
filth of all men, to stand steady in assured hope, but by the virtue and might
of God; therefore let us see whereby the hope of a Christian man is nourished
and strengthened: The Christian hope is nourished and confirmed from God. Job
39.
for it is a clear case, that both hope and faith are the special gifts of
God; so that the strength and nourishment thereof, does come specially from
God, in as much as he which gives us the hope, does also nourish and confirm
the same in our hearts; God does not forsake his gifts, as we do read of the
Estrige in Job, which departs and leaves her eggs in the ground, and cares
not for them, whether that they be saved or do perish, but he does nourish,
increase, and preserve all those gifts which he has once given unto any man:
Note.
and this he does by the operation of the holy Spirit, whereby he does
cherish, feed, defend, and strengthen both the faith and hope, in the hearts of
the Elect. For this is the sure anchor of our salvation which the devil may
endeavor, but never break the cable hold thereof, for God does fasten and
make it tough by his grace and virtue; so that he does preserve the same by his
strength and aid, which could not be wrought by all the power and might of man.

The party which is in hope when he feels the strength of temptation, Prove.
15, 8.
he flies immediately unto his Lord God, by prayer, earnestly requesting that
he may be preserved, and not to be overcome by temptations: so the Lord warned
his Disciples in the garden, when the ppwer of darkness was at hand, saying,
Math. 26.41.
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; indeed the spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak: and he himself has taught us in the Lords
prayer, to say: Luke 11.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. In the Psalms of
David, the Prophet had made such forms of prayers, whereby he sought comfort
and strength to his hope, by praying and singing, to be delivered out of all
his troubles. Therefore the faith of Gods promises, and the knowledge of the
truth and might of God to perform, Romans 4 13, 15.
does minister much help and strength to the traveling hope, for the hope of
things to come is nourished by the milk of the same faith which breeds it, and
the strength of faith, is made the strength of hope. Augustine. cha. 14.
Augustine in his book of meditations writing in the confirmation of his hope,
says, There be three things which do strengthen and confirm my heart, that
no lack of deserts, no consideration of my own baseness, no regard of
heavenly blessedness, can thrust me down from the high expectation of my
hope, for my soul is fast rooted therein. Now to know the matter why we must
consider and weigh three things, in which our whole hope does consist, the love
of adoption, the truth of Gods promise, and his power to perform what he has
promised, and if thus to believe, we may be assured, that God in his exceeding
great love has adopted us his children. Patience of afflictions. Romans 5.1, etc.
Again, the very sufferance also of afflictions, wherewith the Christian man
is tran^aled, and tried, does make hope lusty and strong, as appears by the
Apostle: and on the contrary, impatience does decay that hope that is, The
example of godly persons.
and makes it unprofitable unto us, the examples also of godly men which have
holden on their hope firm and sure in all kind of their temptations and
troubles; even till the very end, have received the crown of immortal life;
as the reward of their hope, Heb. 11.
may profit much to the cherishing and establishing of our hope, as is showed
in the Epistles to the Hebrews, and straight adds in the beginning of the
twelfth Chapter. Heb. 12.1, 2.
Therefore seeing that we have so great a number of godly fathers our
witnesses, let us shake off that burden of sin, which sticks so fast unto
us, and would press us down; and with joy and sufferance, Verse. 3.
let us run the race appointed us, ever looking unto Jesus the Captain and
finisher of our faith; and for the joy that is set before us, let us with hope
endure the cross: hope keeps and stays the workman in his work, and
desperation is full opposite against it; for when it does but slightly assail
the mind of man, it puts into him a fancy to forsake his work he has
begun; but as long as a man does continue fast his hope; Gal. 5.1.
it suffers him not to forsake his work, so the steadfastness of hope makes
up the work. For like as hope to gain riches and wealth keeps the workman
in his work, and makes the Merchant-man to venture; so the hope we have of
the felicity to come, keeps the Christian man in the course and study of
godliness: for like as faith is effectual by love, so it is made also
effectual by hope, without which it is utterly void and dead; for what shall
it profit to believe of those things which are to come, if we have not hope of
them to come: Note.
Faith does also establish patience in her bold: and makes us invincible, when
we be strengthened by hope to hear constantly all adversity with patience; so
hope and patience by an intercourse of aid, do one help the other, and the
one does strengthen and support the other in continual troubles, crosses and
afflictions, and contention of godliness, it makes the mind of him which is
in hope, quiet in the midst of his troubles, which the counsel of man's
wisdom is not able, to work, but does rather disquiet the traveled
conscience then appease it: hope grounded upon the certainety of Gods promises,
keeps us safe from confusion: so witnesses the Apostle, that Hope makes not
ashamed, Romans 5.5.
because the love of God, is shed abroad into our hearts by the holy Ghost,
which is given unto us: but the hope of the world is so vain and fond that it
does daily deceive and shame her darlings.

But blessed is the man which hops upon thee, O God, Psalm. 84.5. Prove. 16.20.
Psalm. 4.5. The blessedness of them which be in hope, is of God
and blessed i, he that puts his trust in the Lord: blessed is the man whose
hope is in the Name of the Lord. This blessedness is not to be attributed
neither to the hope, neither to him that hops, so that of n^cessity it must
be of God. Hereof the Scriptures does often testify of God, that he is well
pleased with them which do hope upon his mercy: as the Prophet David sings,
that he is good to them which do trust upon him: Blessed is he that has the
God of Jacob for his help; Psalm. 146.
and whose hope is in the Lord his God. What favor, grace, and benefits can
they lack, which do feel of his goodness, and do well please him? is not
that true blessedness, when a man pleases God and finds him favorable, and
loving in all things, how can he but have mercy upon them, which do hope upon
him, which do please him, those he wills well unto; yea those he does
specially regard and esteem. Great plagues shall remain for the ungodly,
Psalm. 32.
but whose puts his trust in the Lord, mercy imbraceth him on every side:
Again, the eyes of the Lord be upon them that do fear him, which do hope
upon his mercy. Again, our fathers hoped upon thee, Psalm. 22.4. Psalm. 37.5.
and they were not confounded. For look what the hopeful man is not able in
his necessity to bring to pass of himself, that will the Lord their God, in
whom they do put their hope bring to good effect and end, They called upon
thee, and were helped; Psa. 22.5. Psalm. 17.7.
they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. Thou art the Savior of
them which puts their trust in thee, and keep them as the apple of thine
eye, and hides them under the shadow of thy wings: Prove. 28.25.
and Solomon says, He which hops upon the Lord shall be saved. Here may we
see how blessed are they which hope upon the Lord; they do well please him,
and they shall feel his goodness in time convenient, Psalm. 91.
whom the mercy of God does compass and embrace, and upon whom his eyes be
bent, can be neither forsaken nor confounded, but does deliver them, preserve
and save them by the might of his power; whereupon there comes the
blessedness of them that do hope upon God, but in the mere goodness and
truth of God, whereby he is so affected toward them, that he cannot forsake
them, which do hope upon him, and that without any desert of ours, so that our
heart be clean toward him; and that they hope heartily upon that which they
do hope for, for no other respect, but only in respect of his goodness,
mercy, and truth.

Of Patience.
THe virtue of Patience is commendable and profitable, yea, and also necessary,
and is adorned with many excellent gifts: The singular gift of patience.
Patience is a kind of heavenly tenure, and a sweet temper in the spirit,
whereby the soul is held in possession which restrains nature from exceeding
reason in passion; she attends wisdom in in all her works, and
proportioneth time to the necessity of matter; she is the poison of sorrow in
the hope of comfort, and the paradise of conceit in the joy of peace; she is
the Imitator of the incomprehensible, in his passage to perfection, and a
servant of his will in the map of his worke-manship; she pacifieth wrath, and
puts off revenge, and in the humility of charity, She is esteemed of God
amongst the best virtues.
shows the nature of grace; she is beloved of the highest, and embraced of the
wisest, honored with the worthiest, and graced with the best: Therefore let us
commend patience as it is of it self commendable, and commanded by the
testimonies of holy Scriptures; therefore we will note somewhat of patience,
which may profit not only others, but my self also: For, when I do write of
those things which concern our salvation, I do as well instruct my self as
others. Patience is a kind of perseverance, when we do willingly and
constantly suffer those things that be hard, painful, sorrowful, and to our
loss; every suffering of adversity is not straightway to be termed patience;
for there is no man in the world, It is requisite that a patient man do sustain
and suffer his adversities willingly.
but he suffers many things that he would not do, if he could any ways
withstand it; yet they are not to be called patient men, neither are they
called impatient, which do suffer adversity, but do sustain it with an evil
will, and discontented mind; for it is impatience when we do unwillingly,
strivingly, and with anger suffer that which we do suffer. Patience is not
only the willingness, but also the long sufferance of evils; for the virtue
of patience consists also in the constancy of suffering: there be many that
are willing to suffer for a while, but they be soon weary, and become
impatient, unto them cannot be attributed true patience, which must be both
willing and continual: like as the faith of them which do believe for a time,
and do shrink away at time of temptation, is no true faith, nor their love
true, which does love to day, and hate to morrow, or hate upon every slight
occasion; neither is it true patience, to be patient for a season, Note.
and after a while, to change their patience into impatiency; for the truth of
virtues cannot stand without constancy.

Patient abiding is constancy to suffer and susstaine all adversity.
This patient abiding, is the virtue and constancy to suffer and sustain all
adversity with patience: it is impossible that any man can be void and free
from the disposition of anger; but by impatience we be overthrown, though we
be but slightly assaulted, and thereby are driven from the purpose of
godliness, righteousness and truth: but the parts of true repentance, be the
calmness which is not stirred to anger; the assured looking for Gods aid and
help, is the constant abiding in that which is right, just, true, and good,
and the virtue to suffer and sustain all troubles and adversities; by these
parts, patience is made perfect, and in the faithful man, there cannot one of
them be wanting, without the hinderance of the whole: true patience is
commanded unto us in holy Scripture, Romans 5.3.4.
as to the Romans: Rejoice in tribulations, knowing that affliction works
patience, and patience trial, and proof hope; whatsoever things be fore
written, they be written for our learning, that we may have hope through
patience and comfort of Scriptures; Gal. 5.22.
and to the Galatians, the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
gentleness, goodness, faith, against such there is no Law; and to the
Thessalonians, 2 These. 1.4, 5.
In so much that we our selves do glory of you in the Churches of God, for
your patience and faith in all your afflictions, tribulations, and persecutions
which ye suffer, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for
which ye also suffer: Luke 8.15.
and our Savior Christ himself commending patience unto us, says, that the
seed which fell upon the good ground, be they which with a pure and good heart
do keep it, and bring forth fruit through patience; again, Luke 21.19.
through patience, says he, you shall possess your souls.

Again, by the Scriptures we are advised, counseled, and admonished to
patience, as to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6.
Let us be have our selves, says S. Paul, in all things as the Ministers of
God, in much patience, in troubles, in necessities, in straits and dangers, and
so forth; and to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.1, 2.
I which am in bonds for the Lord, beseech you walk worthily, in the vocation
whereunto ye be called, with all weekenesse and humbleness, with patience,
forbearing one another in love; therefore put you on, says he, Col. 3.12, 13.
as the holy welbeloved and chosen of God, the bowels of mercy, gentleness,
humbleness, soberness and patience, forbearing and forgiving one another,
even as Christ forgave you: Again, 1 Timothy 6.11.
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, meekness, patience:
exhort, rebuke them, says he, with all patience, 2 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 2.2.
and to Titus, Advise the elder men to be watching, grave, sober, sound in
faith, in charity in patience: and to the Hebrews, Take heed that ye faint
not, Heb. 6.12.15.
but be ye followers of them which through faith and patience inherit the
promises, and through patient abiding he obtained the promise, 2 Pet. 5.6, 7.
and Peter says, hereunto apply all your endeavors, and declare your faith in
your virtue, and in your virtue knowledge, and in your knowledge temperance,
and in your temperance, patience, and in patience godly life, in your godly
life, brotherly love, and in your brotherly love, charity to all men; thus we
may see how we are commanded and admonished in the new Testament to patience;
as also there be many places in the old testament, wherein the great virtue of
patience is highly commended unto us, especially in the Psalms of David, and
the Proverbs of Solomon; all which be to this purpose set forth, that we
should be moved and stirred up to the study of true patience, by the
commandment and authority of Gods Word, that we being exercised and tried
thereby, we may constantly without fear or fainting persevere and continue in
the course of holy exercise and godly life, Psalm. 91.14, etc.
and after long continuance have the reward of eternal life.

Now will I call to remembrance some of those holy Fathers, in which the godly
person may, as it were, in a glass, behold, and consider the patience of the
holy Saints, and appoint himself ever to endeavor and follow the same. And
first, and before all, and far surpassing all others the example of patience,
God.
is in God himself, who in his infinite mercy and goodness, Whereas we have
deserved his indignation malligrace and curse.
toward us, does bring forth his Sun, upon both the good and the evil; that
he suffers and directs the times and seasons, the services of the
elements, the increase of all things that are bred, to serve the turns and use
of the wicked and the unworthy, as well as the worthy and godly, and in his
long suffering, bearing with the wicked and unworthy, whereas of his just
judgment, Christ.
he might destroy them all at once, but the mirror of example of Gods
patience, is showed unto us in Christ our Savior, whose whole life does
represent unto us a wonderful degree of patience in all points, and thereunto
we ought all of us to frame our selves, as many as do glory of his name, and
do show to be Christians and professors of his faith and Religion: 1 Pet. 2
20, 21, 22, 23.
For Saint Peter says, If you do abide and continue patiently in well-doing,
there is grace and favor with God; for thereunto you be called: for Christ
also suffered for us, leaving in an example to follow his steps which
committed no sin; neither was there any guile found in his mouth, who spoke
no evil when he was evil spoken of: when he suffered, he threatened not, but
yielded the revenge to him which judges righteously. We should follow the
example of Christ's patience, not only in his sufferings; but in his upright
living also, and in patiently abiding the afflictions laid upon us for our
uprightness, and other ways. And thus we be moved and provoked unto true
patience, both by the examples of our heavenly Father, and of Christ our
Savior, his only begotten: by the following of whom we shall declare our
selves to be the children of God. Let us therefore follow the bright shining
virtue of God, according to the proportion of his heavenly grace: such a one
was Noah, who living in the midst of the malice of the most wicked and
corrupt world, Noe. Genesis 6.5, 8, etc.
being armed with the virtue of patience, continued in the trade of godly life,
and innocence until the end: and proceeded still in the work and making of
the Arc well near an hundred years; notwithstanding that he was mocked to
skorne, and overthwarted of the wicked. In the History of Abraham, we shall
find many goodly examples of patience; there we may see what he did upon the
faith and obedience of God, which was wrought and lightened by this virtue of
patience: otherwise he could not have patiently forsaken the Land wherein he
was born, his kindred and his fathers house, and undertaken to wander like a
stranger in an unknown Country, at the will and Commandment of God: Genesis 20.
Genesis 12. Abraham.
likewise through patience he continued to dwell under the tents in the
promised Land, like as a stranger, and patiently abode the accomplishment of
the promises, Gen, 25.8.
which was to come and so departed out of this life, and dyed in a quiet age.
Who can sufficiently express with what patience he used the matter, when he
was commanded of God to offer up his son Isaac: Genesis 22. Isaac.
and did not Isaac declare a singular patience, in that he did patiently abide
and suffer the froward and stubborn stopping up of his wells and water-pipes
by the Philistines his enemies, Genesis 26 15.
and that he did patiently forbear to do any thing against his son Jacob,
Genesis 27, 28, 29.
when he so deceived him with subtilty, and whereas he thought to bless his
eldest son Esau whom he loved, he bestowed his blessing upon Jacob.

Jacob. Genesis 28.5.
And Jacob declared himself also to be patient, in that he did obediently obey
his parents, and was contented at their commandment, to forsake them, and to
travel like a stranger into Mesopotamia, Genesis 29. and 30. and 31.
yea and did there oftentimes patiently suffer the unjust and wrongful dealing
of his uncle Laban, and that he did so humble himself to appease the
displeasure of his brother Esau; Genesis 33.3, 4.
yea and he did so patiently digest, and yet not without grief, Genesis 34.25.
the cruelty of his sons showed both against the Sychemites, and against his
most dear son Joseph. Joseph. Genesis 37.22.
The like spirit of patience is also set forth of Joseph, in that he did not
revenge the malice of his brethren, being well able to have done it, but did
exceeding much good for them: neither did disclose the wickedness of his
mistress, Genesis 39.20.
although he were clapped into prison for her wickedness; but he did constantly
conceal it, Moses.
and abode patiently the help of God. Who is able to utter the great pains
Moses took, being strengthened by the virtue of patience, in the delivering,
leading out, and governing of the Israelites, a most froward and stubborn
people, who often murmured and rebelled against him: Genesis 11. and 12.
what mislikings, and contradictions he sustained of them; yea, and of his
own brother and sister; Numb. 12.3.
so that in Numbers, it is not spoken for naught, That he was a man most
afflicted, being most meek of all men on the earth.

After Moses comes King David, a notable example of patience, in that he did
by the virtue of patience overcome the rages of King Saul's most sore and
continual persecutions, 2 Samuel 16.5, 6, 7, 10.
and in that he patiently forbear Semei, when he railed upon him, and would
suffer that no wrong should be done unto him. Who can wonder enough at the
exceeding patience of Job? for which he is called, Patient Job: when he was
hurled down from the highest degree of earthly felicity unto the very botome
of misery, Job.
he neither did nor spoke any otherwise than became a godly and patient man, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7.
he tare and rent his clothes, he shore his head, he fell to the ground and
prayed, saying: Naked came I from my mothers womb, and naked thither shall I
return again; the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the Name of
the Lord. And when he was stricken with most pestilent and poisoned blaines and
sores, from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head, Job 2.9, 10.
and that his wife said unto him; stand thou still in thy integrity? curse
God, and die: he did not for all that speak any one word of impatience, but
said: Thou have spoken like a foolish woman; we have received good things at
the hand of the Lord, why should we not then suffer the evil? After the
Prophets, and Christ Jesus our Savior; there follows the patience of the
holy Apostles and Martyrs, yea all the holy Saints have wrestled in this field
of patience: Mat. 5.
of which some have sustained scorns, and stripes, fetters, and imprisonment,
and some have been stoned, sawne, and put to death with the sword; some have
wandered and gone about in Goats and beasts skins; poor, needy, vexed, and
afflicted, which the world was not worthy of; wandering in wilderness, in
mountains, in caves, and in dens. Thus setting before our eyes all this
company of patient godly men; let us both imitate and endeavor their patience
and righteousness, and cast off the heavy burden of our sins, wherewith
we be encumbered, Heb. 12.1, 2.
and with patience and alacrity run the race, and gain the reward, and in
spite of hell gates do the will of God, and wholly endeavor our selves to
attain the felicity which is promised us, which is eternal life.

And for as much as the godly in this world, must by many troubles enter into
the Kingdom of joy: who perceives not how necessary this use of patience is,
to bear constantly, Proof requires patience. Romans 5.
all adversity for the truth of God? It is required of the faithful, that they
be sufficiently proved and tried in the faith of Christ, and no man can be well
tried by troubles but through patience: for as the Apostle says, trouble
breeds patience, and patience works the proof or trial of men; for it is
not possible, Luke 21.19. By patience we do save our souls.
that being once under the cross, we should any otherwise save our souls but
by patience: wherefore our Savior says, In your patience you shall possess
your souls: therefore we must in this life strive against sin, the world,
and the Prince of the world, if we do not strive we shall not overcome, and
in case we overcome not, we shall not be crowned; and we cannot overcome
without patience: and though notwithstanding that charity bears the chief
swing in the common course of man's life, for the nourishment of peace and
concord, yet unless there be adjoined patience withal, there cannot continue
any quiet betwixt nearest and dearest friends; for unless quarrels and
offenses be borne and kept off by the virtue of patience, no love amongst
friends can long endure; for what straighter band is there then that betwixt
man and wife, whereby two are made one flesh? Math. 19.5.
and yet unless that both their minds and stomachs be armed with patience,
the one shall not be able to bear the conditions, contradictions, and cumbers
of the other, and so the unity and concord betwixt them might soon be broken:
but impatient hearted men, they do stir great variance, strife and
contention, and do break the tranquillity of quiet and peace; Patience is the
gift of the holy Spirit.
in this respect we may well call patience the preserver, yea, the repairer of
peace, it cannot worthily enough be expressed how large, how notable, and
necessary the use of true patience is, all which does stand upon the strength
of men's desires.

For without patience, all the rest of our virtues will be altogether
blemished; therefore in any wise, let us not stay until we have attained true
patience, the mistress and governesse of all our affections, which keeps us
within the lists of a contented mind; howsoever it fares with the outward man:
this patience therefore which we must seek and embrace in all things, must be
a joyful acceptance of our miseries, not as compelled, but cheerfully
resting under the burden of our adversity, which then, although it seem to
make us figh, by reason we see no end of the grief; yet it shall in the mean
time, cloth us with spiritual joy; for patience stays the patient man from
fainting in any distress, yea, when neither friend, counsel, Hebr. 6.12, etc.
nor any comfort appears, then is patience the remedy, which like a mighty
Giant, bears it out with a godly courage; true patience loves the
afflictions which she suffers, and if we do attain to this patience, then
shall we give praise to God in the midst of our miseries, and commit our
selves to his providence and care in all our troubles and adversities; neither
can poverty keep us back or hinder us from commending highly the great bounty
and goodness of Almighty God, who is able to restore and bring us out of all
our afflictions: the mother of this precious and admirable jewel, Romans 5.4, 5.
is tribulations, afflictions, persecutions, poverty and crosses; patience
begets experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; it is
concluded then by the holy Apostle, that tribulation makes not ashamed: Faith,
whereof we have spoken before, is the evidence of things not seen, which so
works in time of tribulation and affliction, Psalm. 22.4, 5.
that it assures the afflicted, that his delivery is easy and at hand, his
comfort and relief is coming: So that tribulation and affliction seasoned
with faith, works patience, and a contented tolleration and sufferance of the
misery present, which patience brings forth experience, namely, it has
proof of Gods continual providence, wherein he works mightily beyond all
humane expectation and mortal reason of man's capacity; the great joy, ease,
comfort, relief, and release of all the faithful afflicted members of Christ,
and that by so many and admirable means, that of this experience springs
hope, which works through the same experience by an undoubted assurance, that
such success will follow patient expectation: So that faith, hope and
patience, appears to be the whole furniture of a true Christian, which being
joined together in man, he shall find, that as faith is the ground of things
hoped for, and makes them, as it were, present before our senses, and our
selves as certain of them, as if we were already possessed of them; so hope
makes us attend the time of delivery, restraining our corrupt natures from
practicing any unlawful and forbidden means, for the supply of that we look
for, and having the working of faith and hope, those two singular virtues in
us, there is no place of impatience, of grudging, of grief, nor of desire to
seek sinister devices, for ease or relief, but sets down his rest and
resolution to be as cheerful and full of joy in distress, Dan. 3.17.18.
as in any prosperous events whatsoever: So said the three children: when they
went to the fire, though God would not deliver them; yet would they not
dishonor him, so resolute and patient was Job, who said, though he kill me,
yet will I trust in him, such is the fruit of true patience; it is necessary
that we be tried with affliction, and delay of comfort, to the end that we
should be well armed with these virtues, and have experience how God in his
providence works for us, yea, we shall find, that as the promises of God
are irrevocable, firm and sure: so is our faith and hope grounded upon God and
his promises, also stable and sure, and shall have the reward which is eternal
and everlasting life. To conclude, patience is the gift and grace of Christ,
the true virtue of Christianity, it is the praise of goodness, and the
preserver of the world, and rests upon the providence of God, to the exceeding
comfort of the afflicted.

Of Prayer.
WE be charged by the Commandment of God, to offer unto our Lord God,
thankesgiving and praise, who says, Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm
50.14.
and I will deliver thee; this calling upon him, is a point of service required
of us, and does serve to the glory of his name: for he says, thou shall
glorify me; Verse. 15.
we be therefore as necessarily bound to pray and call upon the name of God, as
we be bound to the study of his obedience and service: this prayer and calling
upon the name of God, is not only profitable unto us, but also necessary unto
godliness and exercising of our faith: for without faith, we cannot truly
call upon the name of God, Romans 10.13, 14
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved; but how shall
they call upon him on whom they have not believed? whereby it manifestly
appears, that study and use of prayer is an exercise of our faith; in this
respect we are specially, by the providence of God, required to ask such
things of him, as our necessities do require; he could liberally bestow on us
all things unasked for, Before thou prayest, prepare thy soul, and be not as
one that tempts God.
as he does to the Reprobate, and other living beasts, but his will is to be
called upon of his children, to the intent that they should practice the
assured trust of their hearts toward him, and be the more out of doubt of his
goodness and promise, when they do obtain that, which in faith they do
desire at his merciful hands; he which does truly pray unto God, does accuse
and esteem himself unworthy, and therefore does submit himself only and
wholly to the will of God. Psalm. 34.16.
The holy men of God, when they pray, do power out the ferventnesse of their
hearts before the Lord, with most earnest meditation and wayling, accuse and
judge themselves; they do beseech the mercy of God; they do express the
sorrow of their heart with crying and lamentation, and also in words do set
forth Petitions and Prayers: but generally prayer is the lifting up of the
mind and heart unto God; for prayer is the devotion of the heart in the
turning unto God, by godly and humble affection and bewayling of an afflicted
heart, whereby the aid of God is most humbly besought; When prayer is in season.
whether we do the same by words, or by wayling, or sighs; we are to pray
in due season with regard of mind, upon reasonable cause, correspondent and
proportionable to the present necessity and case; James 1.5.
and therefore Saint James says, James 5.13.
If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God: again, If there be any
among you afflicted, let him pray: is any merry? let him sing Psalms; if we
consider the parts of prayer, which be to ask, to request, and to beseech, to
lament, and to make more, to cra^e aid, to make intercession for others or our
selves, 1 Timothy 2.1.
to praise and give thanks, we shall easily understand when the time serves
to pray; our wants shall declare unto us, what is to be desired and demanded at
Gods hand, the conscience for our sin does enforce us unto prayer, to obtain
forgiveness for our sins, and to turn away the wrath of God from us: the
slanders and rebukes offered of the reprobate and ungodly do make the
afflicted and miserable to burst out into wailing and lamenting, trouble and
affliction does instruct us when we ought to crave and desire aid and help
from God; Psalm. 34.14. 1 Timothy 2.
Charity and pity do move us to make intercession for our neighbors, and
brethren, that be fallen into adversity or otherwise subject unto temptation,
and the anger of God: the perseverance and continual supply of the benefits of
God, and the zeal of his glory: do stir us unto praise and thankesgiving,
and where there is no feeling of these things in the heart and mind of man,
Without feeling of these things our prayers will not be heard of God.
there is prayer in vain, and out of season, at what time soever it be made.
The Christian man is both Lord and master of times and seasons; so that he may
pray freely at all times and in all places, where and when he lift, at his own
liberty, u^^o his commodity and necessity, levelling his prayers in all things
unto the right mark, which is to work and proceed religiously, faithfully and
truly with his Lord God; having regard of his own and his neighbors
necessities and good, he cease not to pray in his heart, which cease not to
do good.

The necessity of prayer is either spiritual or temporal: the spiritual
necessity, Two kinds of necessities in praying. Note.
is of things which do concern a godly mind, soundness of religion, and
desire of salvation. By this we be compelled to ask of God, a good and right
spirit, the gift of faith, trust in hope, forgiveness of our sins, patience
in adversity, continuance of true godliness, and the like; without which we
cannot be saved. Our corporal necessity is the same which concerns the
sustentation of our life; as the nourishment of our body, aid, succor, and
releife in all our wants and necessities. Therefore we do say in the Lords
Prayer, Give us this day our daily bread: and when we do desire the health of
the sick and diseased, and the ease and delivery of the afflicted and
persecuted, and the preservation of them which are in peril and danger. In
Prayer there be requisite certain outward behaviors and gestures, which do
declare a lowliness and an humble submission unto God: as that of Daniel, who
fell upon his knees three times a day and made his petition, Dan. 6.10. Luke
22.41.
and praised his God. And our Savior Christ prayed upon his knees in the
Garden: Ephesians. 3.14.
and Saint Paul fell upon his knees when he prayed for the Churches of the
Gentiles. Others do lift up their hands toward Heaven, 1 King. 8.22.
as we read of Solomon, that prayed unto God before the Arc. Others do cast
up their face unto Heaven; Mat. 26.27.39.
and others do lie grovelling upon their face, as Christ also did. Others do
pray and humble themselves in hair and sackcloth as David did, Psalm. 35.13.
Jonas 3.6.
and as the King of the Ninevites: and some prayed unto God sitting, as Elias
did sitting under the Juniper tree: 1 King. 19.4.
and David prayed also sitting before the Lord. The Publican whose prayer God
heard, 1 Samuel 17. Luke 18.13. 2 King. 20, 2.3.
he prayed standing; and smote his hand upon his breast, and said, God be
merciful unto me a sinner: and Ezechias prayed, lying in his bed. Therefore,
whether we do fall upon our knees, or lie grovelling upon our face, or in
ashes, hair, or sackecloth; either sitting, standing, or lying or walking, so
that we do pray earnestly, Jam. 5.15, 16, 17.
faithfully, and substantially, with humble and contrite heart and mind, no
question it will be acceptable and well pleasing unto God. Acts 10.31.
Almsdeeds no doubt does commend and set forth our prayers well unto God; as
we may perceive by Cornelius, unto whom the Angel said, Thy prayer is heard,
and thine Almsdeeds are had in remembrance in the sight of God: Note. The
manner of praying.
For that godly disposition is acceptable unto God; which has both mercy and
well-doing joined withal. The manner of praying peculiar to Christians, is,
when we do offer our prayers unto God the Father, by our Lord Jesus Christ
our only Savior and Mediator, and faithfully deo desire to be heard for his
sake: thereunto serves the promise of Christ, in John, saying, Verily, verily,
I say unto you, John 16.23, 24.
whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he shall give it you. Hitherto ye
have asked nothing in my Name, ask and ye shall have it, that your joy may be
full. John 14.13.14.
And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I accomplish, that the
Father may be glorified in his Son. Then if thou call, Esaias 58.9.
the Lord shall answer thee; if thou cryest, he shall say, Here I am.

It is an exceeding great benefit of God toward us, in that he requires us to
confer with him familiarly, by pious prayer; he bestows upon us the gift
and the fruit of prayer: great is the force of prayer which is poured forth on
earth, but has its working in Heaven: the prayer of the just is the key of
Heaven; prayer ascends up from us to Heaven, and deliverance descends from
God to us: prayer is the shield and buckler of the faithful, by which they
repel all the fiery darts of their adversaries; the anger of God is also
repelled by the prayers of the faithful. Our Savior himself prayed; not that
he had need to pray, Ephesians. 6.16, 17.
but to commend unto us the dignity thereof: prayer is the tribute of our
subjection, because God has commanded that we should every day offer unto him
our prayers as a spiritual tribute. Prayer is the ladder of our ascension unto
Heaven; for it is nothing else but the souls traveling unto God. It is the
sword of our defense; Eccles. 35.17, 18.
for the soul of him that continues in prayer is secure and safe from all the
assaults of the devil: for God does always hear the prayers of the
faithful; if not according to their desire, yet to their salvation and profit:
and we may assuredly hope, that either he will give us that which we ask, or
else that which he in his wisdom knows to be more profitable for us: for God
gave us his only begotten Son, that infinite and most excellent gift, we
being not worthy of it, nor he being not entreated thereunto; what will he
then deny us, if he be entreated by earnest and faithful prayer? We cannot
doubt of the Fathers hearing, or the Sons interceding, upon all occasions: we
may with Moses by prayer enter into the Tabernacle, Numb. 7.89.
and consult with the Lord our God, and we shall speedily hear his divine
answer. Luke 9.29.
Our Savior Christ was transfigured when he prayed; so are there many changes
wrought in the souls of the faithful in the time of prayer: for prayer is the
light of the soul, and oftentimes leaves him in joy, whom she found in
despair. With what face can thou behold his Majesty, unless thou do first
worship him, Eccle. 53.1, 2.
who sends that glorious light for thee to look upon? how can thou at thy
table fall to thy meat, unless thou do first worship and give praise unto
him, who in his bounty bestows those good creatures upon thee? with what hope
dare thou commit thy self to the darkness of the night, and be safe from
the dangers of the day, unless thou do first fore-arme thy self by
faithful prayer? what fruit can thou expect of thy labors, and success in
thy travels, unless thou do first worship him, and commit thy self to his
gracious care and providence by prayer, Math. 7.7.
without whose blessing all labor is unprofitable and vain? If therefore thou
want temporal blessings, ask in faith, and it shall be given you: if thou
desire Christ, seek him by prayer, and thou shall find him: if thou
desire that the gate of divine grace and eternal salvation, should be opened
unto thee, knock and it shall be opened, and if in the desert of this world
the thirst of tentations, and the penury and want of temporal things afflict
thee, come with devotion unto the spiritual rock, 1 Cor. 10.4.
which is Christ, and strike it with the rod of prayer, and thou shall feel
the streams of divine grace to cool the thirst of thy penury: Genesis 8.21.
offer the sweet smelling and acceptable sacrifice of prayer unto God, and his
wrath shall cease from thee: converse with him every day by faithful prayer,
which is the spiritual conference between God and the devout soul; prayer
pleases God; therefore invite the Lord to the house of thy heart by earnest
prayer, and he will be thy guest, and not forsake thee. Psalm. 29.2.
Whosoever desires to be heard, let him pray with wisdom, with fervency, with
humility, with faith, with perseverance, and with confidence: let him pray with
wisdom for such things as tend to the glory of God, the good of his neighbor,
and the salvation of himself: God is omnipotent, therefore do not thou in thy
prayers tie him to means, God is most wise, do not thou in thy prayers ascribe
him an order; let not thy prayers break forth rashly, but let the conduct of
faith guide thee, which has respect unto the Word; therefore such things as
God has absolutely promised in his Word, pray for absolutely; and such things
as he has promised with condition, as temporal things, To the reprobate and
ungodly person.
pray for with condition; and such things as he has not promised in his Word,
in no wise pray for: God does often give in his wrath, that which in his mercy
he does deny; therefore follow the example of Christ, who resigned his will
wholly unto God: pray with fervency; for how can thou desire that God should
hear thee, when thou hear not thy self, but the tongue out-runneth the
mind? Would thou have God mindful of thee, when thou art not mindful of
thy self? God will not hear thy prayers, without the affection of the heart;
John 4.23. Luke 6.12. John 17.1.
the mind must be so inflamed with the heat of cogitation, that it may far
surpass what the tongue expresses; and this is to worship in spirit and
truth; for such worship the Lord requires: Christ prayed in the mount, and
lifted up his eyes toward heaven: So must we turn away our mind from the
creatures, and turn them unto God; for otherwise thou do injury unto God, to
pray unto him, to attend unto thee, when thou art not attentive unto thy self.
And seeing God dwells in the hearts of the faithful and godly, there needs
not always words, because he is present even with the thoughts; Luther.
oftentimes one sigh moved by the holy Ghost, and offered in the spirit, is
more acceptable to God, then long repetitions of prayers, where the tongue
prays, and the heart is plainly dumb: let him pray with humility, and place
no confidence in his own merits, but only in the grace and mercy of God.
Christ being the Temple of the divinity, at his passion he cast himself to the
ground, Mark 14, 35.
and prayed; behold how that most holy soul humbled it self before the divine
Majesty: let us pray with faith, the sooner one prays, the more profitable,
the oftener the better, the more fervently, 2 Cor. 6.
the more acceptable with God: let us pray with perseverance; for if God delay
his benefits, and does not presently give them, he commends them unto us, and
does not deny them: the longer things are desired, Matthew. 21.22. The efficacy
of faithful prayer.
the sweeter and the more acceptable they are, being obtained: let us pray with
confidence of heart, that is, ask in faith without doubting, and thou shall
have what thou desire, either ease, relief, redress, or comfort; the
examples are many, they are infinite, set forth in Scripture, of our godly
Fathers, Prophets and Apostles, amongst which is declared the wonderful effect
of prayer, Josh. 10.12, 13.
that at the instant request of Joshua made unto God, the Sun stood still in
the midst of the sky the space of one whole day, until the people of God had
revenged themselves upon their enemies: and Elias prayed unto the Lord that it
might not rain upon the earth, 1 King. 17 1. and 18.1. Jam 5.17, 18. 1 King.
17.22.
and it rained not for the space of three years and six months: and again,
he prayed, and the sky gave rain, and the earth yielded her fruit. Again,
Elias by prayer unto God, 1 King. 18.37, 38.
raised up the dead child of the widow of Sarepta, and at his prayer fire
falls from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering; the wood, Genesis 20.17.
stones, dust, and water: at the prayer of Abraham, God healed King Abimelech
his wife, and his hand-women, and they bare children: Isaac prayed unto God for
his wife, because she was barren, Genesis 25.21.
and the Lord well heard him; and Rebecca his wife conceived, and was
delivered: Genesis 32.11. and 33.
Jacob prayed to God that he might be delivered from the hand of his brother
Esa^, and the Lord heard him, and reconciled him to his favor, and embraced
him, fell on his neck, and kissed him: Exodus 8.12, 13. Exodus 9.28, 29, 33.
as often as Moses prayed unto God, he was well heard; when the frogs at his
prayer were taken away from Pharaoh, and the flies, the hayle and thunder
ceased, the locusts were rid away, Exo. 10.18, 19.
the Amalechites which were the enemies to the people of Israel, were overcome
by prayer: the Lord, Exo. 17.11.13.
at the prayer of Moses, was appeased with Israel, with whom he was angry for
their grievous offense in setting up a golden calfe: his sister Miriam, at his
prayer, Exodus 32.11.
was healed of her leprosy: the wrath of God, Numb 12.13. Numb. 14.19, 20.
when he went to destroy the Israelites, which murmured, and desired to
return into Egypt again, was at the prayer of Moses pardoned: by the prayer
of Moses, Numb. 21.7, 8. Judge. 6.
the people were cured from the fiery serpents: Israel being brought low, and
distressed by the Midianites, cried unto the Lord, and was delivered: Manoah,
the father of Samson, Judge. 13.
prayed unto God, that the Angel might again appear, which was granted him:
Samson being sore athirst, Judge. 15.18, 19.
prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord sent him water out of a tooth, and when he
had drunk thereof, Judge. 16.28, 29, 30.
his spirit came again, and he revived: Samson by his prayer made unto the
Lord, received his old strength, and was at once revenged on his enemies, 1.
Sam. 7.9, etc.
when he was blind: Samuel prayed unto the Lord, for to deliver the Israelites
out of the hands of the Philistims, and he was well heard; 1 Samuel 12.16.
and the Philistims were discomfited: at the prayer of Samuel, the Lord sent
noises and raines from heaven to terrify the people, and they feared the Lord.

David.
We may see the effect of David's prayers every where in the Psalms, where he
says oftentimes, I have cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he has heard
me: when I cried unto the Lord, of my righteousness, he heard me: and in my
trouble I called upon the Lord, Psalm. 18.
and cried unto my God, and be heard my voice from his holy Temple, and my cry
entered into his ears; I will, says he, call upon the Lord, which is worthy
to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies; 1 King. 2. 2 King. 9.13.
I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me: Solomon prayed unto the Lord God,
concerning the people of Israel, 2 Kin. 4.28, etc.
and is heard of the Lord, and his prayer and intercession is granted: Elizeus
by prayer raised up the dead child of the Shunamite: 2 King. 6.17.
again, he prayed unto the Lord, and the young man's eyes were opened, and he
looked, and behold, he did see aid from heaven: 2 King. 20.
Ezechias by prayer obtained at Gods hand both recovery of his health, and also
the prolongign of his days: Jobs friends talked amiss before the Lord, Job
ult.
and yet their offense was pardoned at the prayer which Job made for them.

The Apostles prayed unto God, and the place was moved where they were
assembled together, and they were filled with the holy Ghost: Acts 4.31. Acts
9.40, 41. Acts 10.4.
Peter making his prayer unto God, raised up Tabitha from death, and restored
her to life: Cornelius prayed unto God, and his prayer was had in remembrance
before God: the Church prayed for Peter when Herod had cast him into prison,
Act. 12.5, etc.
and the Lord delivered the Apostle from his bonds, and out of prison: at the
prayer of S. Paul, and Silas, Acts 16.25, etc.
the prison was shaken with an earthquake, and all the doors thereof were
opened, and their bonds loosed: Paul prayed for Publius father, Acts 28.8.
who lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody-flixe, and restored him to health;
these examples out of the Scriptures do sufficiently declare how attent the
Majesty of God is, to hear and grant their prayers, who do heartily call upon
his holy Name, either for themselves, either for others; whereby we may
perceive, what the wonderful efficacy of prayer is before God: the prayers of
the faithful be always acceptable unto God; and that he has a much better
regard and consideration of our necessities, then we our selves be able to
understand; although he do not at all times perform, the same which we do
desire, or not after the same manner, or so soon as we do ask it; fot as
Saint James says, Note.
you do demand, and not receive what you desire, Iam. 4.2, 3.
because you ask ^misse, even to consume it upon your lusts and unlawful
desires. Therefore he that desires to pray effectually unto God, and be heard,
must not be violent and wrathful, cruel and unmercifull against his Christian
brethren; neither proud nor mistrustfull, but they must be quite void from
anger and strife, and ready to forgive, when they have any quarrel against
their neighbors: For God is so offended by these faults, that in respect of
them he does abhor our prayers. There be many other hindr^nces, but these
be the most general, and therefore with the greater circumspection to be
eschued; Ask in faith and waver not, Iam. 1.6.
for he that wavereth is like to the wave of the Sea, which is tossed and
carried about with the wind. Therefore let not that man suppose that he
receives any thing from the Lord: sometimes we do pray so coldly without
heart or spirit, Ecclus. 18, 22.
that we our selves perceive not what it is that we mumble in our mouth.
Therefore he that so prays and hears not himself; how can he hope to be
heard of God? we must not put the fault in God, if we obtain not what we
desire at his hands, but in our own sins and wickedness, vices and
naughtiness, whereby we do hinder his goodness, grace, and mercy from
performing those things which we do ask; for he is so good and merciful
unto us, that he has a regard of our health and salvation; and does give us
such things as do serve for our necessities: but it falls out oftentimes
that he does not grant us our petitions, because if we had them, they should be
more harmefull then profitable unto us. Therefore we must pray with continual
and unfeigned hope and trust in God, that in his good time, he will hear our
prayers, and grant our requests.

Therefore he that prays unto God to be heard, must pray heartily, with all
his heart, with all his soul, with all his strength. Deuteronomy. 6.5:
Thrice he requires all, least we should keep a thought behind: and God
says, My son give me thy heart: Pro. 23.26.
that is, which Christ calls spirit and truth, without hypocrisy; for until
we do give our hearts unto God, our hearts are vain, barren, and sinful;
and then it is the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost, and the
Image of GOD, so changed, reformed, and refined, that God calls it a new
heart: so that when the heart sets forward to prayer, and is willing to serve
God, then all the members will follow after, and yield consent; the tongue will
praise him, the foot will follow him; the ear will attend him, the eye will
watch him, and the hands will serve him; nothing will stay behind if the heart
pricketh them forward: such motion has the heart, that it makes all the rest
of the senses, pliant, nimble, and current about it, and yield consent unto the
heart. Therefore it is almost as easy to speak well, and do well, as to
think well: for if the heart indite a good matter, no marvel though the
tongue be the Pen of a ready writer: Psalm. 45.2. Heb. 3.12.
but if the heart be dull, all the senses are out of tune, like a left hand,
they are unapt and untoward to any good; the tongue will not praise because the
heart does not love; the ear will not hear, because the heart does not mind,
the hand will not give because the heart does not pity; the foot will not go,
because the heart wills not to stir; all depend and stay upon the heart.
Therefore the Lord requires the heart, which is the first motion to all
goodness in man: if the heart be perfect all is good; for our heart gives
consent to all our actions: when we speak, we should speak as if our heart
did speak, pray, as if our heart did pray; hear, as if our heart did hear;
give, as if our heart did give; remit, as if our heart did remit; and counsel,
as if our heart did counsel: as the Apostle says, Cor. 3.23.
Do all things heartily as unto the Lord, and not as done unto men: for there
is nothing troublesome unto our conscience, but that which goes against the
heart, we should therefore serve God with all our hearts, for his honor, and
for his Names sake, and not for our own respects, and our own ends: for he
which gives his heart unto God, does all things for the love of God, and to
his glory. As Joseph charged his brethren, Genesis 42.15. etc.
that they should not come to him for more Corn, unless they brought their
brother Benjamin unto him, whom they left behind at home: so God will not have
us to pray and seek unto him for any thing, Math. 15.8.
unless we bring our hearts unto him, which oftentimes we leave behind: the
tongue that prays without the heart, is a flattering tongue: the eye, without
the heart be godly, is a wicked eye: the ear without the heart, is a vain
ear; the hand, without the heart be right is a false hand. Do thou think
that God will accept a flattering tongue, a wicked eye, a vain ear, a false
hand, without the sacrifice of thy heart? Saint Paul says, If I give all that
I have, and speak with the tongues of men, and of Angels and have not love,
that is, give not my heart, 1 Cor. 13.1, etc.
it avails nothing. Therefore who so fears the Lord, it shall go well with
him at the last, and in the day of his death he shall be blessed: the heart is
the Temple of God, and he that gives it to any thing but to God, commits
sacrilege, and breaks that Commandment, Give unto God those things which
are Gods: that is, Math. 22.21.
an upright heart, with due honor and worship. Wherefore when you pray, let
your heart pray; when you hear, let your heart hear; when you give, let your
heart give; whatsoever you do, set the heart to do it, and let your godly
heart guide you in all your actions; if it be not so perfect as it should be,
yet God will accept it for his sake that gives it, and redeemed it: to whom let
us by faithful and earnest prayer, commit our hearts, our souls, our bodies,
and all that ever we have, unto his most gracious and merciful protection and
tuition.

Of Afflictions.
2 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7.
FOr as much as it is almost unpossible, for the innocent and faithful soul to
attain to the end of her progress, Acts 14.22.
the heavenly Canaan, but that she must pass through the troubles, crosses,
and miseries of this wicked and wretched world, and whiles we do live in the
flesh, we be subject to all kind of afflictions, by the special providence and
purpose of God, both thorough the weakness of our nature, and also through the
malice of this present world: especially the poor, the needy, distressed, and
godly disposed persons. Therefore it behooves all men how to understand and
undertake, to bear and overcome the adversities, which through the malice of
the world, and our own infirmities cannot be avoided, yet there is nothing so
troublesome and sorrowful, which the patient man and well disposed Christian
is not able to overcome by the grace of his Savior that strengthens him: 1
Cor. 10.13.
For the Apostle says, there has no temptation taken you, but such as
follows the nature of man; but God is faithful, which shall not suffer you
to be tempted above that which you are able to bear, but shall with the
temptation, make a way to escape: indeed, our whole nature is generally
corrupt, weak and feeble, There be a passing number of the sorts of
afflictions.
and the corruption thereof does customeably breed certain peculiar griefs to
every age; who can account the griefs of the flesh, which cold, heat, and
hunger, thirst, diseases, and several dangers do enforce upon every age and
condition? but most generally afflictions do chance unto men, as base in
condition, and low in degree; as contempt, oppression, pillage and poverty,
with all manner of wrongs and injuries, whereby the meaner sort be without
respect trodden down by the greater and stronger, and be devoured in this
world; even as the smaller fishes be in the Sea by the greater, and the
mightier: whereof Habakkuk does complain, saying, O Lord, how long shall I
cry, and thou will not hear me? I call unto thee whilst I suffer, and thou will not save me: Habak. 1.
why do thou show me wickedness and trouble; to see spoiling and violence
before my face? and they do raise up strife and contention: the Law is
dissolved, and judgment has no execution; Psalm. 82.2, 3, 4.
for the wicked does compass about the righteous, and wrong judgment
proceeds.

This manner of afflictions, wherewith the poor and the widows, the
fatherless, desolate, strangers, Job 30.25.
and the innocents are oppressed in this world, without care and conscience,
Eccles. 8.11.
and do reign without regard or looking to: the poor lies oppressed in
every corner without relief or redress of their wants or wrongs: Psalm. 69 21,
22
the Apostle makes mention of many other afflictions; as tribulation, anguish,
peril, persecution, hunger, Romans 8.35.
nakedness, Verse 18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
all which shall not separate us from the love of God: for says he, I am
certainly persuaded, that the afflictions of this world, are not worthy of the
glory which shall be showed upon us in the life to come: the occasions of these
evils, wherewith we be afflicted, does proceed of our selves, By the
providence of God. Psalm. 89.
because of our sins; therefore the Prophet says, I will visit their
wickedness with the rod, and their sins with stripes; nevertheless, my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my truth to
fail: as the Lord said to him that was sick of the palsy, Matthew. 9.2.
Be of good cheer my son, thy sins be forgiven thee: Again, he said to him
that had been diseased thirty eight years, Joh. 5.5.14.
Lo, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.
Every man must be fully persuaded, Afflictions be sent from God.
that troubles, crosses, losses, and all manner of afflictions, does come and
fall upon us, by the disposition and ordinance of God, and no otherwise: this
is confirmed by the testimony of God himself, Esaias 45.5.
saying, I am the Lord, and without we there is no God; it is I that created
light and darkness; it is I make peace, and trouble, yea, Verse 7.
even I the Lord do all these things, whereby we do perceive, that we be
scourged of God for our sins and iniquities, and by them we do provoke the
wrath of God upon us; besides, there be some sins that of nature, A covetous
mind is never satisfied, nor thinks any thing unlawful.
they do afflict both our bodies and souls: as drunkenness does trouble and
mar men's bodies and minds, and covetousness and envy the mind and soul;
one says, that every disordered affection, is a punishment to it self. There
be also many afflictions, wherewith the godly, just, and innocent be oppressed
by the wicked in this world, by their ungodliness, malice, anger, hatred,
enmity, envy, pride, and delight in strife and variance, in which they do
hate and trouble them without desert; Job 37.23.
it is not the property of God to afflict, but to deliver, and save the
afflicted: for he is good, gentle, mild and loving toward mankind; so that
he delights in doing good to them, according to the saying of Jeremy, Ierem.
1.19.
I will rejoice in them, when I shall do them good; but it is wrought by the
malice of our nature, that he is compelled like a most loving father, to
chasten and instruct us by the rod of discipline, Afflictions are sent as
chastisments temporary to the elect, but eternal to the reprobate.
to the intent to save them, which otherwise should perish: to this intent, he
did often times afflict and scourge the people of Israel, because of their
intolerable sins and rebellion, to bow and turn them unto himself: so he
does punish sinners, to the intent they should leave off their trade of
sinning, and turn unto him, and amend their lives: thus the godly be exercised
in the faith of Gods providence, to the intent, that knowing their own
weakness, they may put their trust in their Lord God, and have hope upon him,
Eccles. 51.
whose aid does comfort them in all their afflictions, and who in his good time
will bring them out of all their troubles: thus they be trained up to call upon
the Lord, in whom they do depend in steadfast trust and hope, and not in the
vain hope and trust in man, or worldly means, and to offer the sacrifice of
continual praise unto God, by whom they have hope to be delivered out of all
their afflictions. Afflictions do confirm the faith of the godly.
Patience and sufferance of afflictions makes our faith strong; whereupon
comes our hope, which does not confound: this is the assurance of our
salvation, when a man has a tried faith toward God, and an assured hope
against all temptations as armed against the very gates of Hell.

Again, Job 5.15, etc.
we be not only allowed and well tried by afflictions to be the sons of
God, By affliction we be brough to be the children of God, and be assured of
his care of us. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
but the very care of God is commended unto us, whereby he does marvellously
comfort the afflicted: of this the Apostle makes mention, saying, Blessed be
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the father of mercies, and
the God of all comfort, which does comfort us in all our tribulations: like as
the passions of Christ do abound in us; so by the grace of Christ, our comfort
does more abound: and David says, According to the multitude of the sorrows
in my heart thy comforts do rejoice my soul; Psalm. 93.19.
so that by the grace of God, the troubled and afflicted are comforted in all
their troubles and afflictions; in these extremities, the afflicted have great
need to be strengthened and confirmed in the grace of Christ, Without faith we
cannot have the comfort of the Spirit.
to believe that they be chastened, exercised, reformed, tried, and saved from
ruin and destruction, by the immediate hand of God their heavenly father;
unless that they have this faith, they cannot have the comfort of the Spirit;
we must have also steadfast hope, whereby we must not doubt, but that God in
his mercy, and in his good time, shall once deliver us from all our
tribulations, crosses and afflictions, which by his chastening hand, and in his
love he has laid upon us; this hope comes of faith, in that we do believe
that God is faithful, standing to all his promises, and able to perform what
he has promised, and that he will not suffer us to be tempted further than we
be able to bear, and that this hope is not vain, it appears by that which
God himself faith: Psalm. 91.1, etc.
For as he hoped upon me, I will deliver him out of all his tribulations and
afflictions: after his steadfast faith and strong hope, there follows that
unknown and exceeding commendable virtue, Patience; of these three most
excellent virtues, does come the rejoycement of the spirit. Acts 5.
So St. Paul does testify, that he does not only rejoice in the hope of the
glory of Gods children, but also rejoice in their troubles: James 1.
and Saint James says, My brethren, Romans 5.
count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing, that the
trial of your faith works patience; therefore we must so bear our
afflictions, that we must abide them, not only patiently, but with joy also,
through faith and hope.

Whosoever is wretched and afflicted, is to be pitied and relieved, for that he
is distressed and afflicted: the Samaritan which is spoken of in the Gospel,
did pity, Luk 10.30, etc.
relieve and help him that was fallen into the hands of thieves, having no
respect of his Country or religion; but in consideration that he was a man
himself, he had compassion, and took pity of the miserable case and peril
of the man distressed, therefore it is a good and charitable deed, and to be
used of all men, toward their Christian brethren, to relieve, help, succor,
and comfort the needy, distressed, and afflicted person; not only for that he
is afflicted, but for his Savior Christ his sake, who has commanded it: we
ought to do good to all men, as the Apostle says, Gal. 6.10.
Especially to them which are of the household of faith: there must mercy also
be showed unto him that is chastened for his sins. God is well pleased
withal, and does require it, as we may perceive in Esaias, where he charged the
Moabites lovingly to entreat the Israelites, whom he had scourged for their
sins, Hide the chased, says he, Esaias 16.3, 4.
and bewray not them that are fled, let them that are persecuted dwell with
thee, and be thou their refuge. Therefore seeing that it is a work of true
goodness to have pity and mercy upon the distressed and afflicted; we ought
not to enquire after their religion, life, and occasion of their affliction, at
what time we ought to succor them, but for compassion sake to bestow our aid
and relief upon them, in their distress and miseries, as men afflicted; for
their misery and affliction does sufficiently declare their wants and
necessities: but when the afflicted is thus perplexed, vexed, grieved, and in
anguish, they must patiently suffer and bear them, and not despairingly run
to desperation, nor to rest dissolute and careless what become of them, but
they must in Christ's Name repair unto God, who although he be offended, will
yet show mercy; for he does not cast off upon every offense, nor revenge every
wrong as the world does, Luke 15.20.
but like the Father of that unthrifty son, receives again him that
strayed, and lovingly imbraceth him; that returns unto him, by true and
serious repentance, faithful prayer, and holy contemplation and uprightness
of living, with the consideration of Gods purpose in afflicting him, for he
may not censure these evils or the least of them to come by chance, as the
world often and most rashly and unadvisedly affirms, or that they befall him
by reason of the unfortunate Planet, Psalm. 73.5. Esaias 47.13.
under which he was borne, as the starre-gazer fondly maintains; for the Lord
God Almighty, that high and incomprehensible Jehovah, Revel. 1.8.
that everlasting Alpha and Omega, He which was, and is, and is to come: he is
the former, framer, creator, preserver, and governor of all things, and who
but he, made and prepared those famous stars in the Firmament, Job 38. Esaias
51.13. Psalm. 89.13.
Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, who spread forth the Heavens like a curtain?
who limited the North and South climates? who made the Sun and Moon but he?
and therefore let all men think, that his creatures which he has formed,
framed, and placed, for the use and behoof of man, for the distinction of
times and seasons, and to give light unto the earth, and his creatures thereon,
keep every of them his Sphere as a walk, whereas unto a continual task they
are tied, by the omnipotent Commander, who keeps them without variation in
the first course, doing their continual service and labor for the behoof of
man, as other creatures do, and are not as Gods or governors of man's nature;
neither can they dispose of their inclinations, constitutions, or affections,
or make them happy or unhappy, but are ruled, governed, and commanded by God,
as other inferior creatures are to stand and move at his pleasure: the Sun
stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley of Aialon, Josh. 10.13. 2
King. 20.10.
and that for a whole day; so the Sun at the commandment of the Lord retired
ten degrees, in the Firmament, as a sign for Hezechias health: which proves
that these creatures are as all other, even subject to the will of the
superior Governor, who needs not the help of such weak means to work
the long or short life of man, the happy or unhappy estate of man, the poor or
rich portion of man, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7, 8
or any matter belonging to the soul or body of man, but all comes from his
sacred wisdom and divine providence, all men are in his hands as the clay in
the Potters, and he frames and forgeth of all forms, and fashions; Romans 9.21.
some to honor, some to dishonor; some to be high, some to be low; some to
be rich, some to be poor; some to be reverenced, and some to be despised,
afflicted and persecuted; and every man must rest contented with his portion,
be it good or bad, sweet or sour.

And therefore be not so hardy and void of reason, as to dream that thy
constitution, inclination good or bad success in thy proceedings, the
prosperous or adverse issues of thine endeavors; thine estate, poor or rich,
or thy troubles and afflictions, proceeds from the influence, dominion, rule
or power of these creatures, but that a divine and supernatural cause works
that in thee, which the wit of man cannot conceive, wherein though the world
afford thee no comfort, All our afflictions, troubles, miseries, and calamities
which happen unto us comes of our sins.
yet art thou bound by an inward bond of duty to acknowledge all thine
infirmities, all thine afflictions, and all the crosses which happen and fall
upon thee, to proceed even from thine own sins, and filthy corruptions, as
buffets to rouse thee from the forgetfulness of thy duty to his sacred
Majesty, for thy roving and ranging astray, after vain and foolish things,
superfluous desires, and overmuch negligence of thy calling, and in great love
and favor, does thy loving father give thee these gentle corrections, even of
mercy to reclaim thee from the way of sin unto a more sincere and sacred
course of life. Heb. 12.
So that the troubles and miseries, and all the adverse things that can befall
us, are Gods gentle chastisements to his children, to reform them, but to the
obstinate and unbeleeving, they are messengers of his judgments, Numb. 14.2.
Judge 6. Judge. 10.
and utter renunciation; who by his punishments wax worse and worse, who do
murmr and grudge at the course he takes to amend them, as did the rebellious
Israelites whom he did often visit in mercy before he entered into judgment
with them; he calls us by his punishments from perils, to the end we should
not be subject to the dangerous security of a pleasing estate here in this
world, wherewith he sees us apt to be entangled: he does as it were fetter us
with the shackles of adversity, that we should not have scope to dance after
the Music, and sweet sirens tunes of this worlds happiness, which so
enchaunteth men of liberty and lovers thereof, that they are thereby led, as it
were by a golden line, to the everlasting pit: but for the truly penitent and
faithful believer, he has prepared and provided an endless rich and
surpassing Diadem of absolute glory, Romans 8.17, 18.
a beautiful City, the Kingdom of joy, the Kingdom of eternal consolation.
If with patience they bear this moment of trial and fatherly light yoke,
though to flesh and blood most sharp and unsavory, yet will he mix them with
spiritual sweetness and inward consolation. God deals most providently for
his children, and turns even their tears into great joy, and their
lamentations into songs of melody: and although his working seems strange unto
flesh and blood, and hard measure to be crossed, yet God sees it necessary for
us, therefore take it not grievously to fall into troubles, to sustain
miseries, to endure crosses, and to abide afflictions: neither think it
strange, for as the Apostle Saint James says, James 5.
it has been the portion of Gods dearest children, from the beginning, and
will be for ever found true, Psalm. 91.14, etc
that Great are the troubles of the righteous; and as true it is, that the Lord
will delivers them out of all. Dan. 3.
What greater danger could there be, then to be in the fiery furnace, as was
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego? yet did the Lord so qualify the force of the
fire, mortifying, as it were, the nature thereof, that it nothing annoyed them;
yet it did consume the ministers of their execution. What greater peril could
there be, then to be in the Lions den with Daniel? Dan. 6.16. and 24.
yet the Lord shut up the mouths of the Lions, that they could not hurt him;
but yet they devoured his accusers. It is much to be in misery, in want, in
sickness, 1 King. 19. Judge. 15.18. Luke 16.20, 21.
and full of sores with Job, to be in hunger with Elias, to thirst with Samson,
poor, sore, and naked with Lazarus, imprisoned and accused with Joseph,
persecuted, banished, and in exile with David, with Jeremy, with Peter, Genesis
3.9. 1 Samuel 21.22. and 27. Acts 14.19.
to be stoned with Paul, and infinite others; yet did the Lord deliver them out
of all their troubles: such is the force of a sound confidence and trust in the
Almighty God, who in mercy works by outward crosses, the inward comfort of
his children, and shows compassion always upon them, according to the
multitude of his mercies. And as sin is the root from whence springs all our
afflictions, crosses, miseries, and calamities, both inward and outward; and
our offenses is the cause of Gods displeasure against us, and God in his
displeasure powers forth both crosses and curses upon sinners; Temporary to
the elect, and eternal to the reprobate.
therefore it behooveth every man carefully to consider the cause of his
troubles, whether he be fallen into the same by his own riot, wanton
lascivious or licencious life, and by his ungodly conversation and neglect of
the fear of God; for which things sake, Ephesians. 5.6. Col. 3.6.
the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, and he powers out
of the cup of his indignation upon them, either in judgment, to their
condemnation, The reprobate cannot breath one thought of repentance.
and so to be perpetual, or else to recall and reclame them from their wicked
ways, that they may be saved, and so to live for ever. Therefore let every man
acknowledge and confess their sins unto God, be truly penitent, and crave
pardon for them, Esaias 49.8.
and fall down before him in hearty prayer, and he will hear them, grant
their requests, and deliver them out of all their troubles and afflictions, and
give them the reward of everlasting life: for we cannot be so ready to come
unto God by prayers, God accepts of our desires in stead of performance.
but he is as ready to meet our petitions, and in a most fatherly loving
manner he embraces us, and graciously accepts of our humble desires; so that
the godly men have no cause to faint undet the burden of their miseries, but
that they may thereby the rather gather unto themselves continually more and
more strength through the benefit and supply of Gods continual inward succor
and comfort; for even their adversities, their bitter afflictions, and their
miserable calamities, shall all turn to their bliss, Psalm. 32.
and perpetual commodity. Great plagues remain for the ungodly, but whose
puts his trust in the Lord, mercy imbraceth him on every side.

General Rules directing a Christian in a godly life.
EVery day thou drawest nearer to thy death, judgment and eternity; therefore
think every day how thou may be able to stand in that most strict and
severe judgment of God, and so live for ever: keep therefore diligent watch,
over all thy thoughts, words, and actions, Eccles. 12.13, 14. Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
because hereafter thou must give an exact account for them, at the last day of
judgment, whether it be good or evil: be careful to suppress every sin in
the first motion, before it be ripe in thee: let sin be to thy heart a
stranger, 1 Samuel 12.3, 4.
not a home-dweller: take heed of falling often into one and the same sin, lest
the custom of sinning take away the conscience of sin, and then shall thou
wax so impudently wicked, that thou will neither fear God, nor reverence men;
which to avoid, think every evening that thou shall dye that night, and think
every morning that thou shall dye that day; do not therefore defer thy
conversion, and thy good works till to morrow, for to morrow is uncertain,
but death is most certain, and every day hangs over thy head; nothing is more
contrary to godliness then delay. If therefore thou contemnest the inward
calling of the holy Spirit, Ecclesiast. 18.22, etc.
thou shall never attain to true conversion. Defer not therefore thy
conversion and good works till thy old age, but offer unto God the flower of
thy youth; for no age is fitter for Gods service then youth, which flourishes
in strength both of body and mind; and as thou tenderest the salvation of thy
soul, live not in any wilful filthiness; for true faith and purpose of
sinning, can never stand together: approve thy self to be a true servant of
Christ, and study always to walk in the way of the Lord, and think of the
worlds vanity to contemn it, of death to expect it, of judgment to avoid it,
of hell to escape it, and of heaven to desire it: consider in every thing the
end, before thou do attempt the action: let thy conscience deter thee, to
eschew every known sin, and obey God in every one of his commandments; but if
at any time through frailty thou slippest into any sin, wallow not in it, but
speedily rise out of it by unfaigned repentance, praying for pardon till thy
conscience be pacified, thy hatred of sin increased, and thy purpose of
amendment confirmed.

God gives many blessings, lest through want, being his child, thou should
despair, and he sends thee some crosses, lest by too much prosperity,
playing the fool, thou should presume; but in all thy will, have an eye to
Gods Will, lest thy self action turn to thine own destruction: count
therefore Christ thy chiefest joy, and sin thy greatest grief: estimate no
want to the want of grace, nor any loss to the loss of Gods favor; and then
the coffeehouse which grows by outward means, 1 Timothy 6.8, 9.
shall the less perplexe thine inward mind, and bestow no more thought of
worldly things, then thou needs must; Col. 3.1, 2.
for the discharge of thy place, and the maintenance of thine estate; but still
let thy care be greater for heavenly then for earthly things, and be more
grieved for dishonor done unto God, than for an injury offered to thy self:
but if any private injury be offered unto thee, Psalm. 139.21, etc. Eccles. 28.
Romans 12.13.20.21.
bear it as a Christian with patience. Never was an innocent man wronged, but
if patiently he bare his cross, he overcame in the end; but if thou frettest
and vexest at thy wrongs offered, the hurt which thou do to thy self, is
more then that which thine enemies can do unto thee; neither can thou more
rejoice him, then to hear that it thoroughly vexes thee; but if thou can
show patience on earth, Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36.
God will show himself just from heaven; but if thine enemy still continues
in his malice, and increase in his mischief, give thou thy self unto prayer,
Jerem. 11.20.
committing thy self, and commending thy case unto the righteous judge of
heaven and earth, and in the mean while, wait with David on the Lord; Psalm.
27.14.
be of good courage, and he shall comfort thine heart: undertake not an evil
case for no man's sake: for it is not that man, but God that shall judge thee;
do not therefore prefer the favor of men before the grace and favor of
God, and esteem no sin little: For the curse of God is due to the least, and
the least would have damned thee, had not the Son of God died for thee; Ezekiel.
9.4. Mark. 3.5.
bewail therefore the misery of thine own estate, and as occasion is
ministered, mourn for the iniquity of the time; pray to God to amend it, and be
not thou one of them that make it worse: in thy conversation be thou courteous
toward all, grievous to none, familiar with few; live piously to Godward; to
thy self, chastely; to thy neighbor, justly; show favor to thy friend, show
patience to thy enemy; let thy good will be toward all, and show thy bounty to
them that have need; think often of the shortness of thy life, and the
certainety of thy death, and wish rather a good life then a long: die daily to
thy self, and mortify the vices of the flesh; so in death thou shall live
unto God: let mercy appear in thy affection, goodness in thy action, courtesy
in thy countenance, humility in thy attire, modesty in thy neighborhood, and
patence in tribulation; always think upon three things past, the evil which
thou have committed, the good which thou have omitted, and the time which thou
have pretermitted: think always upon three things present; the brevity of
this life, the difficulty of being, and the paucity of them that shall be
saved: always think upon three things to come; death, then which nothing is
more horrible; judgment, then which nothing is more terrible; and the pains
of hell, then which nothing is more intolerable.

Every evening reconcile thy self to God by prayer for thy sins past that day,
and give thanks to God for giving thee time to repent: there are three things
above thee, which never let slip out of thy memory; the eye that sees all, the
ear that hears all, and the dreadful Judge which punishes all: bewail the
evils past, remember thy sins, grieve for them, and pray for amendment;
remember Gods justice, that thou may be kept in fear; remember Gods mercy,
that thou may not despair: as much as thou can withdraw thy self from the
world and the vanities thereof, and addict thy self wholly to the service of
God; study to please none but Christ, and fear to displease none but him: pray
unto God to pardon and forgive thee what is past, and to govern and amend in
thee, what is to come. God has communicated himself wholly unto thee,
therefore communicate thou thy self wholly unto thy neighbor, that is the
best life, that is busied in the service of others; show reverence and
obedience unto thy superior, instruct and defend thy inferior, give counsel
and aid unto thy equal; let thy body be subject to thy mind, and thy mind to
God: for thy works do not pass away, but are cast as certain seeds of
eternity. Gal. 6.8.
Therefore if thou sowest in the flesh, of the flesh thou shall reap
corruption; if thou sowest in the Spirit, of the Spirit thou shall reap life
everlasting: after death the honor of the world shall not follow thee, neither
shall thy heap of riches follow thee, Revel. 14.13.
neither shall thy pleasures follow thee, neither shall the vanities of the
world follow thee, but thy works shall follow after thee. Therefore to day
appear to be such in the sight of God, as thou desire to be esteemed at the
day of judgment: learn to live in this life, as thou would obtain
eternal life; for in this life is eternal life obtained or lost: therefore
let holy meditations bring forth in thee knowledge, Prove. 15.8.
and knowledge compunction, and compunction devotion, and let thy devotion make
earnest intercession unto God by prayer, for the silence of the mouth is a
great good for the peace of the heart. James 1.19.
O the shame, when a man's own tongue shall be produced as a witness against
himself, to the confusion of his own shame. Therefore let thy words be few,
but advised, forethinke whether that which thou art to speak be fit to be
spoken: affirm no more then what thou know to be true, and be rather
silent, then to speak to an ill or no purpose.

Let thy heart and tongue ever go together in honesty and truth, 1 Pet. 2.1.
hate lying and dissembling in an other: detest it in thy self, or God will
detest thee for it; for he hates a liar, and his father the devil alike; let
not thine anger remain when thou see the cause removed, and ever distinguish
twixt him that offends of infirmity and against his will, Prove. 6.30. Acts
3.17. 1 Timothy 1.13. Psalm. 59.5.
and him who offends maliciously, and of set purpose; let the one have pity,
and the other justice: in matters of accusation, be first assured of the truth,
then censure, and as thou tendrest the reputation of an honest heart, never let
malice in hatred, make thee to reveal that which love in friendship, bound
thee a long time to conceal: for as God breeds among men truth, peace, and
amity, that we should live to do one another good; so the devil daily sows
falsehood, discord, and enmity, to cause if he can, the dearest friends to
devour one another. Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy, for thou know
not what shall be the manner of thine own end; but be more glad to see the
worst man's amendment, rather then his punishment, hate no man, for fear least
Christ loves him, and be angry, Pro. 24.17, 18. Romans 5.8, 10.
and turn his wrath from him unto thee: love thine enemy, for Christ loved
thee when thou wast his enemy; by the merits of his blood he requires thee
for his sake to love thine enemies, Ephesians. 2.4, etc. Math. 18.24, 28
deny him, being a Christian, if thou dare: he asks but forgiveness for
forgiveness; petty forgiveness, for the infinite forgiveness of Almighty
God; therefore though thou think thine enemies unworthy to be forgiven, yet
Christ is worthy to be obeyed. Do nothing in the sight of a civil friend,
for which thou can not be safe, unless it be concealed; nor any thing, for
which if just cause be offered, thou need fear him: if that he proves thine
unjust enemy: If thou be disposed to be merry, have a special care to three
things: That thy mirth be not against Religion, that it be not against Charity,
and that it be not against Chastity: then be as merry as thou can, only in
the Lord. Levit. 19.12.
Speak not of God, but with fear and reverence, as in his sight and hearing:
for seeing we are not worthy to use his holy name in our mouths, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
Romans 9.5.
much less ought we to abuse it vainly in our talk; but to use it ordinarily
in vain, rash, or false oaths, is an undoubted sign of a soul, that never
truly feared God. Pray therefore with David, when thou art to speak in any
matter that may move passion: Psalm. 141.3. 1 These. 5.26.14 2 These. 3.5. Levit.
19.17. Psalm. 15.5. Deuteronomy. 15.13, 14.
Set a watch, O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. In
praising, be discreet; in saluting, courteous; in admonishing, friendly; in
forgiving, merciful; in promising, faithful; and bountiful in recompencing
of good service, and other friendly courtesies: making not the reward of virtue
the gift of favor.

Do no evil though thou might, for God will not suffer the least sin,
without bitter repentance, to escape unpunished. Leave not undone any good that
thou can, but do thou nothing rashly, nor any thing till thou have first
taken counsel of Gods word, 1 Samuel 30.8.
of the lawfulness thereof, and praying for his blessing to bless thy
endeavor; and then do it in the Name of God, with cheerfulness of heart
committing the success unto him, in whose power it is to bless with his
grace, whatsoever business is intended to his glory: and when thou art tempted
to do any evil work, 1 Cor. 7.5.
remember that satan is where his business is. Let not the child of God be
the instrument of so base a slave: hate the work, if thou abhorrest the
author; and remember with Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
that though no man sees, yet God sees all, in all places: fly therefore with
Joseph from all sin, as well those that are secret in the sight of God, as
those that are manifest in the eyes of men; be therefore as much afraid of
secret sins, Luke 8.17. and 12.2.
as of open shame, and so avoid all in general, so as thou do not nurse nor
allow to thy self any one particular or darling sin: for the crafty devil
can hold a man's soul as fast by one, as by many sins, and faster by that one
that does please thee, than by all those which begin to be abominable unto
thee: and as thou desire to avoid sin, so be careful to shun the occasion;
Prove. 5.8.
love all good things for Gods sake, but love God for his own sake: whilst
thou hold God to be thy friend, Psalm. 118.6, 7. Prove. 16.7.
thou need not fear who is thine enemy: for God will either make thine
enemy to become thy friend, Romans 8.31. Genesis 32.4, etc. Exo. 32.27. etc.
or will bridle him that he cannot hurt thee. No man is overthrown by his
enemy, unless that first his sin has prevailed over him, and God has left
him to himself: therefore he that would be safe from the fear of his
enemies, and live still in the favor of his God; Number. 42.43, etc.
let him redeem the folly of the time past, with serious repentance; look to
the time present with religious diligence, and take heed to the time to come,
with careful providence.

In effecting good actions, distrust not Gods providence, though thou sees the
means either wanting or weak: and if means do offer themselves unto thee,
Judge. 7.17, etc.
be sure that they be lawful, and having gotten lawful means, take heed that
thou rely not more upon them, then upon God himself; labor in a lawful
calling, for it is Gods ordinary means by which he blesses his children with
outward things: pray therefore for Gods blessing upon his own means, and in
earthly business bear an heavenly mind; do thou thy best endeavor, and
commit the whole success to the fore-ordayning wisdom of Almighty God, never
think to thrive by those means, which God has accursed: Matthew 16.26.
that will not in the end prove gain, which is gotten with the loss of thy
soul: therefore in all thy actions endeavor with Saint Paul to have a clear
conscience toward God and toward men. Acts 14.16.
Give every man the honor due to his place, but honor a man more for his
goodness then for his greatness, and of whom soever thou have received a
benefit unto him, as God shall enable thee, remember to be thankful,
acknowledge it lovingly unto men, and pray for him heartily unto God; and count
every blessing received from God, as a pledge of his eternal love; and as a
spur to prick thee on to a godly life; be not proud for any external
worldly wealth, nor for any internal spiritual gifts: not for external
goods, because they be momentany, and will shortly be taken away; not for any
internal gifts: for as God gave them, so will he likewise take them away: if
forgetting the giver, thou shall abuse his gifts; to puff up thine heart with
a pride of thy own worth, and to contemn others, for whose good Almighty God
bestowed those gifts upon thee; have thou any one virtue that does move thee to
be selfe-conceited? thou have twenty vices that may better vilify thee in
thine own eyes: Be truly the same thou seem to be.
be therefore the same in the sight of God, who beholds thy heart, that thou
seem to be in the eyes of men that see thy face: content not thy self with
an outward good name, when thy conscience shall tell thee it is undeserved. A
deserved good name for any thing, but for godliness, lasts little, and is
less worth: in all the holy Scriptures, we never read of an Hypocrites
repentance; and no wonder: for, whereas after sin, conversion is left as a
means to cure all other sinners, what means remains to recover him, who has
converted conversion it self into sin? woe therefore unto the soul that
seems religions, and is not the same: mark the fearful end of notorious
evil men, to abhor their wicked actions: Numb. 23.10.
mark the life of the godly, and imitate their life and actions; and their
blessed end: obey thy betters, Psalm. 37.35, 36, 37. Esaias 58.5, 6.
observe the wise, accompany the honest, and love the religious. And seeing the
corrupt nature of man is inclined to hypocrisy; beware that thou use not the
exercise of religion, Mat. 23.27, 28.
as matter of course and custom, without care and conscience, and make no more
show of holiness outwardly to the world, then thou have in the sight of God
inwardly in thine heart: keep thy speech clean from all obscenity, and let
thy talk be gracious, Ephesians. 4.2^. Prove. 31.26. Psalm. 139.20, 21, 22.
that he that hears thee, may grow better by thee; and be ever more earnest
when thou speak of religion, then when thou talkest of worldly matters; if
thou perceivest that thou have erred, persevere not in thine error; rejoice to
find the truth, and magnify it; study therefore three things especially: to
understand well, to say well, and to do well: endeavor to rule those that are
under thy charge and authority, rather by love than by fear: for to rule by
love, is easy and safe; but tyranny is ever accompanied with care and terror:
oppression will force the oppressed to take any advantage to shake off the
yoke that they are not able to bear; neither will Gods justice suffer the
sway that is grounded upon tyranny, long to continue: rule therefore over
Christians, being a Christian, in love and mercy like Christ thy Master; make
not an occupation of any recreation, the longest use of pleasure is but short,
but the pains of pleasure abused, are eternal; use therefore lawful
recreation so far forth, Prove. 21.17. Phil. 4.8, 9.
as it makes thee fitter in body and mind, to do more cheerfully the service
of God, and the duties of thy calling; be therefore careful henceforth, to
make use of thy short time that remains, as a man would of an old lease that
were near expired; do not waste and consume thy time in idleness, sports,
plays, and toyish vanities: for man was not created for sports, plays, and
recreations, but zealously to serve God in religion, and conscionably to serve
and help his neighbor in the use of his vocation, and by both, to ascertaine
himself of eternal salvation: esteem therefore the loss of time, Ephesians.
5.16. Luke 16.2. Matthew. 25.21.
one of the greatest losses; redeem it carefully, and spend it wisely, that
when that time shall come, thou may be no longer here on earth, thy master
may welcome thee with an ^uge bone serve, and give thee a better in heaven: in
thy prayer, That is well done, and welcome good and faithful servant. Matthew.
6.6.
pray fervently and devoutly; for God detests the service of the outward man,
without the inward heart, as hypocrisy: so he counts the inward service,
without external reverence, to be mere profaneness; therefore he requires
both in his worship: in prayer, therefore, bow thy knees in witness of thy
humiliation, lift up thy eyes and thy hands in testimony of thy confidence;
hang down thy head, and smite thy breast in token of thy contrition; but
specially call upon God with a sincere heart; serve him holily, serve him
wholly, serve him only: for God and the Prince of this world, are two contrary
Masters; and therefore no man can possibly serve both: the more thou art
separated from the world, Prove. 15.8.
the more acceptable thou art unto God: ask faithfully of God whatsoever thou
desire to have, and whatsoever thou have, give thanks unto God for it; he
that is not thankful for that which he has already, is unworthy to receive
more, and Gods grace ceases to descend, when our thanks cease to ascend:
whatsoever happens unto thee, make use of it for good: when thou art in
prosperity, think that thou have just cause to bless and praise God: when
thou art in advesirty, think that thou art put in mind of thy repentance and
conversion: Prove. 14.25.
when the glory of God, or good of thy neighbor does require, speak the
truth, 1 Kings 22.
and fear not the face nor frown of man: for sometimes the frown of a Prince
may be the favor of God; neither shall flattery still hold in credit, nor
truth always continue in disgrace.

Show the strength of thy wisdom in instructing; show the strength of thy
power in helping, and the strength of thy riches in doing good to the poor and
needy: let not adversity cast thee down; neither let prosperity puff thee up:
let Christ be the mark in the imitation of thy life; Acts 3.21.
follow him in the way, that thou may overtake him in his country: in all
things have a special care of profound humility, 1 Pet. ^.8.
and be ardent in charity; cleave unto God, and lift up thy heart to him by
charity; let humility keep down thy heart, that thou be not proud; judge
God to be a father for his clemency, and a Lord for his discipline; a father
for his power and gentleness, and Lord for his severity and justice: therefore
love him as a father piously; Psalm. 37.5.
fear him as a Lord necessarily; love him, because he wills mercy; fear
him, because he wills justice; commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy
trust in him; Phil. 2.13.
acknowledge thy sins, and proclaim his mercy, and thou shall have ease in thy
misery: O God, thou that have given us grace to will the good, give us also
grace to perfect the good which thou have willed.

Of Gods Glory.
Whatsoever we do, Colos. 3.17.
let us do all things to the glory of God: for God created all things by his
power; but to his own glory: for that was the holy end for which he created
them: for as waters are derived from the Sea, returns thither again; so all
things that are, being derived from the mighty power of God, return their
duty, service, and the honor of all their actions to God, discharging every
one their duty and service in the maine Ocean of Gods glory; the which, though
it receive not augmentation of honor by the supply of any his creatures, being
infinite, of himself, yet all creatures being his own, it does please him to
force the obedience of every creature to give some proof and testimony of his
justice or mercy, whereby God may receive glory in their acknowledgements. God
then is glorified in all his works, but in a double manner; he is principally
glorified in the works of his mercy, he is also glorified in his judgments;
but the riches of Gods glory, Romans 9.^5. Osee 1.10. Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19
consists principally in the vessels of his mercy, because their glory is his
glory, and he does dignifie himself in their advancement. Therefore did God
choose the Israelites for his peculiar people, that by his most powerful
delivering them, and by their demonstrations of duty and service, God might be
honored in the memory of his greatness over all the world, and receive glory
in the report of his admirable protection: God is also glorified in his
judgments: for though the reprobate and damned in their lives, they rather
care to dishonor God their Creator, yet will God be honored in the
punishment of their lives, and force them to give demonstration of his justice
and holiness: for God can turn their ends and purposes to his own end and
glory, and make that set forth his glory, which was intended to his dishonor:
and those that will not give him glory for his mercy, his justice will in
despite of ungodliness compel them to give him glory for judgment, though
God esteem it the greater honor to be glorified in the witnesses of his
mercy, because in Gods nature mercy is preheminent and does triumph, yet it is
much to the glory of God, that the witnesses of his judgments, shall be
prompted by their lamentable experience, to acknowledge that God is infinite
both in power and justice: therefore we ought both to glorify God, Job 36.24.
and to glory in God; for if we glory in any thing but in God and godliness,
we are condemned; and if we glorify in any thing but God, we are likewise
condemned of him: for he is our strength, and light of our countenance: he has
ordained us for an holy end, to his glory, and if we glorify him here on
earth, he will glorify us with himself in Heaven: but if we neglect to
glorify him that is our glory, he will glorify himself in our destruction,
and make us in the feeling torments of our damnation, glorify him with this
acknowledgement, that he is God of most excellent sovereign Majesty, and that
he is most gracious in his mercy, Verse. 22, 23, Psalm. 18.
but most terrible in his judgments: and with this acknowledgement will God
be honored of the devils and damned creatures, whose intolerable and
unsufferable torments in their condemnation, shall be arguments of proof to
conclude Gods glory.

Seeing God has created all things for his own glory, and seeing that he
will be glorified in the several executions of his justice and mercy, in the
salvation or damnation of his creatures: Job 37. and 38.
for in all sensible things there is a special nature, in which they are
obedient, whereby they glorify God in finishing the end of their creation, for
which they were ordained. God has commanded the motion of the Heavens, The
purpose of Gods providence proceeds without stay to the determinate end and
effect which he had before ordained should come to pass.
the influence of the Stars, the nature of the Elements, and the several
nature of every several thing to keep their course: all these continuing
their course and nature, give most notable demonstrations of Gods glory, by
whom they were created, and thus disposed in nature: if these things which are
subject to time, and must perish, do notwithstanding discharge the duties of
their nature, and so by consequence approve themselves to be the instruments of
Gods glory: shall men then, whom God has created for the like end of his
glory; and to whom he has given a soul divine and of most excellent
understanding, and for whom he has created the world, the most admirable
work of his own hands: shall these be careless in this high duty? and shall
the elements and unreasonable creatures be careful? shall men be exceeded of
beasts, in the execution of their reasonable service? God has not threatened
their neglects with hell, and the torments thereof; nor promised to reward
their diligence with Heaven and the joys thereof: but God does both promise
and threaten men, yet are men less careful then beasts. This may worthily
remember those men, or rather those beasts, who make a God of themselves and
their unlawful pleasures, and then dedicate themselves their labors and the
glory of their actions to a godless, profane, and licencious trade of life:
those that will not glorify God of choice, must not do it by force; for the
time will come when God will whip them for their profane, ungodly, and
licentious living with the rods of his judgments, and make them in despite
of ungodliness to glorify God in suffering of the torments of hell, and their
own conscience, and with horror without profit or pity to acknowledge God,
and the terrible justice of so great a Majesty.

This should remember all the children of God, that in all the cares of this
Christian life, they have their maine respect to Gods glory, and that God have
the first place in their hearts, even before the desire of their own
salvation: and that their salvation be desired rather that God may be glorified
thereby, then to desire to glorify God for their own salvation, that so God
may be first in all our cares, that we love him more then own souls, and
prefer his honor before our own salvation. Therefore let all men love and
honor God for his own sake, love him for his goodness, love him for his
truth, love him for his mercy, love him for his justice; and let this love be
so respectlesse of all by considerations as that neither heaven, hell, nor our
own souls, persuade us so much, as the reverence and zealous affection we
have to the love of God: for he that thus loves God, does glorify him, and
shall be sure to be glorified of him eternally in the Heavens.

Let us therefore discharge the sum of all our actions into this Ocean of
Gods glory, let us propose and pursue that end only: let us not respect the
vain shows and purposes of men: let us esteem them light, and value them
less; let us remember that they are transitory, deceiving and destroying
vanities, and will leave us, flatter us, and will deceive us; let us reduce to
memory, the mighty Monarchs of the world; the most admirable in natural
enduments; and the most fortunate in earthly prosperities; Jerem. 2.3.
when we examine their worth, we shall find nothing, but a bare remembrance
of their names, Eccles. 9.5, 6.
and those neglected by the power of time; themselves and their regards are
vanished; their acts are perished, and all these things worn out, and almost
forgotten with the use of time, because the end of their actions ran not this
holy race of Gods glory, but had diverse disagreeing ends and respects: death
has deprived their souls, the grave their bodies, the world their estates,
and time their names; and such destroying ends do necessarily follow such
affections: for when Gods glory is not the absolute proposed end of a man's
life, there is nothing can happen to such life, but extreme misery; even the
bounty of nature, and the treasure of fortune are miserable tormentors, which
present themselves with friendly faces, Psalm. 4.5.
but bring in their hand dangerous and fearful destructions; therefore in
every action, and in every work we undertake; let us first in the fear of
God, propose our lawful end, Gods glory, that he may have the honor of all
our actions, to the comfort of our souls, Amen.

Of the uncertainty of man's life, and the expectation of death.
THis life wherein we live, is rather a death, 4 Esdr. 4.14.
because every day we die; for every day we spend some of our life, and grow
nearer to our end by a day; this life is full of grief for things past, full
of labor for things present, and full of fear and care for things to come:
our ingresse into this world is lamentable, because the infant begins his life
with tears, as it were, foreseeing the evils to come; our progress is
wicked, weak and vile, because many diseases, troubles, losses and crosses
torment us, and many cares afflict us: our ingresse is horrible and terrible,
Revel. 14.13.
because we do not depart alone, but our works do follow us, and we must
pass from death to Gods severe judgment; Hebr. 9.17.
we are begotten in uncleanness, we are conceived in sin; we are nourished
in darkness; we are brought forth in sorrow and misery, we live in pain, and
die in anguish; we were a wretched burden to our mother; we are strangers in
our birth, and pilgrims in our life; we are compelled to part away by death:
the first part of our life is ignorance, the middle part is overwhelmed with
cares; and the later part is burdened with grievous old age. All the time of
our life is either past, present, or to come; if it be past, it is nothing; if
it be present, it is fleeting; Genesis 3.19.
if it be to come, it is then uncertain: from earth we came, and earth we
bear about us; earth we tread upon; Job 7.1, etc.
and to earth we must return again; the necessity of our birth is base, of
our life miserable, of our death lamentable. The life of man is a continual
warfare, because there is in this life a continual fight between the flesh and
the spirit; Gal. 5.17.
what true joy then can a man have in this life, when there is in it no
certain felicity? what thing present can delight us, when all things like a
shadow do pass away? but the judgment of God which hangs over our heads,
does never pass away. Again, what thing can delight us, when that which we
so dearly loved, is taken from us, and quite ended, and grief that shall
never have end, does approach every day still nearer unto us? Nazianzen.
this is all we gain by long life; to do more evil, to see more evil, and
to suffer more evil, and makes our accusation the greater at the last day of
general judgment. What is man, but the slave of death, and as a passenger on
the way, and has no certain continuance? his life is shorter then a moment,
lighter then a bubble, more vain then an image, more empty then a sound, more
brittle than glass, more changeable than the wind, more unconstant than the
air, more fleeting than a shadow, and more deceitful than a dream; what is
it but the expectation of death, the stage of mockeries, the sea of miseries, a
vial of blood, which every light fall breaks, and every fit of an ague
corrupts? course of our life is a labyrinth; we enter into it when we come
out of the womb; and go out of it by the passage of death; this life is
frail as glass, as sliding as a river, as miserable as a warfare,; yet many
seems much to desire it: the vain felicity of this life does outwardly
delight, but if we press it with a more weighty consideration, it will
appear to be vile and wicked; therefore, O dear soul, do not suffer thy
cogitations to set up their rest in this life; Psalm. 42. 4 Esdr. 4.26, etc.
but let thy mind always pant and breathe after the joys to come; compare
the short moment of time here, with eternity which shall never have end; this
life here, posteth away; yet in it do we get or lose eternal life; this life
here, is most miserable, and yet in it do we get or lose everlasting life; in
this life we are subject to many calamities; yet in it do we get or lose the
joys everlasting: if therefore thou hopest of everlasting life, use the world,
but let not thy heart cleave unto it; negotiate in this world, but fix not thy
mind unto it. The outward use of worldly things is necessary, and hurts not,
unless thy inward affection cleave unto them; heaven is our country, the world
is but the way unto it, and place of our sojourning; this life is our sea, but
eternity is our heaven; be not therefore so much delighted with the momentany
tranquillity of this world; but be careful to attain to the haven of
everlasting happiness. This world is sliding and unconstant, and does not keep
faith with her lovers; but does often times fly from them, when they have most
hope of it. The safest way then, is to expect every hour our departure out of
this present life, and to prepare our selves for it by hearty and serious
prayer and repentance: the world is now so worn away with a long consumption,
it has even lost the face, with which it was wont to seduce her lovers.

1 Cor. 1.3.
But he that cleaves unto the Lord is one spirit with him: For as the carnal
copulation of the man and woman makes of them one flesh; Math. 19.5.
so the spiritual conjunction between Christ and the faithful soul makes
of them one spirit: as the soul is the life of the body, so is God the life of
the soul: as therefore that soul does truly live, in which God dwells by
spiritual grace; so likewise that soul is dead, which has not God dwelling
in it; and what rest can there be to the soul that is dead? that first death
in sin, does necessarily draw with it the second death of damnation: Revel.
20.14.
Whosoever therefore does firmly cleave unto God with his love inwardly,
enjoys divine consolation; his rest can no outward things disquiet: for in
the midst of sorrows he is joyful; in poverty he is rich; in tribulations
secure; in troubles quiet; in contumilies and reproaches of men still; and in
death it self living: he regards not the threats of the tyrants, because he
feels within himself the riches of divine consolation; he is not sorrowful
in adversity, because the holy Spirit within does comfort him effectually; he
is not vexed in poverty, because the goodness of God does continually succor
him; the reproaches of men do not trouble him, because he enjoys the delight
of divine honor; he regards not the pleasure of the flesh, because the
sweetness of the spirit is more acceptable unto him. (...) ^ot the friendship
of the world; because he seeks the love of God, who is a merciful father,
gracious, and a friend unto him: he fears no death; because in God he
always lives: he fears not Lightening, Tempests, Fire, Water-flouds, the
sorrowful aspects of the Planets, nor the obscuration of the light of Heaven;
because he is carried up above the Sphere of Nature; and (by faith) he rests
and lives in Christ: he fears no mortal nor evil power; because he that
lives, and overcomes in him, is far more stronger then the Devil, that (in
vain) labors to overcome him: he follows not the inticements of the Flesh;
because living in the Spirit, he ^eeles the riches of the Spirit; and by the
vivification of the Spirit, Gal. 5.24.
mortifies and crucifies the lusts of the Flesh: he fears not the Devil his
accuser; 1 Ioh. 2.1.
because he knows Christ to be his Intercessour; the true rest of the Soul
he grants unto us, who is the only Author thereof. O Christ withdraw our
hearts from the love of this world, and stir up in as a desire to thirst
after the Kingdom of Heaven; to thy eternal glory, and the unspeakable
comfort of our Souls.

Of temporary Death, and of the several estates of Salvation and Damnation.
DEath is an ordinance of God, for the subjecting of the World; which is
limited his time for the correction of Pride: it is a separation and absence of
the Soul from the Body, whereby the Body is reduced to his first matter earth;
and the Soul brought to a sense of either justice or mercy. To understand
this better, we must consider Death in his original and first being; also in
his powerful and general continuance; and the end or dea^ (...) ^at^ the
original cause that gave Death life, was sin; therefore when Adam had eaten
the forbidden fruit, and thereby committed sin; then had Death his first
beginning; for though Adam did not at the instant of the act die; yet at the
very instant of the sin, he was made mortal, and subject to the power of
death: so God foretold him, Genesis 2.17.
that whenever he did eat thereof he should surely die: and from this bad
beginning was Death first derived. So did the woman of Zareptha acknowledge
that her sin was the cause of her child's death: 1 King. 17.18.
so have all the Children of God understood of Death and the cause thereof; and
Saint Paul says, Romans 6.16.
that Death is the wages of sin: as if it were a necessary care in the
justice of God, that all that commits sin, should have the reward and
wages thereof, Death. Now the cause of this cause of Death was the Devil; Genesis
3.
who envying the prosperity of our nature, suggested his temptations to our
first Parents, by whose disobedience we are all made mortal: so says Solomon,
Through the envy of the Devil came death into the World; and they do prove
it that do hold of his side; and so from these two Parents the Devil and
Sin, was Death first derived, from whence he had his being and first
beginning. We must consider Death also in the passage of his life, or in his
powerful continuance, which is evident in this respect, that Death has a
general power over all Flesh, the which he does execute upon all, without
respect had, either to the greatness or goodness of any: Ios. 23.14.
therefore Death is called the way of all the World, Genesis 15.15.
and the way to our Fathers; because, as our Fathers are gone the way of Death
before us; so must we after them, and our posterity after us for ever: for
though Death be but one, and his office the cutting off the lives of all the
world; yet it is to him but an easy task, having the diseases of our flesh,
and infinite other occasions to attend him to the performance of the execution
of his deadly office. His power then is general over all, being limited by God
and time only; who though he bring all Flesh to corruption; yet no Flesh can
corrupt him, or procure favor in the strict execution of his Office.

The end, or the death of Death is the living righteousness of Jesus Christ,
which he wrought by his own death in his own person; therefore says the holy
Prophet, that Death is swallowed up in Victory: Hos. 13.14.
and Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.25.26.
that Christ Jesus must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet,
and that the last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death: therefore the
Apostle (insulting over Death) says, O death, verses, 55.56.57.
where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? the sting of Death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law; but thanks be unto God that gives us
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Whereby it is evident that God by his
son Christ has given us victory over Sin, Death and Hell, if we do
faithfully believe in him: and whereas before we were all servants of sin,
and the slaves of Death, we are now made Conquerors, and despise them that did
command us. This happy alteration does reach benefit to all the faithful; but
not to all men, therefore it is limited by God, and does extend to such
particulars only, as are in his election; for though God cast the beams of
his Son upon every man's face alike, and distribute his temporal blessings
scatteringly as it were, without any heedfull respect where they fall: yet
those favors that are eternal, and import perpetuity of happiness, he
gives them only to his beloved Elect, barring all the reprobates from
spiritual grace, and eternal happiness: and therefore, though the death of
Christ has disarmed Death, and blunted his weapons, that have wounded holy
men; yet are those weapons still sharp, and that Death is still living and
made immortal against them that have not received the image of the Lamb of
God; for though all men enter their graves alike, yet with different condition:
holy and good men enter their graves, Mat. 9.25.
as their houses of rest, where they quietly sleep, and for a time repose in
rest and safety: but the wicked enter their graves as fellons do their
Prisons, to be reserved to a more terrible day of judgment. Eccles. 41.1.2.
Therefore the Wiseman says, Philip. 1.20.21.
the remembrance of Death is bitter to some, and acceptable to other: for the
godly make it their day of hope; but to the wicked, their day of fear. Death
then in these diverse respects of good and bad men has a sting, and yet cannot
hurt; is dead, and yet living; and by opening the gate of temporary death, does
admit the entrance either into eternal life or eternal death: the one is the
most happy condition of Gods chosen; the other, the most miserable state of
the Reprobate and damned: for as this life wherein we breathe, is but a
sacrament or little resemblance of that which is to come; so the terror of a
temporary Death, has no proportion with the torments of everlasting Death,
wherein both the body and the soul shall suffer such affliction as is beyond
the power of imagination; infinite in measure, infinite in manner, infinite in
time. To undertake to report of Heaven and Hell, Salvation and Damnation
otherwise then is set forth in this Book, is not in my purpose or power to
describe them; but this we may know, that both are infinite: Heaven is infinite
in time and happiness; and Hell is infinite in time and torment: the one as
Gods resemblance, is infinite good; the other as the Devils, is infinite evil:
the one is hoped for, the other feared; to which all Mankind must make their
resort, and by the gate of Death, pass their temporal life to one of these to
eternity.

Seeing our sin was the cause of death, and from our selves had his first
original, it ought to humble all men in their own estimation, and to
acknowledge the great corruption of our nature, which makes us powerful only
in doing evil, and in producing such bad effects, as cause our own
destruction, and the consideration of this may correct their proud opinion,
that vainly arrogate such power unto themselves, as to be the means in cause
of their own salvation, fondly and falsely thinking, that their eyes of nature
are not blind in spiritual judgment; but imagine to have in themselves that
virtue and power, which they only have by imagination: for if Adam by his sin
did produce, and give life to such a monster by birth as death is, what
expectation then can be had of our weak ability; who are in all respects but
sin? Adam's far inferiors, and by much less able in the performance of
any spiritual duty; Secondly, seeing death has universal power over all
flesh, and seeing that there is no partiality in the execution of this office,
no dispensing of favor, no lengthening of time; but comes certainly: but not
certainly when: this may advise all men to godly action, and to live to day,
as if they were to die to morrow; lest otherwise death comes unexpected, and
so prevent their good determinations, which being only determined, and not
done, avail us to no other end but grief and unprofitable repentance: Again,
seeing all must die, and be reduced again to earth, Iere. 13.18.
this should control the proud ambitious natures of men, who in this life
insult over men of inferior state, and dignifie themselves in their own
estimations, as if God had not made them of earth, or that the grave would not
humble them, and make them earth again. These men that value themselves rich,
by having the beggarly gifts of fortune, and despise the most rich treasure of
Grace, Iere. 4.2.
where it lives in the banishment of poor fortune: these that despise death
most when they live, P. l. 34.20. Note.
and fear him most when they die, are here admonished to reform this insolent
behavior, and to remember themselves, that how proud soever they be, yet they
must be humbled in the grave, and that the worms and corruption will destroy
their pride; and in despite of greatness, make them inferior to the meanest
beggar on earth: and yet can death heap a greater calamity upon them, and open
unto them the passage to everlasting death, and afflict them with the damned in
torments perpetual and infinite: thirdly, seeing that Christ by death has
slain death, and has taken his hurtful sting from him, whereby he might be
hurtful to Gods Elect, it does admonish a zealous duty of thankfulness in
them in the merit of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Savior. By whose means
death is no death to them, but rather life and advantage: by whom they have the
door opened to everlasting salvation; for so ought all men to understand of
death, Note.
as the common Jailer of all flesh: the world is the prison wherein we are
shut; death, when he opens the door, delivers from prison, leads the
parties delivered, either to liberty, or judgment: for so are all that die,
transported from earth, either to heaven, which is their liberty, or to hell,
the place of execution. Death then is that one key that opens the double
passage: the one to heaven, the other to hell: the one leads to salvation,
the other to damnation.

Lastly, seeing that death is a repose, and rest from earthly labors, it ought
to sweeten the sorrows of this life with hopeful confidence, alacrity, and
spiritual comfort; notwithstanding most men do repute the professors of
holiness, but base and abject people, and deride their simplicity in wicked
worldly policies; making holiness a note of folly, and their own audacious
impudence, the only mark of wisdom and deep discretion: yet should not
this discountenance a good cause, but rather confirm a Christian resolution,
and give boldness, and Christian courage to bear off with patience the
contempts and disgraces of evil and wicked men, and secretly scorn at their
base estimations, having their eyes of faith still fixed on the end of all
things, death; with a settled confidence, that death will not only give them
rest from all their troubles and adversities, but admit them also into the
blessed fellowship of God, the holy Angels and Saints, from whence they shall
see their proud enemies cast into utter darkness, and obloquie, and with
miserable desperation, acknowledge their wilful neglects in Christian duties:
thus the meditation of death, may give disgraced and afflicted Christians a
life of hope, in the height of their extremities.

Therefore let not the faithful do as the wicked do, fear to die, but hope
to die, intending the spiritual passage, and course of their lives; Acts 12.
so as that their end may give them comfort without terror, let us reduce to
memory, what the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs have done, in this cause
how careful they have been to preserve their lives in the memory of honest
and godly reputation; how careless also have they esteemed their lives for the
defense and reputation of the Gospel; Acts 7.
being content, nay careful, not only to give up their lives, but to give
them up with torment for the testimony of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. To
these men let us frame our imitation; let us care for our lives as they cared;
let us also care to die as they cared, in every work of our life, let us
remember our end, and at our end let us remember our hope, and in our hope our
God: while we live here, let us remember that we are prisoners, and in the
bondage of our flesh; and when we die, we know that we shall have freedom: and
death that is cruel to others, will be favorable to us: and death that will
kindle the fire of their affliction, will extinguish our: and doubtless we
shall find death more favorable unto us, than men: for by men we are injured
disgracefully, and reproachfully despised, most ignominiously afflicted cast
down; by fears of enemies affrighted, our opinions doubted, our actions
scanned, and opposed, our endeavors misinterpreted and intercepted, and by
wrongs of ill neighbors oppressed; our good name brought into odious
reputation, and by disquietnesse betwixt false friends and open foes, in a
manner confounded: Death takes us from all these fears and injuries: lays us
in a peaceable grave: makes us sleep in that bed of rest: protects our bodies:
silences our name: and carries our spirit to his place appointed. Let us not
therefore be moved by any example to fear death, but let us have a Christian
resolution to abide it with courage, nay with hope, without doubting. When we
shall see the sons of fortune fear every little sickness, the sergeants of
death, Ier. 4.2.
we shall see the sons of grace deride them for their folly, for they never
behold death, but in his ugly form, to their terror: but to these he
appears most beautiful, pleasant, and of delightful conversation: death is
to them a Lion, but our Lamb: his actions in their Scene is tragical, but in
our comicall, and full of heavenly recreations. Whence comes this? 1 Cor. 15.
It is our Savior Christ that has thus caused it, his power has done it, his
hand has wrought it, he has tamed death, he has taken his sting from him,
that it cannot hurt his Elect: he has shut up hell, that has gaped against
us: and has reconciled us to our graves, wherein we may safely repose without
fear and terror: he has commanded death that would perish us, to secure us,
and to present our full proportion before his judgment seat. This has he
done, that is able to do all things: he has done it also for me, my faith
persuades me so. I will acknowledge my self therefore in most dutiful thanks
to my God and Savior, and in every time of distress I will look at death,
and with that serious meditation receive a full proportion of comfort in my
self, through the merit of my Savior, Amen.

A Sweet Contemplation of the Beatificall joys of Heaven, and Heavenly things:
And the Blessed state of a regenerate Christian.
HEre my meditation dazleth, and cannot conceive, and my Contemplation is not
able to discern, and my Pen not able to describe that most excellent bliss
and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. and Romans 8.18.
whereof all the momentanie lightness of our afflictions and tribulations are
not worthy, which all the faithful Elect shall with the blessed Trinity enjoy:
Romans 8.17. 1 Kings 8.27. 2 Cor. 12 2.4. Psalm. 19.5.
from that time they shall be received with Christ as joint heirs, into that
everlasting kingdom of joy, the heaven of heavens, or the third heaven, called
Paradise: which Christ in his humane nature ascended, far above all visible
heavens: which by the firmament, as by an azured Curtain, spangled with
glittering stars, and glorious Planets, is hid, that we cannot behold it with
the corruptible eyes of flesh: the holy Ghost, framing himself to our
weakness, describes the glory of that place, which no man can estimate, no
not by such things as are most precious in the estimation of man: Rev. 21.2.
etc.
and therefore likeneth it to that great and holy City, named the heavenly
Jerusalem. Therefore, O devout soul, lift up thy self above thy self, fly
away in the contemplation of heaven, and heavenly things, make not thy further
abode in this inferior region, where is nothing but travells, and troubles,
cares and trialls, sorrow and woe, fear, wretchedness, Col. 3.2.
and sin, and all deceiving and destroying vanities: Bend all thine
affections upward, unto the superior place, where thy Redeemer lives and
reigns, where thy joys are laid up in the treasury of his Merits, which
shall be made thy merits: his Protection, thy protection: his Death, thy life
eternal: and his Resurrection, thy salvation: where He sits in his glorious
Throne, Matt. 13.43.
accompanied with all the many thousands of Saints and Angels, shining more
bright than so many Suns in glory, sitting about him, and the Body of Christ
in glory and brightness surpassing them all: and there from his Throne of
majesty, Matt. 25.10. to the end.
he shall in the sight and hearing of all the world, pronounce unto his Elect,
Come ye Blessed of my Father, etc. Here is our blessed union with Christ, and
by him with the whole Trinity: here is our absolution from all sins, and our
plenary endowment with all grace and happiness: here is the author, from whom
by Christ proceeds all our felicity: here is our adoption, our birthright and
possession: see here is Gods fatherly care for his Chosen, from the foundation
of the world. O the free, eternal, unchangeable Election of God, who has
given thee an eternal inheritance assured by an holy covenant made in the word
of God, signed with the blood of his Son, 1 Cor. 5.10. etc
and sealed with his Spirit and Sacraments, his chosen Elect shall be translated
out of this woeful, wretched, miserable, and transitory world, into his
eternal happiness, his immortal and everlasting kingdom, Rev. 21.
the Celestial Canaan, that heavenly Jerusalem, so glorious by creation, so
beautiful with delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for
habitation: This shall be thine eternal happiness in the Kingdom of heaven,
where thy life shall be a Communion with the blessed Trinity, thy joy, the
presence of the Lamb: thy exercise singing the ditty Allelu-jah: thy consorts,
Saints and Angels, where youth flourishes, that never waxes old, beauty
lasts that never fades, love abounds that never cools, health continues
that never slacketh, and life remains that never ends: There is light
without darkness, mirth without sadness, health without sickness, wealth
without want, credit without disgrace, beauty without blemish, Psalm. 86.3.
ease without labor, riches without corruption, blessedness without misery,
and consolation that never knows end: where they shall live for ever with him
in full freedom from all evil and in perpetual fruition of all felicity: so
that as nothing shall be found in hell, which shall be desired; so nothing shall
be desired in heaven, which shall not be found: there shall be mirth without
mourning, a life without labor, and day without darkness, eternal
happiness, and happy eternity: there is neither sin nor sorrow, neither
penalty nor penitencie, neither foe nor frighting, neither corruption nor
contention: amity and no enmity, faith and no fraud, godliness and no guile:
love without lust, wisdom without wiliness, simplicity without simulation,
perpetual solace, and solatious perpetuity, prosperous security, and secure
prosperity: There is no malady, no cross, no curse, no vexation nor calamity,
no defect nor deformities, Rev. 22.3.
no tumults nor troubles, no pain nor penury: Rev. 21.4.
all tears shall be done away, all evils removed, all sin abolished, all
wants supplied: There shall be a perfect, plenary, and perpetual possession of
all good things; even of God himself, verse. 3.
who is Goodness it self: There shall be perfection of knowledge, 1 Cor.
13.12. 1 Ioh. 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.10. Phil. 3.21.
no defect in love, happy immortality, certain security, constant amity, and
secure tranquillity. The Soul shall have perfection of Virtues, the Body shall
be full of beauty, strength and agility: the whole man shall enjoy fellowship
with God, fellowship with the Lamb, fellowship with the Angels: a happy
society, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
a sweet communion, all holiness, all happiness, all joys shall be enjoyed.
The King is verity, the Law Charity, the Possession eternity: yea, the full
fruition of Eternal God, who will be All in all unto us: 1 Cor. 25.28.
Indeed God is now All in all unto us, but by means, and in a small measure:
But in heaven, God Himself, Immediately, in fullness of measure, without all
means, will be unto us All in all the good things that our Souls and Bodies
can wish or desire; He himself will be salvation and joy to our Souls, life
and health to our Bodies, Wisd. 13.16.
beauty to our Eyes, music to our Ears, honey to our Mouths, perfume to our
Nostrills, meat to our Bellies, light to our Understanding, contentment to our
Minds, delight to our Hearts, pleasure to our Wills; And what can be lacking,
where God Himself will be the the Soul of our souls? To conclude, we shall
reign like kings, with the King of kings for ever, with fullness of Grace in
our Hearts, and a Diadem of Glory on our Heads, celebrating an everlasting
Sabbath, and singing an Allelu-jah to the Lord for ever: where there is that
unspeakeable splendor, and that most excellent order, and well ordered
excellency of that happy condition and heavenly company.

O what joy will it be to thy Soul, which was wont to see but misery, woe,
afflictions, calamities, and sinful sinning and sinners, now to behold the
glory of the face of God, and to see Christ welcomming thee with an Euge bone
serve, Well done, and welcome thou good and faithful servant, Col. 1.16. Ephesians.
1.21.
eneer into thy Masters joy: And what joy will this be, to behold so many
thousand thousands of Cherubins, Seraphins, Angels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Priests, Professors, and all the souls of thy Friends, Parents, Husbands,
Wives, Children and the rest of Gods Saints, who departed before thee in the
true faith of Christ, standing before the Throne of Gods Majesty in perpetual
bliss and glory. How shall thy Soul be ravished to see her self (by grace)
admitted to stand with this glorious Company, to behold the blessed face of
Christ, and to hear the treasures of his Divine wisdom! How shall thou
rejoice to see so many thousand thousands welcomming thee into their heavenly
society! for as they all rejoiced at thy conversion; so will they now be much
more joyful at thy Coronation. Luke 15.1. etc.
Who can sufficiently express the rejoicing of this heavenly Company, to see
thee thus crowned with glory, Revel. 7.9.
arrayed with the bright shining Robe of Christ's righteousness, and to have
the Palm of victory put into thy hand! Oh, what gratulations will there be,
that thou have escaped all the miseries and afflictions of the world, the
snares of the Devil, the pains of Hell, and obtained with them thy eternal
rest and happiness? For there every one joyeth as much in another happiness
as in his own; because he shall see him as much beloved of God as himself:
yea, they have as many distinct joys, as they have Copartners of their joy;
and in this joyful and blessed state, the soul rests and remains with
Christ in Heaven for ever; the holy Angels, together with this blessed and
heavenly Society there keep (without any labor to distract them) a perpetual
Sabbath, to the glory, honor and praise of the aye-blessed Trinity, for the
creating, redeeming, preserving and sanctifying of the Church, and the members
thereof, and for his might, power, wisdom, justice, mercy and goodness in
the government of Heaven and Earth: Therefore when thou hear a sweet consort
of Music, meditate how happy thou shall be when with the Quire of heavenly
Angels and Saints thou shall sing a part in that spiritual Hallelujah, on that
eternal blessed Sabbath, where there shall be such variety of pleasures, and
saciety of joys as never know tediousness of time or doing, nor end of
delight and happiness. 1 Cor. 13.12.
Oh life to be desired! Oh blessed felicity, in which the most holy Trinity
shall be the perfection of all our desires, which we shall see without end,
love without end, and praise without being weary, to see God will surpass all
joys, to see Christ, to live with Christ, to hear Christ, will surpass all
the desires of our hearts. What can there be wanting? what can be there beside
to be desired or expected more? 1 Cor. 15.28.
Where God is all in all, and shall distribute to every one all good things
according to the measure of his own heart. If thou desire life, if health,
if peace, if honor. God shall be there all in all; the blessed humanity of
Christ shall be there present unto us, and shall entertain us with a most
sweet voice; Cant. 2.14.
His voice is sweet and his face is comely, full of grace are his lips, and is
crowned with glory and honor. There shall he be fullness of light to the
understanding, Psalm. 45.3. Ps. 68.32. etc.
plenty of peace to the will, and continuance of eternity to the memory. The
Son will satisfy the understanding with perfect knowledge, the Holy Ghost
will satisfy the will with most sweet love, and the Father will satisfy the
memory with the remembrance of both. Let the faithful Soul be here
astonished, and adore the mercy of her Savior; for he does not only receive
us his enemies into favor; but he does also forgive us our sins, and bestow
upon us righteousness, and receive us into our heavenly inheritance, and makes
us like unto the Angels, yea like unto himself blessed for ever. Oh most
blessed City! Revel. 21.23.
celestial Canaan! Oh heavenly Jerusalem, O the most holy seat of the most
holy and blessed Trinity! When will that Sun rise upon me which
inlighteneth that holy City. We are yet banished from our Country; but there
we shall enjoy an ample inheritance. Ioh. 1.12.
To those that believe power is given to be made sons of God; and if we be
sons, then are we also Heirs of God, Psalm. 16.1.
and coheires with Christ. Lift up thy self, O devout soul, and long to come
to the Lord, the portion of thine inheritance, and thy exceeding great reward.
Gen 15.1.
What could the most ample mercy and bounty of God bestow more upon us? He
gives us life, he bestows his Son, Act. 27.27.28.
and bestows himself; if he had any thing greater in heaven or earth, he
would bestow even that also upon us. In God we live, Gods Temple we are, 1 Cor.
3.16.
God we possess indeed; here in the spirit and in a Mystery; but in heaven in
truth, and indeed: our hope there shall become our full fruition, and dwell
with him for ever. Psalm. 42.1.2.
Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, and make us partakers of that heavenly glory.

Esteem not thou faithful soul, the trifling pleasures of this life to be
the way to this everlasting worlds wealth; nor the ignominious estate here;
nor troubles and afflictions to be any bar to prevent thee from the enjoying
of the full use and joyful fruition of the glory there prepared for thee: be
assured that though thou want here, thou shall have riches there; though thou
hunger here, thou shall have fullness there; though thou be ready to faint
here, thou shall be refreshed there; and though thou be here abjected and
cast down, and accounted as a dead man; yet shall thou there live in
perpetual glory; and though thou have run this comfortless race through this
miserable earthly veil; yet there shall thou reign for ever: the honor on
this earth in comparison of that is baseness; the riches of this world, is
poverty; the fullness of this life is want; the joys of this worlds Kingdom,
are sorrow, woe, misery, sadness, grief and calamity; Psalm. 53.1.
and yet the Fool says in his heart, that there is no other Heaven but this
harmefull deceiving worlds happiness; no other Hell but this Worlds
bitterness, no bitter torment, then this worlds cares; no further help, then
this worlds wealth: thus is the wisdom of man become foolishness, his glory
turned into shame; man's power made of no force; and the faithful poor that
are here despised, are there advanced; the sorrowful are comforted, and the
cast-awayes of this world are received to that blessed being, that cannot be
expressed with the tongue, described with the Pen, nor conceived with the heart
of man.

Psalm. 55.6.
O that I had wings (says heavenly hearted David) that I might fly away from
this worlds vanities, and to possess Heavens eternal happiness! Ph^lip. 1.23
Oh that I were dissolved (says blessed Paul) that I might be with Christ! Oh
that I were in this place of such wished happiness, where I might rest from
this Worlds labors, earthly miseries and transitory vanities. Let us daily
meditate of the greatness and Majesty of this high Heavens glorious and
blessed estate, where we shall one day bless our God, with the blessed Company
of that most excellent Unity, where we shall one day sit secure and free from
the dangers, perils, troubles, crosses, and afflictions, which do in this
world assail us on every side both within and without, that we are never free
from one calamity or other. 2 Cor. 1.3.4.5.6.7.
Oh blessed are all they that are thus assured! blessed are the poor that
shall have this Heavens riches! blessed are the base that shall be thus
exalted! blessed are the low and cast down that shall be thus raised and
advanced! and blessed are the Worlds despised, that shall have this Heavens
happiness! yea, happy is this worlds unhappy man, for he shall be happy for
ever! Now therefore, O devout Soul, stand up, fear not, faint not; but give
glory to this great God, praise this high and helping God; seek him in time
while it is to day; drive not off to pray to this God, notwithstanding any hope
thou have in mortal men; pray for, and reject not his gracious means, who in
favor infinite, and mercy endless, moves the hearts of men in this life to
do good unto such as he sees distressed; he can find out and afford
infinite means to succor them that are his, and will not leave them forsaken,
in danger; 1 Cor. 10.13.
for he even here gives his blessings as pledges of his never-failing love,
that being visited in his mercy with timely comforts here, we may assure our
selves of greater blessings in Heaven, where they are prepared for his
faithful Elect, beyond all that humane nature can ask or think. Therefore,
(O devout Soul) sigh no more, sorrow no more, be no more pensive at outward
poverty, fret no more at the worlds crosses, grieve no more at the worlds
miseries, dismay no more for thy many sins; but strive always to stand in
the favor of this high and helping God, and he will set thee free, and banish
thy fear, and fill thy cup, and feed thee with the hidden treasures of his
never-failing love. Unto whom be given all Glory, Praise, Honor, Power, Might,
Majesty and Dominion now and evermore. Amen.

Thus ends our PROGRESS.
The Conclusion.
NOw have thou seen how glorious and perfect God is, and how that all thy
chief bliss and happiness consists in having an eternal Communion with his
Majesty: therefore, (O impenitent Sinner) in the bowels of Christ Jesus, I
entreat thee (as thou tenderest thy own Salvation) seriously to consider with
me how false, how vain, how vile are those things which still retain and
chain thee in thy wretched and cursed estate wherein thou live, The vanity
and wretchedness of this present life.
and do hinder thee from the favor of God, and the hope of eternal life and
happiness, and seeing that likewise thou see how great is thy happiness in
Christ, and how vain are the hindrances that debar thee from the same;
Beware (as the Apostle exhorts) of the deceitfulness of sin; Heb. 3.13.
for that sin which seems now to be so pleasing to thy corrupt nature,
will one day prove the bitterest enemy to thy distressed soul, and in the
mean while harden unawares thine impenitent heart. Sin as a Serpent seems
beautiful to the eye; but take heed of the sting behind, whose venomous
effects if thou knewst thou would as carefully fly from sin as from a
Serpent. To conclude all, forasmuch as thou see that without Christ thou art
but a slave of sin, deaths vassal, and worms meat, whose thoughts are vain,
whose deeds are vile, whose pleasures have scarce beginning; whose miseries
never know end: what wise man would incur these Hellish torments, though he
might (by living in sin) purchase to himself for a time the Empire of
Augustus, the Riches of Croessus, the Pleasures of Solomon, the Policy of
Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.
the voluptuous Fare, and fine Apparel of Dives; Mat. 16.26. Mark 8.36.
for, What should it avail a man (as our Savior says) to win the whole World
for a ti^^, and then to lose his Soul in Hell for ever.

FINIS.
Jmprimatur,

THO: WYKES.
September. 1. 1638.

