THE MISCELLANIE, OR, A Registrie, and Methodicall Directorie of ORIZONS.

Exhibiting A Presentment of the Souls Requests in the high Court of the
heavenly Parliament: Prefaced with Meditations of a threefold distinct Nature,
Preparatiuely instructing the Christian Soul,

For 1 Prayer by Testimonies of the 1. Scriptures, 2. Fathers of the Church.
commending Prayer. Remedies againg Impediments hindering Devotion, and are 7
with a Special Preface divided into Sections. Helps furthering Devotion, and
are 6 with a Special Preface divided into Sections.


Medi 2 -- The Lords Supper. 3 -- Mortality, and Death.


1. Timothy 2. 1, 2 3. 1. ^ exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications;
Prayers, Intercessions; and giving of Thanks, be made for all men.

2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that (...) may lead a
quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

3. For it is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

Imprinted at London for J. Harison, dwelling at the sign of the golden Anchor
in Paternoster row. 1615.

TO The most excellent, godly, virtuous, learned, our gracious Sovereign
Lord, JAMES, by the grace of God of great Britain, France, and Ireland, King,
defender of the true, Christian Catholic Faith.
RIGHT-NOBLE, MOST RENOWNED, MY DREAD SOVEREIGN;
IT is an ancient saying of a divine Philosopher, that Commonwealths are then
happy and fortunate, when either the Wise and Learned, called Philosophers,
govern them, or their Governors and Rulers be Philosophers; that is, lovers
of Wisdom and Learning. Some, to make resemblance of this Truth, do
Emblematize it in the Picture of Pallas, ( whom the Antiquity deemed the
Goddsse of Wisdom) portraicted with a Shield or Target: by which they would
give us to understand, that the whole World, figured under the form of that
Shield, is governed of Wisdom; and by means hereof, a Prince to be invested,
as it were, into a possession of two Kingdoms; the one, of Saturn, which is
Contemplation: The other of Jupiter, which is Action. And to make this to
appear more plain, the Astronomer is bold to say, That no great matters for
weightinesse, nor firm for perpetuity, can be done by any, but in whom
Saturn the Philosopher, and Jupiter the King, are united, ( like Hippocrates
Twins) sympathizing in one, and the same person of a chief Governor, whom
for that cause, they call most happy, as having the Dietie of Pallas ( to use
their words) residing in his Breast; both to possess Knowledge, and to carry
the Lance: For that Knowledge without Power and Might, profits few; and
Power, without Knowledge and Wisdom, does hurt many. This seems to have
been a received Truth of the Antiquity: For, in this sense we read, that the
Kings or Rulers of former times were chosen such, as should both at home
provide for the aduauncing Virtue, and repressing Vice; And also repel Foreine
forces from Invasions; yea upon occasions likewise, Lead an Army abroad:
showing that in these two things, was necessarily comprised the very chief
Office of Kings and Rulers: The one to be performed by good Laws, and
administering Justice always: The other, by Arms, and Martial Cheualrie, as
the times require: For this last, is extraordinary, and in case it must be so:
But that former is ordinary and perpetually in use, and not to be omitted. For
this cause in those heroical Times, all Kings were both Judges, and Captains
of War, as says Aristotle This is manifested in the first Kings of the
ancient Grecians, 1 Aeacus, 2 Minos, and 3 Rhodamanthus, who 1. 2. 3.
all three were called by no other name usually, then by the name and title of
Judges; manifested likewse in those Epithets attributed to Kings, by Homer,
calling them, Shepherds of the people; to note a special care appropriated to
them of Legal protection every way, which also is the very same argument that
the holy Ghost is pleased to use in S. Paul, showing the end for which Rulers
and Kings are appointed, even that they by Gods favor, faithfully executing
their Office, the people under them may 1. Tim. 2. 2.
lead a quiet, and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And for
specialtie the said Poet Homer celebrateth Agamemnon King and General of the
Grecian Army against Troy. And to speak out of History, we read in
Herodotus, that Dioces among the Medes, was first made Judge, and afterward
King: having appointed to him a corporal Guard, as well for his own safety,
as also to keep in awe the Potent and Mighty, and to repress in them
insolent Wrongs against the weaker sort of inferior note. Again, the
Laced^monian Kings, as in time of peace they ruled by the Sword of Justice; So
in the Field against their Enemy, they had an absolute Command, ( though
perhaps herein, some will say; by a special Commission from the Ephori,
delivered them enclosed in that round piece of Wood, called their Scytale,)
both for a good King, and a stout Warrior, by those two epitheted adiunctes
defining him a fit Governor of his people, aswlll for War, as for Peace.
Neither the Romans, who succeeded the Grecians in the Empire, were herein
wanting to themselves; for they also after their example, constituted Kings for
Justice sake, as Tullie says, by their Authority to be maintained among them
for the common good. Now this name of King, having the style of great State and
Majesty, ( as being most eminent amongst men) was therefore so plausible to
the Israelites, and so lively in their Eye, as that they thought themselves
inferior to the Ethniques, so long as they were without a Ruler by that Name;
and therefore asked of Samuel a King, first to Judge 1. Sam. 8. 5. 20
them only: But afterward they would have a King like other Nations, both to
judge them, and also to go before them, and to fight their Battles. And so
they had a King by appointment from GOD, promised them before in Deuteronomie,
Deuteronomy 17. 14. 15.
if they should ask one when they were come into the land of Canaan, which he
would give them to possess; For as then GOD was their sole and only King; and
being the King of Kings, was instead of all, and vouchsafing them always his
one presence, was still among them between the 1. Sam. 4. 4
Cherubims, fr^ whence the Lord answered, and gave out Oracles in all weighty
matters, by 1. Dreams 1. Sam. 28. 6
by ^ Vrim, or by his 3. Prophets; in this manner designeing Judges for Peace,
and appoynting Captains for War extraordinarily, as Joshua, Number. 27. ^8.
Judah, Judge. 1. 2.
Othniel, Judge. 3. 9.
Deborah, Judge. 4. 4.
Gedion, Judge. 6. 14.
etc. And so to Samuel, 1. Sam. 7. 15
who judged Israel all the days of his life: And anointed Saul ^ Sam. 10. 1.
the first King to be the Governor of the Lords inheritance. But to go on in
the matter proposed, it appears by those former allegations of Testimonies
and Examples, that Men at the first were made Rulers and Governors over people
for a common defense to them both in War and Peace: and therefore we may not
think but they were qualified through Wisdom thereto, as having that Eye of
the Learned, defined to be the Judicious discreet Eye, clearly insighted in
the precepts of true Policy; which said Eye, is framed and fashioned, as it
were, first out of a wit to inquire into the quality of State-affaires.
Secondly, out of a Judgment deliberatiue, fitted by much experience to define
and determine them: And lastly, out of a and expedit for speedy execution
accordingly. For this Eye weighing, in the Balance of a Well instructed
discretion, the differences of former Times passed, with the late Customs of
our modern Times, and now present in esse, both 1. abrogateth, 2. reformeth,
and also 3. establishes 1. 2. 3.
Laws; prudently attemperating the reason and use of them, to the distinct
forms of Government in several; which by reason of Change in the manners of
the People, must of necessity admit also Change and alteration in themselves:
and so in the sense of that Civil Law maxim, as things that happen a new,
have need of new reforming Remedies: Which none can be excogitated fitly, and
set for good, without this judicious Eye of the Learned; for which cause it
has been in very high esteem always among Kings, Princes, and men of State,
in that rank for Wisdom remarkable. A matter therefore for excellency not
only in Confession deserving approouement, but much more in Action
(suffragating thereto) singulerly applauded; as is pregnantly related in
Histories of former age. But what needs any recital of foreign examples for
testimony of this truth. To write personal Commendations of living Princes,
especially to themselves, may be held a verbal Simonie; yet, Shall true
praises be smothered in silence, for fear of unjust blame? Only I do
deprecat the suspicion of Flattery, and crave to be bold to utter a true
thought of a loyal Heart, and say, Your Highness, o most Noble, ( worthily so
termed) defender of the Faith, ( which indeed is the very true, ancient,
Catholic Faith) being not only Learned your self in all knowledges fitting
(for Ornament) the stately personage of a Monarchical Governor, ( for this
cause to be truly accounted a LIVING LIBRARY, and a Walking Study); But also
singulerly affecting, and charily forstering the professors of Learning and
good Arts, ( in both these names a myrrour of Kings) do make alone, without
example, the asseueration of the former assertion good, in as much as thus
ordering the Government politic of your Realms and Kingdoms by Wisdom
through wholesome Laws, you have settled and established them in a blessed
Christian Peace and tranquillity, beautifying, and beatifying, both Church and
Commonwealth thereby. This apparently manifested to all your Subjects, ( I
mean Subjects of the best note for true loyalty to your Royal Scepter) who
seeing, (and confessing also an acknowledgment of the same) do rightly and
willingly attribute it to that iudiciously discreet Eye of Learning and
Wisdom, spoken of before; and is in your Majesty the better quick-sighted,
and more clearly perspicuous, for that it has received illumination from the
Spirit of that Wisdom which Solomon calls, The Wisdo 7. 26.
Brightness of the everlasting Light, and, The image of Gods goodness. In the
virtue and power whereof, your Majesty being always guided, can at no time be
deceived in the course of your Government; which as it is now in appearance,
will be hereafter better made known in the public good, being the chief end
of a well settled State. For this Wisdom tells Kings and Princes, that they
are appointed Rulers over Men for Men's sake. And as by this, they are Lords;
so are they Tutors and Protectors of their People. O truly just and most
lawfully ruling Prince! who in this sublimious state of a preheminenced
Sovereignty, has notwithstanding adjoined, and (as it were conserted)
reverend Modesty to Princely Majesty, desirous to be held and reputed of his
Vassals rather Good for Clemency, then Great for Power; a Father of his
Co^ntrie, much ^ore, then a Lord over Men: whom he knowing to be given him of
God, for their special good and benefit, is not seduced by high thoughts of
his stately* Dignity, from executing the kind, and loue-meriting parts of
that necessary Charge committed to him from above, acknowledging with Adrian
the Emperor, the Commonwealth to be the Wealth and Welfare of his People, and
not his own in proper. A true and plausible effect of Wisdom and Learning
specified in that worthy saying mentioned before, and much celebrated in the
writings of the best learned Politiques of either Philosophying Rulers, or
Ruling Philosophers, making happy Commonwealths by the use thereof, and for
it worth has carried a long my Pen unto this discourse, the rather because it
has a true conformity with your Majesty's Royal deportment, in the whole
course of your Highness Rule over us with great correspondence. But this
notwithstanding (though very plausible both in opinion and example.) Religion,
in specialtie, is that, which first reduces the Throane of a Prince into a
form of government by wisdom; and afterward raises and setleth it in an
Eminent height of a most flourishing state; For those Commonwealths are in the
Eye and speech of all men religiously wise, most firm, and permanent, in whose
midst is seated the Temple of God, yea who themselves are in deed the very
Temple of God; so as all Kings and Princes, which do reign with God, do
reign most happily and best secured; as of your Majesty is acknowledged to
be well understood for a truth, even at the first entrance and commencement of
your Reign over us. For, (may it please your Grace my most gracious
Sovereign) to give me leave, I shall remember unto This Conference ^eld at
Hampton Count ^anu. 14. 1603.
your Highness your own words, making proof thereof, in that Conference had
with the Lords, Bishops, and others of the Clergy, about Church Matters when
to declare your Princely meaning in calling that assembly, you said, It was
after the example of all Christian Princes, to take the first course for the
establishing of the Church, both for Doctrine and Policy: Wherein your Highness
manifested that See (...) Lib. 1. page ^.
religious Care, which is best fitting the Royal person of a Christian Prince,
knowing, and doing to your Subjects also thereby to know, that the maine
Pillar of a Politic State for happiness, in permanencie and stabilitie in
Religion; which cannot be settled, but by that true Wisdom whereof Solomon
speaks, calling it, The Wisd. 7. 25.
Breath of the Power of God: For, if God Job. 12. 18.
loses the Collar of Kings, and girdeth their Loins with a Girdle, as Job
speaks, which as by interpretation out of Daniel, Dani^. 2. 21.
takes away Kings, and sets up Kings; it is out of question, that the
Throane of Princes is the Throane of God; So acknowledged, and in words
confessed of the Queen of Sheba, when she said to Solomon, 2. Chro. 9. 8.
Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set thee on his Throane as
King in stead of the Lord thy God. And this Throane, David calls the Throane
1. Chro. 28. 5^
of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel. And in a fit correspondence hereto,
Salomo^ testifies unto God, that he made 2. Chrno. 1. 8. 9.
him King over a great people, to reign in his father David's stead, Therefore
in the Proverbs the Wisdom of God challenges this power of Constituting
Kings, to her self only, saying, By Prou. 8. 15 16.
me Kings reign, and by me Princes rule. This is that wisdom of God, which
dwells with prudence, and finds out knowledge, and ver. 12.
Counsel, even the true knowledge of the King of Heaven; without which no King
can well reign, nor bear rule on Earth. In this sense speaks Lactantius
very soundly to the purpose: Lib. 5. Instit. 8.
Therefore does all evil and mischief ( says he) daily increase, lying
heavy and weighty upon man, because God the maker and governor of this world
is forsaken, and wicked Religions professed against his true worship: For, All
the wisedeme of man, ( says the same Author) See
consists in this one thing: first, to know God; (...) page 1. 2. 3, lati.
Lib. 1.
then to worship him: So, Wisdom preceading, and Religion attending, it must
be, that true Worshipping of God, is a Consequent, to a Sound knowing him, as
He is to be worshipped. Writing of this matter to your sacred person, I
beseech your Highness, let me use here your own words See (...) page 1. 2. 3.
Lattin.
for proof to be alleged out of your own Book of the Institution of that
most noble and heroical Prince HENRY, our late Prince of the best and
greatest hopes.

In the beginning of which your said Book, your self does profess, None to
be meet to govern a Christian religious Nation, who does not (how great
soever) from his heart, worship and reverence the divine Godhead. And Lib. 1.
6. in the Latin.
proceeding further in this Argument, your Majesty sets down Two degrees
of this Worship from Mah to God: The one Inferior, which ascends: The other
Exterior, 1. 2.
which descends. The former consisting in Prayer, and in Faith toward God:
The latter, in Actions issuing from that Fountain: so as that former
contains nothing else but a right use of Religion to be exhibited unto God:
That other, respects the Rule of Christ; Math. 7. 12 Luke 6. 31.
What you would Men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them; which is
the Rule of Justice and Equabilitie, preceptiue in the Law and Gospel for
Love and Charity to each other. Here to continue this Discourse, (into which
I am willingly entered, as being fitted in part to the Argument of this my
Book, treating of See (...) Lib. 1. page 7. in the Latin.
Prayer) I humbly crave leave of your Majesty, to speak hereof unto you, out
of that your learned Treatise truly Religious, and Christianly Politic. I
find in it Religion defined, that manner of worshipping God, which himself
has appointed out of his manifest revealed Will, receiving life from a true
Faith; and so by it seems to be animated and quickened unto all good Works:
also preserved by a right Conscience, and so continued in that knowledge of
God, ( with which he has enlightened the Mind of man) both against
Reprobation, and Impenitencie, page 16. lat 19.
the Leprosy of the Soul; and also against Superstition, the very Nurse and
Fosterer of ^rronious opinions peremtorily derogating from the truth of Gods
word. This then kept sincerely pure from pollution of Sin in Manners, and of
errors in the doctrine ^^ Faith, that interior worship of God which your
Grace there mentions, will have an easy ascent unto him, and be the more
plausible in his sight for acceptance, religiously commended by Devotion, and
Zeal in Prayer.

To enforce here a necessity of Prayer by Arguments (which is sufficiently
treated of in the Preface, or fore-speech of this my Book) were to set a
Candle in the Sun flaming to give light at noonday: For although Divinity,
( as it is o^ccupied in the Theorie of God, and heavenly things, both to be
believed, and hoped for,) may seem a speculatiue Discipline, only for the
Souls bare knowledge; yet, if the Schoolmen grant (which argue this point)
that Consent in believing the Doctrine of Christian Faith, is an Action of the
Will and Mind of Man; it must needs follow, that Divinity is also a
Practicque Doctrine, which requires the same of Man: For what respects
Consent, but Action in consequence unto Knowledge, which was in precedence to
it? Christianity consists not in Wording: It is mere Vanity, yea dissolute
Security, to dicourse of Faith, out of the Scriptures, and for defense thereof
to allege Theological reasons, and Authorities, if also there be no Consent,
and Agreement for acting the Works thereof. Christ said to his Disciples, Ioh.
13. 17.
If ye Know these things; blessed are ye, if ye Do them. Doing therefore,
and not Knowing only, blesses the Christian* For, He that Luke 12. 47.
Knows* and Does not, shall be beaten with many stripes. As so by all true
consequence, Divinity is a Practicque Doctrine, and not only Theoricque, and
Speculatiue.

To come then to the matter of Prayer purposed, for as much as our Soul has no
ability of it self to deserve any thing, but must depend wholly upon Christ;
who is the true bright shining light of righteousness for all grace working
acceptance before God, ( which not obtained, all knowledge contemplative is
idle, and unprofitable) we must needs holdit very necessary (The state of the
Soul, thus disabled through it own infirmities) that we attend upon Prayer
sedulously and seriously, by it in Christ's name to call unto God for his
Spirit, to lighten our understanding with the iufluences of his Grace, which is
only powerful unto all virtue, as [to analogize great things to small] may be
observed in the Moon, to work upon these inferior Sublimarie bodies, in
every one (after their several qualities and natures) conformably to the
Light it receives from the Sun. There is no assurance to the Elect and Godly
of obteining either spiritual Graces, or otherwise the favor of God, for any
other temperall Benefits, but by Faith. This is the Solicitor, that makes
the motions in the celestial Star Chamber befort the Throane of the high Judge
of our Souls for access of our Supplicatorie Requests, to be presented and
pleaded there, by our Aduocat Christ. And how does Faith make these motions,
but by Prayer only? For as (...), Lib. 1. page 11 in the latin.
Faith in that your Majesty's Princely Institution is truly said to be the
Nurse, and Cherisher of all Religion, and Piety. So is Prayer there also said
to be the fosterer, aduancer, and mainteynor of this religiouse true
Catholicque Faith; by which is wrought in our minds a firm persuasion, and
sure apprehention of God his Promises; as your Highness has there defined,
calling it that Golden Chain, by which the faithful Soul is lincked, and
annexed unto Christ: for in him only are they made; and to the godly by him,
and for him, shallbe always yea and Amen.

The Faithful assurance of the Godly, is in 1. grounding, and 2. guarding. If
then the Godly will be grounded as the which cannot be removed but stands
fast for ever; And guarded as Jerusalem, which is compassed about with Hills
on every side; Let them be intentive to continual Prayer, which cherishes
their faith, settling it in Gods promises, whereby it is made strange against all
Ephe. 6. 16.
the fiery Darts of the wicked, And to Pet. 5. 9.
resist the Devil. So as Prayer, next to Preaching the Word, ought most
specially to be had in esteem and regard of us: But first in place, is the
divine Word, out of which God speaks unto us by his Ministers, and
instructs our Consciences in the true knowledge of his Faith, ( for Faith
Romans 10. 17
is by hearing,) and therefore great care, and diligence is to be used, in
hearing frequently the sacred Doctrine with attention and reverence, as your
Majesty (...) Lib. 1. page 5.
advises.

Next to it, succeeds Prayer, for the very special use and necessity
thereof as may appear proved both in the examples of the godly practizing it,
and also in the exhortatiue precepts given for it throughout the whole body of
the Scripture, and so (...) Lib. 1. page 12. in the Lattin
( as I take it) understood of your Highness commending next to that most
absolute form of Prayer made by our Savior Christ, the divine Psalms of
David, from whence* as out of a rich Vain, and pure Fountain, may plentifully
be taken, those forms of Prayers and Supplica^ions that may make for either
1. Necessity, or for 2. Comfort* Now that the Ministry 1. 2.
of the word preached, has of right a precedence to Prayer; and that Prayer,
in the next place is subordinated thereto as a subsequent, may thus appear; For
that the Word, being the ground of Gods promises in Christ, signed to us by the
Seal of his Spirit, we had need to be first instructed by it, how that God
being not as man that he should lie, or repent him of the good he purposes
to his Children, is very Truth it self, and so secureth them of performance,
in as much. as he knows it to be a part of his glory ( whereof he is
always jealous) to perform what he promises in his Word.

Again, the Nature and Effects of Prayer, both what it is in it self, and
how to be confined, and also, what force it has in working to the good of them
that use it, is also first to be learned; which cannot be had before it be
taught out of the said divine Word. Hereby our Faith well instructed,
addresseth it self the more boldly and soundly to Prayer, which is a singular
prerogative of Gods high service for his Glory vouchsafed his Children; Yea,
and commanded to be offered up of them at all times, for the supplying all
their wantes, both in spiritual Graces to the Souls good, and also in
Temporal commodities to the welfare of the Body. At all which times, we are
specially to have good respect of our behavior and gesture in Praying, that it
be with all Reverence due to such a Majesty, that fills the Heavens. For if
a Subject may not dare (...) Lib. 1. 13. ^at*
to present himself before the King ( whether by Petition, or otherwise) but
submissely and accommodately; How much less is any Man* ( who is mortal) to
presume to call unto the Almighty GOD, as to his companion and fellow?

In deed a wise discreet Man will not appear before any of eminent
Superiority, to ask any thing at his hands, but well pr^pared every way in
reverent Gesture, and fitting Speeches; for he brings his Errand with him
well furnished* If then such provident care be had of worldly Authority for
worldly respects how ought we to be advised in what sort and manner we do
present our selves, and our speeches, before the Lord God, craving of him
Spiritual graces. Of all these points, I have spoken in the Preface, to my
Book sufficiently (I hope,) and I may say also of purpose, for the instruction
of some Readers, perhaps not so thoroughly learned in the knowledge of them, as
the necessity thereof requires: Needless therefore may seem here any
commentation upon a Subject of this Nature. But vouchsas* me herein your most
Gracious aspect, I hambly crave it; and be pleased to know, that your Highness
first Book of your (...) in concurrence of this matter corresponding to mine,
did first induce me to insert this Discourse, and has continued me also in
it unto this extent of longitude; the which being graciously pardoned of your
Majesty, J may hope of a favorable construction in the Argument it self thus
discussed: For, as in ^scussing the matter and subject of my Book ( which is
made specially for Prayer,) I follow the common style of Dedicatories for
example, which all in a manner do the same: So, having in purpose to
consecrate it unto your Highness, I thought it very meet for appl^use to
fashion, in some sort, the handling of the matter contained therein out of that
your Majesty's Book, as it were by a suffragie from your own mouth witnessing
the Truth of what is alleged from thence in my writing, and so to commend it
to the censure of the indicious and wise Reader. Were I either able for
Learning, or for my Person worthy to blaze, and decipher the singular, and most
eminent endowments of nature (wherewith the Divine Majesty, from above has
bountifully enriched, and graciously blessed your sacred Majesty) I would most
gladly (as already acknowledged of others) so to their learned ^udgments
ascribe my opinion also in particular, for a testimony of my Loyal heart
unfeignedly devoted to the best and highest thoughts that is fit for Subjects of
true allegiance and Fealty to carry of your Highness honorable, heroical,
and well deserving Praises. Notwithstanding that I may not seem to forget
carelessly the Laws of dedicatorie writings or purpose neglect, for fear to
be reputed a flatterer in following them (which drawing to the conclusion, do
commonly insert in the Catastrophe a commemoration of personal commendations*)
J will capitulate some few speeches of that sense, such as I have read,
recorded, and published in other men's Writings, and so after this manner
only, as it were by my bare suffragie, applaude in assent to the truth of
their renowming encomies. Your Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions consisting of
a Twofold government; the one Spiritual in all Church-causes, and over all
Persons: The other Temporal, for the managing of Civil and Politic affairs
with great dexterity both supreme and sovereign, is therefore celebrated to
be beautified highly, in the words of excellent Knowledge, Wisdom, Prudence,
Justice, Religion, and Godliness: which must needs be those Princely
qualities* for which your Highness ( as one says) being eminent, we* your
Subjects are, and shall be, the happier. -- Your Theological Wisdom and
Learning in matters of Religion; your witten (...), and other your Books, and
sundry Speeches, extant and in the Eye of the World, can sufficiently witness:
yet for more specialtie it is made known, and manifessed in that into
locutorie Conference mentioned of me before in this Dedicatorie; Of which I
read these several Judgments given out by great persons of State, and High
note, eare-witnesses the same time of your Majesty's intercourse speeches, then
uttered and auerred, to have been such as that one says, J am fully
persuaded, that his Majesty spoke by the instinct of the Conference. page 83.
84.
spirit of God. Another says, that he had often heard and read, that, Rex est
mixta persona cum Sacerdote; But he never saw the truth thereof, till that
day. And a third, accomodating his testimony in truth to these, writes; That
the Title of a living Library, and of walking Study, might properly fit your
Majesty: for which cause he says further; That In the Preface to the Reader.
it was pity to loose one Syllable of your admirable Speeches: The words
whereof there, and then uttered by your Highness in that Conference bieng like
Apples of Gold, with pictures of Silver for the apt fitting them in their
places conveniently, and iudiciously. Nay the same party says further, That
your Majesty did so admirably both for understanding, Speech, and Page 20.
Judgment, handle the points there propounded, as that they were sent away
(upon the breaking up) not with Contentment only, but astonishment. -- And as
touching your Politicque wisdom, Prudence, and Justice in State affairs,
thereby administered and brought into good Government: Yea, as one In the
Preface to the Reader
says, (to use his own words) beautifying it to Gods glory, with the
Churches good, as many may with truth acknowledge Conference.
it, as have loyal Hearts devoted to a truth, and will be well affected in
sincerity to testify and confess the same upon occasion.

But neither is here wanting public Testimony hereof, forasmuch The
Protestants Counterpo^s to the Catholicques Supplication
as I find it also avouched in print; Such to be the rare Perfections,* and
admirable Guiftes of the aboue-said Virtues wherewith the bountiful hand of
Gods divine Majesty has endued your Majesty, as in the deapth of your
provident Judgment, we doubt not, but you foresee, what concerns both the
Spiritual, and Temporal government of all your Kingdoms and Dominions. --
Then well said he, who thus said. Our duty, as we are Men (yea, I may say,
as we are true Subjects,) to be an acknowledgment of our settled State in your
Royal person. -- Many more Testimonies The Preface to the Conference.
of a deserved Truth in this kind, might be here alleged. But to your
Majesty ( whose humble deportment in those your most eminent Sublimities has
always held suspected all words of Praises in commendation of your own
person) these already cited, may seem perhaps, distasteful, and so rejected,
as not acceptance-worthy. If it be offensive thus in the Phrase and Style of
others to write unto your Majesty of your self, as it were, in os laudare;
yet because it has the Testimony of a loyal Heart devoted to the best
Thoughts ( as I have said) of your rare Virtues much praise worthy; and
therefore meet to be uttered at all times, as occasion fitly serves, both in
writing and speaking without d^ssimulation, I may hope also it to be
pardonable; And therefore am yet further bold in all humility to crave your
Graces most gracious favorable leave to adioyne to these former, mine own
private commendation of your singular clemency, and benignity toward your
Subjects. For among all those guiftes of Grace, and Nature, ( which are in
your Majesty for variety manifold, and for their worth very singular) none
yet for applause generally may seem rightly superiorating that of Bounty, and
Clemency, noted of all in your Grace more eminent, as remarkable for many
presidented particulers. A memorable virtue, and eternizing Memory; the which
as it is best agreeable to man's Nature; so, beseeming none more then Kings and
Princes, ( as they write,) because it conciliateth and breeds the love of
their Subjects; by which both Security, issuing therefrom, and also
Stabilitie; proceeding out of it, is gotten, and procured to the common good of
all subjected to their government; whom, rather to find good, and dutiful,
then otherwise to make such, is honor to them; which is, to fear not a King,
but for a King: And this to do* is a strengthening safety both to King and
Subjects.

Wise Tac^tus, gives this Precept of a pitying Justice, To In Agric.
be content most often with the Repentance of one offending, and not often to
punish all offenses: Yea, says Claudian the Poet; It is a kind of Punishment
to see an Offendour dejected with true Sorrow for his faults, submisly
entreating pardon. This is that true Magnanimity, which your Basilicon
treats of, and advises to be embraced: Not in taking reuengement, but by
accompting him, that has offended, unworthy your Anger; and so by ouer-swaying
that Passion, to triumph, and joy greatly in this, that you (...) Lib. 2. page
100.
have commanded your self, ( yea against your own will) to grant Pardon.

And this by way of Counsel there written of your Majesty, appears through
your own practice in this your Graces mild government over us, to have been
set down in great judgment, long premedit^ted and purposed for action;
knowing and rightly understanding, that it causes Man by imitation, to draw
nearest unto God, whose Mercy, and loving kindness, is above all his Works.

For this cause, are Kings and Princes in the Scripture, Psalm. 82. 6.
termed Gods, that they being by function Lieuetenants to GOD upon Earth,
should also expressly imitate, in their Rule Joel. 2. 1^.
and Government, this divine Virtue ( appropriated to his Nature,) of
Clemency, Patience, and long Suffering. A virtue so highly applauded and
magnified of the Heathen, that (as Aristotle writes) Many Philosophers have
attributed divine honors to it, calling it Beneficence of doing good. And
Seneca will have that only Lightning which Jupiter sends forth, to be most
plaucible and mild; herein having reference to those kind of Lightnings which
the Latins call albas Manubias, and said to be harmless, for that they are
made by Jupiter in a friendly traiection, and shooting forth to the Sun
without offense to any. -- This was a constant opinion of Antiquity; doing
thereby to understand, that Jupiter ( whom they took to be the Prince of the
Gods,) is never angry at any, never hurts or violateth; neither judges and
condemns any. This, though fabulously delivered in the writings of those
ancient, both Philosophers and Poets, does yet seem parallelwise to keep the
same proportion, with the like, au^rred by the Hebrews, concerning the common
calamities of Plagues, Pestilence, Diseases, and other Casualties, happening to
Man for a chastisement of Sin: in which respect, all such kind of Evil, is
called Malum paenae, and in this name sent from God, as the Scripture teaches.
Isay 45 7. Amos 3. 6.


Notwithstanding (say they) these Evils come not from God immediately, as from
the efficient prime cause to be taken for the chief Author of them; but are
derived by a certain consent Bodin de repu^. lib. 4.
from a middle intercurrent cause not inhibiting and restraining the ordinary
or extraordinary course of them; the which cause, they in their usual speech
express by the word Hiphil: Not thereby denying his Justice, but preferring
his Mercy and Clemency; forgiving rather then punishing: Psalm. 103. 8, Da^.
9. 9.
which causes in his Children a Sonly fear, tempered with an obseruant Love,
prescribed to Kings as an example for imitation, that so they do honor God in
Heaven by this virtue of whom themselves are honored on Earth, by that his
own Title. How, and in what Terms this is performed, your (...) Lib. 2. page
23. 25. 24. 25.
Majesty shows in that your Comparison of a King, and a Tyrant, by apt Notes
differencing them: where you define a King to be as a Father indulgent, and a
Lord, Sovereign, but not unkind: one, not so much borne to his people a King,
as given of God from above, for their good and tranquillity, conserved through
wholesome Laws, thereby procuring Love; which he must account for his
Sanctuary, and only Refuge. A most luculent Testimony, seeming to be
instructed from out the voice of Nature it self, suffragating thereto in
Truth; and so to receive a worthy allowance the more plausibly. For Nature has
framed the chief Maister-ruling Be, which is the King in the Swarm of Bees,
without Sting, of purpose, that it might not annoy and hurt any of the lesser
Bees, which are unto him as his Subjects, to follow, and attend him at
commandment.

This Discourse, my dread Sovereign, wherein speaking to your self, I have
spoken of your self ( I trust not too boldly, because truly loyally,) I will
end with the words of Cassiodorus; In Agric.
Mercy and Clemency is that only virtue, to which all other virtues refuse
not in honor to give the pre-eminence. If to have taken in hand this Argument,
and to have accommodated it to your Royal person in this manner prayseably,
be an ouer-fight blameworthy, I may say (under your Highness reformation) that
I presumed upon the nature and quality thereof, and so hope for the Argument
sake, which is of Clemency, a resplendent virtue in your person, (being also
entertained in Truth, and discoursed in Loyalty,) to find accordingly a
favorable pardoning Construction; which most humbly I crave of your Majesty,
to be the same (if you please) which Alphonsus King of Aragon, ( a most
victorious, and learned King) gave of one Lucas a Phisicions demonstratiue
Oration, in it, highly commending the King to his face. If those things, says
Alphonsus, which thou have reported of me, be true, I heartily thank the
immortal Gods: If otherwise, I humbly beseech them to cause, that they may be
true in me.

Howsoever this my commendatorie is accepted of your Majesty, I for mine own
part, am so well instructed in those former Testimonies of your Regal virtues,
and alleged of me, of right, (so occasioned for the credit of them) as to
conclude this matter, by your Gracious patience. I rest in the judgments of
sw^ great personages (both sometimes of you honorable pri^e Council) now
deceased, and say with them in their words: The first speaking thus. This
whole Land was much bound to GOD, for setting over us, a King so Wise, Learned,
and Judicious. The other thus acknowledged; that, We were very much bound to
GOD* that had given us a King of an understanding Heart: Which appearing
manifestly in sundry particulers of your blessed Government, is yet chiefly
and most singulerly ennobled by your Majesty's heroical Spirit, divinely
instincted to plead Gods cause against his, and your Enemies; whose
Supplication offered up to your Highness in the beginning of your Reign over us
for Toleration Anno Domi. 1603.
of Popery, ( a false usurped Cathollecisime ( in right terms) an Idolatrous
Superstition, diametrally opposite to the very true Catholicque Religion, as
blending of Truth, and Fa^sehood,) your Majesty has repelled; and is well
accepted, with ominous acclamations (as I may say) of all truehearted
Subjects, to the best secured safeite of your sacred Royal person under GOD,
whose Houour you have thus vnidicated, by continuing the Gospel among us, to
s^ine forth for the enlightening the Hemisphere of this our Church, under whose
roof the Ark of God may not permit the Philistims 1. Sam 5. 3. 4.
Dagon of Ashdod to have footing. For away with all them, who with the same
Tongue swear by the Zeph. 1. 5.
Lord, and swear by Milcham, and yet pretend a holy Worship to him, whose Name
they do thus dishonor. He is a plain Ephraimite, that for Judge. 12 6.
Shiboleth, pronounces Sibboleth. No lisping-halting Laodicean hypocrite, can
be a True professer of Gods Religion. Neutralitie is a Birth of
Luke-warmenesse; which is, and is not: Would be, but dare not be; aad
therefore seems only, as temporizing with the present. Who are such, are
mere Politicians, double-faced like Ianus; yea blind, though seeing: and
deaf, though hearing: without all Sense, and feeling of Truth, because they
are possessed with s^ares; and faint-hearted, doubting all things, and
mistrustfull of all: Which make Religion, a matter of indifferency, and
arbitrarie, left to their choice, to make the Lord, or Baal. GOD: yea, and if
they refuse Baal, in this sense; yet to follow the Lord that is the true GOD,
as themselves please, and so to Worship him in part, after their own corrupt
fancies, But the wrath of God is upon such, and Judgment has already taken
hold of them, which is theatened in Isaiah: To Isa. 6. 9. 10.
Hear in deed, and not to understand: To See plainly, and not to perceive; by
reason, that their Heart is made fat, both to a heaviness of the Ears, and
to the shutting up of the Eyes, that they might not convert and be healed. A
heavy Judgment. But the Temgle of GOD, and the Altar ( which John meant by
appointment of the Angel in the Apocalips,) is not for these ^o Reave. 11. 1.
Worship therein: for they being profane and reprobate, are for the Court (^)
only without the Temple, not measured, but refused, and given to the
Gentiles. To whom God speaks in Ezekiel; Ezekiel. 20. 39
Go ye, and serve every one his Idol, seeing ye will not obey me. And
Christ tells them, that he will Math. 10 33.
deny them before his Father in Heaven, because they have denied him before
Men in Earth. 2. Timo. 2. 12.
Who these be, are known by the print of the Name of the Beast, whom they
Reave. 14. 9.
Worship, marked in their foreheads: whose punishment is there also set down,
even Torments in Fire and ver. 10. 11.
Brimstone without ceasing: A most just reward of all Hypocrites, and
Apostataes, which either counterfeite Holiness, or revolt from their Faith; and
so are lincked in fast to the Reave. 17. ^.
Whore of Babylon, and drunk of the Wine of her Fornication. But on the other
side, they, which fear God, and Reave 14. 7.
worship him that made Heaven, and Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of
Waters; are also known by a different note, even by their Revel. 14. 1.
Fathers Name, written in their foreheads, for they are not ashamed of their
Profession, being the Saints which keep the Commandments of God, and ver.
12.
the Faith of Jesus: All such* shall cease from their Labors, ver. 13.
and their Works follow them: For, these consessing Math. 10. 32.
Christ here, before Men, are also confessed of Christ before his Father, which
is in Heaven: and before Luke 12. 8.
the Angels of God, I was put in mind of this Note, by your Majesty's words
of your self, in your Basilicon, saying: (...) Lib. 1. page 4.
I have never been ashamed to profess openly, what I thought of GOD. True, for
what your Highness have thought of God, and of his Worship, is so well
manifested, as there needs no disputation to satisfy any not parti^lly
minded; much less the evil Tounged, and the malicious Carpers, who
calumniously, and faulsely, have otherwise traduced your Majesty's Name by that
imputation. If Wishes may take effect, they are not wanting to your good
Subjects, against as many as have evil will at Sion, and seek to disturb
the Peace of Israel, laying Cockatrices Eggs in the shade of secret designs,
to have them hatched by some thunderclaps of Treason, and other Treacherous
practices whatsoever. O that these of Pelops race were all abandoned from
hence, if any be ^ic. ad At. lib. 15. ept.* 1.
here yet residing in your Majesty's Realm or Realms, so as their Names be
not once heard amongst us. Paul taxes the Corinthians, in that they had entered
into fellowship with Infidels, partaking with them in outward Idolatry, as
forsaking their first love: seeming thereby, to have received the Grace of God
in vain, to which they were called; and tells them, that they were unequally
2. Cor. 6. ver 14 ver. 15. ver. 16.
yoaked, for, Light has no communion with Darkness; nor, Christ with Beliall
has any concord; nor, the Temple of God, with Idols. So likewise, what part
has the Protestant with the Papist; and the true Ghospellers, with the
hollow-hearted Neuters? There can be nothing between these: though they are 1.
Ioh. 2. 19.
among us, yet are they not of us: For, can their Leprous rotten See the
Protestants Counterpoise. Sect. 12.
affections entertain any true Thought of either Zeal toward GOD, or of
Loyalty to your Majesty, who maintain Positions most dangerously Traiterous
in opposition directly against both the one and the other. The Emperor
Constantine by his politicque Proclamation, discovered Lib. 1. Tripart. hist.
cap. 7.
the dissembling of Christianity in some of his Subjects; whom thereupon he
banished, and said, Seeing they were not faithful to God, much less would
they be to him. I leave this concluded with S. Hieroms Judgment; There can be
no sound affection of them to each other, whose Profession of Faith, and
Religion, is not the same, but diverse.

And now to come to the matter, for which this Dedicatorie is to your Majesty,
that I might put my self and others in mind of our duty toward GOD; the
which being first known, is subordinatly next, and the more readily, and
carefully discharged unto your Highness person. -- I have written this
Treatise entitled the Miscellanie of Orizons, being the Argument in chief;
prefacing it with certain Reguler preparatiues instructing the devotion unto
Prayer. To which also are annexed certain Meditations of the Lords Supper, and
of Mortality; all for the aduauncing the Welfare of the Christian Soul. An
Argument of necessary consequence in this great dotage, of the World possessed
generally with the Spirit of slumber, and security; through which, Charity is
become cold, as seeming altogether deaded in the frozen dregs of
Sensuality, obdurating the Consciences for want of Faith, which by no means
is better cherished, increased, and mainetained, then by Prayer; as to your
Majesty is well known, (...) Lib. 1. page 12. lat. 14.
appoynting it to be frequent, solitary, and private, yea specially in Bed
as well as publicque; at all times upon occasion, as the Mind suggested, with
exception to all unlawful Matters, which cannot be of Faith: And, Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

It is a Work framed to the several uses of all sorts of Men, of all degrees
in a manner, to be practiced by them as necessity requires (my hope is) to
the benefit, and comfort in the Lord, of as many, as shall delight in the
practice of a Christian Faith by Prayer. For it cannot be, (in whom soeuor the
celestial fire of a fervent Faith is kindled, though for a time it may seem
perhaps to be suppressed) but the same will break forth into a flame of that
Godly zeal which Paul testifit^h Coloss. 4. 1^. 13.
Epaphras to have had for the Colossians, striving for the in Prayers, that
they might stand perfect, and full in all the will of God. This Work I huue
presumed to publish under the Protection and Patronage of your Majesty's name,
for the better acceptance abroad with applause. -- It bears a testimony of
my Loyal Heart toward your Highness; to whom all my endeavors, of what
nature soever, are most specially due. And for my Religious intention to do
thereby also a common good, my hope is, it will the rather be well accepted.
For I may not doubt, least it be prejudiced by the hard censure of a needless,
and superfluous Writing, because of the great variety, and multitude of Books
of the same Argument.

The material Temple, was re-edified under Zerubbabel by the labou^s, pains,
and employments of sundry and diverse Workmen, even by accommodating things of
the same Nature, as Lime, Stones, Wood Iron, etc. So may it be said of the
studies and endeavors of learned Wits, which labor in their Writings, by
knowledge to further and erect the Building of the spiritual Temple, though
for matter and subject, one and the same.

The manner of penning this Work, may seem strange for order and composition:
likewise for Matter and Subject perhaps much borrowed from others; so as I may
say, All here, and nothing here, to be truly Mine: For, as the compiling the
instructing Preparatiues, with the Prayers, and the digesting them under their
certain Heads, and the Meditations upon the Lords Supper, and Mortality, is
all mine own; so yet I do confess, I have excerpted, and culled out of
Authors, both Words, and Sentences; sometimes whole, sometimes the Clauses,
and Members of them; not always the same, but in part, as they were to be
accommodated to the matter in hand. Neither do I fear herein to be
stigmatized by S. Hieromes censure, with a branding J* for I have to some
places cited by me, ascribed the Authors Names, upon whose credit I might
warrant the Allegations: other Writers of a suspected note, and so not of that
Authority with us, as to be allowed, especially in a subject of this Nature,
(they differencing from us in some Material points) I have for that reason,
concealed, to avoid prejudice, and wrong, which often is occasioned through
scrupulositie.

J say then, I do ingenuously acknowledge, that the Matter, and Stuff of this
Work, is in part borrowed: But I may truly claim to my self the framing and
fashioning it in order as it is set forth. Let not the Spiders Web, wrought
of the threddes which the Spider it self does weaue, be of greater account and
esteem, then is that juice of sundry mellifluuous Herbs which the Be
gathers, and by a certain mixture and property of her Breath, ( as Seneca
writes,) alters into that savor and taste of pleasant sweet moisture which
is called Honey. We see also, that Embroderers work Tapistrie, and Arras with
partited Threddes of sundry colors, which themselves do not first make. I do
not by this, argue the worthiness of this Work: Be it, as they which read
it, shall censure it. If all herein written be ascribed to others for
Invention, as not mine, being aptly disposed, and well applied for sense, it
shall be to me a thing indifferent; so that out of this Work thus composed by
me and ordered for phrase, and style, having both in word and Sense, a fit
correspondence with the analogy of Faith, this principally: then next that,
such fruit and profit do redounde to the Sons of the Church, as may cause
(if but one) godly and truly sanctified Cogitation ( gained thereby) to arise
and settle in some one Christian soul at one moment. If God out of his Mercy
shall be pleased thus to bless these my Labors what-soeuer, I have my Wish
and Desire; which is the end of my Project in the first attempting hereof: Most
humbly beseeching your Majesty, that of your gracious clemency, ( wherewith
you glad and comfort the hearts of your Subjects lovingly loyal) you will be
pleased to vouchsafe a favorable aspect in the acceptance hereof, not
presumptuously required, in an opinion of worth; but upon a confidence of your
wonted grace, submissely craved in the name of true, and unfeigned loyalty.
Pliny writes, that the Idol of Apollo, which was mute at all other Times,
did then (as seeming suddenly to be revived) discourse at large, when the Sun
casting forth his quickening comfortable Rays, appeared bright shining in the
Face of it. And that many of Apolloes not Idols, but Sons, ( which before
kept silence, in a manner mute, and dumb, encircled (I may say) within the
confined shadie Couerts of their private readinges,) since enlightened by your
Majesty's serene Countenance, gracing their Studies, have been encouraged, and
(as it were) receiving Life from thence, have breathed forth in publicque
Writings, is evident (as a matter to be confessed and acknowledged of all.)
For even our Life, and our action ( which is manifested thereby) must needs
proceed from the strength and vigor that harbors within your most royal
Heart, by reason that all the Arteries of this Commonwealth, do daily beat in
the sweet temper of that regal Authority, and this Fatherly indulging
Clemency; in that, excelling all your Predicessors, in this equalizing the
best, in both happy, because profitably eminent; and thereby also making all
your Subjects most fortunate. So then (most Gracious and dread Sovereign) our
duty ( as we are your Subjects, enjoying this happiness by you) is first, a
true acknowledgment of a settled state in your Person; with a protestation
before God for all Loyal obedience in all dutiful devoted Submission: Next,
(as we are Christians) to render our most hearty, and humble Thanks unto
God, ( who) in mercy vouchsafing favor to this Realm, has placed your
Highness King over the same a Wise, virtuous, peaceable, and merciful Prince,
to the inestimable good and happiness of your people; under whose tuition, and
patrocinie, true Religion, godly Discipline, the best studies of Learning, by
wholesome Laws administered in equity, do flourish, and are maintained. In
this name therefore, (which is also a duty commanded in the Scripture, and now
properly ours,) do we submissely offer up the Calves of our Lips, for a
Morning and Evening Sacrifice; even earnest Supplications, and fervent Prayers
daily to that divine Powerful Majesty in Heaven, ( who gives safety unto
Kings, and is the keeper and only defender of all politicque States, that
harbor the Gospel of Christ,) for the perpetual safeguarding, and
prescruing your Scepter, and Regal dignities, in all Christian peace, and
Tranquillity; beseeching him* to be GOD to you, and your Seed, as he promised
to be unto Genesis 17. 7.
Abraham, and to his Seed after him; that accordingly he bless the government
of all your Majesty's Dominions and Kingdoms, in your self now Ruling; and in
your Son, our noble Prince Charles after you: Who being your lawful Heir
and Successor to those your Kingdoms, may in like manner be the lively
representative Image of your rare, and singular endowments of Nature, and
Grace; and so by your example, to become a Nursing Father, in defending,
preserving, and propagating the truth of the Gospel; having in mind always
that saying of the everlasting Wisdom the Son of God, in the Proverbs:
Prou. 4. ver. 8. ver. 9.
Exalt her, and she shall exalt thee. She shall give thee a comely Ornament
to thy Head, yea, a Crown of Glory shall she give thee. For, I Prou. 8. ver.
17. ver. 15. ver. 16.
love them, that love me; even to glorify them: For, By me Kings reign, and
Princes rule. This Memorial being as a Frontlet before his Eyes, must needs
tell him, that He is to be as ^ burning Torch of all Virtue, and Godliness
above others; by the Light thereof, to direct the footesteps of his Citizens in
the whole course of their lives; as your (...) he admonishes in your (...) by
the name of a demieGod* (...) ^^^. 1. page 2. 3. ^^t.
sitting upon this Throane of GOD, to be his Lieuetenant ^ere on Earth.

The which Throane and Seat of Majesty, ( my Prayers unto God for your
Highness to be continued unto your own Person in all happiness all your life
long first and chiefly premitted;) I humbly crave at Gods hands next, that Sam
7. ver 12.
When your days be fulfilled, and you sleep with your Fathers, to reign with
them in Heaven, that then the same your hereditarie Throane, may be the Throane
of David unto your Son, in him, and in his Seed, which shall proceed out of
his Body to be established.

I conclude with the words of Solomon: Let Reg. 2. 45.
King JAMES be blessed, and his Throane be established before the Lord for
ever. And to this, let all Loyal faithful Subjects of an immaculate
allegience, giving their assent in the words of Nehemiah, Nehem. 2. ver. 3.
God save the King for ever: and say with one heart, and voice: Amen, Amen.

Your sacred Majesty's most loyal true hearted subject, Paul Wentwourth.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Treating of the Nature, and essential Qualities,
together with the proper Attributes, and Adjuncts, and Effects of Prayer:
Distinguished by Sections particulerly containing the same.
Section 1. Of the Excellency of Man's Nature, above all Creatures.
IT is a most certain truth (auerred by the common consent of all Writers,)
that the Nature of Man, of a self instinct from above, is wholly propensed
unto a desire of knowledge: A matter not in controversy; yet by the
Philosophers of former times argued, to manifest thereby the excellency of
man's Nature, though in an other both sense, and phrase; referring the same by
privilege of a special difference, to a preheminenced sovereignty in Man,
over all Creatures through the benefit of Reason: making him therein equal to
the Angels; but in a more singular eminency far surpassing all Creatures;
and so by consequent, their Lord and Ruler. As this is most true, and of all
confessed accordingly; so yet are we further to search out a more special
meaning thereof. God said in Genesis: Let us make Man in our Image, according
to Genesis 1. 26.
our likeness. It seems by these words, that God had a purpose to make Man
a most singular Creature, when he first entered into counsel as it were, with
his own Wisdom, to create him his Superintendent over all his other
Creatures; and therefore saw in his wisdom, how necessary it was for him to
adorn this sovereign Creature with endowments of qualities fitting the charge
of so large, and potent dominion. S. Paul well understanding the same, in his
Epistle to the Ephesians, by those two words of Gods Image, and Likeness, in
Man, implies the whole perfection of man's Nature by two words also, saying;
Man after God, is created in Ephesians. 4. 24.
Righteousness and true Holiness. It is not enough therefore for us to know
only the creation of this our Nature to be heavenly, and so in a kind of
pre-eminence most eminent by the power of Reason; but we must in like manner
accordingly endeavor to advance it unto the quality of the perfection
thereof, assigned by God, in Truth, Wisdom, and Innocence: for without these
three theological Virtues, this Image of God in us, (our Nature through the
pollution of sin, being wholly in a manner blemished and defaced) cannot be
said to have been truly instructed into a sufficient knowledge of that
perfection, which is thereby signified, and must be obtained of us, if we will
be like to him our maker.

Section 2. Of Man's Natural knowledge, perfected by a true fear of God
through Prayer.
KNowledge then, not instituted in the fear of God, is a fruitless and idle
Knowledge; yea, altogether prejudicial to the health of man's soul; not only
defacing utterly the beauty of that supernatural heavenly Image in us, (for
it is said, The fear Prouer. 1. 7.
of the Lord, is the beginning of Wisdom. A good understanding Psalm. 111. 10.
have all they that do thereafter.) So, as a Soul deuoyde of a godly Fear,
is merely ignorant of a godly Knowledge; as being altogether without a good
Understanding which is not, where true Wisdom has not first laid the
foundation, to build up true Obedience unto the Word of God, which teaches the
same. Now, for as much as, Every good, and perfect gift, is from above,
coming from the Iam. 1. 17.
Father of light: and that no gift either for use, or excellency is, or may
be compared to the fear of GOD, (which produces in us that sanctified
Wisdom, comprehended in the Prophetiall, and Apostolical writings.) And
seeing further, that neither this, nor any other good Gift can be had of us,
but by such means as Christ him self has set down in these words: Ask,
and it shall be given you; Seek, and you shall find; Knock, and it shall
Math 7. 7. Luke 11. 9.
be opened unto you: pr^ceptiuely arguing, to persuade the necessary use, and
profitable fruit of Prayer; which is the end at which it aymeth: (the use in
these words, 1. Ask, 2. Seek, 3. Knock: the fruit in these other words*
first, it shall be given you; secondly, ye shall find; thirdly, it shall be
opened unto you.) We are to use frequent and earnest Prayer unto God, who
first, Gives that we ask: secondly, Opens, when we knock: and thirdly,
makes us to Find, what we seek for, with him, and in him through Christ:
For Christianity, (that is, the true profession of Christ, from which
denomination, we are termed Protestants,) does not consist in an idle bare
acknowledgment of that name, but in the manifesting of that holy, and
sanctified Image of God in us, by working the will of him, who to that end has
sanctified us unto a spiritual, obedience in all humility, by the inspiration
of his most blessed spirit.

Section 3. Of Prayers conformity, unto the will of God.
ANd not only must we Ask, Seek, and Knock; that is, Pray fervently, and
make earnest Suppications to God for all things, whether spiritual, or
temporal, whereof he shall be pleased to minister unto us at our need: But
how, and in what manner, we are to present our selves in Prayer before his
Throane of grace, this fear of God does instruct, and teach us: For we must
not Ask, nor Seek, by Prayer, what our selves do fancy, and best like of;
but in all our Prayers, we are to refer our selves to Gods good Will,
showing thereby that we are desirous wholly to depend upon him for any his
goodnesses, which him self shall think fit out of his mercy to vouchsafe
us; especially in things temporal, which evermore in all our Petitions unto
God, are confined within the limits of the conditional, if. As S. James
teaches: If the Lord will: or* If James 4. 15.
we live, we will do this, or that. In this manner also spoke S. Paul: If
the Lordwill, I will come unto you. And 2. Cor 4. 19
besides, we must have this special care, that our Prayers be grounded upon a
strong Faith, (for we must Ask in faith, and waver not) because it shall be
done unto us, James. ^ 6. Mar. 11. 24
if we believe, that we shall have that which we desire by Prayer, Whereby it
is only required that we have a Faith; but it must be such a Faith, as is
also warranted by the word of God, and no other. This seems to be confirmed
by that saying of Christ in S. John: If ye abide in me, and my words abide
in you, (that is, if ye be John. 15. 7.
rooted in me by Faith, instructed out of the word of God,) ask what you
will, and it shall be done to you; viz. so that in asking, ye follow that word
of God which ye verily believe, as having fully taken hold of it, by a sure
and steadfast Faith: For, A wavering minded man, is unstable James 1. 8.
in all his ways: that is, doubting both of the Will, and Power of God, in
helping them that call upon him: and also of his Word and Promises, which are
Yea, and Amen.

Section 4. Of Prayer to be made in Christ his name only.
Hereunto let us add in express words, the Profession of his Name, by which
we are assured to obtain what w^e pray for. Therefore, as God is only to be
called upon by us in Prayer, because he is both Omnipotent, that he is able to
help: and Allknowing, that he understands our cause, that it needs his
help: also, exceedingly Good and Gracious, that he is willing to succor and
relieve our wantes: Again, of that incomprehensible Infiniteness of Nature,
comprehending all places in it self, that our Prayers any where without
exception of distance; and at all times, may easily ascend up unto him: Lastly,
because he Understands much better then our selves, what things we have
need of; and those also, how, when, and how far, to our good, and his glory,
are to be administered unto us. As I say, God for these causes in special, is
only to be inuocated upon; so for the better furthering of our Inuocations,
and Prayers, and the proceeding in them with good success, we must in the
strength of a well grounded Faith, supported by the blessed and powerful Name
of Christ; even in his Name only, call upon God in our Prayers, beseeching him
for his sake, and not otherwise, to hear us.

Section 5. Invocation of Saints, derogatiue to a Christian Faith.
FOr that distinction of the School men in which they associat an Invocation
of Saints with God, by a different phrase, is friuoulous, idle, and impiously
opposite to the truth of Gods Word; and so most abominable. They say, That as
our Prayers may be granted by God himself, in that sense they are to be made
unto him only, and immediately; because (say they) those good things which are
chiefly and principally to be asked, God alone does give: otherwise, when they
are to be granted at the entreaty of an other, we are to crave therein by
Prayer, the favor of Saints to interceed for us, that God at their request,
would be pleased to hear our Prayers: And for this cause, we Pray unto God,
Have mercy, or Give us: But in our Sainct-Inuocation, we say, Pray for us.
These their distinction, as I have said, is frivolous, and greatly derogating
from the truth of Gods word, which has constituted Christ ou^ Intercessor
only, in these words. It is Christ, who is at the Roma. 8. 34.
right hand of God, and makes request also for us. And again our only
Mediator, in these words. There is one God, and 1. Timo. 2. 5.
one Mediator between God and man; which is the man Christ Jesus. What need we
then the vain and fruitless Intercession of Saints? Christ himself being
the only Redeemer and reconciler of Man unto God; who both wills us to pray
in his Name, and also does promise the aid and furtheraunce of his
interceading favor for the obtevning our requests without difficulty,
saying: Ye shall ask in my Name, and I say unto you, that I will pray John
16. 26.
unto the Father for you.

Section 6. Adoration of Saints, of like nature, and blasphemous.
BY these places of Scripture, it may evidently appear, that all Intercession
of Saints, is absolutely excluded, and so in consequence Invocation to them,
is merely vain, needless, and blasphemous. To enforce further Argument by
way of consutation thereof were to move here among us an unnecessary doubt of
a most undoubted and generally recei^ed truth* For if Invocation of Saints
be to be allowed, Adoration also may by the self same reason take place in our
Religion; which yet is refuted by the scripture in Esaias, where God speaks of
himself thus: There is none other God besides ^say 45 21 22.
me, a just God, and a Savior: there is none besides me; for ^ am God and
there is none other: Therefore, him only must we fear, him only must we
serve, and cl^au^ unto, as it is Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10. 20.
commanded in Deuteronomie; and so testified by Christ, when he repelled the
Devils temptation, saying: Avoid Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God and Math 4. 10
him only shall thou serve. And this was that Testimony of Jesus, which the
Angel in the Apocalypse said he had, when Reave. 19. 10.
he would not be worshipped.

Section 7. Of preparing the Mind unto Prayer, by a foresight of a twofold
respect: the first of Necessity, the second of Comlynes.
HItherto have we treated of the desire of Knowledge in Man, to be instituted,
instructed, and religiously taught by a true fear of God* which is the very
Fountain of heavenly Wisdom, unto all piety and holiness of life, obtained
specially by a faithful inuocating and calling upon God for it, by Prayer, in
the name of Christ only. Now then it may seem not impertinent, to treat in
the next place, of the kinds, and most comfortable effects wrought by the
true and faithful Prayers of the Godly, as have been manifested in the
Scriptures. But first I shall premit in this discourse a two-fould respect to
be had of man in his Prayer, as I find it allowed of good Writers, and a matter
of good consequence for the instructing our knowledge, by way of Preparatiue
unto Prayer: Therefore before we come to make our suplications before God, and
offer up unto him the Calves of our Lips. Hosea. 14* 3.
Which in the Epistle to the Hebrews is called, The fruit of Hebr. 13. 15.
the Lips, even to confess his name by prayer; we are first heedfully to
consider, whether for Necessity, or Comlines sake we pray: for these are the
two-fould respects, which I mentioned before, and do here understand
necessarily worthy to be had in chief regard of man in Prayer.

Section. 8. Of Necessity for Sprituall graces.
IF by Necessity we are compelled to pray, we do it either for spiritual
things, or for temporal, or both. In this kind of prayer, we are to desire
of God to be instructed by him in the way of Godliness, and true Religion, as
David says. Open my eyes to see the wonders of thy Law. Again, (verse 32.)
Enlarge my heart to run the way of thy Commandments: again, (verse 33.) Teach
me O Psa. 119. 18.
Lord the way of thy Statutes: again, (verse 34.) Give me understanding:
(verse 35.) And Direct me in the path of thy Cammaundementes: Also, (verse 66)
Teach me good judgment and knowledge. I say in these, and such like manner of
speeches, may we call unto the Lord, and for that cause, ask at his hands the
direction of his holy Spirit, which leads his children into all the truth,
and shows both to whom to pray, and how to pray: For, It is the spirit which
makes request for the Saints, according to the will of Romans 8. 27.
God. In that former manner of Necessary praying unto God, which is merely
for spirtuall graces to be ministered unto us, the care of our Souls health is
specially minifested.

Section 9. Of Necessity for Corporal benefits.
NOw in that other Necessity of inuocating upon God, which is for Corporal
things to be likewise affoorded us from him, a religious care of our Bodies
welfare out of a Christian devotion, is also to be chiefly expressed. In this
form of Prayer, we ask of God what is meet to be given us by him, for the
sustenance of our earthy, and corruptible life, which otherwise cannot be
relieved and maintained; as Food, and Clothing, whether in sickness, or in
health. And this is to be craved conditionally, so as these may have a special
reference to the performaunce of Christian duties toward one another; that
Gods glory thereby may the better be advanced, even in these his Temporary
benefits, which we must necessarily acknowledge to proceed from his mere, and
solie free Bounty: and so upon this acknowledgment we are with that Samaritan
Leaper, to fall down at Gods feet, most humbly giving him Luke 17. 16.
thanks, and with a loud voice, to praise him for the same.

Section 10. Of Comlynesse in Praying unto God, as proper to him in chief.
THE second respect to be heedfully considered of us, is a kind of Decorum, or
Comeliness in Prayer; and it depends v^on the former of Necessity: And as
that, before mentioned, and declared; so this also, has a twofold distinct
note for difference: The one is proper to God* that he give us not, What our
selves would have, to se^ue our private inordinate lusts and appetites; but,
What a true God may, and ought well and seemly to bestow upon us: For it is
meet and seemly, that he being our God indeed, and none other besides him,
who requires at our hands the sacrificing of our Lips at all times of our
need, taking it for a holy service done unto him, and so warranting the effect
of our Prayers by a Promise annexed thereto in these words. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, so shall I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. I say
it is a Decorum in God to grant Psalm 50. 15.
us those things only, which himself knows best beseeming his nature to
grant, both for our good, and the glory of his blessed name. Therefore here
we must understand, that all Prayers which are either Lewd, Unjust,
Presumptuous, Idle, Unprofitable, Hurtful, Curious, Superstitious, or any
manner of way Ungodly, or Fantastically conceited, are utterly excluded and
rejected, as sinful Prayers, procuring the wrath of God for our punishment in
the day of vengeance.

Section 11. Of Comeliness in Praying, to be respected of Man, by a reference
to the former.
THE other Decorum, or Comeliness of Prayer, is belonging to those that do
pray, and is of them Carefully to be heeded, as having a special reference to
that former: For it teaches us two things; First, to ask What may chiefly
and principally declare and set forth Gods glory: Then next, not otherwise to
pray, then as we are prepared in mind, Humbly to submit our selves unto the
Will of God; and so in the name of Christ, to recommende our Prayers unto him.
To the confirming of these assertions for our instruction, make both that
Prayer which Christ himself taught his Disciples, saying: Pray after this
manner. etc. and so is as a Pattern out Matt. 6. 9.
of which all godly Prayers must be exemplified: And also Christ's own Act
praying upon the Mount of Olives, where in his great Agony, being perplexed
with horror of his Passion then near at hand, he Prayed thus: Father, if thou will, take this Cup from me: Nevertheless, not Luke 22. 42.
my will, but thine be done.

Section 12. Of appropriating our Prayers, to the Nature and Quality of that
we pray for, whether by the groninges of the Spirit inwardly* or outwardly by
the Mouths utterance.
TO this purpose I think it very meet, and consonant to this Argument, that
the Readers hereof, before they pray, do address themselves with a
consideration of the diverse kinds of Prayers; that so they may the more aptly
Appropriate their prayers unto God. For all Prayers are not of one Nature, and
Quality; which being not well known, and accordingly used, causes many
ignorant people to abuse Gods goodness in the effecting their desires. The
general name of Prayer, though the same in show; yet by reason of the matter,
and manner, (which is not one and the same always in all Prayers,) does sort
sundry appellations after a distinct and different sense and understanding. Out
of that to the Romans 8. 26. The Spirit also Romans 8. 26.
helps our infirmities; for we know not what to pray as we ought: But the
Spirit it self makes request for us with sighs that may not be expressed.
This may be gathered concerning Prayer, that there is a kind of Praying unto
God inwardly only conceived and secretly offered up to God in the Spirit by
sighs and groans, not only in words, as generally is used to be uttered by
the mouth.

Section 13. Of the sundry Names and Appellations of Prayer.
HEreupon are those distinct Names and Appellacions of Prayer which we read
of; for some signify Adoration, Depreoation, and Supplication; which may in
some special sort be appropriated to that inward conceived manner of Prayer.
Some again are for Vows and Intercessions for others, which commonly require
the Mouths utterance. For Vows, as is said in Numbers, and Deutromie;
Whosoever voweth a Vow unto the Numb 30. 3 De^t. 23. 21, 22, 23.
Lord, etc. shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth* For
Intercessions, says S. James. 5. 16. Pray one for an other; for the Prayer of
a righteous man, avails much, if it be fervent. Both which kinds of Prayer,
S. Paul may seem to mean, where he says: I exhort, that first of all,
Supplications, 1. Timo. 2. 1.
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all men. To these
are adjoined in two other distinct names, Invocation and a most humble
Subjection, when in our Prayers to God we prostrate our selves as it were at
the feet of God.

Section 14. Ofreducing those sundry Names of Prayer, unto two only,
comprehending fully the Nature of Prayer.
ALl which kinds of Praying, howsoever of Writers differenced by several
Names, may be reduced into two distinguishing Names, of Request, and
Thanksgiving, and so have reference to one and the selfsame end; instructing
us in a manner how we should prepare our selves before we Pray, and also
during the whole time of Praying; and so they do all communicate with the
definition of Prayer, which is said to be the Affection of the Soul aff^icted
and distressed through wantes whatsoever, most humbly imploring the help of
God in Faith, whether by Words, o^ by Sighs, or Groninges; as I said before.
In which definition, is comprehended a document as well for the outward gesture
of our Bodies, as for the inward affection of the Soul. And the example of
Christ himself admonishes us thereof in the 2^. of Matthew. ver. 39. where he
fell on his Mat. 26. 39. Mar. 14. 35. Luk 22. 41.
face and prayed. In the 14 of Mark 35. where he fell down on the ground and
prayed. In the 22. of Luke 41. where he kneeled down and prayed. The words
also of the Tempter* in the 4. of Matthew. 9. do purport the same in sense, when
Math. 4. 9.
he said to Christ, If thou will fall down and worship me.

Section 15. Outward Gesture to be conjoined with the Mouths utterance, for
argument of the inward devotion.
FOr in doing that holy Worship to God, which we ought to perform in
singlenes of Heart, we are to conioyne with the word* of our Mouth, uttering
the Hearts conceit, the earnest representation of the outward Gesture, for a
testimony of ou^ inward devotion in Prayer; so-that God being honored by us
both in the external Action, and also in the inward Affection; he may have
our Bodies, as Temples, wholly consecrated to his worship to dwell in them.
This may be argued out of S. Paul (1. Corin. 6 19) where he says: Know ye not
that 1. Cor. 6. 19.
your Bodies are the Temple of the holy Ghost? concluding there with these
words; Therefore glorify God in your Body, 1. Cor. 6. 20.
and in your Spirit, for they are Gods. I grant this is not inferred o^ S.
Paul as specially to be applied unto a Precept for our behavior in time of
Prayer; but is rather in opposition to carnal Lust; showing thereby the abuse
of Christian liberty, which consists wholly in a pure serving of God both
with the Body, and the Soul. An imputation thereof charged upon the
Corinthians, and in their person, may be to us a commandment to avoid the
like. Nevertheless, for as much as no man must think himself a fit
Instrument for the glorifying of Gods name at any time, who in his Prayers also
made unto him, does not at all times so compose the Gesture of his Body, as
that it may appear to be even then Consecrated of purpose to express a single
and pure devotion of the Heart: I say, the Application of the said Text, to the
former matter in argument, may seem, though not direct, yet not amiss
alleged, to auerre and conclude the affirmative thereof.

Section 16. Outward gesture (as before) to be used, argued by Testimonies, and
Examples.
FOr if our Bodies be the very Temples of the holy Ghost, as Paul says, and
he also be pleased to have us talk with him, which by Prayer must necessarily
be performed: Is it not a pla^e truth, that we are to address those said
Temples so, as that they may be holy and sanctified places for his Holiness to
delight in, and to talk with us there? For God is said, Not to dwell in
Temples made with hands, because he being of a Spiritual nature, is to have at
our hands a service agreeable to that Nature, which is merely spiritual, and
can not be exhibited of any, that comes unto Prayer with a Body polluted with
sin. Daniel, the man greatly beloved, so called by the Angel of God, after
he had Turned his face Daniel. 9. 3.
unto the Lord God, sought by Prayer and Supplications, with fasting in
Sackcloth, and Ashes. This example of Daniel shows, that their is an outward
reverent gesture to be used of gods Children in prayer, the more effectually
to express the motion of the Spirit, Inwardly stirred unto a godly devotion,
for the craving God* his gracious and merciful kindness, speedely to relieve
our miseries. Yet must we further know, that Daniell did not use this kind of
external habit in his common and ordinary Prayers which he made to God
th^ise a day in his house; for the words of the Text are: That, He Kneeled
upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and praised Dani. 6. 10.
his God. Here only Kneeling was the outward gesture in Prayers ordinary and
usual: Therefore by way of note, let it be understood, that in Prayers of a
rare Argument, a rare and most vehement expression of gesture, such as this
was, must necessarily be used.

Section 17. A Transition to a Treatise of the Fruict and Profit of zealous
and devout Prayers.
I Think this already spoken of this point, touching A decent, and reverent
gesturing our Bodies in the time of our praying to God, sufficient; and it may
seem also to an intelligent Reader, not impertinent to the Argument of this
Book, if he consider the true end of Prayers; which is to work the Will of
God in his good time; to effect our Desires, and the more earnestly to incite,
and stir up the Godly to these kinds of fervent and hearty prayers, wherein
the bodies gesture acting (as it were) the minds affection, argues an
apperance of a greater zeal; I shall here set down the Fruit and profit,
that has redownded to men, by their Godly and zealous prayers; a matter
promised in the former part of this my Treatise. GOD our Creator, and most
gracious Lord, as he made us of nothing, for his glory, who was all in all,
and above all; so yet has he been pleased from time, to time, to be gloryfied
by man whom he has made and to that end has instituted, and ordained means,
by which that kind of holy service may be performed of his Children: And to
encourage them to the same, has manifested by his divine working power, that
he is well pleased therewith. For diverse, and wonderful effects has he
wrought, at the earnest, and hearty prayers, of such as have called upon him,
in the faith of a pure conscience sanctified thereunto. And verily such an
Invocation, and calling upon God, whether in the Spirit by Sighs; or by
words, expressing the Souls devotion, through a most settled faith, grounded
in the word of God is much available, having the warrant of Gods promise both
in the old, and new Testament.

Section 18. The effects of such Prayers argued by testimonies of Scripture.
I Saiah in the person of God, says; Thou shall call, and Isay. ^8 9.
the Lord shall answer: Thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. Nay, to
make us the more forward in Prayer, he brings in God offering his merciful
assistance at all times ready, and at hand, yea, before we do ask it, saying:
Yea, before they call, I will answer; and whiles they speak, Isay. 65. 24.
I will hear. Of this God his present Willingness to help without exception,
does Christ assure us in his name, thus. What soever ye shall ask the father
in my name, he will John 16. 23.
give it you. And to remove from out our minds all scrupulous doubtfulnesse,
Christ himself immediately upon the former words says: I will pray unto the
Father John 16. 26.
for you, And in deed this is that Angel in the Apocalips unto whom, Standing
before the Alter, having a Goulden Reave. 8. 3.
Censure, much Odours were given, that he should offer with the Prayers of all
Saints, upon the goulden Alter, which is before the Throne; For he is the
Sacrifice, the Prince and so the only Means, by whom we may bouldly appear
before the face of God, at all times of our need. How then can we not be very
willing to call unto our God, when we are most assured of good success in
Prayer, by promise from him, who is all truth, and the sure Rock of our
defense.

Section 19. Argued by Examples out of the Scripture in the old Testament.
TO prove unto us the certain Effect of faithful Prayers, the Scripture
alleges Examples most plentifully; of which, let us consider respectively
for our instruction: For what soever is written, is written for our learning,
that we understanding it to be so, and also believing, should be secured of
fear, and the rather imboldned through Hope, to the confirming of our Faith in
the practice of Praying. Faith is said, Hebr. 11. 1.
to be the ground of things hoped for. To begin with Examamples of the old
Testament; We read in Genesis 20. 17. Genesis 20. 17.


1. Abraham for Abimelech his wives Womb to be opened.

That when the Lord had shut up the Womb of the house of Abimelech, that they
could not conceive, because of Sarah Abraham's wife: Upon Abraham's Prayer unto
God for Abimelech, God was pleased to heal Abimelech, and his Wife, and his
May de servants, and they bare Children.

2. Isake for his wife Rebekah.

And Isake prayed unto the Lord for his Wife Rebekah, because Gene. 25. 21.
she was barren; And the Text says, That the Lord was entreated of him, and
Rebekah his wife conceived.

3. Jacob for his deliverance from Esau.

Jacob likewise being in fear of his brother Esau, prayed against him, to be
delivered from his hands. And accordingly Gene. 32. 11.
did God work the heart of Esau, that he Ran to meet his brother Jacob,
and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and Gene. 33. 4.
kissed him: So was Esau reconciled to his brother Jacob, by Prayer, that Jacob
parted from Esau without danger, which before he feared, in the 32 chapter,
expressed in these words; For I fear him, least he (that is Esau) come and
smite me, and the Mother upon the Children. Genesis 32. 11.


4. Moses for Pharaoh.

But see how low God can be willing to descend to the Prayers of his Servants;
that even at their entreaty, and for their sakes, he is content to show
favor and pity, to the ungodly his very Enemies. It is written, that Moses
at Pharaos request, Prayed four several times, against four several
Plagues, and prevailed for him with God; as is manifested in Exodus: For in the
8 chap. verse. 13. Moses cried unto the Lord concerning Frogs, and the Frogs
Exodus 8. 13. 3^.
die And it follows there: Moses went out from Pharaoh, and Prayed unto the
Lord, and according to the saying of Moses, the swarms of Flies die, parted
from Pharaoh, and his Servants* etc. Again in the 9. chap. of Exodus Moses
went out Exodus 9. 33.
of the City from Pharaoh, and spread his hands to the Lord, and the Thunder
and Hayle ceased. Fourthly, in the 10. of Exodus Moses went out from Pharaoh,
and Prayed unto the Lord; Exodus 10 18. 19.
and the Lord with a mighty strong Wind; took away the Grasshoppers: Yet,
(says the Text,) Pharaoh hardoned his heart. Where by way of note, it may
appear, that let God show never so many, and strange wonders, by which he
instructs Man of his powerful Majesty, and after a sort, leads him
thereby to some knowledge of the same; yet do they nothing at all prevail,
but where God out of his gracious goodness, opens the eyes of the Heart, in
Faith to see and understand the same.

Section 20. An Objection against Moses Prayer made for Pharaoh God his enemy,
answered.
IT may be asked, Why Moses, who was made Pharaohs Exodus 7. 1.
God, (as the Text speaks, Exodus 7. 1.) That is, had power and authority
from God to execute those his judgments upon him, would notwithstanding, Pray
for him? And why God would hearken to Moses, Praying for such a one, who sought
unto God by Moses for fear, because he now felt those grievous Plagues, and
did dread him; and so not for love of his Name, to do worship unto it? Let us
here for our instruction know, that in corporal things, which are concerning
this life only, God many times is pleased to hear the Prayers of his
Children, for the Ungodly and Reprobate, and in them is glorified, and greatly
magnified; though the Wicked, having feared and senseless Hearts, can have no
feeling of the same, but to their greater cond^mnation.

Section 21. The Allegation of Examples in the former said matter continued,
out of the old Testament.
1. Moses appeaseth God his wrath, kindled for the golden Calfe.

TO go forward in Examples: When God had threatened to consume his people in
the Wilderness, for their Molten Calfe, which they caused Aaron to make in
Moses absence, to offer burnt Offerings unto it: Moses by Prayer, turned away
Gods wrath, so as He Exodus 3. 14.
changed his mind from the Evil which he threatened to do unto his people.

2. Moses for the Israelites against the Pestilence.

And again, in Numbers 14. when God would have smitten them with Pestilence,
for Murmuring against Moses; neuer-thelesse he prevailed, in so-much as God
says there, I have forgiven it, according to thy request. Number. 14. 20


3. Samuel for the Israelites against the Philistims.

In the first Book of Samuel, the 7. 8. The Children of Israel were afraid
of the Philistims, who came up against them in Mizpeh, and said to Samuel,
Cease not to cry unto the 1. Sam. 7. 8, 9
Lord our God for us, that he may save us out of the hands of the Philistims.
(verse. 9.) And Samuel cried to the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him:
For in the 10. verse. The Philistims by Thunder from Heaven were scattered, and
slain before Israel.

4. Hannah conceiueth by her Prayer.

Behold also even this Samuel, (who here was Intercessor by Prayer unto God
for Israel, against the Philistims,) was himself by Prayer in like manner
obtained of the Lord: For his Mother Hannah the Wife of Eikanah the Leuite, was
barren, and could not conceive; But, I 1. Sam. ^. 27
Prayed for this Child (says Hannah,) and the Lord has given me my desire,
which I asked of him.

5. Manoah for a second apparition of the Angel.

Manoah the Father of Samson, after the Angel of God Judge. 13. 3.
had told his Wife (who was barren,) that she should conceive, and bear a
Son: Which she did, and it was Samson, (verse. 24) Being desirous to
understand further the Judge. 13. verse. 24, 7. 9.
will of God, touching the ordering of the Child, when he is borne, (verse. 7.)
thereby to show his willing and ready mind to obey Gods will, in the bringing
him up; Prayed unto the Lord for the second apparition of the Angel, to that
purpose (verse. 9.) And the Scripture said, that God heard the voice of Manoah,
and the Angel of God came again unto the Wife, and talked also with Manoah in
the matter. verse. 13.

Section 22. 1. Joshua heard, for the standing of the Sun. etc.
SEe further, how God does as it were embrace the desires of his Children and
Servants, whom he is willing to make known unto the World that he loves: For
even he subiecteth to their commands, the supernall powers of the Heavens,
and those two great Luminaries of the Firmament. As when Joshua fought the
Battle of the Lord against the five Kings of the Amorites; and had spoken to
the Lord in that day, when they, and their people were overcome, and said;
Sun stand thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Iosu. 10. 12. 13.
Aialon. The same very time, God heard Iosuah his request, And the Sun abode,
and the Moon stood still, until the people avenged them selves upon their
Enemies. verse. 13.

2. Samuel reduces the people of Israel to an acknowledgment of their sin,
for asking a King.

Also, Samuel (when he was to reduce the people of Israel into a true
acknowledgment of their sin, which before they did not confess) called unto
the Lord, and the Lord sent Thunder and Rain, the same day, to testify
against their wickedness in asking a King. And then they feared, and said; We
have sinned in asking a King, besides all 1 Samuel 12. 18
our other sins.

3. Eliah for Rain and Fire from Heaven.

Eliah the Prophet said to Ahab, the King of Israel, that there should be no
Deaw, or Rain, but according to his 1. King. 17. 1 Luke 4. 25. Iam. 5. 17.
word; which was for Three years and six months, as both S. Luke, and S.
James accomptes the time; who does attribute the same to his earnest Prayer, by
which he did both shut and open the Heavens, that it Rained, and Rained not,
but as the Prophet should declare it by God his Revelation.

And as he thus prevailed with God by Prayer, for Rain and Waters: so
likewise he calls down Fire from 2. King. 1. 10
Heaven, to deuower the Captain, and his fifty men; which were sent to him
from Azariah the King of Israel. So potent and so wonderfully mighty is the
Spirit of God, in the Prayers of the Faithful, that it obtains for them,
even execution of Gods Judgments against the wicked.

No marvel then, if when the glory of God was more specially to be revealed,
and made known, against Idolatry, the said Prophet prevailed with his God by
Prayer for Fire from Heaven, which consumed the burnt Offering; to show, that
he was the only God: for when the people saw it, they fell on their faces,
and said, The Lord is God, the Lord is God: In whose power the Elements, and
all things else, were to be commanded by him, for Man, and against Man.

This already spoken, argues manifestly a mighty power that the Word of God
has, being uttered from out of the mouth of his Children, against the wicked,
both to threaten, and also to execute Gods Judgments, for it never returns in
vain.

Section 23. Eliah restored the Widow of Sereptas Son to life.
NEither only in Judgments is he a God for his Saints sake; but also in
Mercy, and Kindness, does he show himself a loving Father unto such, as at
their entreaties, he is pleased to make known his bounty, and gracious
favor. See then how miraculously the same Tishbit Prophet wrought, by Prayer,
for the Widow of Zarephthas Son,; who falling sick, and dying, whilst he
soiourned 1. king. 17. 9.
there with the Widow according to Gods appointment; (for, he had commanded
the Widow to sustain him there,) was by his Prayer restored to life: For, The
Lord heard the voice of Eliah, and the Soul of the Child 1. king. 17. 22
came into him again, and he revived. Note in this, an extraordinary, and
supererogating virtue and efficacy of true Prayer, when it is blessed of God.
And as this was a special matter, as well for the trial of the Widows Faith
and trust in God, who before had manifested his powerful providence in her
Meal; so also for the securing the Prophet of that fear, and doubt, which he
seemed otherwise to have had, least the killing of the Widows Son, as the
Prophet speaks, during his soiourning there, might have occasioned a contempt
of Gods Ministers in his person, and so in consequent a slander to his holy
Name.

Section 24. Eliah his example in this case, is not for imitation.
AS I say, this was most special, for the causes alleged; so are we not to
make it an example for imitation, as by it presuming to attempt the like by our
Prayers unto God. For the Prophets in these former days, both Denounced Gods
Judgments, and also Wrought strange and supernatural Wonders in the sight of
the world, upon warrantise of special Revelations from himself; which now are
not usual and common; nay, in a manner taken away; for as much as we need
them not, having his own written Word, in which he has been pleased to
reveal his will unto us; by it only to inform, and instruct our ordinary
Petitions upon all occasions. And besides, To restore from death unto life, is
a work of omnipotency, infinitely, and immediately potent; which only
belongs to God, who first Breathed life into man, to make him a living Soul.
So Christ by his Word, (when he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus John. 11.
39. 43. 44.
come forth,) raised him from death, after he had lain in the Grave four
days.

Likewise, when he but said to Iairus Daughter being dead, Maid, I say to
thee, arise; straight way she arose, Mark. 5. 41.
and walked: which she could not have done, unless she had received life,
that was then clean extinguished in her: And therefore S. Luke distinctly
says, that Her Spirit came to her, and she rose straightway, and Christ
commanded Luk 8. 55.
to give her meat.

The restoring of these unto life by Christ, was an Immediate Power, and Virtue
from himself, arguing merely his Divine Nature, far above the reason, and
strength of any faculty in Man; and therefore not propounded to Man for
imitation, farther then God shall warrant it, by some secret motion of the
Spirit, mediating the working of it, and upon special occasion of glorifying
his name thereby: For this is the end in chief, for which such a Miracle so
extraordinary, and wonderful, is wrought; as Christ himself witnesses to
Martha Lazarus Sister, when she said to Christ: Lord* he stinketh John 11. 39.
already, for he has been dead four dayees. In which words, Christ noting
her incredulity, said unto her: Said I not unto thee, that if thou did
believe, thou should see the glory verse. 40.
of God; that is, a Miracle, by which the name of God was to be glorified; more
plainly expressed in the foresaid words mentioned, Christ speaking thus: This
Sickness John 11. 4.
is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be
glorified thereby; which accordingly was manifested: for, Many Jews (upon the
raising of Lazarus from John 12. 11.
the dead,) believed in Jesus.

Section 25. How to interpret imitation of Man, in this case of restoring to
life.
Here, least any in opposition to my former Allegations shall say, that some
likewise in the Scriptures, are remembered to have restored the dead unto life;
and so this Miracle, though only and solely properly belonging to God, yet may
also be unto Man for imitation: I think good, before I proceed further in this
Argument, to insert a note by way of admonition to the simple sort, not well
instructed in the same; to wit, That where they read in the Book of God, of
any, being once dead, restored again to life, in appearance by man, they do
there observe the mediate working of that effect, in Prayers of the Faithful;
to difference it from that of Christ's immediately working power upon Lazarus,
and Iairus Daughter before declared. And likewise that they take heed, they do
not attribute any virtue to the work of Prayer, (whenever in that miraculous
manner blessed of God,) as if of the worthiness of the person, his Prayer
took that virtue and sorce, to give life: But let the Reader be rather
consideratly advised to know, that for as much as all Gods Promises for
obtaining any thing at his hands, are in Jesus Christ his name accomplished,
and by him only made good unto us, Yea, and Amen: We do therefore depend
wholly upon him in Faith; by him, as the only means to have access unto God.
For this our Lord Christ Jesus, has made by his reconciling Passion; and now
by his gracious Intercession, does make that Throne of God his Father, which is
full of Majesty, to be a Throne of Mercy, of loving Kindness, and of much
Pity, unto his Adopted Children in Christ, who cry daily Romans 8. 15.
unto him in the spirit, Abba Father.

Section 26. Herein, and in all other like cases, Faith in Christ, imboldneth
and secureth upon occasion.
LET us then go boldly unto the Throne of Grace that we may receive Mercy,
and find Grace, to help in the time of Heb. 4. 16.
need, as the Apostle to the Hebrews, does admonish us: yea, as the said
Apostle speaks more expressly: Let us draw near with a true heart, in
assurance of Heb. 10. 22.
Faith, by the blood of Jesus; (which is always fresh and verse. 19.
lively, to cleanse and quicken our hearts from an evil Conscience,) We may
be bold to enter into the Holy place, by a new and living way: which he, who
is our High Priest, over the house of God, has prepared for us: In this
manner, Having our hearts established in Faith, and secured with Hope, by the
Spirit. Which testifies unto us, that Jesus Christ is our Prayers unto God by
Christ; who of himself has said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. This Math. 3. 17.
therefore is he, by whom we must present our selves unto God in whom we must
supplicate, and make our Prayers unto him: And lastly, for whose sake we must
hope to be heard, and to obtain our requests at his hands.

Section 27. So Peter heals Aeneas of the Palsy, and also raises Tabitha of
Ioppa from death.
OF this does S. Peter, who knew it to be most true, well assure us, when he
said to Aeneas of Lydda, a man sick of the Palsy, and bedred eight years:
Aeneas, I^s^^sm ^keth thee whole, arise; and Act 9. 34.
take up thy Bed: and he arose immediately.

Again, when the said Peter raised a certain Disciple woman of Ioppa, named
Tabitha, from death to life, (for the Text says, She was sick, and died:)
Was it not Act. 9. 37.
done by Prayer out of a strong Faith grounded upon Gods Promises Christ, which
is no other, then that mediating working, of me before remembered; as is to be
observed in the words of the Text: For, Peter kneeled down, and prayed. To
whom kneeled he, and to whom Act. 9. 40.
did he pray? Was it not to God? And why? To be heard of him speaking thus in
his name; Tabitha, arise. What followed? She opened her eyes, and when she saw
Peter, she sat up. This was the end for which he kneeled and prayed.

Section 28. A true and godly construction of this Miracle, for instruction
sake.
AND yet, let us not think, that this Woman was thus restored to life, for her
own sake: But here a more principal and true end is to be acknowledged, even
the Glory of God. And therefore the holy Ghost notes, that when Peter had
Given Act. 9. 41.
her the hand to lift her up, He called the Saints, and Widows, to restore
her alive unto them. That they seeing this done, by Peter's Prayers, (in this
Miracle blessed of God,) might make it a good occasion of strengthening their
Faith in him, whom they saw just cause, rightly to praise and glorify, for the
same.

Section 29. Elisha for the Pitcher of Oil, of the wife to one of the Sons
of the Prophets, and restores the Shunamites Son to life.
TO proceed in this memorable, and most comfortable History of effectual
Prayers, working by Faith, in the feruencie of the Spirit, the very true and
only Author thereof; who both instructs our Spirit how it should Pray, and
aff^aunceth our Consciences by the Promises of God in the holy Scriptures, unto
a steadfast Hope; giving us boldness to appear before the Throne of Gods
Majesty, in Christ's name, as has been declared: For, None comes to the
Father, but by him. I say, to relate further of the wonderful effects wrought
by the Prayers of the Servants of God. Elisha, now made a Prophet in the room
of Elijah, his Master, by Gods appointment; and having his said Masters
Spirit doubled 1. Kin. 19. 16
upon him, as himself required, wrought in the strength of the same Spirit,
wonderful effects, agreeable to that, 2. King. 2. 9.
which his Master had done before; both for the condition of the persons, and
manner of doing, and is worth the noting: For, as Elijah before had done for
the Widow of Zareptas as touching her Cruse of Oil, not to be ^ Kin. 17. 14
spent and wasted, according to the Word of the Lord, by him spoken: So in like
sort did Elisha, by the same Word, deal with one of the Wives of the Sons of
the Prophets, and a Widow also: For her Pitcher of Oil, 2. King. 4. verse. 5.
6.
which was only remaining to her in Goods at home, out of which she powered
forth and filled Many Vessels, as the Prophet had said. Again, as Elijah the
Master obtained by Prayer at Gods hand, life; for the said Widow of Zareptas
Son, being dead: So Elisha the Disciple, as it were in imitation of his
Master, using most earnest and fervent Prayer unto God, was pleased at that
instant, to make him his powerful instrument, to restore the Shunamites Son
to life; which before by the 2. Kin. 4. 3^.
same means, she had received from the Lord, in her barrenness.

Section 30. The exterior Gesture of these Prophets and Apostles, in the time
of working their Miracles, observed.
But in the exterior Habit and Gesture that these Prophets exercised in time
of Prayer, to declare their feruencie, for the effecting the said Miracle, is
also matter for a fit observation to be appre^ended of all, in specialitie, who
bear the word of God, and are distributers of the spiritual life.

Behold then, how El^^ah stretched himself upon the Child 1 kin. 17. 21.
three times, and called upon the Lord.

Also, Elisha lay upon the Child, and put his mouth to the 2. king. 4. 34.
Child's mouth, etc. And again, Spread himself upon him.

And S. Paul in the Acts of the Apostles. At Troas, where he was to raise a
young man, named Eutychus, unto Act 20. 9. 10
life, who, as Paul was long pr^ach^^g, was overcome with sl^epe, and fell
down from a third lo^^, and so taken up dead: is said there, to have laid
himself v^pon him, and to em^race him. And in this ^aner it p^^a^eo God to
revive E^^ychus, by Paul's ministry, for the glorifying of his own name, in
the* sight of the Disciple* ^^ere assembled at Paul's Preaching before the
breaking of Bread, according to Chrstes institution.

Likewise Acts 9. 40. 41. in Peter's Action of re^i^ing Tabitha before spoken
of, may be observed a vehement motion of his Spirit, out of a sanctified ^are
he had, by it to manifest the glory of God in the time of his Prayer, for her
life: to wit, his Kneeling down, and turning Act. 9. 40. 41.
himself to the Body: his giving her the hand, and lifting her up* etc.

It is to very good purpose, that the holy Ghost is pleased, to specify after
this particular manner, the Outward g^sture of the Saints, conjoined with the
Inward affection in Praying; for that they are induced, by a secret motion of
the Spirit, to ask, and desire also to obtain at Gods hands.

Section 31. The imitation of these, and such like, belong only to the Godly,
and faithful.
We must be advertised hereby, that the Imitation hereof is m^erely
appropriated to the Children of God o ely; who only have true Faith, which
does always accompany true and zealous prayers, and so do work these
miraculouse eff^ctes, yea, or any of other nature, and quality, as God
thinks fi^ and expedient for us, and for his glo^ie* and in such time also as
himself in his heavenly wisdom, knows mee^ to be granted. And to this
sense m^st all our int^rpertations be referred, for use made, of all Scripture
places, mentioning the virtue, and effect of true Prayer, working by Faith;
without which, no such matter can possibly be wrought, as appears in the
answer o^ Christ unto his Discipl^^* who could not cast the Devil out of a
certain man's Son that was Luna^icke, and had said unto Jesus a part, (who
had now healed him*) Why could we not cast him out? It was answered them, Mat.
17. 19.
verse. ^0. Because of your vnb^liefe. And therefore Christ tells them
hereupon a^ it follows in that verse, that If they have faith as much as a
grain of M^star^ (...) and say to this Mo^ntaine, ^emooue henc^ (...) place,
it shall remove and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Or as Saint Luke
17. 5.
Luke otherwise repo^te^^ (...) ^hen the Apostl^s said unto the Lord. Increase
o^r says, the Lord said* verse. 6. If ye had says so much, as ^^ t^^ (...)
of a Mustard-seed^, and should say to this Mulberie Tree* pl^ck^ thy self ^^
by the Root, and plant thy self in the Sea, it shall ^uen obey you; ^or ^^e
has spoken it, who tells them ^n Saint, John. 14. (...) He that believes
in me the works that I do, the same* ^^ll he do also. The truth of which
saying, was f^l^y (...) ^^ested in his Apostles* who in like manner d^d w^^ke
the works of Christ, which he had done before.

Section 32. Miracles wrought by the Apostles through faith.
THE particulers for the proof of this Allegation, are many, and of great
variety: yet may it seame a needless discourse to particularize the sundry
confirmations of the Miracles manifested in the practice of the Apostles, and
Saints of God: I say, needless; for that the holy Ghost, whose testimony is
of the greatest validity to euict the truth of this matter, and to confirm
our Consciences in the same, has in general Act. 5. 12.
words avouched it, in the 5. chap. of the Acts of Apostles, where, upon the
discovery of Ananias and Sapphira his wives hypocrisy, rebuked by Peter, and
the punishment; which was a sudden death presently following: great fear
occasioned thereby on all the Church, it is said: That, By the hands of the
Apostles, were many Signs and Wonders showed among* the people. What these
Signs and Wonders were, the holy Ghost, out of his heavenly Wisdom, has
also been pleased to specify there in the 16. ver. saying: There came also a
multitude out of the Cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks,
and them which were vexed with unclean spirits; who were all healed.

Section 33. Peter, and Stephen, and Paul, work Miracles through the power of
God, by Faith.
ANd that we may not doubt of the Persons agents in these Miracles, the name
of Peter, is there mentioned, Act. 5. 15.
for it is said, They brought the sick into the Streets, and laid them on
Beds and Couches, that at the least way, the Shadow of Peter, when he came
by, might shadow some of them.

And in the 6. chap. it is also written of Stephen, that he, Act. 6. 8.
Being full of Faith and Power, did great Wonders and Miracles among the
people. We must think that these great Wonders and Miracles, (though not
expressed in particular by name,) were yet such matters acted by Stephen, as
being supernatural and extraordinary, might not be confined within the
limits of common natural working causes; and so, far exceeding the
faculties, and powers of Man's reason.

Such were the Miracles that Paul did also, in the 14 of the Acts, Where he
by his Word spoken, caused a certain Act. 14. 10.
man at Listra, which had been a Creeple from his mothers womb, to stand
upright on his feet, to leap, and to walk. And where in like manner, He
healed the Father of Publius, Act. 28. 8.
in the I Will of Malta, of a Fe^er, and Bloody flixe, by laying his hands on
him. And as many also of the said Island, as had Diseases, And came unto him,
were healed by him. verse. 9.


Section 34. The End, for which Miracles are done, by the ministry of the
faithful, is the Glory of God.
ARe not these Works, and those before recited done by the Apostles, and
others Gods Children, The works of Miracles, and for Nature and quality, like
to the Works which Christ him self did before, in the Gospel? And can it be
any marvel, that these Matt. 20. 34* Mar. 10. 52. Luke 18. 43.
Miracles were done by the Apostles, with whom, as it is w^itten, Act. 11. 21.
The hand (that is, the Power and Ve^^^e) of the Lord, was continually working,
to the glory of his ^ame? For by this means, A great number believed*
^^^turned to the Lord, as there is said.

To ^nforce a greater credit, by acc^mulating more Examples, in this Argument,
already sufficiently discussed, the intelligent, and believing Reader, will
hold it a matter of fruictlesse pains, rather then of any necessary moment
and consequence: For what needs any further proof to avouch this point, which
is as clear as is the light of the Sun at noone day. What then shall I say
more? To use the very words of the Apostle to the Hebrews: The time would be
too short for me, to tell of Gedion, of Heb. 11. 32.
Barach, of Iephtha, of David, and of the Prophets: Who by Faith, (the very
true cause of religious Prayers) Subdued Judge. 6. 4. 11*
Kingdoms, obtained the Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions* quenched the
violence of Fire, and wrought diverse other wonderful Effects; which there are
expressed. Nay, Seeing (as the Apostle speaks) We are compassed with so
great Heb. 12. 1.
a Cloud of witnesses: let us cast away every thing that presses down, and
the sin, that hangs so fast on. Let us run with pati^^^^, the Race that
is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the A^thor, and finisher, of our faith.

Section. 35. The Faith of the Godly is by th^se exampl^s, to be ^ff^^nced*
^^d fully to be confirmed, for working the like.
THis conclusion of the Apostle, to those his former (...) of Faith, is mee^e
exho^tati^e, and of him is i^^orc^d to this end: That setting our Consciences
upon the truth of that which he in those words has ^uerred, we might be
encouraged thereby unto a full resolution, of imitating their examples, in hope
of the same, or like effects, to be also accomplished unto us from God: That
is to be heard of him at all times, when so^uer in the like Faith ground^d upon
his word, we shall accordingly pray unto him ^s Daiud witnesses: The Lord is
near unto them that call upon him* Psalm. 145. 18.
yea, to all that call upon him in truth For thus to do, viz. To pray in
truth, appertains to those only, who are the Children of God, even of the
household of Faith, to whom the Promises of God are only and properly
belonging* For these only have this believing virtue, which is contrary to
misbeliefe, doubting, impatience, and grudging, or murmuring; because they are
fully assured, that as Moses speaks: No Nation so great, that has Gods come
so near unto it, as is the Lord our God near unto us, in all that ^eu^. 4. 7.
we call upon him for: helping us, and delivering us out of all dangers; yea,
Fulfilling the desires of his Children, a^ says the Psalmist: Adding further
the reason, taken from Psalm. 145.
a true note of difference, which is, Of them which fear him. For herein are
the Elect, and Chosen of God, distinguished from the Godless, and Reprobats:
For these, Ask all things according to Gods will: And in this assurance that
John ^. 14.
so asking, They are heard, and have the petitions that they desire 1. Ioh. 5.
15.
of him. They pray confidently, in the name of Christ who may be said to be the
ve^ie formal cause* of all o^ Inuocations, because all the commandments for
pra^ing, and all promises, for the blessing our prayers, a^^ founded and
builded upon Christ Jesus only, as before has been sufficiently declared.

Section. 36. Works of Miracles, being work^s of powerful Faith in Christ,
are presidents to the Godly; Commendable and Allowable; done, for Gods glory.
NOw then, for as much as by these former exampl^ of Godly men's Prayers,
effecting thus wonderfully, as has been showed, the working of true and
faithful Invocation, on the name of God, i^ warranted unto us: What should
withdraw us from practicing with these men, the use of fervent and zealous
Prayers? Is more written, as done for these holy Saints, then may seem any
wise credible? Shall we then charge the holy Ghost, with an Imputation of
vanity and Lies, who is called in the Gospel, The spirit of truth, and has
Ioh 14* 17. and 1. 26.
testified of these things? God forbid, for notwithstanding they were Men, as
we are; subject to the like passions and infirmities, as we are; So witnessed
by S. James of El^as before Iam. 5. 17. Act. 14. 15.
mentioned: And by Saint Paul and Barnabas. And for this respect, not to be
thought able to work such admirable and extraordinary effects of themselves:
yet must we think, that God, who looks not to the person of Man, which by
the nature of flesh, is merely sinful; and in him self, most unworthy such a
prerogative of Gods favor; having yet made Man for his glory, and endowed him
from above, with apt gifts for the same; has been therefore pleased from time
to time in all ages, to select and choose out some to be Ministers unto him, to
witness his name, even before Kings, for the setting forth of his Glory, in
the show of the world; that so he might be known the only GOD, and Lord of
all the World.

Section 37. Nebuchadnezzar, and Darius, and Cyrus, great Potentates, caused of
God, through Miracles done upon Daniel, and the three Children, to acknowledge
and confess his name.
OF this, the Scripture avouches very many testimonies, besides those already
by me related: yet, this place so fitly occasioning, I will exemplify some
more of them, for this specialtie; containing my self only within the
Chapters of Daniels prophecy. It is there remembered: That when Daniel Dan. 2.
had interpreted King Nebuchadnezzars Dream, and had revealed the secret
thereof, (which the wise men of Babylon could not expound:) The King upon this
acknowledgment, said to Daniel, I know for a truth, That your God, is the verse.
47.
God of Gods; the Lord of Kings; and the reuealer of secrets; seeing thou
could open this Secret. Where note, how God, sometimes extorteth a
confession, of his wisdom and power, even out of the mouths of these wicked
Infidels: As here he does by this King, whose hearts belief, was dissembled,
in the mouths confession not truly testified; And so it appeared to be but a
sudden motion of the heart; as was that of Pharaos in Exodus, Exodus 9. 27.
where he confessed, The Lord to be righteous, and himself, and his people,
to be wicked.

Again, the very same King, upon the wonderful delivery of the three
Children out of the fiery Furnace, spoke thus, and said: Blessed be the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, Dani. 3. 2^.
and Abednego: publishing by his Letters throughout all his Dominions, that His
Kingdom is an everlasting Dani. ^. 33.
Kingdom; and his Dominion, from generation to generation.

And in the 4. of Dan^el, after his restitution to his former, Dan. 4. 34.
both shape, and dignity; Himself pronounces thus: I Nebuchadnezzar, praise,
extol, and magnify, the King of Heaven, etc.

Also, Darius after that God had delivered Daniel from the mouth of the Lions
in the Den, did acknowledge him to be, The living God; and accordingly, Made
a Decree, Dan. 6. 26.
That in all his Dominions and Kingdoms, men should tremble, and fear, before
the God of Daniel.

Lastly, in the History of Bell and Dragon; as is mentioned Dan. 14.
to be written in the 14. of Daniel, after the Latin Translation. Cyrus also,
when he saw Dani^l sit in the midst of the Lions, where he had been now
seven days; of purpose detained in it, to have been deuowred of them, and was
not: He cried with a loud voice, verse 41.
saying; Great art thou, O Lord God of Daniel; and there is none other, besides
thee.

Behold how wonderfully, and after a strange manner, God out of a zealous
respect to his own Glory; Has wrought a mighty deliverance of these four
persons, Daniel, Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego: In them, to make himself
acknowledged, and confessed, of these Heathen Kings, to be the only God in
Heaven and Earth; besides whom, no other God, Can do like his works, and like
his power, as Moses speaks in Deutronomie. Deuteronomy. 3. 24.


Section 38. Obstacles, and Impediments* hindering our knowledge of God, to be
removed.
TO return then to that saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews, before
remembered. Let us remove from Pag^. ^1.
us all abstacles and hindrances, that may in any sort withdraw our minds,
from apprehending says toward God, in Christ; By which, these most admirable
effects, and all the rest of like nature, have been wrought for his children,
throughout all Ages.

I mention here Obstacles, to be removed: Because, If they were not, viz.
Riches; The Choking cares of the world; and such like: we should the better
know God, by denying our selves; and so in a submissiue conceit of our
unworthiness; considering the poverty in which we are, both of body and
Soul; We should the sooner, with an affection of a truly sorrowing heart,
call unto God, for relief of our miseries.

It cannot be said, that God is now, less willing to (...); or less potent,
to help us in our trouble then he was in former times, when he showed his
greatness, by doing wonders, with his mighty hand. Nay, An assured virtue,
power, and strength for effecting, is promised to all prayers alike, that are
made in faith: Because, he that has promised, is the same God always, without
variableness and changing; even the God of Iam. 1. 16.
truth, who never fails to perform, what he promises his Children.

Section. 39. The good pleasure of God, is only to be attended upon, for the
effecting our Prayers, and requests.
I Do not deny, but that the Prayers of the Godly, and best devoted, are some
times furstrated of their demand at Gods hand; Or perhaps, not so soon
accomplished, as they look for: Are they therefore to be discouraged, from
praying? Or rather are they, not to seek to be instructed, in the reasons
thereof; And so to rest satisfied, in the will of God, which he reuealeth in
his good time, and not otherwise? I say then if God do not so soon answer,
the desiers and requests of our Inuocations made unto him, as we would: Let us
herein submit our selves, unto his wisdom; Who knows truly, the Limitations
of all Circumstances, in the nature of the things to be granted, as well for
the manner How, as also for the time When, it is expedient and meet, that we
obtain our demaundes: For in them, not our own good so much, as Gods glory;
and that chiefly, is to be sought for of us; which thing at all times, is to
bemanifested: Nevertheless, because the certain Time, for the manifesting it,
is not revealed unto us, we are to attend his Leisure; and yet not to cease
from praying Always, as becomes his faithful Children to do.

Section 40. Causes, for the not answering our demaundes as we expect,
alleged, to remove all excuses, for not continuing in Prayer.
FOr besides the two former Reasons of exception to our Demaundes; (as that the
things which we require of God, are either not Expedient and Behouefull for
us, or, not then, when we ask them, Fit to be granted;) We are further to
consider, That God, for a further trial of our Faith, as also to exercise us
in a continual practice of Prayer, for the approouing our constancy therein,
does many times delay the granting o^ out requests, as if he heard them not:
And it may be also, that our Prayers sometimes be faulty, and so displeasing
to God, are worthily of him rejected for the time. Prayers are said to be
faulty and unprofitable, when they are deuoid of such conditions, as true and
faithful prayers ought to have: What these conditions are, in the former part
of this Epistle, diversely handled, may be understood: And yet, because I will
draw to an end, I shall willingly recapitulate them, briefly thus.

Section 41. All Prayers, of what nature soever, without true knowledge, lively
Faith, and hopeful Confidence in Gods favor, and goodness, are in vain
conceived.
FIrst, a true knowledge of God, that he is goodness, yea, our sovereign
goodness; our full and perfect Treasures. Next, A steadfast and lively faith,
that we believe, (he being of a loving and fatherly affection toward us,)
cannot but participat unto us at all times, what he sees most needful for us
to have. Lastly, that we have a sure affiance in God, To rely wholly on him;
To repose our full trust and confidence in his goodness: For how may we
address our Prayers unto him, of whom we have not Knowledge that he is our
God, able, and willing, to help us, calling upon his name? And this Knowledge
serves us further, for an other most necessary advertisement, arising out of
the former: viz. That otherwise we should not praise God, with Prayers of
thanks giving, if we did not know, that what good thing soever happens unto
us at any time, whether bodily or ghostly, it comes only from God. For, as
the affiance which we have in God, of his goodness, certified and confirmed
unto us, out of that our Knowledge of his Nature (wholly prone unto Mercies and
Favors, toward them that love and fear him) does incite, stir up, and
animate our Hearts, chearefully without doubting and distrustfulnesse, to call
unto him by Prayer, for all things meet to be demanded of us: So, when the
said things are obtained, and our necessities now served; Because we know
certainly, that the only free Mercy and goodness of God, has ministered the
same unto us; We break forth presently into a song of Thanks giving, as
forced by the testimony of our Conscience, upon this Knowledge, to say with
David, My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, who vpholdeth all that
Psalm. 14^. ver. 21, 14, 20.
fall, and l^fteth up all that are ready to fall; who opens his hand, and
^^lleth all things living, of his good pleasure: Who preserves all them that
love him, keeping his fidelity for ever. Who executes justice for the
oppressed; giving Bread to the Psalm. 146 ver. 7, 8, 9.
(...): Who loses the Prisoners, gives light to the Blind, rayseth up the
crooked, keeps the Strangers, and relieueth the Fatherless and Widow. For
the Lord delights in them that Psalm. 147. (...)
fear him, and attend upon his Mercy. For he will make the meek glorious,
by deliverance: Wherefore, let all slesh, bless his holy Name, for ever and
ever,

Amen.
Section 42. Contrariwise all Prayers, consisting of those three essential
Attributes, are effectual, to the good of such as make them.
THese are the effects, issuing from out that true Knowledge of God, spoken of
in the beginning of this Treatise, and now argued* which is founded in His
fear, builded upon by Faith, perfected in us through Obedience to his will:
For this Knowledge, causes us (as is said) both to Invoke, and also to
Thank^ God for his benefits obtained by Prayer; and so aduauncing our Thoughts
on high, to seek there only from above, what we would have, and can not
find, but in God only; we are forced to call only upon him for it: and
therefore, The Eyes of all, both Man and Beast, are said, Psalm. 145. 15.
To weight upon him. For he alone satisfies our wantes, when we pray unto
him to be relieved. Can we otherwise think of Gods provident care over us, to
whom he has assured performance of all his Promises, both for things of this
life, and of the life to come? No, for He Psalm. 147. 9. Mat. 6. 26.
gives food to the Beasts of the Fields, and to the young Ravens that cry.
And are not we much better then they? says Christ. So, to conclude this
matter, that true Christian Knowledge of God, which is not had, but in his
Word, fully instructed and sanctified in us by his Holy spirit, causes this
godly zeal, both to Pray as we ought, and also to testify a due and
religious Thankfulness for all good things; because it tells us, that we
have nothing, but from him soly, being the sole, and all-sufficient dish ibuter
to Man, of all necessaries, if we serve him; as it is in Matt. 6. 33. Seek the
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of it, and all things shall be
ministered unto you.

Section 43. God only, and none other to be prayed unto, for all things meet
to be asked at his hands.
TO pray, then unto God only, and to none other besides him, being the. Only
God unto us, as says S. Cor. 8. 6.
Paul. Which is the father, of whom are all things, and we in him even that
King everlasting, immortal, invisible, and only wise, as the said Apostle
speaks. I say to 1. Tim. ^. 17.
pray unto this our God only, for all things of what quality and Nature
soever, the same being meet to be asked: that is, having the warrant of his
word; Is a confessed truth, suficiently before declared by the testimonies of
Page. ^.
holy writ; And that of necessity, as has been said, not so much in respect
of our selves, by reason both of wants to be supplied, and also of
afflictions, and troubles to be releiued by him as of duty exacting at our
hands this Godly obedience unto his holy will, so commanding it in many places
of Scripture, most expressly in words: And by examples of Moses, and all the
Prophets Mat^. 7. 7. Luke 18. 1. Romans 12. 12.
in the old Testament, and likewise of Christ, and all the Apostles in the new,
plentifully confirmed.

Section 44. Yea, if we know that Gods will is necessarily to be executed,
without our calling unto him for the same: yet are we in duty to pray for the
executing thereof.
NOtwithstanding to this, as also to the former part, may be alleged matter,
for a true Exception: For, first to demand by Prayer, that which we well know
God will do of himself without our Prayer, may seem needless; and so our
Prayer in this kind, not to be used at all. But let us not so take it; for
howsoever it is true, that the Will of God, in all things, must of necessity
be performed, Because it is his Will; against which no resistance can seem
available; Yet, it is our part, and duty, to require the same, by way of
protestation, that we are his Children, begotten by him with the seed of his
word, which conteyneth his will, and therefore desirous, and as much as we may
for our ability, endeuowring also, the performance of the same* do pray as
Christ has taught us; Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: Which is
no more but this, that a true, and perfect obedience be attributed unto him
for the sanctifying his name, and advancing his kingdom thereby, guiding and
governing by the holy motions of his holy Spirit, the hearts of all estates,
in such sort, as that every vocation of men, in ^euerall distinguished, both
Prince and people, subject to it, may no less serve him here on Earth, then
the Angels do in Heaven.

Section. 45. Murmuring against Gods chastisements, is an Argument of our
Ignorance, in the doctrine of Gods will.
ANd though our Consciences tells us, that we are to subscribe hereunto, as
being a most certain Truth: Yet may they justly accuse us of great hypocrisy:
for Gods will is done in all things that happen unto man: A thing that cannot
be denied: Yet, let affliction, and tribulation assault us, to disturb and
overthrow that peace of our life, in which we most joy; Oh how do we
Murmr against God? How do we, with much grudging say, God has forsaken to
do well for Israel, and has shuit up his loving kindness in displeasure? And
this we do, forgetting that it is his will, we should be afflicted of him,
for our chastisement unto our amendment of life. For God in lustice does
punish, what we through unrighteousness do ostend in. And therefore it is a
question, whether we may lawfully desire of God* to be eased of troubles, into
which his will was we should fall. For seeing we are to submit our selves to
the will of God, and accordingly to conform our wills thereunto, surely, to
complain unto God in our prayers, of our Miseries, and to desire of him a
deliuerence from them, knowing they were sent from him, and so his will to be,
that we endure them, may seem a thing very unlawful to do, and repugnant to
his will, to which we are subiuct, and ought chearefully to obey, and as the
patience of Job teaches us to say. The Lord has given, and the Lord has Job
1. 21.
taken away, Blessed be the name of the Lord. Confessing herein with him, that
God is just and good; yea also loving, howsoever his hand be at some times
heavy upon us.

Section. 46. The ungodly, and the Godly, are of a different sense, in the
construction of Affliction, as touching the final cause.
TO this Doctrine, the wicked are merely adverse, who, when they feel
affliction (which they worthily deserve,) yet dejected through impatiencie into
despair, blaspheame God; and to use Job his words, Charge God foolshly with
injustice, and tyranny. For these men, as if that which they have, were theirs
by a just claim, say, To loose our Gods, is as much as, to loose our sense,
and understanding.

But with the godly it is not so, who say with Job, Shall we receive good at
the hand of God, and not receive evil? Job 2. 10.
These, as men sanctified in the spirit, unto a most holy and dutiful
obedience of his will, do well acknowledge the cause of those evil miseries,
which they feel, to be even their sins, justly provoking the same; and so
taking their Affliction for a just punishment, are made the better by it: Which
is the end, why they are afflicted of God: wherein they behold the loving
kindness of God their Father, who Chastises every son who^ he receives: and
therefore refuse not the Chastifment of the Almighty, because they say with
Job, Blessed is the man, whom God corrects: Job 5. 17.
accompting it a great happiness in this world, to be under the cross of
affliction, by which they are assured, that a way is prepared for them, unto
that true and endless happiness in Heaven above with God himself, Act. 14.
22.
and his Angels. Wherefore, to urge the former objection. It is not so much
unlawful, To pray against the afflictions; seeing they are ordained after Gods
will, to be trials 1. Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14.
of his Childrens faith, and to that end laid upon them by himself; as rather
inconvenient, and prejudicial, for that they are accounted of them, as
blessings; being Endured with patience; and so are indeed: advancing in their
minds, a resolute expectation of many future blessings. For S. Paul,
susteyning the person of the elect Saints of God, makes himself the mouth of
them all, to that purpose, in the. 5. to the Romans, where he says. We
rejoice in tribulations, knowing that Tribulation brings Romans 5. 3, 4, 5.
forth Patience; and Patience, Experience; and Experience, Hope, and Hope,
makes not ashamed, for it is ever with good success, not frustrating
expectation.

Section. 47. It stands with a Christians duty, to pray for deliverance out
of troubles.
THese two S^uerall Objections, aginst praying for releife in time of troubles,
make show of good reason in the affirmative, as well for the prime cause, which
is the will of God thereby manifested; As for the final cause, which is, A
joyful issue, with a 1. Cor. 10. 13
blessing. Never the less, forasmuch as, God has endewed us with such a
Nature, as must needs be subject unto all casualties of this life, that
commonly breed offense unto it; And the same also not without a sensible
feeling of them, when they do happen; He in his wisdom does well know, that
we cannot choose but grieve, when we feel the smart, which Nature may not
brook; and so in consequence, make our complaint unto him, who only can send
remedy: for Nature seeks a preservation of it self in all things; And
therefore detesteth whatsoever is in repugnancie to the same: Can we think then,
that God will impute it unto us for sin, when we feeling grief in that
kind, do call unto him, by Godly prayers, for his gracious help and
releasement out of the same; No, For, first we have his express word,
commanding our Invocation in the needful time of trouble, with a pomise for a
safe deliverance, as witnesses David. Who there shows it to be a part of his
service, Psalm. 50. 15.
even to be called upon in such cases, Saying; And thou shall gloryfie me. The
godly, who have been instructed in the School of the Prophets, by the holy
spirit, (the Doctor, and only informer of all truth,) having this warrant; have
likewise from time to time, been bold, in all times of such need, to cry
aloude unto God their deliverer. So David, being brought into any great danger
by his enemies, as were the Ziphims, whom in Psalm. 54. He called Psalm. 54. 3.
strangers; Called upon God, for his succor against them. Also against Saul,
in the, 55. Psalm. Where his heart trembles within him, for the voice of the
Enemy, and an Psalm. 55. 5.
horrible fear covers him, And against all the malignaunt adversaries of the
Church, in diverse Psalms, makes the like requests.

Section. 48. Enemies to be prayed, and not to be prayed for. This by way of
Question, inferred, and argued, both by the affirmative, and Negative,
concluded.
SOme here more a question, whether it be lawful and consonant to the rule of
Charity, to Pray against our enemies: For besides, that Prayer deuoyd of
charity, (which can be none in the Nagatiue) as they think, is sinful and
displeasing to God; Christ commands us, To pray for our Enemies: So did
Christ himself: So did Stephen: So did all the Martyrs.

By way of advertisement, we may distinguish, between private Enemies, and
common Enemies, both to God and Religion. Against these latter, I hold it a
work of godly Charity, to pray and desire Gods help for their overthrow, who
seek and endeavor the overthrow of the Church, and so in consequence, the
extinguishing and abolishing of Gods name from among men. For this we have
good warrantise in the example of David so praying. Consume them in thy wrath.
viz. in thy time, Psalm. 59. 13.
make my enemies examples unto others of thy vengeance. Of Jeremy, Who prayed
in like manner for the Iere. 18. 23.
Ourthrow of his enemies, and to have them dealt withal, In the time of God his
anger. Likewise S. Paul, against 2. Tim. 4. 14 15.
Alexander the Copper Smith. Who had done him much evil, withstanding sore his
Preaching, and therefore desires the Lord to, Reward him according to his
works.

Section. 49. To pray for deliverance out of Troubles, is with a Condition, by
Christ's example.
TO pass this over, (which was inferred only, for a note of observation upon
the former question,) that we may safely and lawfully pray unto God for a
deliverance out of troubles, in his good time: Let the example of our Savior
Christ, be unto us a sufficient Authority; who having a sense of his death and
passion near at hand, and being in an agony, prayed, saying. Father, if thou will, take away this Cupp from me. Luke 22. 42


But as we are taught here to request Gods aid at any time, in all our
distresses and miseries, so yet we must know further, to refer our selves
wholly unto his both leisure, and pleasure; And not to expect more, then he,
who has the times and seasons in his own power, does know fittest to Act. 1.
7.
be done: And therefore Christ adds: Yet, not my will, but thy will he done.

Section 50 Prayer to be commonly celebrated in the public places of
Christian congregations, appointed for the same.
AND now in the conclusion of this Discourse, though it seem very long; yet
somewhat would be said of The Place of Prayer. Of this therefore, let us
consider briefly, and so end. It is to be held for a certain verity, that
Prayer is necessarily tied and bound, to the Church of Christ. I mean not here
material Temples, which have limitations both of places, and times of public
Prayer: Happily then, we should not Pray, but in those places, and at certain
times appointed for Prayer: But I understand the Church to be, The Congregation
of the Faithful, in what place so ever assembled together for that service;
who are such, as being United in Faith, and Linked in Charity; do Agree in
the same Doctrine, and so make one Communion, and Fellowship in Christ: from
which, whosoever is separated, must not hope to be heard of God. The
Observation which here seems worth the noting, is: That no Heritique, Turk,
Pagan, Infidel, Atheist; no, nor the falsely termed Catholic) Papist, can
use any true form of Invocation, and Prayer acceptable to God; Because they
are merely excluded from out that true Church, whereof Christ is the head; for
it is the Pillar and ground of truth. 1 Timothy 3. 15.


Section 51. Material Churches fitly appointed, for common places of Prayer;
argued by testimonies, of Solomon, and Christ; out of Esaias, and Jeremy: also
by examples of the Apostles, Peter and John.
NOw to speak somewhat of the Place for common Prayer; I grant, that Temples,
and Churches, are erected purposely for the public celebrating Divine
service; and that thither the people by commandment, are to be assembled;
there to join in hearty Prayers unto God for all men: as may be testified out
of the words of Solomon, making Supplications to God, 1. Kin 8. 30
before the Altar in the Temple, that he would hear the people of Israel,
praying in the Temple, etc.

And Christ when he chased the Buyers and Sellers out Matt. 21. 21
of the Temple; alleging there the words of the Prophet Esaias and Jeremy: It
is written, My House shall be called the Esa. 56. 7. Iere. 7. 11.
House of Prayer, for all people; confirms the same.

Again, is it not said, Acts 3. That Peter and John went Act. 3. 1.
up together into the Temple to Pray? For which cause S. Paul, gives it in
charge to Timothy, saying: I will that 1. Tim. 2. 8.
men pray every where: If every where; then surely in Temples, as places
specially erected, and built to that purpose, even in them to call upon God, by
hearty and faithful Prayers; whether of Requests, or giving of Thanks.

Section 52. Prayer, not of necessity tied to any place, seeing God his
Majesty, is not to be enclosed within material places.
THese, in this manner avouched, and proved by testimonies and examples of
old, and accordingly in common practice amongst us, I do willingly acknowledge
to be most true. Notwithstanding, that I be not mistaken in the true
application of this matter, I am bold to say; That I think it not fit, the
Majesty of God (which is in it self infinite,) and his gracious favor
toward his people, should be enclosed as it were, and shut up in material
places; As if, out of them, God would not hear us, praying unto him, because
of the Holiness of the same Places, requiring that specially above all other.

Zorubbabel was commanded from God by Haggai Hagg. 1. 14.
the Prophet, to reedifie the material Temple. Yet there does he prophecy of
a Second Temple, that should exceed Hagg. 2. 8.
the first in glory; meaning spiritually, The Church in Christ to be
accomplished, and is now amongst us Christians, dispearsed abroad every where.
So then, as touching the Nature, and quality of Places, let us say, it is all
one and alike before God, (who makes Holy any Place, wherein he is pleased to
be worshipped) receiving no Holiness from the Place where he is worshipped; as
does appear manifested in these words of Isaias, saying: The Heaven is my
Throane, and the Earth my Footstool; Where Isa. 66. 1.
shall now the House stand, that ye will build for me? and where is that
Place of my rest? Where the Prophet shows, the vain confidence of them,
plainly refuted and condemned, that reposed trust in the Temple. This has
Stephen confirmed unto us by his testimony, for when he had said. Solomon
built God a House, he presently inferred, Act. 7. 47. 48.
How be it, The most High, dwells not in Temples made with hands: Arguing
the gross conceits of the Jews, imagining that the Power and Wisdom of
GOD, was contained within Material places, there to be limited, and confied by
corruptible things.

Section 53. Every true Christian, being the true Temple of God, is, without
special limitation of Place, to pray every where, upon occasion, observing fit
circomstance thereto appertaining.
Where then shall we assign a fit Place, in it to pour forth our Prayers
unto God? Even wheresoever we find our selves aptly disposed in mind
thereunto; whether for Necessity, or Comeliness sake. For, seeing We be the
Temple of God, as himself has appointed, for his Spiritual service; what
Place can be exempted from Prayer? God is a Spirit, and John 4. 24.
they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth; without
limitation of either certain Time, when; or material Place, Where. Only we
are to be admonished here, that in time of Prayer, we seceed from a concourse
and frequencie of people, or sight of any, into some place of secrecy and
quiet rest, to be free from such letts and hindrances, as are occasioned
thereby, and commonly do fall out to withdraw our minds from attentiveness
in Praying. Such a Place meant Christ, in Matthew, where he teaches us to
Enter in a Chamber, and when we have Matt. 6. 6.
shut the Door, to pray. And this doctrine himself also has left confirmed
unto us, by his own example, who many times in the night, Prayed in
Mountains: and even at the very hour that he was to be betrayde, he went
aside into places of secesse, to Pray. Matthew. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. John. 18. 1.

Section 54. The place fittest for Prayer, is the Chamber, so called, because
of secrecy, and private secesse, argued by the Testimony of Christ, and the
Example of the Apostles.
IF therefore we will Pray Secretly; and indeed, that is, with feruencie and
attentiveness, we m^st make choice of such a place, as Christ specifieth, by
the name and appellation of a Chamber: which may be understood he did speak
in that word, because men at their pleasure do use it privately, when they are
desirous to seek their quiet rest from company, and to be out of sight of
men. And in this sense, when Peter prayed in Simon the Tanners House, of Ioppa:
He went up into the upper Act. 10 9.
part of the House; some high Chamber, as a place which he thought most secret
for that purpose.

In like manner the Apostles, when the holy Ghost was sent down upon them, in
the Day of Penticost, were all with one accord in one place, continuing (there
secretly) in Prayers, (with other faithful,) and breaking of Bread. Act. 2. 1.
42.


Section 55. Daniel, a special Example of praying Secretly in a Chamber,
confirms also the former Position.
THis was the last point, which I had to discuss in this Treatise, and shall
be shut up with the example of Daniel, as well to show, that the Prophets also
in the old Testament, observed the like rule for sequestring themselves, from
out of open places, in times of their Prayers to God; as also for that it
gives matter, for a note of an instructiue Observation: So then, the said Note
being first discussed, the Treatise shall be concluded, according as this example
of Daniel has given occasion of the same, and may of the intelligent Reader be
noted in the circumstances.

It is written, that when Daniel understood that King Darius had sealed A
writing, such as the Rulers of his kingdom had devised against him; He
persently went into his house. And ( his Window being open in his Chamber
toward Dan. 6. 10.
Jerusalem,) and kneeling upon his Knees three times a day, prayed and praised
his God, contrary to the express words of the said writing, which inhibited
all Darius Subjects to make petition for any thing, either to God or man, for*
thirty days; But to himself only, upon pain of Death: This shows, that
Daniel also withdrew himself into his Chamber, that is, out of the sight of
men, when he prayed; According to the Rule of the same Spirit, which out of the
mouth of Christ taught his Disciples to Pray, (as is said before) Privately,
from company of man; and Secretly, out of their sight.

But yet Daniel thus Secretly praying, was discovered: For, The Rulers
assembled, and found Daniel praying, and making Dan. 6. 11.
Supplications unto his God. etc.

Hereupon is that instructiue Note of observation, occasioned in the
circumstaunce of Priuacie, and Secrecy, by this example.

Section 56. What is meant, by Praying in a Chamber, expounded. To avoid an
idle exception against Praying in Public places.
IT has been said, that Prayer, and Suplycation, and giving of thanks unto
God, is to be made in a Chamber, as a place most fit to entertain, and to
advance the devotion addressed unto Prayer. For confirmation whereof, the
Counsel of Christ has been alleged, together with his own example: and the
practice of his Saints in imitation of their Lord and Master. May it then be
argued hereby, that Prayers, made in the Public assemblies of people, met
together in open places for the same purpose, are less acceptable in the
sight of God, being so made in the sight of men? Christ's warrant for a
Blessing promised in this case, bids me say no. For Christ says, Where two or
three are gathered together Mat. 18. 20.
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them: viz. to hear them, and to
grant their Requests. What then does Christ mean, when he bids us to
Enter into a Chamber, and, To shut the Door, in time of our Praying? Matthew. 6.
6.
The thing hereby meant, is Secrecy. But if you will know what Secrecy? look
with an understanding eye into the 6. of Matthew. (where Christ commends this
Matthew. 6.
manner of place for Praying.) The true sense and meaning thereof in the manner
of Giving Alms, and of Fasting. verse. 1. verse. 2.
In giving of Alms, he forbids Blowing the Trumpet in the Sinagogues, and
in the Streets: Yea, he will not have the Left hand to know, what the Right
hand does. In Fasting verse. 3. verse. 16. Verse. 17.
likewise, he forbids Sower looks, which is the disfiguring of the Face;
and commands Annoynting the Head, and Washing of the Face: What is this
else, but a preceptiue Doctrine, for avoiding all Vain ostentation, and
seeking the Praise of Men? Because, if for these respects verse. 2.
we desire any reward; let it be sufficient, and let it content us, that God
alone both knows, and allows these works done in Secret, only before him;
for, The Lord which sees in secret, shall reward openly. So Matt 6. 6.
then, to pray in secret, is to subject our selves in true humbleness of
heart, before God, out of it speaking unto him, and ^^^ring the sincere truth
of our loyal thoughts; and so to entreat him in Simplicity, and with a
Distrust in our own Worthiness, what soever we would obtain of him by
Prayer. For we cannot dissemble with God: And what is it then, to deceive our
selves? For seeing our Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost, in which he
is ^. Cor. 6. 19.
pleased to dwell through Faith justifying us before him, 1 Cor. 3. 16.
by the Me^tes of Christ, and from whence he is willing to hear our Prayers:
we must understand the secret of that heart which is in such a Body, is the
Chamber properly, into which we must enter, and in which, we are necessarily
to hide our selves; if we will auoyd^ the blame, and the reward of hypocrisy,
which Christ in these actions of Christianity, ad^iseth his to shun and
detest, for it makes altogether unto pomp, and vain ostentation of men.

It is not then any Material place, wheresoever by the hands of man
fashioned, to which Christ excepteth, in that speech of Pr^uacie and Secrecy,
understood in the word, Chamber.

Section. 57. It is a Jewish hipocriticall conceit; And condemned of Jeremy,
to think; That God for the holiness of the temple, must necessarylie be there
present, to hear our prayers, above other places.
ANd yet, let us not be as those Jewish Hipocrites whom Jeremy Reproo^eth,
for saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; Thereby conceiting,
I^re. 7. 4.
that God his presence being continually residing in the Temple, his favor and
gracious countenance, must also for the Temples sake, be there better
presented of necessity; Because of his promise to preserve them, howsoever
sinning and offending. For these were lying words put into their mouths by
false Prophets; which Jeremy wills them not to credit. I say, let us
abandon out of our hearts this deceivable conceit, as if in consequence we
were to think that God were bound to hear us, praying in the Temple, for the
holiness thereof, rather then else where* For, if our Souls be resolutly
devoted, and inwardly in humility of heart, and in a defiaunce of our selves,
be christianly settled unto Prayer, at what time soever, whether openly in the
material Temple, or privately in a material Chamber, it shall be all one*
Because God accepts it, as done in the Secret of the heart, with the submisse
eye of the Publican, and smiting of the Breast. These being the notes and
signs of true Humility and Contrition of the humbled Soul* confessing it
own unworthiness; and so, Working salvation in fear and trembling, as S.
Paul speaks. Phil 2. 12.


Section 58. The Pharizes, and the Publicans manner of Praying to be observed,
for an instruction.
THerefore to conclude this point, let the Pharize, who glories to himself in
his own praise and worth, Pray in the most Secret, and Chamberlike place
wheresoever, yet shall it be as done Openly and in public, seeking the
applause of Men, to be magnified of them; for Christ notes such a one to Stand
and to Pray: arguing in these Luke 18. 11.
words, his proud, and disdainful heart, too too much affianced in his own
Righteousness, with contempt of others.

But let the Poor spirited Publican, make his Orizons, unto God in some hidden
place: Yea, if possibly, out of the bottomless depth let him cry unto the
Lord, it shall be accounted as done of him in secret, and in the Chamber, to
which Christ has referred us in time of Prayer, to be heard of him; and God,
whose presence is in the deep Waters, and in the most Secret corners of the
Earth, shall both see it, and by rewarding it, make it publicly known to be
accepted of him: Because this Publican, out of an Humble spirit, has called to
God for his Mercy and goodness, as one who is schooled and instructed by his
Fear; which causes true reverence, to seek him secretly in heart, and not
openly in public places, for the Praise of men, as did that Pharisie: who
therefore is there said, to be rejected, where the Publican was justified of
God.

Section 59. Pharisaicall praying, whether openly or privately, being wholly for
an ostentation with all simplicity, is rejected.
AND to apply this by way of Document, I wish, that in this Pharisie, thus
insolently aduauncing himself, with a disdain of the humbly penitent
Publican, all Pharisaicall Hypocrites would behold themselves. For,
Counterfaite sanctity, is double iniquity; and so rewarded accordingly:
Because, whether openly, or privily, it is addicted, and wholly devoted to
Vain glory; which is always singled from Simplicity of heart, and so is
always opposite to the Glory of God, and the edefying of others: which are
the two things chiefly to be ^ought for of us, in all our actions of
Christianity. And so, if due care be had of these two things, it shall be
requisite at some times, to Pray Publicly, for the better inciting, and
stirring others thereunto: For, by the example of our Good Works, God is
honored, and our Neighbor edified; according to the will of him, who
commands it, saying: Let your Light so shine, that your Good Matt 5 16.
Works may be seen, and the Father be glorified, which is in Heaven.

Section 60. True Devotion of the Heart, ^itte for the Chamber, which Christ
means, and is rewarded.
IF Then we bring unto Prayer the devotion of an humble Spirit, whether we
pray Secretly, as to God alone; Or openly, in the sight of others for example
sake; we pray in that Chamber which Christ has appointed, and therefore are
assured, that our Prayers in this wise made, are accepted, of God, who sees
our hearts deuoyd of Ostentation, and so allowing our devotion from thence
proceeding, will in his time effect our desires; and reward accordingly.
Blessed be his Name for ever, by the Prayers of all his Saints in Christ.

Amen.
THE EPILOGVE OF ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
BEhold (courteous Reader) A Treatise of Prayer; fully discussed and laid open
to thy understanding, (whosoever art pleased to read it with attention,) in the
Nature, Parts, Effects, and Reward thereof. It is written for thy good, if in
that sense, it do correspond thy desire, give the praise to God only, whose
mercy and mere goodness it was, to make him an instrument of his Glory, in
the edefying of his Neighbor thereby. And to the Author, who, out of a mind
to do good, (recommending himself unto thee in that name,) first undertook
this work, and through Gods gracious assistance (howsoever,) has perfected
the same, as thou see: Vouchsafe, if you please, a favorable construction.
It is the meede only, which he shall acknowledge sufficiently recompensing
his pains, travailed herein for thy sake. If also, thou benefit thy
understanding* and zeal thereby, (as it is the thing he most desires,) so
shall it be unto him a great cause of praise and thanksgiving unto God, who
blesses Paul's planting, and 1 Cor. 3. 6.
Apolles watering, with increase of Knowledge, in some thirty, in some sixty,
in some an hundred fold, after a diverse manner, and by adiuers means And there
is no doubt, but if thou be a true Zachary, viz. one that will have God
always in remembrance to set him before thy eyes, thou will in like sort show
thy self a right Simeon, even a Disciple of Christ's School, a diligent
Hearer, and an obedient Practizer of his will. The which God grant to thee and
to me, and to all his true believing Children in Christ, and for Christ: To
whom all Praise, Glory, Majesty, and Honor, be given always, as is always,
and only belonging, for ever.

Amen.
Certain Meditations, as Preparatiues, instructing unto Devotion before Prayer.
FOrasmuch, as, To know how to Pray, as becomes us, is the special gift of
God, by the working of his holy Spirit; We are to lay the consideration
thereof before our eyes, asking at Gods hands that Grace, that necessarily is
required thereto: That so we may be admitted into his presence, to talk with
him by Prayer; having through his gracious favor, such attention, devotion,
fear, and reverence, conferred upon us from his only goodness, as may in
some measure corresponde the worth of so great a Majesty, before whom we
stand in time of Prayer.

1 Therefore, we are first and principally, To reckon with our Consciences,
(which we cannot hide from God,) to call them into a strait account, there to
search what sins by us committed, do lie hid in the secret corners of it, to
bring them forth, as it were unto Judgment: For, If we judge our selves, we
shall not be judged of the Lord. But especially, let us call to mind, the
sins and offenses of the day, and for them accuse and condemn our selves:
For, The just, says Solomon, is the first Accuser of himself. After Prou. 18.
17.
the example of David, according therein with his Son Solomon, and saying. I
know mine iniquities, and my sin is Psalm. 51. 3.
ever before me: By this calling unto God, for a feeling of his abundant
mercies (the which do raise up contrit and wounded hearts, being his true
Sacrifices, as says David and them he will not despise and reject:) Is indeed
to be Sanctified, and to wash our Clothes, before we meet with God at the
nether part of the Mount, etc. As was commanded the people of Israel by Moses
from God, in Exodus. 9. verse. 10. Exo. 19. 10.


2 Secondly, to consider the Majesty and greatness, of that Lord, before whom
we are to pour forth our Prayers. For this consideration shall instruct us,
what reverence, and what attention, so vile a Creature, as is sinful Man,
ought to have, that will parle with such a Majesty, as fills the Heavens.
For if Heaven and Earth, and the whole World, be in a manner an Ant or Pismier;
yea, as a wiseman speaks, the grain of a weight in the Balance, compared to
the Majesty of God: How may thou O man, who art but a very small part of
the whole world, appear in the sight of this our God, so mighty, and so
infinitely powrefull? Let us remember here with Abraham: That when we Begin to
speak unto the Lord Gen* 18. 21.
God, we are but Dust and Ashes; that so, presenting to the eye of our Soul,
the baseness and misery of our Condition, in it self considered; we may the
better instruct our minds unto a true humiliation, which recommendeth the
Prayers of the Saints unto God, in Christ.

3 Thirdly, To bethink us seriously of the things which we aim at, when we
go to Pray: For it is no other, then to receive the Spirit of God, the
Influences of his Grace, the cheerfulness of Love, and Charity, and true
Devotion. In this place, the Devotion of the Apostles may be propounded unto us
for example: Who after Christ's ascension, were Assembled together in an upper
Chamber, continuing Act. 1. 13. 14.
there in Prayer and supplication, expecting the coming down of the holy
Ghost. For we also must know, how to dispose our selves to receive the same
Spirit, though we cannot have it in so great a measure of perfection, as was
poured upon them.

Likewise the examples of the Hydropicall, and Leper, in the Gospel teach us,
with what spirit we are to present our selves before the face of God.

The Hydropicall person, stands before Christ with great Luke 14 2*
reverence, expecting the cure of his Hydropisie: and it was cured.

The Leper beseeches Christ, kneeling down unto him, and saying: If thou will, thou can make me clean. Matt. 8. ^^. Mar. 1. 4^ Luk 5. 12.
In like manner the Soul, being thus prepared unto Prayer, by confessing the
Hydropisie, and Leprosy thereof, and craving pardon for the same, in Christ's
Merits, which is the only cure of our Souls Maladies; we may be bold to say
that Psalm of David: I lift up mine eyes to Psalm. 123.
thee, who dwell in the Heavens. etc. unto the end thereof; for it does
merueilously kindle and inflame the zeal of our Douotion, by way of a
comparison there mentioned, showing the certainty of Gods help, and present
aid, when all other means fail, in all our troubles, and upon all occasions;
if we call upon him for it, with David's spirit.

Now, to stir up our minds the more seriously to this holy exercise of
Prayer, it shall be much available, the night preceding, before we go to
sleep, to be resolutly purposed, to do the said Exercise the next morning;
and with this thought, and resolution, to take our sleep, imitating therein,
the practice of those well aduized Negotiators, who having many affairs to
busy themselves in the day following, are wont, over night well to consider of
them. Even so ought Man to come unto Prayer, with a godly premeditation, of
that he will entreat God for; and so to recommend himself, and his cause,
(being first well perpensed, and weighed,) unto God from day to day: Having
always this care, that no sooner awake out of sleep in the morning, but he
is to recall presently to mind, that Godly premeditated resolution for Prayer,
in manner and sort, as the night before he had purposed to do: Because, at
the very instant, when he shall awake, the Soul stands so disposed, as what
thought soever first offers it self, the same is settled in such manner, and
so mightily preuayleth, as it is hardly removed thereout, to give place to any
other. Therefore the first occasion is necessarily to be apprehended, and taken
hold of. God, that Father of light, the only sole beneficent giver of all true
understanding, grant unto us the graceful illumination of his Spirit, that
we do at all times take a true account of our sins, knowing that he must
necessarily be our Confessor, from whom we can hide nothing.

And because of the greatness of his Majesty, which of right strikes a
reverence into our souls, be it by the indulgence of his beninge favor, that
we do with due reverence in great humility, accord unto him, as often as we
shall present our selves by Prayer before his Throne; craving then a
reformation of our Thoughts, Wills, and Faculties of the Soul, for, and in
respect chiefly, of a true and godly devotion; that so at all times our Prayers
may be heard, and we relieved in Christ Jesus. Amen.

The Natures, Virtue, and Quality, of Prayer.
PRayer must be formed and fashioned of Charity; for without it, no Virtue
has either form, or life, or merit, or valor before God; for as much as,
Charity is, as it were the form, not only of Faith, but also of Prayer, etc.
According to which signification, Prayer, after a sort, may diversely be
defined, to be the Spiritual work in the Body; the Rational Soul, drawing
near unto God, to whom it is subjected, in all humility. The standing of the
Soul in the presence of God: The speech that utters our conceits in the
ears of God: The sweet cry, and loud sound in the understanding of the Heart:
The estranging of the Mind and Senses, from all other bodily works, when that
is in action: The full, and whole employment of all the faculties of the Body:
The forgetfulness, or rather the denial of it self, and all other Creatures:
The Haven of a straggling and wandering Spirit: The presentment of it self in
the sight of the Judge: The sentencing the Writ of Condemnation against it
self: The distrust and diffidence in it own works: The Judgment preceding
that Judgment of the great Judge: The true Glass of the Soul: The most
clear Light of the intellectual Mind: The invisible Light, through things
invisible: The Shadow obfuscating the sauoures of our Lusts and Concupisence:
The Resignation of it self into the hands of God; And so loving no one thing
more entirely, then to execute and fulfill his most blessed will.

Let Prayer then be the elevation of our Hearts unto God; by which, as it were
mediating, we approach near unto him, and with him do the same thing.

Prayer, causes the Soul to ascend, and lift it self up even above it self,
and above all other Creatures, and to be conjoined to God, and to be plunged
into that immense and deep Sea of all swauitie and love; and so to receive
God, when he comes unto it as a most kind Neighbor, to lodge him within it
self, as in his holy Temple, there to possess him, love him, and enjoy him.

Prayer, is the placing of the Soul in Gods presence; and the placing of God
before it; God beholding the Soul with the eye of Mercy; and the Soul
looking upon God with the eye of Humility: the which sight of the Soul, is of
greater virtue, and more operative, then all those aspectes of the Stars and
Plane^^ in Heaven.

Prayer, is a certain spiritual Chair, in, which the Soul sits at the
feet of God, hearkening to his Doctrine, receiving the influences of his
Mercy, and saying with the Spouse in the Canticles: My soul is awakened, as
soon as it heard the voice of his Lover. There does God inflame the S^ule with
his Love, and annoint it with his Grace: and being thus elevated, it does
contemplate in God; and in contemplating, does love him; by loving, does taste
him; by tasting, relyeth wholly on him: and by this means, has all the glory
and content, that is to be had in this present World. Insomuch as Prayer, is
the Food of the Soul; the embracing* of God with delight; the holy Kiss of
Peace between the Bridgroome and the Bride; the spiritual Sabboath in which
God delights himself with her; the place of Solace upon the Mount Libanus,
where the true Solomon sports himself with the Sons of Men; the wholesome
Salve and Cure of all our offenses day by day; the most clear Glass, in which
God is beheld, and Man known, with all his imperfections and miseries.

Prayer, is the daily practice of all Virtues, the Mortification of all
Sensuality, and the fountain of all good Desires, and godly Purposes.

It is a since^re Milk, of our Infancy and new coming unto Christ: the solid
Meat, of our growing up in him; the Haven of them that are in dangers, and the
strengthner of all such, as have gotten the victory and triumph over Sin:
and so Prayer, may be said to be, the Physic of the sick diseased Sinner,
the Consolation of the Distressed, the Strength of the Weak, the Remedy and
Salve of Sinners, the Delight of the Just, the Aid of the Lining, the common
Succor and Relief for all the Christians, that have Faith settled in Christ
only. And to conclude, Prayer, is the Real Gate by which, and through which,
entrance is made unto God: the first Fruits of a future Glory; the Mansion,
which conteyneth in it self all Sweetness, delighting the taste of Faith: the
Ladder, much like that which Jacob saw, which reached from the Earth up to
Heaven, by Genesis 28. ^2.
which, the Angels of God ascend and descend, ministering unto us from him.

Places of Scripture for Prayer.
YOu that remember the Lord, hold not your peace, and cease Esa. 6^. 6.
not at any time to call upon him.

Watch always, continuing in Prayer, that you may be thought Luke 21. 36.
worthy to escape all those evils, which are to come to pass, etc. that ye
may stand before the Son of Man.

Take heed, watch and Pray: for you know not when the day of Mar. 13. 33.
the Lord will come.

Be careful for no worldy thing: but in all things present your Phil 4. 6.
Requests unto God, in Prayer and Supplication, with giving of thanks.

Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same, with thanks giving. Collo. 4. 2.


1 I exhort, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, 1. Tim.
2. 1. verse. 2.
2 and giving of Thanks, be made for all men. 2. For Kings, and for all as
are in Authority; that we may live a quiet* 3 and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. 3. For this verse. 3. verse. 8.
4 is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. 4. I will that men
Pray every where, lifting up pure hands, without wrath, or doubting.
A Widow in deed, trusts in God, and continues in Supplications, 1. Tim. 5.
5.
and Prayers, night and day.

Before thou Prayest, prepare thy self, and be not as one that Ecclesia. 18.
22.
tempts God.

Testimonies of certain Fathers of the Church, Commendatorie of Prayer.
SAint Chrysostom, in a Treatise, wherein he shows, how that Prayer is the
beginning and cause, of great good to Man, etc. says:

What thing can be more Just, more Beautiful and Pleasant, more Holy, more
full of Wisdom, then the Mind and Soul, that communeth with God? For if
they, who customably have conference of speech with Wise men, yea but some
little time, become themselves Wise; What shall we account of them, which
continually commune with God by Prayer? O how great is the Wisdom, Virtue,
Prudence, Goodness, Temperaunce, and Conformity of Manners, that the study
of Prayer bringes with it? Therefore he was nothing deceived, who said: That
Prayer was the cause of all Virtues: and that none of those things, which are
necessary for the obteyning of true Piety, can have entrance into a Soul,
which altogether rejects Prayer. Yea, as a City without Walls and Fences,
lies open to be taken easily of the Enemy: Even so that Soul that is not
strengthened with Prayer, is very soon overcome of the Devil, and filled full
of sin.

Again he says: See what it is to take Fish out of the Water; the same it is
to remove Man from Prayer.

S. Basil speaking of Prayer under the name of Psalms, says thus*
Psalms, that is Prayers, chase away Devils; entertain Angels: Are the
Bucklers against the fears in the Night; the Repose and Rest from the Travels
of the Day; the Safeguard of Boys, the Ornament of Young men, the Comfort and
Consolation of Old age, the Beauty of Women.

Psalms, that is, Prayers, cause the Deserts to be inhabited; and to live in
Cities with sobriety; and are the A. B. C. of young Nouices, the Spurs of
Proficients; the firm ground for connenient and sure footing, to them that
aspire unto perfection.

S. Bernard, says:

WHat thing more profitable, then Prayer? Which is a Sacrifice for God, Music
for Angels, a Banquet for the Saints, Succor and Aid to them that Pray, a
suppling Ointment for the Contrite, a Salve for the Penitent, a Dart against
Enemies, a Buckler of defense for Trauailers.

And again, there is no one thing, that is more sweetly felt in this life; nor
that more chearefully is received; nor yet that does so much withdraw, and
alienate the Heart from the love of this World; nor that so strengthens the
Soul against Temptations; nor that so stirs up and encourages Man unto all
good Works, as the grace of Contemplation, even that we call, Prayer.

S. Laurence Justinian, says:

BY the exercise of Prayer, the Soul is purged from sin; Charity and Love,
is nourished; Faith is illuminated, Hope is fortified, the Spirit of man is
cheared up, and comforted; the Bowels are settled to rest, the Heart is in
peace, the Truth discovered, Temptation is overcome, and vanquished; Sadness
chased away, the Senses renewed; the Faculties of Body and Mind, being first
weakened, are recomforted and refreshed; Luke-warmenesse removed, the fury
and rage of Vice abated and consumed, the quick, and lively sparks of
Heavenly desires are kindled; by which the flame of the love of God, and godly
things burns in us.

Very great is the excellency of Prayer, and the Privileges thereo fare most
singular: for unto it, the Heavens stand always open: To it, the secret
knowledge of the hidden Mysteries are revealed: to it, the Ears of God are
continually at all times attentive to hear.

Fire does soon burn up the Wood that is very dry; And the Print of a Seal,
is received and impressed into Wax being soft and pliable, much better and
fayrer then otherwise: For according to the Philosophers grounded rule; All
causes of what nature soever, do communicate their virtues unto their
Subjects, being their apt matter to work upon, according to the disposition
they find in them. And surely God, being the universal cause of all
goodness, the sole and only Author and giver of all Grace; it must be
confessed, according to the reason of the said Rule, that Man shall receive
Grace, so long as he shall be disposed thereto. And this being admitted for
Truth, it follows to be also granted, that whosoever consideratly looks
into the nature and quality of true Prayer, he shall find it to be no other
thing, (doing that is fitting thereto,) but a certain disposition, and a most
convenient preparation of the Soul, for Grace. For there does Man present
himself unto God, as to a true Physician, showing and laying open his wounds,
and for them requires Medicine and Cure; alleging for himself the titles of
Prerogative, and all the reasons that it has: which are, The Merits of
Christ, and the Mercies of the same true God our Father in Christ: and so
confessing on the one side his own great misery; and on the other side also,
acknowledging the infiniteness of Gods mercy, most humbly craves pardon and
remedy at his Creators hands.

To conclude them, I say, that all perfection of a Christian life, occasioned
to Man by Grace and Prayer, being so convenient a means for the obteining the
same; it must be granted, that the more it is disposed to Grace, the more he
shall receive the same: And so the use of Prayer daily put in practice, the
riches of Grace shall increase accordingly, and by consequence, all perfection
of Virtue.

Of the Impediments, that withdraw our Minds from true Devotion.
The first Impediment.
FIrst, our Sins; and of these such specially, as seem Sins, etc. Which
the Papists have termed, Venial Sins; that is, Sins of so small
reckoning with them, as they are of their Nature, accounted therefore to them,
easily and of necessity pardonable: In this sense, distinguishing these from
Mortal Sins, viz. Sins in quality, killing and condemning us unto death.

But that Sins in general, whether small or great, are lettes and obstacles
to all true Devotion, may appear by this, viz. That they cool in us the heat
of Love and Christian Charity; and so in consequent, all Devotion: For where
Charity is cold, there cannot Devotion be fervent and profitably working to
our good: for, Faith is clean abandoned; without which, It is impossible to
Heb. 11. 6.
please God. Therefore let us take heed that we do not secure our thoughts,
in acting those small Sins, which we least account of: For, these soonest
do deceive and kill our Souls, being by custom made familier; and so by
degrees acquainting us with the greatest, making a very ready step unto
Perdition; as says the Son of Syrach: He that despises small things,
shall fall by Eccle. 19. 1.
little and little.

Remedy.

Take heed, that Sin, reign not in your mortal Bodies, 1 Romans 6. 12.
to obey it, in the lusts thereof.

The Second Impediment.
SEcondly, the Compunction, and the Sting of Conscience Sins, being too much
indulged of us. For this kind of Remorse, is like a Worm that gnaweth our
Conscienses filling our Souls with Fears and Dispaires; representing unto us
continually, the Anger of God for Sin, and so the Punishment due for the same.

This breeds in time, that Gaul of bitterness, which S. Peter found to be
in Simon; Forbidden in Deuteronomy. where Act. 8. 23. Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
God will not, There should be any root among his people, that brings forth
Gaul and Wormwood: meaning thereby, Sins, that brings forth bitter
fruits of utter Perdition, and Destruction.

And S. Paul writing to the Corinthians, for the Adulteter, 2. Cor. 2. 1.
who was first given over to Satan; but upon repentance, was to be admitted
again as a Brother, willed verse 7.
them to Forgive, and comfort him, least (says S. Paul) he should be
swallowed up, with overmuch heaviness.

These Allegations, ought to be unto us, Documents, that in any wise we
indulge not, that indiscreete, and needless sorrow, which may surcharge our
Souls, with a superfluous anguish of a dulling Heaviness, and plunge us into
the Pit of a confounding Despair.

Remedy.

Godly Sorrow, causes Repentance unto Salvation,

The Third Impediment.
THirdly, Seekeing Delight and Content in sensual consolations, (for therein
wholly we are adverse and opposite, unto the love and taste of Spiritual
Consolations; and so consequently hinder and let Devotion:) For, as Christ
says of his coming into the world, that it was for the Unjust sake, to call
them unto repentance; (for these had need of the Physician, and not the
Righteous.) So it may be said, that God sends not now his Holy Spirit (which
is the Comforter,) unto them that Joy vainly in Worldly Comfort, but unto the
Afflicted in Spirit: For, Wine, (says Solomon) is to be ministered unto such,
as live in the bitterness of the Heart.

This Divine and Godly Consolation is most sweet, and given to none, but such
as love it, and seek after it. It is likened unto a chaste Woman, who deserves
to be loved alone, and admits no c^partners in her H^sbands love. So is it
in the love of Godly, and Celestial things, which minister true Consolation
to the Soul: for it will by no means, couple and associate to it, the vain
and fruitless Comfortes, which men seek in Worldly things.

God is a zealous lover of our Souls: and therefore will admit no thing in them,
that may breed delight, contrary and repugnant to his.

Remedy.

Therefore say with David: My Soul will not be comforted, nor joy in Earthly
things: But pleases it self in God, and delights it self in the
remembrance of him. And so forsake all, to obtain all: for he shall find all
things in the Lord, that forsakes all for the love of him, who is all in all,
unto all.

The Fourth Impediment.
FOurthly, The overmuch Caring, for the things of this World: An impediment
differencing from the former, in it own Nature; and yet combining with it
against Devotion: As is noted by our Savior, in the Parable of the Seed that
fell among the Thorns, to which they are both likened, in the Gospel of S.
Mark, saying: The Cares of this world; the deceitfulness Mark. 4. 19.
of Riches, and the Lusts of other things; which S. Luke calls, Voluptuous
living; and so agreeing with him, concludes Luke 8. 14.
as he does: that by these two impediments, the Word is made unfruitful. Can
there be then any Devotion, where God his Word is not rooted? No more this
Seed, sown among Thorns, where it can have no Root, nor bring forth Fruit
to the Sower.

Against this corrupt worldly Affection, which like a Cancker fretteth the
Soul, with a continual grief, occasioned through choking cares, is that
Sermon of Christ in Matthew, where he says: Be not careful for Matt. 6. 25.
your self, etc. Showing it to be both vain and idle. For, Who can add one
Cubit to his stature, by taking thought? And Luke 12. 25.
also mere Paganicall, joined with a Distrust in Gods Providence: for, The
Gentiles, and people of the Word, who ver. 30.
knew not God, seek after these things, says Christ Forbidding his Children
in them, to care for to Morrow, or to set their thoughts upon such transitory
matters, as hinder Devotion, and serving of God.

Remedy.

Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee. Tell me, was any
ever confounded, that trusted in the Lord? Psalm. 55. 22. Eccle 2. 11.


Who has continued in his fear, and was forsaken? I have been young, and now
am old; yet I saw never the Righteous Psalm. 37. 25.
forsaken, nor his seed begging their Bread.

Seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, Matt. 6. 33.
and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

The Fifth Impediment.
Fifthly, Much Busying and ouertoyling the Body, with daily Labors about
worldly matters; and wearying the Mind with continual Study, and
Contemplation: These be means to withdraw our Minds from Devotion, which we
ought specially to care for, as Christ well notes in Martha, and Marie her
sister. Martha was Luke 10. 41.
troubled about many things; and was reproved of Christ: For by this she
forgate to hear him preaching God his word; which Marie hearkened unto with
great attention, and was commended: For, She had chosen the better part, that
shall not be taken from her. verse. 42.


By these, we are admonished, so to busy our selves in worldly affairs, as
that we kill not the spirit of Devotion, and wholly reject the necessary use
thereof; making our selves thereby, unworthy of Gods grace, when he calls
us, To taste of his Supper, and, to eat with him at his Table. So did those
three sorts of Guestes in S. Luke: Who alleged excuses to keep away from
Luke 14. 18, 19, 20.
that great Supper, and were rejected accordingly.

He that will Consecrate himself unto Spiritual devotion, and the Service of
God must cast from him all Worldly affections and desires, which are cherished
through the affairs of the World. How can he get Wisdom, (says Eccle. 38.
25
the Son of Syrach,) that holds the Plough? etc.

Remedy.

A man comes unto Wisdom, by using well his vacant time: for he that
ceasseth from his Labor, may come by Wisdom. Eccl. 38. 44.


Disburden your selves of Business; and know that I am the Lord, says David.

The Sixth Impediment.
Sixthly, Curiosity: A great enemy unto Devotion sundry Curiosity is, to have
a desire to understand other men's matters; and so is always searching and
prying into the lives and actions of others; themselves having idle and
wandering thoughts, to the preiudicing the peace of the Conscience; without
which there is no true Devotion.

An other kind of Curiosity, is the understanding part of the mind, which
through a desire only, to be wise in human things, spend time wholly in
reading profane Books, some, merely vain, and unprofitable, not careing to
benefit themselves, in the knowledge of Wisdom, but only to seek after
quaint and choice words, neglecting matter; which is not carried in the
elegancie of Speech. This is the Curiosity which S. Paul seems 1 Cor. 1. 17.
and 2 ver. 1. 1. Tim. 1. 4. 2. Tim. 2. 16. Titus. 1. 14. and 3. 9.
to condemn, in his first Epistle to the Corin. Of this may that be said,
which the Son of Sirach speaks. That they have a heart, as it were a fine
Boulter, which sends forth the flower of Wheat, and reteyneth only the
Chafe and Branne. And this is to love words, for the words sake, and not for
the matter.

An other kind of Curiosity, is a Disordinate care and desire that some have
of their things; whether Apparel, Books, or any household ornaments, that
they be well wrought, finely polished, quaint and sightly: For if their humors
be displeased therewith, they are caused to spend much time, in ordering,
framing, and fashioning them a new. A special impediment unto Devotion, which
requires always the mind freed from all incumbraunces. By these the Devil
does powerfully seduce the minds of all sorts of men, as well the Clergy, as
the Lay people; whom we daily see very superstitiously curious in Apparel,
diet, Buildinges, and all manner of Ornaments, delights, and pleasures, that
humor the Senses outwardly, and breed them content.

But in the mean time, where is the decking, trimming, and beautifying of the
Soul, which ought to be most precious? And is it not then apparent, that
Devotion is much prejudiced and hindered, by such means?

Remedy.

Let us, which are of the day, that is, lightened by the Gospel unto all
truth,) be sober; putting on the breastplate of Faith, and Love, and the hope
of Salvation for an Helmet. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.


Be sober, and watch; for the Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5. 8.


The Seventh Impediment.
Seventhly, Deliciousnes of Diet and Banqueting, among all Impediments by which
Devotion to Prayer, and serving of God, is impeached; yea altogether
prejudiced, this especially is mere contradictorie to this kind of exercise:
For, by no means, will the Spirit of God have that Body that is daily
engrossed with pampring Belly-cheare, to be a Temple for him to reside and
dwell in. And in deed, how unfit such a Body is for Spiritual and Ghoastly
motions, every one given to much feeding, may witness to himself, were no
reasons otherwise to be alleged for proof thereof: But the Reasons are
direct, and many. For first, that Animal faculty in Man, which is by Nature
designed to concoction, and digestion of Meat, for the nourishing of the Body,
is most of all busied of necessity therein, occasioned by the excess of
Feeding and Drinking: for which cause, the Body is become heavy for the time,
and so the virtue of the rational Mind is made very unfit for any good
studies and employment. Again, the fumes and vapor of those Meats and
Drinks, which have surcharged the Body, mount up to the Brain, in which the
power and virtue operative, for the work of contemplation, has his seat; and
like to ouershadowing Clouds, obfuscate and darken it; by which means, the
operation of the Brains faculty, is greatly hindered, and by consequence, the
virtue of the Understanding part that serves thereto, is dulled and much
weakened: Hereupon it is said, That a Belly stuffed with Meats and Drinks,
engenders no quicknes of wit: a gross Body, a gross Understanding.
Lastly, do we not see, that through overmuch Feeding and Drinking, the Heart
of Man, is solicited and invited unto vain, yea profane things? As, Idle
talk, rebaldrie, immodest gesture, scoffing, scurrilitie, Eccl. 31. 29
brawlinges, scouldinges, diminishing of strength, contention and strife; yea,
and many times, much cursing. Wine is a mocker, and strong Drink is raging,
says Solomon. In which Prou. 20. 1.
sense, he speaks in an other place thus To whom is woe? To whom is sorrow?
To whom is strife? To whom is murmuring? Prou. 23. 29.
To whom are words without cause? To whom is rednes of the eyes? Even to them
that tarry ^ong at the Wine, etc. And therefore his counsel is good: Not to
company with Wine bibbers, verse. 21.
and gluttanous deuowrers of Flesh. It seemed that Job had conceited an aminous
fear of some ill event that might happen to his Sons, Banqueting one with an
other in their Houses: For he had this thought; It may be, my Job. 1. 5.
Sons have sinned, and blasphemed God, in their hearts; and for that cause,
sent and sanctified them, offering Burnt offerings, according to the number of
them: And indeed the effects of inordinate Feasting, and delicious Banqueting,
are strange, Sodomie, and presaging evil. viz. Many enormous Vices,
accompanied with great danger, and disastrous preiudices, not only to all
Virtue, but even to the life of both Body and Soul. And can it then be
imagined, that Men, who make their Belly a God, are at any time capable of such
Spiritual thoughts, as are fit to be addressed upward, unto the service of
the very true GOD in Heaven? No: for, the Godly zeal of Douotion, and the
delicacie of Meats and Drinks, are incompatible, working by contrary means,
contrary effects: the one, unto life; the other, unto destruction.

To conclude, I say, That as Fire can neither be kindled, nor have any
nourishing for continuance by Fuel that is very green and moist: So the Mind
of man, which is said to follow the temperature of the Body, can have neither
disposition to begin, nor vigor of strength to perform and continue the works
of Godly contemplations, and devotions; The faculty thereof, being by daily
overmuch feeding and drinking, dulled and weakened, yea in a manner, as seeming
to be extinguished.

Remedy.

LEt us by Fasting, subdue our bodies unto the Souls hests, and rule, that at
all times it may be obsequious and ready to execute the will thereof, in these
necessary functions of piety and godliness. It is the counsel of the Son
of Syrach in these words, Be Eccl. 37. 8.
not greedy in all delights, and be not too hasty upon meats.

And in S. Luke, our savior Christ advises, thus. Take Luke 21. 34.
heed to your selves, least at any time, your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness. etc.

Likewise S. Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, mentioning Romans 13. 13. 14.
Gluttony and Drunkenness, warns us to take no thought for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof.

And by these words, what manner of Fast is meant may be understood in the
contrary. For to minister unto our bodies, food sufficient and requisite for
the health and strength thereof, is both necessary and godly. Therefore
measureable Feeding, is allowed; by which that kind of Fast, upon occasion more
easily performed, which is to be joined with Prayer and Devotion; And so
commanded in the Scripture.

This by an other name is termed Abstinence and Temperancie, viz. A forbearance
from indulging the lusts of of the flesh. This we read in many places of the
Scripture, to have been much practiced of the Saints of God.

So Daniel prayed with Fasting, for the deliverance of Dan. 9. 3.
the people out of Banishment.

David Fasted, when he prayed to God, for his Childs 2. Sam. 12. 16.
Life.

Confession of Sin, and reading in the book of the Nehe. 9. 1, 2, 3.
Law, are conjoined with Prayer and Fasting.

Again, Ester, to deliver the Jews, from the great danger, Ester. 4. 16.
intended against them by Haman, Fasted and Prayed three days and three
nights.

To come to the new Testament, S. Luke tells of Luke. 2. 37.
Anna the Prophetess, a Widdowe of 84. Years, to have served God in the
Temple, with Fasting and Prayers,

In the Acts of the Apostles, where Paul and Barnabas Act. 13. 23.
were called to preach the Gospel, by imposition of hands.

Again, at the election, and ordeyning of Elderes in the Churches of Antioch,
Listra, and Iconium, Prayers Act. 14. 23.
with Fasting were used of the Apostles.

And Christ testifies, in Matthew. That lunaticke Matt. 17. 21
Devils, cannot be expelled out of any possessed with them, but by Prayer and
Fasting.

These examples show the necessity of Fasting, in regard of the great help it
ministers unto a Christian true devotion, for it aduanceth it always in our
Prayers unto God.

These be the Impediments and abstacles in chief, (though many others may be
alleged) and these adverse unto true and Godly meditations, and devout
spiritual exercises of Faith; through which, man is diuerted and withdrawn
from that Christian service which he is bound to perform unto God by Prayer;
unadvisedly neglected of him, and sometimes preiudicially rejected, to the hurt
of his own Soul.

God of his mercy remove them, from out the heart of every true Christian; That
all agreeing in the sinceere profession of piety, may wholly be deuoated, to
the sanctifying of his most holy name in Christ.

Amen.
Of the Nature and Effects of true Zeal and Devotion.
TRue Zeal and Devotion, is the chiefest good as being that Virtue, which does
awaken and rouse our dull spirits, out of the drowsy sleeps of sin; and
keeps them vigilant, to attend upon all other spiritual virtues, meet for
the spiritual man, who only seeks those things, that are apperteyning unto
godliness: For by it, he is made quick and lively, unto all good works.
Yea, wheresoever true Devotion is, there are adjoined to it, these excellent
virtues, Meditation, Prayer, Contemplation, Comfort of the Spirit; The love of
God (acting always spiritually to his glory,) the continual study of heavenly
Wisdom, which is the lovely knowledge of God, so greatly commended in the
Scriptures. Prove. 8. 9. Luck 1. 77. Ioh. 17. 3. 1. Cor. 2. 7.


Devotion then, being so great a good, it must needs seem worthy man's whole
endeavor, and employment of wit, and all the faculties coadiuuant ayders
thereunto.

But the difficulties of obteyning it, are occasioned many ways, as in that
which follows may appear, all seeming to branch out of Three special
Roots: 1. The general corruption of Nature, through original sin. 2. The
ill custom of suffering the imaginations of our hearts, to run into all sorts
of vain and idle thoughts, which distract the mind into a thousand parts,
irresolutely to wander and straggle from holy exercises of Godliness. 3. The
Malice of the Devil, who envying the state of our Salvation in Christ,
procures all means to hinder Devotion in Prayer, which should always bring
pure hands, lifted up unto God; as being fully, and steadfastly settled in him.

But forasmuch as the Grace of God is more powerful to our good, then all
these are to our prejudice; Let us oppose it against them, craving at Gods
hands the assistaunce thereof in Christ, against evil, and the furtherance of
it, for our proceeding in all goodness. To this purpose are the
aduertizementes that follow, manifesting the helps, for the obteining of true
Devotion.

Helps to further true Devotion, being advisedly considered and followed.
THe first, is an earnect and unfeigned desire and love unto Prove. 2. 4.
Wisdom: For he that seeks her, as Silver; and searches for her as
Treasure, shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God, which leads us into every good path, preserving the ways of God his
Saints, as it is in the Proverbs of Solomon, who therefore says in his book
of Wisdom: I prayed, and understanding Wisd. 7. 7.
was given me; I called, and the Spirit of Wisdom came upon me.

And why did Solomon thus affect her? Because as he there says, All good
things came to me together with Wisd. 7. 11.
her: Agreeable to the speech of Christ in the Gospel. Seek first the
Kingdom of God, and all things shall be ministered Matthew 6. 33.
unto you.

But how are we to seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof?
Can it be by any other means, then by calling after Knowledge, and crying for
Understanding? And can this be done of any, whose zeal to God ward, Prou. 2. 3.
is cold, and his Devotion misled and sequestered, by idle extrauagant thought,
or otherwise seduced from the exercise of Prayer: for such leave the ways of
Righteousness, to walk in the ways of Darkness; and therefore will never
(...) 3.
have Devotion, because they are deuoyd of this Godly knowledge following
crooked ways, and ar^ leawd in their paths. Prove. 2. 15.
Let us enter into a true conceit of this matter in question, by examining it,
after the sense of common reason. Tell me then, is not some end, as a
small-cause, propounded to every one that entendeth an Action, in moral or
civil matters, before he go about the same? And is not the love and desire
of obteyning the said end, the first Motive and chief cause that induces that
will, and encourages the powers of the mind unto Action? Yea, and in such
sort inciteth and forces them, as that the greater the Love and desire is unto
the end, the more earnest are the thoughts, and the pains more industrious to
obtain the same. What needs any illustration hereof by examples; of which
common life is full? Conquest, Fame, Honor, Riches, Beauty, Pleasurs, are the
ends, to which the Captain in War; the Ambitious person, in time of peace;
The Usurer; the amorous Lover; The voluptuous and licentious Ryoter, do
address their actions, and to obtain those ends, omit no means destinated
for the same. And shall not the Conquest over Sin, and the World; the honor
of a celestial Crown, the riches of Gods infinite Goodness, the beauty of
the heavenly Wisdom, the pleasures and joys of eternal Bliss, the
consolation of the holy Ghost, the food of the Angels, the peace and true
liberty of a christian Conscience; (all which are the ends, at which this
godly zeal, and sanctified Devotion does aim) incite, stir up, and fully
and resolutely enforce, and put forward in us, a desire and love, to obtain,
enjoy, and practice the same? Wisdom is better then precious Prove. 8. 11.
Stones; and all Pleasures are not to be compared unto her. Who so sets his
whole affection on it, shall taste the fruits Galla 4. 18.
thereof, and so be satisfied, both with profit and pleasure It is a good
thing, to love always earnestly, in a good thing. Titus. 2. 14.
And to whom does it appertain to be zealous of good works, but unto us, for
whom God gave himself, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purge us, to
be a peculiar people unto him self.

I conclude with Solomon: Blessed is the man that hears Prou. 8. 34.
me, (even Wisdom) watching daily at my Gates, and giving attendance at the
Posts of my Doors: For he that finds me, finds life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord.

Lord, thou have made Man for thy Glory; grant him zealous Devotion, to set
forth the same in Christ.

Amen.
Of Courage, Perseverance, and Diligence.
THe next coadiuuant cause of Deuotian, is this, as appropriat in a manner, and
necessarily subsequent to the former: For, what is the Love and desire to any
good thing, that is not strengthened, and Encouraged with a Resolution to
undertake it and continued with strict Deligence, to go through with it. And
by reason of many intercurrent difficulties in the functions of this true
devotion, which do commonly auert the minds and endeavors of men from it,
ought these virtues, to be the rather required.

There be two Faculties, which Nature out of his provident care for man's good,
has conferred upon him: One, is called the Concupiscible faculty, by which
the Mind works, unto a desire of that which seems convenient for the
preservation of either the whole kind, or some particular and singular
dependancie on it The other is termed the Irascible faculty, by which, a
sight and contention is maintained against all impediments that hinder the said
Desire. Both these have their application and use, in the ordering, guiding,
and governing of this our spiritual life. For, first the mind is to be
enflamed and kindled, with an earnest Desire, to seek after that great and
special good, to be obtained and atchiued, as already has been spoken. The
next is virtue, of a generous Resolution to encounter all difficulties, that
shall interpose themselves to be obstacles in the cause of this godly Action.
For what can a poor, solitary and bare Desire to any thing effect of it
self, that wills no longer, then it has in consideration the beauty of
Virtue, by which it was first allured and enticed to Will? No sooner are
difficulties represented to it, in that it first liked, but presently
willingness is abated, in that it wants courage, and so the obteyning of the
said Virtue, is given over and neglected. Therefore Desire, and a perseuering
Deligence, must be associated and conjoined together in this spiritual work
of Devotion Solomon attributes Prou. 14 4.
Much increase to the strength of an Ox, for, where no Oxen are, the Crib is
empty; meaning, that without Labor and pains taking, and a continuance in
it, no profit can arise to man, out of any thing he takes in hand.

To this purpose is it said, that all Virtues, are as Widows which have no
Husbands: that is, no helpers and ayders, if they are destituted of Courage and
Patience. For which cause, let us shake off Faintness and slothful Security,
and arm our Minds with a strong and sound Purpose, to entertain this good
work, and not to leave off, till we have with our pains, come to the
perfection thereof; Craving yet with great humility, the assistance of Gods
grace, for the furthering of so good a purpose begun in his name.

And for thy names sake O Lord, let a godly resolution corresponding the true
zeal of devotion, attend always thy children.

Amen.
3. The watchful Guard, and Custody, of the Heart and Soul.
THis, as the most speatiall and sovereign, among all the Habilyments of
ayding faculties, furthering true Zeal and Devotion, is of all other, very
heedfully to be cared for. We see, that no kind of musical Instrument can
sound pleasingly to the Ear, that is not well tuned and accommodated, for the
concords of the musical notes to be sounded by it. And so is it with the
heart of man, which, being the principal Instrument for heavenly Music, must
of necessity be addressed unto concords, for sounding forth the Celestial
tunes of Angelical notes, such as are sunge by the Angels Apoca. 5. 13.
in the Apocalips: Praise, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. I am here put in
mind of the saying which I have heard spoken; that, not the Voice, but the
Devotion; not Musical strings, but the Hearts music; not Loud cries, but the
sound of Loves affection, makes the Melody in the ear of God. It is the
Heart only, that God requires of us; It is our Heart then, that we must give
unto him; So commanded in Duteronomie. Thou Deuteronomy. ^. 5.
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with
all thy might. For, in our Hearts has God himself written his Law: and has
made them his Temples for the delight he has to dwell in them, with us:
Wherefore, Hebr. 8. 10.
Keep thy Heart with all diligence; For from thence comes Life, says
Solomon; Because, as it is disposed to good, or Prove. 4. 23
evil, even accordingly is the whole course of the life.

And we are by this reason also, to attend with a vigilant eye, over the
Guarde of our hearts, for that the delicacie, and weakness of the Heart, is
such as it receives quickly Corruption, and soon decays, and falls into
ruin. Hardly and with much pains of Study, is it conformed unto reason; and
very easily, yea, in the twinkling of the eye, even by the lightest toying
allurements, is it drawn from it, and forgets it self, thereby hindering
all good motions, to Zeal and Devotion. The sight of the eye, is blemished
often times, by a small moat fallen into it; and a clear Looking-glass is
stained with the breath of a man. And do we not think, that the Eye of the
Mind, and the purity of the Heart, is easily obscured, with the least
vanity? I say then with Solomon. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for else,
how shall we speak unto our Prove. 4. 23.
selves in Psalms and Hymns? How shall we sing spiritual songs, to make
melody unto the Lord, as Paul wills. Ephesians. 5. 19.


There be two things, which being ouer-maistred of Reason, and schooled by the
holy Ghost, will make greatly for the safeguard of the Heart. First, vain and
godless Thoughts: And secondly, disloyal Affections and Passions of the
irrational Mind. From these two Mischeifes must the Heart be purged and
freed, before the holy Ghost will lodge in it.

Christ tells us, that, That which comes out of man, Mark. 7. 20.
defiles the man. And that they are the very same already mentioned, himself
there specifieth, saying: For, from within, even out of the Heart of man,
proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Theftes,
Covetousness, wickedness, Deceit. Uncleanness, Backbyting, Pride,
Foolishness: All these evil things come from within, and defile the man

The understanding, or intellectual part of the Mind and the Will (which is
said to be the fountain and oryginall of man's Actions,) are the two Tables of
the rational, and of the irrational mind: To the former, appertains the
Thoughts; To the other the Will. In these two Tables, is the Image of God to
be imprinted: But as a Painter that will delineat the Portracture of a man,
has care that his Table be fair, Clean, and Neat: And being made apt to
receive Lineamentes in proportion, fashioneth the parts of the Picture, by him
to be deliniated and amplified therein. So must the Table of our Heart, be
cleansed from all viciositie, and spotts of dissolute corruption, nourished by
evil thoughts, and manifested by unruly passions; Before the wisdom of
Heaven can be Imprinted and Engraven in it, by the finger of God; which is the
holy Ghost. The eyes of flesh, cannot behold the Stars: And the bueau^y of
the Heavens above, when the Air is ouershadowed with the dusky mantell of
foggie clowdy Mistes; No more can the eye of our Soul contemplat and apprehend
that eternal bright shining light of Gods Wisdom, (which is the true light
of the Soul,) when it is dazeled and obscured by the interposition of
eclypsing passions, and vain thoughts of the mind.

To speak then of the truly mortified thoughts of the spiritually regenerated
man, they be such, as suffer nothing to break forth from the heart in a
passionate ^ sumour, nor to issue in speech out of the mouth, but what first is
well seasoned with the salt of sobriety, both in the thought conceited, and in
the words uttered; and so agreeable to Gods spirit; And by spetiall motion
thereof does think, speak, and do accordingly. Whereupon, the true servant
of God is never sad, but for that which does separate him from God; Rejoices
in nothing, but what aduanceth his hopes in God; Admits of no chief
thought, but what gives him content in God; Breaths no other love, fear,
desire, and hope, then in God only, and for the love of him only.

This is that Mortification of the Soul in the Regenerate man, which the
Apostle S. Paul terms, The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the
world was crucified unto ^lla. 6. 14
him, and he unto the world.

In whom soever the Spirit of God works this Mortification of the Soul,
deadding it to the love of worldly things; and quickening it to the longing
desires of Heavenly contemplations, wholly and only fixed above; he
abandoneth all outward Pompes, and Ceremonies, as one forsaken of himself, to
be the true Servant of Christ Jesus: which none can be, but such as have
soundly guarded their Hearts from the contagion of both ^aine Thoughts, and
distemperate Passions: Among whom are those, who are not se^^ed in a godly
Resolution toward the fear of God, which instructs the Mind ^^to all
heavenly Wisdom; but like a Weather-cocke (...) to every Wind, diuersely
humoured, beyond all sense of Reason; sometimes discontent, sometimes pleased;
sometimes dull and heavy; sometimes light and vain; sometimes again devout,
and religiously affected; sometimes idle in opinion, and dissolute in Manners:
and so attemperating his Reason to the humorsome affection of others,
endeavors to be like in condition unto all men, forgetting what he is, and
ought to be in himself; without stabilitie of Sense, gravity of Judgment,
weight of understanding, valor and courage of Mind; Light, Faint hearted,
easily misled, Unconstant, Mutable upon any occasion, Unstable in all his
ways. Let such consider the Cameleon, which God numbreth among the unclean
Beasts, conformable to all color; but not aptly conformed to any in
particular: Leui. 11 30.
and for that cause, forbidden in the Law.

And can any wandering minded man, who being unsettled in the truth of Religion,
is always doubtful of Gods will; (as variable in opinion, as the Chameleon is
chaungeable in color,) think, that he can be acceptable to God, or as S.
James speaks, Receive any thing of James. 1. 7.
the Lord?

Wherefore, if any be desirous of that heavenly place, which belongs to a
conscience informed by a sanctified fear unto al puritle, and is a principal
mean for obteyning of heavenly Wisdom; Let him fence and guard his Heart,
from the anoyance of vain thoughts, and violent Passions.

And so to conclud this point; Blessed are the pure in Matt. 5. 8.
heart, for they shall see God.

For these be such, as have not lifted up their minds unto Vanity; and
therefore shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the
God of their salvation; into whose hill they are ascended in all their
strengthes, and stand firmly settled in his holy place; Psalm. 24. 5.
Whither God bring us, for his Christ's sake.

Amen.
4. Of the guarding of the Senses.
THe Senses in the body of man, are good helps and furtherances unto Devotion,
being trusty and saythfull Guarders of the Heart; To which they are appointed,
as Porters of a City, to shutt out, and let in upon occasion: For which
cause, several Guarders are for every singular Sense in particular, and not
one in general ^an serve for all, they holding correspondence with the heart
in distinct functions, accordingly as they are differenced in the Body, by
place and apprehension of several obiectes: So then, the Sense, which may and
do commonly wrong and abuse the Hearts assent, are in chief, Two. viz. The
Eye, and the Ear: These must specially have a watch set over them, that is
properly belonging to them in several. The gates of these Senses must be
locked, and not too open to all occurrent Obiectes; But unto such as are
instructors of the Soul, to the contemplation of only Divine and Celestial
things. The Eye therefore, must after a sort be blinded; and the Ear in like
manner as it were deadded in d^^fenes^e; That neither Sight, nor Hearing, do^
breed offense unto the Soul. It was said from the Lord unto Ezechi^ll in a
parable, that He dwelled in the midst of a rebelliouse Ezech. 12. 2.
house, (meaning the people of Israel.) Because they made no good use, nor
received any fruit, of that which they saw with their Eyes, and heard with
their Ears. This, by way of application may also be spoken to the heart of
man, that It is seated in the midst of a rebellious earthly Tabernacle, which
is this our body of corruption; It self, ill affected, with the pollutions of
their Senses disordynate functions, and so by consequence, ill affecting the
Heart, forced thereby to see and hear, that is, to understand, what the Eye
and Eeare lusts, and no more; In which Sense and Construction, the Eye
seeing, yet seeing not; and the Ear hearing, yet hearing not; Are become
Rebels to the Heart, accommodating themselves to the external things only,
which hurt, and annoy the Soul.

Let then the servant of God have his Heart, as a sound strong fenced wall,
which will endure a Battery of assaulting offections, bred and occasioned
through the corruption of those Senses; I say, let the Heart be instructed by a
sanctified Eye, and a chaste Ear, that they may minister matter for sincere and
pure thoughts: For, out of them are engendered, divine Contemplations, and
meditations, in^orming the Heart always, to the knowledge of heavenly
Wisdom. Of this kind of Wisdom does Job testify when he said; I made a
Covenant with mine Job. 31. 1.
Eyes; Why then should I think of a Maid? Where note, as is the Eye so is the
Thought. And David also, instructed by it, cries to God in the, spirit, Turn
away mine eyes Psalm. 119. 37
from beholding (or regarding) vanity. Where is to be observed, that which
follows; And quicken me in thy way; verse 37. 40.
Again, quicken me in thy righteousenesse; Because otherwise he could not
have been quickened, that is, have had the strength of God his spirit, to abide
firmly and constantly in his word, even to the end, as he desired, unless
his Eyes were first by Gods grace cleared, from the contagion of sinnfull lust:
meaning, in the word Eye, all the other Senses, by an implication: For, the
excellency of the Eysight, being among all Senses, the most noble, and
renowned for use in as much as, it both apprehends more kinds of things, and
also impresseth the more deeply into the Mind, and so the most apt Sense, and
friendly to man, for procuring knowledge to the understanding and intellectual
part of the Mind; This Sense of Seeing, being then so singular for worth, and
so necessary for use, apprehending the magnitude, place, situation, figure, and
proportions of all obiectes, not only in one proper and peculier, which are
coler, but of common likewise obuious unto it, out of which arises all
knowledge; How great and spetiall ought the care be of Guarding this Sense, and
in it the rest, as may appear by this already said? It is in common speech,
that the seat of the Heart, is in the Eye of the Body, and it semeeth so
approved of Christ in that Parable of the Laborers in his Vineyard, where
Christ says to one of the^ that murmured at his hire, Is thine Eye evil,
because I am good? Noting by his evil Eye, the Maliciousness of his envious
Heart. The Fy^, in the Scripture, is called, The Light of the Body: But L^k.
11. 34.
what Eye? Even the Single Eye; for this guides, and leads the Body. Then on
the contrary, by a good sequel, The evil Eye, must needs be argued, the
Darkness of the Body. And what is this Darkness, but an essential
deprivation of Light; yea of all Goodness in our Hearts? God knowing this
defect of true Light, to be in us naturally, through the contagion of that
prime general inherent Corruption, gives an Item, or Caveat, that we may not
do, What seems good in our own Eyes: Number. 15. 39.
For they are evil and dark, blind Guides; and so leading into the Pit of
Perdition.

The Eyes that we guard and keep seruicable for the Hearts devotion, are the
Eyes of the Faithful, which S Paul calls, The Eyes of Understanding: for
which he Ephe. 1. 17. 18.
prays, That they be lightened by the spirit of Wisdom. These Eyes are the
Eyes of David, which are ever toward the Lord. Psalm. 25. 15.
Yea with these Eyes lifted up toward Heaven, did Christ pray in the Gospel.
John. 11. ^1.


Whosoever has these Eyes, shall have both Ears to hear, and Hearts to perceive
the Word of God, through his mere goodness, giving the same: for it is his
only Guist, that we See, Hear, and Understand; as Moses speaks Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
in Deuteronomie.

And what shall we say of the Tongue? for of right it has a place in this
Discourse, being o^ right to be reckoned among the Senses; forasmuch as, the
faculty of Tasting is seated in a Nerve or Sinew extended upon the Tongue, to
discern and judge the similitudes, and differences of Taste.

The Tongue discovers the conceit of the heart to be good or evil. It is
offensive most commonly, by lauishing out much. Odoriferous, and sweet Waters,
standing long in a vessel uncovered, are soon tainted with the Air and lose
the virtue of their sweet smelling savors. And surely that pleasant perfuming
Ointment of Devotion; (which suppleth the Hearts affection, and makes it
pliant to prayer) is corrupted and made unprofitable for use, when the mouth is
opened to the Tongues vain and much Babbling. For in many words, there can
Prou. 10. 19.
not want iniquity, says Solomon. All desire naturally felicity and
happiness; Behold, it is offered and promised unto as many, as will refrain
there Tongues from 1. Pete. 3. 10. Psalm. 34. 12. 13.
evil; for they shall have long life, and see good days.

It is meet therefore and agreeing to Reason, as well for avoiding hurt, as
obteyniug good, that a special regard be had of Guarding the Tongue. S. James
calls James. 3. 8. 6.
it, An unruly evil, full of deadly Poison, defiling the whole Body, setting
on fire the whole course of Nature. etc.

This is meant of the Tongues Intemperancie; and the remeadie for it, is
Sobriety, and paucitie of words, well ordered, and uttered upon occasion,
after the counsel of the Preacher, saying: Be not rash with thy mouth, etc.
Eccle. 5. 1.
Let thy words be few. It argues a well seasoned Discretion; for, He that
has Knowledge, spares his Words; and a Prou. 17. 27. 28.
man of Understanding, has an excellent Spirit: Yea, Even a Fool, when he
holds his peace, is counted Wise; and he that stops his Lips, is
Prudent.

We have of this matter, the example of that holy Prophetical King David, who
witnesses of himself, saying: I will keep my mouth bridled, that I sin not
Prou. 39. 1.
with my Tongue. This Bridle of David, (which was a discreet and godly
refraining from unnecessary and offensive Speech,) must be also the Guard and
Lock to our Mouth: And if we be forced to speak at any time, Let us make
haste to return with that Dove into the Gene. 8. 9.
Arc, that we do not perish in the Deluge and Inundation of Words.

Or otherwise, if, as Job speaks, The Spirit within us Job. 32. 18
compels us to utter matters of Understanding and Knowledge, in this case
we are not to forbear, nor yet to be afraid to speak and declare the
conceits of our Hearts: For when the Spirit of God shall Put Words in Exodus
4. 15.
our Mouths, and be with our Mouths to instruct and guard our Speech,
(forasmuch as he gave the Mouth to Man, and his is the Spirit of Truth,
Boldness, and Eloquence,) we are not to be silent, because we have a
direction by warrant from him, what, and how to speak. This most blessed
Spirit sanctify the several functions, and operative virtues of all our
Senses, that they being faithful Messengers and Reporters of these foreign
things, for Knowledge to our Hearts, we may have Understanding in this
Truth, by which we may grow up into a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

Amen.
5. Of a continual Remembrance, to be had in our minds, of God.
We shall never fail in the cause of true Devotion, if we have God always
in mind, to set him before our eyes, to meditate in his Laws, which will call
us continually to a remembrance, of his wisdom, power, infinite goodness, and
mercy, thereby still creating in us new Spirits, which works unto
righteousenesse in Christ. For, man's heart unreformed by God, is also unapt to
do him service, as may be observed in the example of Zerubbabel Hag. 1. 14.
and Iehoshua; Whose Spirit, and the Spirit of all the remnaunt of the people,
the Prophet says, The Lord stirred up, and then they came, and did the work
in the house of the Lord of Host, their God. It was a Zeal that moved Phillip
to say unto Christ, Lord show us thy Father, and it satisfies John. 14. 8.
us. For who can say, Lord, in this sense, without the Spirit? And who can see
him, but must also of necessity think upon him? This will engender holy and
sanctyfied Thoughts in us; This will also preserve them undefiled, and
unspotted of Vanity: This will kindle more and more the zealous heat of
fervent Prayers, and daily exercise us in them: This (to be short) will lift us
up into an height of all Perfection, to Walk in truth, with 1. king. 2. 4.
all our Hearts, and with all our Souls, before God, as in his sight, all the
days of our life. For this, causing the blessed and happy Union of the Spirit
with God, will force us to consider, that we see him present in all places with
us, to protect us with his Power; to guide and govern us with his Wisdom, to
succor and relieve us by his Goodness, to assist us by his Grace and favorable
Mercy.

What great cause have we then, To carry God always in our Eyes, that
continually cease not, to carry us in his Arms, to ouershadow us under his
Wings, to support and hold us up with his Hands, to sustain and bear us up
in a manner, with his Feet; to rule and govern us with his providence: In
whom; and by whom, we have our life, our moving, and our being; and with it,
all things else, for the preservation thereof.

Let God therefore be a Witness to thy Conscience, of thy whole life; a
Companion to thee, in all thy Travails; to him commit and put over thy
affairs; to him recommende thy self in all thy dangers; Parle and talk with
him, when the time of thy sleep is at night; and awake with him, and to him
when thou arisest from sleep. O happy is the man that can say with Diuid, I
remembered thee in my Bed; I think upon thee, in the night Psalm. 63. ^6.
watches. Such a one will omit no occasion of remembering his God and Savior:
nay, he will endeavor to have him always in sight; He will Journey with him
into Matthew. 2. 14. Matthew. 27 55. 56 Ioh. 19 4^ Luke 23. 26 27. Maet. 27. 33.
57. unto 62.
Egypt; He will accompany him in Prayer, Into the Garden; He will follow him
to the Mount Caluerie, and not forsake him there.

At Meat he will take his Sauce, Matt. 27. 34.
to be Christ's Gaul a and Vinegar: His Cup John. 19 34.
to drink in, the Fountaineb of Blood and Water that issued out of Christ's
precious Sides: Going to Bed, Luke 23. 26.
he will imagine, that his Bed is Christ's holy Cross: c His Pillow Matt. 27.
29.
or Bolster, Christ's Crown of Thorns. d

Again, when he puts his Clothes either on or off, apparelling, or
disroabing himself, He will think, in what ignominy, the Soldiers stripped
Christ of his Garments, Matthew. 27. 28.
and put upon him a Scarlet Robe, for a Mock, at the time of his Passion.

These kinds of Remembrances, will be good Aduertisements unto us, for
Instructions to a zealous devotion unto Prayer.

It is a special Grace, and more then a natural Virtue of the Heart of man,
granted unto it, by a special favor and goodness of God, (who has created it
of purpose to serve him,) that howsoever the body and the exterior Senses may
seem wholly busied in outward affairs of the world, yet the Heart may in a
moment, think of his God, and do him secretly an holy service, without let
and hinderance to his other business.

This may seem not unworthy our observation, for it has matter also for a fit
instruction, even in this Discourse. If then We would heedfully consider, the
excellency of our Soul, to which it was of God first created; and now by a
regeneration and second birth, (as it were newly begotten,) is from above
appointed and preordinated, we should be careful in zeal, to sanctify in
what we might, those singular Motions of the Mind, wherein consists the
Souls excellency, easily passing and returning with a wonderful celeritie,
like to those four Cherubins, which came and returned, as it Ezech. 1. 13. 14.
15.
were Lightning and had the appearance of resplendent Lampe^. I say, that our
Souls, having this spiritual divine Nature, for quick and speedy motion,
never ceasing, and wonderfully comprehending the whole world in a moment, ought
to admonish us, of a special use of it in remembering God, from whom we
received it of his mere gift, howsoever we are busied: that though sometimes
we do slack, as forgetting this duty; yet of a sudden to return unto it,
pricked forward with the Spur of Attention, saying with the Prophet: Return
unto thy Rest, o my Soul, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee. Psalm.
17. 61.


This Knowledge of the Souls dexterity in motion, considered advisedly, and a
care for the employing it had accordingly, would inestimably benefit us, in
the course of our whole life, in guarding our Hearts from vain and idle
Thoughts; which is a special help to further us in all godliness. For man
hereby carrying always about him the Testimony of his Conscience, to witness
of all whatsoever done, or spoken by him, would be forced to walk in a
continual fear of the Majesty of God, and so afray de to offend, standing
always in his sight, would endeavor to do and speak all things in measure
and weight, as were fitting the nature and quality of his Actions and Words,
to Gods glory. Which he grannt, in Christ, and for Christ.

Amen.
6. Of a continual Practizing our selves in good and virtuous exercises.
IT is not of any great moment and worth, to the instruction of a Christian
Soul, only to have the good Motions and Suggestions of godly Thoughts, which
notwithstanding are material, and much available to excite and stir up the
Will unto Action, (it being the Fountain from whence Action must issue:) But
withal. Well-doing must of necessity be produced, to manifest the inward
affections of the Mind, says Christ. And it is to this purpose, that the
Heart of man, is as his Treasurehouse: Matthew. 12. 35. 34.
If it be good, it brings forth good things; if it be evil, it brings
forth evil things: For out of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks.

Neither shall it profit a man, to make a fair show of good and godly
Thoughts, by some few good correspondent Actions, unless also he persevere
constantly in a continual, and daily practice thereof, to the Acquisicion of
the Habit of Well doing. When S. James James. 2. 18.
speaks of Faith to be showed out of Works, he does mean that Faith, which
having the quickening and lively heat of Charity from the Spirit, is always
stirring and forward unto the Actions of true Christianity, grounded upon the
understanding Zeal of a justifying Faith in Christ: And this kind of Faith,
cannot at any time cease from acting the works of Piety and Godliness. A
very special Remedy to Devotion, is this Continual practizing of good, and
virtuous Exercises.

Otherwise, either to purpose, and not to do; or to begin well, and not to go
forward in it, is as the common speech has, To weaue and unweave Penelopes
Web. Who so are of this idle and unprofitably working humor, they are upon
any slight and small occasion, withdrawn easily from this Godly work of holy
Meditation and Devotion; and consequently for want thereof, (not inuring
themselves to the spiritual exercise of Prayer,) they may be compared to
Sampson, who when Judges. 16. 18. 19, 20.
he had those Seven fatal Locks (as I may say,) of his head shaven off by
Dalilah, had his strength also presently gone from him, and so was taken
prisoner of the Philistims. etc. Which is to be understood, that God forsook
and departed from him, for contemning his Ordinance; which was, That he should
be as one Separated from the world, and wholly Consecrated to God; and for that
cause, the Angel foretold Manoah his wife, that No Rasor should Judge. 13. 5.
come upon his head, because he was appointed A Nazarite unto God from his
Mothers womb. Even so is it to those, which accustom not themselves to
spiritual Devotion, and Prayer: For being once deuoyde of these, by sinister
occasions of worldly Affairs, or through negligence omitting them, they
appear straight-wayes destituted of the Grace of God: And thus left to
themselves, are wholly weakened, ( The Shield of Faith, which Ephesians. 6. 16.
is to Quench the fiery darts of the Wicked, being taken from them,) and so
become a prey to the Devil; which cannot be withstood, but by the Zeal of a
true working Devotion in Prayer, occasioned in us, through the grace of God.

Therefore it is very expedient, that in this Spiritual exercise of devout
serving of God, be used a very strict Constancy, and Resolution, as S. Paul
counsayleth, saying: Pray always with all manner Prayer and Supplication
Ephesians. 6. 18.
in the Spirit: and watch thereunto, with all perseverance.

The Celestial Bodies, retain the same course in their motions without change
and variableness, which they received by appointment from God at their first
creation; because on them does depend the government of the whole world;
which else had long since decayed. And shall we not think, forasmuch as the
whole course and order of our Spiritual life, is fully and perfectly
interessed in the work of this Spiritual Exercise; that therefore it is meet
and right, he do well direct and dispose the orderly succession of causes, on
which it depends, that has a mind to have his life godly instructed, unto a
Perpetual Practice of Well doing? No matters, or intercurrent affairs
whatsoever ought to divert us from the daily exercising our devotions in
Prayer: Nay, we are rather to be wanting to our selves in Temporal
businesses, then not to take hold of all occasions offered at all times, to be
conversant with God This is to chouse with Mary, that Good part, which Christ
said, should not be taken from her. And that other, is with ^uke 10. 42. 41.
Martha, To care and to be troubled about many things; which cause us to
forget and neglect the principal, viz. The hearing of Gods Word, and the
practicing of the same.

Of her mind are such, as hold Prayer, and exercises of Spiritual devotion
for pretenses of excuse, to hazard the Spiritual good, for the obteyning of
the Temporal: for, Martha was combred about much serving, when Mary sat at
Christ's feet and heard his Preaching; which, she not regarding, as not
knowing that one thing, is needful, called to Christ for her sisters help,
saying: Master, do thou not care, that my sister verse. 40.
has left me to serve alone? It is an argument of great folly, for the
lesser good, to lose the greater. In this point, the Serpent is naturally wiser
then Man, which by a mere instinct of Nature, is taught to hide and cover the
Head, in time of danger, and rather to expose the Body to the stroke, as
seeking by hazarding the lesser, to save the thing of greater consequence: For
the Head direct^th Sense and Motion to the whole Body. But let the Patriarch
Jacob be unto us for a president, and out of a particular of his Wisdom, let
us exemplify a general document for our instruction in this matter. Jacob
after his return out of Mesopotamia, went to meet with his brother Esau, of
whom he stood greatly in fear, and sent before to his brother by Messengers,
A Present of Genesis 32. 13. 14. 15.
Goats, Ewes, Camels, Asses, etc. things of lesser value and regard,
following himself after, with the Maids, and their Children, Leah and her
Children after, and Rahel and Joseph hindermost: showing thereby, that he Gen
33. 2.
did chouse, rather to lose that which he less regarded, then to hazard that
which he most loved, and had care to preserve from danger: for so were Rahel
and Joseph most dear unto Iacab, and therefore of him placed behind, for
their more security.

I say, this example may be unto us for imitation, and as it is allegorized,
may fitly be applied to this question in hand.

For what is Rahel by Allegory? but the life contemplative or speculatiue, as
the Divines write, which is always busied and occupied in Divine matters,
Whose delight Psalm. 1. 2.
is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does exercise it self day and night.

And to this sense is Rahel interpreted a Sheep, from the name thereof, taking
a signification of Meekness, Peace, and Quietness, which agrees well with
the speculatiue life, always recording, and as it were chewing the Cud of Gods
Law, and of his holy Word, as I said before. And what is Leah? but
Wearisomnesse through continual labor and daily pains taking, such as this
world yields; and therefore by an Allegory also, is said to be that active
life.

To speak of Joseph: was not he borne of Rahel, after that God had opened her
womb? He is therefore called Gene. 30. verse. 22, 23, 24.
the Spiritual Son; signifying the purity, and innocence of the inward
Man. Now then, to end with this; Let not our Cares for temporal things, be
such, as for them, we loose finally the things eternal: Let our Cares be
seemingly employed for both; but yet so divided, as that Leah have her place,
and Rahel her place, in due order: and howsoever it falls out with Leah, let
us be circumspect in the safe guarding of Rahel; and be wanting in our care,
rather for Leah, then for Rahel, if the case so require, as having an eye
specially intentive to contemplation, always according to the counsel of
Christ in the Gospel, saying: Lay not up Treasures for your selves Matthew. 6.
19. 20. 21. Luke 12. 33. 34.
upon Earth: But lay up Treasures for your selves in Heaven: Forwhere your
Treasure is, there will your Hearts be also.

God grant we may herein be advised as we ought, receiving from these words,
spiritual instructions, such as may be to the glory of Gods name, and for
the everlasting comfort of our Consciences in Christ Jesus. Amen.

This continual practice of holy exercises, as it makes greatly for the
confirming in us, a habit of divine meditations, with a delight of the mind,
to the aduauncing of the inward man, even unto a full groath; So has it need
to be aided, by certain circumstaunces of Place, Time, and manner of Gesturing
the Body, which are here to be considered accordingly: For these help much
for the settling the Heart in a confirmed resolute devotion at time of Prayer.

It has been sufficiently spoken already in the former Fol. 13. 14.
Preface to this work, of the place and manner of Composing our Gestures when
we pray. Only by way of Admonition, (it being a thing to be left to the
consideration of any upon occasion devoted unto Prayer,) I say, as touching
Outward gesture and carriage of the Body in time of Prayer, that it is to be
used as conueniencie requires, and the state of the body does permit; For
otherwise, if either standing, or kneeling too long, (the weakness of the
Body not admitting either,) these Gestures, (through pain so occasioned,) may
interrupt and hinder the course of Devotion; which specially is to be regarded:
I say in this case, we are not to stand precisely upon those accedences, not
so necessarily behouefull.
(For it is the Spirit, and inward sound affection of the Heart, that God
requires in chief, at the times of serving him; (and yet I confess, that in
those External signs, and Corporal Gestures, conspiring with the Hearts
Devotion, arguing true humility, God is well pleased to be honored of us.
Therefore leaving these to be considered, of such as in a godly discretion
shall have cause to use the same; I only advise, that in matters belonging to
Gods service, whether publicquely, or privately, no one thing be interpreted of
so light and small a moment, as that it ought for the quality thereof, to be
rejected of us, after our own minds, and mere santasies. Let Christ, who is
the teacher of all truth, and did use those outward Gestures in Prayer, be
only to us for example. And so I return to my purpose, and say; The
observation of the Time, is rather here to be entreated, and discussed.

The Wise man says in his Proverbs; To him that seeks for true goods, it
avails much to rise up early in the morning. The Children of Israel are said
in Exodus, to have Gathered Manna in the Morning. By this Exodus 16. 21.
we are admonished in general, of a fit and convenient Time, to be necessarily
employed in good Exercises, as notes the Wise man in Ecclesiastes: To all
things there is Eccle 3. 1.
an appointed time, to every purpose under the Sun. If for every Purpose that
man apprehends for his necessary uses, then surely there is a time to be
limited out, for performance of our godly Purposes, and Vows unto God. And of
this time must we take hold, because it is the Acceptable time, of which
Isaiah speaks, that God heard, and helped his Church; for it was the day of
Salvation, Esaias. 49 8. 2. Cori. 6. 2.
as Isaiah and also S. Paul calls it. For at all times, wherein the Spirit of
God moves our hearts to a zealous Devotion, God sets before us his
infinite Love and Mercy, by it, as it were inuiting us unto him, to receive
his Grace, sanctifying us unto all Godliness.

So then, no time is exempted from the service of God, whether by Prayer, or by
any other spiritual function of the Soul, and Conscience. For both day and
night, we are admonished out of the Scripture, to attend thereunto. Yet not to
omit altogether, the care of the several affairs apperteyning to the
several vocations, in which God has placed every one, to seek honestly and
competently, for corporal food and sustenaunce, out of his particular
providence, to be administered accordingly.

This being advisedly considered, let us be bold to assume all times, for this
service. What they be by general terms of Day and Night, the Scripture
teaches, as before I noted.

The Son of Sirach tells, that the man, Who applies Eccl. 39. 1. 5.
his mind to the Law of God, and is occupied in the meditation thereof, is he
that gives his heart to resort carely unto the Lord that made him, and to pray
before the most high etc.

Saint Luke says, that Christ In the Day time taught in the Temple; And all
the people came in the Morning, to hear Luke 21. 37. 38.
him in the Temple.

When Christ did choose his twelve Apostles, Luke notes the time to be in the
Morning, after he had Spent the night in Prayer to God; For it follows, And
when it was Luke 6. 12. 13.
Day, he called his Disciples, etc.

And David in his Psalms testifies of himself, That Psalm. 130. 6. P^al 55.
17 59. 16
he rose betimes in the Morning, to think upon God, and to meditate on his
Laws. In one of his Psalms, he witnesses of him self, That he returned
seven times in Psa. 119. 164
a day to praise God.

And Daniel, made Prayers and Supplications, three times Dani 6. 10
a day unto God, upon his knees.

All the faithful in the Acts of the Apostles, Continued Act. 2. 46. 47.
daily with one accord in the Temple, praising God.

It was daily Prayer, that did procure God, to deliver Judge. ^0. 11. 12. 16.
the Israelites from their enemies, in the Book of Judges.

Saint Paul wills the Ephesians to Pray always, with all Ephesians 6. 18.
manner of Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit: and to watch thereunto with
all perseuer^^ce and supplication for all Saints.

For himself writes to Timothy, That without ceasing, he 2. Tim. 1. 3.
^ad remembrance of him in his Prayers day and night.

And it follows, in the same example, by way of admonition unto Timothy,
That Widows in deed continue in 1. Tim. 5. 5.
S^pplications and Prayers Night and Day. Such a Widow was A^^a a Prophetess,
who served God with Fasting Luk 2 37
and Prayers day and night

Thus a perseverance in Prayer and serving God, is commended unto us in the
Scripture, not for the Day ^^e only, but also for the Night in particular, and
expressly by word.

Jeremiah says, Arise, Cry in the Night: in the beginning Lamen. 2. 19
of the Watches, powr^ out thy Heart like Water, before the face of the Lord.

David says, That every Night he washed his Bed, and Psalm. 6. 6.
watered his Couch with his Tears. And thought upon him in the night Watches.

Christ is to us in stead of a million of Examples; and Luke 6. 12.
he is said To go into a Mountain to pray, and there to spend the Night in
prayer to God.

In him therefore let us rest our imitation, as by him, who is the very Truth,
fully confirmed unto the practice of this Divine exercise, after the example of
all the Saints; which though it be a matter out of question, and therefore
needs no further illustration; Yet I will recite here, as by this present
occasion I am put in minds, for the worthiness thereof, a very memorable
president of a true zealous devotion; and the rather, for that it is observed
by an Ethnicque.

Pliny writes to Traian the Emperor, that there was a certain people, who
^^ued without blame and offense to any, and had nothing fault worthy in them,
save only that they spent much time in singing Psalms, and spiritual Songs,
and H^mnes, to the pray se and honor of a Man, called Christ, who was
crucified in Palestina A most worthy and singular Example of true Devotion in
the primitive Church, left to posterity for imitation, and so accordingly to
be practiced of all the Children of faith in Christ. And therefore generally it
is in this manner written of all the Saints, that the most part of the Night
watches, (for the Night was divided into Watches, as appears in Matthew, who
mentions the Fourth Mat. 14. 25
Watch of the Night: And Luke, Luke 12. 38.
who speaks of the Second and Third Watch) was spent by them in the
spiritual exercises of Prayers, in reading the Scriptures, in Contemplations
and deuo^t Meditations, according therein with the Psalms, which wills them
to lift up their hands in the Night unto Holy things, and bless the Lord.
And therefore speak with David, saying: Our Souls waytes on the Lord, more
then the Morning Watch watches for the Morning.

Let these suffice for a Preparatiue of instruction unto Devotion: And
understand, that a Perseverance in Prayer, and other godly Exercises, is
chiefly meant, in the true acception of these words ( Morning, and Night,) as
occasion may fitly correspond thereto; So be the words to be interpreted; for
so in that sense and meaning they are taken in the Scripture. David says, Let
me hear thy loving kindness in the Morning: He means not Psalm. 143. 8.
the Morning only, but at all times of the Day; that is, Speedily, and in due
season, let me have the counsel of thy holy Spirit, to direct me in the way
that I should walk in.

Likewise in the Canticles, the Church, which is the Spouse of Christ, seeking
for succor, and help at her Loves hand, in all her troubles; to signify the
same, uses the word Night, saying: In my Bed by Night, I sought him that my
Soul loved. By which we are taught, Cant. 3. 1.
that as afflictions come upon the faithful, so are they to call upon their
Lord and Savior CHRIST, whether in the Day or in the Night: For they happen at
all times, and therefore at all times they must be ready, in a true Devotion
to crave help from their God, who hears and delivers. To him therefore,
the only Wise and Immortal GOD, the all sufficient, powerful, and most
merciful Lord of Heaven and Earth; Be all Power, Dominion, Praise, and
Honor, for ever, throughout all Ages.

Amen.
MEDITATIONS. Of which, the Preface.
THe Spirits of Men are so strongly possessed (as) seeming in a manner dulled
with an accustomed slumber of sinful security, that they are altogether
without all sense and feeling of Heavenly motions, which should quicken and
vi^ificate them unto the actions of Piety, and Godliness.

Therefore all means occasioning Good thoughts, addressed unto spiritual
motives for the acting of True Devotion, would carefully be sought after; and
no sooner offered to our Minds by the spirit of God, ( Who only works the
will,) but ought as speedily, with reverence, and thanksgiving be
apprehended. If delay in temporal matters of consequence, (which require
speedy dispatch,) be said many times to breed prejudice; How much more
dangerous (yea) with ^eares of dreadful hazards is the delaying, and putting
off Devotion? the sparks whereof the Spirit has begun already to kindle in
our minds, for the acting, either inwardly by Sighs; or outwardly by the
Tongue, the works of piety; such, as by Prayer, is to be performed, toward
God.

Among many spiritual Lessons, which S. Paul gives the Thessalonians, this is
one, Quench not the Spirit. When 1. Thessa. 5. 19.
God is pleased to put into thy Soul any Godly motion, know, that he has
sent it as a Forerunner of himself, to be present with thee, and to have a
dwelling in the Chamber of thy Heart. And this to signify, that now thou art
to dress and deck it up, so as is fit for the entertainment of such a Guest,
as silleth the Heavens with his Majesty. Iere 23. 24.


Thou must abondon, and expel* all ill Thoughts, wicked Intentions, leawd
Affections, wanton and idle Desires, and Lusts of the heart, whatsoever.

Oh how happy shall thou be, when God comes to knock at the door of thy
Heart, if then thou (as one watchfully attending his coming,) be there ready
to open, and to let him in? And will thou know, when God knocks? even as
often as he stirs up in thy mind, a willing desire to hear, and read the
words of his Law. And will thou know also, how to open, and to let him in,
that thou may have him to harbor in thy soul, and there to reside with thee
for ever?

Thou read, and thou hear the Law of God preached: and thou do well.
But when GOD commanded the Law to be Read, he added the end to be, the
Learning of his fear, and to keep the words thereof. Deuteronomy. 17. 19*


Therefore to Joshua he said thus: Let not this Book, (meaning Deutronomie)
depart out of thy Mouth: And there Joshua. 1. 8.
shows the way to keep it, that it may not depart; Even to Meditate therein
day and nigh: for so thou shall observe it.

And David auerreth the same, by the words of Delight, Psalm. 1. 2.
and Meditation or Exercise: For Meditation can not be, but where Delight of
the Mind (which first is occasioned by a True affection and love to a thing)
has prepared the way: Therefore he that does mean to Observe the Law of God,
will usually Meditate the same* and he that does so, argues a Spiritual
delight, he has therein: And such a one in those former places, is pronounced
Rlessed and happy.

Will thou know how? In Joshua, thou art promised, Iosh^. 1. 7, 8, 9.
by keeping Gods Law, Thy self shall make thine own way prosperous, whither
soever thou go, and to have good success. And David says, Thou ^rt like a
Tree planted by the (...) of Waters, etc. That is, so moystened with God his
Gra^^* that what soever thou shall do, shall prosper: And to use ^alomons
words, When thou walk, it shall lead thee, (how Pro. ^
can thou err?) When thou sleep, it shall watch for thee* (how can
thou, but be in safety?) And when thou wakest, it shall talk with thee,
(can thou then but have knowledge to guide thy footsteps in the Way of the
Lord?) For, Psalm. 119. 10^.
his Word is a Lantern to thy Foot, and a Light unto thy paths. Write then
the Law of God upon the table of thy Heart, that Prou 7. 3.
thou never forget it; and bind it about thy Neck, as Solomon Prou 6. 21.
Psalm. 19. 10.
counsels, as A most precious Jewel: For, the Law of God, is more to be
desired then Gold; yea, then much sine Gold, says David. Accord then with the
same kingly Prophet, and say in the Spirit, I will meditate in thy Precepts,
Psalm. 119. 15. 16.
and consider thy Ways: I will delight in thy Statutes, and I will not forget
thy Word.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him, of all, as many as do
steadfastly believe his Word, to do thereafter, make us his Children, to
understand the way of his Precepts, that we may Meditate in his wondrous
Psalm. 119. 27.
Works, as David says.

So shall we evermore Rejoice in him, (and not grieve the Spirit:) Pray
continually, (and have daily conference with 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 17, 18.
God,) Give thanks to him in all things, (and so acknowledge his Mercies, and
gracious kindnesses toward us.) GOD grant this for his Christ's sake. Amen.

Meditations for the Morning.
He only, that applies his mind to the Law of the most Eccl. 39. 1.
High,; and is occupied, in the Meditation thereof:

He w^ll give his Heart to resort early unto the Lord, that Eccle. 39. 5
made him; And, to pray before the Most high; and will open his Mouth in
Prayer, and pray for his Sins.

That it might be known, that we ought to prevent the Sun Wisdom of Sal^.
16. 2^.
rising, to give thanks unto thee, and to salute thee before the day spring.

O God, thou art my God; Early will I seek thee. Psalm. 63. 1. Psalm. 3. ^.


I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me.

Admonitions for the Morning. Meditation.
1 Thanks to be given, for the Nights rest, This, ^^on occasion, if it so fall
out.
especially if passed without dangers, which many times are occasioned by the
illusions, and assaults of the Spiritual Enemy; who is wont to infect and
trouble man's mind with vain and restless Fantasies, more in the Night, then
at any other time.

But, in no wise to be forgotten, that we, Thank God for his Patience, and
merciful Grace, in affoording us (yet) a longer time of Repentance, by this
days rising.

2 Offer thy self wholly, and all the faculties, and powers of thy Mind, and
Body, unto God; that, what soever thou shall do in the day time, he be pleased
to guide, order, and dispose it, after his own will.

3 Therefore, Ask Grace at his hands, that thou committest nothing this day,
contrary to his heavenly will; but pray for his aid, and help, against
sins; especially such, as are most familier, and in custom with thee, as,
naturally thine own; to withstand them: ask a strengthening of thy Mind, in a
firm and settled Resolution of amendment, by God his grace in Christ.

Meditations for the Morning.
At the first appearance of the daylight, pray thus.
Son of GOD, Light of Light, the most true, and great Brightness of the
Father; a Light shining in John. 1. 5. 9.
darkness, and lighning every one, coming into the World: Through who^e
goodness only, the light of the verse. 3.
Sun, and of the Day, shines unto us; Lighten my Eyes, that I may see,
behold, and know, in thee, and through thee only, the Father of Light; whom to
1. Know, to 2. Love, and whom to 3* Serve, in fear to his Name, is, to reign
with thee, everlastingly.

Amen.
At your rising ^ut of your Bed: Pray.
AWake Ephe. 5. 14.
thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall shine unto
thee, and give thee Light. Arise, arise, o my Soul, 1. purchased, and 2.
purged by the Matthew. 26. 28.
Blood of Christ; Shake off the 1. Pollution of Sin; and, put on the 2.
Garment of Righteousness; and, sit down in the 3. Peace of Conscience, through
Christ. 2. Pet. 1. 2.


Amen.
As you are apparelling your self: Pray.
^ Isay 61. 10.
Will greatly rejoice in the Lord; and my Soul shall be joyful in my God: For
he has clothed me with the garments of Salvation; and covered me with the
robe of Righteousness: He has decked me like a Bridegroom; and as a Bride
tireth her self, with her Jewels.

Give Romans 6. ^3.
your selves unto God, as they that are alive, from the dead; and give your
Members, as weapons, or instruments of Righteousness, unto God.

Stand Ephe. 6. 14.
therefore, your Loins guirded about, with Verity; and having on, the Breast
place of Righteousness.

Going abroad.
CAll to mind, that you are to come into a World of Dangers; into a Forest,
which has many Groves and Woods, beset with Toils and Hayes of spiritual
Hunters, to entrap thee.

Consider then, So many Men, so many Nets: So many Ways so many Ginnes: So
many Trappes, so many Obiectes for the Senses: So many wide Nets, so many
Pleasures and Delights. So many Snare^, and guilefull Tricks, as there be
Affairs, and Endeavors, of Men in this World of cares.

Therefore, to be freed from the annoyance of these Deceiptfull practices of
the World, and to return Home, both better for Life, and Manners; and also,
for avoiding many Dangers, that may befall thee abroad; fence and arm thy
self, before thou go forth, with Godly Prayers. Let Prayer, I say, be thy
Helmet; Let it be thy Shield and Buckler. Take Ephe. 6. 13.
unto thee, the Complete Armor of God, that thou may be able to resist in
the Evil day.

Pray with David, in the Spirit, Psa. 25. 4. 5
Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy Paths. Lead me forth in thy
truth, and teach me. Thou art the God of my Salvation, in thee do I trust all
the day.

And then be bold to say with him, Psalm. 23. 4.
Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear
no evil; for thou O Lord, art with me: thy Rod and thy Staff comfort me.

Going about any business; consider, and Pray.
COnsider, that except God guide thee with his Spirit, thy enterprise can have
no good success. Pray with David, Psalm. 90. 17.
Direct thou, O Lord, the work of our hands upon us: O prosper thou our
handie work.

Pray with Solomon, for Wisdom, saying; Wisdom 9. 10.
Send her out of thy holy Heavens, and from the Throne of thy Majesty, that
she may be with me, and labor, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight.

And so, commend all thy Works, and Studies, to the Lord thy God.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving for the safe custody of the Night past, with a
Petition for God his Protection against the evils of the Day.
It is a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing unto thy Plal. 92. 1. 2*
Name, O most High. To declare thy loving kindness in the Morning, and thy
truth in the Night.

Almighty, and everlasting GOD, I Praise thee, I Bless thee, I give Thanks
to thee, for thy gracious Providence in protecting, and defending me this
Night, from all the dangers both of Soul, and Body; For, Psalm. 91. 11.
Thou have caused thy holy Angels to watch over me, being a sleep; who, by
thine appointment, Psalm. 34. 7.
Pitched as it were their Tents, round about my Bed, to defend me from the
crafty assaults of our common Enemy the Devil, who sleeps not, but is 1.
Petr. 5. 8.
Watchful; and then, most intentive to seek occasion of harming our Souls,
when we are in sleep, less heedfull of his Tretcheries. I thank thee also,
that thou have raised this Body of flesh, from sleep, (the very image of
Death) that I might not be stiffled, and choked up in the darkness of my
Sins; thereby giving me a further time yet, for a serious repentance of my
Sins; for which, thou might most justly have punished me with a
suffocating sudden death in my sleep. But, O Lord, as I do most humbly give
thee thanks, for that thy great undeserved Mercy; so am I bold, in the name
of thy Christ, to crave and entreat thee, for thy Fatherly care in safeguarding
me also this Day: Attend upon me, I beseech thee, with the Eye of Mercy:
Psa. 119. 35.
Direct my footstepes in the paths of thy Commandments; that they wholly may
be guided after thy Will. And so being 1. Pet. 1. 2.
Sanctified by thy spirit, I may the more freely follow my Vocation, in which
thou have placed me; even to the good also of others, for the glory of thy
Names sake, in Christ: Whom, I here make my Intercessor for me; because, of my
self, I confess, O Lord, I am most unworthy the least part of thy Mercy.
Look therefore, O good God, upon this thy Son, and cast thy gracious Eyes
upon him, Romans 8. 15
by whom also, thou art pleased to be my Father; for the righteousness of this
thy Gala. 4. 6.
Son, spare the sins of me thy Servant, and vouchsafe that unto me out of
thy mere Mrcie, which in no wise is due to me, by merit of mine own Gene.
6. 5.
Worthiness. O Lord, I most humbly crave, and beseech thee, that my Senses,
Words, and Deeds, may so be Sanctified, as that my whole Body in this life,
be a helping fellow, and a joint Minister of Godliness to my Soul; that also it
may with it, be partaker of everlasting Blessedness in that other Life, where
thou live, and reignest, with God the Father, and with the holy Ghost, for
evermore. Amen.

Meditations for the Evening.
REmember, that in the Law were commanded two daily Sacrifices: The Number. 28. 4
Morning, and the Evening 2. king. 16. 15.
Sacrifice.

Let this put thee in mind, that thou also must offer up to GOD, both Morning
and Evening, the Calves of thy Lips.

Chrysostom
Remember here, the Night was not made wholly for Homil. 26. upon the Acts.
^ase, by sluggish sleep, says Chrysostom.

Psalm. 6. 6.
David Washed every Night his Bed, and Watered his Co^ch with Tears.

Luke 6. 12.
Christ spent the Night in Prayer to God.

Admonitions for the Evening, before you sleep.
TAke account of thy Conscience; Search every Corner thereof: Examine it truly,
and narrowly: Lie not to thy Soul, by either Dissembling, and covering the
Guilt thereof: or by Soothing, to lessen, and excuse it any ways.

Therefore, let thy Thoughts first, be had in question; then thy Words;
afterward, thy Actions, severally inquired upon.

First, what thou have Committed; and so next, what thou have Omitted; must be
sifted out, by particular Inquisition: In both, there may be cause of sorrow,
and joy, to thy Soul

To this purpose, is that worthy saying, reckoned among the golden sayings of
wise Pythagoras.

Pythagoras in his golden sayings.
Suffer not thine Eyes to sleep, nor thine Eyelids to slumber, before thou
have run over in mind thrice, every deed, and Work of the day, in
particular: To wit, Whither thou have gone, What done, or not done: laying
all in order, from the first, to the last: If aught thou have done well,
rejoice; If ill, be sorry: Study these points well, and meditate seriously
upon them.

Then Pray; and know, that the Evening prayer, does much avail to the Prayer,
to be said in the Morning: For, thou shall then reap the fruits of those Good
thoughes and meditations, which in the Evening going to bed, thou have laid
up in the Storehouse and Treasury of thy Heart. Pray therefore, I say, 1.
Confessing thy Sins: 2. Asking pardon: 3. Giving thanks: 4. Requiring God
his Protection, for securing thy Sleeps; And so, recommending thy self into
his hands, say:

O Lord, I call upon thee; Psalm. 141. 1. 2.
Let my Pray^^ be directed in thy sight: and the lifting up of my Hands, be as
an Evening Sacrifice.

Say thus: Psalm. 4. 8.
I will lay me down, and take my rest, for thou, O Lord, make me to dwell
in safety.

Psalm. 55. 17.
Evening, and Morning, and at Noone, will I pray, and make a noise, (that is, I
will be instant, and earnest,) and he will hear me.

When thou wakest in the Night time, it is good to have in mind some Godly
saying, as this:

Psalm. 9^. 5, 6, and 9.
Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of the Night, nor of the P^stilence,
that walks in the Darkness: For, thou have said, The Lord is my Hope; I
have set the most High, for my Refuge.

Psalm. 119. 148.
Have I not remembered thee on my Bed, and thought upon thee in the Night
Watches; because thou have been my helper?

Evening Prayer.
It is a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing unto thy Psalm. 92. 1. 2.
Name, O most High: To declare thy loving Kindness in the Morning, and thy
Truth in the Night.

LOrd Jesus, the Christ of GOD, the sole, and only 1. Tim. 4. ^^
Redeemer of mankind, the safe Tim. 2. 6. Ephe. 1. 7.
Deliverer of all that trust in thee. Behold, and hear me; hearken to the
Prayer of my Lips unfeigned: I confess, thou dealest lovingly with Man, to
whom thou give both the light of the day to work in, for the necessaries of
this mortal Life; (which otherwise, could not be maintained, thy heavenly
Providence, having so first appointed ^^.) And also, the Darkness of the
Night, to rest from Bodily Labors, for the refreshing Nature in Man; (which
by no other means could stand.) Forasmuch as thou p^rs^^rm^st all this, most
happily, to all that Love thee; because, that unto them, thou shinest inwardly
by Grace to the perfo^rmance of all Functions of (...)* more brightly, and
effectually* then does the Sun give ^^light to the world: I humbly besee^h thee
that thou (...) be pleased, out of thy Mercy, to be pr^sent wi^^ ^^ (...)
night; thou, O God, who art, the true an^ (...) of my soul, to defend and
keep me as the apple of th^^ (...)* (...) Ps^ (...)
to hide me, under the shadow, of thy wing^ from the wicked one, who does
wake always, to lie in w^^te* for my ^. Pet* (...)
soul. Good Lord, guard me with the safe conduct o^ thy spirit, from his
ambushments, and secret s^ares, with which he obsesseth all the paths* and
ways of my footst^ps, to intrappe me; now especially, when I shall sleep,
which, I desire not to do, but unto thee. And therefore* into thy 2. Sam 4* 9*
Ephe. 1. 7.
hands, O merciful Lord, do I commend my spirit Thou art my Deliverer; Thou
have Redeemed it, upon the Cross; Thine it is, O my Savior, even thine only,
Oh, be pleased to be glorified by it, in me thy servant. Then suffer it not to
sleep in sin; but watch over it, that it may be waking, always, unto thee.
Let it not be, as it were surcharged, and oppressed with overmuch sleep,
least it, being destituted, and forsaken of thy help, be surprised of our
common enemy, and so carried away capti^e, into utter darkness: Forbid
therefore, that I do not sleep, above the just and necessary time, of
convenient refection; but raise me, in the due and fit season, that so being
wakened, I may rise unto good works* even to the praising of thy holy Name, day
by day; and thus at length, through thee, with thee, and in thee only, I may
come to inhabit, that eternal rest, in thy heavenly Jerusalem, for ^uer,

Amen.
A Meditation of Penitencie for the addressing, and Preparing our minds unto a
true, godly sorrow for our sins.
To depart from evil is a thankful thing to the Lord. Eccl^s. 35. 3.
And to forsake unrighteousness is a reconciling to him.

COnsider then, that it is most needful to be truly sorrowful for thy
sins unto amendment, before thou crauest pardon and forgiveness of the
same, as witnesses Peter.

Amend your lives, and turn, that Acts 3. 19.
your sins may be put away, etc.

As a Bourd or Plancke of a Ship Lib. de poeni.
dashed in pieces, is unto a man in that perilous time of shipwreck
distressed; so to a sinner seeking to be relieved and refreshed out of the
fear of danger for his sins, is a godly Repentance, and contrition of the
broken heart, and humbled soul, feeling inwardly the heavy judgment of God,
and crying outwardly, as it were, from the depth of his sorrow to God, for
mercy, and grace: for mercy against despair; and for grace, unto amendment
and newness of life. And so does Turtullian account Repentance, to be a
happy and fortunate Plancke after Shipwreck: for this, will hold us up, as it
were by the Chinne, that we sincke not, though seeming to be plunged, over the
Ears in the floods of our sins, and so at the length, after some conflicts
and struggling, for recovery, bring us even to the Haven of God his clemency,
and goodness, assisted thither by his only mercy and favor, because he will
not that we perish in our sins. Ezekiel. 18. 32.


Know therefore, and let it be thine earnest Meditation, that till thou art
chastised of the Lord, thou art no better I^re. 31. 18.
then an untamed calfe, disobedient and unruly in all thy works, stubburne and
wilful not to be subjected unto the yoke of Christ* though it be light and
easy, and all this Matthew 11. 30.
while, thou can not repent, because thou art not converted: much less, as
yet smite upon thy Thigh, because thou Iere 31. 19
have not bin instructed, to detest thy sins, and to forsake them. For thou
can not of thy self take unto thee, the least thought of Repentance, much
less work in thy soul the habit thereof; for it is a work of the mighty
and merciful hand of God, As witnesses Jeremy, saying, Turn thou Lam. 5 21.
us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. Therefore in us there is no
power at all, to turn unto God, we must implore and crave, by hearty,
earnest, and constant prayers, God his special and only powrefull aid herein.

It is a worthy saying of S. Augustine.

We believe none to attain unto salvation, but God first De Dogma. Eccle.
inuiting and calling him thereto: None being so called, to work his
salvation, but God also ayding and asisting him in the said work, and yet,
none to deserve to have God his help therein, but himself craving it most
f^ruently, by hearty faithful Prayers.

Pray therefore for it, according to that measure of faith, which God has
given thee; it shall suffice to procure that it be powered upon thee, as it were
from that Throane of his grace most abundantly in a fitting measure, though
undeservedly without thy merit.

Say with David, Teach me to do thy will, for thou art Psalm. 143. 10.
my GOD. Let thy good Spirit lead me unto the Land of Righteousness.

And be well assured, that God will be ready to hear thee, and help thee, to
teach thee, and to lead thee, whosoever desire the same in the Spirit, by
faith, for his Luke 1. ^. Exodus 34. ^.
mercy is above his works.

Manifested in these three Parables of Christ. Of the Lost sheep, and
recovered Of the Groat lost and found. Of Luke 15 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13,
14, ^5, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
the Prodigal son, voluntarily and wilfully offending, and yet by
acknowledging Gods free mercy, received into favor again, and restored into
his former state of bliss, yea, made most happy, being now called to
Repentance, upon his confession unto God, that he had Sinned against Heaven,
and was no more worthy to be called his son.

The sum is as you see, yet let us not rest so, but for our better
instruction, as well to stir and incite our minds to hope well of Gods
mercies, as also to confirm our consciences therein through a true
acknowledgement of our sins; let us insist in the observation of the
particulars of this worthy example, for the laying it fourth in the
circumstances, gives a more clear sight to our understanding for use in the
application very necessary.

It is said of the prodigal son, that he came to himself. Luke 15. 17.
This argues, that he began then to have an inward feeling of his miserable
state, unto a godly sorrow and purpose for a true repentance: hereupon was
inferred presently an acknowledgement and confession of his sins. For he rose
and came to his father. Verse 20.


In this was his hope of pardon manifested: he came to his Father, to the end
he might obtain Remission and forgiveness of his former sins, and he was
not deceived in his hope, for his father saw him a great way off, and had
Compassion, here was mercy and loving kindness, even that whereof David
speaks, that a Father has on his children, yea, he ran, and fill on his
neck Psalm. 103. 13. Luke 15. 20. Ezech 18 21, 22.
and kissed him. Here was showed a readiness, and most joyful willingness,
to forget, and forgive his sons former wickedness and sins, and wholly to
take him into his blisfull favor for ever, For whom God loves, he loves to
the end. John 13. 1.


Now when this Prodigal son was come to his father, He said, I have sinned
against heaven, (viz. Against Luke 15. 21.
the seat of thy Majesty, where thou dwell) and before thee (from whose
eyes it was impossible to hide my nakedness) and am no more worthy to be
called thy son.

A most lively confession of an humble penitent sinner* acknowledging his own
misery, dispoiled of Gods favor, and craving his pardon to be received into
^^ again. Therefore the futher commands his servants to Ver. 22. Ver. 23.
bring forth the best Robe, and to put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet, and to kill the fat calfe, and said, Let us eat, and be merry.

Well, and truly agreeable to this, spoke Joel, that God is gentle, and
merciful, patient, and of much mercy, and Joel 2. 13.
such a One, as is sorry for our afflictions So much testified also by Christ,
out of his own mouth, Who came to save Matthew 18. ^1, 14.
that which was lost It is not the will of your father which is in heaven, that
one of these little ones should perish. Well may ^^ chide, and show his
judgment for a while, even for the disciplining us in the School of faith, to
our amendment: yet upon our true repentance and humble submission, which is
our unfeigned turning unto him, he also presently without delay, yea before we
do crave his favor, turns to us, and embraces, and receives us into his
mercy. So says David, He will not always chide, Psalm 103 9.
Neither keeps he his anger for ever argued by the verse following; He has
not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded Verse. 10, 11* 12, 13.
us according to our iniquities.

To come to the application of this Parable, it may be observed in the person
of this Prodigal son: First, that the state of all wilful sinners is very
miserable, yet not remediless, as desperate and without all hope of recovery
and help: For by repentance through Faith, God the only recouerer of their
state, is reconciled unto them, and in that reconciliation, is contained their
most happy bliss for ever, and this is the second point here to be observed.

As concerning the first, Wilful sinners, etc, voluntarily falling from God,
and casting behind him his graces, are causes of God his judgments against
themselves, which must needs bring upon them distressed misery, and woeful
calamity, never ceasing to afflict them, till thereby being humbled to an
inward feeling of their wretchedness occasioned by their sins (justly
deserving the same) they enter into some true account of their life wickedly
passed, and by examining it, find the punishment to be justly laid upon them
for their sins, yea, and were it infinitely great, yet to be proportioned to
them in weight, and measure, which exceed both the sands of the sea, and the
stars of heaven. And now being thus dejected thoroughly with an inward feeling
of their sins, into a sanctified and blessed sorrow, prostrate themselves
before Gods throne of grace, acknowledging out of contrite and broken hearts,
that they have offended most grievously, and are worthily punished, craving
instantly pardon at Gods hand, as most humbly submitting themselves to his
mercy, which is far above all his works.

Of this, the whole world may exemplify to us, infinite specialties, for it is
full of manifest, and evident signs of his mercies, which the faithful his
children feel, whose sins he has removed; for then he heals all their
infirmities, redeeming their life from the grave, in which till then they
seemed to be as dead men; as appears plainly proved in this Prodigal
son, and lost Child. I do willingly insist the longer in it, for that it
contains the fit matter of comfort and consolation to the conscience of a
godly penitent Sinner, wounded for his Sin.

This Prodigal Son, would needs take his journey into a far Country;
(This notes his wilful falling from God,) and there wasting his goods with
riotous living, (By this foul means, he cast away Gods graces, which he had
received,) and now when he had spent all, he began to be in necessity, for
he fed swine, and would feign have filled his belly with the husks, that the
Swine eat, but no man gave him them, and so was ready to die for hunger, (here
was misery procured unto him, through his own folly:) All this time, was a
time of anger, and Judgment, which David notes in this word, ( Chiding.)

But now that God had showed himself unto him, to be a Father; to look upon
him with the Eye of Piety, to humble him by the acknowledgement of his
infirmities, unto his fear; that he could say in faith, Father, I have
sinned, he was taken to mercy, and pardoned all his sins, and was crowned
with compassions and loving kindnesses: For he was dead, and is alive again;
and was lost, and now is found, and his Father was merry and glad thereof.

An Example of hopeful comfort, and worthy our best observation, instructing
unto a godly fear in Christ, by whom, and for whom only, we are pardoned,
and receive mercy. The which being truly acknowledged, gives the first step
unto Repentance, which because it cannot be without a feeling of our sins,
and this feeling, must of necessity breed both sorrow and shame for them.

Then also follows, an humble Confession of Sin unto God, wherein we are to
show our Nakedness, and to desire to be clothed, with that best Robe of this
Prodigal Son, even with the Righteousness of Christ; and so no doubt we
shall obtain a full remission of all our sins: Which he grant, for his Names
sake.

Amen.
Meditation upon the Communion of the Lord his Supper, before, as a Preparatiue
to the Soul of the true Receiver.
REmember thou, whosoever presentest thy self to the LORDS Table, to
communicate with the Saints there; that it is the Body and Blood of Christ,
which thou art truly and Realie to receive, with the mouth of Faith, and not
otherwise. The first Consideration.


Consider then, if the Temple of Solomon, which was but Material, was held in
so great honor and reverence, because of the Ark of the Lord, 1. King. 8. 6.
brought by the Priests into the Oracle of the house, into the most holy
Place, and placed there, even under the wings of the Cherubims.

Of how far greater reverence, and esteem, are we to repute that Temple to
be, which is Spitituall, even thy own heart and Soul, Where the Lord
himself, has made 2 Timothy 1. 14. Ephesians. 3. 17.
choice to dwell, if thou be of his Household, built up and strengthened in a
most true and lively faith, by which only thou art to receive him in that most
holy, and Sanctified Sacrament of the Eucharist. Wherein the most precious Body
and Blood of Christ, which was offered upon the Altar of the Cross for the
redemption of man: The Body broken, the Blood shed) is represented and to thee
presented, in the Forms of Bread and Wine, according to Mat. 26. 26. John 6
63. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Christ's own Institution, Visible, and yet Spiritually, if received of thee by
Faith.

This consideration well prepensed and meditated, must needs breed in the
minds of the Faithful, a most earnest and zealous devotion, inwardly as it
were in the Soul, to affect a frequent, and often communicating with the
faithful, at the Lords Table.

For hither must we resort, to have a sound, and perfect cure of our
infirmities. 1. John 1. 7.


In this Sacrament are also contained, the most precious Treasures of Gods
graces, and also exhibited accordingly to every one, faithfully apprehending
Christ, in truth and verity.

Therefore the worthy Receiver, must carefully attend upon Meditation, by it to
prepare, and address his Soul, to the celebrating this most holy Sacrament.
For, as it is of it own Nature, (being merely Spiritual,) most noble and
singular; so it requires a most exquisite 1. Cor. 11. 28.
and perfect Preparation of our selves thereto.

Of what Nature this Sacrament is, and of how infinite a virtue, may herein
appear, for as much as it has in it Christ, the chief and principal object
of our Faith, which works chiefly in it, for the Receiver his good. And
together with Christ, it presents all the merits of the Lords Passion, to the
worthy Receiver, to be effectually Partaker of them: for Worth, inestimable;
for Measure, incomprehensible; for Number, infinite; and for the good of the
Soul, powrefull; Working fully Salvation to all Believers.

And this is the first Consideration must be had, in this our devout, and
sincerely religious Meditation, upon the Communion of the Lords Supper.

The second is; That the more pure and sound in The second Consideration
in Christ our Preparation is, by which we are to address our selves unto the
Sacrament of his holy Supper, the greater will be the grace, we shall receive
thereby.

Therefore that a true Preparation of our Souls may proceed, to make us worthy
receivers in Christ, we must have certain degrees, by which we are to step
unto it, and from it to the holy Communion.

The first is, a true Cognition of our state, what it is The first degree.
in it self, and otherwise. For it is differenced by two words; Of Nature, and
of Grace.

Nature offers a Consideration of our miserable state, Nature. Gene. 3. from
the 1. verse, to the 20.
occasioned by the fall of Adam, in which our general corruption of Sin,
argues destruction of Soul, and Body, against us.

Grace, presents the consideration of a blessed, and Grace. 1. Cor. 15. 22
happy state, by a restitution, promised in the Covenant, through Christ.

To this, as subsequent, and next in order, is a The second degree.
sincere and unspotted Faith in Christ. For causes are Operative, according as
is the disposition of the subject. Heb. 10. 22, 23.
Therefore, to make conparison of this matter, between it, being merely
Spiritual, and another Chap. 11. 6. 2. Chron. 20. 20.
thing which is Temporal, and corruptible (be it spoken without prejudice, to
derogate any thing from the excellency thereof, which is without comparison. I
may say that the Receiver can be partaker of no more Grace at the Communion,
then for the capacity of his devotion and preparation, he believes he may
take Heb. 11. 6.
(which can be none without Faith:) even as he that comes to a Well for
water, carries away with him no more, then his Vessel or Pitcher will
contain and hold.

To these, is adjoined, True Repentance for our Sins, The third degree.
to be understood, as always renewed in Faith, for offenses newly admitted,
and committed against God, and Job. 4. 6. Jonah. 3. 5. 2. Chro. 33. 12, 13.
our Neighbors through infirmities.

Lastly, as properly belonging hereto, we must seek for a Reconciliation of
our selves with our Neighbors, for wrongs and offenses so done; for this
effectually Tne fourth degree. Matt. 5. 24.
performed, will argue the three former, to have been seriously, and godly
meditated of us.

Neither are we hastily and abruptly to come upon the sudden, unto the Lords
holy Table, as careless how, and in what manner we present our selves there,
to receive the Lords body, to eat it; and his Blood to drink it: But we are
to search and sift our Consciences, and thoroughly to try and examine them; to
call all our 1. Cor. 11. 28.
thoughts, words, and deeds, to a straight account, as it were sitting in
judgment upon them, remembering that the unworthy Receiver, is guilty of the
Body, and 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.
Blood of the Lord, and so subiecteth himself to the curse, which is unto a
Condemnation.

Therefore let every one examine himself by knowledge, First. 1. Cor. 11. 28
whether he be rightly instructed, and Catechized to the right Receiving the
Lords Supper.

Again, by Faith, whether himself do verily believe, Secondly.
that the Bread and Wine spiritually received, and so eaten and drunk, is to
the feeding and nourishing his soul, that together with the Saints, he may
grow up into an holy union with Christ.

And lastly, by Repentance, whether he have unfeignedly Thirdly.
repented him of his sins, confessing them before God, and craving pardon for
them, with a resolute mind, to amend his former life, and according to Gods
will, to conform the whole course thereof, as far forth as in him lies,
working his salvation, by Prayer, in Phil. 2. 12.
fear and trembling.

Therefore let every one take fit time, to prepare himself to this holy
Banquet of the Lord.

By way of Note, I may here remember, that the Virgins, Note. Ester 2. 12.
etc. Which were to go in to king Ahashuerosh, had a twelve months time of
preparation thereto. But I omit this, though the observation may be to
admonish us, that we cannot be too provident, for the time of preparation,
seeing we are to present our selves before God, at his Table. I rather call to
mind that place in Exodus; Exodus 19. 10.
Where God commanded Moses to Sanctify the people, two days; and to be ready
the third day: which Moses Ezod. 19. 11.
did accordingly. Showing them there, how they should prepare themselves,
saying, Come not at your verse. 15.
Wives; to wit, Consecrate your selves wholly for that time unto Continency
and Prayer; Hereby to be the better prepared, to attend upon the Lord at the
time appointed, for the receiving from out his own mouth, his Commandment
upon the Mount Sinai.

Here you see three days, by Gods own appointment, assigned to the people of
Israel, to prepare themselves against the Lords coming down in their sight,
upon Mount Sinai, which was the third day.

And here is also the manner and way of Preparing, appointed by Moses unto the
people; which was, to Sanctify them, as was commanded him.

Now is this more specially for our Instruction: For if God prescribed to the
people of Israel, the time, three days; and the manner; to be sanctified: and
the Mount, Sinai; Exodus 19. 13. 12.
where they should attend the Lords coming down to them; and yet forbade them
upon pain of death, the touching of the Mount, or any Border thereof, (which
was of an earthy groess matter so sensible, and touchable,) what are we to
think of our Preparation, before the receiving of the Lords Supper? How ought
we hereby to address our selves unto that holy Communion?

For we come not now to that Mount Sinai, which was temporal and toucheable,
but to Sion the Spiritual Mount of the Lord; which is not to be seen with
the eyes of the body, but of the Soul and Spirit, even there Heb. 12. 22.
to be made Citizens of the Celestial Jerusalem: as it is in the Hebrews.
If we be found worthy Receivers of the Body and Blood of Christ, to whose
Table we are admitted; to the end, to be of the fellowshippe, and Company of
Angels in the City of the Living God.

Therefore this our Preparation for the Lords Table, requires a fit and
convenient time, at the least of three days Meditation, for an actual
Devotion: not only, the Habitual, consisting of a general affection of the
Spirit, seeming to be composed of all the Spiritual affections that enduce to
Piety; as godly contrition, and sorrow for sin submissiuely confessed,
issuing from true humility, joined to very great Reverence, strong Faith,
fervent Love and Charity; an hungry longing after Righteousness, and a desire
of that Super-coelestiall Bread, which feeds unto eternal Life in Christ.

It is very requisite, that in this time of Preparing our selves for the
Communion Table, we carefully shun all occasions, that may withdraw us from
meditation, to interrupt the same, as company either vnnessarily fough after,
or idle followed; Occupation, and business in Mundan affairs; much eating and
drinking; All fleshly and other vainly delighting pleasure. For the most
certain and chief aduancer of Devotion in such Dan. 9. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10.
a time, must be Fasting and Prayer; after the example of Daniel, which setleth
in the mind, a True and zealous Meditation of the Lords Passion, as is most
largely Matthew. 26. 13. throughout, and al tho 27 chap. John 1. 12.
exemplified in Matthew. and produces also semblable Effects, even the worthy
receiving of his Body and Blood, in this holy Sacrament of this blessed Supper.

In which, are offered to the soul of the Receiver, after a godly manner, well
busied in Meditation for the furthering the same more soundly in the
understanding of the Sacrament, a Sacramental comparing, of both things, and
actions, to be considered.

Things in the Sacrament, are both outwardly subjected to the senses; and also
inwardly apprehended in the Spirit.

The things sensible, are the Signs signifying, viz. Bread and wine.

The things Spiritual, are the things signified, viz. The Body and Blood of
Christ. The Body figured in the Bread, and the Blood in the Wine.

The Actions also are, Sensible, and External; Spiritual, and Internal. And
these in the persons acting, are in a twofold manner severally distinguished.

The Actions Sensible, are in the person of the Minister, and of the Christian
Receiver, exhibited, and made known.

The Actions sensible of the Minister, are four.
The taking into his hand the two Elements, or Signs; First. Secondly.
Bread, and Wine.

The Consecrating of the Bread and Wine, by the words of promise recited, and
by the Prayers conceived to that end.

The breaking of the Bread first, and the pouring Thirdly.
fourth the Wine into the Communion Cup.

The giving the Bread and Wine into the hands of the Fourthly.
Receiver.

The Actions of the Christian Receiver, are two.

The taking into his hand, and putting to his Mouth First.
the Bread and Wine.

The eating the Bread, and the drinking the Wine so taken, Secondly.
that a nourishing of the Body may be thereby.

The Actions spiritual are of God himself, and of the Christian Receivers.
The Actions of God in this Sacrament, are four. First. 2. Cor. 5. 18, 19. 1.
Cor. 1. 30. 1. Tim. 2 5. Secondly. Heb. 9. 13, 14, 15. 1 John 4 9. Thirdly. 1.
Ioh. 19 34 Fourthly. 1. Pet. 3. 18


Sealing, and specially signing Christ to this Office of * Reconciliation, *
Redemption and * Mediation.

Sending down from above, Christ to perform the * Mediation, whereunto he
was sealed, from the beginning.

Subiecting him, to those execrable sufferings upon the Cross, having there
his Body pierced, and his blood shed.

Offering CHRIST unto all, yea, unto hypocrites: But most truly, unto the
faithful Christians.

The Actions spiritual of the Christian Receiver; are two.
Apprehending, and laying hold on Christ by Faith, First. Rom 5 2. Secondly.
Ephe. 4. 15, 16
whose Object he is; there propounded.

Applying; and Accommedating Christ, to himself: that so may grow and
increase, a true Union, and Communion with Christ.

Say then; O Lord God, with what contrition of the Heart? with what a Fountain
of Tears? with what Reverence, and trembling? with what chastity of Body, and
purity of Mind, are we to celebrate the Mystery of this thy Sacrament, so
spiritual and heavenly? In which thy flesh is eaten, and thy Blood is drunk,
both truly, and indeed; but both Spiritually, and after an heavenly manner: in
which base contemptible things, with highly precious things; Humane and
terrestrial with Divine and celestial things are coupled. In which is the
presence of the holy Angels, and in which thy self, O Lord, art both the
Priest, and the Sacrifice, after a miraculous and unspeakable manner.

Exhortatiue Motives unto Christian Instructions* making both for the
strengthening of Faith, by the virtue of a godly humiliation; and also for the
comforting and emboldning the Soul, by a trustfull hope of Gods Mercy, and ar^
seriously to be considered, of any well disposed to the Comunion of the Lords
SVPPER.
FIRST, acknowledging thine own Unworthiness, to present thy self to the
holy Table of the Lords Supper, by way of comparison; and say as Bildad Job ^5.
5.
does instruct thee in Job. Behold, the Moon has no light; neither are the
Stars clean, in the sight of God, so great is his Majesty.

Also as Job there answers. The very Pillars of Job 26. 11.
Heaven do tremble, and are sore afraid at the beck of his Countenance.

Confess then against thy self with Bildad, How Job 25. 6.
much more unclean is Man, that is rottenness, and the son of Man, who is
but a Worm.

For can a man (compared to God) be justified: or appear Job 25. 4.
clean, that is borne of a woman.

Saint John Baptist, who was sanctified in his Mothers Luke 1. 15. Esaias 40. 3.
Luke 7. 27. Ver. 28. Luke 3. 16 John 1. 27.
womb, the voice of a Crier in the wilderness, etc. The Forerunner of
Christ, so testified by Christ himself, saying there further; That among the
sons of men, there has been no Prophet greater then John Baptist. Yet this
holy man and Saint of God, thought himself unworthy to loose the latchets of
Christ's shoes, yea, to carry Matt. 3. 11
his shoes.

Saint Peter Matthew. 16. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
also, the chief of the Apostles, as some will needs have it, greatly, and
amazed, at the miracle of the infinite multitude of Fishes taken by him, in
Christ's presence, says unto him, Lord, Luke 5. 8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man.

Abraham having an intercessorie Parle with God for Sodom: Genesis 18. 27.
Behold, says he, I have been bold to talk with my Lord, who am but dust and
ashes.

The Apostle Paul, a chosen Act. 9. 15.
Vessel to the Lord, to bear Christ's Name; A Teacher 1. Tim. 2. 7.
of the Gentiles, to instruct them in the Faith, and true worship of GOD; A
Minister Ephe. 3. 6, 7
of the Gospel; who was wrapped up into the third 2. Cor. 12. 2. 4.
heaven, and taken up into Paradise, where he heard words, not possible for man
to utter: notwithstanding these Prerogatives of Gods spiritual favors, and
graces unto him; Yet there, confesses himself to be nothing, and calls
himself the least of the Apostles, Ephe. 3. 8.
and as one borne 1. Cor. 15. 8, 9.
out of Time, seems to make himself unworthy to be called an Apostle, and
unmeet for so high a calling, as to preach Christ's Name among the Gentiles.

These Examples, and such like, of the true servants of God, are to be
Documents, and lessons of Humiliation unto thee, as at all times, so especially
now, having in purpose to receive the Communion: which is to be done with
great reverence and fear, having grace whereby we may serve God, and please
him, as it is to the Hebrews. Hebr. 12. 28.


Out of these art thou to know thy self, and by them to learn accordingly to
prepare thy mind and conscience before, for so holy a work, that requires
thy mind and soul wholly cleansed from sin and hypocrisy.

Therefore, enter into account of the whole state of thy Soul; examine and
prove thy self, whether thou art in the Faith: which if thou do truly and
zealously, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
thou shall find that thou art far short of that thou ought to be in the
Lord, for thou art by Nature a Vessel of corruption and rottenness, a
creature not apt to any good^^sse, Genesis 6. 5.
but to all evil most inclined, and most ready: a contemner of God, and
prophaner of his holy Name; Saying with the Foole^i^^ thy heart, There is no
God. And with the wicked Psalm* 14* 1.
in Job: Depart from me, I desire not to know thy ways; Job. 21. 14, 15.
For what is the Almighty, that I should serve him? and what shall it
advantage me to pray unto him? A horrible judgment, to be of this kind, a
Reprobate; yet art thou n^ better of thy self: For thou have no good thought,
because Genesis 6. 5.
thou art the worker of all sin naturally, showing thy self daily, to be the
son of the devil, and not of God; the heir of Hell, and perdition, not of
Heaven and Life everlasting. Say therefore out of this true acknowledgement of
thine own natural unworthiness: Lord, this I am, and no better: Job* 14. 1.
Ephe. 2. 3.
Miserable, in the whole state of my Nature; Blind Iere. 10. 14.
in all my Counsels; Unclean Gene. 6. 5.
in all my desires; Working Romans 1. 27.
all kind of iniquity, and yet proud Luke 1. 51
in mine own Eyes. Dare I then appear before thee, who art powerful Exo. 15.
3, 6
in might; Infinite in Psa* 147. 5,
Wisdom, Wonderful in all thy Isa. 9. 6.
Counsels, terrible in Psa 66. 3, 5.
Judgment, most perfect and absolute in all Luke 18. 19
goodness.

And dare I now present my self to thy Table? For in this execrable state of
all Misery, and wretchedness, I must needs fear Matthew. 22. 11, 12.
the binding of hand and foot, and the casting into utter darkness, if I
presume to come to that most holy Feast, having not the wedding ^at ^2. 13
garment.

For if it were not lawful, for any unclean and polluted person to eat the 1.
Sam. 21. 4, ^.
Shewbread, which was a shadow of this holy Mystery, how may I be secured of
thy displeasure, if I shall eat this food of thy Saints, and faithful
children; not ^^ansed from my sins* and sanctified by thy Grace.

But consider more specially the Commandment of God, Exodus 1^. 8, 11.
for the manner of the eating of the Lords Passover. It was to be eaten, with
Unleavened bread, and sour Herbs, the Loins girded* and shoes on the feet.

This Passover, is, as is said, the true Type, and Figure of the Supper; and
therefore the correspondence more heedfully to be known: For what is here
meant by the Bread unleavened, but Purity, and sincerity of life, without
hypocrisy and maliciousness, as Paul seems to make construction, 1. Cor. 5.
7.
willing the Corinthians to purge the old Leaven, and to become a new Lump:
that is, every one among them to put away the old corruption, and to be
renewed in the Spirit, as is there signified, in the word Unleavened: and his
reason is, for that Christ our Passover, is sacrificed for us.

And what are sour herbs? even a vehement contrition for Sin: a sad
sorrowful spirit, humbled in it self, through a true acknowledgment of it
own misery, and unworthiness, and therefore the girding of the Loins; and
the feet shod, can signify nothing more fitly, then the cleanesse of holy
desires, and of sanctified wills, always in a readiness to obey the will of
God?

So then the matter contained in the circumstances of this Sacrament, is most
singularly material, for the instructing our understandings in the true
knowledge of the Lords Supper, which requires of us, a pressed, and cheerful
willingness to come thereunto, and to bring with us cleansed and purified
minds, freed from the Leaven of all corruption, whether in belief or Manners.

Wherefore we are by this admonished, to be circumspectly advised, that we
come to this Supper, worthily prepared. 1. Cor. 11. 28, 3^. 1. Sam. 6. 19*


The Ark of God, was also a Figure of the Lords Supper. See in the first of
Samuel, how the LORD punished the curious looking in it, upon the men of
Beth-shemesh, where h^ is said to have slain fifty thousand, and seuent^^ men.

Again, the Priest Vzzah, was stricken of God, that he dyed, because he put
his hand to the Arc, not having express word from God to warrant the touching
it, though he did it then to save it from falling, and so showed a good 2.
Sam. 6. 6, ^
intention to stay it up.

A dangerous thing it is for any ^o attempt any endeavor about any part of God
his holy Service, by himself sanctified though it have a good intention of
willingness to the same, and a presupposed conceit of acceptance before God;
unless it be warranted by a special Commandment from God, or in his word be
revealed.

Therefore it behooves us to entertain a purpose of acting matters concerning
Gods service, and worship, with a reverent thought of the worthiness
thereof, in sobriety and fear.

For it is not enough, to pretend a good purpose, in doing a good thing, but it
must be fore-addressed, with a precogitation of it own Nature, and quality,
as also with the circumstances, to which it is liable, least it be outrun with
it own shadow, and be condemned of the Lord, of whom we would seem to be
accepted for doing it.

Let this admonish us in the action of Communicating at the Lords Table, as a
matter of necessary instruction herein; and the rather, for that this
Sacrament is of a far higher estimation and worth, then that Arc of the
Covenant could be, (which was only a Figure of it) and therefore of a greater
danger to our Souls, if we Discern not 1. Cor. 11. 29
the Lords body; Because, to receive it, is more then either to touch, or see
it; as they did the Ark of God.

Oh the wonderful Mystery of this Sacrament! Incomprehensible, being too high
for the reach of thy Natural capacity; Ineffable, being too profound for the
utterance of thy polluted Lips; far exceeding the very cogitations of thy
Heart, passing all thine Understanding: How then may it come to be expressed
with Words of thy Mouth?

Oh, tremble and fear; be humbled in great reverence, unto an holy
acknowledgment of thy sins, and be heartily sorrowful for the same;
confess them penitently unto God, that thou may obtain pardon: Prostrate
thy self before his Thoane of Grace, that he may ^ay se thee up, and give
thee Comfort in his Son Christ, whose Body and Blood, thou come to receive.

Before thou receiuest it, being the Mat. 26. 26 28.
Body and Blood of thy Act. 5. 31.
Savior and 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Redeemer, a 1. Tim. 6. 15 16.
Lord of most infinite Majesty; Tremble I say, now tremble and quake for very
great fear, which the greatness of thy unworthiness represents unto thee,
through a sense and feeling thereof, occasioned from an infinite multitude of
sins, committed many ways, against that his Majesty; and no ways Expiable,
but by his Mercies.

After thou have in this manner, or therwise sifted, tried, and examined thy
self, as it were called into Judgment all thy Thoughts, Words, Actions, and
whole course of life; by which, finding thy self full of the Souls Leprosy,
worthy to be, in a manner, abandoned from out the common society of Men; in no
wise to be admitted in this case into the company and fellow ship of the
Saints to the Lords Table: thou have then, out of an horror, and trembling
freare of Gods Judgment, laid upon the Unworthy receivers, humiliated thy
self before God, inplored his Mercy for his saluing Grace unto a sanctified
Contrition, and full Resolution of amendment and new life, in this, or the
like phrase of penitent sinners confession, saying:

O Reave. 1. 8.
Eternal God, full of 1. Tim. 6. 15. 16.
Majesty, who art tirrible in Psalm. 66. 3. 5
Judgment, and yet Just John 5. 30.
when thou iudgest; I have Iere. 14. 20.
sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and done evil before thine eyes; for which, I
deserve to be utterly Psalm. 51. 3.
rejected from out thy sight for ever: I have not Iere 3. 25
Feared thee, nor reverenced the face of thy Countenance: I have been
Disobedient, Nehe. 9. 16.
and have hardened my stiff Neck, and not bowed it to thy Mat. ^ 1. 29 30.
Yoke, which notwithstanding is Dan 9. 11.
Light and easy to be borne. I have taken unto me a Whores Iere. 3. 3.
forehead, and I cannot be ashamed; Behold, I speak unto thee, but yet I do
evil, more and more.

Therefore have Cast I Neh. 9 26.
thy Law behind my back, and have not hearkened to thy Commandment, that I
might depart from my evil ways: For I have Ploughed a impiety, and Prou. 22.
8.
reaped iniquity; and eaten the fruit o^ Esa. 59. 4. 13.
lies, because I have trusted in mine own ways, and would not walk in the
Paths of thy Saints, as thou have appointed.

Hereupon it is, that thou have given me over, to follow the lustful desires
of my Heart, to do that, which was not convenient and meet for me to do;
yea, which doing, I must needs provoke thy heavy wrath and displeasure
against my self. Woe to me, for I have departed from thee; great and much
Calamity, and Miser^^, is unto me for my wicked life.

I have devised Counsels; but not by thee: I have performed my Thoughts; but
not by thy Spirit: therefore is Sin heaped upon Sin; and Judgment upon
Judgment, is revealed against me.

Who will now give me Water to my Head, that a Fountain of Tears may distill
from thence, into my Eyes, to bewail day and night my sins, and to lament my
Ingratitude Iere. 9. 1.
against my GOD and my Creator; my Lord, and my Redeemer?

What shall I say of my self? Or what may I allege for excuse of my
Blindness and ignorance; of my backwardness and slownesse; of my wilfulness
and peruersitie; yea, of my profaning the Sabaoths, through an idle absenting
my self from hearing thy Word in the congregation of thy Children, publicly
assembled to that end? For thus cherishing in myself the Old man, and his
corrupt Works of the flesh, by vain and careless pretenced allegations of
Business (as if meet to be preferred to the observance of thy most holy
divine Siruice, which thou have commanded:) I am clean without excuse, yea,
subject to thy Curse; for I have hated thy Discipline, and cast thy Words
behind me In my Heart is no truth, and my Hands have wrought unrighteousness.

Thou know, O Lord, how I have provoked thee unto anger by my lewd
inventions; and all my offenses are not hid from thee. I have done evil, and
not repented; yea, rather passing from evil to evil, have followed greedily
the wicked lusts and concupiscences of my Heart: Therefore Reproach and
Ignominy is before mine eyes; Shame and Confusion has covered my Face.

In this woeful state of obstinate and wilful misery, shall I approach before
thee? Shall I dare to put my foot under thy Table at thy Wedding feast, to
which, I confess thou have invited me? But I, as one unworthy, have made
light of it, and as of a set purpose refused to Luke 14. 16. to the 21.
come, have with those three sorts of Unworthy Guestes in thy Gospel returned
answer, I pray you have me excused.

Thou have forbidden in thy Gospel, To give that which is Holy, to Dogs;
and to Cast Pearls before Swine: And Matt. 7. 6.
O Lord, how may I not most worthily be ranked among those Dogs, which
stubbornly and wilfully in all my life, impugn the truth of thy Word.

Also, how may I not be accounted, as the Swine which tread the Pearls of thy
most glorious Gospel under foot?

For there is no part of my Soul clean; no corner of my Heart (where in deed
thou ought be received) free, and void of filthy and most abhominably
polluted Cogitations. Oh, how am I confounded with Shame! when I look into the
state of my sinful Soul; out of which do breath forth rotten savors, and
infectuous scents of many dreadful annoying Sins.

And now I blush, acknowledging my self far unworthy to taste of that Bread,
which thou have prepared at thy Table, for thy Children only, of the true
house of Israel, being one of those Canaanite Whelps, to whom thou Mat. 15. 26.
thoughtest it not good to cast it.

Who art thou, my Lord? And, who am I, that dare approach near to thy Table,
and presume there, to receive with my Hands, (the instruments of much
wickedness;) to touch with my lips, (defiled with all pollution;) to taste
with my mouth, (an open sepulcher of filth, and corruption:) to take down into
my stomach, (a most loathsome sink of putrefying humors,) that thy Sacred
bread, feeding unto Salvation, which afterward ought to be conveyed
spiritually into my Soul, where is no heat of zeal, to concoct it, for the
true nourishing of charity, and godliness; without which, there can be no
growing up into a perfection of the inward man.

Who then, as he said, art thou Lord, that offerest thy self in this thy most
holy Supper? And who am I, that come to thy Table to receive thee, there? Thou
a God of wonderful Majesty; I a worm of great baseness and vilitie; which
being considered of me, I am sore afraid, and in my self amasedly
confounded, much doubtful, whether I may, or how I can presume to appear a
Guest there, with thy Saints, to communicate: For if I shall come unworthily,
I shall run into the danger of thy judgment; and unless thou in Mercy shall
make me a worthy Receiver, I shall labor in vain.

Wherefore, seeing thou have given us thy Body for Food, thy Blood for Wine,
thy life for our Redemption; I must be emboldned, to call unto thee, for the
help of thy right hand: Supply, I beseech thee, of thine, that is wanting of
mine; prepare and deck up my heart for a Spiritual Parlour, in which thou will be pleased to eat thy Supper, that the remembrance of thy merueilous
benefits, heaped upon man, by the merit of thy most bitter, but blessed saluing
Crosse-passion, may continually reside, and for ever dwell in it: Who live
and reignest, the only GOD of the Faithful, throughout all Ages, World
without end.

Amen.
A Prayer Consolatorie, for the raising up of the Soul of the true penitent,
dejected in it self through the former humiliation: necessary to be said of
any now prepared and ready for the Communion.
I Acknowledge, O Lord, as I have confessed, that I am a most wretched Sinner,
very unworthy to come into thy sight, who art all Goodness and Sanctity;
Behold yet, Lord, O thou our loving Father, and of great kindness; I that most
unworthy Sinner, do approach before thee, even to thy Holy Communion Table,
the Sacrament of the precious Body of thy Son CHRIST, my Lord, and Savior.
And how come I? in a presumption of Merit in myself, who am (as I have
confessed) nothing but Sin, and unworthiness? No Lord: Thy only gracious
Favor, and immense Goodness, which exceeds all thy Works, emboldeneth me
to come to thy Supper. Have thou not made it known unto me by the mouth of
thy Evangelists in thy Ghospels, that thou do not reject and despise
Sinners, but rather call them unto thee, saying; Come unto me, all ye that
are weary, and laden, Mat. 11. 28.
and I will ease you.

And was it ^^rthy custom, when thou were upon the earth, to converse with
Publicans and Sinners? And when thou were reproved of the Pharisees for it,
did thou not testify so much thy self, that thou came to call Sinners to
repentance, because they were the Sick that neded thee, the only Physician of
their Souls maladies, otherwise incurable.

And for this cause, O Lord, it is to be confessed, that notwithstanding our
Sins be the very cause of all manner Afflictions befalling to Man; yet being
once washed Isay. 1. 18.
in thy Blood, they are suddenly made to appear in thy sight as White as
Snow, pure and clean, which before were as Crimson, and red as Skarlet,
bloody, foul, and most filthy.

For thou only forgiuest; thou only and none else, healest the most incurable
Diseases of the Soul, be they never so old. Thy Power it is, that working by
the Faith Matt. 9. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 23, 24, 25.
of the true Believer, does restore the dead unto life.

And now, good Lord, thou, who in thy life time upon earth, did company with
Publicans, and eat with Sinners; healing, curing, and reviving, have not
changed thy Nature, or art less able in Power, to work the like effects of
Piety and Mercy: But as then loving them, thou did call, and receive
Sinners, because it seemed as Meat unto thee to feed with them; and a
delight, to be conversant in their company: Even so now, thou being in Heaven,
absent in Body, but present with Men in Spirit, do by virtue of the same
thy comfortable reviving Spirit, call daily thy Children, saying, Come, and I
will refresh you.

This is thy indulgent Care for the good of them, whom thou love, to call
them to Repentance, and to salve their running Soars of Sins, has
emboldened me to come unto thee, to present my self before thee at thy Table:
For seeing thou delightest in such Guestes, as thy Gospel speaks of before
mentioned; Behold me also, a notable Sinner, with whom thou may in like
manner feed and eat thy Bread: Be not angry, O Lord, that I being such a
one, dare offer my self so before thee.

Thy Ghospels make mention of all ill Diseased people, to come flocking out of
all places to thee, because of thy Mark. 1. 32.
Divine virtue, powerful to cure; and also of thy great Pity, ready to help
and relieve them.

Therefore came unto thee, the Halt, the Blind, the Lame, the Dumb, the
Maimed, and many other, and thou healedst Mat. 15. 30 31.
them: For the Dumb were seen to speak; the Maimed, whole; the Halt, to go;
the Blind, to see.

There came also to thee, a Lepar, and thou by touching Mark. 1. 40. 41.
him with thy stretched forth Hands, did heal him.

Many also Possessed with evil Spirits, were brought to thee, and thou with
thy Word, did cast them out, and Matt. 8. 16.
healedst them.

Neither did thou this only for the Children, who, as thou saydst, were
first to be fedd, but, even the Whelps also, who were to eat under the Table,
of the Childrens Crumbs; For at the entreatie of the Syrophaenician Greek woman
Mark 7. 26
(who was by profession, a profane Woman,) thou did verse 29.
drive out of her Daughter, an evil Spirit.

What shall I say more? May I now doubt of thy gracious Favor, both unto
repentance of my former Sins, for the mortifying in me the old Adam, and
also, unto amendment of life hereafter, for the relieuing my Soul in thee,
the new Adam, who killest the works of the flesh, and quickenest the inward
man, by the power of thy Spirit?

Yet give me leave Lord, to relate further thy singular Bounty, and great
Mercies of old: For the remembrance of them is delightsome, and comfortable to
my Soul. I am verily persuaded, that the Tears of that Woman, a common
sinner, (and so noted of the Pharisees, at Luke 7. 38.
whose Table thou did sit,) were more pleasing to thee, then the Banquet of
that proud Pharisee; and therefore thou did not repel her, but rather thou
did kindly entertain verse. 44, 45, 46.
her; and by amplifying the greatness of her Love toward thee, did
testify greatly thy merciful acceptance of it, and accordingly defending her,
against the calumnious verse. 39.
exception of the Pharisee, did openly proclaim, that Many sins were
forgiven her, because she loved much. verse. 47.


And the Woman Mat. 9. 20.
who had been diseased with an issue of Blood twelve years, by touching the
hemme of thy Garment, was made whole. ver. 22.


To conclude, all the Sick, Mar. 6. 56
(which were laid forth in the open Street) as many as touched thee, were
healed of their Diseases.

So as it may be verified of thee that is written, All the Works Eccle. 39.
16. 33.
of the Lord are exceeding good, and, He gives every one in due season, and
when need is ^ according with that in Mark; He Mar. 7. 37.
(even thou, O Lord) has done all things well; for, thou have made both the
Deaf to hear, and the Dumb to speak: Yea, the Blind, Matt. 11. 5. Mark 8.
23. 24. 25.
to see; the Halt, to goe^ the Leapers, to be cleansed; and the Dead, to be
raised.

And have thou been pleased in this indulgent manner to be infinitely Gracious
unto thy people, O Lord! Luk 7. 22.
Yea, for besides these, thou have in mercy looked upon the Woman John. 8. 3.
etc. unto the 12. verse.
taken in adultery, and brought unto thee, by the Scribes and Pharisees, to be
judged.

Thou have received Luke 18. 13. 14.
into favor the humble Publican, calling to thee for mercy.

Thou have likewise called an other Publica^ Matt. 9. 9. A^ar. 2. 14. Luk 5. 27.
to follow thee, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of Custom; and in his
house did vouchsafe to eat meat, with many other Publicans and sinners.

Thou have pitied the Tears Mat. 26. 7^ to the end of the chap.
of Peter denying thee.

Thou made Paul Act. 9 5. etc unto the 16, verse.
a Minister of the Gentiles, who persecuted thee in thy Saints, to be of a
Persecutor, a Preacher of thy Word among the Gentiles.

Yea, thou have taken to thy Mercie^ the Thief upon the Cross, confessing
thee.

Where thy self hanging, and suffering intolerable Luke 23. 42. 43.
pains, even in thy greatest agony, did pray Luke 23. 34
to thy Father for them, who in malice through ignorance, had crucified thee.

In these, and many other infinite Examples of thy Grace, and Fauo^r, extended
from out thy singular and mere Bounty upon Men; yea, Men wretched by Nature,
and polluted every way through Sin, have thou manifested the Truth of that
thy Word, witnessing, that Thou came into the World, to call Matt. 9 13 Mar.
2. 17. Luke 5. 31. 32.
Sinners unto repentance; who were, and are daily those Sick, that need the
Physician, as of thine own words before has been said, even thine own self,
O Lord! who only best know, and also art most willing (such is thy Mercy)
to heal and cure the Maladies of our Souls.

This acknowledges, and confesses thy Servant Paul, where he testifies, that
thou made him Strong, Tim. 1. 12
not only when he had no will to do well, but also, when he was wholly given
to evil; as is gathered by his own words, when before he was a Blasphemer,
and a Persecutor, he was verse. 13.
received to mercy.

Now then, shall I fear to come unto thee, as one doubtful of either thy
Favor to receive me; or of thy Will, to help and relieve my infirmities?

No, Lord; I come boldly into thy presence, in an assured trust, and confidence
of that thy spiritual Physic, offered me, and promised in that thy general
Proclamation, by which thou would make known unto all Sinners, that thou
art their Physician, saying; Come Mat. 11. 28
unto me, all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ^ase you.

And, what is the Burden that thou promisest to ease them of? Even the most
insupportable, and depressingdowne Burden of sin.

And, what is the Ease thou offrest? Even the Absolution from the guilt
thereof; and the blessed peace of Conscience, through Grace in thee.

I come therefore, O Lord! confidently s^cured by Hope, which makes me not
ashamed, to ask boldly the assistance of thy Grace; yet I come in fear and
reverence, groaning under the burden of my Sin, as one in a manner swallowed
up in the gulf of my vile Indignity: I come with bowed knees of my Heart; I
come to the Rivers of thy Mercies; I come to the running Streams of thy Graces.

I present my self before thee the true Son of righteousness, whose Beams
reflected upon the cogitations of my Heart, already illuminated by thy Spirit,
do geminate and doble the heat of my desires I have, to be accepted of thee,
to be with thee, all the days of my life.

It is a great boldness, and presumption not pardonable, so unworthy the least
of thy favors, to desire thy company; which is the greatest thing that can be
asked of thee, and obtained of Man.

I confess it, Lord; but what shall I do silly wretch, seeing thou have by a
Writ of Citation (in a manner) summoned me to come, being one of those, whom
as it were by name thou call to come unto thee, even a sinner, yea, the
greatest of sinners, surcharged many ways infinitely, with a hidious weight of
all manner sins, that lie too heavy upon my Soul, ready to be plunged into
that bottomless Pit of Despair, were not thy Grace 1. Tim. 1. 14.
exceedingly abundant, with Faith and Love in thee; who only can, and must
help me: For, I full of infirmity, come to thee, my Physician, and thou must
heal me: ^, replenished with all pollution of sin, and sins; to thee, the
very Fountain of Righteousness, and thou shall justify me: I, the blind,
to thee, the brightness of eternal Light: I, poor and needy, to thee the
Lord of Heaven and Earth: I, naked; to thee, the King of Glory? What is then
my Supplication? What is the effect, that this my humble Petition labors so
earnestly to obtain of thee?

That thou, O sweet Jesus, my Savior, upon whom only I rely, abounding in
Riches of all Mercies, do vouchsafe to cure my Infirmities, Wash my
filthiness, Lighten my Blindness, Enrich my Poverty, Cloth my Nakedness:
That thy infinite Goodness, do expel my execrable Maliciousness; thy
incomprehensible Divinity, make perfect in me, my base human Nature greatly
blemished, and corrupted through Sin: So, being first purged and cleansed
inwardly in Soul, by a secret working of thy Spirit, securing my Conscience
from all fear, for the guilt of sin; I shall receive thee, the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, the true Bread of life; not the bare Sacrament only
in the outward signs; but in it the virtue of thy Body and Blood spiritually,
and truly, even thy self with Faith, and Love, O my Savior: and in such a
reverence and humility; such a contrition, and devotion; such a purpose and
intention, as best may advantage my Soul in thee.

Receive me good Lord, in mercy, that by it, I being made thine, may also,
for the Merit of the said thy Grace and Mercy, receive thee accordingly in
Faith: So my Heart, thus first created anew within me, shall be made a fit
receptacle, and Mansion, as a spiritual Temple addressed for thy service, in
which thou may take delight to dwell, and remain, for the testifying thy
gracious favor, with the honoring thy name for ever.

Thou see, O Lord, the sum of this my humble Supplication: Thou see, and
for thy Mercy sake toward me, (manifested in the bitterness of thy Passion
upon the Cross, for all Mankind,) say to my Soul; I am thy Life, Live, and
be incorporate into my mystical Body, as a true Member thereof, by, and
through the benefit of the Communion with the Saints, in my Name.

Come then, because thou thirstest after Salvation in me, come Isa. 55. 1.
to the Waters.

Come, I say, unto me, and drink; I will cause Rivers of Water of Life, to
flow out of thy Belly, because thou beleeuest in me.

I believe, Lord, that thy Flesh is Meat indeed, and thy John 7, 37. 38.
Blood is Drink in deed: And that none can live by thee, but such as eats
John. 56, 57, 51.
thee: for thou art that living Bread, which came down from Heaven.

This is the cause, for which thy Righteous and Faithful Children, do
zealously desire to come and feed on thee at thy Table, and there joyfully to
sound forth the voice of confession and praise, in that thy blessed Cup of
Salvation.

Make me worthy, I humbly pray thee, O Lord! to be ranked in this life,
amongst this Holy Communion and Fellowship; that with them also, I may be
Glorified in the life to come: Therefore with them, let me, O God ^ the only
God of my salvation, be graciously admitted to that thy Holy mystery, in which
is comprehended my Life through thee.

If I be sick and feeble, here I shall be healed: If sound and in health, I
shall by it be so preserved: If I live, I shall be comforted: Yea more then
this, for if I be dead, I shall be raised, and quickened unto a new life, by
the power and virtue of thy Body, fed upon in Faith.

It comes to my remembrance, O Lord! and my Heart ioyeth to think of the
Miracle, registered in thy Holy writ, of a Dead 2 King. 13. 21.
body, cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha the Prophet, and by the only Touch of
his Bones, to be revived, and made to stand upon his feet. For, if the dead
Body of thy Prophet, was able through thy power, to work by a touching, such
an effect, as to quicken a dead Body: What shall not the living Body of the
Lord of Prophets perform, as touching Life, to the Soul of the Believer?

For I know, Lord, that my Soul is no less dead in me, through Sin, then
was the Body of that Man, cast into Elisha his Sepulcher. And also I am sure,
that the touching, and receiving of thy Body with the mouth and heart of Faith,
is of no less efficacy, and virtue to my Soul, then was that of thy Prophet,
unto him: For thy Power is as effectually working in the mystery of this thy
holy Supper, as it was in the Sepulcher of thy Prophet. Why then may I not
expect for the like benefit to my self, for thy mercy in Christ, working to a
better Life.

Shall a body conceived in sin, work a greater Miracle, then a Body
conceived by the holy Ghost? And shall the body of a servant, have a greter
Prerogative, then the Body of the LORD?

Why then shall not the Body of thy Son, raise up my soul, sanctified in his
Blood, and conjoined to him through Faith?

Oh, let it please thee, of thine infinite Mercy, to give me life, by means of
this Sacrament, most humbly craving the same; that not I may live, but thy
Son may wholly John 6. 57.
live in me, who lives by thee, being that living Father.

It is written, that thy most holy King, and Prophet David, admitted
Mephibosheth, lame of his feet, to his table, to eat bread with him, there;
The which kindness he showed him not for his own desert, but for Jonathan
his 2. Sam. 9. 7.
fathers sake, says the Text

So, Lord, vouchsafe unto me, I beseech thee, the Communion of thy Saints, at
thy Table, to eat there with them of John 6. 51.
that living bread.

I am also Lame, yea, Poor, and a Sinner of a polluted heart; yet be pleased,
good Lord, to admit me a Guest of thy Princely Wedding, not for my sake, (who
am without all worthiness,) but for the Merits of thy Son Christ, my Lord,
in whom thou art best pleased. I shall not fear, though he find me there,
blind; for he illuminateth, and gives sight: I shall doubt nothing, though I
come halting, for he will bear me up, that I shall not fall; and likewise
falling, He shall raise me up, that I may stand: yea, and though I be naked,
yet will I not fly from his sight, as Adam did, for He will cloth my
nakedness with a Robe of Righteousness, washed in his blood: I will not hide
me, as fearing his Presence, because I am unclean, and full of iniquity, for
He is the Fountain of Mercy, from whence shall arise water to purge, and
cleanse me from all my sins.

But whereupon is this so great mercy toward me, that thou, O my Father, my
Shepherd, the Lord of the Angels, and glory of Heaven; Thou, O my GOD, my All,
and complete goodness, should vouchsafe to come unto me, dust and Ashes, and
most base Earth?

Thou come, and offerest thy self spiritually, to be entertained in my
heart by Faith, with all the Merits of thy Passion, in this Kingly Banquet,
represented under the forms of Bread and Wine:

What, Lord, has caused thy Majesty, to descend unto my baseness, to dwell
with me, of purpose to make me one with thy self?

Have my works premerited this so great and singular favor?

Or, have thou need of any my goods? Whose the World Psalm. 50. 12.
is, and all that therein is?

No, Lord; But thy only goodness and mercy has caused it. For thou have
confessed, that thy delight is, to be Pro. 8, 31.
with the children of men.

Therefore, thou being the Wisdom of thy Father, wast pleased for man's sake,
to cloathe thy Divine Majesty, with Man's Nature, that thou might converse
and have company with Man on Earth: And now being in Heaven, at the Right hand
of thy Father, in Body, naturally absent from us; yet, because of the solace,
which thou tookest from Pro. 8. 31.
the beginning in the compass of thy earth; even Man, the work of thine own
hands, that thou might always be present, mystically in the Spirit; thou
have instituted this thy Supper. In it, showing thy self unto us, in a manner
feelingly by Faith; though inuisibly to the senses, by thy Divine Power,
filling us with unspeakable treasures. What is this, Lord, else; but a
manifestation of thy desire still to continue, as it were, thy daily residence
amongst us. Therefore I desire thee, because I am poor and miserable; Thou
seek me, because thou art merciful; I come unto thee, because I need thy
help; Thou come to me, because thou art loving and kind; Lord, how rich
art thou in mercy? and how potent art thou in doing good after a wonderful
manner? Thou saw a man as thou did pass by, which was blind from his
John 9. 1, 6, 7.
birth; and by annoynting his eyes with clay, and causing him to wash in the
Poole of Siloam, thou restoredst his sight: And to refute a false suppose of
thy Disciples, who imagined the sins of this man's parents, or of himself to
be the cause Luke 11. 49.
of his natural blindness from his birth, thou were pleased out of thy
heavenly wisdom, (for thou art the wisdom of God thy Father in heaven) to
instruct them in a more principal cause, for which that natural blindness was
occasioned upon that man; even, that the works of God might be showed on him.
John 9. 3.


Teaching us to know, that notwithstanding, sin is the beginning of all
sickness and defects, naturally, or accidentally happening to any part, or
member of the body; and so to be construed, as a deserved chastisement of
sin: yet God, not at all times in punishing, has respect to sin,
especially when a more chief cause, though unknown to man, is offered to
reform the same.

As in this it seems the Glory of God thy Father, (whose John 9. 4.
Works thou must work; because he has sent thee into the world to that
end:) was the principal cause, that this Man was borne blind. A work of
true Light indeed; most worthy of that Divine Power, and virtue of thy
Godhead. For, as none was so fit to lighten the blind, as thy self who art
the true light, Which lights every man that c^meth into the world: John 1. 9.
So by woking this Miracle, which is beyond the reason of Man; (For since the
world began, was it not heard, that any man John 9. 32.
opened the eyes of one that was borne blind,) was thou to be acknowledged,
the Son of the everliving God; and to be glorified according to the same
acknowledgement. For which cause; Behold here likewise, one naturally born
blind from his mothers womb, yea, verily blind, in a far higher degree, having
his understanding darkened through sin, (which causes ignorance of thee,) the
very true darkness of the heart.

This may also be a work of thy glory, when thou illuminating my mind, shall
thereby make me to know, that thou came from the Father, and believe that He
sent thee. John 17. 8.


Vouchsafe then, I beseech thee, the virtue of that thy most special Light,
which is able to open the Eye of the soul, to receive sight, inwardly in the
Spirit.

And in rel^iuing the misery of this my distressed state of blindness, will
be manifested the greatness of thy mercy and goodness, forasmuch as without
all respect had of any worth in me (which is none) thy mercies shall appear,
only, to have wrought the same, for, and through which thy heavenly Father,
has already adopted me for his son of Grace in thee, to be heir with thee,
and thy saints of Eternal bliss, in his Kingdom, which He has appointed
and prepared for all them, whom he has given thee, confessing, and
acknowledging thy Father, and thee in John 17. 2, 3.
him to be the only Jesus Christ.

Wherefore send down thy holy spirit into my heart, I most humbly beseech
thee, to lighten the darkness and blindness of my understanding in the true
knowledge of thee, especially now Lord, prepared to receive thee spiritually in
thy Supper, it being a signal and Pledge of thy Love, in that Register of my
admittance into the Fellowship of the Saints with thee. For this thy
Sacrament, is not only Meat for the whole, but also Physic for the sick
and weak: not a strengthing of the Living only, but a resurrection of the
dead; recreating and gladding the just; healing also and purifying the sinners,
among whom, Lord, I am the greatest, by reason of this blindness, and
ignorance from my birth; and therefore crave of thee, who art the only Light,
to instruct my soul unto the true receiving of this Sacrament, the fruits
whereof, is the joy of Conscience, and a new growing up in thee, agreeable to
that new Birth, and Regeneration, by the spirit of Adoption, which teaches me,
to cry in thy Name, Abba, Father. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6.


Seeing then, O Lord, thou art all in me, (for thou art the true Paradise of
my soul; the very Light of my eyes; the only comfort of my Life; the saluing
Medicine of my wounds; the most certain Guide of my ways to conduct me to thy
Father; the safe harbor of my peace, and tranquillity; the staff of my hope;
that Elect and most precious chief Cornerstone, upon which my Faith is builded
up into an Holy Temple for thy worship;) Seeing thou only art all this unto
me, how can I be any thing without thee? Yea, how can I be but worse then
nothing, not having thee, who must be my Joy, my Riches, and all my Treasure.

And how I may have thee, thy self, (as I have said, and do confess most
gladly) has showed me in that most holy, Sacrament of thy blessed Supper; by
virtue whereof, worthily received, I am made thine, and thou mine.

Come down, come down, Good Lord, even now come down, thou my only Lord and
Savior, into the lowest and most secret parts of my Heart; (for thou art the
Center thereof,) enter thou into it wholly, make thy dwelling there, that thou
may possess me wholly.

Come, and kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for my Cant. 1. 1.
soul is inflamed with the desire of thy Love, which is better then Wine.

Power out the sweet Savor of thy Good Ointments, Verse. 2.
that I may have a feeling of those thy benesits, with which thou blessest thy
Children, who, if thou drawest them, must Ver. 3.
needs rum after thee.

I have said, I will not suffer mine Eyes to sleep, nor Psalm. 1 32. Verse. 4,
5.
my Eye lids to slumber, nor the temples of my head to take any rest, until I
have found out a Place, in my Heart for thee O LORD, and a Tabernacle in my
Soul, for thee, O GOD Ver. 5.
of Jacob.

And do thou not answer me, when thou say, Cant. 2. 10.
Arise, and come thy ways.

Come to my Supper, Feed there upon me, and I will Sanctify it unto thee,
that thy Sacrimentall Feeding by Faith, may be the spiritual worthy receiving
of me wholly into thy Soul.

So shall my Spirit abide with thee always, in the abundance of all Love, and
Charity, and true Obedience to the Will of my Father, that by imitation of
me, thou may be made all one with me for ever; And so, I living in thee
spiritually here on Earth, thou in the end may live also with the Saints
in Heaven eternally. It is thy voice, that speaks thus unto my Soul; Oh, how
is it comforted in thee? How ready does it now arise at thy call? And how
boldly does it come to receive thee? It will not now say any more, it is
Blind, for thou art the very Light, that dwell in it. Neither, that it is
Poor, for thou art the fullness of all Treasure, that possessest it: Be thou
therefore blessed in all thy Mercies, who live, and reignest throughout all
ages, world without end.

Amen.
Dogmaticall Instructions, upon the Lord his Supper: BY, Questions, and
Responses.
Of the Lords Supper.
Question.

TEll me, why come you to the Communion Table?

Res To communicate there, with the Faithful, in the Lords Supper, as is
commonly said, To Receive.

Q. What is this, you call, The Lords Supper?

R. It is a Sacrament. 1. a.


Q. What signifies a Sacrament?

R. A Sacrament, is called a Ceremony, Exo 12. 26. 27.
instituted of 2. b.
God; Deu. 12. 32
And appointed unto his People. Genesis 17. 10.


Q. To what end;

R. 3. c.
To manifest, and seal up the Promise of Genesis 17. 11
Grace contained, and expressed in the Covenant of God. Genesis 17. 7


Q. How does a Sacrament manifest the promise of Grace?

R. By representing in the similitude of external things, to the Eyes, as it
were, of the believers, the Sacrifice of Christ, and efficacy thereof. Heb. 9.
15.


Q. How does a Sacrament seal up the Promise of Grace?

R. As it is the Testimony of God himself, to testify, and assure, that is
promised thereby Psalm. 81. 6. Romans 4. 13.


Q. What is that?

R. It is considered in three things: to wit, 1. In the Forgiveness of
sins; 2. In the Grace of the holy Ghost: 3. And in the Life everlasting.

Q. By what means are these assured?

R. By the sacrifice of Christ only, once offered. Mat. 26. 28.


Q. To whom?

R. To the Faithful, Ioh. 15. 5.
who only are the worthy Receivers.

Q You have spoken hitherto of the Nature of a Sacrament; now tell thee, how
manifold is a Sacrament?

R. Twofold: 4. d.
Baptism; and 2. The Lords Supper.

Q. You say truly touching the Number, according to Christ's first
institution: for Baptism succeeds in the place of Circumcision Colo. 2. 11.
12.
And the Lords Supper, in the place 5. e.
of the Pascall Lamb Luk 22. 15. 6 f.
To come to the Lords Supper; Tell me, how many are the Parts of this
Sacrament?

R. The Parts are two: 1. One is Earthly and visible: 2. The Other is Heavenly
and invisible.

Q. Which Part is Earthly, and visible?

R. The Bread, and the Wine. 7. g.


Q. How happens that these earthly, and visible parts, are in this Sacrament?

R. Because they are so appointed, as by commandment from the Lord in express
words. Matthew. 26. 26, 27.


Q. What is the heavenly, and invisible part of this Sacrament, called the
Lords Supper? Mark 14. 22, 23.


R. The Matthew. 26 26.
Body of Christ, signified in the Bread, and his Matthew. 26. 28.
Blood, represented in the Wine. The which both Body and Blood, are taken of
the Receivers; the Body eaten, the Blood drunk.

Q. How may this be so?

R. After a Spiritual manner; and yet truly and in very verse. 26, 27.
deed; For as Bread has a natural faculty to nourish our bodies; so the
Body of Christ exhibited in this Supper, has a Spiritual power to feed our
souls, through Faith.

Also, as Wine does exhilarat and make glad the hearts of Men, and refreshes
the bodily strength: even so Christ's Blood, represented in it, and ministered
unto us at this Supper, does refresh, relieve, and cheer up our souls by
Faith; for after no other manner, can we receive the Body and Blood of Christ
in this Supper. And in this sort taken, we may as fully assure our selves, that
we are true partakers of Christ's body, and Blood; as we know, that it is Bread
and Wine, which from the Ministers hand, we have received with the mouth, into
the Stomach.

Q. You say not, that the Bread and Wine are transformed into the Body and
Blood of Christ, Really?

R. No* For this were to auerre the Papisticall most absurd and heretical
Tr^^substansiation, which is derogatiue to the truth: Annihilating and making
void the Nature of the Sacrament, which must necessarily consist of a Matter,
both Earthly, and Heavenly; Visible, and Invisible: otherwise it cannot be no
true Sacrament.

Q. This Supper then, was not instituted to be a Sacrifice, offered still, to
GOD the Father, for Remission of sins?

R. As you say. For Christ in as much, as he dyed upon the Cross for us,
offering up himself there, a most perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Heb, 10.
10.
once for ever, for the purging of our sins; he has thereby washed away the
guilt of the said our sins, by his Blood, so as there is no need of any more
verse. 18.
Sacrificing for sin.

Q. What then is now left to us, to do?

R. We are by a strong, and steadfast John. 6. 47, 48, 51, 54.
Faith, to secure our Consciences in Christ only; which is the fruit, and
profit we are to reap, and take inwardly in our Souls, by this his
everlasting Sacrifice, represented here, in this his Supper.

Q. Tell me, What are we further to perform, that we may become Worthy
pertakers of this Supper?

R. We must search 1. Cor. 11. 28.
and sift our selves, to find out, whether we are the true Members of Christ,
or no.

Q. What are the True Sign^ and Notes, to discover 2 Cor. 13. 5.
the same?

R. They be four special, viz. 1. A True Repentance for sins: 2. An assured
Hope of God his mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of our
Redemption, purcha^ed to us, by his Death only: 3. A serious and earnest
Resolution, for a Godly life, ever hereafter to be led by us: 4. A sinceere
Godly love, from the Heart, toward all Men, without Hypocrisy, and
Dissimulation, or any pretense of Malice.

If you rightly understand this, and accordingly do purpose, as much as in
your self lies, (all pretensed excuses of infirmities set apart,) to
perform, by the help of God; You may worthily be a Receiver, of this the
Lords Supper.

Animaduersions upon the former Instructions touching the Confirmation of the
same.
The Lords Supper to be a Sacrament.
THE words of the first Institution 1. a.
do argue, that the Lords holy Supper, is a Sacrament, pronounced thus by
Christ himself. Mat. 26. 28
This is the Blood of the New Testament; Or as it is in Saint Luke: Luke 22. 20.
This Cup is that New Testam^nt in my Blood, which was s^^d for you; In the
same words speaks S. Paul: This 1. Cor. 11. 25.
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.

To be noted, that here the word Cup, is figuratively meant, for the Wine
contained in the Cup: And the Wine, sacramentally is the Blood, by which the
New Testament is figured, and understood; because it was a custom in former
times, to confirm, and ratify Covenants by blood.

A Sacrament to be a Ceremony.
2. b. Exodus 12. 25, 26.
MOses shows in Exodus, where he instituted the Pass^ouer, wills the Elders
of Israel, when they shall come into the Land of Promise, to keep the
Passover; calling it there, by the name of a Ceremony.

A Sacrament to manifest and seal the promise of Gra^^.
3. c.
BY manifesting the Promise, the Faithful are instructed in the Mystery of
salvation: By sealing they are persuaded of the truth of the Promise, and so
confirmed in their Faith. But to be understood, that in the Sacrament, there is
no virtue of it self, to perform this, and therefore, no otherwise meant,
then as the holy Ghost by it Ephe. 1. 13.
works the same. Ye are Ephe. 4. ^0.
sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise.

And this working of the Spirit is free: exempted from Place, Time, Measure,
and Quality, as Saint John seems to argue it, from the Nature of John. 3. 8.
Wind, blowing whether it lists.

4. d. That a Sacrament is but twofold, in the New Testament.
THE truth hereof is laid forth, and argued, by the same number of the
Sacraments of the Old Testament, to which those of the New, are true
Correlatiues.

The Sacraments of the Old Testament, are: 1. Circumcision, 2. and the
Passover. viz. two in chief. Therefore in the No^e Testament: 1. Baptism,
and the 2. Lords supper: and no more, as is before showed.

But further thus to be noted, that as none was to be admitted to the
Passover, but first circumcised, as it is said; No uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof: so in like manner Exodus 12. 48
may none receive the Communion, to be partaker of the Lords supper, with the
Faithful, but such as have been baptized with them, into Jesus Christ, and
his death. Romans 6. 3.


And further to be understood, that the Supper of the Lord, is not only a
Sacrament, but also a Sacrifice Encha^^sticall, that is, of giving of Thanks
in a reference to that of the Passover, which bare the Type and Figure of
Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross.

For, as in it, a Lamb was exhibited, ceremonially, and killed, for a memory
of the People of Israel^^ deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt, to be
celebrated with Thanksgiving. Exodus 12. 27.


So in the Lords supper, is the body of Christ eaten, and his blood drunk
representatiuely, in the Forms of Bread and Wine, but yet truly by Faith; and
that, in remembrance, that he, by his Passion and death upon the Cross,
delivered us, from out the power of the Devil; and this remembrance to be had
and prosecuted of us, with Praise, and Thanks to his blessed name. 1. Corin.
Where Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. 23
testifies it was that himself had received of the Lord.

Said also to be Sacraments, in as much as, they have reference to these former
already mentioned, by a representative signification, of a promised Grace.

Pacifications, under the name of Leuit. 14. 7, 8.
Washing.

Sacrifices, in the name of Leuit. 1. 4. and 4. 20. 16. 7. to the 30.
Expiation.

For Purifications, which were by Washing; signified, the Sins of the
Faithful, to be washed and cloansed, through the Blood of Christ; and so dayl^
to be washed, by ^^e holy Ghost.

Also Sacrifices, which were by Expiation, and satisfaction for Sins;
prefigured the death of Christ, to be a Sacrifice by himself, offered for Heb.
9. 26* 28. and Hebr. 10. 12. 14.
Sin. Thus, by a kind of reference to Baptism, and the Lords Supper, they
may be accepted for Sacraments, in a general signification; But the chiefest,
and most proper for use, and application, are those Two representative
Sacraments, a^ is said: And so the Sacraments of both the Testaments, as
touching the things signified, are one and the same in all points; yet are
they differenced, both in the 1. manner of signifying; and also in the 2.
evidence of signification; As in the 10. and 1. to the Hebrews is argued, That
the Law had only the Shadow of things to come, and not the very Image of the
things: Therefore the old Sacraments did figure Christ, as he was to come;
But the New figureth, as already exhibited in the Flesh, and come: which
sh^weth, that the New Sacraments, are in signification more clear and evident,
then the Old; because they represent a thing already done, and preached by the
Gospel for a truth.

5. ^. Baptism, The Lords Supper.
In place of the Circumcision. Pascall Lamb.

SO it is, that the Sacraments of the Gospel, were represented in the
Sacraments of the Law, and therefore have a correspondence with them, both in
the 1. Number, and 2. Things signified. In the 1. Number, because they are two,
and no more. In the 2. Thing signified, 1. Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4.
because in every respect, they are both the same, as says Saint Paul. verse. 2.
Which place also argues, the number of Sacraments, (as are alleged) by the
words of Baptized, verse. 3.
did Eat verse. 4.
the same spiritual meat, and did Drink d the same spiritual Drink; even
the spiritual Rock Christ.

6. f. The parts of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper are two: and true,
correlatiuely,
The Bread, Wine,
The Body of Christ. Blood of Christ.


For otherwise the Nature of the Sacrament, could not consist, and be known
what it were. Neither can any other Parts be assigned, because these
expressly are in the Institution of Christ himself, so appointed, and
mentioned. Besides, they are very opposite, and fit, to represent unto us,
the very lively crucifying of Christ. For, in as much as the Flesh of Christ was
crucified for us, in that respect, it is made to us the Bread of Life; for he
is the John 6. 51. to the 59.
Food a of our Souls.

And the similitude in these external Elements, holds as well for this point,
as the preaching of the Gospel, which Gala. 3. 1.
also represents Christ his Passion upon the Cross, if we believe S. Paul
where he shows, that by preaching, Christ was as lively set out unto them,
as if they had seen him Gala. 3. 1.
crucified with their eyes, and therefore in the verse following he tells
them, that the graces of the spirit, which they received upon the same, were by
Faith conferred upon them, as Seals of the Truth of that Gospel preached,
touching Christ crucified.

And therefore the chief Parts, and full scope of this Sarcament, i^, to send
us to Christ's Cross, where that Promise was fully exhibited, and completed,
concerning the Life eternal, assured to all the Faithful, by eating the John
6. 51.
Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood: Because, that Flesh is Meat in deed;
and that Blood, is Drink in deed, so testified verse. 55.
by him self there.

Whereupon that former Assertion, has a necessary consequence, in as much as
by reason thereof, there is a mutual spiritual union, and conjunction of the
Faithful with Christ, auerred in the word Dwelling, which there Christ verse.
56.
uses.

7. g. The Bread and the Wine, earthly, visible parts.
IT may not be denied of any, that will acknowledge truth, but that Christ,
when he first instituted this his holy Supper, 1. took Bread, and 2. brake
Bread and 3. gave Bread to his Disciples visibly* which they saw, and touched,
and did eat: So as of necessity, we must have visible Bread to eat at the
Communion: and if so, it is of an Earthy quality, subjected to the outward
senses, and to be felt; otherwise, neither Christ his own example alleged by
Matthew; nor his express Word for the taking it, as he Mat. 26. 26. Man. 14.
22.
gave it, Mark; can stand firm and good: which were impious to say; for
Christ not only brake Bread for a certain true sign and taken of his Body,
to be broken; but also commanded to eat the Bread so consecrated by breaking,
Luk 22. 19.
as a sure Pledge of his Body broken; that is, Crucified.

S. Paul delivers it to the Corinthians, in the same manner, 1. Cor. 11. 23*
as himself received it of the Lord.

Besides, this breaking of Bread, is an essential Ceremony, without which,
the Sacrament can not stand in force, because it apperteineth to the end, for
which it is used, even Luke 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 24*
to represent Christ's crucifying; for it must be done, in Remembrance of
Christ's death.

The same reason is, of the Pouring out of the Wine, compared to the shedding
of Christ's blood, proved by the former Testimonies already cited; and by
Luke, This Cup, Luke 22. 20.
is that new Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you.

8. h. After a Spiritual manner.
A plain truth irrefragable; for how can else the Faithful be assured in
their Consciences, of the Promise of Remission Mat. 26. 28
of sins, and of Life John 6. 51. 53, 54, 58.
eternal, which have no warrant thereof, but by Faith apprehending it, as the
Fruit of Christ crucifying, and of his Death; whereby they have a knitting
together with Christ, and an engraffing in him, 1. Cor. 16. 16 17.
through this communion of the Body, and the Blood of Christ, represented and
exhibited, under the forms of Bread and Wine.

Therefore, let it not enter into the Heart of a Christian, that will be a true
Disciple of Christ, to think, much less to profess by word of mouth, that,
this Bread, and John. 6. 35.
this Wine, can be eaten and drunk of him otherwise, then by Faith: For, the
food of our Soul must have a correspondence with the Nature and quality of
the Soul it self: But the Soul is merely spiritual, and therefore the
Food in like manner, ought to be spiritual, even Christ himself.

It follows then, that none can be partaker of him, but after a spiritual
manner; in as much as, his Flesh gives life, not of it own Nature, but as it
takes Power of the Father, to give life; For so the words of the Text do
purport, thus: As the living Father has sent me, so li^e I by John 6. 57.
the Father; and he that eats me, even he shall live by me,

9. 1. You say not, that the Bread and Wine, are transformed, into the Body,
and Blood of Christ really?
THis is the foul, and both impious, and ridiculous Error, yea, Heresy of
those Papisticall Ingen^rs of uncouth and blasphemous usurping Catholicisme;
who metamorphoze the Lords Supper into a Sacrilegious Mass, making the
simpler sort, of credulous people, their Proselites, to believe, that after
Consecration, which is, after a demurmuration of the five Words ( For this is
my Body:) the Bread presently to be transsubstantiated into the Body of
Christ, and so by an offering us Christ Idolike, in this manner created of the
Priest, the Sins of all them, for whom in special that Mass is celebrated,
whether alive, or dead, and in Purgatory, to be expiated and fully purged.

To insist somewhat in this Argument, for the better satisfying of some, unto
an instruction of the Truth; which is, that the substance of Bread remains,
after the Words of consecration, as they call it, uttered by the Mass Priest.

First, it is certain, that Christ, by this Bread, as a thing likened unto it,
was willing to teach us, saying; My Flesh, John 6. 55.
is Bread indeed; and my Blood, is Drink in deed: Therefore, of necessity, it
must be true Bread; that we may certainly conclude, Our Souls, as truly to
be nourished, and fed, with the Body of Christ crucified for us, even, as our
Bodies are truly fed by that Bread, broken to us at the Communion Table. And
of this Truth, we are sufficiently secured, by that Testimony of Paul, where
to prove, 1. Cor. 10. 17
that all the Christians of the Household of Faith, are one Bread, and one
Body, is alleged the community they have with Christ, and one with each
other; for we are all partakers of one Bread, says the Apostle.

If then we will that the Analogy hold, (for otherwise it is no Sacrament, if
it have not a similitude of that thing, whereof it is a Sacrament, as Saint
Augustine speaks.) Epist. 23. ad Bonefacium.
Adding thereupon, that the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is after a
certain manner, the very Body of Christ: we must needs grant that it is
true Bread, which is ministered at the communion Table. For in deed, as many
Grains beaten into Flower, and kneaded, make one Bread; so many Faithful,
knitt through Charity, (the true bond of christian society,) do grow up
together into a Body, and make one Church, and Congregation in Christ.

Again, as not that Water which gushed, and flowed out of the Rock which
Moses struck with his Number. 20. 10.
Rod: Nor the Water with which John baptized Christ in Mar. 1. 9.
Jordan: Nor yet the Water of our Baptism, is, or at any time was turned into
the Blood of Christ, whereof notwithstanding it is, and has been a Sacrament:
So, not the Wine also of the holy Supper, is changed into the Blood of Christ,
of which it bears the Figure, and is a Sacrament.

Neither does this disagree from the sense of the words of Christ, which
depends wholly upon a Metonymie, by which the name of a thing signified; that
is, his Body, and Blood, is attributed to the Sign, viz. Bread and Wine: And
this Metonymicall kind of speech, is very usual in the Scripture, where
mention is of the Sacraments.

So is the Circumcision, the Covenant of God, between Genesis 17. 10.
him, and his People.

So, the Paschall Lamb, was the Lord Jehovah his passing Exo. 12. 11, 12, 27.
through the Land of Egypt.

So, that Rock in Horeb, out of which streamed forth Exodus 17. 6. 1. Cor. 10.
4.
Water in the Desert of Zin, was Christ: As the Lamb was the Passover; that
is, not the thing it self, but the sign, signifying it: and therefore S. Paul
calls it there, The spiritual Rock.

This being a Truth (as it cannot be denied) it must needs follow, that
metamorphosing of the Bread, and Wine, into the very Body, and Blood of Christ,
by a masking Transubstantiation, is excluded from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

For it is vain, and most wickedly blasphemous, that pretensed Allegation of
Gods Omnipotency in this case, which the Papists (wrangling Adversaries to the
Truth) have imagined, to maintain, that Christ's body is both in Heaven, and
in the Bread of the Supper: For the Question is not of Gods Power, but of his
Will.

And, is it not said, that, In all things, he was made like Hebr. 2. 17.
Hebr. 4. 1^.
unto his Brethren, yet without sin; and that it behooued him so to be, both
touching Nature, and the qualities also; otherwise, how could he be our High
Priest, to reconcile us to GOD, unless he had been touched with a feeling of
our Infirmities?

From whence is gathered, a necessary inference of this Conclusion, viz.
Therefore God his Will was, that Christ should have, A finite, circumscript
Body, consisting of all the dimensions, complete and perfect.

Besides, though God is omnipotent, having all Power in himself to do all
things, without resistance; yet, he cannot effect mere contradictories, and
opposite in Nature; to wit, that any thing may be, and not be, in one, and
the same Titus 1. 2. Hebr. 6. 18. Number. 23. 19. 2. Tim. 2. 13.
time; because, he cannot lie: For, GOD is not as Man, that he should lie;
neither deny himself; For, this is plain against his Nature, in which, is No
variableness, nor shadow of turning James. 1. 17.


And what is of a more contrariety, and repugnancie in it self, then Christ's
Body, to be a true Body, and no true Body; for, if a true Body, it is Finite;
if not, Infinite: Therefore, the general Conclusion is, that seeing the Body
of Christ, is taken up into Heaven, out of this World, Act. 1. 9. 10. 11. Act.
3. 21.
and there must continue, Till the time that all things be restored; it
follows, that, for this reason, the Body of Christ, being Finite, cannot be
Every where, nor in the Bread of the Supper be contained: And, in saying, that
the Body of Christ is in Heaven, whither it was carried, which is Luk 24. 51.
Scripture, and no where else, there to be contained, after the manner of a
true Body, Till the time that all things must Act. 1. 9.
berestored; we do not yet confine it, within a limitation of some certain
place in Heaven, as the Adversaries charge us falsely; but we think, and say,
that it is there, free, and exempted from all circumstance of Place, as most
may seem agreeable and convenient to that celestial Glory, signified in the
words of, Sitting at the Right hand Mar. 16. 19.
of God.

But see, how they are fleshly ingenious, to devise new Couertes, for the
cloaking of an old Lie, which otherwise they could not maintain.

They say, that the Body of Christ, howsoever it be visibly in Heaven, yet in
the Bread of the Supper, it may inuisibly be contained.

As they can allege no Testimony of the Scripture, to prove this; so, let it
seem no marvel, that they unadvisedly, do contradict themselves herein:
For, How can it be affirmed for truth, that the Body of Christ, is in the
Bread of the Supper, both Substantially, Really, and B^dily, and also Inuisibly?

For in as much, as Visibilitie can by no means be separated, and removed,
from the substance of an humane Body; it must of necessity be granted, that
wheresoever the Body of a Man is substantially, there also to be visibly.

Christ, after his Resurrection, appearing to the Eleven, Mar. 16. 14 Luke 24.
33 36, 37, 38, 39
where they were assembled, the Doors Ioh. 20. 19.
being shut, makes manifest proof hereof, when as they, being afraid,
supposed they had seen a Spirit, he showed then his hands and feet, saying,
It is my self, handle me, and see; for a Spirit has not Flesh nor Bones, as
you see me have: Reasoning, as it were of purpose from the Adiunctes of a true
Body, which were, Sight, and Touching, that he was present there among them in
Body substantially.

Again, though it be denied that Christ's body, is in the sacramental Bread,
as has been said: Is it therefore to to be objected, Christ himself to be
altogether absent from his Supper, received of his Children? Or the Bread Mat.
18. 20.
and Wine there, to be bare idle Signs? For Christ in deed, and truly, is
present by the Power of his Spirit, wheresoever Heb. 9. 24.
two or three shall be gathered together in his Name; And lifts up to
himself in Heaven, through the Promise of the Gospel, the Hearts of the
Faithful, to contemplate there, even in that celestial true Sanctuary, the
Sacrifice offered upon the Cross; and so through Faith, feed thereon, unto life
everlasting.

Amen.
An Exposition upon the Words of Christ, occasioned by reason of a doubt, of
the Iewes-Capernaites, about the John 6. 51, 52, 53, 55.
eating his Flesh.
CHRIST teaching in the Synagogue, at Capernaum, verse. 51.
said; I am that living Bread, which came down from Heaven; If any man eat of
this Bread, he shall live for verse. 52.
ever: And the Bread that I will give, is my Flesh. etc.

The Jews Capernaits, striving among them selves, said; How can this Man give
us his Flesh to eat? verse. 53.


Hereupon Christ replyeth, and tells them, that Except they eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, they had no life in them. verse. 55.


And to persuade them thereto, he pronounces in plain words, that, his
Flesh, is Meat indeed; and his Blood, Rom 8. 5.
Drink indeed.

It is true, that S Paul speaks: The fleshly Man, savors Romans 8. 5.
the things of the Flesh.

No marvel then, if these Capernaits, understanding Christ's speech, of the
eating the living Bread, which he called, his ^^ne Flesh, after a literal
construction, condemn it, as not understood; and so reject it as absurd, and
idle.

To these, and all such being merely Natural, I may well apply the saying of
S Paul, that they perceive not the 1. Cor. 2. 14.
things of the spirit of God; For, they are Foolishness, unto them; neither
can they know them, because they are, spiritually to be discerned.

To discuss this Doctrine being both very necessary, to be rightly
understood, and most comfortable to the Soul; two Questions are to be
propounded and laid open.

1. What manner Food, the Flesh of Christ is. 2. After what manner, and how it
is to be eat ^n of us.
The like two Questions, are of Christ's Blood.
1. What manner Drink, it is. 2. After what manner, to be drunk of us.
The Exposition.
A Man consists naturally of two Parts: I an Inward part viz the Soul: 2 an
outward part, viz the Body.

These two Parts, as they have a Consistencie in Man, by a natural
conjunction yet in Nature distinguished; so, for the maintayning, and upholding
the said Consistencie, they are to be fed, and nourished, after the quality
of their kind, in a distinct manner, by a Food, giving correspondence to their
Nature in several.

For this cause, I say, for as much as Christ will have his Flesh to be Meat,
and his Blood to be Drink; that therefore, his Flesh, and Blood, be either
corporal Meat, and Drink, or spiritual; for in one of these two senses,
they must necessarily be taken. If Corporal, there must be a Mouth to eat it;
Teeth, to chew it; a Gullet, to swallow it; a Ventricle or Stomach, to digest
and concoct it; that so, being reduced into that White-iuyce, which engenders
Blood, (the Fountain of Life,) it may aptly be distributed into every part of
the Body, and be converted into their Substance, for nourishment.

The very same in all points, is to be affirmed of Christ's Blood; if it be
corporal Drink: For, Corporal, both Meat, and Drink, is such as serves
only for the feeding of the Body, and is usually, and properly called Meat
and Drink, visibly, and sensibly; and so to be taken.

But how absurd, and against all common Sense and Reason is it, to be said,
that Christ's Flesh, and Blood, is corporal, and feelingly to be used.

And if not Corporal, then surely Spiritual, (for no third kind of Food can
be alleged:) And besides, there is a Spiritual Food, which is appropriated
to the Spirit, and Soul of Man, by which only it is fed and nourished: and
for this reason, having a similitude of Meat, properly so termed it is said,
to be Meat also, by a Metaphor: because, as Meat, (properly called Meat,)
nourishes the Body unto a temporal Life; so, this spiritual Food, tropically
called Food, nourishes and cherishes the Spirit, and Soul of Man, into life
Eternal; And that by the virtue and power of the Godhead, conferred upon the
Flesh of Christ; (otherwise, of it own Nature, it were but Flesh, nothing
available,) which, by that means, gives Life to the Faithful, in manner, as
it issuing from the Father, lives in it self.

Neither may I seem to err herein, having that Testimony of Christ himself,
urging the proof of this said Truth, in these words.

It is the Spirit, that quickens; the Flesh profits nothing: John 6. 63.
The Words that I speak unto you, are Spirit, and Life.

For, what other sense can the Words carry, but this* that, the Flesh of
Christ, profits nothing unto eternal Life eaten Corporally: but it is the
holy Spirit, quickening the Hearts of the Faithful, that works unto life,
in as much as it moves them to believe steadfastly in Christ, and so, to eat
his Body, and drink his Blood, spiritually; that is, by Faith.

The opposition of the Spirit, and of the Flesh, in their Attributes, may seem
to warrant this interpre^^tion, The Spirit quickens; The Flesh profits
nothing, as it is Flesh of it own Nature, as is said; Ergo, seeing it is
necessary unto Salvation, to eat Christ's Flesh, not by the help of the
Teeth, Corporally; we must have, the quickening of the Spirit, which effects
the same in deed, by his own power, through Faith.

Hitherto is it showed, what manner of Food, the Flesh of Christ is,
represented by the Bread, in this holy Supper. Yet, more fully to thy
understanding, for a better satisfaction thereof, it shall not be amiss to
show also, how the Flesh of Christ is made Food, and Meat for us.

Of this, let us receive instruction, out of the words of Christ, saying; And
the Bread, which I will give, is my Flesh, Joh. 6. 5^.
which I will give, for the life of the World.

In these last words ( Which I will give for the life of the World,) that one
word ( which) being rightly understood, will manifest the manner, how, the
Flesh of Christ, is to be a Food unto us: For by ( Which) is meant ( in as much
as, or how far f^orth) that his Flesh is to be given, for our Life, unto
death, as an holy Sacrifice, offered to God the Father, of him, as Priest.

If not taken in this sense, there must needs follow, by a false exposition of
the word, an absurd division of the General, in many particulars, as if Christ
had a double, and twofold fleshly Nature, by two Bodies naturally
distinguished; one to be given, for the Life of the World; and another,
reserved to himself; and so, suffering, and not suffering; crucified, and not
crucified; dying, and not dying as touching his whole humane Nature: which to
affirm, were blasphemous, being adverse to the Articles of the Creed; which
teaches the truth of Christ's Flesh, to be but one only.

The man, that has no further light of knowledge, then what his Mother might
seem to have conferred upon him in her Womb, is that Natural, in S. Iudes
Epistle, having Jude 19.
not the Spirit: And as he speaks in the tenth verse, Corrupt themselves in
those things they know naturally, verse. 10.
as Beasts.

For none can truly understand, and discern all things, but the Spiritual
Man, says S. Paul, Therefore, I^ do 1. Cori. 2. 15
here deprecat all preiud^eating (...), requiring a Mind, humbled in it self
to the Truth. It is the single Eye, that discharges the single trust GOD send
us his Children, that Eye, in the Myster^^^ of his Word. I say then, and do
speak it unto the intelligen^ (...) not weaned to his Will, nor seduced by
fa^^e (...) from the Truth, to believe them easily, without ^rying the Spirits;
(for, a light belief, is no true, and sure document) I speak as unto them
which have understanding: Judge 1. Cor. 10. 15
ye what I say. That the former exposition of the word ( which,) may well, and
consonantly be adhibited, to the words of institution of the Supper, when
Christ, breaking the Bread, and ^iuing it to his Disciples, said; This is my
Body, (which) that is, in as much, as it is given, and broken for you. For, that
holy Bread, even the Bread of the Lord, as S. Paul speaks, is not absolutely
the Sacrament of the Lords Body; But it signifies and testifies, the Body of
Christ to be given there, as it was broken, and offered upon the ^rosse, with a
sense of Gods Anger, to expiate, and take away the guilt of our Sins. And in
like manner, The Blood of the new Testament, which, is, viz. so far forth,
as it is powered soorth, and shed for you, and for many, for remission of
^innes, admits the same construction: For, by this means, that new League,
and Testament, was established, and confirmed unto us; and withal, Remission
and forgiveness of Sins, purchase^ (...), and obtained for us: whereas,
Without effusion and shedding of Blood, is Heb. 9. 22.
no Remission.

And it was necessary, that the New Testament should so be ratified,
otherwise, all transgressions had not been taken away, neither had we received
the promise of eternal enheritance: for, No Testament can be effectual,
before the death of the Testator; as it is written, Hebrews. Heb. 9. 16.


Christ then, being the Son of GOD, as well as Man, shedding in his Nature,
his Blood, must needs have an everlasting virtue, of purifying and clensing
our Souls, from all guilt of Sin; For his Death was, to purge our
Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

By which alreadi^ spoken, it is evident, that the Flesh, and Blood of Christ,
has the sense, and understanding, of Meat, and Drink; not simply taken, but
after a sort, and by interpretation; to wit, in as much as, his Body was
crucified for us.

So we speak, that a Natural Body, what soever, is subject to the external
sense, as it is colored, and no otherwise.

Thus the first Question as touching, what manner Food, the Flesh, and Blood,
of Christ is, has been discussed.

The other is, the manner how, it is, and ought to be eaten, and drunk^, unto
the salvation of our Souls?

The answer of this Question, is easily made, out of the former already
explaned: For, if we well, and duly consider the Nature, and quality of the
said Food, we must easily find out the manner of taking, and using it, to our
good

For, it is to be accommodated unto it wholly, and properly. Say then, because
the Flesh, and Blood of Christ, offered in the forms of Bread and Wine, are
absolutely spiritual, as is already demonstratiuely proved; the manner of
feeding upon them must necessarily be, with the Mouth of the Spirit: (...),
what is this Mouth of the Spirit, but the Faith of the Soul?

And what is this Faith, but to believe that the crucifying of Christ upon the
Cross, was the breaking of his Flesh, and the shedding of his Blood, for the
redemption of our Sins?

The words of Christ in John: He that believes in me, John 6. 47.
has everlasting life. And verse. 54. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks
my Blood, has eternal life, bear the same verse. 54.
sense.

Were it otherwise, that, in the proposition, of eating his Flesh, and drinking
his Blood, Christ signified differently, from the proposition, of Faith, and
Belief in him.

A twofold way, of obteyning eternal life, must in consequence be said to
be; one, by eating Christ's Flesh; another, by Faith.

But the way to eternal Life, is one, sole, only, and the same; even Christ,
apprehended by Faith; or, Faith apprehending Christ, as his only Savior, and
Redeemer.

And this is considered in the very Nature of Faith, which is, his most proper,
and natural object, even the Testimony of God himself, touching his Grace
toward Man, for Christ's sake, revealed in his Gospel; which is a
Testimony most Divine, and infallible, uttered by the Evangelists.

And, what is this Testimony, but a Witnesse-bearing of Christ's, both Person,
Office, and also Benefits toward Mankind: As, that he was the only Begotten
Son of ^. John. 4. 9.
GOD; and for our sakes, even to save us Sinners, and his Enemies; came down
from Heaven, from out the Bosom of his Father, bringing with him, his Fathers
eternal Purpose and Decree, for our Salvation: Made Man of the Virgin Marie;
became Flesh for that cause; Lived according to the Law of God, in all true
Holiness, and sanctity of life: And so being just, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, for us that were unjust; was Crucified, and died? etc.

And, as the Gospel witnesses these things; even so do the Sacraments
testify no less: which be the very Seals of the Gospel, even as it were, a
visible, and palpable Gospel.

Who therefore gives credit, to these Divine Testimonies, that Man therein,
both feeds upon the Flesh of Christ, and drinks his Blood spiritually; that
is, effectually works by the Spirit, his own Salvation. GOD grant this, to
all his.

Amen.
A Prayer, before the receiving of the Communion.
O Most merciful Father, who after the Sacrament of regeneation, have
appointed us eft-soones, to receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
for confirmation of our Faith. Have mercy upon us, vile, and wretched Sinners,
not worthy to approach unto this thy Table; Pardon us, ( Oh gracious GOD,)
accept us into thy favor, and forgive us all our sins, according as thou
have promised in thy Word, to all faithful believers; Inflame us with love
toward all men; make us heartily to forgive our Enemies, and to pray for
them; Open the Eyes of our understanding, that we may earnestly repent us of
all our sins pas^, and hunger and thirst after Righteousness: Satisfy us
with thy heavenly Food; and make us partakers of all the benefits of thy
Pas^ion: Grant us Grace worthily to eat of this Bread, and drink of this
Cup, that we may remain in thy favor for ever. Holy Father, give us full
consolation and commemoration of this Mystery, that our Faith may be
increased, our Hope confirmed, our Charity inflamed, our weak Consciences
comforted; all Dangers repelled, and our Souls assured of their Salvation, in
the Blood of Christ. Let no Profaneness enter into our Hearts, so long as we
are about this Holy action, or afterward: But give us Grace to receive, with
pure Hearts, clean Souls, fervent Love, and steadfast Faith. Have mercy upon
thy whole Church, especially upon this Place and Company, that we may serve
and please thee in this holy Service, and all other actions of our lives, for
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Bread.
O Sweet JESUS, as thou have given thy Flesh, to be the Bread of eternal
Salvation: So vouchsafe to work in me, by a lively Faith, that I (receiving
the same,) may be, and evermore continue in thee, and thou in me^.

Amen.
A Prayer before the receiving* of the Cup.
O LORD, vouchsafe, that as thy Blood was shed, to wash me a most miserable
sinner, from the corruption of the old Adam, and all actual sins: So grant,
that it may (through a lively Faith,) take effect in me, and wash me from the
filth of sin, and renew i^ me, the fruits of Righteousness, that I may
become a fit member of thee, and live and die in thee.

Amen.
A Prayer after* the receiving* of the Communion.
O Sweet^ JESUS, our Lord and Savior, we render unto thee, all humble and
hearty thanks, for suffering Death upon the Cross, for our sins, and
admitting us, miserable sinners, to the participation* of this thy* blessed
Sacrament, the memorial of our ^edemption. Unite us unto thee, by thy heavenly
Grace; Apply all thy Merits, unto our Souls: Suffer us never to doubt of the
forgiveness of our Sins; but let the Doar^ of thy Sanctuary, (...) be open
unto us, that, in our greatest needs, we may* (...) thither, and apprehend thy
gracious Pardon, ratified by this Seal of thy Covenant. Quicken us, ( O Lord)
in this life; reui^^, and renew us, that we may disclayme our old
conuersations, and become New men, in Holiness of life. Keep us, that we
s^ippe not out of this building: Cause us to love thee, that our whole delight
may be only in thee: To this end, we entreat thee, to strengthen us with thy
holy Spirit, against our frayltie: To defend us with thy Power, against Worldly
troubles: To purchase our Pardon, by thy Merits: And to cure our So^es, with
thy Blood, for thy Truth, and Names sake.

Amen.
A Meditation upon the Mortality of Man's frail Nature, arguing the
corruption, and final dissolution thereof upon Earth.
A Sanctified thought in the meditation of Mortality seriously employed,
gives blessed content unto the resolute Conscience stayed in it self, as
secured thereby from all fears, which otherwise commonly do assault it, and
so annoy the state of the Soul: Neither is it sooner procured to the mind of
man, disposed unto the actions of true Godliness, or more soundly settled there
by Faith; then when an earnest well instructed Consideration of this life is
offered unto it, and pre-cogitated: which being so had, calls a man to a
remembrance of himself, in himself, circumspectiuely viewing and pondering
the great imperfection of his own Nature, subject to change and alteration;
and in fine, to a summarie dissolution of it self.

Of this, are we admonished by Job, where he tells us, Job 14. 1.
that, Man, who is borne of a Woman, is of short continuance, and full of
trouble; He shoots forth as a Flower, and is cut down: verse. 2.
he vanishes also as a Shadow, and continues not. For his days are swifter
then a Weauers Shittle, and as the Cloud vanishes Job 7. 6. verse. 9.
and goes away: so he, that goes down to the Grave* shall come up no more:
to wit, shall not have any use of this Mortal life, being now passed over,
and wasted in the momentaine motions of his own Breath.

For to speak of Man in that his own Nature considered, which he has
received from the Womb of his Mother, and wherewith he, as clothed, seems
here to live upon the earth; what is he, I say, (taken in the true sense of
Mortality,) after the opinion of Aristotle, but a Myrror of great Weakness
and Infirmity? The Image and representation of all Incontin^ncie tending to
Ruin: The Pastime, and very scorn of Fortune: The Balance of Envy, and
pitiful, but remediless Misery? The Prey, and Spoil of Time? and what else
is, or may be thought to remain in him, to be altogether Fleame, and Choler.

It seems, that wise men, who have well and considerately re^ized the state
of this our dayly-dying life, have upon good reason, to express the same
significantly, likened Man for his baseness, unto the Wind, Job 7. 7.
a Bubble of the Water, a Spiders Web: Unto a Vapor Iame. 4. 14.
that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away; arguing from
thence a common fragilitie incident to our Nature, which has no life, but what
it breaths in the Land of waste, and so by breathing necessarily spends it
self. This frayltie and corruption of our mortal Nature, is very sufficiently
argued, by that kingly Prophet David, in the allegation of two special
Attributes, Dust, and Grass, or the Flower Psa. 103. 14. verse. 15.
of the Field: In which words, he notes affirmatively the frail condit^on
of our Mortal bodies, which is but a Span long, a Minute of a time, yea less
then a Minute: For all our life is confined by the limitation of the three
distinct Notes of differenced Time, said to be either 1 Passed, or 2 Present,
or 3 Future: If 1 Passed, it is that Genesis 3. 19.
Dust out of which we being made, are returned to it again: If 2 Present, it
is that Grass, Psalm. 103. 15. 16.
or Flower of the field, which flourishes, till the Wind c goes over it: If
3 Future, yet by reason of the motion perishing, it may seem to be gone, before
it be fully come, as an idle Dream, or Vision of the Night, which has
uncertain returns, but passes away speedily, and effects nothing.

What is then the first part of our life, into which we enter, with Tears of
mourning, but as the Time passed, without knowledge of it self? And as a thing
forgotten, never returns to be seen any more; Only by proceeding forward
(if in case it hold out the full pases) it makes the step into the 2 Middle
Age of Man; which is, as the Time present, interiected between the Time
passed, and the Future: And what is the 3 Middle Age? Even a continual Toil
both of Body, and Mind: Carpes afflicting inwardly, Labor and Painfulness
wearying outwardly; Enemies assaulting, Flatterers entrapping, Temptation upon
Temptation; nay, scarce one ended, another succeeds, the former Conflict yet
abiding: many come upon us unexpected. Consider this, O man! and weigh the
condition of thine owneselfe.

Thy Body is in League with the World and the Devil; and by a mutual consent,
have joined their forces for a Battery against thy Soul. Hereupon it is, that
the World beleagreth thee daily, and obsesseth thee on every side, even through
the working of those five Traitors, the Senses, which thou have always about
thee; The Devil lying in wait to prey upon thy Soul, which by the Bodies
treason is thus betrayed, to the merciless Enemy. What now will thou do, O
Man? And what can thou do for thine own safety? For there is no Security,
whither soever thou turnest thy self: Thou can not rid thy self of thy
Body: Thou can not fly from it, nor cast it off: Thou must of necessity
carry it about with thee, because it is tied and bound unto thee: And yet see,
thine Enemy, yea, the chiefest of thine Enemies, and daily helper to those thy
most dreadful, and annoying Enemies, the World, and the Devil: See their
forces, and how they are Marshalled; Thy Flesh gives the first onset, it
talks with thee of Meats, and of Drinks, and pampring Cheer; it tells
thee, that the Belly must be thy God, it parleth to thee of Sloth and
Idleness, of all manner lustful Pleasures, and vain Delights: Now art thou
ready for the Worlds Baytes, which are, Ambition, Arrogancy, Pride, Boasting,
Insolency, Covetousness* by which, the Devil provoke thee to Anger,
Malice, Envy, Swearing, Cursing, denying God, much occasioned thereby; and
lastly, to all Bitterness, the Bane of thy Soul: Do thou not see, O man,
that thus living, thou have Rebels, and Thieves with thee, and that Ezekiel. 2 6.
thou remaynest with Scorpions?

And seeing this, do thou yet desire to have a further st^ppe into an other
Age, which is the last part of this Dying life? What is this, but to desire to
wear Earth still (which we carr^e abut us,) that so by wearing it, at length
our selves be worn out of Breath, and in fine, become Earth in deed, whereof
we first came? Admire, GOD his pleasure attends upon thy longing herein, and
he be content to give thee a step into further years, that make up the last
Age of thy life, what have thou gotten, but a brittle hold of frail, and
deceivable uncertainties, which also are accompanied with Wearisomnesse,
Pain, and sundry Fears of undoubted Mortality? For, if our first entrance
into the World, is in corruption, and putrefaction from the Dust of the Earth;
and the 2 Progression thereof the days of vanity, with wasting of years in
heaviness and mourning; Can this 3 latter Time, of an ouer-spent life, be
comfortable to thee, that wearieth out the Body with a daily, yea, howerly
Consumption of Flesh and Boane, making thee as a Broken Psalm. 31. 12. 10.
vessel, which causes strength to fail in thee for Pain; and thy self in
the end, to be a destroying food for Woormes?

Hearken to David, who tells thee, that the time of thy life is Seventy
years, according to the common interpretation Psalm. 90. 10.
of our Nature, and so may come to Eighty, if they be of strength: and yet is
not this strength such as may continue us with certainty in that course, to
end it without Labor and Sorrow: For, Our days are as the days Job 7. 1.
Psalm. 90. 9. 10.
of an Hireling; yea, they spend as a thought, which suddenly passes away. No
marvel then if they be cut off quickly, and we fly away: Surely there is no
comfort in this Life, which has a threefold necessity inevitable: 1. Of
Bacenesse in our Birth 2. Of Wr^etchednesse in it whole course, and passage on
forward. 3. Of a final Dissolution of the Body, in the hour of death, by
separating the foul from it. Yea, consider this threefold Necessity yet once
again. 1. In your Conception, by which you have the first ingresse into life;
for, it is a fault. 2. In your Growing up; which argues a progressio^ of
days, for it is with great weakness, and in darkness. 3. In your Egresse
and departure from hence; for it is with horror and dread: I say, consider
this well, and lay it to your Conscience, and see the state of your Natural
life, Conceived in sin and filth^nesse, brought forth in heaviness and
mourning, fostered in carpe and fears; prolonged by a little Vial of vital
Blood, which either it self, may be dashed and broken in pieces suddenly,
with some unexpected accident; or that vital Blood in it easily tainted and
corrupted, being of Nature diuersely apt to be hurt, through contagion of
infinite Diseases; and so in the twinkling of an eye, brought to the Grave of
utter darkness, For surely, so long as we dwell in these Houses of Clay,
whose foundation is the Dust, and Job. 4. 19.
is to be destroyed before the Moath; we cannot choose, but see. Death
continually in our eyes; and both Morning and Evening, and every Hour,
approaching toward us: Make hereout use to thy self of this certainty of
Death, after this manner.

I am borne into the world upon condition, that when Death calls to me for
the debt of Mortality, which my Nature is to pay unto it, I must yield it:
Tell me then, Can thou know, at what hour of the Night the Thief will
steal upon thee? If this be hid from thy knowledge, how can thou be secured
of the Time of thy death? Which though most certain in it own Nature* as thou
can not deny; yet, to thy conceit let it be known to be most uncertain
also. Whether thou think, or not think of it; speak, or not speak
of it, is not in question, Death is neither the nearer, nor farther off: For by
not thinking, or speaking of it, art thou able to put it the farther off from
thee; nor by thinking and speaking, can thou cause it to hasten the sooner
upon thee: Walking or running, standing or sitting, lying, or doing any thing,
Death attends upon thee, is continually at thy Back, follows hard at thy
heels; every pace thou make walking, is a step to the shadow of death,
leading to the Grave. Be not deceived in a foolish conceit of thy strength,
being new in the flower of thy age, that therefore thou may live till to
morrow. I tell thee, Young man, thou have not the Months of Times in thy
hands: And it is a vain thing, yea, dangerous to thy Soul, to be foolishly
confident in uncertain securities: Such Trust, may be said to be, as the
House of a Job 8. 14.
Spider, as Bildad to Job speaks; which is to day, and before to morrow is
swept away: So is the Earthy vessel, that car^ieth thee about; For to day it
seems sound, is suddenly cracked and broken; and being Job 7. 21.
sought after in the Morning, thou art no where to be found, because now thou
sleep in the Dust, contrary to thy expectation; wherefore know, that thou
art dying every day, eury hour, every minute of an hour: and then be
persuaded, that a minute of an hour in this day, wherein now thou live, may
give thee, the last gasp of Breath, which thou expectest, and promisest to thy
self to enjoy to morrow: But if thou do wear out this day, according to
thy hope, by breathing; yet understand, that thou have so many hours fewer to
spend; and a day decreased from the number of the days of thy life, which thou
look after; which is an Argument of a decaying state, occasioned through
that general corruption in thy Nature; and therefore of necessity, must be
mortal unto Death; perhaps in the Morning, before the Evening come: For what
comes to us of our life, goes from us also: and what thou accomptest added,
is rather subtracted, and taken out of the account of thy days; for Death
steals upon thee, when thou imaginest it to be fardest off.

The Life of the Wiser sort, is a true Meditation of Death: Be wise then and
say to thy self, now ready to Sleep, I may happily not waken; being wakened,
it may fall out, that I Sleep no more. Likewise, Going abroad, I may die, and
not return again: Being returned, I may not go out, nor look abroad again.

There be many Reasons, which may school our Reason to this profitable
Meditation; some already spoken, and some in that which follows, to be
remembered; among which this of the great incertaintie of Death, when, and where
to fall out, may have place in the chiefest rancks.

God out of his Wisdom for the knowledge he has of our great security in
the state of our own Salvation; has hid from us the day of death, that by not
knowing it, we may suppose it to be nearer unto us, even obsessing all the
parts of our mortal Bodies, and so uncertain of Deaths approach at all times,
we be at no time unprepared in expectation to die whenever. Therefore, as
touching the Place, say thus to thy self, I know not where Death does wait
for me; Therefore will I be, as a Watchtower attending the coming of it in
all Places.

And in regard of the Tim^, say thus: The Son of Man Luke 12. 40, ^5.
will come at an hour when I think not: I will therefore be prepared, having
my Loins gir^ about, and my Lights burning.

No doubt, this uncertainty of Deaths, both Place, and Time, well and
advisedly pondered, must needs incite, and stir us seriously to meditate our
Mortality, with some fear and horror to the Conscience, dreading the after
Judgment. And the rather for the manner of Deaths assayling us unawares, it
being in greatest variety of Accidents; yea, some of them such, as for their
quality, not seeming to be feare-worthie, are therefore little expected, and
doubted, and so least of all thought upon Yet surely, to be suddenly surprised
of Death, is a fearful thing; and therefore against it we pray in the
Church-Letanie, saying: From sudden Death, good Lord deliver us.

Yet does common life minister fondry examples hereof and of which some
recorded in History, may here not unprofitably be recited, both for
illustration, and instruction sake.

I said before, the accidents occasioning Death, upon the sudden, were, some
for quality not fear worthy; yet have they happened to some not suspecting
the same. As Strangulation, by the moisture of one small grain of a Grape to
Anacreon a Greek Poet: and likewise the same by a Hair Druncke in Milk, to
Fabius a Roman Senator. A strange Accident, worcking so sodeinely, and
speedely unto a dissolution of Nature, as far void of man's Reason, as to be
thought of them nothing feared; or misdoubted.

And may it be thought, that Aeschylus an other Greek Poet, suspected any
approachment, or seysure of Death, when sitting without the walls of Sicilie, a
sunning himself, bare-headed, an Egle, let fall upon his bauld Crown a shell
Crabbe, or Snaile, and therewith struck him presently dead. Other strange
Accidents, and Occurrents of Death, do many ways assail and affright the
life of man. As too too great Joy, suddenly conceived in mind upon any thing
moving the Affection precipitated before in the contrary, or otherwise, and by
th'essense unexpectedly, yea, beside all hope represented.

So did those two Mothers of Rome for joy, that there Sons were returned
home safe, from that great slaughter of the Romans, made by Annibal, at the
lake Thrasimen in Hetruria, whom they did not look for; the one hearering of
her Sons death there; the other, suspecting it.

So Marcus Iuuentius Talua, Consul, as he was sacrificing in Corsica, received
Letters certificatorie of a Supplication to be decreed him from the Senate: Upon
the intentive reading whereof, fell down presently dead for joy.

So died Sophocles suddenly, for Joy that a Tragedy of his was applawded,
and approved by the suffrage of one above the rest.

Contrarily, immoderate Grief, and Sorrow, is a cause of death suddenly
surprising, as is written to have happened to Homer the Poet; and no doubt has
been, and is to many.

Likewise some sleeping, have died; as Pindarus that eloquent Poet of Greece,
in the bosom of a Boy, in whom he much delighted.

And Scipio Aemilianus that overcame Carthage, the adopted Son of Scipio
African, found dead in his Chamber in the night time: And in bed, diverse others
have also breathed forth their last gasp.

Also by Dogs dilaniated and ^ent in pieces; as Euripides the Poet.

Again, by Ruins of Houses, as (...) a noble rich man of Crannon in
Thessalie, with so many, as were there at supper with him, Simonides the Poet
then also present; but miraculously preserved. Here to be remembered, Job his
Children, who, as they were eating and drinking in their elder Job 1. 19.
Brothers House, were suddenly killed, after the same manner.

Thus has Death many ways to take away life from Man upon the sudden, by
unlooked for accidents.

Are we not then even for this cause especially, to be warily circumspect in
the whole course of our lives? in no part thereof to be dissolutely wanting to
our selves, in a vigilant care for addressing our Thoughts daily, and howerly
to an expectation of that end, which is naturally confined to our Mortality,
and every minute stealing upon us, is more nearly approaching, then we can
imagine, or dream of. I conclude all this matter thus, saying: O happy is that
man, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find redily attending for him with
watchful Eyes, and burning Lamps, wheresoever, whenever, and howsoever.
Grant this O Lord, unto me, and unto all that love thy coming. Amen.

Now then, to return to the Question of Meditation propounded, let no man
think it an idle, and fruitless thing, to recall often to his remembrance the
fragilitie of his Natural, and decaying Life, consuming and passing away, in
the days of Vanity: Whosoever is well studied in the knowledge hereof, shall
find Instruction sufficient, to guide his Thoughts in the true understanding
of his Mortality. The meditation of Death, says one, is a doctrine of living
well. Agreeable to this, is that of Jesus the son of Eccles. 7. 36.
Syrach^ Remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss; or, thou shall not
sin eternally. For surely the memory of Death, both that it is inevitable,
and also uncertain, does easily reclaim us, seriously exercised therein, from
often, and greatly offending God. For, it can not be, without the suggestion of
the second coming of Christ unto Judgment: before whose Tribunal, we are to
render account of all, as well Thoughts, and Words, as of Deeds. This being
represented to our minds, must needs keep us in awe, unto amendment of life,
which is not here, without continual infinite miseries; and also afterward,
in that general summons, is to be laid open, unto a Trial, upon a second,
either Life, or Death: If we be found to have died here daily, through sin;
we shall pass by this first death, of our natural bodies, unto that second
death, of both Body and Soul, in Hell. But if, as seeming to live daily, we
shall also in our selves, die daily in deed, to our selves, as Paul speaks:
Coloss. 3. 5.
Mortify our members, (which are the lustful motions of the Flesh,) that the
dead Nature of the old Man, (which is the Flesh) may not bear rule in the
affections of our minds, to work iniquity; but rather that living Nature of
the New man, (which is after the similitude and image of God, by knowledge in
the spirit,) reform the whole Soul, and conform it wholly to the obedience of
Gods will, we may not doubt, but dying thus here in Earth unto Sin, we shall
live in Heaven with Christ, and his Angels; where is the full fruition of all
perfect bliss with eternity. This is that true, and blessed fruit of the
Meditation of Man's Mortality spoken of before, seriously and in the fear of
God practiced in the daily exercises of our Religion, even to suffer the old
Adam with all his vices, to die in us, in our lives; and to cause thereby, that
Christ renewed inwardly, may be effectual in us, unto a true life, at the Time
of our Natural death: In which sense, this Temporal death, is nothing else,
but a Translating of our Bodies and Souls, to the place of Immortality; For,
Where Eccle. 11. 3.
the Tree falls in that very place it shall be, and remain for ever: which
is most certainly to be auerred upon the change of this Corruptible, 1. Cor.
15. 50, 51, 52.
with Incorruptible: for, Flesh and Blood, must first put off all Corruption,
before it can inherit Incorruption But to return to the matter in question, I
say, that the Meditation of this Transitory life, in a general view of it
self, as well of the miseries, in which it is inwrapped here in this vale of
Mortality, as for the certainty of Death, to which it is subjected, after an
uncertain manner, is very necessary, and profitable to the Soul, especially,
if the contemplation of eternity, either in Bliss and Joy, or in Pain and
Torments, be always in the Eye thereof, which tells us, that every day of
this mortal life passing away, is a drawing near unto the end thereof; and
the end is the hastening of Judgment; which we cannot avoid: Therefore happy
art thou, o Man, whosoever art blessed with this motion of the Spirit, daily to
think, how thou may stand in the seueere discussing of Death, and Judgment,
which in precedence of Actions, are before Eternity.

To live so, as that thou may die unto a Perpetual life, is most joyful,
and to be desired: But to die so, as hereafter to live in a sensible tormenting
Death, is lamentable and dreadful*

Can thou then take pleasure in this dying Life, or delight in the use
thereof, otherwise, then as the due consideration of it in the Spirit, may be a
means to prepare thee against the hour of thy Death, in which thou must
necessarily receive thy Dome?

The life of the Sages in the former Age of Paganism, is said to depend upon
the Precepts of Moral Philosophy, from them to receive instruction unto all
virtue of manners for common life. And as we read, they were by them, through
the only light of Nature, so sufficiently well instructed, as that they are
highly celebrated in histories, and propounded as examples for imitation. But
says one; All the doctrine of Moral Philosophy, is not so much available to
give perfection to the life of the wise, as one particular Motto of that wise
man indeed, who said; In all thy works, remember still, that thou have to die.
Remember then, and let it be the first object always in thy remembrance
whenever thou go about any thing thou would effect, to consider whether
thou would undertake it, if thou should even the very same time, and
moment of time, die, and come to appear before God, to give account for it?
Were our Consciences settled in this cogitation, our minds could never be
souocated, and traduced by vain affections, from the Meditation of death;
which seriously attended, and studied, has a spiritual force, to break in
sunder, that spiritual chain of the Devil, made up of nine Linkes; viz: 1.
Evil Thoughts. 2. Delight. 3. Consent. 4. Action. 5. Habit. 6. Hardness of
Heart. 7. Necessity. 8. Desperation. 9. Death Eternal. For Evil Thoughts,
being abandoned from out thy Mind, (as must needs be, when it is wholly
possessed, with a daily, earnest, and godly Meditation of Death, representing
the day of Account, Judgment, and Eternity;) how can the other Linkes,
depending all upon the former, now broken and annihilated, but fall also in
pieces, and come to nothing? Let me have leave, by your patience, to term this
kind of sanctified Meditation, the fountain of all Divine graces, having
virtue and power, effectually in chief, to remember the passion of Christ,
which cleanses our Souls from all guilt of Sin; cassireth all sinister
cogitations out of our hearts; fortifying them in the love of God by faith, and
so utterly excluding thereout the love of this world, Enemy to godliness, (for
the love of GOD, and the love of the world are incompatible) witnessed by
those worthy speeches of a certain noble man, in a paroll conference, had
with an other of his own Rank, who said, that he had sometimes proved to his
great grief, and sorrow, that the desire of worldly Treasures, produces in
the name of man, two dangerous effects. 1. The one, a difference, and distrust
of God his goodness, and providence: 2. The other a restless disquietnes, and
sadness of the heart, deuoyd of all godly content. And further says, that upon
a voice which he seemed to hear in his sleep, being therewith awakened, he
presently uttered these words, as they came to his mind; Repose all thy care
in the Lord, and he shall worship thee. For before, as himself confesses, he
was plunged into a kind of despair of Gods providence, by reason of his
wrath, etc. But now, being called, as it were home to himself, and more
advisedly considering the state of the world, and of worldly things, he said,
that the said sentence was to him a Medicinable Salve against that his too much
worldly Carefulnes, having force in him to quiet the Mind, to confirm and
strengthen it in a lively Faith, to cause him to rest contented with his
present state, and to make him know, that he cannot serve Matthew. 6. ver. 24.
two Masters, which Christ there interprets, God and Riches; And therefore
the said Noble Man said well, who so loves God, cannot set his affection upon
the world: For surely, as the Shadows are always greater, when the heat of
the day is decreased, the Sun being then in declination from the Meridionall
point: But otherwise the Sun rising, and ascending, they are far less, and
decrease: So is it in the opposition between the love of spiritual graces,
and the desire of Temporal and worldly things; for as that waxes cold and
number in man, so these are in greatest vigor; contrarily, as that increases in
zeal toward God, so these vain, and foolish carking cares for Riches always
unstable, and commonly hurtful, are weakened, and vanish clean away. And to
these godly Acknowledgements of infirmities, fighting as it were by murmuring,
and grudging against Gods providence, that other Noble Man ascribed his assent
also; saying, you have greatly to praise God, who by his holy Fire, has
wasted, and consumed in you, that frozen hardness of the heart against him,
through despairing of his goodness, in supplying to your wants, maintenance for
your self, your Children, household, and family, in which state of weakness of
faith, he suffers the greater part of men to die, and to carry to their
graves that false suppose, arising out of possessing so much, as is to be
required for the maintenance of their Port, and it may be, my self am one of
those.

But it is meet we correct this our perverse Judgment; and confess that our
state, and liuelihood, is very good and blessed, in as much, as not having a
superfluity of plenty, and yet not suffering want in extremity, we are
succored, and relieved of God, as touching a competencie, in the use of all
Necessities, fitting to the clothing, and feeding our families; in which state
whosoever is found, he may well acknowledge Gods provident care over him and
his, and be content to suffer affliction, which is but his fatherly
chastisement, and without grudging, or despair, to submit wholly our wit to his
wisdom, Math. 9. ver. 32.
who knows that we have need of Meat, and drink, for our life, and also
Clothing for the Body, as Christ tells us.

Let us then after the example of these two worthy noble men, Eclesiastes 7. 4.
ver. 6.
go to the house of Mourning, where the fear of the wise is, there to see the
hand of God, for the amendment of our lives, there shall we be sighted with the
sight Ecclesiastes 6. ver. 9.
of the Eye, which Solomon says, is better* then to walk in the lusts of the
heart, for in this house are we schooled, to a quietness, and peace of the
Conscience, fixed in the Meditation of Gods providence, and so taught, to be
content with that God gives us, for life, and not to follow the desires of the
flesh, never satisfied, which is one of the greatest Tortures that can happen
to increase affliction upon misery without all comfort. To him that says, Why
is it, that the former days were better then these? Solomon tells,
Ecclesiastes 7. v. 12.
Thou do not enquire wisely of this thing: for, what is this, but to murmr
against Gods justice in punishing thee for thy sins?

Let us be of S. Paul's mind, who says, that 1. Tim. 6. ver. 6.
Godliness is great Riches, if a man be content with that he has. The want of a
due consideration hereof, has bredde many, and those in a manner inexpiable
Inconveniences, annoying the whole state of our life, in matrers of both
Religion, and manners. For, who does say with Job in his Soul, If I have
sinned the^ thou will straightly look unto me, and wilt not hold me guiltles
of mine iniquity. Job. 10. 14. Or who with David calls to Psalm. 77. ver. 6.
Remembrance a song of Thanksgiving in the night, and communeth with his own
heart, that his Spirit may search diligently, To know himself, and his whole
life; To sift his gifts, in what case they stand; if good, whether put forth
to the good of others, for the honoring his Name, of whom he has received
them; if defective, and faulty, whether of their own nature, or abused
through security; in both, to seek to God for amendment by his spirit, that
his will may be obeyed of us in all things.

But how can this search of the Spirit be in our Souls, when the keye that
should open the door of the closet of our hearts, is not had of us? I mean a
Consideration of our selves, and of God, in his Mercies and judgments. The and
is to be considered in the course of our lives, wherein, it will appear,
whether rightly understood, and accordingly followed or not, by the works that
we do, and in them also shall we manifest that good and godly consideration,
which we ought to have of God, in his mercies, and judgments; For these are
rewarders of our works in this life, either with Pain, or Joy; Joy, the
object of his mercy: Pain, of his Judgment toward us; in both to be
glorified, (yet is his mercy above all his works;) If we do well by (h)
faith, applying our Talent (d) Mat. 25 ver. 20. 21.
with increase, which we receive from God, to that end Mercy steps forth to
embrace us; and to double them upon us, if by laying our Talent up in a Napkin,
and hiding it. Judgment has the hearing and determining (e). Luk 19 ver. 20.
etc.
the cause, and is to punish also; I say, the Meditation hereof, rightly
construed, and fitly accommodated to the matter in hand, will make us
acceptable to God in the Course of our life: for as much as concerning the
world, and the Riches thereof, we shall use the things of this world, as if we
used them not; and so enjoying the peace of Conscience, through this grace of
God, have a longing to be dissolved, and to be with Christ our peace, who
has joined us in himself Ephe. 2. ver. 14.
to God his father. Who then has fruit by the Meditation of this Mortality?
To answer this Question by illation of the Contraries, is to the intelligent,
an instruction. For the Doctrine of Contraries is one, and the same, because in
the Negative contrary, is an implication of the Affirmative contrary to it.
And therefore, I say, who so has set his whole affection, upon the things of
this world, making them his Treasure, that man whosoever, has no true sense of
this Meditation. For his heart is far from any Thought sanctified to the
Consideration of his end. The Spirit does not well relish to him, that has
sauourly tasted of the Flesh: Christ is sour to him, because he delights in
the world, and accepts it sweet. So then, not the Rich, and Covetous person
can reap any sound benefit of this meditation: For to him the remembrance of
Death Eccle. 41 ver. 1.
and mortality is bitter: because he is a man that lives at rest in his
possessions, and has nothing to vex him, yea, has prosperity in all things
etc: the which wealth, and Riches, ease, and quietness, he now dying, must needs
loose, and forgo, with all the delight, and Treasures, where in his heart was
fixed, when the young man in the Gospel was willed of Christ, to Matt 19.
sell all he had, and to follow him, he was sorrowful; for he had great
possessions. A Rich man says Christ, shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven: whither, whosoever will have passage, must first forsake the worlds
mammon, and prepare his way, by the meditation of Death, which the Rich man
cannot hear of, that delights in his Riches, for to him the thinking on
Death, which depriueth him of those things, wherein his chief delight is,)
must needs be loathsome, with great dread and horror of mind, For Isai 5. 8.
woe unto them, that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there
be no place (viz: for the poor to dwell in) that ye may be placed by your
selves in the midst of the Earth. These are of that generation, the wise man
speaks of, Pro. 30. 14. two holy Teeth are as Swords, and their jaws as
knives to eat up the afflicted out of the Earth. And the Poor from among men,
the horseleach with her two Daughters, which cry, Give, give, also the
Gormandizing Epicures, etc.

Also the gormandizing Epicures, that live in delitiousnes of fare, abusing the
creatures of God unto easeful, and wanton disports, are merely adverse from
this meditation, as being unfit Auditors to the doctrine of man's mortality.
These make their Philip. 3. 19.
Bellies their God, passing over their days, in joy, and gladness, Isai. 22.
13. 1. Cor. 15. ver. 32.
as it is in Isay, slaying Oxen, and Killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking
wine. And as the Apostle out of the Prophet there speaks, say, (in a scorn
and derision of the Resurrection) Let us eat, and let us drink, for to morrow
we shall die: persuading herein themselves, that they shall die like
brutebeasts, having no account to make of their Actions done in their Souls
and bodies, because they imagine they perish both together. These I say, are
such, whom the holy Ghost mentions in the Act. 17. 18. 19.
Acts, to have mocked at Paul's preaching of Jesus, and of the Resurrection,
calling him Babbler, and a setter forth of strange Gods. And these in all
likelihood can have no benefit, by meditating a dying date: which though they
know to be certain, yet do never think of it, or fearing the approach,
tremble at the thought thereof, and may rightly do so, for there is a woe
denounced against them, (g) Isai. 5. 11. ver. 12.
that rise up earelie to follow drunckennesse, and to them that continue
until Night, till the wine do inflame them. And the Harp and viole, Timbrel,
and Pipe, and wine, are in their feasts, and regard not the works of the Lord,
nor consider the work of his hands. For they say, we are borne at all (h)
wisd 2. 2 ver. 6. ver. 7 ver. 9.
adventure, and we shall be hereafter, as though we had never been. Come
therefore, Let us enjoy the pleasures that are present; Let us cheerfully use
the Creatures, as in youth; Let us fill our selves with costly wine and
Ointements, and let not the flower of our life pass by us. Let us all be
partakers of our wantonness; let us leave some token of our pleasure in every
place, for that is our portion, and this is our Lot. There is also ^ third
kind of men, called, the Damned Crewe, whom their own wickedness has
blinded, who cannot (i) wisd. 2. ver. 21.
make any good use of this fore said meditation, being themselves wholly given
over to drink iniquity like water; (k) Job. 15. ver. 16.
and to work all abomination with greedines; These speak good of evil, and
evil of good; These put (l) Isai. 5. 20.
Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness: Bitter, for Sweet, and Sweet for
Sour; As being not ashamed of any sin, are hardened in desperation to all
impiety: For the fear of God, is not before their Eyes, and the ways of
Righteousness they have not known: Psalm. 56. verse 7. Psalm. 94. 7.
They (m) Psalm. 53. verse 1.
are altogether corrupt, and do abominable wickendes. They say in there
hearts, there is no God: for ( u) they think, they shall escape by iniquity:
supposing the Lord shall not see, and the God of Jacob will not regard it. But
he, that teaches man knowledge, will make them to understand, that these
thoughts are vain, and abominable. For he has planted the Ear, that he
must needs hear: and he has formed the Eye, that he must needs see. And the
woe denounced by Isay shall be against them, and upon them unto punishment,
because they Isai. 5. 18.
draw iniquity with Cords of vanity* and finne, as with cart Ropes; For
says Salomo^, wisd. ^. 19
horrible is the end of the wicked generation. So that I may conclude, to these
vnr^penting sinners, who are the Reprobates and cast-awayes of uncircumcised
hearts, and searde Consciences, death of all other, is Gaul, wormwood, and
Coloquintida, at whose remembrance they are affrighted, but at the ^ight
thereof, laying open unto them the Book of enditement in which they read
their Sins engrossed, and the punishment allotted for them, are altogether
astonished, and lamentably passionated with horror infinitely tormenting. Can
these then partake* fruit and benefit of this Meditation, who, ioying only in
the fruition of this life, fear death, as having no hope of the resurrection
to a further life, but rather unto an eternal Death; and yet so dying, they
shall in a sort always live, that by living always unto Torments, they may
always be dying in Torments; For the state of the Damned, is a dying life, and
a living Death, never, and yet ever living, and dying. O miserable Catiffes,
who live here in their Sins, to dye in them; and so dying, live in perpetual
pain of hell fire, never to dye by them. But this is most agreeable to the
Rule of Justice, that, an infinite Evil, which is Sin, committed here against
the infinite good, which is GOD, should receive punishment their also infinite,
to answer the price paid for it which was infinite, and ^estimable. Wherefore
let no such, nor any Rich gluttonous Epicureall Worldling, think to receive
good of this Meditation, who have excluded themselves from the use of it, being
far removed from the favor of God, for which it is made. Who then, to repeat
the very words of the former proposed Question has fruit? etc. The aunsweare
by the affirmative is, they that have lost the taste of all the falsely supposed
filicitie of this miserable life, knowing it to be mere vanity, and in this
sense mortify and sacrifice themselves daily, living here in the world;
showing after the example of Paul, a wonderful desire of being loosed out of
this body of Phil. 1. 23.
flesh; which Paul says is best of all. For hereby they avoid three, the
greatest enemies of Mankind: 1. The World. 2. The Flesh. 3. The Devil. The
World a^luring, the flesh consenting, the Devil executing, and accusing: all
Accomplices to treason against the soul, of purpose to overthrow the state
thereof.

In this respect, the great misery of this our life, with infinite dangers
many ways pretended, and intended against it, craves a very serious and godly
Meditation, of death and mortality. And art thou, o my soul, prepared to the
hour in which thou must of force be freed, from the prison of this Body; and
from it, be separated, till the day of thy last doom? Be exercised daily and
hourly in a settled consideration of the death of Christ, which he suffered for
thee upon the Cross; of the glory in the heavens above, which he by that his
Passion has purchased unto thee. This well considered, and perpensed of thee
long before, must needs withdraw thee clean from the world, and draw thee
nearer unto Heaven; and by this means being sequestered from among men, will
cause thee, even now, living with them on earth (that notwithstanding) to be
associated with the Angels in heaven, though here as yet absent in body from
them. For so those senses of the Body (which otherwise are ministers to it of
all pollution and sin) shall more religiously serve to thy only use, o my
soul: 1. The Eyes, shall be turned away, that they behold no vanity; 2. the
Ears stopped, that they shall hear no leaud and cursed speeches; The Tongne,
as tied and stiffened, shall utter no words, either of blasphemy, to wrong
GOD in his honor; or of sla^nder, to injury a Neighbor in his Name. These
with all the other parts of the Body (whereof thou art made the Mistress and
Gouernesse to have command) shall now be conformable to thy hests. The Eyes,
as the Eyes of a Psa. 1 ^3 2.
servant, shall continually wait and attend upon thee, to be lifted up after
thy direction, to him that dwells in the highest Heaven. The Ear; as the
Pro. 18. 15.
Ear of the wise that seeks Learning, being wholly sanctified unto thee,
shall now wholly and resolutely hearken to the words that proceed out of the
mouth of God, thereby to instruct thy understanding, which thou have from God,
thy maker. The Tongue, schooled by thee in the discipline and institution of
Piety, shall be as the Pro. 15. 2.
Tongue of the wise, to use knowledge a^ight; which is to Psalm. 71. 24.
talk of the Righteousness of GOD, daily; and to Psalm. 35. 28.
utter his praises every day, by the Commandment of the Holy Ghost in S.
Peter, Pet. 4. 11.
speaking as the words of GOD; which make to Edification, and building up of
the inwardman, through Faithin Christ.

Thus being 1. Cor. 6. 11.
sanctified in his Name by the Spirit of GOD, o my Soul, thou must needs have
his Coloss. 3. 16. 17.
word dwell in thee plenteously in all wisdom, so that whatsoever thou shall
now do, in word, or deed; thou shall do all, in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

For those earthy members of the body, being Coloss. 3. 5.
mortified unto all uncleanness and evil concupiscence (which S. John
confineth, to the John 2. 16.
Lust of the flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of life, and reckons
them all to be of the world:) and by the benefit of this Mortification, thou
being Coloss. 3. 10.
renewed in knowledge after the Image of him, who created thee: O Soul, how
can thou now, but appear pure, and acceptable in his sight, having the Pro.
15. 33.
instruction of his fear, unto wisdom in Christ Jesus?

And now, o Soul, thou being in this blisfull fruition of Purity, and
sanctification, in a manner stated, through the grace of thy Maker, and Redeemer
Christ Jesus, now I say, thou may boldly, in him, avouch, that thou art well
prepared to leave thy prison of clay, in which thou art enclosed, and by it
detained as an exile from thy true country, where is thy sure abiding place of
an everlasting habitation, even in the heavenly Jerusalem, sited upon the Holy
mount Sion, where thou art enfranchized into the liberty of the Sons of God.
For as yet thou art but a Pilgrim upon earth, wandering up and down in a
wilderness of vanity, lodged always Guest-wise, without certainty of abode,
as a Farmer and Tenant of the world at will, upon a sudden, even in an hour not
excepted to be discharged; for thy Mansion is above, whither, if, whilst here
abiding, thou do in thy thoughts and endeavors, truly aspire; thou may
in the time appointed for the calling thee home, assuredly ascend, and be
received there into that city, which S. John says, is laid out (v)
foure-square, whose light is the glory of God, and the Lamb; in which light
thou shall walk with the People (u) Reave. 12 16. Verse. 23*
that are saved, for such as are Phil. 4. 3.
written in the Lambs book of life, which is the Eze. 13. 9.
Register, and writing of the House of Israel. Therefore, o Soul, if thou do
earnestly affect this place, a place full of all content, of bliss, and
tranquillity, seek for it here, by mortified affections, and sanctified
cogitations, drawn from worldly things, and fixed upon the heavenly. Begin here
thy after everlasting life, whilst in this thy daily dying body, thou as yet
seem to breathe and live. And because thy passage thereto, must needs be, by
the death of the body, thy house and prison: It shall be fitting for thee, to
think daily and hourly, of that thy dissolution. This Meditation would be
engraven in the Table of the heart, where thy seat is; a thing of all other
most remarkable, in Letters of Or, to cause a better remembrance of the worth
thereof, with greater delight also unto the eyes of thy understanding* Take
examples of like Memorials from others; partly Divine, partly profane, and
heathen

Divine, as the Exo. 28. 30.
Breast Plate of Judgment, the Vrim, and the Thummim, upon Aarons heart, to put
him in mind of his Office, which consisted in knowledge and Holiness; The
Deuteronomy. 27. 2, 3.
writing all the words of the Law upon stones by Gods appointment, in the
land of Canaan beyond Jorden, for a remembrance to all them, that God had
consecrated that land to his service.

And before they entered over Jorden to possess that Land, Moses exhorted the
people of Israel, to Deuteronomy. 6. 7
rehearse the Commandments to their Children continually; to talk of them,
tarying in the house; Walking by the way; Lying down; and Rising up. Also for
a sign to be Verse 8.
bound upon their hands, to be as Frontlets between their Eyes. Also to write
them upon the Posts of the Houses* Verse. 9.
and upon the Gates. And this was commanded, to the end, that they might the
more surely, Deuteronomy. 11. 18.
be laid up in their hearts, and in their Souls.

And likewise the Numb. 15. 38, 39.
Fringes, upon the Borders of their garments, with Ribands of blew silk, were
commanded by Moses from the Lord; that, as is written, when they looked upon
them, they might remember all the Commandments (e) Mark 13. 38. Luke 20, 46.
of the Lord, and do them: Which in Saint Mark, and Luke, Christ notes to
have bin used of the Pharisees, in the name of long Robes.

The divine examples of Memorials, for instruction unto Religion and godliness
are these. And for thy Instruction, o my soul, that in like manner also, thou
may further the meditation of Mortality, by having always in thy sight,
written as in the heart, these words, Remember to die, which is the end of
this life. Philip King of Macedon, and father to Alexander the great, feared to
have well instructed himself herein; when notwithstanding the greatness of
his worldly pomp, and sovereignty in Greece, reckoned himself by the common
course of Nature, to be subjected unto death, and took order accordingly, with
a Page of his chamber, to be advertised of that his Mortality, every Morning
at his Chamber door, in these words: Philip, remember that thou art a man.
Which is, as much to say, as that thou must die, as other men. Thou have
Records of Antiquity, touching this very point of Mortality, which thou art
advised to practice by daily Meditation, for the better conforming and settling
thy resolution therein.

Among many and sundry examples of Remembrance, registered in the Annals of
former Ages, and left to the posterity for Imitation, these two or three which
I shall recite are memorable.

I read, that the manner and custom of the Grecians was, presently upon the
choice of their Emperors, to send Masons, which were workers of Monuments, and
Tombs unto them, with four sorts of the best Marbles, and to know of them, in
what manner, and fashion, and of what sort of Marble, they can be pleased, to
appoint their Sepul^hre to be errected unto them yet living. This of purpose
put in use, to abate the pride of that their so high, and eminent estate,
agreeable to that in the Psalm, Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
I said, ye are Gods, and ye all are children of the most High: But ye shall
die as men, and ye Princes shall fall like others.

And it seems, the Popes of Rome, by an usurped Title of prehem^nencie, the
Graund-masters of Emperors, and Lords of Kingdoms, have in another kind
imitated this Action of remembering their Mortality. For it is also written,
that at the Consecration of those holy Fathers, forsooth, is two Hards, or
Flax, burned before them, and so caused to flame out; to which is adjoined
these words* So passes away the glory of this world, in manner, as the flame
of that Towe or Flax burning, is suddenly exti^guished.

Well says one to this purpose, There is no King Emperor, nor Monarch, but
may ^inde about his Finger these words; Eccle. 10. ver. 9.
Why art thou proud, o earth, and ashes? For what are Princes by nature, but
men, whose Psalm. 146 ver. 4.
breath dpearteth, and they return to their Earth. To these former alleged,
which are examples for worth remarkable, let be adjoined those sensible, and
feeling speeches of that good Emperor Adrian, as making also greatly for
credit to that Truth, for they purport a memorable document of man's
mortality testified of himself. This Adrian, a little before his death,
commending Antonius Pius his adopted Emperor to the Senators, Consuls, and
other Officers of Rome, spoke thus; Fathers conscript, you see for a truth,
how upon the sudden, Death not expected, and less doubted, has surprised me
unawares, and by how small occasion it takes my life from me. I may herein be
an example unto you, and to all men, to hold it a Truth most certain; that,
that part of life is m^st commonly in peril, and soonest fails, in which for
pertainty of longer days, we had reposed our most trust, and best hopes.

And, may I not say, why do thou, o Father Pope, bear thy self so stately
insolent above Princes, in the pride of thy triple Crown? Thou vsurpest the
authority of God, to pardon sins by Indulgences: but where is thy power to
exempt thine own foul body of sin from death?

A man, says David, Psalm. 49. 7 Verse 9.
can by no means redeem his brother, he cannot give his Ransom to God, that
he may live still for ever, and not see the grave.

Art not thou then a soiourner in Rome, as thy Predecessors were before thee,
whose place of spiritual whoredom thou now do occupy? Is not thy time, as
was (k) Wis. 2. 2. verse. 3.
theirs, a shadow that passes away, not returneable? And is not thy breath
also, as the smoke in thy Nostrils like others, which is clean vanished, as
the soft Air?

Let that thy Predecessor of the Guelfian Family tell thee, who upon an
Ashwednesday (being a day of Shrift) besprinkled the face of a Gibeline, being
in opposition to him, and his name,) with Ashes, saying; Remember, o Gi^^line,
that thou art ashes, and into ashes thou shall return.

But where is he now, and where are the rest? They are al gone, and are now as
if they had never Wis. 2. 2.
been, they are no where to be found: 1. Chro. 29. 15.
There is no abiding; no waiting for them to Wis. 2. 5.
return, for it is fast sealed, so that no man comes again.

Tell me thou that These. 2. 4.
exaltest thy self above all that is called God, sitting as God, in the Temple
of God, showing thy self that thou art God, and saying, thou can shut up
heaven, and open it at thy pleasure: Tell me, I say, if thou can the way of
an Pro. 30. ver. 19.
Eagle in the air; or the way of a Serpent upon a Stone; or can thou find
the way of a ship in the midst of the Sea?

What does then Wis. 5. 8.
Pride profit thee? or what profit does the Pomp of Riches bring thee?

Surely, when an Wis. 5. 12*
Arrow is shot at a mark it parts the Air, but no man can know where it went
through, because it comes immediately together again.

Inquire, I pray thee, of the former Age, and prepare thy self to search of
those forefathers thy Predecessors. Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee,
that in the death of a man there is no recovery? Wis. 2. 1.
neither was any known, has returned from the grave?

As the foolish confidence they had in their Pomp, and worldly honors is cut
off, and themselves consumed in their own vanities; so shall thy Job. 8. 14.
be, even as the house of a Spider, which being swept away is no more seen.
For thou, and all the Princes of the world, are made as the Clay; which is
fashioned out of the dust, and therefore must of netessitie be brought into
dust again, which cannot be known any more.

How necessary a thing it is for all degr^es of men, as well the High, as the
Low; Noble, and Ignoble; Rich, and Poor; and ^ow behoofefull to their Souls
welfare both now and hereafter, to represent to their remembrance the memory
of death and mortality, by some good means whatsoever, in any sort howsoever;
may easily be coniectured by that has been already spoken, in regard as well
of the Misery of this present life, which is transitory, as of the happiness
of the life in expectancie, which is everlastingly enduring.

And it may seem, that the due consideration hereof, has exercised the wits
of the former Age, in devising, and inuenting fit objects representative of
this kind. I have recited a little before two examples, to this purpose to be
also remembered. It comes likewise to mind, that among the Egyptians, it was
a custom in their solemn Feasts, and Banqueting cheer, to cause the Figure
and shape of a dead body portraited in wood, to be carried about, by one
appointed to that Office, and to show it to every one there, being a Gu^st;
speaking to them severally, in these words; Turn your Eyes hither, and whilst
you are now eating, and drinking, remember that thou shall be, as this is,
after death, which is stealing on apace, and will seize upon thee unawares; if
thou think not of it betimes.

A worthy wise custom, instituted by them first, and brought into use, of
purpose, to put them in mind of Temperance and sobriety in meats and
drinks, which commonly produce excessive appetites, from whence issues, foul
enormious crimes and offenses, perciudicing the quiet of a godly Christian life.

To this wise judicial custom of the Egyptians, is much agreeable, the well
advised course of them, who of purpose, or howsoever, carry about with them in a
Ring, either engraven, or enamelled, the Image of deaths head, and otherwise
also in some Table pictured, and proposed, to the view of the Eye; that so
presented daily in sight to the inward Common sense, and to the Memory, The
Mind also may the sooner, and more seriously be invited to an apprehension
thereof, by it to be presently stirred up to meditate the consideration of Man's
mortality. For in deed, what is, or can be more terrible to a natural man,
then the Dissolution of the Soul from the Body? The which, as it cannot be
without some agony, though not alike in all; so the same represented to the
Eye of the mind, by much, and often thinking upon it, must necessarily cause
fears to any man, especially as then not resolved to dye, and less prepared
thereto, because he has not taken a view of his state, by the Account he is
presently to make. For surely, as it is appointed unto men, that they shall
once Heb. 9. ver. 27.
die; so after that comes the judgment. The which being a consequent to the
natural death, and in it self fearful, must also of necessity, make Death
seem the more terrible.

For, whither is the Soul, once parted from the Body, to go, and pass, but to
the Cor. 5. ver. 10.
Tribuniall seat of Judgment, even before GOD, to render an Account of all
Thoughts, Words, and deeds, done in the Body, and to receive according to the
same. For which cause the Apostle there calls that day of Judgment, that
Verse. 11.
terror of the Lord, which is meant in the words, appear before the Judgment
seat of Christ, and receive the things, etc. to be the second Judgment, which
will be general, for the Sheep, and Goats; The Sheep unto the right hand, to
hear the sentence of Glory; Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. The Goats on
the left hand, to hear the sentence of damnation; Depart from me ye cursed,
etc.

This I speak by way of Note for distinction sake, because of the particular
Judgment, which is appointed also to man presently upon his departure out of
this world. For no sooner are we mortality dead and passed from thence, but
we are translated to the place of eternity, either for Bliss, or for Curse,
even in the hour; yea, in the very moment of that hour of the Souls
dissolution, eternal joy and felicity, is either gotten, or lost. The (z)
Tree (y) Matthew. ver. 41.
falling, whether to the South, or North, lies there in the place, in which it
falls, as has been said before. And is manifested for a Truth in the
Examples of Lazarus, and Dives. Luke 16. 23.
Lazarus died, and was presently carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.
Dives dyed also, and was in Hell torments.

As this is most true, and constantly to be auerred, so ought it not to be
just cause of scrupulositie to any, thereby to make question, whether for the
reason of that first Judgment, this other, which is the second, and shall be
the last, should therefore seem the less necessarily to be had. GOD
forbid, this idle, and incomposit, yea, most impious doubt, should once enter
into the cogitation of any true Christian well devoted to the best sanctifred
knowledge of him. Rather let every one seek to satisfy themselves out of S.
Paul; who teaches, that 2. Cor. 5. verse. 10.
every man shall receive, according to that he has done in his body, whether
it be good or evil: which cannot be understood to be, at the time of our
Natural death, for that the Gene. 3. 19. luke 16. 22. 23. 1. Cor. 15. 51. unto
55.
Body then, goes into the Earth; the Soul separated from it, to the place of
either joy or pain, as before is showed, till the time that it return to the
Body, raised from out the dust, to partake with it upon the sentence, in that
day of Doom, according, as it lived with us here on earth in doing good, or
ill. This is very pregnantly witnessed by John in his Gospel, where speaking of
the power most sovereign, and high above all power, which Christ has of John.
5. verse. 26. 27. 28. 29. Dan. 12. 2. 3.
life and death, and in the virtue of that power shall execute judgment, as he
is both God and Man; says, that the hour shall come, in the which, all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice. And they shall be come forth, that have
done good, unto the Resurrection of life: But they that have done evil, unto
the resurrection of condemnation. That day will be to the godly a day of Joy
and endless comfort, for they shall be accounted among the children of God, and
have their portion with the Saints. All tears are wiped from their Eyes, for
they shall weep no more; their mourning is now turned into perpituall joy and
gladness. But to the wicked who have wearied themselves in the way of iniquity
and perdition, that day shall be a most terrible day, a day of heaviness, and
lamentation without pity, for their Laughings shall be turned into weepings
immeasurable; and their worldly pleasures into pains insufferable. By this
already spoken, is sufficiently argued the second Judgment.

Yet this notwithstanding, may easily be persuaded by reason also, for that
we do not at our departure from hence, carry away with us dying, the whole
measure of demerit, and evil. For either our Example of evil living in words
and deeds; or our writings, being tainted with errors, (deprauing the sense,
and understanding of others unto vanity, and lies,) have been means of great
corruption unto them after our death, for which men so il deserving in their
life time, could not the^ dying receive their judgment, because that the
corruption occasioned thereby, came to pass after their death. And it is a
reason making forceable for the second Judgment already argued out of the
Scripture. In which, eue^ that which was not known at our death, being not then
acted, but falling out afterward, shall be then revealed; and so the Justice,
and Mercy of God, shall be manifested upon the good and bad; in heaven mercy; in
hell, justice for ever. Understand this, o my Soul, and learn wisdom, for
Wis. 8. 4
she is the Schoole-mistres of the knowledge of God This teaches thee, that
Wis. 2. 1. verse. 2.
life is short and tedious. That the breath of man is as smoke in his
Nostrils, and his words, as a Spark, raised out of his heart. Think
therefore upon this last gasp, which will make an end of all vital Breath,
and meditate of it, before it comes and seize upon thee, least it surprise
thee so unawares, as that all thoughts, not fore-stalled with a due
consideration hereof, nor well exercised in it, do foolishly perish, and
suddenly leave thee to thine own prejudice.

Men are deceived in this, that they imagine they die not, before they give
over their last breath, not perceiving in themselves a decay of life daily,
which is the cause that men through this false suppose, promises to themselves
a length of days in their youth, and middle Age; because, as they say, Death
is then far distant: whereas even then, life passes away, as a Wis. 2. 4.
trace of a Cloud, and comes to naught, as the mist, that is driven away
with the Beams of the Sun, and cast down with heat thereof.

How then are they fowly deceived in conceit, that conjecture an extent measure
of days, by the life in the Morning, as if both the Midday, and the Evening,
were necessary in consequent, to the Morning breath, and for continuance of
life to a multitude of days.

But do thou, o my Soul, take unto thee, the instruction of wisdom, which
teaches Soberness and Wis. 8. 7.
Prudence, that by it thou may understand, Nothing to be nearer to any
thing, then is death, to life; and so in the consideration hereof, be settled,
through a Godly prepared thought, against that day, which will come, as thou
art taught, like 1. These. 5. ver. 2. 6.
a Thief, stealing upon thee in the night. Thou must therefore watch in prayer
continually, that thou be not surprised unawares; which thou may avoid; if,
as Solomon warns thee, thou shall Act. 12. ver. 13.
hearken to the end of all: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: for this
is the whole duty of Man. The true fear of God, has for the fruit, Wisdom,
(for he that Pro. ^8. verse. 7.
keeps the Law of God, is a child of vnderstand^ng) and for Reward,
happiness, for the man that fears abuses, standing in awe of GOD, is
pronounced Blessed. For this cause, the Verse 14.
house of ^c^les. ^. verse 4.
Mourning, and Sorrow, is preferred, before the house of Mirth and Feasting*
where we shall learn to Micha. 6. 8.
humble our selves, and carefully to walk with God.

And unless we do here in this life, so address our ways before God, that
we may be thought worthy in his mercy to walk with him, (which must be in
Sanctity, and Holiness,) Let us not think that we have truly meditated the
state of our Mortality, for (if done eff^ctually,) it must be with a vigilant
Eye to the day of our Resurrection, in which we shall every one be called to
an Luke 16. verse 2.
account of our Stewardship; how we have bestowed our several gifts in this
life, which God gave us, to glorify him in the necessary good uses of them:
In which sense, that day, must needs be a day of great fear and horror, of
much trembling, and p^ine to all, as many as shall be found to be the Goats;
for theirs shall be shame, and Dan. 12. verse. 2.
perpetual contempt, Matthew. 13. 42.
cast into the F^rnace of fire, where shall be weeping and Gnashing of tenth.

But to such as be found to be Sheep, which are the wise and the just, who
have kept the true fear of God, and his Religion, they shall Dan. 12. verse. 3.
shine, as the Brightness in the Firmament, or, as the Matthew. 13. 43.
Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father: Because they have not only committed
no iniquity; but, yea, rather done the works of Peace, Righteousness, and
Love; and therefore they shall be received into a possession of joy and
happiness; as then, in that great day of the second Judgment, shall be made
manifest to all indifferently.

To conclude, and to shut up this discourse of Man's mortality, both necessary
and comfortable to the godly, I say with S. Peter; 2. Pet. 3. verse. 11.
Seeing all these things must be dissolved, (viz, The Heavens melt with heat,
and the Earth with the works therein, be burnt up) what manner persons ought
we to be in holy Conversation, and Godliness, looking for, and hasting unto
the coming of that day of GOD.

Wherefore seeing we look for such things, Let us be Ver. ^4.
diligent to be found in him in Peace, without Spotte, and blameless?

Let us Mark 1. 33.
take he^de, watch, and pray, as Christ admonishes in his Gospel. For we know
not when the time is, whether at Even, or at Midnight, or at Cock-crowing, or
Verse 35.
in the Dawning.

CHRIST the King of Heaven; the Riches of his Servants; true Treasure of the
Souls of his children, which ought always to be within them; So sanctify
our Thoughts in the Meditation of that Day, as that, when He commmeth, We may
be found, not sleeping, but watchfu^l and waking to him; even for his own
Names sake.

Amen.
A Premonition for the addressing our Souls unto a Devotion seriously zealous
at the time of prayer.
EXceeding great is the goodness of God, that requires of his Children the
familiar talk, by godly, and devout prayer. Yea, infinitely Ephe. 2. ver. 4.
rich is he in (a) mercy, that both gives them a willing affection to pray; and
affords also a meede for the same, even the effect of their desires, as out of
his own wisdom himself sees meet, and convenient.

See the wonderful force, of true Prayer. It is powered forth by man in Earth:
It works for man above in Heaven: It is the Keye of the Celestial Gate, to
open the way for Ascension up thither, even to the Throne of Gods grace, that
Gods mighty deliverance, may from thence in like manner have passage, to
descend for man's relief at all times of need.

Will thou offer an (a) acceptable (a) sacrifice unto God? offer Prayers, even
the (b) calves of thy Hebr* 13 ver. 15. 16.
Lips?

Will thou daily converse with God? use (b) daily (b) (c) Luk 21. ver. 36.
Math. 18. 20
Prayer, which is the spiritual conference the devout Soul can have with God.

Will thou taste how sweet the Lord is? Inuit him by James. 5 ver. 15.
Prayer to the house of thy heart. For it is Prayer, undoubtedly, that pleases
God greatly.

But the manner how to pray discreetly to please God, is here carefully to be
heeded. This consideration is confirmed by five words. 1. Wisely. 2. Ardently.
3. Humbly. 4 Faithfully* 5. Confidently.

1. Wisely. That Gods glory in chief, and next our Neighbors good, be
respected according to the Rule of Christ* Love God Math. 22. ver. 37. 39.
above all* and thy neighbor as thy self: understand thy Neighbor, to be any
whom thou may conveniently help at any time, as Luke 10. ver. 37.
Christ teaches.

Now as touching the things for which thou art to pray, Know, that herein thou
art to be directed by the word of God his promise, and according to it, thou
art to pray, either absolutely, or with a Condition.

If absolutely, then are the things of such Nature, as to which God has bin
pleased to tie himself by promise absolutely, as are his Spiritual graces, and
other such, as by which his glory is advanced.

If with a Condition; thou must accordingly pray condit^onally. And such things
are Temporal benefits. And in all these, let Christ be unto thee an example,
to ^eeld thy will in all thy petitions, unto the Luke. 22. ver. 42.
blessed will of God.

2. Ardently. For there must be in thee a mind stirred with an heat of
Cogitations, and inward Thoughts, fully settled to this heavenly meditation.

Thou must remember now, that he to whom thou praiest, is a Spirit, and
therefore to John. 4. ver. 23. 24.
be worshipped in the Spirit only.

Will thou then 1. Corin. 14. ver. 15.
pray in the Spirit? Enter into the Chamber of thy Heart. Lock thy self in
there, with all the most holy Thoughts and faculties of a sanctified Mind,
that all cares of worldly affairs be clean shut out from thence at the time
of talking with God. For how can thou desire God to hear and attend thy
Prayers, when in praying, thou neither hear nor attendest thy self, being
distracted with Thoughts of mundan and earthly matters.

3. Humbly. That all thoughts of self conceited worthiness, and Meritorious
works, be clean abandoned out of our Minds in time of Prayer. In which time,
we must remember, that we present our selves before God, merely petitioners
and Suppliants, to crave that, which, as we know we do not deserve to have
granted, so we cannot claim, by right title of Merit, to exact the same.

Therefore we must pray in Christ's name, through him, and for his sake only,
to be heard; otherwise we pray vainly, and derogatiuely to his merits, who
only is our Heb. 1 ver 10.
Altar.

4. Faithfully. For how can we have a good conscience, 1. Timoth. 1. ver. 5.
if faith unfeigned be away? and where is faith, if Love and Charity, which is
the end of the Commandment, be not present, to commend our Prayers unto God?

And having then no good conscience, can we pray, as secured of Gods help,
being destituted of his promise, which his word, ( without which there can be
no faith,) must warrant and make good? Have therefore faith, that we be not
doubtful of Gods promises, which are, yea and Amen.

5. Confidently. To argue a perseverance in praying; at no time to be
discouraged, though we are not answered from God, according to our own
desires, being assured, that God does not deny, which h^ deferreth to give;
but in his good time will be ready to hear, and grant our requests, as shall
be both for his glory, and our own good.

Let us therefore be confident in Prayer, continuing therein fervently, for all
men, without 1. Thessa. 1. ver. 2* and 3
ceasing, after Paul's example for the Thessalonians. And according to his
Counsel to Timothy, saying* 1. Timot. 2. ver. 8.
I will, that men pray every where, lifting up James 1. ver. 6. 7. 8.
pure hands, without wrath, and doubting, for it is against faith.

An Advertisement to the Reader. etc,
FOr a more expedit, and ready means to forward Devotion, upon occasion, I
have thought good, to digest into some fit order these Prayers, referring them
Common place wise to their several heads, for any special use in particular.
Advised hereunto by those distinguishing appellations of Prayers, which S. Paul
uses, seeming to note in them a peculiar and proper use, in different
specificall kinds.

And truly, as the matter, (of which Prayers consist,) is distinct, and
diverse, so the manner of praying is not always of a like, and the same nature.

To use then S. Paul's words, (a) There be 1. Prayers, 1. Tim. 2. 1.
There be 2. Supplications. There be 3. Intercessions. And there is also, 4. A
giving of thanks.

Of this have I sufficiently discoursed in my Preface, as to the Intelligent
Reader may appear for his instruction, if he be pleased to aduertize himself
thereof by reading the same.

To come then to the matter in hand, you shall understand, that all the Prayers
herein contained, are in the general name of Prayer mere,

Prayers 1. Petitorie. 2. Supplicatorie, or of supplication. 3. Intercessorie,
or of Intercession. 4. Thanksgiving.

1. Payers mere Petitorie, for spiritual Graces of a simple Nature, absolutely
to be termed Prayers. As are these following.

A necessary, and godly Prayer for the assistance of God his holy Spirit,
against all wandering, extrauagant thoughts, distracting devotion in time of
Prayer, first, and principally to be made, before we pray to God for any thing,
whether Spiritual or Temporal.
Almighty and everlasting God, thou o God (whose Ierem. 33. ver. 2.
Name is the Lord) have mercy upon me, and be pleased to hearken unto the voice
of my prayer, which I make unto thee at this time: I confess that thou Ier.
17. ver. 10.
searchest the hearts, and triest the Reins, as thou speak of thy self;
and 1. Cronic. 28. 9.
understand all the imaginations of Thoughts. Forasmuch then, as it cannot
be unknown unto thee, (who art all wisdom, seeing in secret places, a God at
hand, and ( d) Ierem 23. ver. 23. 24.
not a God far off) that the minds of men in this mortal life, are
wavering, and unstable, easily enterteining vain and idle thoughts, and so
most ready to be diuerted, and seduced by them, (being the mere suggestions
of the devil thine and our Enemy) from the contemplation of thee, our chief
good, and from the invocation of thy most blessed name: My humble and hearty
petition to thee, at this time, devoted to the calling upon thee by Prayer, and
Supplication, is for the assistance, and special direction of the holy Ghost.
For, as thou art a Ihon. chapter 4. ver. 24.
Spirit, by the Nature of thy Godhead; so thou requirest to be worshipped in
Spirit and Truth. Lord I know this, and I desire to do this according to thy
will, revealed to me in thy word; But it is not in me to perform it, as thou
requirest; who by my will, can testify no more, then a bare purpose, and
endeavor of my heart; It is thy work in me, o Lord, when thou art pleased to
show Romans chapter 9. ver. 16.
mercy. Oh then, be pleased, I beseech thee, now to be gracious unto me;
Direct, and guide, the thoughts of my heart; do thou o Lord, sequester, and
address them, wholly to thy self, for this service, which I am now in purpose,
willing to perform unto thee. For who can better discipline my heart, and
fashion it thereunto* then thou? who art the God of my heart, even the first
framer, and maker of it? I have now need of thy grace, yea, of thy great and
most special grace, without which, I can do nothing; that thy preventing, and
assisting grace, to begin, to continue, and to perform this good work, of
praying to thee; a work, which thy self have commanded, and wherein thou
most delightest; Arise therefore, come, and d^scend into my soul; replenish it
with the fulness of thy Spirit, that it may be wholly, and soundly settled unto
thee; raise it, by a f^ruent and zealous devotion, to the true worshipping of
thy Name; For this cause, Remove, from out of it, all unseasonable Cares, of
worldly matters, whatsoever; Lead me, into that my Mat. 6. chapter 6. ver. 6.
Chamber, which thy Christ mentions; and shut thou the door thereof, and do
thou keep it, against all idle Cogitations, which interrupt devotion, and
draw me away from thy worship; that so being brought by thy spirit, into that
quiet closet of my heart, I may sit there, intentive to my prayers only; in
them, embracing thee, as it were perfectly united to thee, without lettes and
hindrances, as far forth, as the infirmities of my flesh may permit;
Otherwise, I shall seem as one of them, whose hypocrisy thy son Christ
taxes out of Matthew, and out of Isaiah the Prophet, to draw Matthew. chapter 15.
ver. 8 Isaiah. 29. 13.
near unto thee with the mouth only, honoring thee with my Lips, when my
heart is far from thee: which were in my Prayers to tempt thee, by abusing
the knowledge of thee, which thou have given me in Christ, who teaches me,
by his Apostle Paul, to 1. Tim. chapter 2. ver. 8.
lift up pure hands, which cannot be, without a mind purged from griefs and
offenses, that do weaken devotion, at the time of calling upon thee, in faith,
as I am there commanded; for I must lift up pure hands, without wrath, or
doubting. Grant this, o Lord, and thou shall forbid the other; and so cause,
by the inspiration of thy holy Ghost, that this good means, by thee appointed
to man, for procuring thy help, and favor, to his relief, and comfort; shall
never be a cause, of thy just wrath, unto Judgment, in thy heavy displeasure,
against my Soul; I beseech thee good Lord, let me find this favor in thine
eyes, for h^s sake, who has said; Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in
John* 6. 23
my Name, he shall give it you. So shall I pray always to thee, and thou shall
hear me, and give me my hearts desire, that whom I know now, in this world,
by Faith, 1. Corint. chapter 13. ver. 12.
seeing him as it were through a glass darkely, I may in the world to come,
See him, (k) face to face. Who with thee, and the holy Ghost, lives for ever.

Amen.
1. A Prayer to the Trinity. The Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, one God.
WE humbly thank thee most merciful father* for our creation after thine own
Image, and all other thy benefits bestowed upon us. Give us grace we beseech
thee, to live a holy life, agreeable to thy law, as becomes thy children.
And that we may the better effect the same, we pray thee to forgive us our
sins, and wash us in the blood of thy Son, that our hearts, and minds,
being framed to thy will, we may be fruitful in all good works, and for ever
safe-guarded from all dangers, by thy almighty providence. Sweet Jesus,
blessed be thy holy name for our redemption. Print in our hearts and minds we
entreat thee, continual memory of thy great kindness, and sore passion,
that we may evermore love and praise thee, that have bought us with so dear a
price. Heal our infirmities; Teach us obedience; Increase our faith; Hide us
in thy wounds from thy fathers just wrath; Commend our Prayers unto him (for
thou art our only Intercessor, by whom we have access unto him;) Enable us
with grace always to keep thy commandments; Prosper our Labors in this
world, And bring us to life everlasting for thy name sake.

O holy Spirit, the Comforter of all mankind; The author, and giver of life;
we magnify thy holy name for ever, beseeching thee to inspire our hearts, and
minds, with holy motions; To inflame the coldness of our zeal with the fire of
thy love; To lead us into all truth; To guarde, and defend us from all evils
and dangers; To clear the storms of temptation; And for the glory of thy
name, To bring us safely to the blessed haven of Life everlasting,

Amen.
2. A Prayer for the obteining of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
O Father of light, from whom every perfect gift does proceed, we beseech thee
to indue us with all spiritual blessings in Christ; To increase the little
grain of our weak, and feeble faith, directing it to the merits of Christ
Jesus, and making it fruitful through Love. Make us constantly to give credit
to thy word, and protect us from all heresies that fight against the same.

Lord disappoint us not of our hope which we have in thee; But make good thy
promises unto us. Give us courage in Conflicts, Patience in trouble, And
comfort in all things. In our extremities, strengthen our faith firm in thee:
And so inflame our love toward thee, that nothing may remove it. Grant us
compassionate, mild, and charitable hearts, that with melting affection and
tender compassion, we may cherefully, and willingly without repining, help,
and succor all men to our powers, (especially those that are of the household
of faith: And with relenting minds forgive their offenses, that we may at the
last yield up an acceptable account unto thee of this earthly Talent which thou
have here bestowed upon us. Comfort us in all grievous accidents, And at the
point of death, give us grace to fasten our confidence in thee alone. To whom
be rendered, all honor, glory, praise, renown, dominion, and majesty, both
now, and for ever.

Amen.
3. A Prayer, for Sobriety, Chastity, and Patience.
LOrd for thy Christ's sake, direct my paths in the right way to all
spiritual, and corporal sobriety. Suffer me at no time, to abuse thy
creatures, or to turn thy grace into wantonness: And grant me grace, to use
all thy blessings temperately, and moderately, that I may live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

Give me grace this day and ever, to crucify the flesh, with all the
affections and desires thereof; and to bring it in subjection unto the spirit.
Quench o Lord the flame of all carnal desires in me; Abate the heat of Lust
in me; And keep me from the intisements of all wanton company.

Holy father, thou know that by Baptism my members are made the members of
thy Son; Sanctify them throughout, that I avoiding all uncleanness, may
possess my vessel in holiness that it may be a Temple, for thy self to
delight, and dwell there. To this end o Lord, stay my unbridled nature this
day and ever, from all discontentednes of mind, and furious actions; Give me
grace to take in good part, whatsoever it shall please thy good pleasure to lay
upon me; Prevent all ^uills that may befall me; And turn all things to the
best for my good in thee; That mine eyes may see thy saving help upon earth;
And my heart may rejoice in thy mercies, for ever and ever.

Amen.
4. A Prayer for true Chastity.
Sweet Jesus, the bright resplendance of the divine Majesty, who in most
zealous charity out of thy great love toward us, did suffer death for us
poor sinners, to deliver us from eternal death, thereby giving us an example
of sincere Charity which we ought to exercise one toward an other. We
entreat thee to warm our hearts with the fire of thy divine Love, that loving
thee above all things with our whole hearts, and one of us another in thee, we
may thereby appear to be thy servants. Let this charity be true without
fraud, cunning, or hypocrisy, not in words only, but in deeds. Inflame our
hearts by thy holy spirit, that imitating thine example, we may love our
enemies, and do good to such as hate us, patiently committing all revenge of
wrongs into thy hands. Suffer not the Sun to go down upon our wraths; but
lend us thy holy help, that we forgiving one another according to thy example,
may remain always in thee, and thou in us, in such powerful sort, as neither
life, nor death, nor any other thing whatsoever may separate us. So be it.

5. A Prayer for Spiritual joy*
O Lord our Sautour and Redeemer, which have by thy holy Spirit prepared for
thy faithful, and oobedient servants, far greater pleasures then the world
knows of, we beseech thee grant, that the ann^ynting of thy holy Spirit, may
continually drive away from us all wickedness, and cheer up our minds with
celestial gladness, and a desire to be dissolved and to be with thee; that
having our hearts and minds continually filled with heavenly meditations, we
may ^oyfully sing halleluya, unto the glory of thy holy name, for evermore.

Amen.
6. A Prayer for Grace, Wisdom, and understanding.
O My God, my Lord, and the only Giver of all good things; For James. 1. ver.
17.
every good gift, and every perfect gift, is descending from above, even from
thee the father of light, in accessible, never changing. Thou have Genes. 1.
ver. 27. Wisdom. 2. ver. 23.
made and fashioned me after the likeness and similitude of thine own Image,
So gracious wast thou pleased to be unto me, when as yet I was not. But, o
wretch that I am, how have I obscured and defiled this thy Image in me, with
the pollution of all sin, and uncleanness? Romans 7. ver. 23.
For the Law of sin and Iniquity, which I feel in my ^lesh, daily
rebelling against the Law of my Soul, which carries thy Image, prevails in
me, conquering and ouer^uling all the powers thereof; yea, leading me as a
^aptiue and slave, to obey the sensuality of the flesh in many things; Neither
have I means ( as in my self) to withstand the assaults thereof; For in me,
(that is, in the general corruption which is yet abiding in my Flesh,) ^8.
dwells no good thing. Wherefore thy Grace o Lord ^^raue, even that thy
special Grace* which descends ver. 18.
into the very corners of the Heart, cleanses them from the filth and stinch of
the old corruption; sanctifies all the thoghts unto a newnes of life;
fructifieth unto good works; is the mistress of Truth; The Instruct^r of true
discipline, the very light of the Soul; the Nourisher of godly devotions; The
comfort, and consolation in all Troubles; expelling al fear and d^spaire, and
confirming our hopes in thy promises. Let this thy Grace attend me in all my
thoughts, and in all my Actions, that by a spiritual prevention through the
same, I may continually address the whole course of my life, unto a sanctity
and holiness, to work my Salvation by thy Spirit in fear, and trembling. And
for the better furthering of my endeavor in the way of Godliness, (forasmuch as
thy Grace is not otherwise to be seen in thy children,) grant me the Spirit
of thy true spiritual wisdom, which may direct my footstep^ in the paths of
thy commandments. Wisd. 9. ver. 6.
For though a man be never perfect, and so seems to be furnished with many thy
good graces, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded,
He shall not dis^^rne the things which are upon earth, 16. whereby the ver. 16.
life of man is guided, helped, and sustained; much less seek out the things
above in Heaven, by which our Souls are sed, and nourished unto thee: 17. For
without ver. 17. ver. 12. ver. 18.
it, who can know what thy will is, 12. to do works acceptable thereto? 18.
because the ways of men which are upon earth, are reformed, and they are
taught the things that are pleasing unto thee, through wisdom. Send her
therefore down from above, out of ver. 10.
thy holy Heau^ns, that she may be with me, and lead me soberly in all my
ways; labor with me in my thoughts, and in my understanding, to know, and
practice the grace which thou have given me, according to the measure thereof,
and so may become acceptable unto thee, in Christ thy wisdom from
everlasting. To thee I come in humility of heart, to entreat for the same;
For Wised. 8. ver. 21.
except thou give it, I cannot obtain it, as I am taught by thy servant
Solomon, who has said, that it is a point of wisdom also, to know it to be
thy gift. To thee then I come, beseeching thee for thy spirit of wisdom, which
is the worker Wisd. 8. ver. 5. and 6. ver 8. ver. 4. ver. 7.
of all good things, and has the spirit of discipline, and true 8.
understanding, She is the 4. Schoole-mistresse of thy knowledge 7. teaching
sobernes, prudence, righteousness, and strength. O good God, refuse me not,
praying unto thee for wisdom. Wised. 7. ver. 28. ver. 25.
For thou love none that has not his dwelling with her. So shall I be
accepted of thee in all my ways, when thou by her instruction, have made me a
fit vessel for thy grace; 25. She is the breath of thy power; that pure
influence that ^loweth from thy glory; the 26. brightness of the everlasting
ver. 26.
light; the very Image of thy goodness and majesty, which 29. shines
throughout the world. To which with thee ver. ^9.
and thy holy Ghost, be glory for ever.

Amen.
7. A Prayer for a good purpose, in the whole course of our Life.
Sweet Jesus, the only Son of the living God; The Redeemer and Savior of
mankind. I thy Creature, craving the light of thy gracious aspect, do groan
unto thee. Thou art my Creator, look upon me; Thou first did fashion me, and
have since newly begotten me with the seed of thy immortal word. Suffer not
the grace of that n^w Birth, to be disgraced in me, through the foulenes of my
Sin. Thou art my only truelife, quicken thou me by thy word. I am blind, I
hasten to see light; I am even dead, I breath for Life. Whither then shall I
go, but unto thee o Christ? For thou art the Physician, the light, and the
life of my Soul: O Jesus of Nazareth have mercy on me; Matt. 9. ver. 27.
O Son of David, have mercy on me, most miserable, and distressed wretch. I
am altogether both inwardly and outwardly deformed with iniquity; There is no
good in me at all; My understanding is blind; My will weak; All my senses are
prone to Sin; All the thoughts of my heart b^nt to wickedness; I drink in
sin, and iniquity, like water; And there is no sound part in me. And yet in
this most loathsome burden of all filthy corruption, I do live securely, as
one surcharged with the slumber of forget fulness; The Cogitations by which I
meditate on thee, are like to the endeavors of them, who seek to be awakened,
but yet overcome with dro^ sines do fall a sleep again; Thou have called me,
but I have not heard; Thou soughtest to draw me unto thee, but I have w^lfully
hunge back, and would not follow thee, nor yet do, seeking new occasions ^or
continual del^ies through Satan's suggestions, grudging at thy callings,
saying, Suffer yet a little while, Ano and Anon. But, o pi^^ifull Jesus, when
shall that Anon and Anon, have an end* How far shall yet a while go on in
Sin? How long to morrow, and tomorrow? And why not, o Lord, even now, and
presently, am I cleansed from my Sin, and renewed in Soul and Spirit unto
thee, by thy Righteousness? I say often, I will do this, and I will perform
that, to be accepted of thee in Christ; when will is ready, then have I no
power; and when power is present, my will is backward; So I purpose many
things, but perform nothing that good is: And what now, I allow, I do
dislike afterward, as naught; And so am always wavering in mind, never
resolved upon any one purpose, because I am too much affianced to mine own
strength. But now I confess unto thee, o Lord, that no man shall be confirmed
in his own strength, to boast himself before thee; For foolish is all
presumption and pride of Flesh; And it is not in man, either to will what he
can; or to be able to do, what he wills; but rather all the ways of man,
are directed and gu^ded by thee only. I beseech thee therefore, o most loving
Jesus, even by the bowels of thy great pity, to grant me a true, and
discreet Resolution unto good, that I may neither commit any thing contrary to
thy will, or omit and leave undone what is agreeable to the same; that in the
whole course of my life, I seek not, nor desire, but what may be profitable
and healthful to my Soul, and specially acceptable to thy divine Majesty.
Give me a mind sanctified to a constancy of this Resolution, always
steadfastly to retain the same; that neither Riches, nor Honors, pleasures, nor
any worldly respect whatsoever; No not the fear of death, may at any time
hereafter cause me, in a bold presumption of thy mercies, to divert from that
grace, wherewith thou have purchased to bless me; Nay, Let the strength of thy
holy Spirit, arm me against all torments of death, yea, to the loss of this
earthly life, rather then to offend thy majesty. For I know, that nothing
does more displease thee then Sin; it being that thing only, which caused
thy Shoulders to be rent and torn with scourges; thy Head to be pricked with
Thorns; thy body to be nailed to the Cross; and thy most divine spirit to be
separated from the body* by a most bitter, and shameful death. Let my Soul
think upon this, so often as the devil shall assault me; My mind seriously
meditate thereon, as often as the devil tempts me; And my Heart have an
inward feeling thereof, at what time soever the flesh shall entice and egg me
unto Sin. I shall most cheerfully run unto this light, being in this manner
armed at all times with thy grace, promising unto my self a victory in the
same: For thou art the Author and finisher of Faith; and thou will be also the
rewarder of that Fight, being begun, and finished by thee; even to crown it
with Immortality in Heaven, where thou ^ittest at the right hand of thy
Father, in glory, for ever, Amen, so be it.

8. A Prayer before the Catechizing of a Family.
LOrd Jesus, the Math. 1. ver. 21. Luke 1. ver. ^1.
eternal Son of the everliving God, 1. Cor: 8. ver. 6.
Father of us all, out of whose bosom thou did diseend upon earth, a Doctor
and Teacher to men, even to reveal unto them the sanctifying will, of thine,
and our heavenly Father; thine by nature, and ours by grace in thee only,
thereby instructing us in the way of Salvation, purchased to us through the
same; working Ephesians. 3. ver. 20.
abundantly above all that we can ask or think, according to the power and
efficacy of thy holy spirit. Behold Lord, we are come hither, to hear and
learn the true documents and instructions of Christian piety and godliness, as
shall be most truly and faithfully delivered out of thy word, which is the
savor of life unto life, to all that believe therein. Open we beseech thee the
inward Ears of our Souls, and withal give us understanding hearts, that
whatsoever is instilled by means of the outward bodily ears, may penetrate
even to the marrowe of our Spirits, and settle in the secret corners of all our
reformed affections, working them soundly and thoroughly unto a perfect
obedience of thy will. For unless thou will assist us in hearing, with thy
preventing grace, we shall become unprofitable Hearers; and so thy word
returning to thee fruitless, may in thy judgment be made to us, a Savor of
death unto death, which forbid o good Lord, we most humbly pray thee, and with
David, acknowledging our imperfections; and also desiring to have them reformed
and conformed to thy word, do say in the spirit, Oh that our ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes. But how shall they be directed thereto, unless
thou do teach us? And how shall we be taught, except thou make us to
understand? Therefore teach us o Lord, and give us understanding; for when thou
shall enlarge our hearts, we will run the way of thy commandments, because
thou will direct us in the path of the same, by making our hearts large to
receive thy grace, and willing to obey thy will. That this be done effectually
for our good, and seruiceably for thy honor, be pleased according to the
measure of that thy indulging Grace, as thou see convenient, to remember,
that this Image of thine in us, can no otherwise be made to retain and keep
wholly unspotted, it own likeness, but through a godly instruction of piety,
Catechized out of thy word, by apt and direct principles of Christian Religion,
teaching the true knowledge thereof. And what is this knowledge else, but to
understand Righteousness, Judgment, Equity, and every good Path? And how is
that man blessed of thee that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding? For length of days is in her right hand (because she is a tree
of life to them that lay hold on her,) and in her left hand, Riches and glory,
(because she brings to honor those that embrace her, and fills their
Barnes with abundance, causing health to be unto their Nauill, and marrowe unto
their Bones, even all manner of blessings both spiritual and corporal, have
they powered upon them that seek thy word, and be willing to be instructed by
it, unto the Rules of Ghostly wisdom. Thou see o Lord what we crave at thy
hands, and why we crave it, thou also perceiuest. We crave to know thy
commandments, which are as Lanternes to our feet; And to have instruction,
which is a light unto our Paths. For, of our selves we are but darkness, and
cannot see, except w^ be lightened by thy word. Open our Eyes we beseech thee,
that we may see the wonders of thy Law, to serve thee aright, and be afraid
of thy Judgments; which teach us obedience, and thy sonly Fear, working
always unto repentance, whereof comes life, as thy Prophet David taught,
saying; Grant me understanding, and I shall live. ^or so shall our Faith
(instructed by it,) acknowledge from our hearts, and confess with our mouths
concerning thee, that thou art the only God, who in great wisdom have
created, and do also accordingly govern all things, by person
distinguished, into the 1. Father, the 2. Son, and the 3. holy Ghost, but in
essence and dietie united into one Godhead, and so one God, Almighty,
everlasting, immortal, only wise, invincible, never seen, nor to be seen
with mortal eyes, dwelling in the light that none can attain unto. And as
touching m^n, whom thou have made to serve thee, our Faith in like manner is
instructed to believe, that he is wholly blemished with the filthy pollution of
Sin; For there is none righteous, no not one; having their cogitations
darkened; walking in vanity of their minds; and this to happen through the
fall of Adam from grace, by whom Sin entered into the world, and death by
sin. And so walking according to the course of the world, after the prince
that rules in the Air, which has blinded our minds, to hinder the light of
the glory of the Gospel of Christ, that it should not shine unto us; we are
all made guilty of eternal damnation: For it is written, Cursed be he, that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do
them. And again, by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to
condemnation. And now o Lord, our states being thus damnable, as representing
before us, nothing but horror, dread, confusion, shame, and endless
destruction both of body and soul: we should utterly be plunged into despair,
were not our Faith further also Catechized to believe, that thou have ordained,
and appointed us a means to avoid the same; even Jesus Christ thy eternal
Son, to become man, as being of the seed of Abraham, who being wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our Iniquities, took the Chastisement of
our peace upon him, and so healed us with his stripes, that by his obedience,
we should be made the Righteousness of God, in him; because he is able
perfectly to save us, alone by himself; for that no other name is given under
heaven, whereby we can be saved accomplishing and fully perfecting all things
requisite to the salvation of man, because he as the Reconciliation for our
sins, and the sins of the whole world. Wherefore, o Lord our merciful
Father, seeing the use of Catechizing in thy Church to be so necessarily
instructiue, for knowledge of godliness unto salvation; we beseech thee in
mercy, to enfiame our hearts with a fervent zeal thereto, that we may often
frequent thither, to hear, and learn thereby. For which cause sequester all
our thoughts, bring them from all vain, and Idle Imaginations, and settle them
wholly to godly meditations of thy Law, taught out of it; That so reaping the
benefits of this Ghostly Catechizing instruction, even the building up of the
new man in us, we may daily die more, and more unto sin, thy holy spirit
bearing record to our spirits that we are thy Children, grafted into thy body,
and with thee made by thee the fellow heirs of the everlasting kingdom of
thy Father, with whom, and the holy Ghost, thou raignest for ever, and ever.

Amen.
9. A Prayer after the Catechizing.
GReat is thy goodness, o Lord, and thy loving kindness to man is far above
his expectation. As in thy benefits which thou laiest upon him for blessings,
so in this especially, that thou feedest his Soul with the Amos. 8. 11.
spiritual bread of thy word, which nourishes unto eternal life. And
forasmuch as thou have commanded us to labor for the same, and also promised,
that John. 6. ver. 51.
whosoever feeds on it shall live for ever, because it is a full spiritual
nourishment, augmenting in us Faith toward him who is the true bread from
Heaven: Grant we beseech thee, that we, whether 1. hearing, 2. reading, or 3.
meditating, may continually feed thereon, and daily grow from virtue to
virtue, in a full strength of the spiritual man, to John. 6. ver. 29.
work thy works, even such as are acceptable, and well pleasing in thy sight.
To raise this strength in us daily, and to cause us to walk more stedily in
the paths of holy verity, through which thy works are accomplished, thou
ordainest means for the same, which are the Luke. 0. ver. 1. Matthew 9. 37 38
ver. 2.
Teachers and Preachers of thy word, Laborers in this thy spiritual harvest,
and workers in the vineyard which thy self have planted, even the Cant. 4.
Spouse of thy Christ. These I say thou hirest with thy Matthew. 20. ver. 2.
Penny, and sendest forth to work in this vineyard, to dress and trim it, to
be therein as instruments for our instruction, by preaching and Catechizing,
that we should be Ephesians. 4. ver. 23. 24.
renewed in the spirit of our minds, and put on daily the new man created
after thee in righteousness and holiness. Herein we most thankfully do
acknowledge thy love toward us, (for thereby thou seek to make us holy
v^ss^ls of thy m^rey, Ephesians. 4. ver. 30.
sealed by thy spirit unto the day of our Redemption.) Yet, good Lord, the
sound of thy word, uttered out of their mouth preached or Catechized, howsoever
striking the outward E^re, may little avail us unto instruction of godliness,
unless thou inwardly move our hearts, and be pleased to touch them, s thou
did the Iseiah. 6. ver. 7.
Lips of Iseiah, and the mouth of Ieremi. 1. ver. 9.
Jeremy thy Prophets, furnishing them thereby with fit means to publish thy
word; So in like manner we beseech thee, to bless our Souls with the Spirit of
understanding, and apprehension of holy mysteries, as may serve to guide us in
the way unto holiness of life. O most merciful Father, make not our hearts
fat, not our Ears heavy, neither shut up our Eyes now that we have bin here
present to hear the Doctrine of thy truth, although our sins deserve this
Judgment, for we confess them unto thee, and crave thy m^rcy; Nay rather
renew in us all the powers and facul^ies of our minds; willingness always
with a godly zeal* wits with true apprehension; Memories with firmenes and
stedsastnes for retaining and keeping the words of spiritual Doctrine; That so
we hearing indeed, and plainly seeing, may understand, perceive, and show
forth, the fruits of our knowledge in our lives accordingly; For it is thy
Matt. 13 v^r. 3. Mark. 4. ver. 3.
seed, which those thy Sowers, even thy preachers, do sow in the furrows of
our hearts* to fructify unto good works; Oh, but let it not be as Seed sown
in 5. stony ground* to wither away for want of ver. 5. ver. 7.
deep root and moisture; Nor as Seed fallen among 7. Thorns, to be choked
up with choaky cares; Nor yet to be devoured of the 4. Fowls of the Air, as
was that ver. 4. ver. 8.
which fell by the wayside; But let it be that 8. good seed which thou causest
to fall on a good ground, to spring up, and to bear fruit, even an hundred
fold, according to the masure of faith, thou shall vouchsase me in mercy.
Thus shall thy word be blessed in us, when Isay. 55. ver. 11. ver. 10.
thou do in this manner prosper it, in the thing, whereto thou sendest it;
For it will be as the 10. Rain which thou sendest down from Heaven, to give
seed to the Sower, and Bread unto him that Eareth. Hear us them o our God and
only Lord, at this time praying unto thee for thy blessing, and special
grace, that our Hearts and Souls may be that good fruc^ifying Ground, in which
thou art pleased to cherish, foster, and nourish, by the working heat of thy
holy Spirit, the word now received of us by hearing; make it effectual unto a
lively working Faith for ever, as well to fulfill, and execute thy will, as to
know it; and so fearing to offend thee, because of thy Judgments; and loving
to please thee, because of thy mercies; we may preserve and continue in well
doing, even to the time which thou have appointed to call us unto the full
fruition and enjoying of Immortality in thy heavenly Jerusalem, with thee, thy
Son, and the holy Ghost; God from all eternity, and throughout all Ages most
glorious, and only praise worthy.

Amen.
10. A Prayer before the hearing of Gods word Preached.
VOuchsafe oh merciful God, to open the Closer of our dark understanding,
that the word may enter therein, and be so received of us, as that ignorance
being thrust out, heavenly knowledge may enter in, and have perfect aboade in
the Bowels of our hearts, Give us grace (oh Lord,) that the seed of truth,
being sown in our hearts, may take deep root, and bring forth to the comfort
of our poor souls, a thousand fold, Let thy Spirit so rule the Lips of this
thy preacher, that he may boldly without fear, viter unto us the true word of
life; that we thy flock waiting for the same, may pick up the crummes that
fall from thy Table. Send (o Lord) so many painful, faithful, and able
Laborers into thy harvest, as may by their diligence gather together the
Sbeaues of thy Church, that are appointed to be received into thy celestial
Barn. Lord infuse grace at this time into the Lips of the Minister, and into
the hearts of us his hearers, that he, sounding forth and declaring thy will
sincerely, and we following the same effectually, may through Christ, obtain
at thy hands, remission of our offenses past; peace of Conscience, and heavenly
felicity in this world; and enjoy the perfect joys of eternal bliss in the
world to come; through Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
11. A Prayer after the hearing of Gods word Preached.
LOrd, we thank thee, that it has pleased thee at this time, to feed us with
the wholesome bread of Life, the word of eternal truth; we humbly beseech
thee, to replenish us inwardly with thy grace; and to inspire our hearts with a
true understanding of that, which this day we have heard, by the preacher of
thy word; that it may work in us amendment of our lives; increase of faith,
fear, and love of thee; and continually abide with us (for our comfort) unto
our lines end; Give us grace ( oh heavenly Father*) to bear constant hearts
and devout minds to the truth; and to avoid the company of such, as by cunning
persuasions seek to set up superstition, error, and false doctrine; make us
earnestly to bewail our offenses, and to cl^aue fast to thy word; Suffer not
Satan at any time, to wrest from us the good seed which is sown in our
Hearts; or to set Tares amongst the wheat which thou have planted in us. But
so assist us with thy holy Spirit, that we contemning the vanities of this
wretched world, (being truly edified by good and devout pastors,) may continue
within the Hur^ell of sincere conversation and godly life; to the praise of thy
holy name, and attainement of our heavenly inheritance, sor Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
12. A Prayer for the Saboath day morning, to be said in the Chamber.
ARise Ephesians 5. ver. 14.
o my Soul which sleep, arise from the dead, and Christ the true light
shall shine upon thee, and lighten thy understanding in him. For thou o Lord
said in the beginning, Genes. 1. ver. 3.
Let there b^ Light* and it was Light. Thou therefore which first made Light
by thy word, lighten my Eyes by the sam^ word, that they may be watchful, as
at all times, s^ especially upon this day, which thou have Genes. 2. ver. 3.
blessed after thou had made, and finished the sixth da^s work; an^
accordingly did sanc^ifie it* Exodus 16 ver. 30.
to be a day of cessation from Labor, and bodily Travails; Commanding it to
be kept holy unto thee, for thee, for the hallowing of thy d) I^r^m. 17 ver.
12. 22.
name, as thou have said in thy word; Ezech. o. ver. 12.
I gave them my Saboth* that it might be a Sign between^ me and them. th^^
they might know by it, that I the Lo^^ do sanctify them. beseech thee o good
God, look merc^fully upon ^^ that I may also acknowledge the acco^dingly
conform all the powers, and faculties of my will and Soul, to the true
keeping of this thy Saboath, which is not only for doing no bodily works, but
for Isay. 56. ver. 2.
ceasing and refrayning, from the dead and corrupt works of the Flesh, as we
are taught by the Prophet Isay. This is the true Sabatizing of this day, which
thou did first bless and sanctify to that use. Grant me grace good Lord,
to employ this days service wholly to thy glory, according to this thy
Institution thereof, even for Jesus Christ's sake, my Lord and Savior.

Amen.
13. A Prayer for the Saboath day Evening, to be said in the Chamber, before
going to Bed.
BBehold o Lord the Submission of me thy Servant, and most humble suppliant,
Take me to thy mercy in Christ Jesus, and say not to me in thy Anger, Render an
Account for this days work; For I know, that if thou shall straightly
examine me, I shall not be able to stand in thy presence, so great is the
weight of this burdensome account, as it must needs depresse me down, even
into the bottomless pit, and merciless gulf of desperation. For I do
willingly and penitently confess my great weakness, very insufficient to the
performance of so heavenly a work, as is the due and right observation of thy
Saboth, in such manner specially as thou requirest, and was meet to be
performed of me, for whom thou have instituted the Saboath, in it, to cease
wholly from worldly affairs, the more specially to attend upon thy worship. O
Lord, how I have bin wanting herein, thou know, and that I deserve the
punishment for my negligence in this kind of function, I must needs
acknowledge; For how shall I dissemble or hide my faults, before whose
all-seeing Eye my nakedness is laid open? How then shall I excuse my self
unto thee, for this Saboath days work, partly intermitted, partly profaned
in the executing thereof, which I ought to have performed before all other
things whatsoever, and holily to have kept by all my best endeauours. Therefore
I yield my self wholly into the hands of thy mercy, craving it for the
pardoning and remitting the same in Christ; entreating also further at thy
hands, that I may have a true inward feeling of thy grace, so as hereafter
still more and more I may abound through it, in the works of religious piety,
by which I may perform thy will, even Humility in Conversation; Stabilitie in
Faith; Modesty in words; Rrighteousnes in Deeds; Mercy in works; Discipline in
manners; yea and such a meek Patience, as not to know how to do wrong, but
rather for thy sake to suffer it being done unto me; and for the better
effecting hereof, Lord for thy Christ sake, grant me Peace with all men, and
so I shall truly both love and fear thee: Love thee, because thou art my
Father: And Fear thee also, because thou art my God. For this is truly to
hallow thy Saboath, and this being granted in Christ, I shall be unto thee,
both a Son and a Servant, in him subiecting my self in all obedience unto
thy will, which may guide all my Actions unto a true holiness, through the same
Christ.

Amen.
Prayers Supplicatorie, or of Supplication; Wherein we humbly commend our
selves and others to God, either by a confession of sin to be remitted; or for
any temporal benefits to be obtained of God. And also against evil
spiritually, or bodily to be avoided: In these referring our Petitions unto the
will of God; And so Prayers called Deprecatorie, have also their place. Of this
kind are as follows.
1 A Prayer of the acknowledgement of our unworthiness, to ask any thing.
O Eternal God, thou art the Lord, we unprofitable servants; Thou art the
Father, we unworthy to be called thy sons. How the^ may we ask of thee, who
grievously do offend thee daily? yea hourly sinning and trespassing against
thy divine Majesty; Notwithstanding, we humbly beseech thee to give us that we
ask, and to grant us that we desire; both because we do humbly supplicat for
the same, steadfastly believing in thee without wavering, as thou have commanded
in thy word; And also for that thou art that pitiful Lord, that benign, and
gracious Father; which do not sharply chastise our Faults, but remittest
and pardonest all offenses, most mercifully in Christ.

Amen.
2 A Prayer for remission of sin.
O Lord God, Father of mercy, and omnipotent in power, we wretched sinners
justly deserving everlasting damnation, for our manifold sins committed against
thy divine Majesty, cast down our selves at thy feet, Beseeching thee to
look upon us with thy eyes of compassion. Behold we are a piece of that price
which was bought with the precious blood of thy dear son, which cries for
mercy; Enter not into judgment with us, but set his cross and passion,
between thy judgments and our souls. Power thy oil of mercy, into the
wounds of our putrefying and fainting hearts, cleanse and season them with the
Salt of thy Grace. Lord, we thank thee for thy patience, in giving us so long
time of repentance; Appease thine anger toward us, both now and ever. Create
in us new hearts, that unfeignedly with weeping and mourning, we may repent us
of our sins, and take hold of Christ by a lively faith, and obtain pardon;
Suffer not Satan, o Lord, to compel our troubled consciences to despair; But
so guide us by thy holy Angels, that we may always live in thy fear, and die
in thy favor; and in the Resurrection be joined with them in eternal bliss,
for ever.

Amen.
3 A Prayer of one that is afflicted in Conscifor sin, etc.
MOst merciful God, I forlorn wretch, afflicted in conscience for fear of
thy judgments upon my sins, with bended knees, tears unfeigned, a sorrowful
spirit, a heavy heart, and of my self altogether unworthy the least of thy
blessings, do come unto thee in the name of Jesus Christ thy dear son,
craving succor and mercy. Lord, thou have promised in thy word, by the mouth
of thy Prophet Hoseah, That thou would have mercy on Hose. 2. ver. 23.
him that could find no mercy; Let it light upon me; Let the power of thy
Sons Passion, defeat all the devises of the devil against me. O Lord hear
me speedily, least I faint under this burden; for my Spirit is weary of this
bondage; My conscience is clogged when I behold the bloody wounds of my Soul;
The voice of joy, and mirth is gone from me; I am deeply plunged in discomfort;
I pray thee therefore to send the comfort of thy holy Spirit, into my heart, to
strengthen my faith, that I be not overcome with heaviness; Forgive me my Sins
which are the ground of all this woe; and let them never come unto Judgment;
Sanctify unto me all good means to seek relief, As Prayer, Conference,
Reading, and hearing of thy holy word; Mittigate my vexation; increase Faith;
establish hope; grant patience; keep me from despair; and suffer me not to
be tempted above my strength; Look upon my humble and contrite heart, for I
morn all day long, and am like unto him that is at the point of death; Lord
comfort me, spare me, and revive me; Though my Heart condemn me, yet do thou
acquit me, spare me, release me, and ^^y unto my Soul, I am thy salvation;
Hearken Lord unto my Prayer, and grant my requests, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
4. A Prayer of Confession of man's ingratitude, and all other Sins, with a
supplication for Pardon.
O Supreme, and the onley everliving God, the wonderful Ingenor and Framer of
the whole world, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, whose Majesty fills the
Heavens, and whose kingdom is extended over all the earth. It is thou, before
whom I am to confess, and lay open mine own shame and reproach; Thou who art
almighty in power; infinite in wisdom; wonderful in all thy counsels;
terrible in Judgment; a righteous Judge, severely punishing sin and
wickedness in man, who is altogether most miserable, blind in his counsels,
variable in his purposes, unclean in all his thoughts, prone to wickedness,
drinking in sin as it were water, in every work highly offending against thy
Majesty. How then dare man, whose wickedness is great, and whose iniquities are
innumerable, a most vile and polluted creature, present himself before thee,
or approach near to thy Heavenly Throne. For, if the Job. 25. ver. 5.
Moon does lose her light, and the Stars are unclean in thy sight, how much
more man, a worm, even the son of man, which is but a worm, must despair
to be accepted of thee? This made Luke 5. ver. 8.
Peter cry to thee Christ upon his knees, and say, Lord, go from me, for I am
a sinful man, because he was utterly astonished; such is the feeling of thy
presence, that it causes man to hide himself from thy face, by reason of his
nakedness, occasioned through sin, which makes him ashamed and afraid. But
o good God, though I am a worm, the slime of the earth, vile dust and ashes, a
very sink of uncleanness, be pleased that I comune with thee, and hear me; Art
thou said to be the God of patience and long suffering? The Father of piety
and compassion? The Lord of all comforts and consolation? amiable for thy
loving kindnesses, and easily found of them that seek after thee? because thou will be entreated for thy unspeakable mercy sake, and be reconciled to man, for
that thou have a favor unto him? For me thinks I hear the sownde of that thy
cry in mine ears, which says, What have I done to thee, o my people? or
wherein have I grieved and made thee sad? Is not this cry, to show, that thou,
who art the party offended by man, would yet be excused to man? And thou,
who art the Judge, and Majesty of rig^t, give the sentence of doom against
him, do rather supplicate to be reconciled unto him? And what now then shall
I say, but thou, o Lord, who suffer thy children to be transported, and
carried away, through the disordinate passions of their unruly concupiscence,
as led by them in a manner, to the very gates of Hell, do afterward in
the time which thou have appointed, bring them back again, to the Haven of
their hopes, firmly settled in thy promises? And now I am bold to say unto my
Soul, Why a^t thou so disquieted within me? Be not cast down so low, as into
the pit of despair: neither be thus grieved without measure; notwithstanding
the weight of thy sins is heavy, and the burden of thy manifold
Ingratitudes be insupportable; yet comfort thy self with firm hope, fixed
upon the righteousness of Christ; The mercy of him before whom thou pleadest in
that name for pardon and forgiveness, is greater, then thine iniquity, for it
is far above all his works. Say then out of that hope, Luke 18. ver. 13.
Lord be mercifall unto me a miserable sinner; And fear not to confess boldly
all thy sins; Therefore lift up thy self in all humility o my Soul, and
with a true sense and feeling of a godly sorrow for thy thy sin, break out
into this confession, and say, Psalm. 51. ver. 3.
I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me; yea my conscience
tells me of many sins, so as I can have no rest, till I be reconciled unto
my GOD. Ier. 9. 1.
Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, to
bewail and lament day and night my sins, my manifold enormious sins, my
great Ingratitude against God, my Creator, and my Redeemer. I will yet reprove
my self, that I be not reproved of thee o God; I will recount all my wicked
deeds of unthankfulness, and acknowledge them before thee, as read out of a
Roale. But where shall I begin the recital of my ungrateful Rememberances,
but even, where thou wast first pleased to begin to show thy self a kind
lover to mankind? For I cannot forget that thou gave me my first being and
moving of nothing; Thou were pleased to be my GOD in the womb, for thou art
he that took me out of my mothers Psalm. 71 6.
Bowels; In it received I a body framed by thy hands, with all the members
and senses thereof; In it did thou infuse also a Soul, with the poa^es and
faculties thereto appertaining and belonging, created and fashioned after thine
own Image and likeness, to make me partaker of thy heavenly glory, in the
Heavens above, with thy holy Saints; and ever since unto this hour, have thou
sustained, relieved, and most gloriously preserved my life, by the great
unspeakable benefits of thy good providence; And to make me to have a better
feeling, and truer taste of thy goodness; yea, if it had been possible to have
obliged me unto thee, in a more near bond and link of true thankfulness, thou
came down from Heaven, and forsookest thy Fathers bosom, to enter into the
Womb of a blessed Virgin, there to take my Nature upon thee, to become man
for me, to converse upon Earth with men, of very purpose to seek me, in the
ways in which I had lost my self, and should still have wandered astraie from
thee, without this thy singular and far surpassing kindness.

Hereby, as thou did enable our Nature with that thy Humanity, so did
thou, to our greater benefit and comfort, by thy captivity, deliver me and
all mankind, from slavery and bondage; by yielding thy self voluntarily into
the hands of sinners, free us from the power of the devil; and so by assuming
the form and habit of a sinner, did thou destroy Sin, because in it only
thou were not like to man. By this wonderful benefit of thy incarnation,
arguing infinite love to mankind, what did thou seek else, but to
regenerate in me a detestation of Sin, and so by strengthening my hopes, to
draw me unto thine own self? But how Lord? even by regenerating and
begetting me a new, with water and the holy Ghost, exempting me from out the
number of Infidels and Pagans, and associating me to the fellowship of thy
faithful children; For without Baptism, neither my Creation, nor Redemption,
had auailed me any thing unto Salvation; For in it was I registered and enroled
to be one of thine; For we are all Romans 6. ver. 3. 4.
baptized into thy son Christ, from whom we receive virtue to kill sin, and
to rise up into a newnes of Life; there was that memorable contract and
wonderful league of peace confirmed and sealed, in which it was couenanted,
that thou would be my Lord, and I should be thy Servant; yea, thou my
Father, and I thy Son; for so it was agreede between us, that thou should
do the part of a Father, I execute the function of a serviceable Son all the
days of my life. What shall I speak of that other thy precious Sacrament of
thy Body and Blood, by which thou feedest by Faith unto the hope of
Immortality, working in me thereby a sanctified obedience unto thy most
blessed will? All these are great means and helps of furtherances unto grace,
as being certain tokens of thy unspeakable love to me; Notwithstanding I
revolt still from the way, in which thou soughtest to conduct, and direct my
footsteps, such was the strength of sin, and stubburne malitiousnes in me,
that I lost and wholly extinguished the state of my first innocence, increasing
daily new offenses against thee. How can I but power forth a River of sorrowing
Tears for my Ingratitude? and so much the more, for that all this time thou
have patiently expected my thankfulness, so many ways due, and not performed?
yea, rather carelessly neglected? and not only so, but not looking into mine
unworthiness, (because thou art the Lord, full of Psalm. 103. ver. 8.
compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness;) have preserved my
life hitherto from infinite dangers incident thereto. How many times might
thou have taken vengeance upon me for my transgressions, daily and hourly
committed, in thought, word, and deed, against thy name, and the glory of thy
Majesty? Who did withhold the scourge of thine Indignation, when I had justly
provoked it? What did thou see in me worthy this favor, that thou should
deal more mercifully with me still offending, then with many whom thou have
punished in justice for sin? Eor I confess, now since thou have bin pleased
to open mine Eyes to understand the scope of this thy long suffering, that
thine Ears have been shut, and would not hear my Sins crying for thy
vengeance, of purpose, to reclaim me from my evil ways. Thou have by many
outward signs, called unto me from heaven, and more peculiarly to my Soul, by
inward motions of thy Spirit have thou invited me unto thee, as it were in
these words, Thou have played the Ierem. 3. ver. 1.
Harlot with many Lovers, yet turn again unto me: Instructing me thereby,
that notwithstanding my manifold transgressions, (for which I deserve
Judgment,) yet thou will not cast me off, but receive me to thy mercy, because
thou art Joel. 2. ver. 13.
gracious, slow to anger, of great kindness, repenting thee of the evil thou
had once devised against me, for thou do take no delight in the death of a
Sinner, but rather that he should live, as thy self do witness by the
mouth of thy Prophet, saying, Ezeki. 33. ver. 11.
Have I desired that the wicked should die? or shall he not live, if he turn
from his evil ways? Therefore have thou commanded thy Prophet, to say unto
the people in thy name, Eze. 33 ver. 11.
Turn ye, Turns ye from your evil ways, and live, o ye house of Israel.
But I, o sinful wretch, and forlorn Caitiffe, having no remorse of my sin,
no feeling or sense of thy patience, and loving kindness, have been like to
them of whom thy Prophet Jeremy has spoken; who said desperately, Ierem. 8.
ver. 12.
Surely we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the
stubbornness of his wicked heart. I can be willing to be cleansed by thee of
the Leprosy of my sin, because it is two-folde, and makes me loathsome in
thy sight; and therefore do say with these ten Lepers, Luke 17. ver. 13, ver.
15. ver. 16. ver. 16.
Jesus, Master, have mercy on me; But being (15) cleansed, I have not turned
(15) back with that (15) one, (who was a (16) Samaritant, to fall down at thy
Feet, and to give (16) thanks most humbly, as was most meet to be done. How
may I now in the true acknowledgement of my unworthiness for my great
Ingratitude, appear before thee with a Prayer of Humiliation, whom I have
forgotten to praise with a Psalm of thanksgiving? Here does my Conscience set
before me the terror o^ thy Judgments, if thou accordingly should deal with
me; For whatsoever good I had before, and enjoyed from thee, and have now
lost, was all thine; That did thou commit to me by way of trust, to employ
unto good uses, and that now I owe unto thee, for it is a debt. Beside, how
have I accumulated new offenses unto thee, having lost thy former good graces?
How have I wronged, and do daily wrong thee, by heaping sins upon sins,
and only abused thy good gifts, even unto the contumely of thy name? It is
very great, and inexplicable impiety in man, not to be thankful unto thee,
for benefits received at thy hands, they being such, as without which, we are
not able to serve neither thee, nor our selves in this life.

For thy graces are the only helps and furtherances, both unto thy service,
and also to the releeuing of our necessities, being rightly used.

This I confess to be true, and confessing, am confounded in my self, both
with shame for my careless security in this behalf; and also with terror of
Conscience, for the wrathful displeasure to be powered out upon me for the
same: And being thus perplexed with doubtful fears of thy Judgments, shall I
altogether abandon hope, and fall utterly into despair of thy goodness? Shall I
hide my self from thy presence, because of my nakedness, especially thou
calling me even now, as I am meditating on this my unworthiness, unto the
acknowledgement thereof? Shall I not rather have mine eyes opened by thee, to
behold the cause of my nakedness, to be the contempt of thy will, and the abuse
of thy gifts and graces, which I must needs say in truth, are proceeding merely
from out the bounty of thy nature, and not to be challenged and exacted by us,
as due rewards of our own merits, which can be none to deserve the least of
thy gifts? For if I have done any good work to merit grace, wherefore is that
saying of the Apostle, Ye are saved by grace (r) Ephe. 2. ver 8.
through Faith, and not of your selves, for it is the gift of God? If I have
prevented thee with my good works, how truly has thy kingly Prophet spoken
of thee? Psalm. 21. ver 2.
For thou did pre^ent him with liberal (3) blessings. And again, Psalm. 59.
ves. 10.
My merciful God will prevent me; If by the strength of my own goodness, and
righteousness, I may follow thy Christ? How shall I then not make him a Liar,
who says, John. 15. ver 5.
Without me, ye can do nothing? And again, John. 6. ver. 44.
None can come unto me, but whom the Father draws: And if my love has gone
before thine, how true is that, 1. John. (ver. 10.
Not because we loved him, for he loved us first? All therefore that I have,
and that I am, is of thy gratuitie; thy only proper gift; thy merely
bounteous, and gracious goodness; so, as I never was able, no not in thought,
at any time, much less by virtue of mine own good works, to prevent thy
gifts, o Lord. 2. Cron. 3. ver. 5.
For we are not suffici^t of our selves; but our sufficiency is of thee o God.
What then shall I do, the miscreant of the world, as one borne out of time,
that knows no good; miserable and wretched sinner, a poor, bare, and naked
Beggar, weak, lame, feeble, full of Leprosy and uncleanness, what shall I
do? The good, that I had from thee, and by thy great mercy, I have made ship
wrack of it all, in the Sea of this troublesome, and deceivable world; Only
the Ancker of Hope, and one Board of Faith, by means whereof I was saved from
sinking, and utterly perishing, through thy goodness is remaining to me; On this
do I lay hold, as thou gave me strength; In this do I wholly repose the
comfort of my future Hopes; securing my self of thy help in Christ, by it to
be brought to the wished Heaven of thy eternal bliss. Therefore now am I
confident to come unto thee, to stand at the door of thy Heavenly Mansion,
knocking, calling, and crying without ceasing, till thou hear me, and have
mercy upon me. For thou lie Caine, thou lie; Greater is the mercy of God,
then the misery, and wretchedness of all Sinners. How can I then, though here a
Pilgrim, (wander yet a vagabond, and as one exiled) be clean excluded for
ever out of the land of the Living, which is the heavenly Jerusalem? No, it
cannot be. For I know from thine own mouth, at what time thou made all thy
good which was thy Exodus 3^. ver. 19.
mercy and fatherly care over thine, to go before thee, and to cry with thee
in thine own words, Exodus 34. ver. 6.
The Lord, The Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth. I know that thou Psalm. 107. ver. 41.
raisest the poor out of misery; bring them out of all their distress,
that cry unto thee in their trouble, I know that thou forgauest the lewd
Servant the Matthew. 18. ver. 24. 25. 26. 27.
ten thousand Talents (having nothing to pay,) at his humble entreatie. Shall I
in this certain knowledge of thy gracious nature be dejected in my hopes, and
distrustful of thy mercies? No good Lord, for I come to thee, and falling
down at thy feet, with that Servant, beseech thee, saying; Master, have
patience toward me, and I will pay thee all; yea all o Lord, that thou shall
enable me to pay; For, how otherwise shall I have ought, if thou first do
not give? and thou give to none, but to him that ask thee? And can any be
deterred from asking, whom thou so freely and liberally inuitest by thy
Prophet, saying; Ho, every one that thirsts, come unto the waters, and ye
that have no silver, come buy and eat; I say, buy wine and milk, without
Silver, and without money, even all things meet for the spiritual feeding of
our Souls. And is not the same proclaimed also by thy Son Christ, crying to
man, Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will
refresh you? Do thou, o Lord, thus graciously inuit me, and I not come? Or
do I feel the weight, and grief of my sin and misery, and not desire to
be relieved? Yes Lord, thou have opened mine Eyes, that I should see, and
behold thy kindness; Thou have touched my heart, and put into it a sense and
feeling of my heavy state; wherefore I come Lord in the Spirit, groaning, and
humbly craving thy helping hand, to stay up this most heavy Burden. Be
favorable and bounteous I pray thee, and give me out of thy Bounty, that I
may make payment of all that I owe thee; For I must pay thee with thine own,
otherwise I shall never be able to pay thy due, and so must needs be delivered
up to the Iaylor. Forbid this, o good Lord, and therefore Give, Give I say, a
full remission of my Sins, a true contrition of the Soul, working to a godly
repentance: Give grace, that I do not wilfully and willingly offend thee
hereafter, either with my familiar and accustomed sins; or with any other new
bred sins, which the world, the flesh, and the devil, do daily bring forth;
and and are Baits to entrappe, and entangle thy children withal. Therefore to
withstand this, I crave thy special grace, and the strength of the Spirit,
even this whole Armor, o my GOD, which may give me a sure foot to stand
fast, and be able to resist in the evil day; Above all, Arm me with the
shield of Faith, with which I may quench and clean extinguish, the fiery
darts of this wicked and enchanting world. Grant me I beseech thee, for the
better performance of my obedience to thy will, that I may sincerely chastise
my flesh, and subdue the pride of it; That I may refrain my Tongue from
speaking deceit and guile, or any wantonness, that I may mortify and kill the
inordinate lusts of the Heart, which engender unto leaudnes and vanity; that I
may gather together all wandering thoughts of my imaginations, and settle them
in thee only, that so being outwardly reformed in will and action, I may
become inwardly a new creature, and be thought a worthy temple, in which thou
(by thy holy spirit sanctifying it) may vouchsafe to have thy mansion and
abiding place, for ever: Adorn it therefore with all thy spiritual virtues, and
celestial graces; As, the holy fear of thy name; Sound and firm hope; True
humility; godly patience; prudent discretion; perfect obedience; a perpetual
fortitude of the spirit; diligent and circumspect alacrity in all things
appertaining to thy worship; and with all these chiefly a most fervent and
zealous love, to thee first, and so for thee, and in thee toward our neighbors
as our selves, for this is thy message which thou have sent to me and all thy
children, by thy Apostle John, that we should love one another; and not in
word, neither in tongue only, but in deed and truth; And so having Faith for my
Eye, Hope for my Guide, and Love for my Light; I shall the better be enabled to
seek and find thee, for thy own self; Faith, to direct straightly in the
way wherein I may find thee; Hope, to comfort me, that I faint not, til I have
found thee; Love, to make me delight in thee, and be delight some to thee being
found, who art the true light, to discover true Love. Be it then, that my faith
has sound thee but in a cloud, yet my hope will not cease to seek further
for to see thee; And if my hope have led me to the sight of thee, my love
affianced in thee, will still make progress to seek into thee. And why, o
Lord, being once touched with a remorse of conscience for his sin, (in it
secured by an holy instinct from the spirit of his reconciliation in Christ)
who, I say, but will be earnestly inflamed, with a godly desire to find thee?
For thy favor is precious; and who, having once loved thee, will not still
advance that his desire, to seek still for thy Treasures, which are infinite
and full of heavenly blessings, and affoords sufficient recompense for the
pains of those who seek and find thee, for there must be no end, either of
our hope in this life, (because when thou hidest thy self, and seem for a
time to be absent from us, thou must be sought to be had), Nor yet of Faith,)
because thou being found and had, must also be sought to be more and more
enjoyed daily.) Grant therefore, o my Lord God, and most blessed S^uiour, that
I may seek thee truly, purely, and only; Truly, and no other for thee; Purely,
and no other thing with thee; Only, and nothing besides thee. Strengthen thou
this Faith; Comfort this Hope, Cherish this Love; thou, even thou o God, who
art the object of my Faith, the Anchor of my Hope, and the Rewarder of my Love;
not as it is my love in it self co^sidred, (for so it is sin) but as thou art
said to be the God of Love, and to dwell in who^ thou have vouchsafed to bless
thy gift of true Love. Behold me Lord, for to thee do I fly for grace, to
thee do I power out my grieved Soul with thy Prophet David, saying as
follows; Incline thine Ear, and hear me, for I am poor and ne^die; o my
God, save thou thy servant that trusts in thee; Be merciful unto me o Lord,
for I cry unto thee; Rejoice the Soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I
lift up my Soul; For thou o Lord, art good, merciful, and of great kindness to
all them that call upon thee in faith; Lead me forth in thy Truth, and teach
me, for thou art the God of my Salvation. Remove from me shame, and contempt;
Take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; Incline not my heart to
evil, that I should commit wicked works with men, that work iniquity. O
Lord, accept I beseech thee, the free offerings of my mouth; Take away all
Iniquity; And receive us graciously; so will we render thee the Calves of our
Lips, (which sacrifice only thou requirest at our hands,) even with thanks
and praises, always to confess thy name; to which is due, all praise, honor,
and worship, for ever throughout all ages.

The sum and total of my Prayer unto thee o Lord, is this; A godly Sorrow,
and grief of Conscience for my sins; An humble request for thy merciful
pardon, and a free remission of my Sins in Christ; A zealous desire, of being
thy true Convert unto amendment of Life; and so to be sanctified by thy holy
Spirit unto all virtue and piety, that I may be such a one in this world, as
thou desire to have me in the world to come; even, where thou reignest, with
thy Son our Savior, and the Holy Ghost, A God of eternity, the only wise
and Immortal God, for evermore.

Amen.
6. A Prayer against the Temptations, of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.
Almighty God, the Fortress of the faithful, and refuge of all distressed
Souls; We beseech thee keep our Bodies and Souls, from all temptations, and
Snares of the Devil, the world, and the flesh: Take from us, that which is
deformed, through our corrupt natures, and continue that, which thy grace has
wrought in us, that we may be able to withstand all the assaults of our
Enemies. Give us power so to tame our Bodies by Prayer and abstinence from all
superfluity, that they may be made fit for thy service. To this end, put far
from us all deceitfulness of the world, and delight therein; That our minds
being filled with godly motions, we may walk uprightly as be comes thy
children. Suffer us not, o Lord, to be tempted above our strength; Grant that
with a strong faith in thee, we may resist Satan; Let the continual
meditation of thy word, mortify the lusts of the flesh; Suffer not knowledge,
to puff us up; Prosperity, to misleade us; Poverty, to dismay us; Sickness,
to turn us to impatience; Or want, to make us distrust in thy providence; But
so arm us with thy Spirit, and encourage us with thy presence, that we may
daily grow up from virtue to virtue in this world, and reign with thee
perpetually in the world to come.

6. A Prayer, in time of Plague, or other extraordinary sickness.
O Lord God, our only helper and defender, who amongst all other evils, have
promised to deliver thy people from the noisome pestilence; we beseech thee,
take this thy heavy plague away from us; Let our humble Supplications (which at
this time, upon our knees we make unto thee, in the name of Christ Jesus,)
procure our happy release, and appease thy wrath, which we have justly
procured against us through sin. Lord, we being heartily sorty for our sins,
(fully purposing, by the assistance of thy holy spirit to amend our lives,) do
humbly entreat thee to have mercy upon us, to take away this plague from us,
and not to suffer us to perish after so miserable a sort. We thank thee o
Lord, that thou have not left us altogether comfortles, nor cast us off without
hope, but have somewhat withdrawn thy hand, and spared many of us; We pray
thee to continue thy favor daily more and more toward us; To deal with us in
mercy, and not in Justice; To bless us, and all those that depend upon us; To
set thy saving mark upon our houses, as thou did for the Israelites in
Egypt; To give order to the destroyer, that he hurt us not; To put thy
strength to our medicines; To let thy good blessing, make the preservatives of
the Physicians; And to make our shifting places for more security, profitable
unto us. Give us grace, (o Lord) not to trust too much in outward means, but
only in thy mercy. Protect us always in all our ways; Have pity upon our
distressed brethren; Comfort the desolate widow; Provide for all fatherless
children^ Gather us together again, that by these means are dispersed, Send
us peace with men upon earth; And peace of Conscience toward thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
10 A Prayer to be said; of one that undertakes a Journey.
O Thou great keeper of Israel, who preseruest our going out, and our coming
in, Into thy hands we commit our selves, and all that we have. In the name of
Christ Jesus, we beseech thee, to direct our paths in this Journey; Grant us
health; Give us strength and courage; Refresh us when we are weary; Keep us
from the hands of Spoylers; The sleights and deceits of Thieves and Robbers;
And from savage beasts, and evil workers. Grant that wheresoever we come, we
may always find godly men, which may honestly entertain, and courteously
entreat us; Keep us from leaud company; and so assist us with with thy holy
spirit, that we may always set fear before our eyes; So guard us day and
night with thy holy Angels, that our enemies may be afraid to attempt any evil
against us; These thy favors we humbly crave of thee, submitting yet our
selves to thy will, which above all we desire to be done in these and in all
things. Therefore Lord, if thou have appointed that we shall dye in this voyage
before we return home, We entreat, that wheresoever these our mortal bodies
shall decease, our souls may safely arrive at the everlasting land of Promise,
the common home of thine Elect; the celestial Jerusalem, the place of blisfull
peace and rest, with all eternity. In the mean time, make us partakers of all
the prayers of the godly; give us grace also to remember that duty for all
men; Furnish us with all necessaries for this life, as thou see in thy
wisdom best befitting every ones degree, to their good in thee. Also send
health unto our friends; And grant us a a joyful return unto them, if it be
thy will, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
11. A Prayer of a good Wife.
O Lord God, which have made every married couple one flesh, and have ordained
that they should be of one mind, and careful one for another, as members one
of another: I beseech thee, lead me and my husband in the way of thy truth;
Govern all our actions to thy glory, the good of thy Church, and the discharge
of our duties; Deliver us from all temptations, enemies, deceits, and dangers
whatsoever; Prosper my Husbands business abroad and at home; And send him a
healthful and happy return; Make us one to Love and cherish the other; One
to be faithful and dutiful toward the other; that taking joy each of other,
we may without disturbance bring up our children, and govern our servants in
thy fear, with godly Discipline and good order, whereby we may take comfort in
them, and they in us. And for the better effecting hereof, give us grace o
Lord, to use those temporal blessings (which thou have bestowed upon us)
moderately and soberly, according as thou have commanded; Forgive us our
Sins, and so guide us by thy holy Spirit, that we may Love, Honor, fear, and
serve thee here, all the days of our lives, and after this life ended, Live
with thee in eternal bliss for ever.

Amen.
21. A Prayer of a Teacher, touching his Function.
Merciful Lord, and father of Light, who guidest and gouernest the wits of
men, to inform and fashion them after thy will, give strength both to my wit,
will, and pains; That, as it has pleased thee to commit unto my discipline
these youths (as yet rude and Ignorant of good Literature,) I may by thy
heavenly assurance, and only halpe, be made thy fit and true Instrument, to
inform them rightly according to the quality of this function, put upon me by
their parents from thee, with a great trust (which I beseech thee good Lord
suffer me not at any time to betray;) And that I may the better effect this
duty, I humbly entreat thee for Christ's sake, to send down into my mind,
thy holy Spirit of Judgment, Moderation, and Wisdom, which may instruct my
manner of teaching, to be accommodated only to their capacities without
ostentation of learning, doing faithfully the office, of an honest and
painful Teacher, delivering by way of precept, that which may serve hereafter
for their use, to be further extended by them, even to the good of others in
common life; But above all, to the praise and glory of thy name, in Christ
Jesus thy Son, our gracious Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
13. A Prayer of Scholars.
O Lord God, the abundant giver of all true wisdom, I beseech thee, breath
into my Soul the Spirit of understanding; That in my childhood I may learn,
and in riper years put in practice, the study of those things that are
agreeable to thy laws. Have mercy upon me; Lighten mine understanding, with
thy divine wisdom, that I may have wit and capacity to conceive; Memory to
retain and bear away all such good things as I shall read or hear; and
judgment to make the best choice thereof. Prepare and make fit my heart, to
receive into it the impressions of thy divine Grace. Grant that I may
carefully seek for the Pearls of true knowledge, and obediently submit my
self to my teachers and governors; Make my study pleasant unto me, through a
vehement thirsting after wisdom; Power thy spirit into me; Bless my studies;
that I may plentifully reap the fruit of my labors, and be thankful unto
thee for the same. Loving Father, be thou my Schoole-maister to instruct me;
Let all my studies be referred to their right end; Suffer not knowledge to make
me proud of thy gifts; But let me be wise unto ^obrietie, carrying my self
humbly, lowly, and modestly toward all men, to the furtherance of a godly and
virtuous life, and the discharge of a good conscience, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
14 A Hrayer in the Morning, for Scholars before Schooling.
O LORD GOD, the Fountain of all knowledge and learning, We humbly thank
thee, that of thy singular goodness, in these our tender years, even from our
childe-hood, it harh pleased thee to take such fatherly care over us, as that
in most liberal sort, we may be instructed in such preceptiue Arts, as
deliver the full discipline of a godly, and well nurtured life. Kindle we
beseech thee, in our minds and understanding, thy celestial fire of wit and
apprehension, which otherwise must needs lie hid and buried under the embers of
mistie error, that perceiving first easily, what shall be delivered unto us by
our Teacher, we may have our memories raised by thee, and so strengthened, as
thereby we may the more firmly retain and keep, whatsoever apt precepts we
have fully learned. Vouchsafe o gracious Lord, so to prepare our minds, as
that, both readily, cheerfully, and with an ardent and zealous desire to
learn, we come to School, least this so great opportunity of obtaining
knowledge (by thy good favor only afforded us) be through our backwardnes and
sloth, utterly lost and forgone. Be pleased therefore o good God, to send down
into our minds thy spirit of understanding, Truth, Judgment, and wisdom,
whereby we may the better fructify in learning, that the pains of our Teacher
and Instructor, may in no wise be made void. Grant, that what Arts soever we
shall hereafter attain unto, they may be wholly referred to the best end,
which is the knowledge of thee in Christ Jesus, by whom only we may have our
hope and confidence fixed, and wholly settled in thee, for the better performance
of our obsequiousnes unto thy holy name; it being manifested in the sanctity
and holiness of our lives hereafter, when we shall more fully have learned thy
testimonies; So shall those Arts which we now learn, be known to be good
means, and isntrumental directions thereunto. And, forasmuch as thou have
promised to give wisdom unto the little ones, and humble spirited; And the
proud minded persons, confidently weaned to their wills, to beat down and
depresse, even unto the vanity of their own senses: Teach us we pray thee,
true humility, by means whereof we may willingly be dutiful; first and
principally to thee, the Author and only free giver of all goodness; and next to
him whom thou have set over us, as a Tutor and Governor; For whom, as duty
binds, we humbly entreat and beseech thee, that he may have such care of us,
as is befitting his charge; that is, that he by first finding and sifting out
our capacities, may then conduct us aright, and lead us along in a straight
path, unto the knowledge of those things, which through thy goodness, may be made
greatly profitable, not only to our selves, but to all others, as occasion may
serve hereafter. For these, and all other things which thou know necessary
for us and thy whole Church, we thy children come unto thee our Father, in the
name of Christ Jesus, who has said, Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in
my name, ye shall obtain the same, begging it at thy hands, with the
selfsame prayer, which himself has taught us, saying. Our Father, etc.

15. A Prayer in the Evening, after Schooling.
O Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly thank thee, that it has pleased
thee to vouchsafe us thy gracious favor this day, so as through thy guiding
thereof, we have spent the same upon our books, thereby to give us knowledge
of good literature; we beseech thee for Christ's sake, so to assist us with thy
holy Spirit, that we may spend the rest of our days in the precepts of good
learning, to the bettering of our wits in the understanding of thy truth, and
all other virtues thereupon depending. Increase our knowledge, make our studies
profitable unto us; that we spending our days therein according to thy holy
will, may in like manner from the bottom of our hearts, acknowledge our selves
wholly beholding to thee only for the same, who only give, and only
blessest thy gifts; Among which, we cannot but confess, Learning as it is of
all others most singular, so above all to be by thee conferred upon man for a
special use, even for the culturing of the mind, then which nothing is more
divine, that is, more lively representing the similitude of thine Image. Suffer
not therefore this so great a good to Languish and slack in us through sloth
and idleness, but grant we heartily pray thee, a lively faculty to every one
of us, to the uttermost of our power, to increase and beautify it by daily
pains and diligence; especially o Lord, stir up in us a willingness to our
books; Kindle an earnest desire in our hearts and minds to follow the same;
Quicken and set forward our pains and industry, that having a correspondence
both to will and desire, it may cause our Sense of Hearing, which is most
available to the apprehension of knowledge, to delight more and more in the
sound of such material documents, as may through thy help conveniently
inform our tender minds to the true understanding of all virtue; So shall
knowledge, grow up with our years, whereby we shall have great cause to joy
in our selves, and to give, all laud, praise, glory, and honor, to thy holy
name, in Christ Jesus, to whom only it is due; By whose word and commandment
we are embouldened to pray, as he himself has taught us, saying. Our Father,
etc.

16. A Prayer general, for any Student, before his Studies.
O Most wise, most powerful, and our most loving God, the only true Father of
all such, whom thou have begot with the seed of thy word, and trained up by
thy holy spirit, in the Scools of thy Prophets. Thou art the fountain and
bountiful giver of all wisdom and knowledge, without whom, all the Studies
of man whatsoever, can have no success, but are made frustrate, and come to
nothing; It is thou which teach knowledge, and make to understand the
weaned, from the milk, and drawn from the breast: For thou calledst
Shepherds of Sheep, to be Prophets and Teachers to thy people; and fishermen,
to be Apostles and Teachers of the Gentiles; Thou even thou, o my God, infuse
into my Soul, for the merit of thy Christ, the instructing grace of thy only
wise and blessed Spirit. Grant me favor, to have my understanding by the same
Spirit, clearly lightened with such knowledge of liberal Arts and Sciences,
as thou have revealed to man, principally, for the spiritual good of thy
Christian Church, and to the honoring of thy most glorious holy name Name.

For I know, if thou should out of thy just Anger, for the punishment of my
sins, deny me the direction of thy Spirit, at what time I shall enter into
study, that then, my Reason would become senseless, as infatuated in it
self, and the endeavor of my wit, be unto me as a dream, and the fruitless
labor of an idle brain, or some strange illusion of a wearisome working
fantasy. Wherefore remove my sins from out thy sight, o Lord, and let them
not come within the reach of thy revenging anger. For I confess them unto
thee, desiring pardon in Christ Jesus; and as at all times of my life, so now
especially in this work of special reason, which is the apprehensio^ of
knowledge, because thou art in it most specially to be glorified. Bless me, o
my God, bless me I beseech thee, that entering now into my studies, with thy
favor, I may therein go profitably forward, being directed only by thy spirit.
And as thou have given me a docilitie of wit, so according to the strength
thereof, grant me a correspondent quicknes and subtilitie, with such alacrity
and earnest desire of profiting in learning, as that my mind be never wearied,
with overmuch study, whereby it may at any time seem to loath and disdain
it, for the pains thereof. And exercise it, I most humbly beseech thee, in
those kind of knowledges only, which are commendable, and best allowed of thee
and thy children: who are by them, to receive good, whenever it shall please
thee to call them into use and practice, by me thy poor minister thereof, as
thou shall enable me thereto. But if it shall please thee in mercy, to enrich
my mind, with some special endowment of knowledge, by which, I may be thought
to excel others, forasmuch as thou have said, by the mouth of thy Apostle
Paul, that knowledge puffs up; above all, o most gracious good Lord, beat
down in me, all proud and vain ostentation, clean extinguish and extirpating
out of my heart, high and lofty conceits, of mine own unworthiness, in
learning the nourishers thereof. Teach me therefore to be humbled unto thee in
those gifts of wit and knowledge; For I must confess, that I have nothing, but
what I have received of thee, and not as deserved by merit, but as freely, and
graciously conferred upon me by thy bounty, and only mere kindness, procured
to me through the love thou bear unto me, in and for Jesus Christ. If then
I have nothing of my self, being altogether void and destitute of all goodness,
suffer me not to boast and brag, as if I had not received from thee, that
whereof I would seem to boast. Thus giving me the spirit of humiliation, with
a a desire of pleasing thee, thou shall thereby cause me in all my studies, and
endeavors of wit and learning, chiefly to seek thee, o Lord, and not my self,
and so doing good to others in thee, advance thy glory, which is the principal
end, to which all our thoughts, words, or deeds, howsoever employed, in what
kind of study soever, are especially to be referred: In this manner, and to
this end, am I bold through Christ, to commend my self in all my studies,
wholly unto thee by Prayer, that beginning them in thee, I may go forwar^ in
them by thee* and so receiving this grace from thee, I may acknowledge thy
mercy only to have wrought knowledge in me, by the benefit of reason, which
thou have been pleased thus to sanctify, with the blessing of thy holy spirit;
And for all thy mer^ifull kindness, give thee only praise, honor, and worship,
who only art the wise, omnipotent, and immortal God, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, for evermore.

Amen. Amen.
17. A Prayer, at the entrance into the Church.
Almighty God and most Heavenly Father, trusting in the multitude of thy
mercies, we in all dutiful manner do enter into this thy holy Palace; and
(in thy fear) do humbly present our selves before thee. Conduct us in thy
righteousness; and guide our feet in the way of truth, thou Lord of our
salvation. Behold, we love thy house, and greatly desire to sing forth thy
praises, in the assembly of the Saints. Grant, that we prostrating our selves
here, before thy footestoole, may so present our petitions at this time, as
that they may not only be heard, but also acceptable unto thee, through Christ.

18. A Prayer for the fruits of the earth.
OEternall God, which with thy bountiful goodness feedest every living thing,
we wretched sinners, unworthy of the least of thy benefits, most humbly
beseech thee, to be pleased to bless the fruits of the earth, that we may be
partakers of the comforts therein. Give us this day our daily Bread; Prepare
our ground; Prosper our Corn; Make seasonable the seed time, with the first
and the latter rain, and meet temperature of Air; Keep our fruits, while
they be in the earth, from Hail, Thunder, excessive drought, overmuch Rain,
Mildnes, and all noisome worms; Send us a joyful harvest, and give a
blessing, to that which we shall reap; Increase our Cattle, with all other
provision which we shall carefully labor for; Replenish our Basket, and our
store, that we may have wherewith to refresh our selves and others; Protect our
servants, and workefolkes, that they may be strong to Labor, wise to forecast,
and faithful in their business; Keep our Garners, Barnes, and Storehouses,
from Fire, boystrous winds, Thieves, and sudden Inundations; Prosper the
works and travels of them, that any way labor, for any thing, which we shall
have occasion to use; Send remedy against misery; Turn dearth into plenty;
Oppress us not with overmuch poverty; Nor puff us up with too much plenty;
But grant us competent store, of things necessary for this life, and give us
grace, to use them soberly, to thy glory, and our comforts, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
19. A Prayer in time of common hostility.
O Lord God of Hosts, mighty in Battle, that have heretofore sundry times
miraculously defended us, we beseech thee bear not in mind our vile deserts,
but in mercy take pity upon thy persecuted Church; Bless and preserve us,
who have reposed our trust in thee alone; Consider and behold, how they that
hate thy Sanctuary, are up in arms, to root out from the earth, the
professors of thy truth. Bless our Armies both by Sea and Land, which are
joined together for the defense of thy cause, and safety of our country. Give
wisdom unto our Counsailors, discreetly to foresee; Courage to our Captains,
valiantly to defeat; And courageous hearts, unto our people, stoutly to put in
practice, with one mind, one will, and one strength, the lawful designs of
their commanders, to the utter abolishing of the enemies slights and forces. To
this end, o Lord, Keep all our Leaders from wrong plots and teacherie: and our
people from mutenie, and all inconveniences that follow thereon; Sanctify us
likewise at home, and give a blessing to all our actions; Guide all our
consultations; Suggest ^ero^call motions into our hearts; Banish all
^eart-burnings and divisions; and in place thereof, assist us all with unity
and concord; Give us perfect experience; Good Intelligences; and sound
Aduertisements of thine enemies devises; Consecrate all our Weapons and Engines
of War, with happy success to do thy will; Bless the season of the year;
and sweeten the close air in our multitudes; Command the winds and seas to
favor us; Hearken unto our Prayers; Behold our tears; And give victory to
thy people; Turn thine enemies weapons into their own bosoms; destroy their
whole Armies; Confound their Forces; Disappoint their Counsels; Reconcile them
unto us and thy truth by thy word, if it be thy will; Or else send peace unto
thy Church by their confusion. Grant this o Father, for Jesus Christ's sake,
our only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
20 A Prayer of a General.
O Most just and righteous God, even thou the God of Hoasts, (who for the
sins of men) do out of thy Judgments, raise wars, and bring upon thy
people the sword, which is the revenger of the breach of thy league and
covenant) Behold first, o Lord, how the enemies, both of thee, and our Prince,
in great multitudes are gathered together, and in a full presumption of their
own power, are banded against us; provoking us, without cause of just offense
offered on our parts, to take arms, in this defensive war, for the securing
our Prince, our selves, and our country, under thy shield of protection, from
their violence. Consider then, o thou God of righteousness, consider I beseech
thee our cause; And seeing that by the wrong of these our enemies, we are thus
unjustly provoked and solicited unto fight; Be thou pleased out of thy mercy,
to uphold, maintain, and fortify these our Arms, which we do now take in
hand, for our lawful and just defense. And, o my GOD, on whom only I trust,
cast down upon me, (whom my Prince and Sovereign, my liege Lord and
Master, has by thy appointment, made his Lieutenant General over this
Army,) cast down I say upon me thy unworthy Servant,) the brightness of
thy countenance; Look upon me in mercy, and favor; Behold me from thy
Throne of grace and pity; Thou know o Lord, that neither for any ambitious
conceit of Rule, and Authority; Nor for the desire of Prey and spoil, to
enrich my self thereby; Nor to revenge private quarrels; Nor for any sinister
respect whatsoever, do I undertake this charge; But by express command of my
great Lord, (to whom thou have by thy word obliged me, in all kind of
serviceable allegiance,) I am called thereto, under his Standard, to fight for
his Person, and Laws, but chiefly for thy Church, and People; and by the
strength of thy Arm, to vanquish and overcome these malicious disturbers of
our State and country, and so to settle and establish a common peace and
tranquillity among thy people, if it so like thee: Thou therefore, o my help,
my strength, and mighty Fort^esse, look down from above, out of thy holy
Sanctuary; and thou who in times past did fight for the Israelites
miraculously against the Egyptians and against many Nations, give me both
strength, and wisdom, to overcome th^se thine, and our enemies, by this
ordinary means of lawful Arms and weapons, which are used by man for his
defense and ours, chiefly in Fights and Battles. Thou did not rep^ll the
Centurion, when he came ^^ to thee, but thou receiuedst him, and praise^st his
Faith, seeming thereby well pleased with his calling. Lord, behold I also come
unto thee, with prayer, beseeching thee, to make me, at this time, and always
in the like charge, worthy so high a vocation; that in no wise, neither my
self, nor any soldier under my command, do abuse the Sword, whereby this
military power and authority, ordained also by thee for defense of the good,
and to the reuengement of the evil disposed, may in any sort be ill spoken of.
For this cause, give me the spirit of wisdom, such as is meet for this
place, to contain all the Regiments of my Soldiers, in good order, by a just
rule and government of military discipline, that no wrongful injuries be done
to any; No violence made upon such, as are not confederates in this war
against us; And as thy servant John has taught, that both I and they,
contenting our selves with our wages, and the stipendarie entertainment which
we have from our Prince, do not invade our confined and bordering neighbors
without cause, or make outroades to wast and dispoile the fields and countries
of any, not being our Enemies. Also that there be no mutenous person amongst
us; No false hearted fugitives* by whom contentions and seditions in the Army
may be raised; The common cause weakened; The Enemy made stronger; And thy
Name dishonored; But that we all conspiring in the full consent of Hearts and
Minds, may have our wills firmly* united to that strength which thou shall
arm us with all, and so join in a plausible Resolution, either to overcome,
or to die, if thou have appointed it; (for in this, and always, thy will be
done o Lord.) Wherefore when I shall bring forth my Soldiers to battle, even
in that same very hour, give both me and them a good courage, without all
fear, and faintness of Heart, or treacherous practices, resolutely to fight,
and encounter the enemy, be ^e never so strong and mighty in number; For we
know, that thou art able with a few to overcome many; Be thou therefore in
the midst of us, then fighting, because we have made thee our help, ready
and present with speedy mercy to defend us. Thou art the Lord of Hoasts; Thou
o God of Jacob art our Refuge; Thou breakest the Bow, thou snappest the Spear
in sunder; Thou raisest wars, and make them to cease after thy will and
pleasure, doing therein what seems best to thy heavenly wisdom. Wherefore,
o Lord, infuse into my mind some gracious sparks, which may fully instruct my
understanding in thy fear, that at no time, in the outrage of fury, I shed
innocent blood, nor suffer any to be shed and spilt by my Soldiers; Preserve
me, and mine, under my government, from all kind of riotous disorders, as
Drunkenness, Wantons, Rape, Incest, unlawful companying with women; Let neither
me, nor them, oppress widows, and fatherless children; or do any wrongful
harms to the poor, whose cries may justly call down thy vengeance upon us,
to our utter confusion. And this moreover I humbly entreat at thy hands, o
merciful God, to Remove far from v^* our minds, and Tongues, all the leaude
custom of swearing, forswearing, and blaspheming thy Ma^^st^e; Let thy Blood,
thy wounds, thy holy Name, much abused by Oaths, be had of me, and them, in
very great reverence; that we all, from the highest, to the lowest, with clean
hearts, circumcized lips, and pure hands freede from all injustice and
innocent Blood, may so walk in this Souldierly vocasion, for the time of
warfare limited thereto, as that after this military life ended, we may at
length, come to the triumphant, and most glorious life, to reign with thee in
thy kingdom for ever.

Amen.
21 A Prayer of a Soldier.
O Lord God of Hoasts, which teach my hands to fight, and my fingers to
Battle, I humbly beseech thee, to have mercy upon me, that am continually
subject to so many dangers, that I fall not before mine enemies. Touch my
heart, that I may truly feel my sins, and earnestly repent me of the same:
And seeing I have undertaken this service, not for any covetousness, or revenge
of blood, but in obedience to my Prince, and defense of a righteous cause;
Suffer me not (I entreat thee) to give my members as weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin, but give me grace to look carefully unto my ways,
that I may first with a safe conscience perform my duty toward thee, and
then with all diligence discharge my loyalty toward my Prince and Country.
And that I may the better effect this duty, O Lord, gird me with strength;
make my way upright; Conduct me with thy hand; Encourage me with thy word;
Arm me with Faith and Hope to thee-ward; And prepare me courageously to the
combat.

Bless all our Companies in these our lawful attempts; Suggest unto us the
best meaues to save our selves, and to defeat the purposes of our enemies;
Arm us with thy Grace, that we may manfully fight in thy quarrel; Make our
name fearful to our enemies, to the abatement of their pride; Raunge us
within the limits of truth and honesty, that we may not be given to those
vices which accompany the war; In thy name, o Lord, we are come against this
great multitude, of thine and our enemies; Help us, and suffer them not to
prevail against us, for our trust is in thee; Keep us from Treasons,
Mutanies, and Conspiracies, either against our Prince or Captains; Hear the
mournings of diverse of our Captains detained in the hands of their enemies,
and work means for their deliverance; And if it shall please thee at any time
to lay thy heavy cross upon us, or to expose us to death in this place, keep
us in thy faith, that fighting the good fight of Christians, we may l^ue and
dye thy Soldiers, in thy favor, and in a firm hope of a joyful
Resurrection; The which the Lord for this Christ sake grant us. To whom be
all honor and glory, boh now and evermore.

Amen.
22 A Prayer of Humiliation,
O Lord God, the Auenger, the Auenger of all them (a) Psalm 44. ver. 1. 2.
that provoke thee to anger, by their sin and wickedness: How is thy Psalm. 74.
ver. 1.
wrath kindled this day against the sheep of thy pasture? For thou have caused
our adversaries and thine, to rejoice and triumph over us, by Psalm. 89. ver.
41. 42.
setting up their right hand, to overthrow and destroy our Forces, with a
great slaughter. Thou feedest us with the bread of Psalm. 80. ver. 5. (e)
Tears, and have given us Tears to drink in plentiful measure. (e) Have
thou cast us off, and will thou no more cause thy face to shine upon us? For
it was thy work, o Lord, that the Psalm. 89, ver. 43.
edge of the sword was turned this day, and that we did not stand in the
Battle. Have thou then taken thy Peace, even Psalm. 77. ver. 8. 7. Ierem. 16.
ver. 5.
Mercy, and (g) Compassion from thy people? O Lord, we confess, that our
Psalm. 38. ver. 4.
sins are a weighty burden, too heavy for us to bear; and do therefore
most humbly prostrate our selves at thy feet, before thy Throne of Mercy,
craving it by earnest Psalm. 91. ver. 15.
prayer, which is only our Refuge. We are most heartily sorry, that we have
offended thy divine Majesty thus far, to provoke thee, (being a father of
great 2. Corin. 1. ver. 3.
pity and kindness,) in this manner to punish our wickedness, with the
slaughter of thy people. It is our own sorrow, (l) Ierem. 10. ver. 19.
and our just plague, therefore we will meekely bear it; taking it patiently
and thankfully, that thou do visit our sins with the Rod; For by it, thou
tellest us, that we are thy children, because thou receiuest none, but whom
thou first Job 5. ver. 17.
chastisest; And this thy servant Iobe, calls a blessing. Yet, o Lord,
correct us by thy Ierem. 10. ver. 24.
judgment, as thou promised, even in and the chapter 30. ver, 11.
measure contend with us, now that thou have blown, with thy rough wind, in
this heavy day of the East wind, and let us not be utterly cut off, by this
affliction, which thou have brought upon us, ou^ King and country by
overthrowing the forces and (p) Isay. 28.
strength of out Armies, and making us a prey to the teeth of our enemies. It
is true, o Lord, that thou speak by thy Prophet Jeremy, our Bruising is
incurable Ierem. 30. ver. 12. 13.
and our wound is dolorous. There is none to judge our cause, or to lay a
plaster; none to cure by medicines, or to help us; For it must be thy work
only, o God It is thou that woundest, and healest; Thou that casts Job. 5.
ver. 18.
down, and raisest up again, with thee is life, and death, Health, and
Sicknes^e; Thou only destroyest by the Corin. 10.
destroyer, whose ministry thou use to execute thy Judgments upon all
sinners. Wherefore, to thee we come, o Lord God of infinite mercies, to thee I
say, and to none else, do we offer these our prayers of supplications, and of
Repentance, humbling our selves, in a ture submissiue acknowledgement, of our
misdeeds; Confessing, that we have worthily deserved, this scourge of reproach
and conquest. Yea, if thou had powered forth the full measure Psalm. 59. ver.
13.
of thy furious wrath upon us, to have brought us to nothing; if thou had
punished us with so mighty a slaughter, that our Enemies had Psalm. 58. ver. 10.
washed their feet in our blood; or had carried us clean away, with a whirle
wind, In this thy wrath against us; Yet must we have confessed, that this had
justly fallen upon us, for our sins; and that thou, o God, had showed thy
self righteous, in those thy ver. 11.
Judgments. But ver. 9.
thou have not so dealt with us, but have measured this thy Rod by our
Infirmities; tempering judgment, with Corin. 10. ver. 13.
mercy, thereby causing us both to fear, and love thee. O Lord make us also
thankful for thy merciful moderation of the same; And cause us thereby, to
descend into our selves, to call our misdeeds, into a straight account, as thy
word teaches; To learn, and understand, that when thou do extremely
punish thy people, it is for their manifold transgressions, and for that
otherwise, we cannot be brought to acknowledge our sins with repentance, and
so to turn unto thee, that we might be healed. For as thy Prophet Da^id has
spoken in the spirit; Psalm. 107. ver. 17.
Fools, by reason of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities,
are afflicted; For such have no fear of thee before their their Eyes; and
therefore, out of thy wisdom do thou chastise them with sharp Rods,
that in thy mercy, they might so find thee. This thy wisdom, full of
commiseration and pity, toward us this day, we do all from our hearts, both
acknowledge in love of thy name, and also ^euerence, with fear of thy
Majesty; giving thee thanks for this thy fatherly chastisement; and purposing
amendment of our liu^s. O Lord, give us a godly sorrow* to work in our hearts
a true Repentance; and the strength of thy spirit to confirm, and continue
this purpose and Resolution in us all, both king and people, for ever; that we
may say, Psalm. 8^. ver. 17. 18.
thou a^^ the glory of our strength, and in thy righteousness shall we be
exalted, because ou^ shield appe^teineth to thee o Lord* in as much as, our
King has power from thee only, to protect and defend us.

Wherefore o our God, Father of infinite mercies, Bow down thine ear, and
hearken unto us thy Israel, even thine Elect, whom thou love, for thy name
sake.

Out of the deep places we call unto thee; From (f) Psa. 130. ver. 1.
our bottomless miseries do we cry unto thee, The terrors of thy anger, and
the horror of hell, which with open mouth, is ready to swallow us up quick;
do constrain us, in most pitiful lamentations, to be supplicate unto thee,
unto thee o Lord, for thy help. Lord hear our lamentations, which contain
nothing but the humble prayers of thy servants, desirous to be recommended unto
thy mercies. For, art not thou o God, the Father of pity? the Lord of
comfort and relief, to them that are in distress, and call fai^hfully upon
thee for thy deliverance? Have not thou said, that the Rod Psa. 125 ver. 3.
of the wicked, shall not rest on the (h) Lot of the righteous, because thou will not drive them from hope of thy succor, into a despair of thy goodness?
Thou can not forget thine own nature, prone to clemency and kindness; For
though thou seem to be angry with us, which we know is to our good; and
have in a manner abandoned us from thy presence, in this thy heavy displeasure;
yet do we trust in thee, for that thou have not utterly rejected us, for ever.
We are confirmed in this hope, by the example of the Israelites, who,
notwithstanding they rebelled against thy word, and despised the counsel of
thee the most high God; yet, when they Ps. 107. ver. 6.
cried to thee in their trouble, thou did deliver them from their distressed
state and misery; And art still the same God, to all thine elect; aiding and
Ps. 106. ver. 10.
helping them in their necessities, Be thou therefore the Lord God of Exo. 29.
ver. 45.
Israel, for ever and ever; which so Job. 5. ver. 18.
make a wound, as thou (l) bindest it up again, so (l) smitest, as that thy
hands do yet make whole. Be thou blessed, be thou blessed only, which blessest
man who^ thou Job. 5. ver. 17.
correctest. In ver. 20.
Famine thou deliuerest from (n) death; and in (n) Battle also when thy
pleasure is, from the power of the destroying sword; yea, if thou heapest
trouble upon trouble, and doublest the sorrow of affliction, laying all the
burdens of Famine, of the sword, and of Pestilence, upon thy children; yet,
thou do then instruct their minds, and openest the eyes of their
understanding, to see and know that thy purpose, in these, and the most
grievous chastisements that thou can and do lay upon them, is continually
more and more, to depend upon thy mercy, and to trust in thee the rather for
help of deliverance. For so it is said of thee, that thou do deliver in
six Job. 5. ver. 19.
troubles, and in the s^uenth, the evil shall not (o) touch thy children. To
whom then may we call for help and mercy, but to thee who give us a
comfortable issue, even in the greatest and last trouble, that it shall not
annoy us? But rather in the end we may have occasion by our correction to
rejoice in thee, and for it, to give thee praise with thankfulness, when,
through thy mercy in it, forgiving our sins, we shall be found just before
thee, in Christ Jesus thy son, our only Mediator and Savior. In whose name,
we offer unto thee at this time, this our Prayer of Humiliation, presuming the
acceptance thereof, for his sake; Because, Ps. 130. ver. 4.
mercy is with thee, that thou may be (p) feared world without end. To thee
therefore, the only wise, and most powerful God, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, Majesty, and power.

Amen.
23. A Prayer in tempestious weather.
Almighty and most powerful God, Eternal, Strong, and magnifice^t, at whose
voice the highest mountains, lowest deeps, and all things under the son do
tremble and quake: preserve us from thy insupportable anger; Pardon our sins,
let thine amiable countenance shine upon us, and always be near unto us;
Grant that this grievous and terribel tempest may pass away without hurting
of us, or any of our brethren; Keep our bodies, our house, or any thing else
that belongs unto us, from Lightning, fire, or any other destruction. Holy
father defend us, from all evil, sudden, and unprepared death; and for thy
dear Son Christ Jesus sake, bring us to thy habitation of eternal bliss,
where we may sing perpetually amongst the company of the Angels and Saints in
heaven, Haleluia, unto the glory of thy holy name.

Amen.
24. A Prayer of an Admiral.
I Confess it to be true, o God, that thy Prophet David (a) Psalm. ver. 3.
has spoken in the spirit; Though an Host had pitched their Tents against me,
my heart should not be afraid; and though war be raised against me, I will
trust in this, even that thou will deliver me, and give my The marginall note
of the Geneua Transtation.
faith the victory. But because thou have said likewise, by Solomon, that
Prove. 24. ver. 6.
war must be enterprised with counsel; My humble prayer and supplication unto
thee in Christ Jesus is, That it would please thee to grant unto me (who by
thy appointment, am chosen of my King and Liege Sovereign, to be his Admiral,
to rule and govern this whole fleet, assembled together in Ships prepared
to sight thy Ba^tailes upon the waters, against thy enemies, unjustly provoking
us to the fight) to me I say, and to all the rest of the Captains and
Commanders of the Ships of war in this whole Fleet, now preparing our
selves for this present Sea fight, wisdom, discretion, and policy, carefully
to foresee, and diligently to prevent all inconveniences that may hinder the
atchieuement of the victory. To this end, give grace to me, and to all such as
are called by way of assistance for their experience, to aid and further the
common cause, as well with sound policy, as with strength of Arms, (for Pro.
24. ver. 6.
in the multitude of them that can give counsel, is health,) give grace I say
unto us Lord (if it be thy good pleasure to be so favorable unto our King and
Country,) that with true and perfect knowledge of wisdom and understanding,
which increases strength, we may prevent all dangers; Pro. 24. ver. 5.
For thou do strengthen by wisdom, and sauest by understanding, when and
whom it pleases thee; in so much as, with Iud. 15. ver. 15. Joshua. 23. ver.
10.
one man guided by thy Spirit, thou preuailest against thousands destituted
thereof. Give unto us all a Constant Resolution grounded upon firm faith in
thee, by which we may be embouldned when we encounter the enemy, to say in the
spirit, We Psalm. 56. ver. 4.
trust in God, we will not fear what flesh can do unto us; For our Psalm. 22.
ver. 4.
Fathers trusted in him, and he did deliver them. Cause the Spirit of our
enemies to Isai. 19. ver. 3.
fail in the midst of them; Destroy their Counsels, let them be for the
Ezekiel. 66. ver. 5.
spreading of ne^ts in the midst of the Sea, wherein they are embouldned
through the multitude of Ships to ride; and in the confidence of a fleshly
Arm, to fight against thy people, which call upon thy Name. O Lord, for that
they have undertaken a false quarrel, and do encourage themselves in a Psalm.
64. ver. 5.
wicked purpose, Let them be a Ezekiel. 2^. ver. 5.
spoil unto us, that all other Princes seeing how wonderfully valiant thou art
in thy Battles, may cloth themselves with a 16. Robe of astonishment, and
say, Verily, the Lord ver. 16. Exodus 14. ver. 25. 22.
fights for his people, the Lord went forth with their Armies and conducted
them, he is the Shield and strength of their deliverance, Psalm. 28. ver. 7.
No counsel can stand against God, Psalm. 33. ver. 10.
no power, nor force of Arms may dare to oppose it self and prevail, against
them whom he is pleased to protect and defend by his Counsel; And the Nations,
seeing how thou have Eze. 26. ver. 17. Psalm. 11. ver. 9.
executed vengeances upon our enemies with rebukes of thy indignation, may
confess thee to be the only Lord God, mighite in Battles, and powerful in
all wisdom, and so be provoked thereby the more seriously to give to thee the
glory due unto thy name, which is a name of great fear and wonder in all the
world. Furthermore I beseech thee, be pleased in mercy to hearken unto me,
praying in the name of thy Son Christ, forasmuch as thou art the Lord, which
Psalm. 29. ver. 10.
sit upon the floods, moderate the Tempests of wind and weather during the
time of the fight on the Sea, and also both before and after, as that neither
our Ships nor men suffere any annoyance by the raging surges of the waters,
which otherwise in thy judgment might ouerwhelme and destroy all. For we
confess that our unworthiness is great, and our sins deserves the surie of
thine anger; but remember, o Lord, that thy name is called upon of us, and we
are thy people, to whom thou have graciously made thy self known by many
mercies and favors, enriching us both Prince and people with infinite
blessings of peace and tranquillity above all Nations; For which we heartily
thank thee, desiring thee for thy Christ sake to Luke 17. ver. 5.
increase thy faith in us daily more and more, that we may still grow forward
in true love and thankfulness toward thee, both Prince and people; So shall the
King Psalm. 21. ver. 1. ver. 6.
rejoice in thee his strength, whom thou have made glad with the joy of thy
countenance, and we thy people his subjects, for all thy favorable kindnesses,
and for this Sea victory, give thee praise and glory, saying, The Psalm. 18.
ver. 2.
Lord is our Rock and our fortress, in him do we put our trust. Grant us
these, and all other thy good blessings which thou know to be necessary for
us thy whole Church, even for thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
25. A Prayer against our Enemies.
O Most merciful Redeemer, give unto us the spirit of mildness, that we may
with patience suffer the evil speeches and doings of our enemies, which not
only wish us evil, but to their power work us what mischief in them lies.
Keep us so far, from offering wrong unto them, or seeking or wishing revenge
upon them in our hearts, as that we may not only be helpful unto them to the
uttermost of our power with temporal blessings, but may always pray unto thee
for their welfare and fowls health as becomes thy children, beseeching thee
bountifully to bestow upon them, whatsoever thou know may do them good; and
chiefly a sound and vncorrupt mind, where through they may know thee, and
seek thee in true charity, with their whole Hearts. Let not their hating of
us turn to their harm, but save them for thy mercy sake, and join them unto
us in mutual love, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
26. A Prayer to be defended from our Enemies.
Keep and defend me most merciful father, from the cruel hands, envious
Hearts, and malicious tongues, of such as undeservedly go about to take away my
life, good name, or goods; Oh Lord be on my side, for my trust is in thee, (who
art a Castle and Fortress so strong, that none can prevail against the least
of them that believe in thee.) Wherefore, o Lord, let it be thy good pleasure
for Christ thy Sons sake, to (b) protect me continually under the shadow of
thy wings. Give me patience meekely to bear their slanderous words and wicked
practices, and so guide me by thy holy Spirit in all my actions, that my
adversaries may take no just advantage against me, so that they seeing my
sincere life and godly behavior (having their fury stayed by thy mighty
power,) may be ashamed of their wicked intentions toward me, and constrained
to magnify thy holy name, who so mercifully have defended thy servant from
them. Lord, I commit my self and all that I have wholly into thy hands, deal
with me according to thy mercy, and evermore mightily defend me, for Jesus
Christ's sake.

Amen.
27. A Prayer against Desperation.
MOst merciful father, I acknowledge that I have diverse ways, and many times
most grieu^usly offended thy divine Majesty, for which my conscience is now
sore charged and wounded, in such sort, that if I look only unto mine own
self, I find nothing due unto me but utter confusion. Wherefore I humbly
entreat thee, to give me grace, and to assist me with thy holy Spirit, that in
true faith I may call upon thee for mercy, in the name of my Savior jesus
Christ thy Son, and obtain forgiveness of my sins by his merits,
according as thou have promised in thy sacred word. Leaueme not I beseech thee
in despair, or destitude of heavenly grace, least the wicsted spirit take from
me all inward consolation, and drive me to infidelity. Confirm my faith so
strongly, that in the midst of death, my hope may be in thee who art my life.
Let me never distrust thy succor and mercy: Augment my faith, which I have
grounded upon thy death and passion. That one drop of precious blood which thou
did shed for my sake, is much more excellent in greatness of virtue, then all
my foul sins are in pollution. Look upon me therefore (dear Lord) with
thy eyes of mercy, that I may not despair with Judas, or sin against the
holy Ghost. Blessed spirit, the treasure of all sweetness, help me in my
latest necessities: when the foul Feend shall accuse me, my conscience shall
declare me guilty, and the terrors of hell astonish me: then dear Jesus
comfort me, and let not the trust which I have in thee be confounded. Make my
hope firm in thee, and suffer me not to doubt of the remission of my sins.
Put me in remembrance of the bond which I made unto thee, when I received the
Sacrament of Baptism, that I may even then comfort my self with thy blessed
promise thereto annexed, namely, that whosoever believes and is baptized,
shall be saved. For these etc.

Our Father, etc. Lord, I put my whole trust in thee, lay not my sins to my
charge.

Special Medicines against Despair.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
Math. 11. ver. 28.

So God loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Ioh.
3. ver. 16.

Christ came into the word to save sinners. 1. Tim. 1. ver. 15.

If any man sin, we have an Aduocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the just,
he is the reconciliation for our sins. 1. Ioh. 2. ver. 1. 2,

The Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as
be afflicted in spirit. Psalm. 34. 18.

Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116. ver.
15.

Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost. Ioh. 17.
ver. 12. Ioh. 6. ver. 39.

The Lord is pitiful, and merciful, flow to anger, and of great kindness.
Psalm. 86. ver. 15.

He that believes in him, shall not be condemned. Ioh. 3. ver. 18.

Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with
the precious blood of Christ. 1. Pet. 1. ver. 18.

Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again; But ye received
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Romans 8. ver. 15.

God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength. 1.
Corin. 10. ver. 13.

Upon assured repentance, use these places of Scripture here under written.
The blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1. ver. 7.

I am the Resurrection, and the life, he that believes in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live. Ioh. 11. ver. 25.

Because he considers, and turns away from his transgressions that he has
committed, he shall surely live, and not die. Ezekiel. 18. ver. 28.

Blessed is the man, whom God corrects. Job. 5. ver. 17.

If thy sins were as red as crimson, they shall be made as white as snow.
Isaiah 1. ver. 18.

Being justified by Faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Romans 5. ver. 1.

28. A Confession of Faiih. Job. 19. ver. 25. Ephe. 2. ver. 3. Matthew. 26. ver.
28. Isaiah. 53. ver. 11. Matthew. 3. ver 17.

I Believe and confess that my Redeemer lives.

And albeit I am by nature the child of perdition, yet by the death and
passion of Jesus Christ my Savior, my sins are washed away, through shedding
of his most precious blood.

Works and merits have I none, but only the satisfaction of Christ.

In whom only, God is well pleased.

And whereas the terror of my sins, and the consideration of my manifold
iniquities, whereof I most heartily repent me, might justly condemn me, and
cause me to despair, yet knowing that Christ has 1. Peter. 2. ver. 24. Luke.
5. ver. 20.
borne all our infirmities, and that by his stripes (not only I) but all
mankind is made whole.

I assure my self, that not only God has forgiven me:

But according to Isaiah, If my sins were as red as Isaiah. 1. ver. 18. Romans
4 ver. 25. John 6. ver. 54. 1. 24. John. 5. ver. 24.
Crimson, they shall be made as white as Snow.

Also I believe the resurrection of the body, I mean, that as Christ died for
my sins, and rose again for my justification:

So my body shall rise again.

Finally, I believe that there is an everlasting life purchased for me,
persuaded thereof, for that Jesus Christ himself says;

Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death unto life: Which God of his great mercy grant me. Now
I feel Gods hand; Now Lord have mercy upon me. God the Father, God the Son,
and God the holy Ghost, strengthen me. Lord receive my soul, for it comes
to thee.

A Prayer tr^be said at a man's departure.
OH my God, oh the life of my soul, oh my whole Ezekiel. 18. ver. 28. Iam. 1. 6.
Psalm. 145. ver. 17. John. 5. ver. 24.
desire and joy. Thou have promised in thy word forgiveness of sins, to the
true repentant sinner. I, by the assistance of thy holy spirit (without
waueuering,) challenge thee of thy promise, whom I know certainly to be just.
Thou have said, There is no condemnation to them that die in Christ Jesus. I,
by thy grace steadfastly believing in him, forsake mine own self, and
earnestly desire to be melted, consumed, transformed and changed into the
vehement heat of thy love, unto whom I commit my soul and body, with full
assurance of a joyful resurrection, and life everlasting, through the merits
of Christ my Savior. Now my Redeemer is come, Lord receive my spirit.

Thus far a man, by the counsel of Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 38. ver. 16. and
the 22. Chap. ver. 11. may lawfully mourn for the dead.
MY Son, says the wise man, (following the example John. 11. ver. 11. and so
to the. 35.
of Christ, who wept over Lazarus being dead: Power forth thy Tears over the
d^ad, and neglect not his burial. By which it appears, that decent interring
of the corpse, and seemly mourning, being the last duties of love in this
world, befitteth Christians. But it must be done, with a resolution, to be
content with that which God has done, without repining thereat.

30 A Prayer at the burial of any, then specially to be used, oceasioning a
Meditation of Man's Mortality.
O God, my God, the only God of my health, thou Redeemedst me by dying for me,
and have saved me, by redeeming me, in that thy death upon the Cross. I do
with all reverence acknowledge my most humble thanks unto thee for the same.
But, o sweet Jesus, what is man that thou so regardest him? and how could he
any ways demerit the least part of such inestimable love? I c^fesse, o Lord,
the depth of this mystery, is far above the reach of my capacity;
Notwithstanding be pleased I beseech thee, to address all my thoughts at all
times unto a serious meditation thereof, that I being fully instructed by thy
holy spirit, and made truly to understand that it was thy love, merely and
solely working thereby salvation to man, may accordingly live unto thee, and so
dying in thee, be made a worthy partaker of the blessed fruit thereof, by and
through the worthiness of that thy death and passion only. And now, o my God,
what thing can be more available to work in the heart of man an earnest
endeavor to the said Meditation, the^ a due and Christian consideration of the
state of his mortality, the which, though many ways represented unto him,
does occasio a remembrance thereof; yet no one way more sensibly works a true
acknowledgement of it, then the presentment, and general summons, which death
makes at the Funerals and burialls of such, as the eye beholds enterred then
and shut up in the grave. For by it are we taught to know the fragilitie and
momentany stabilitie of our life, in as much as death steals upon us in an
hour in which we look not for it, and in our greatest security, are we
soonest and suddenly surprised by his messengers, which atte^d daily upon
these our frail bodies of claie and dust, and therefore are easily overthrown
and destroyed, notwithstanding all vain hopes and affiances in the help of man's
strength, wisdom, and policy, or any other worldly means whatsoever. For
thy servant Job has said, (c) Though I hope, yet the Grave shall be mine
house; and that because a man by no means can (d) redeem his brother, he
cannot give his ransom to God, to live still for ever, and not to see the
grave; For in stead of any worldly help shall corruption be our Father, and
worms shall be both mother and sister unto us; The truth hereof, though most
certain, for the reason taken from daily experience, which tells us that
thou bring all to the dust, yet not so certainly believed of many, whose
careless and loose life does show, that there is no fear of death before
their eyes; which yet behold daily examples thereof, even lively spectacles of
mortality, and most instructing documents of a span long life, fading like the
green grass, which withers in a moment; and wearing away like a tale that is
told. But these shall go into the land of darkness, and never return from
the shadow of death, being men as clean deuoyd of the sense and feeling of
thy Judgment; so in this desperate state altogether in capable of thy mercies
in Christ, are likewise debarred from all comfort of the Resurrection.
Wherefore, o Lord, vouchsafe me, I pray thee, for thy Christ's sake, the
favorable look of thy gracious eye, that I seriously beholding my self in
this our brother, (whom thou have called out of this life, and is now buried
in the grave,) to be returned to the earth, out of which thou did first raise
and fashion him,) may learn thereby, both to know the time of my breathing here
upon the earth to be short, and subject to sudden change, and also knowing the
same, may be taught by thy spirit to number my days, and to order them
accordingly unto thee; So shall neither my life be grievous unto me, being
guided by thy holy spirit, neither death at any time unsavory or not welcome;
securing my conscience of thy favor, even unto a blessed hope of a joyful
resurrection, promising that rich garment of immortality, which this
mortality of ours, (uow cladde with sinful flesh) being thus by death
changed, and clean abolished, shall then put on. O my God, thou art my refuge,
my hope, my only mercy, in which I must trust; Be near unto me, to assist me at
al times of need; But* at the very hour, in which thou shall call me from
hence, be present with all the power and might of thy gracious favor, to
withstand the assalts of the devil, who then is most busy to pluck me from
thee. But, o Lord, be thou merciful unto me, that my spirit by death separated
from the body, may return to thee, from whom it came; If I was so dear unto
thee, as to be redeemed by thee, let me not seem so unworthy, as then to be
lost and utterly rejected from thee. I know, that without thee, that is,
without the help of thy loving kindness, and merely gracious good favor, I shall
neither live to please thee, nor yet die, to be accepted of thee. For I have no
good works to allege for my self before thee; nay rather full of corruption and
sin, I deplore my unworthiness, and do prostrate my self at the throne of thy
mercy, craving the imputation of thy souls righteousness, who has washed away
the guilt of my sins, with his precious blood. Grant me therefore, o Lord,
that having a godly feeling of my misery for sin, I may use this life, as if I
used it not; loathing it for the wretchedness thereof, and yet patiently abiding
the appointed time of my dissolution, after the rule of thy blessed will; And
when the time is come, that the^ I may say in the spirit, Lord, I fly to thee,
despise me not the work of thy hands; refuse me not now, in this last hour of
mercy; where the tree falls, there it lies, as thou have decreed in thy
secret counsel; and who remembers thee in the Grave? Wherefore now, o Lord,
even now, whilst thou may be found, do I cry unto thee for grace and mercy;
Let thy loving kindness come unto me, for thou art my por^^on, and my soul
faints for thy salvation, according to thy promises in Christ. In the mean
time, that is, for the time of my restless breathing here upon earth, be
pleased to assist me, with the power and wisdom of thy sanctifying spirit,
against the incursions and assaults of all wicked ^ leaud tentations, of the
world, the flesh, and the diu^^ that I living after thy will (according to that
measure of faith, and go^lines, which thou in mercy, out of thy love in Christ,
have allotted unto me,) may at the very hour of death be accepted of thee,
and so be taken up into Abraham's bosom, which is the place of blessed rest,
prepared by thee for the souls of thy children, to the fruition, and full
enjoying of all eternity, with thy Saints for ever. Grant this, o Father, thou
who live and raignest one God, in perfect Trinity, world without end.

Amen.
31 A Prayer of Widows.
O Lord God, which despisest not the Prayers of a sorrowful widow; I beseech
thee take pity upon me a poor desolate woman, whose best stay in this world
(next unto thee) thou have taken away; Give my grace patiently to bear this
thy visitation; Let nothing be able to separate me from thee, the only joy of
my soul: Preserve me from all greedy and covetous minded persons, that lie
in wait to supplant the simple; grant me favor in the sight of all Governors
and Judges, before whom I shall have any suites in time of oppression; Stir
up the hearts and minds of all men, to help me in all reasonable demands;
Provide for me all necessary things for this life; Take pity upon me in
all dangers, and stretch out thy hand to deliver me; Bless the small portion
of earthly goods which thou have given me, and make it sufficient to supply
the necessities of me and mine here; But specially and above all, forasmuch as
it h^th pleased thee, o Lord, by thy holy Apostle S. Paul, to instruct all
widows how to demean themselves toward their 1. Tim. 5. 4.
own household, after thy fear, let it please thee of thy goodness, to give me
grace, to be an example of godliness, and all religious virtues, unto my
children, and whole family, for that is acceptable unto thee, as thy Apostle
says in the same place. So shall both my children and servants (having their
hearts first moved and disposed thereto by the instinct of thy holy spirit) be
by my godly example, the better framed and fashioned, to all godly obedience,
peace, and true holiness; and willingly pliant without grudging and murmuring,
unto the knowledge of godly discipline, to their good in thee only, and no
otherwise. Assist me o Lord my God, with thy comfortable and powerful spirit,
in this and all other things whatsoever; that putting my whole trust in thee, I
may continually (as befitteth a modest religious matrone) glorify thy holy
name, for these thy great blessings bestowed upon me, saying the same prayer,
which thy son Christ Jesus has taught me. Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

32 A Prayer of Orph^n^s, or fatherl^sse Children.
O Most merciful Savior, the succor of the distressed, and father of the
fatherless; I being by thy appointment deprived of my parents (who were my
chiefest stay in this world,) do fly unto thee for succor, humbly
entreating thee to hear my prayers; to take pity upon me: to deliver me in
all perils; and to appoint me faithful Guardians, that may carefully breed
me up in thy fear. Give me grace with all willing obedience, to follow
their good counsel. Grant, that I may find favor and upright dealing at
their hands, and all other Magistrates whatsoever; Suffer me not to be
oppressed by the mighty, or seduced by the crafty; But deliver me from all
greedy cormorants and dissembling friends, that would make a prey of me; And
let me not run too and fro to seek my bread, but provide (o Lord,) a
competent living for me, whereby I may be furnished with things necessary;
Bless my endeavors, whether at my book or otherwise; and so direct me with
thy spirit, that I may always live in thy fear, and die in thy favor.

Amen.
33 A Prayer of men Servants.
O Lord God, who have made us all one in Christ Jesus, give unto me I beseech
thee, a contented mind in that condition of life, wherein thou have placed
me, that in all humility, patience, and dutiful obedience, I may submit my
self, unto the honest and lawful commandments of my Master and Mistress;
Lead us all in the way of truth and righteousness; Defend us from all
temptations, enemies, deceits, and dangers; Bl^sse us all, especially our
Governors, with heavenly wisdom, understanding, godliness, worldly wealth,
and happiness; Govern all our actions to thy glory, the good of thy Church,
and discharge of our duties; Grant me an understanding heart to manage my
businesses aright, and carefully to look unto the things that are committed to
my charge; Make me circumspect and diligent, that with a good conscience, I may
perform all faithful and true service unto them, not suffering any thing to
go to wrack, either through negligence, or unnecessary expenses, that they
may take joy and comfort in me, and I in them; And that I may the better
effect this duty, Lord for thy Christ sake, forgive me my sins; Strengthen
my body, to perform the business that I am appointed unto; Keep me from
murmuring against my betters; From envious detracting the estimation of others;
From Idleness; From evil and wastfull company; and from my Masters enemies.
Send unity, and peace amongst us, from the highest to the lowest; Suppress
all hasty and cholloricke motions in us; Nourish mutual love between me and
my fellows, that our minds being free from evil thoughts, our tongues, from
leaud and vain speeches; and our bodies, and every member thereof, from
sinful actions; we may with one mind, willingly and carefully follow our
Masters business in this life; and hereafter be made freemen of the
Heavenly Jerusalem with Christ for ever.

Amen.
34 A Prayer of Maid Servants.
BLessed Lord, which despisest not the low estate of thy Handmaids, vouchsafe
to hearken unto the humble petitions of me thy poor servant. Consider, that in
the labors both of body and mind, I am the weaker vessel, of less
capacity, and more infirmity; Give unto me strength of body, and as I grow
up in years, so increase grace in me; Crown my virginity with chaste and
religious thoughts; and my body and mind, with godly watchfulnes, to wait for
thy coming. Preserve my good name and reputation; Let my behavior be modest
and meek; My talk sober; And my body chaste; Keep me from leaude and
wanton company; Pardon my former vanities; And by the power of thy spirit,
protect me from all evil actions; Slanderous tongues; and wicked temptations;
Make me faithful; trusty; wise; and very wary, in the ordering of such
goods, as are committed to my charge; And painefully to employ my self in my
vocation; And when it shall be thy good pleasure to call me to the honorable
estate of matrimony, govern all my actions so, as that I may follow Rachell in
love; Rebecca, in wisdom; Sara, in faithfulness and obedience to my husband,
and all other worthy matrones, in modesty and honesty. Grant this (o Father)
for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom be all honor, glory, might, dominion, and
Majesty, both now, and for evermore.

Amen.
35 A Prayer of Teachers.
MOst gracious Lord, the only wise, and all-sufficient God, I do most
thankfully confess, that that thou have made me a wonderful creature, which
am the worke-man-ship of thine own hands, and of no less mercy, then
wisdom, forasmuch as when thou mighst have made me any thing else, save that
I am, as a bruit beast, a plant, a stone, yet then it pleased thee to think
upon me in kindness, and even in my mothers womb, having as yet no being, to
frame, and fashion me a lively and reasonable creature, endowing me with the
gift of knowledge and understanding, after the similitude of thine own Image.
For which thy wonderful wisdom, I with an acknowledgement of thy merciful
goodness, do from the bottom of my heart, give thee praise, thanks, and all
glory, to whom only it does belong; beseeching thee to instruct my mind in
the right understanding of the true end, for which thou have been pleased,
thus graciously to bless me in creation. I confess, that this knowledge, is
far excelling the reach of my simple capacity; For o Lord) I am merely
carnal without thee, being left to my self, and so am altogether ignorant of
thy heavenly Mysteries, Among which, this being one, and the chief, I humbly
crave the assistance of thy Spirt, that all my thoughts, and the very inward
parts, yea the most secret corners of my heart and Soul addressed and prepared
to a most sanctified resolution, evermore to attend in all my endeavors, upon
the obteining of this special end, which is the honoring of thy most glorious
name. It cannot be denied, but that reason is the chiefest endowment of the wit
of man, by which thou have made him equal to the Angels, having a special
propriety, apprehensiue of all kind of knowledge, and so most fit for thy
Honor, as most worthy to be glorified in it, and from it, in all manner
employments, that the industry of man may and does atchieue unto. But (o Lord)
what is it, destitute of thy grace? even an engine of inventions for sin and
wickedness. Therefore (o my God) I humbly crave at thy hands, thy grace and
bounteous favor, for the guiding of my wit and studies, as in all other
matters of any good consequence, so especially in this function of teaching
whereunto thou have appointed me, that howsoever, I shall be therein busied and
employed for the time of the continuance thereof, and for the good of them whom
thou have committed to my charge, (which is thy goodness also) I may chiefly
above all refer the same in the whole course of this function, to the setting
forth of thy praise and glory, in the profiting my Scholars wits in all good
knowledge, as well of virtue, as of literature; wherein cause me to have a
zealous care, faithfully to discharge the trust reposed in me for the same,
according to thy blessed will. So shall I never fail, (being enabled by thee)
to attain unto the full view of that end, and it to make the very centor and
place of al my endeavors, in which they are to repose themselves wholly.
Wherefore this is my humble request unto thee, o most merciful God, that my
whole meditations, whether teaching, or not, at home, and abroad, may be fixed
and settled in the study of the said end, so that all the powers and faculties
of my Soul, wit Reason, and understanding, be working in chief for the
advancing of thy most glorious name. Wherefore make me always to have a
religious Conscience in all my Actions, that in them thou may be glorified
through Christ thy Son, and our only Savior, for whose sake only, I crave
these mercies at thy hands, giving thee all praise and glory in him, for ever
and ever.

Amen.
36. A Prayer of one that is afflicted in conscience for Sin.
MOst merciful God, I forlorn wretch (afflicted in conscience, for fear of
thy judgments upon my sins,) with bended knees, tears unfeigned, a
sorrowful Spirit, a heavy heart, and of my self altogether unworthy the least
of thy blessings, do come unto thee in the name of Jesus Christ thy dear
Son, craving succor and mercy.

Lord, thou have promised in thy word, by the mouth Hose. 2. ver. 23.
of thy Prophet. Hose, That thou would have mercy on him that could find no
mercy. Let it light upon me; Let the power of thy Sons passion, defeat all
the devises of the Devil against me. O Lord hear me speedily, least I faint
under this burden, for my spirit is weary of this bondage; My Conscience is
clogged, when I behold the bloody wounds of my Soul; The voice of joy and
mirth is gone from me, I am deeply plunged in discomfort; I pray thee
therefore to send the comfort of thy holy Spirit into my heart, to strengthen
my faith, that I be not overcome with heaviness; Forgive me my Sins, which
are the ground of all this woe, and let them never come unto judgment;
Sanctify unto me all good means to seek relief, as Prayer, conference,
Reading and hearing of thy holy word; Mitigate my vexation; Increase faith;
Establish Hope; Grant Patience; Keep me from Despair; and suffer me not to
be tempted above my strength; Look upon my humble and contrite Heart, for I
mourn all day long, and am like unto him that is at the point of death; Lord
comfort me, spare me; and revive me; Though my Heart condemn me, yet do thou
acquit me, release me of this guilt of sin, say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation; So shall thou open my mouth, and I shall sing unto thee a Song of
Thanksgiving, for thou art my God, my Lord, and my Redeemer; Therefore hearken
Lord unto my Prayer, and grant my requests for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
Prayers Intercessorie, or of Intercession, wherein we are become humble
Petitioners unto God in Christ's Name, for others of all degrees, after S. Paul's
Rule, Pray for all men.
Such are these which follow.

1. A Prayer for the state of the whole Church.
MOst dear John. 20. ver. 17. Deuteronomy. 32* ver. 6.
father, in our Lord and Sauio^r Jesus Christ, vouchsafe to bless and preserve
all those for whom thou would we should pray, namely our King; defend us
with thy mighty power from thine and his enemies; Give him a stayed confidence
in thy defense, many joyful days to reign over us; And a zealous care to
further thy word, in true Discipline. To this end, endue hi^ Counsel with thy
grace; Direct them with thy holy Spirit, that by all* godly policy they may
maintain his safety; Frame their hearts to execute justice without
parcialitie; And give them, will, Ablenes, and Courage, to cut off the secret
and open enemies of thy truth, to the advancement of thy glory, and quiet of
this thy Church and Commonwealth. Rise up (o Lord) and defend thy servants,
wheresoever afflicted for the testimony of thy truth; Confound the adversaries
thereof; throw them down, and let them never rise up any more. Instruct thy
Ministers and them with thy grace, and give them, both knowledge, will, and
bouldnes, to teach thy truth, as well by word, exhortation, and doctrine, as in
Life, Conversation, and godly ^eh^^iour. (...) and keep all thy children (o
Lord) wheresoever they remain, of what estate, condition, or calling soever
they be of. And grant amongst us, such a mortal consent in true religion,
that we may be ready and willing to help one another, as thou have commanded.
Grant reformation to sinners; Be patient (o Lord) and pleased with us in
Christ thy Son; and lay not the pu^ishment and Plagues upon this thy Land,
which our Sins have deserved; But call us home unto thee in hearty
repentance; and make us all partakers of thy blessings; that when thy Son
Christ Jesus shall come to Judgment, we may with joy meet him in the Clouds,
and from thenceforth accompany him in his heavenly kingdom, for evermore.

Amen.
2. A Prayer for the King.
O Thou mighty Iehoua, whose 1. King. 8. ver. 30. 39. 43. 49.
habitation is in the highest heavens, who rulest all things, every where, by
that same wisdom, by which thou did first create them; even thou, the Lord
of all Lord, exalted far above the Wisd. 6. ver. 3. Roma. 13. ver. 1. Pro.
8. ver. 15. and 16.
Princes of the Earth, who have no power, rule, nor authority, but what is
given them from thee. For by thee Kings reign, and Princes rule. Forasmuch, as
thou have commanded by thy Apostle Paul, that we shall make 1. Tim. 2. ver. 1.
2. and 3
intercessions for Kings, as being a thing, good, and acceptable in thy sight:
I am bold upon this warrant to appear before thy Throne of grace, and to
present thee with a prayer, and supplication, in the behalf of n^y most dread
Sovereign, and Liege Lord, King James, for whom, I thy servant, his most
loyal, and faithful subject, by thy appointment, do most humbly supplicate,
that seeing thou have chosen him (as thou had appointed it long before) to be
now a Wisd. 9. ver. 7.
king to us thy people, and a Judge of thy Sons, and Daughters, and he
knowing, that the Throne 2. Chro. 9. ver. 8.
on which he sits as King, in thy stead, is thy Throne; may be illuminated
with thy spirit of understanding, and all princely knowledge from above, fully
replenished with that Wisd. 9. ver. 4. ver. 3.
wisdom which sits by thy Throane; To do according to equity, and
righteousness, and to execute judgment with an upright heart. For he thus
enabled by thee, shall know how to go out 1. Kings. 3. 7. ver. 8.
and in among thy people, whom he is to judge, being now in the midst of
them. Kindle therefore in his Heart ( which is in thy hands, as the Pro. 21.
ver. 1.
Rulers of waters) a true and constant zeal of all godliness, which may argue
in him, a sound and perfect knowledge of thy heavenly will; that so
principally, and above all things, seeking and procuring the advancement of thy
Glory; he may be unto thy People a Isai. 49. ver. 23.
N^ur^ing father, to defend, maintain, and preserve thy Church, against all
enemies, foreign, domestical, open, or secret, which treacherously seek to
disturb the peace of it, and of his Kingdoms. For the better maintenance
whereof, as also for establishing a common tranquillity in his state politic
in thy fear, give him the wise heart of Moses thy servant, to obey the godly
Counsel of son I^thr^, Exodus 18. ver. 24. 21.
cause him to provide Ministers under him, such as are men of 21. courage; 1.
fearing thee, his, and their good; 2. dealing truly; 3. hating covetousness. And
grant, o Lord, that these so ordained, and Deuteronomy. 1. ver. 16. 17.
constituted* Magistrates under him, for his ease; (For who is 18. able to
overcome such a people alone, as Iethro speaks there?) may be as his Ears,
Eyes, and hands, to see, and look clearly into all parts of his kingdom, with
a sincere and single sight; hear the causes, and controversies of his people,
with an ear of Wisdom and understanding; deal righteously in all matters
between every man, and his Brother, and the Stranger that is with him; without
respect of person, and fear of any man's face, as Moses speaks. O Lord, hear
me, praying unto thee, for my King, out of a loyal heart. And thou (o Lord)
thus blessing our King* with wise and discreet Ministers, who discerning
between good, and bad, will judge, thine, and his people according to equity,
every one walking in his several function before thee in singl^nes of heart,
(for all Act. 10. ver. 42. 2. Timo. ver. 1.
judgment is thine,) thou shall be unto him a mighty God against his Enemies,
as thou have bin, to break their Counsels, and to frustrate all their wicked
enterprises at all times. Therefore (o Lord) hear me, thus praying unto thee,
for my King, out of a most loyal Heart, Stablish his kingdom, and settle his
Throane in his posterity, that it may endure, as the days of Heaven; O, Loose
Ioh. 12. ver. 18.
not his Collar, neither girde his Loins with a Girdle, that wisdom be never
taken from him, nor his honor abated by any subjection under his enemies: yea
rather, (he endeavoring by all his counsels, studies, and Actions, to keep
his people in obedience unto thy will, by the spiritual sword of thy heavenly
word (which teaches the same) may have thee his sure Tower, and Rock of
defense; his Psalm. 32. ver. 7.
secret place to preserve him from all trouble; to secure him in all times of
any danger extended against him, howsoever then, by the Temporal Sword also
of his Crown and dignity, (when occasion requires that it must be used,)
thou specially guiding, and ass^^ng him therein. For it is thou only that must
stand up for his help^. Therefore do thou lay (o) hand upon the Shield, and
Psalm. 35. ver. 2.
Buckler; Assure him of thy present power to defend him; Psa. 35. ver. 3.
Say unto his soul, I am thy salvation; I will send upon thine enemies the
Isa. 19. ver. 14.
Spirit of giddines, to confound all their treacherous enterprises, and to
bring their devises to naught. For they shall be as Chafe before the wind,
and my Angel shall scatter them. Thus let thine, ( r) Psalm. 35. ver. 5.
and his ^n^mies, be dealt withal; that they may know thee to be his God, in
fear. That his Rule and government may give peace to thy Church in thee; and
his people thereby religiously discipl^ned unto obedience with all humility
toward his Majesty, for thy sake, may willingly and readily perform the
mutual offices of Christian love, and charity to each other. So shall thou
bless his kingdom here on earth, and afterward take him up to thee in heaven,
there to reign with thee in that thy kingdom which Isa. 9. ver. 7. Luke 1.
ver. 33.
never has ending, but endures for ever. This do thou grant unto him, for
thy Christ sake,

Amen.
3 A Prayer for the Queen.
O Lord God, our only 1. Corin. 8. ver. 6.
God, and Father, thou did open my mouth, and I prayed unto thee for our
dread Sovereign thine Anointed, James, our King; Be pleased I beseech thee,
to untie my Tongue now also, to utter a prayer unto thee for our Queen his
wife. I confess I am of all men most unworthy to intercede for her, being a
person of Princely Majesty, neither, do I presume: But to witness my loyalty
toward her, as ^ay be acceptable to thee. I crave, and humbly entreat ^^^e,
that thou will bless her, with all thy heavenly gra^es, such in special, as
best befitting her personage, may ^lso testify the love, and care, thou had
of thy glory ^o be advanced by him, when first thou did call her to this high
state, of an eminent and most illustrious dignity above others here with us of
her sex. Grant, I beseech thee, that as thou have made her a Mother of
Chil^ren for a posterity, to sit upon the throane of our King hereafter, so as
she in a manner may be said to be a true Gen: 17. ver. 15. 16.
Sarah, whom thou did bless to be a Mother of Nations, and Kings, and for
this, it being a means to continue a succession for the peace of thy Church,
here amongst us, I do thee most humbly thank: So, forasmuch as thou have
promised by the mouth of thy Prophet Isaiah, that Queens shall be Nurses to
thy people, (c) Isaiah. Isaiah. 49. ver. 23.
begotten by the mortal seed of thy word, she being the Queen to our King,
who is to us a Nurcing father, may likewise in a mutual consent of one and the
same thy religion here established amongst us, employ all her endeavor, power,
and authority for her part, to the preservation of the peace of Israel, which
is, in the person of a Queen, to be a careful Nurse of thy Church. For this
cause, inspire her mind from above, Direct and guide her will, that she may
serve thee, in fear of thy Majesty, who have the Prou. 21. ver. 1.
Hearts of Kings, yea of Queens also, as the Rivers of waters, to turn them
as thou please. Lighten her Mind and understanding, with the true knowledge
of thy will, that having first received a sanctified apprehension thereof, by
instruction from thy Spirit, she may resolutely persist, in the profession of
it, and so living in thy fear, may die in thy love, to live in thy glory, with
thy Saints for evermore, in Heaven.

Amen.
4. A Prayer for the Prince.
O God of our Fathers, and Lord of mercies, thou have (a) Exodus 3. ver. 6.
manifested thy great and loving kindness, unto (b) Romans 15. ver. 5. 2. Cor.
1. ver. 3.
thy Servant James, our King, by placing him first in this thy Throne here
among us in England, which together with other kingdoms, and dominions, are
fallen unto him, and his posterity, by lawful Title, and in the same have
hitherto preserved him, and his people, miraculously, from many dangers,
(which otherwise must needs have lighted upon us,) wherein we acknowledge with
thanksgiving, thee only to be our great Deliverer,) And yet among the
greatest of thy great and unspeakable mercies, this is not the least, as less
worthy to be remembered of us, even with hymns of prasies gratulatorie, that
thou have blessed his Loins, with a Son, to sit upon his Fathers Throne, in
the Time which thou shall appoint for the same.

For whom, we all, his true hearted Subjects, I say, (as many, as sincerely
wish well to thy Israel,) do heartily pray for his Royal welfare in thee, and
by thee to be vphelde, and maintained in his seed also for ever, as long as
the Sun and Moon endures.

Art not thou the same God now in these our days, to this our King James,
touching the establishing his Son, Prince Charles in his Kingdoms, as thou
wast unto David concerning his Son Solomon, in the former time? saying then
unto him, 2. Sam. 7. ver. 12.
When thy days be fulfilled, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall
proceed^ out of thy Body, and will stablish his Kingdom.

And was not that thy 1. Kin. 8. ver. 20.
word made good, and confirmed in Solomon, when thou did raise him up in the
Room of David his father, to sit on the Throne of Israel? O Lord, it is
confessed, that thy mercies, and loving kindnesses toward thy Children, are
manifested also ^^ their posterity, extended even to the third, and fourth
generation of them that Love thee, and fear thy Majesty; For so has David
thy servant testified of thy promised word unto himself, in that his Fatherly
charge to his Son Solomon (when he was now going the way of all the Earth) to
walk before thee in truth with all his heart, and Soul, that he should not 1.
Kin: 2. ver 4.
want one of his posterity upon the Throne of Israel.

Now therefore (o our God Matthew. 19. ver. 17.
and only God,) I the most unworthy of thy Servants, yet thy servant, do pray
thee in the name of Christ thy Son, my Intercessor and Mediator, that thou be
pleased out of thy mercy toward our King and his people, which profess thy
Name, for the better securing thy Christian pea^e here amongst us, to bless
the life of our Prince Charles, with length of days, in much health, and great
prosperity after thy will, to continue them, and fill up a just measure under
thy protection, against all Malignant, and Treacherous Enemies. O Lord, thou
who art the God of Psalm. 20. ver. 116.
Jacob, hear him from thy Scanctuarie, by the mighty help of thy right hand;
That we may rejoice in thy Salvation, for in it consists the hope of our
welfare, and all the strength of our felicity is by it made good unto us from
thee, whose Psalm. 21. ver. 8.
Right hand shall find out his and thine Enemies, even all such, as hate him,
for thee.

We confess our sins before thy Throne of mercy, we say, they be as the
Stars of heaven, and as the Sands of the Sea, infinite, and innumerable: yet
not for number so many, as for mightines insupportable, and they call for thy
vengeance; Notwithstanding, o Lord, Let them not be punished in our King and
his issue; but rather in our selves, and in our Children, who deserve the same.

Bless both him and them; Bless our Prince with all thy heavenly graces, with
a sanctified fear of thy Majesty, by which his hopes for the succession of
his fathers dominions, after the fulness of time, may be confirmed, and
accomplished unto him, and his, for ever, during the age of this world, by such
means as thou have ordained for it.

Be thou in these his tender years, his Shepherd, that thy Psalm. 23. ver. 6.
loving kindness and mercy may follow him, all the days of his Life, and he
remain for ever in thy house, to the end he may know thy fear, and true
serving of thee, to be his best assured felicity, and only happiness, and so
continue in it for ever; So shall thou give him his Psalm. 21. ver. 2. ver. 3.
ver. 4. ver. 5. ver. 6. ver. 7.
hearts desire, and not deny him at any time the request of his lips. Yea,
thou will prevent him with liberal blessings, and set a Crown of pure gold
upon his head. Therefore will thou give him a long Life, even for ever, and
ever.

Thou shall make his glory great in thy salvation. Honor and worship shall thou
lay upon him; Thou shall set him, as a Blessing for ever, to be a perpetual
example of thy favor, for thou shall make him glad with the joy of thy
countenance; and why? Because the King trusts in thee, o Lord, so as in thy
mercy, o most high, he shall not miscar^e, for thou shall destroy all his
Enemies in time of thine Anger, and in thy wrath consume them.

Grant this ( o good Lord,) for thy Christ's sake, that thou may be exealted
in thy strength; and we sing, and praise thy power, which is only thine, and
to be magnified in thy Chrildren, for ever,

Amen.
5. A Prayer for Frederick, Prince Elector Palatine; and the Lady Elizabeth
his wife.
WHo am I o Lord, that thou should herare me? And what can be my worthiness,
that I should dare, now again, to intercede by prayer, before thee? I
confess, it is of thy free mercy, that thou hear, and not of any worthiness
in me, praying. And in this name, that thou art 2. Cor. 1. ver. 3.
the father of all mercies in Christ, I pray and be^eech thee, behold from
above, with thy Eye of pity, Frederick, whom thou have created Prince
Elector Palatine, and Lady Elizabeth our Kings daughter, by thy ordinance
coupled together man and wife, and so made one flesh.

Forasmuch then, as thou have so appointed it, and the Genesis 1. ver. 28. and. 9.
ver. 1
end also of Matrimony, to be for the propagation of Seed; and that thy
favor in no outward thing more appears, then in the increase of Children;
Let his Psalm. 128. ver. 3.
wife be as the fruitful Vine, on the side of his house; And his Children like
the Olive Plants round about his Table. Bless them ( o Lord,) even with this
Temporal favor, because of the Spiritual blessings, which thou have made to
thy Church, whereof they are, and their people, to profess thy name, after thy
word.

Let thy power, and wisdom, ouershadow them, O thou most High; Thy heavenly
grace, lighten, and preserve them, in thy Love; that they also may govern
their subjects, in the Truth of thy says; In mutual Charity; and so have
them always, obedient to all Loyalty in thee, for thy sake. Prolong the days
of their life, with many years, to see theit Childrens Children, if it be thy
will. Let them enjoy, Health, Wealth, Peace and Prosperity of all things; That
they, living in thy fear, to set forth thy glory, and worship, here on earth,
may after this temporal ever dying life, be translated from hence, into thy
kingdom, to live there, with thee, for ever and ever, world without end.

Amen.
6. A Prayer for the Clergy.
WE humbly crave at thy hands, most merciful father, in the name of thy
beloved son, Jesus Christ, that thou would be pleased, to vouchsafe, to
cloathe the ministers of thy word, with righteousness, wheresoever dispersed;
And to this end, power out thy spirit of wisdom, and understanding upon them,
that they may know the mysteries of thy holy word; Give them the gift of
utterance, that they may set forth the abundant riches of thy Gospel; write
thy laws in their hearts, and thy testimonies in their Bowels, that they may
lead thy people into all truth, and rule thy Church with discretion; make them
good workmen; Faithful Shepherds; and wise builders; that they may mend up
the broken walls of Jerusalem; Feed the flocks of thy sheep, with the
bread, and water of Life; Husband thy Vineyard, and dress it, in due season;
Repair thy holy sanctuary, bring in the vessels dedicated to the service of
the Lord; And finally, shine, with such light, of holy and pure conversation
before men, as that they may edify no less, by example of life, then by
instruction of teaching, to the intent, that men beholding their modesty,
meekness, sufferance, patience, and other virtues, wherewith thou have
endowed them, to the benefit of thy Church, may be won, to thy Gospel, and
so, to the amendment of their lives, by the holiness of their conversation.
Grant this, (o Father,) for thy Son Christ Jesus sake.

Amen.
7. A Prayer for the high Court of Parliament.
O Eternal God, (a) who have Counsel, and wisdom, Revel. 1. ver. 8. (a)
Prou. 8. ver. 14. ver. 1^.
and understanding, and strength; by whom Princes rule, and the Nobles: And who
do cause the Judges of the Earth, to walk in the midst of the paths of
Judgment; (For there is no true Justice, or Judgment, that is not directed by
thy wisdom.) Behold from above, our King and Nobles, and the whole state of
the Kingdom, assembled together in Counsel, for the decreeing of matters,
principally apperteining to thy holy worship, and next for the constituting
political orders and laws, for the good fo our Realm. Behold them I beseech
thee, with a favorable and gracious Eye; Send down upon our King, that
wisdom which sits by thy Throne; Wisd. 9. ver 4.
Give him thy servant, a wise and understanding Heart, 1. King. 3 ver. 9.
as thou gave to thy servant ver. 12.
Solomon, to discern between good and bad, that he may know how to go out
and in among his people, even to behave himself wisely in this his charge of
Ruling. And to our Nobles, both the Spiritual, and Temporal, and the rest
representing the whole Comminaltie of the Realm; Grant dexterity of
Counsel; Faithfulness of Hearts; willingness and readiness of minds to
understand, first, what is meet to come into present consultation; Then, to
decree and set down with full consent, faithfully, and readily, what is, and
shall be concluded and determined, by nature and deliberate counsel; That
addressing all their Consultations to the advancement of thy glory in Chief,
and the good of this thy Christian Commonwealth, may so settle, by godly and
politic Laws, astate of government among us, as that we may have a
Commonwealth established, by a religious fear of thy name, and continually
guided, protected, and preserved, by true wisdom, Christian policy, and
faithful loyalty, from all manner disorders of impiety, and leaud practices,
in peace and tranquillity, (the strength of thy Arm, and power of thy holy
Spirit, always assisting the same) in Christ Jesus our Lord. To whom with thee
and the holy Ghost, one immortal and only wise God, be praise and glory, for
ever and ever.

Amen.
8. A Prayer of the Church, in the behalf of the faithful brethren, that are
persecuted for the truth sake.
O Romans ver. 5. 2. Corin. 19. ver. 3.
Merciful father, who never do Psalm. 9. ver. 10. Psalm. 37. 28.
forsake such as put their trust in thee; Stretch forth thy mighty Arm, to
the defense of our brethren, grievously tormented in sundry places by the
public enemy for thy truth sake: who in their extreme necessity, cry unto
thee for comfort. Give them patience to attend thy good pleasure; preserve and
defend the Vine which thy right hand has planted. Look down upon them with
thy pitiful Eye, and with speed let them feel relief, that all nations
beholding thy mighty power, may glorify thy holy name, for ever and ever.

Amen.
10. A Prayer for our brethren that are in adversity.
MOst gracious God, we beseech thee to look upon the adversity of our poor
brethren; relieve their necessities, and rid them out of their miseries, that
they may the more quietly set their minds upon thee (if in thy wisdom thou
shall see it expedient,) otherwise give them patience, with constant minds,
and willing hearts, thankefully to bear this thy fatherly visitatio^ without
grudging or repining against thee, humbly submitting themselves unto thy divine
pleasure, with full assurance, that in the end thou will bring them unto thy
everlasting rest, there to remain with thee world without end.

Amen.
A prayer of intercession for the right honorable the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs,
the Aldermen his Brethren, and Cominaltie of the City of London.
O Heavenly Father, the all- sufficient and ever living God, we thy Servants
and Chidren in Christ, acknowledging in heart that Truth of thy word, that
tells us, The Powers that be, Rom: 13. 1.
all whatsoever, to be ordained of thee only (for that there is no Power, but
of thee,) do with the mouth accordingly consesse, thee o Lord who art the
very Author) to be also the sole Preserver of all Orders, and States
Politic where-soeuer, ruled, and governed with good Dicipline, wholesome
Laws, and just judgments in equity, by Magistrates, as thy Lieutenants,
appointed Tim: 2. 2.
and constituted over thy people, for the good of both Church and
commonwealth, a very manifest, and singular Testimony of thy providence and
presence among men, Settling, Establishing, and upholding Authorities, that they
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. In this
acknowledgement and confession, we give thy most divine Majesty our hearty
Thanks (which we pray thee to accept, as a sweet John: 16. 23
smelling Sacrifice) beseeching thee further in the name of thy Christ, for
whose sake thou have promised to hear and grant our petitions) that
forasmuch, as thou have commanded us to make intercessions for all that are in
Authority, and (...) for an accept^ble service 1. T^^. 2. 2. 3.
in thy sight; thou will be pleased, to lo^ke down from thy high Throne of
pity, and mercy. ^^holding v^ from thence with a gracious eye, even now that
we do supplicate most humbly, for the whole fate of thy Cuie London, the right
honorable the Lord-Mayer of the same, the right worshipful the Sheriffs, the
Aldermen his Brethren, the Companies, and Societies, with all the (...)
thereof, ioynthe, and severally. The Lord Mayor, who is placed in Authority,
and Rule there chief, under our king, by thy gracious permission and
ordinance, we in these our Prayers commend first and principally unto thy
Almighty protection, most humbly entreating, that being in that high place
above the rest, for their good, so appointed, thou will give him so much the
more wisdom, and understanding, that may truly guide, and conduct, both his
mind and will, to the true obedience of thy heavenly will, knowing that to be
the Squire and Rule of all godly Actions, above which his function of Rule and
government, is, and ought to be always chiefly conversant, even to lay forth
all his pains and industry, to maintain by an honest external discipline,
the public peace and quietness of the people of all sorts under his
government, in special to count enaunce virtue, for the encouragement (b) of
them that do well, and are willingly subject for Conscience sake, Rom: 13. 5.
because to such, thou have made him thy Minister for their wealth. Again, to
repress, and beat down vice for Verse. 4.
the terrifying and keeping in awe such as do evil, and are contumatious and
stubbornely a^ obedient therein, resi^^ing verse. 2.
thy ordinance, that they may learn to fear the Power of thy Magistrate;
whom thou have made also thy Minister, verse. 4.
to take vengeance on him that does evil: for he bears not the Sword,
(which thou have put into his hand) for naught. For this cause instill into his
Mind a zealous care of thy Religion, to fear thee o Lord above all, for thy
fear is the beginning of wisdom. Infuse into him the Spirit of true
fortitude and (e) courage. to deal truly Exodus 18.
in that his place of Lieutenancie, to execute judgment therein without (f)
respect of persons, neither (g) fanouring vers^ 21.
the poor, no^ honoring the Mighty, but (h) hearing the small, as well as
the great, to judge his neighbors Deutr: 1. 17
justly, knowing that the Authority which is committed to him from thee
mediatly by our king, is for the administering Leui 19. 15
true justice under him, with m^teration and equity, to the great comfort of
every one of his charge; and that he saccountable both to our King, and to
thee, for the same. To our king here in this life, when he shall please to call
him to it. To thee the king of kings, in that Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 1. Luke 10. 2
day, wherein thou shall say to him, Give an account o^ thy Stewardship, even
of thy Mayoralitie, shall thou say unto him, how have you discharged (i) that,
if he have walked (k) injustice and spoken righteous things, refusing gain of
oppression, shaking his hands from taking of gifts, he Isaiah: 33
may dwell on high, having his Defense the Munition of Rocks. O then let thy
power and wisdom ouer-shadowe him. Thy divine and heavenly grace lighten, and
preserve him in thy fear. We pray also for the whole fraternity of the
Aldermen his Assistants appointed as helpers Deutr: 1. 1
to him in government, to bear (by with him the co^brance, change, and strife
of the people, that these in like manner blessed by thee, may be M^n of
understanding, and of a know^e godliness and vprightnes, to further by Christian
policy, the health and (...) of their people. And for all others, as many as
be (...) any office under him and them by what name or ^itle soever they be
called, so as they all joining together in a mutual consent, for a godly
conformity in all decency, and conueniencie. to the establishing a Christian
peace with the glory of thy name, may accordingly endeavor by all the powers,
and faculties of their mind and will, the constant maintayning thy religion,
in sincerieie and Truth. In which name cause them, we beseech thee, to
countenance, so^ter, and cherish, the zealous preachers of thy Word, giving
them of their temporal store, for feeding their Souls with thy spiritual
food; which they shall do the more seelingly and readily, if thou by thy
grace shall make them to know, that they be thy Prophets, and Ministers,
whom thou have sent to reveal thy Arm, to report (m) Isai: 53. 1.
the glad tidings of peace, and the glad tidings of good things. For by thy
word preached, is hearing and by hearing is Faith: without which, comes no
S^luation Isai. 52. 7.
to man.

O Lord, be thou therefore always present Rom: 10. 17.
among them with thy Spirit, that they all may hear willingly, believe
steadfastly call upon thy Name fervently, and be saved everlastingly. So shall
they sing to thee in Psalms, and Hymns of thank^sgiuing, and be telling
forth thy praises from day to day. And as Magistrate, and the inferior
officers under him; so may we not forget to remember in these our
supplications, the whole Comminal^ie of the said Borough, and City of London,
the (...), a^^ Tradesmen thereof, who^ thou have appointed to live* every one
in their several vocations, by their (...), and Manuell trading, justly and
co^scionable dealing one with another, according to the instruction of John,
Luk: 3. 10. 11 12. 13. 14.
the Forerunner of thy CHRIST, given by him, to the Publicans, Soldiers, and
others of the people in thy Gospel. Imprint therefore in the minds also of
them all, a religious fear to thy Name, that setting it before their eyes
always, they may see to walk uprightly in their vocations, not seeking to
raise wealth, and to make Prou. 11. 1.
gain to themselves, by wrong and ^xtortion, by diverse Weights, for they are
abomination to thee, by Dece^tfull Prou. 20. 23.
balances, for they are not good. Thou have spoken it, o Lord, who will also
punish it, for thou shall cause their mouths to be filled with gravel; that
think it sweet to feed upon the bread of deceit and guile. But a perfect
Weight pleases thee, and they that are upright in their Prou: 11. 1. Prou: 20.
23
ways, are thy delight. Be therefore merciful good Lord, we pray thee, to
the Arti^icers and Tradesmen of this City, assist them ever with thy grace in
all their Contracts, that they trust not so much in wrong and Robbery: as to
forsake thee for Mammon; to hazard their souls, for lucre and gain of money
by fals^hood, and Leuit: 19. 36
lies, which shall rise up in judgment against them.

Thou speak out of thy Word unto them, thus, Thou shall have just Balances,
true Weights, a true Ephah, and a true Hin. I am the Lord, Deuteronomy: 25. 13.


Again, Thou shall not have in thy Bag two manner of weights, a great, and a
small: but thou shall have a right and just weight, a perfect and a just
measure shall thou have. This is thy word, which must be obeyed: o then open
their Eyes, that they may see thee in it: open their Ears, that they may hear
thee speaking to them out of it: Give them Hearts to understand, and willing
minds to follow thy Commandments, that their days may be lengthened, in this
thy City, which thou, have given them to dwell in; for this is thy blessing,
which there thou have promised for the same: which thou, o our only Lord,
powerful and merciful, vouchsafe to them for Psalm. 127. 1.
thy Chr^sts sake.

Thy Kingly Prophet David has said, Except thou keep the City, the Keeper
watches in vain. In these he shows, that all States of Commonwealths
depend wholly upon thy protection and sauegarde; admonishing us thereby, that
we seek to thee only for thy watch and ward, not trusting in the help of
Man: which is but vain, for without thee, no City may stand and long endure,
prosper, and flourish. Seeing then all the wisdom of man in it self is folly,
and all order, seeming well settled by policicie, is mere confusion; All power,
and strength of weapon, feeble, weak, and ^asily frustrated, unless thou
do assist, direct, and bless, both the one and the other; we most humbly
and reverently supplicate, even upon the bowing knees of our hearts, (by which
thou, art most truly worshipped and served,) craving and entreating thee, that
thou will be pleased to attend with thy vigilant eye, over this City of
London, which we confess thou have many ways infinitely blessed: (Oh give
them grace also to be thank^^ll to thee for the same:) Thou art their God; Thy
Statutes and Ordinances thou have even in that very place divulged and
published among them, by which they know, that they are thy children, and an
holy priesthood unto thee. Thou have fi^led them with great m^rcies, continue
them still, and c^ase not to do good unto thine Israel, that they may rejoice
in thee their God, and be glad all their days of thee, their sure hope, and
fortress, their Rock, and Castle of defense, in whom they may trust, and not
be deceived, for thy Psalm: 91. Verse. ^. Verse: 1.
truth shall be their Shield and Buckler. Therefore who so dwells in the
secret of thee, the most high; shall abide in thy shadow, o thou the most
Almighty, so as they shall not be afraid of the pestilence that walks in
the darkness, verse 6.
nor of the Plague that destroys at noonday, because thou couerest them
under thy wings, and make them Verse: 4.
sure under thy Feathers.

This is our petition unto thee o Lord, for this thy City Loudon, that thy
Religion, as it is there made known by the free passage of thy Gospel, and
professed publickely of the chi^fe, may of all alike be embraced, for that
salvation is alike appertaining unto all, that so the fruits of a true well
instructed faith, redounding and appearing in their life, thy Name may be
glorified among them: every one laboring according to the measure of his
Faith, vouchsafed him from thy Spirit, to perform daily his v^wes unto thee,
in sincerity and truth. This chiefly o Lord, for first, let thy Kingdom come
among them, that thou may rule in their hearts by thy holy Ghost, which
lights into all truth, guiding, and directing their Thoughts wholly unto
thee. For thy Psa: 119 Verse: 105.
Word is a lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths, that we swerve
not at any time from thy Commandments; which, through the illumination of thy
Spirit, teachet^ us that perfect obedience to thy will, that thou requirest a^
our hands. Give, o Lord, that thou commaundest, and command what thou will:
For thou teach the way of thy statutes; Thou give understanding in thy
Law; Verse: 33. Verse: 34.
Thou directest in the path of thy commandments. O then quicken thou us in thy
righteousness. Thus we shall know thy ^ill, thus we shall obey thy will. For
what else is thy Verse: 40.
will, but the evident rule, and government of thy Spirit in us, that thy
kingdom may wholly posseste our hearts, to (...): (...): 5. verse: 24.
crucify and subdue the corrupt, and lustful affections of the flesh unto it:
so as we fearing thy Judgments, (who art the God, taking reuengement of our
wickedness,) may yet love thy m^r^yes, who art the Father, not Psa: 103 Verse. 10.
dealing with us according to our sins, nor rewarding us acding to our (...).
Give this grace to thy Children, Inhabitants of this City, that acknowledge
thee to be their God in fear, and their Father in love. So shall they restifie
unto all men, thy rule in themselves, by (c) Galat: 25
the fruits of the spirit (y) in (which we li^e in all holiness) through
humility in conversation; s^edfast^es in Faith; ^odestie in words; vprightnes
in deeds; mercy in works; discipline in manners; Patience in wrongs; giving
place unto wrath; having peace if it be possible with all men: and Rom: chapter
12. ver: 18. 19.
holiness, without which, no man (...) ^^ thee, our Lord and God. Hear us
therefore, o thou the only Father of true (...) and loving kindness. G^ue ear
unto us, and Hebr: chapter 12 verse. 14.
harken to the voice of our supplications, interceding by thy permission, in
the name of Christ, for this City: power out all thy mercies upon it. Let the
Magistrates Deuteronomy: chapter 1. verse. 16. ^^
be thy true keepers of godly Discipline in it, seeking the quiet of their
subjects; hearing all controversies between man, and his brother, judging them
righteously, punishing according to law, malefactors, and disturbers of the
public peace, for the defense of the Innocents, against oppression and wrong.
Let the Preachers of thy word publish sound and good doctrine, least being not
well seasoned according to truth, it be rejected as vain, for they are the
Salt of the earth, so shall every one be Salted with Fire, as thy CHRIST has
said: even purged from all filthiness, that they Math 5. 13,
being consecrated unto thee, in thought, word, and deed, may be examples in
life, of the Truth of that doctrine they teach to edify withal: For they are
Mark. 9. 49.
the light of the world; and as a Candle lighted, is to give light to all in
the house; so shall men seeing their good works, glorify thee our Father which
art in heaven. Math. 5. 15.
Yea, and being themselves followers of them, in sanctity, and honesty of
life and conversation, shall also become examples of godliness and true
charity, every one to teach other, for the praising and glorifying thy Name.
Thus, and thus, o LORD, and every way, as it pleases thee, bless London; let
thy favorable countenance shine upon it always, if it be thy will. Establish
among the Inhabitants there, Psalm. 122. 13
concord and unity, in religion and manners; that they living in mutual love,
and charity, by thy special grace, it may be as Jerusalem, a holy City,
compact together in it self: environed round about with thy benediction,
having peace within the walls, and prosperity within the Palaces. Let the
corners of their Psalm: 144.
houses be filled with all manner of Store, through the gleat abundance of
thy blessings. Let there be no decay, no annoyance by enemies, or complaining
in their streets. Suffer no evil to annoy them, or to breed any empeachment
of their blessed repose, and security in thee, because thou o Lord, art their
God.

To thee therefore let all honor, power, dominion, and Majesty be ascribed
always, for thou shall put a song of praise and thanksgiving into their
mouths, who have done so mighty favors to them, and others shall declare the
same, and say, Lo, thus are the people blessed, that fear the Lord, and serve
him; who lives and reigns a GOD powerful, mighty, and most worthy to be
magnified for ever, world without end. So be it Amen, Amen.

A Prayer supplicatorie, for the cause of Religion, against the enemies of the
Church, by force of Arms, or otherwise: seeking to ouerthr^w it.
BLessed be thou, o Lord, that fightest for Israel, the God of Hoasts, who are
the mighty Lord, the Isai: 33. 21. 22
Lord our Judge, and the Lord our King; Behold us with a ^auourable, and
fatherly Eye, and bow down thy most gracious ear to hearken unto our prayers,
which we do now present, and offer unto thee, in the Name of thy Son Christ.
O Lord for his sake, forgive us our sins: for we confess them unto thee; let
them not come into thy sight, to reject us from thy presence, now praying to
thee, for thy Church. Thou take delight to dwell among thy children, who by
the spirit of thy Son cry boldly in their hearts, Ab^a-Father; And art well
pleased, when they pray, and praise the^ in the great Congregation, where thy
name is called upon daily; we confess thy favors manifold in thy singular
benefits toward us, to be infinitely great; yea, so many (...) occasions to
us, of glorifying the name of thee, the powerful Lord JEHOVAH; But we are
ashamed of our insufficiency for desert, when we behold our dullness of
Nature for any true conceit by thought, of the least of them. How then may we
worthily glorify thee in thy favors, being so unworthy to think of them,
or by thinking, altogether unable without thee to conceive them? Do thou
therefore, o Lord, put into our Psalm: 40. 3.
mouths a new song of praise. So shall our tongues utter thy righteousness, and
praise every day, even in Psalm: 35. 28.
Zion: where thy dwelling is, and in thine own City, where praise wayteth for
thee, Psalm: 65. 71. upon thy holy Mountain, shall we thy children sing
praises Psalm: 74. 2.
and Thanksgiving unto thee, in the Assembly of thy people, that protest the
true worship due to thy most holy Name: A Name manifesting thy great power
Psalm: 48. 1.
evidently, in defending thy people, and, destroying thine and their enemies.
For thou art a GOD, Psalm: 76. 1. 2. 3.
known in Judah, And have thy Tabernacle in Shalem, where thou brakest the
Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, the Sword, and the Battle. We pray thee
therefore, be good Micha. 4. 11
still unto Israel, and extend thy loving kindness toward Zion, against which
the nations are gathered together, saying: Zion shall be condemned, and our eye
shall look upon Zion. Yea Lord, their banding is to lay waste thy habitation,
where thy worship is prosessed, and to laugh at the desolation and ruin of
Zion: that thy Name may no more be called upon there. But strike them with a
sudden fear, and astonish Micha. 4. 12
them with a destruction, which they looked not for, that they may see, how
they were deceived of thy thought, which they knew not, and of thy counsels
which they understand not, when thou have gathered thy children, as the sheaues
in the Barn, thereby Psalm: 48. 12. Isai. 34. 2. 5.
causing Zion to rejoice, and the daughters of Judah to be glad, because of thy
Judgment. For then shall thy indignation be upon the idolatrous Nations, that
dishonor thy Name, and thy wrath upon all their Armies, so as the sword shall be
drunken with blood, when it shall come upon Edom, even upon the people of thy
curse, which pretend holiness in outward show, but are in very deed thine, and
our enemies, and accursed of thee. These be as those children of Edom spoken of
by thy kingly Prophet David, which have Psalm: 137. 7.
conspired with that Babylonian-whore, against thy Church, saying: Raise it,
Raise it, to the foundation thereof, can thou hear this and be silent? Can
thou see, how they persecute thee in thy members, and not revenge it? O God,
have thou put us away for ever? Psalm: 74. 1. Psalm: 48. 4.
Is thy wrath kindled against the sheep of thy pasture? For lo, the Kings are
gathered, and are gone together. Have not thou brought out of Egypt a vine, and
planted it with thine own hand, and caused it to stretch out her branches unto
the Sea, and her boughs unto the river, yea, to spredde themselves over all
the Psalm: 80. 8.
Seas and rivers, and to cover all the mountains of the earth with the shadow
thereof? Behold, Lord, Psalm 93. 1.
thou the Lord which reigns, and is clothed with Majesty? and which
fittest between the Cherubims? Psalm: 99. 1.
Art not thou the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in Battle? O
Lord God, the auenger, Psalm: 24. 8.
o God the auenger, show thy self clearly, that thy enemies may know thee,
to be the Judge of the world, psalm: 94. 1.
to take reuengement upon all that persecute with ^^re and sword thy people, of
purpose to turn Beth-^l, into Beth-(...), even to pollute thy name, in that
place Psalm. 35. 1.
of thy holy habitation. Let them know thee to be that God, who both can and
wilt plead thine own (...) 21. ^0
cause, with them that strive with thee: against whom no strength of Flesh, nor
sorce of A^mes, no worldly (...) ^^
wisdom, nor policy of man may prevail.

Up Lord, gird thy self with strength, lay hand Psalm. 35. 2. Psalm 74. 2.
upon the shield and Buckler, stand up in our help, whose hope is in thee
only. Lift up thy strokes, that thou may for ever destroy every Enemy
that does evil to thy sanctuary. The sound of thy Gospel, preached first by
thy Apostles, and since by the ministers thereof published abroad, is gone
forth into (...) 19. 3
all Lands, and there is no Speech nor Language, where their voice is not
heard, which the Prophet (...) 53. 1.
calls thine Arm revealed; As was manifested in that miraculous sudden sound
from heaven, with cloven Acts ^. 2. 3.
tongues, and by this thy word sincerely administered, both in preaching, and in
the Sacraments, thou have gathered together thine elect, (collected in the
unity of Faith) of which (being the Communion of thy Saints, worshipping thee
in true holiness (does consist specially thy Church: This is that Church, which
is the (...) 2. 2. 8
Spouse of thy Son Christ, and of him preferred abone all things, being his
Love among the Daughters, as is the (...) among the Thor^s; for whose ^ake, he
came down from out thy b^so^e, and took out (...) ^ 20
nature upon him, and suffered a most bitter death upon the Cross; Promising
also, before his As^^ntion, to be with it to the consumation of the world. For
this Church, which thou have espoused to thy Son upon the Cross, at the very
hour of his death (whereof he therefore is the chief head) we the sons of
thee our Father* and disciples of that thy Son Christ, o^^ Master and
Teacher, do appear now before thee in supplications, most humbly beseeching
thee, to cast thy gracious pitiful eyes upon her, many ways afflicted and
oppressed. Be thou a refuge against all her enemies, which have consulted in
heart together, and have made Psalm* ^^ 3.
a league against thee, and thy secret ones* saying, Come let us cut them off
from being a Nation, that the name of Ismaell be no more in remembran^^. See,
how they lift up the head, presuming upon the multitude of weapons, ^
even the strength and puissance of their Armies* We know that for the
trangrossions o^ thy people, (which worthily deserve all afflictions, and for
the Trial also of their Faith, and Love toward thee, (which by this Psalm: 78.
21.
means thou do make known likewise,) thou art many times angry, and
displeased at thy people: ^ so ^22.
as the Fire is kindled in Jacob, and wrath comes upon Israel, because they
believed not in thee, nor did trust in thy help. For this cause o Lord, have
thou abhorred thine own inheritance, and given them over Psalm: 106.
into the h^ds of thine enemies, making them their Lords that hated them: Yet,
when thou reme^bred^^ 40. 41. 45.
thy covenant toward them, thou did st^pitie their affliction, and when they
sought thee their strength, and thee the most high God, thou calledst back
oft-times Psalm. 78. 35* 38* (...) 2. 13.
thy anger, and would not stir up thy wrath to destroy them; but because
thou went merciful, thou forgauest their iniquities, as seeming to be forie,
and according to the multitude of thy mercies, to repent Psalm 2. 13.
thee of the afflictions, thou had brought upon them

We also o God, as many as are of the household of Romans 9. 7* 8
faith, being of Abrahams-seede, blessed in Isaac, are children unto Abraham,
to whom appertains also (...)
the promise made to him, and his posterity in Christ; and by him only
accomplished.

Thou therefore, who are pleased to be called the God Psalm. ^^ ^
of Abraham, art our God, upon whom we call by faith in Christ only. Thou
art the Shepherd of Israel, we the people of thy pasture, and sheep of thy
Psalm: 95. 7.
hand, by which thou guidest and gouernest us, as thine own flock. Thou ou^
Lord, our light, and salvation, Psalm: 27. 1.
the very Strength of our life: we thy Servants, resigning our selves wholly
unto thee, and trusting in thy Psalm: ^43. 12.
protection. In this most assured hope, we are confident to say, Though the
earth be moved, and the mountains Psalm: ^6. 2. Psalm: 2. 2.
fall into the midst of the Sea, we will not fear to be overcome with it.
Yea, let the Kings of the earth band themselves, and the Princes assemble
together, and pitch an Host, and raise war against Psalm: 29. 3.
us, yet will we trust in this, that thou o Lord wilt deliver us from our
enemies, and give our faith to the victory; Thou breakest the Bow, and
snappest the Spear Psalm. 46. 9.
in sunder; and burnest the Charriots in the fire. The Lord of Hosts is thy
Name, and by it will thou be known to ^^.
be the God of Jacob, that wilt be exalted in the earth, even in this, to show
thy self a present help and refuge Mine heart trusted in him, and was helped.
True Lord. For thou have made him an example to all thine Elect, of thy sundry
great favors: causing them in a true acknowledgement Psalm. 28. 7.
thereof, to repose their whole trust and confidence in thy help, grounded upon
thy promises, which are to them always Yea, and Amen. Therefore to secure them
of their assured, and ready protection at all times, against all that shall
dare to trouble them, without thy Zachar: 2. 8.
will, thou have testified thy singular love, and watchful care over them, by
thy prophet Zachariah; saying, He that touches you, touches the Apple of my
eye, then which nothing is more tender, and dear to Man, as thou Psalm. 17. 8. 9
know o Lord, which is the cause that David thy servant, desires to be
kept of thee, as the apple of thine eye, from the wicked that oppress thy
Church, figured in his person, which thou have most mercifully performed,
rescuing and delivering him out of all his dangers yea, extraordinarily
assisting him in battle against the sworn coniured enemies of thy Israel, as
was manifested Sam: 17. 10.
in that admirable incou^ter which he had with the proud uncircumcised
Philistim, who^defied and reviled 26. 49. 17.
thine Host, whom by a sling which thou did direct out of his hand, he
smote, that he fell groueling to the ground, and dyed. Well and truly then,
has that thy Servant said, That thou o Lord, sauest not with Sword, nor with
Spear, for the Battle is thine. It is Psalm: 68. 1.
sufficient to thy Church, and a present succor, to have thee o Lord to arise
only, for no sooner art thou up, but thine enemies shall be scattered: They
also, that hate thee, shall ^lie before thee, as thou did make it manifest
that day, in which thou deliueredst the Philistims 1. Sam: 19. 1.
into the hand of Israel, by Jonathan, and his Armor-bearer only: for in that
day, thou o Lord did 12. 13.
save Israel, who before had hid themselves in Mount Ephraim, for fear of the
Philistims; Here it appears 23. 22.
true, that Jonathan there testified of thy hand, (which is thy power) that it
is not hard to thee, to save with many or with few; yea rather, as Asa, the
king of Iadah confesses in his prayer unto thee, It is nothing with thee, to
Chronic. 14.
help by many, or by no power. This spoke he out of a great confidence he
had of thy helping hand, when Terah the King of Aethyopia came out against him,
with an 11. 9.
Host of ten hundred thousand, and 300. Charrets; For he calling to thee for
help, had thy help presently, in so much as thou did smite the Aethyopians,
before 12. 13.
Asa, and before Judah, and the Aethyopians fled, and all their host was
overthrown, and destroyed before thy Host, so that there was no life in them.

The like confidence of thy mighty protection, had also thy servant Judas
Maccabeus, confessed by him in 1. Maccab: 3 18.
words of the same sense, saying* There is no difference before the God of
Heaven to deliver by a great multitude, or by a small company, and accordingly
thou ga^est him the like resolution and courage, to fight with a few against a
great and strong company. For as he said, Verse* ^9.
so he found it true, that the victory of a Battle stands not in the
multitude of an Host, but strength comes from heaven. ^ First, ^n fighting
with Apollomus, (...)
next with Ge^on, a prince of the Army of Syria. Then (...)
with Gorgias, afterward with L^s^^s, and lastly, with N^^or: All which came
against thy Isra^l, with a cruel, ^^.
and proud company to destroy it, but thou did (...)
cast them down, by the Sword of them that loved thee, and sought* for thy
laws, and thy sanctuary. O Lord, thou the Savior and only protector of thy
^ Ma^^a^* 4
children, show thou the light of thy mercy, and ^et it shine upon us; make
us thy Israel also, that we may (...)
find favor in thy sight, in that day, in which we see, and thou best
know, we must cra^e thy heavenly aid, against such as under pretense of
religion, seek by force of Arms to overthrow thy religion. Look down from
the high Throne of thy Majesty, see, and (...) ^ 4^*
judge between them and us. We call upon thy name, by the Mediation of thy
Son Christ, only; They, by intercession of thy saints. We seek salvation
by faith, justifying in Christ: They, by works of supererogation, as it were,
challenging it for the worthynesse of the same; We publish thy word out of
thy book plainly and truly; They adulterating it, ^each the Tradition of men:
We exhibit to thy people, thy holy scriptures, laying them open, in a tongue
known to them, to be read of all sorts. They in stead of thy Testament,
o^t^^de unto them Images in Churches, (...) men's books to be looked upon*
forbidding them the reading of the ^aw, but in ^ ^a^g^age, whi^^ they
^nderstand not: we adore thee, the God of ^eauen and earth, in spirit only,
and none other: They communicate that honor to the Saints, contrary to thy
express word, and command creeping to crosses, falling down before stocks
and stones, to worship them; using all hypocritical gestures in their
Pharisaicall prayers, to get praise of men. We in our church admit 2.
Sacraments, as thy Son Christ has instituted: They add to those, five more;
yea, and profanely Heb. 9. 26.
wrong those. 2. And as touching that most sacred and holy mystery of our Lord
thy sons body, offered upon the Cross, once for all, in a full satisfaction
for sin. They deny it, celebrating for it after their own fancies, that
impious and abhomniable Idol, their blasphemous Mass: wherein they will have
Christ to be offered up daily, making void thereby unto thy children, the
fruit and benefit of his death and passion, Rom: 13. 1.
falsifying by this, the truth of thy word. We, as we have learned out of thy
word, so do teach, to obey the higher powers, which are thy ordinance, giving
them both fear and honor, even hearty obedience and reverence, as most
belonging to them, submitting Pet: 2. 13.
our selves unto all manner ordinance of man, for thy sake; They contrarily,
not exempt from ^ll legal obedience, to their Kings, and magistrates, their
own subjects, if Clea^giemen; but also authorize such, to commit all kind of
treasons, whether powdered or vnpowdred, against their Liege Kings, whether by
murder, or poison; and this to be done of any private man, their subject,
lawfully as they say at the Popes beck, that Antichristian prophanour of true
Christianity. These are our differences, and many others, in which they are
merely opposite to thy Truth, imitating in their contradictory traduceme^ts of
thy written word, Genes: 3. 4.
the Serpents voice, saying yea, to thy no, and no* to thy yea, as thou
know, o Lord, for which they are mortally in hatred at us, infesting and
persecuting thy members in Christ, either by bloody Inquisitions, o^ by open
war, the destroying Sword, and the consuming fire: so as we may say, Surely
for thy sake ar^ we slain continually, and are counted as sheep for Psalm:
44. 22
the slaughter. How then can we do, but pray unto thee, o our God, in whom
we have reposed all our hopes, for relief, and present succor, against these
their malicious enterprises. Power thy spirit of wisdom and true fortitude,
into the hearts of all thy faithful, who protest, ^^d profess thy Religion
both* Prince and subject, to endeavor jointly, and severally (upon occasion,)
their best and soundest employments of wit and strength, against the detestable
designs of that Babyloni^n-whoare, who has armed* her accomplices with
authority, without thee, and contrary to thy will, revealed in thy word, to
raise war upon thy children wheresoever, because they will not fall away
from thee, in a mutual consent with them against thy truth. Behold their
tyrannical pride, and their deadly hatred toward us, for this our profession
sake, which is, of the sincere hallowing thy Name, as thou know. This is our
prayer, o Lord, that thou be pleased, either to turn their hea^ts, that they
may acknowledge their wicked ente^prizes, and see how vain, and dangerous they
are, being undertaken against thee, and so forsake them: Or, if thou have
appointed them unto judgment, fill their faces with ignominy and shame.
Confound their devises, frustrate their counsels, and bring their purposes to
naught. Let not that great whore of Babylon have any harbor and resting place
to roost within the dominions of thy true Christian Kings; Nay, give them such
understanding of thy zeal, that they may Revel. 18. 6.
rather persecute, and afflict her with all torments, as she has deserved:
Give her double according to her works, in as much as she has glorified
herself, and lived in pleasure, so much then to her torments and sorrow. It is
thy express word, and it must be thy work to bring her to* confusion, for
she says in her heart, that she shall see no mourning; And let the Kings of
Alas, Alas. Smite the heads of all her Princes, Eccles: 36.
for they are our enemies, and do say, there is none 4. 5.
us, as thou art sanctified in us before them; That they may know, that there
is no other God, but thou Psalm: 46. 10* 11.
only o Lord, who wilt be exalted in the earth, above all kings and
potentates* the Lord of Hosts, the God of Jacob, the refuge of the people. O
Lord, hear the prayer of thy Servants, according to the blessing of Eccl. 36.
17.
Aaron over thy people, by the words of thine own mouth, saying; The Lord
bless thee, and keep thee; The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
merciful 1. Numb: ^. 24. 25. 2. 6.
unto thee; The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.
Let this blessing be upon us, good Lord, and upon all them that call upon
Revel: 7. 12.
thy NAME, we beseech thee for thy Christ's sake. And to thee our God, be all
praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might,
for evermore.

Amen.
11 A Prayer for a Counsel of War.
WHereas, o most wise God, thou only art the Romans 16. ver. 27. Hebr^. 13. ves.
20. 21.
true Author and perfitter of all good works which are begun in thy name, for
Psalm. 127. ver. 1. Ester. 16. ver. 15. 16.
thou disposest and gouernest all things in private families, and preseruest
the public estates of Common wealths, as well in war as peace,) And seeing also
that nothing can either be well begun, nor be proceeded in, and ended, without
good and fit counsel appropriated to each actio^, (which depends upon
occasions, and therefore is wisely to be laid forth by a due consideration of
circumstances for the same, except it be both entered, and likewise seconded by
counsel corresponding to it in particular;) Let it please thee, in Christ, (*)
to assist with thy spirit Colos. 2. ver. 3.
of wisdom, all such as are appointed Colleagues, and associates in counsel
for the administering of warlike affairs; Give them both a quick and ripe wit,
to enquire and search out, what is fit and meet to come into their
consultations upon the present; And then a discreet judgment, to find and
discern, what is most behoueful for effecting the present business; and lastly,
a courage and resolution to execute, what by mature deliberatio^ shall be
decreed; And in all their co^sultations, let them Prou. 21. ver. 30.
specially attend upon thy fear; knowing, that no counsel can be administered
to prevail and take effect, which is not guided thereby. For as Solomon says,
Prou. 8. ver. 12.
I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and I find out Knowledge and Counsels. To
this end illuminate their Prou. 4. ver. 25. ver. 27.
eyes to behold right, and let their eye liddes direct the way before thee,
that they turning neither to their right hand nor the left, for fear; Nor by
means of corruption, or otherwise seduced from true fealty, may at all times,
boldly and saithfully advance the present business, by such counsel as it
requires, to thy glory, in the lawful managing of those warlike affairs,
even to the conquering of the enemy, without doing wrong and unnecessary
violence against the law of Arms. Therefore abandon far from out their
hearts, all false, treacherous, and leaude counsels, which respect only
profit, without a due and godly regard of right justice; Remove all sinister
passions and affections, working by colorable pretenses for private gain; or
by malice moving contentious questions, of purpose to interrupt the course of
the consultation, by which the cause may be hindered, and strength of Arms
weakened, to the great prejudice of the commonwealth. As it shall seem good
to thy heavenly will, so be pleased I beseech thee, to be present with them at
al times, in all their counsels, that no pretenses, no particular respects; nor
quarrels, may draw them apart into Factions; But concurring in a mutual
consent of opinions, may truly and loyally advance the common cause, by
presupposing in their first thoughts, the end of that which is to be presented
to the consultation; Also by fitting the best and safest means, for the
atchieuing the said end; And lastly, by putting into execution what is
determined, with the least charge and loss (if else it cannot be done.) And
otherwise, if their Counsels, by the favorable assistance of thy spirit, shall
be furthered to a good and wished success, let them out of the knowledge of
thy fear, say with thanksgiving, Psalm. 115 ver. 1.
Not unto us (o Lord) Not unto us, but unto thy Name, give the praise; For thou
only give prudence, and thou only sauest by prudence, whom thou make wise
in thee. Be thou therefore only glorified, in all the wisdom of men, for thy
mercies sake in Christ for ever.

Amen.
12 A Prayer for Seafaring men.
O Almighty God, who art, the way, the truth, and Reuela. 1. ver. 8. John. 14.
ver. 6.
the life, so as none without thy guidance and conduct, can direct aright his
foote-steppes in the paths of true life, much less promise to himself free
and safe passage through so many crooked diuerticles, and by-turnings, in the
narrow and craggy ways of this our wearisome pilgrimage, unless thou sendest
thy hand to lead them; Forasmuch as by thy power and wisdom we stand, and are
vpheld from falling: thou (o Lord) who have made the Sea as well for man's
travel as the land, and to that purpose have given him dominion over the waves
and deep floods thereof, to walk upon them by fit means; Be thou a shield
of strength; and a buckler of defense against such dangerous and perilous
casualties as are most commonly attending upon Seafaring men, and the more and
sudden the occasions are for threatening dangers unto them, the more present be
thou pleased at all times, to vouchsafe thy helping powerful hand, for their
protection and deliverance. Let not the depths prevail at any time against
them, to cover and devour them: Thy right hand is as well made glorious by
mercy in saving thy people, as by power in destroying thine enemies: This
appeared manifest to the children of Israel, unto whom thou made the Exodus
14. ver. 22.
waters a wall on the right hand and on the left, and did cause them to go
on dry ground through the midst of the Sea, when as the ver. 27. 28.
Egiptians host, were all covered with the waters, returning upon them, in the
same place where Israel went dry. In like manner when thy Apostle Peter, (c)
Math. 14. ver. 29. 30. 31.
walking on the waters to meet thy son Jesus, was feared with a mighty
wind, and now ready to sink, did in that extremity of danger cry unto thee
for thy help, thou immediately did stretch forth thy hand, and caughtest him,
and so saved him. Mat. 1. 23. Exo. 15. ver 3. Psalm. 81. ver. 7.
I confess thee to be the true God Imanuel, because thou art God with us; For
thy name is Jehovah, ever constant in thy promises, to all such as call upon
thee in says; For thou have said, * Call upon me in the needful time of
trouble, and I will deliver thee. We are instructed in thy holy writ, of thy
merciful protection, by land, extended and manifested, upon whom thou have bin
pleased to vouchsafe thy fatherly care in the same: As upon Gene. 11. ver. ^1.
1. Genesis 12. ver. 10.
Abraham with his father Terah, and Lot and Sarat, traveling by thy
appointment, from Vr of the Chaldeans, into Canaan. And when the famine was sore
in that land, that no food was to be had, but in Egypt only, did not thou
then extend thy great mercy upon Gene. 42. ver. 3. 25.
Iaacob his sons, going down thither to buy food from thence; And
afterward likewise, when Gene. 34. ver. 5. 6. 7.
Iaacob with all he had, was to depart out of Canaan into Egypt to dwell there;
Did not thou most graciously, in a ver. the 2. 34.
vision by night, encourage him to take that Journey, when thou said unto
him, ver. the 3. and 4.
Fear not, I will go down with thee into Egypt? O good Lord, thou were to
Abraham and this his seed, in their travails and peregr nation, a solace upon
the way; a comfortable shade in extremity of heat; a veil and covering in
rain and tempest; a refreshing in their lassitude and wearines; a buckler of
defense in time of need; a staff in all slipperie and dangerous places; and so
a very sufficient guide to bring them safely, unto the place of their appointed
rest. It has been always thy custom to be present with thy children in
their affairs, to aid and assist them in their dangers, and to direct their
foote-steppes in all their ways; yea, and to show that thou have a provident
care continually ouershadowing them, thou do (as it seems convenient and
behoofefull for their good) afford them the watchful guard and attendance of
thy Angels over them; Exodus 33. ver. 19.
For thou will show mercy, to whom thou will show mercy; and have
compassion, on whom thou will have compassion, as thou have said; and
accordingly did perform that word upon Tobias, the son of Tobit, sending
him thy Angel Tobit. 5. ver. 4. 5. and. 6.
Raphael to attend and conduct him in his journey to Rags of Media Tobit. 12
ver. 3.
for he had a prosperous iourny by Raphaels company, and so returned home to
his father Tobit. And art not thou the same God, all-sufficient every where,
full of Majesty, power, and strength, alike in all places? And is not the^
that thy Arm of defense stretched forth at large, as well over the Sea, as
upon the Land? Yes Lord, we know that thy paths are in the water floods, and
d^y ways found also in the ^cas: for thou (...) only Ruler and Governor of
the deep, as thou (...) only first Founder and maker thereof. For (...) o
most gracious and Almighty God, and in true acknowledgement of thy infinite
power, I thy unworthy servant, yet thy servant, and work of thy hands,
present this my Prayer of intercession unto thee, in the name of thy son
Christ, for thy safe conducting and guiding of all Mariners, Sailors,
Passengers, and whosoever Ride upon, either Seas, floods, or waters, whether in
Ships, Boats, or any vessels of vecture and carriage. Grant them a
protection against all dangers and casualties of water, if it be thy will,
freely and safely to pass whither they are bound by occasion of business, and
so to return to the Haven of their wished home, freed by thy mercy from all
annoyance.

O Lord, we confess that thou art exceeding great, clothed altogether with
Majesty and honor; Psalm. 18. ver. 10.
Thou Ridest upon the Cherubins, as upon a Horse; and walk upon the wingges
of the wind; Thy (o) ver. 1^. and.
voice is the loud Thunderings; And thy Arrows, are Lightning, Haile-stones,
and Coals of Fire. ver. 7. 9.
When thou art angry, darkness is under thy feet and a consuming fire comes
out of thy mouth; For thy judgments are horrible to the wicked, and
insupportable; (q) wisd. 17. 8 through. (r) wised. 18. ver. 1. 2. and. 3.
But to thy children, which are such as fear and love thee, thou show thy
self kind and merciful altogether, clothed with light, as with a garment; (s)
For in this manner did thou appear unto them, ever amiable and lovely.
Fo^asmuch then as thou art powerful both in judgment and mercy, and that all
visible powers, are ready and pressed at commandment, to serve for the executing
thy blessed will, we have none at whose hands we are to expect favor and aid
besides thee only. Wherefore most humbly I pray thee, be gracious unto those
which occupy in great waters; Take them always into thy protection, if it so
stands with thy good will and pleasure; Repress the furious Incursions of
whulewindes, tempests of Hail, Thundrings, and Lightnings. Bridle the rage of
the Seas and waters, that they ouerwhelme not ships of men, to their
destruction; Give them such wind and weather, as may securely serve them unto
a safe and joyful passage. And o God, our most loving Father, full of kindness
and pity, as thou can be willing to save from ship wrack, occasioned by
waters and tempests, so be pleased I beseech thee, in that fatherly care over
thy people, and for that thou art a Father always of such as seek according
to thy will to live houestly in their vocation, to which thou have appointed
them: Be pleased, o merciful Lord, to defend also all Seafaring men, from
Robbers, and Pirates, and all whatsoever enemies to thee and thy children, who
wickedly and leandly, contrary to thy commandments, live upon the spoil of
thy people, or otherwise under pretense of lawful hostility, may and do
assault them on the waters, to their utter undoing. Give not thy people in this
manner (o Lord) as a prey into their hands, that they may know thee to be a God
of might, powerful, and saving, a very present help in all trouble. Be thou
therefore their guide, going out, and coming home; and put into their mouths
a song of praise, and thanksgiving, for thy loving kindness and favor, in
Christ Jesus; For whose sake, lend me thy gracious ear, praying in this sort
unto thee, in his name only, to the which, be all glory, for ever, and ever.

Amen.
13 A Prayer for the honorable state of Matrimony.
FOrasmuch o Lord, as it has pleased thee, out of thy infinite love unto man,
to be the author and ordeiner of marriage, whereby thou have made it honorable
among all men; Let it please thee also, to bless all so coupled together in
thy fear, that they acknowledging this vocation to be thy ordinance, may
accordingly demean themselves in the same, with all sobriety, for the better
atchieuement of those two principal ends, for which it was first instituted of
thee; Even, for the propagation of seed, and also for a mutual comfort and
consolation to themselves in thee. And because this state is ofnecessity
subject to the flesh, which through frailenes of man's nature, may occasion
great offense, to the dishonouring of thy name, and provoking thee justly unto
anger, Grant I beseech thee, unto this man, and this woman, now conjoined
together within this indissoluble bond of Matrimony, that after the rule of thy
first Institution, they may live in the said wedlock fellowship, as wholly
guided with the fear and love of thee; For which cause especially, circumcise,
o Lord, their hearts, that all carnal, forbidden, and distemperate lusts of
the flesh, may be clean abandoned for ever out of their thoughts, remembering
with fear and horror, that dreadful sentence of doom pronounced by thy
Apostle Heb. 1^. ver. 4.
Fornicators and Adulterers, God shall Judge; Which is, (as thy holy Apostle
Saint Paul says) That no 1. Cor. 6. ver. 9. and. 10
Fornicators and Adulterers, shall inherit thy kingdom.

Let this heavy judgment be engraven upon the tables of their hearts, that at
no time they be overtaken with inordinate concupiscences, to follow the lusts
thereof, sinning against thy holy ordinance, by defrauding each other, and
procuring thereby their own condemnation; Nay rather, in an holy regard to thy
worship, let the^ 1. Cor. 7. ver. 5.
refrain for a time, but with consent, as thy Apostle teaches, that they may
(g) giuethe^selues the more freely to (g fasting and (g) prayer, and so again
come together, to avoid Satan's temptation, by reason of incontinency. That
this may be effected more agreeably to thy most blessed will, Sanctify their
souls unto an holy concord, and a matrimonial consent of minds, as becomes
thy children, matched together in thy blessed fear, that, as the Ephesians. 5 ver.
25. ver. 22.
husband is to love his wife, so, the wife may in like manner, and with like
affection, honor her husband, being Genesis 2. ver. 24.
two in one flesh, as thou have said, and because also thou have commanded Ephesians.
5. ver. 25. 22.
the same. Wherefore, (o Lord) instruct the^ in the truth of this holy mystery,
that through a mutual agreement, they may always, in all godly sort, show by
their example, wedlock, to be a figure and representatio^ of Christ and his
Church; to wit, in love with rule and authority; and in subjection, with love
and fear; For thou have said, Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the
ver. 25. ver. 22. ver. 23.
Church, And wives, subject your selves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord
for the husband is the wives head, as Christ is the head of the Church; That
being by an especial instinct of thy holy spirit, made to understand thy will
herein, they may the more easily and gladly consent to a mutual function of
all matrimonial office; The husband as being head, to govern, guide, nourish,
and defend his wife;

The wife likewise, to submit and accommodate her self, wholly to the will of
her husband, in all godliness; doing whatsoever she shall think, is, and may be
pleasing to him, for thy sake, (o Lord;) For unless their love, and duty, be
joined, and knit, by fear in thee, it can neither work effectually to their
good, nor any ways be accepted of thee, who requirest the true affection (l)
of the heart, performing unfeignedly, such obedience as thy self have
commanded. And because Satan is a most deadly enemy to the state of
Matrimony, seeking all means possible to prevent the love between man and
wife, either by surmizes and suspicions, or by subornations of false crimes, to
cause hatred, and raise contentions between them; Abandon Satan far from
them, that in no sort he do entermeddle with their actions; But weaken and
disable all his subtle devises, and crafty plots, endeavoring any ways the
breach of wedlock. Suffer not the common enemy of mankind to enrage against
thy holy Ordinance, by sowing discord and debate between them; Cut off all
occasions of wrongful suspicions, which may breed discontent with hatred;
That in a true consent of minds they may live together, and thou who art the
God of peace dwell in the midst of them. Give them grace so to esteem of
this state and holy vocation, that they be a joy and comfort to each other, at
all times, as well of adversity as prosperity, and of sickness as of health,
and that, without grudging and murmuring against the course and working of thy
will. Beside, in as much as thou have made Popagation of the seed, to be the
special end for which thou did institute this coniuction of man and wife;
Vouchsafe of thy goodness, that their wedlock be not altogether fruitless and
barren, but as thou see best fitting in thy wisdom, so accordingly deal
with them in mercy; Let them know, that the promise passed by word from thee,
at what time thou reatest them Male and Female, saying; Bring forth fruit, and
multiply, is a promise of blessing also unto these, and to be extended unto
them, for breeding of children, if thou have so appointed, and if it be thy
will, otherwise, be it as thou have appointed in thy secret w^ll, and purpose
unrevealed. But if it please thee, that they bring forth fruit, and have
children, grant them grace for their education in the knowledge of this care,
as thou have spoken by thy Apostle; So shall (n) Ephesians 6. ver. 4.
they be taught, first and principally to know thee for their God, the very
true, and only Author of their life, and what good soever they receive
therewith; and ^ext, understanding what duty ver. 11. 2.
thou requirest at their ^ands, toward their Parents, they shall with all
realines of mind exhibit the same, obeying and ho^ouring them, as thou have
commanded. o good God and merciful Lord, as this thy institution is holy, so
^^nctisie it, unto this new married man and wife; a^orne it with the blessings
thereto appertaining, if it be thy will; that they living together in wedlock
^oue and agreement, godly, and soberly, may through their holy conversation and
concord, glorify thy name; and so by their life, advance the doctrine of thy
Gospel, in Christ Jesus.

Amen.
14. A Prayer for friends, and Benefactors.
BE gracious and merciful, o Lord we beseech thee, unto our Parents, Kins
folks, Frinds, Benefactors, and those which have brought us up, Taught,
Promoted, Or any way relieved us. Enrich them with all blessings, that have
done good, either to our bodies with temporal benefits, Or to our Souls with
profitable instructions. Bless their estates here, that they may have always
wherewith, to relieve themselves and others; Give them the consolation of the
holy Ghost, to the keeping of faith and a good conscience; And as they have
showed mercy unto us, in comforting us, so Lord help them in their greatest
needs, that both they and their families, may have comfort here, and find
mercy with thee at the latter day. Lord, let their Almesdeeds and prayers, be
always in thy sight, as an acceptable Sacrifice unto thee. Keep us so far
from ingratitude toward them, as that always we may be ready, (according to
our abilities,) to recompense them, if need require. Let not that, which they
have bestowed upon us, be cast away, but, make it fruitful, and us worthy of
it. Grant this o Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord, and Savior.

Amen.
15. A Prayer to be said at all times, for the reducing of all true Christians,
into the Church of Christ.
MOst loving and pitiful Lord, the only true Shepherd of our Souls, who
have lost none of those whom thy father gave thee, but seek after the lost
sheep of thy Israel, to bring it again into thy Sheepefolde; Seek I beseech
thee, through the free gift of thy gr^^e, and the vigilant care of the
Ministers of thy Church, all such as are strayed from the same, either by
infirmity of the flesh, seduced and misled into any kind of sin in life and
manners, occasioning thereby a slander and reproach unto thy name, or otherwise
through ignorance oppugning the Articles of thy Christian Religion, and so know
not how to subject in humility then blinded understanding unto a holy
absequiousnes of thy sanctified word, in obedience to thy Spouse, which is the
true Catholic Church, eue^ the P^ller and stabiliti^ of all truth It is thou
only, who healest that is diseas^^ in our Souls; Strengthenest that is weak;
binds that which is broken and decayed* Loosest that which is bound; Castest
down* and raisest up again; Reiectest, and say, turn again and be saved.
Look with thy Eye of pity upon all such, as either wande^ out of the way of
truth, or are justly excommunicated and expelled out of thy Church; Open their
Eyes, and Ears, that they may see, and understand what the truth is, and so
for ever hereafter, forget to blaspheme thy name, either in Life, or in
profession of thy Religion; and thereby in a true acknowledgement of thy love
and mercies, believe in the heart, and confess with the mouth, thee to be
their only Redeemer and Savior, and so give thee praise and glory forever.

Amen.
16. A Prayer for our Brethren excommunicated, to be restored to the Church
again.
ALmighty God and heavenly father, full of all consolation and unspeakable
mercy, which have of thy great goodness and bounty, freely secured man, not
only from the guilt of Sin, but also from the punishment thereof, in and for
thy dear Sons sake, Christ Jesus: and in token of the same freedom, have
for his greater security, invested him into the communion and fellowship of
the Church, making him a lively member of that thy Mistical Body whereof Christ
is the head, thereby knitting him unto thy self, together with the Saints,
through the participation of the Sacraments, which are most sure and infallible
tokens of thy love toward man, forasmuch then, as there can be no Salvation to
man, being secluded out of this fellowship and communion of Saints (which is
the true Church;) And seeing also, that it is a most heavy and lamentable
Judgment laid upon man, that shall deserve to be expelled thereout, by a true
and lawful sentence of Excommunication. Be pleased, o Lord, to hear this my
praye^, which I most humbly power fourth unto thee in the behalf of this our
Brother, fallen through the infirmity of the flesh, and by ignorance seduced
into error of thy Truth. Vouchsafe him I beseech thee thy special grace, that
his mind being illuminated with the bright shining Lamp of sincere knowledge,
through the instinct of the holy Ghost, he may now come to a sensible feeling
of the woeful case into which he is plunged by this his fall, never being able
to rise up again, without the help and gracious assistance of thy favor.
Thou therefore, o Lord, who will not the death of a Sinner, but that he turn
and live, have pity, have pity, Spare him whom thou have redeemed with thy
most precious blood. Take from him all Co^tumacie and hardness of heart, even
that Stony and senseless heart, that is without all feeling and remorse of
Sin, and give him a heart of flesh, softened and mollified with the spiritual
dew of thy heavenly grace, and so made pliable to the obedience of thy will to
follow it in all things; That he understanding aright, the miserable state in
which he now stands, being excommunicated out of the fellowship of thy
Church, may in a godly sorrow for his former sins committed, be heartily
desirous to be restored to it, with a true repentance, ever hereafter working
his salvation in fear and trembling, through Christ Jesus our Savior.

Amen.
17. A Prayer for our Brother, truly repentant, and doing penance in the
Church, before the Congregation.
O Most merciful God and loving Father, forasmuch as thou have commanded by
the mouth of thy holy Apostle S. Paul, that supplications, prayers,
intercessions, be made for all men, it being an acceptable thing in thy sight,
(who art willing that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of thy
truth; I beseech thee most humbly in the name of thy Son Christ, who gave
himself a Ransom for all men, to incline thy merciful Ear to the voice of
this my prayer, which my soul powers fourth in great humility, in a
compassiue sense and feeling of this our brothers heavy groaning under the
burden of his sins, by which he has provoked thy just wrath against him,
and for which he now presents himself before this thy congregation, in
acknowledgement of his offenses, entreating pardon of thee for the same, unto
whose great mercy he wholly betakes himself, notwithstanding his manifold and
grievous Transgressions, in as much as thou have promised forgiveness to all
such as are truly penitent, and unfeignedly turn unto thee, thereby
commanding that none should despair of pardon, or distrust thy merciful
kindness. O Lord, vouchsafe unto him thy grace, work in him, true contrition of
heart, by which he may be humbled in himself unto thy fatherly correction, and
so be raised by thee from himself, unto amendment of Life. Let that
pittifulnes which first moved thee to redeem him, move thee now also to
restore him unto thee; It is thou only which instructest the ignorant; Thou,
which reducest the wandering and straying sinner into the right way; Thou,
which raisest him being fallen, and houldest him up standing; Thou, which
comfortest him in affliction; and strengthenest him in despair; Thou, even
thou o Lord, which healest him in all his Infirmities; and when he turns unto
thee, thou turnest also unto him, and receiuest him. Come therefore, o Lord,
and receive this our Brother unto thy mercy; Vouchsafe to behold him with a
fatherly eye, For thy only favorable aspect will quicken and revive him,
being now dejected into this misery through Sin, ouertaking him as one
forsaken of thee for a time, till thou had made him to know thee, and
forsake himself. Let him no longer now, wander out of the way of truth, but
bring him in to it, and guide him in it; Thou have said, thou will not the
death of a sinner, but that he turn from his wicked ways, and Live; For, as
thou delightest in the saving of sinners, to reduce them to the truth of thy
word, which is the savor of Life, to them that apprehend the same in Christ; so
now, I beseech thee, grant this our Brother the certain knowledge thereof, by
which he may be assured of the inward grace of thy spirit, both, for the
am^dment of his life, and salvation of his Soul, according to thy will, and so
give thee praise and thanks, for thy mercies in Christ.

Amen.
18. A Prayer of a Midwife, for a woman in Travail.
O Gracious God, that art nigh unto all that call upon thee, mercifully hear
the voice of thy handmaids here assembled, for the help of this our sister, in
her agony now approaching; Look upon her in mercy; Mittigate the judgment
which thou have laid upon her, and all women, for sin; Give her courage of
Heart, and strength of body, to bear the pangs of her Labor; and so inwardly
comfort her, with thy holy Spirit, That neither her natural frailty; The
temptation of Satan; Nor the extremity of Throws; cause her to faint. Holy
Father, give her Patience, and willingness, to be advised by her friends, in
this so great a work; and to remember, that as in justice, thou have greatly
increased her sorrows in Conception, So it is thy will, to have a holy seed,
brought forth of her, which being sanctified by thy grace, may be consecrated
to thy service, and made partaker of thy glory. We pray thee therefore, to
bless, both her, and the fruit in her womb; Show thy mercy no less in the
Birth, then in the wonderful forming, and fafhioning, of that she bears.
Have mercy upon me, (whom thou have ordained, to do the principal office,
to her, and many others. Set thy fear always before mine Eyes; Grant me
skill, and judgment, to finish this work well, which I am to undertake; Help
mine infirmities, and imperfections; Give me a tender Heart; and a quick and
steadie hand; Perfect thine own work, in the hand of me thy Deputy, that it
may be, to thy glory, her comfort, and my credit; Prosper us o Lord, that the
mother being safely delivered, and her Babe preserved, they may lovingly live
together, many years, to thy glory. For which thy inestimable blessings, give
us grace altogether, with one accord to praise thy holy name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
19. A Prayer of Children, for Parents.
O Most gracious God, and heavenly father; the Father of our forefathers
Abraham, and in him my Father also, by promise: Bow down thy fatherly Ear, I
most humbly beseech thee, to the dutiful cry and petition of a child,
supplicating unto thee, for his dear Parents, of them, borne in sin, and so
I confess, a child of wrath and perdition; But, by a second new birth,
rebegotten as it were, through the immortal seed of thy word, in Christ, and
now become to thee, an adopted Child of Grace, and so thy Child.

Therefore in this name am I emboldned (yet not presuming) to present my prayer
unto thee, for and in the behalf of my natural Parents, toward whom all
obedience in thy fear performed, is acceptable to thee, and well pleasing; For
thou have commanded all Children, to honor their Parents, and promisest a
reward of long days, for the same.

Grant then, I pray thee, first and principally, the illumination of thy
Spirit, that by virtue and power thereof, (their hearts being inst^ucted in
the sound knowledge of thy truth) may cause their faith in thee, resolutely to
be settled, and so accordingly be professed of them, at all times, before men.

Direct their foote-steppes always in the paths of thy statutes, and lead
them along in the ways of thy commandments, that their thoughts, words, and
deeds, be always addressed to the good of all men in thee, for the setting
forth of thy glory, it being the chief end thereof. And as thou art willing to
be entreated of thy children for thy spiritual graces, first sought for of
them; so be pleased, I beseech thee, to hear me praying in their behalf for
thy temporal benefits to be conferred upon them, as in thy wisdom thou see
most fit.

Increase, and multiply the days of their natural life upon earth. For this
cause, preserve and keep them, in all health, both of mind, and body; Be
thou unto them, a strong Tower and Rock of defense, that no annoyance of
troubles whatsoever, do at any time hurt their souls.

Bless them with children, that having many, they may stand, as young plants of
Olives round about their Table.

Give them thy fear, to bring us all up, in all true godliness. Let them be
unto their family* godly examples of all goodness, both in words and actions of
sanctity, and true holiness, that so, they living, as mortified, to the
corruption of the flesh, may afterward dying in thee, be raised in the said
flesh, cleansed from all corruption, and live for ever with thee, where thou
raignest with thy son, and the holy Ghost, one God, everlastingly.

Amen.
20 A brief Prayer of a Child for his Parents.
O Lord God, who have strictly charged all children to honor their Parents,
and to pray for their states, so far forth, as may stand with thy will;
vouchsafe I beseech thee, to my father and mother, health and peace, both
bodily and ghostly. Preserve them from all danger, of body and soul; But
especially keep the^ in the knowledge of all true Christian faith, that being
strongly assisted with thy grace, they may never willingly offend thee, but
rather endeavoring by all possible means to please thee, may find thee
accordingly, a propitious and merciful Father in Christ.

Amen.
21 A Prayer of a Child, for his Parents.
O Heavenly Father, lead my Parents I beseech thee, in thy Truth; Govern all
their actions to thy glory, the good of thy Church, and discharge of their
duties. Defend them from their enemies; and from all deceits and dangers* that
by their godly wisdom, care, and painfulnesse, I may be brought up in
virtuous instructions, nurture, and good order, and so live, and serve thee, in
righteousness and holiness all my days. To this end (o Lord) for Jesus sake,
endue me with thy holy spirit; Make me a Babe of thy heavenly family; Regerate
me anew, into Christ; Give me grace, willingly to submit my self with all
obedience and duty, unto the godly admonitions and government, of my Parents,
Instructors, and Rulers. Incline my heart diligently to seek after wisdom.
Preserve me from all evil ways, leaude company, false doctrine, and heresy:
Let all my understanding and conceits, tend to the good of my soul, and
bettering of my life, in faith and manners: Mortify in me, the raging lusts
and follies, of youthful affections: Pardon all mine offenses: Make me
helpful to my aged Parents, if need require) Protect me in all dangers and
necessities: Forgive me my sins: That I may live in thy fear, and die in thy
favor; and in the end, be made heir of thy euerla sting kingdom.

Amen.
22 A Prayer for Children.
FOrasmuch as, o most gracious Father, and most loving to mankind, after thou
had created them male, and female, thou were pleased to say, Bring forth
fruit and multiply, and fill the Earth. In which words, thou did bless their
seed, that it might propagate veto Generation, as we see it come to pass at
this ^ay, whereby we acknowledge thy word, to be a word of power and truth,
(for thou art altoger virtue, and all wisdom): Let it also please thee, I
beseech thee, to bless the issue of the said seed, first blessed of thee, in
the first creation, even children of Parents, whom thou couplest in the
beginning, Man, and Wife; that they, principally endowed with thy holy Spirit,
from above, made thereby Babes of thy heavenly family, as regenerated and borne
anew into Christ thy son, may have grace thereby, the more obediently and
willingly to honor their Parents, with all dutiful reverence, and beseeming
obsequies, submitting themselves in all obedience, to their godly counsels and
admonitions, and woorthily deserved chastisements, done, and taken of them, in
thy fear, for their amendment.

Let them be wise, to obey the instruction of their Prou. 13.
Fathers, and not as Scorners, which will hear no rebukes, as says Solomon.

Grant them therefore, discreet religious minds, to be a comfort, and no
grief unto their parents, as the same Solomon says.

Obey thy Father that begot thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.
Therefore incline their hearts to seek wisdom in thee, that may preserve
them from evil ways: Keep them from leaude company; defend them from
corruption, of both doctrine, and manners; Let all raging Lusts, and wanton
follies of youthful affections be mortified in them; Make them hopeful to
their Parents in their youths; and always during life, helpefull to them at
all times, upon occasion, especially in the times of age and sickness, when
need requires.

Finally, forgive them their sins; and guide them in thy way, that thus
living in thy fear, they may die in thy favor, and so live for ever, heirs
of thy kingdom in Christ.

Amen.
23 Another Prayer for Children.
O Heavenly Father, be merciful unto the sons of men, I most humbly beseech
thee, for Christ's sake, thy natural only begotten son.

Especially (o Lord) be good and gracious to such, as are yet young, and in
their childe-hood, under the government, and the discipline of their Parents,
whom thou have commanded by the mouth of thy Apostle Saint Paul, to obey.

Grant them this, that thou command; inspire their minds from above, with
a true understanding thereof, that according to the true sense and meaning of
the said dutiful honor, which thou requirest of them, they may always
demean themselves in thy fear, both in their thoughts, words, and gestures,
as becomes obedient, and humble spirited children.

Let them therefore first always, entertain in their minds, honorable
opinions of their Parents; Mention their names, upon all occasions, with great
reverence, in testimony of that honor, which thou have enjoined them, speaking
of them, with some applause of their wisdom and discreet discipline, where
need so requires, having them in chiefest price, as their greatest Treasure
next unto thee.

Secondly, in external behavior, grant them true and godly humility, to do
them all honor in the gesture of the body, that is requisite. In speech, to
utter words of modesty, arguing the inward reverence of the mind, devoted unto
all reguler dutifulnes, so as at no time they offend them, either in malepart
wanton gestures, or with sharp, and tanting speeches. Therefore here (o Lord)
let them know, what true obedience is, even in all matters, as well civil as
domestical, to submit themselves unto their wills, doing what herein may be
well pleasing to them, of purpose avoiding what may disquiet and discontent
their minds. And if their P^rents shall happen to do them wrong, as they
conceive, yet to take it patiently, and to remit it, for thy sake; yea, what
faults else, and oversight, they shall see them commit, to dissemble and hide
them, as is the counsel of Ecclesiasticus, Glory not in the shame of the
father, that at no time, they be a Cham, but always rather, a Sem, and a
Iaphet: to their Parents.

And now, when old age is come upon them, that they become weak, and feeble,
not having how to relieve themselves, through wants, occasioning the same; that
then (o Lord) they do^ the office of the Storke, in feeding, succouring, and
cherishing them, according to that ability, thou have been pleased to afford
them, for that end; And what office else besides these, is to be performed,
according to thy will, give them understanding thereof, eue^ from their
childhood, that in the whole course of their lives, they may give due
correspondence, to that honor which thou have commanded them to do. Grant this
(o Lord) unto them, for thy Christ's sake, that thou may also bless them,
with the fruits of thy promise, both in this life, and in the life to come,
even for the same thy Christ sake.

Amen.
24 A Prayer of such as come to visit a sick person.
OMnipotent God, who preseruest our life in death Let it be thy good pleasure
we beseech thee, to cast thy eyes of mercy, upon this oursicke brother; Ease
his afflictions both in soul and body, wash away his sins in the blood of
Jesus Christ, that they may never rise up against him; Assuage his pains;
Keep him from all accusations of Conscience, and subtle temptations of the
wicked adversary; That he valiantly fighting in firm faith, may hold out to
the end, and obtain the victory. Grant him a happy entrance into endless
life; and send thine Angels, to conduct him into the assembly of thine elect,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
25 A Prayer in time of sickness.
OH sweet Lord, and omnipotent Father, maker of all mankind; Look down
upon this our weak brother, whom it has pleased thee at this time, to visit
with extreme sickness, no doubt, for the trial of his patience, and the
amendment of his life. Consider his miserable estate, and give him grace to
call to mind all his sins past, and heartily to repent him of the same;
Forgive them we beseech thee, blot them out of thy book, and nail them unto
the cross of thy dear son, that they may never rise up in judgment against
him. Make his faith strong in thee, that he may be able to prevail against
Satan, and all his wicked devises. Lord, as thou have cast him down, so we
entreat thee, if it be thy will, to raise him up again, otherwise to give him
patience. Oh good Jesus, the Physician both of our souls and bodies, Let thy
blood wash the one, and thy mighty power relieve the other; Cleanse our souls
from all open and secret sins, and plague us not as we have justly deserved.
Grant him grace, that in all willing obedience, he may refer his crazed
estate, both of body and soul unto thy will; Deal with him, we beseech thee,
not in justice, but in mercy; Send thy holy Ghost into his heart, that it may
labor with him, and make all things ready in him, against the day of his
departure out of this vale of misery; Wash him with the oil of comfort, before
he go hence; And sweet Lord, (when the hour which thou have appointed, for
the dissolution of his body, shall come) accept him into the bosom of thy
mercy; And receive him into thy everlasting kingdom, there to remain with
thee, in joy unspeakable, for ever, and ever. Amen.

For these, etc. Our Father, etc. Lord depart not from this our sick brother,
in the time of his need, but evermore mightily defend him, even unto the end.

26 A Prayer for prisoners, when thou come into a Prison, to visit them.
THou only, o Lord, see the infinite miseries, and distressing calamities, of
this frail, wretched, and wearisome life, occasioned through this body of
sinful flesh, which we carry about us, budding forth from out the contagion
thereof, and blossoming fruits of rotten corruption, and so laid justly upon
us, for a punishment of the same, to our amendment, thy grace herein specially
assisting us. And as thou see this, so also thou best know, that it is
convenient for thy children, howsoever sinning, by all manner crosses, yea, by
bonds, and imprisonments, by tortors, and death, to be chastised, that their
faith toward thee, being tried and known in thy chastisements, their patient
abiding may in the end be glorified of thee their Savior. Wherefore, o my good
Lord, and merciful Father, forasmuch as it has pleased thee to instinct this
motion into me at this present, to visit the poor prisoners of this place, as
a thing acceptable to thee in Christ; Grant me further, thy special grace,
for a document Mat. 25. 36.
and instruction to my self, of man's common frailty, that in their miseries,
and howsoever incident to them upon offenses,) I may behold mine own state,
and know it* in these, to be subject every moment, to all casual mishappes,
that thereby I may learn, to fear thy Judgments, which, howsoever sometimes
they may be hid from the eye of man's reason, are yet notwithstanding, all, most
just and righteous, as now falls out unto these poor Prisoners, lying here
in bonds, and Irons, till the day come, which by thy will, shall be appointed
here on earth, for their Trial.

I beseech thee (o our God,) who art full of all kindness, compassionating the
falls and miseries of man; that thou will be pleased, in some sort, to have
pity upon the lamentable state, and condition, of these poor Prisoners, whom
here in bands, the Snares of death, may seem to have overtaken, as it were
preventing their days, by an untimely execution of thy judgment for their
Sins; Yet Lord, indulge them so with thy gracious favor, as that in the
mean while, they may seriously and most unfeignedly repent them, for that they
have thus far provoked hearty sorrowing for their former neglect of thy
fear, (which might have kept them in awe of thee,) they may be reconciled unto
thee in Christ. Be not far from them, o Lord I beseech thee; but let the
comfort of thy holy Spirit, be present with them in their miseries, now in this
their needful time of thy heavenly assistance; Help them, I say, help, and
relieve them, in that manner, as thou in thy wisdom best know, to make
most conveniently behoofefull to their salvation in Christ Jesus, for his sake
only.

Amen.
27. A Prayer for Prisoners, to be said, when thou go out of a Prison, from
visiting them.
LOrd, I confess, I have been bold, to offer up my prayers, and supplications,
in this manner, for these poor prisoners, my self being a most wretched
sinner, unworthy to lift up mine Eyes to Heaven. But, o Lord, I have not
presumed this, for any merit of worth in my self, for I am dust and earth,
yea, the very dross and skum of filthy corruption; a man of an uncircumcised
heart, and of polluted Lips. Yet, forasmuch as, we are all the members of one
mystical body in Christ, and so ought to have a compassiue sense and feeling
of each others miseries, howsoever occasioned; And besides, for that thou have
charged us in thy Hebru. 13. ver. 3.
word, That we should remember them that are in Bonds, as if we our selves were
bound with them, etc. Herein then doing thy will, according to the measure of
faith, which thou in mercy have bestowed upon me, yet not presuming upon any
merit of the same faith, which as it is my work, I confess is sinful; I pray
and entreat thee on the Knees of my heart, in a most humble and submissiue
devotion, that if it may stand with thy good pleasure to deliver them, or any
of them, from the sentence of death, (of which they seem to be in danger, and
may worthily expect it for their sins,) thou will also grant them, a godly
sorrow, unto a hearty true repentance, for amendment of their former wicked
lives, that so hereafter, being taught by the instinct of thy blessed Spirit,
to live in a holy dread of thy name, serving thee, and working their salvation
in fear and trembling, through obedience Phil. 2. ver. 12.
to thy will, they may be made thankful unto thee, for thy merciful goodness
showed toward them, in that their deliverance; Otherwise, if out of thy
wisdom, thou shall see it more expedient for their Souls health, to execute
a judgment upon them for their offenses committed against thee, in thine
anointed their Sovereign, whose Laws they have violated and wronged: Yet,
vouchsafe good Lord, to every one so suffering, a convenient strength, both of
Body, and Soul, such as may sufficiently assist them in the time of that their
Agony, (being before well schooled by thy Spirit,) that so their Bodies being
enabled to withstand the torments of death, and their minds wholly fixed and
settled in the heavenly meditations of thy comfortable mercies, they may be
raised in the height of that godly Resolution, unto a just and competent
strength of the Spirit, to equalize the pains and panges of a deserved death,
even in the very time of the passion; That so having their minds in this
manner reconciled unto thee, by the godly motions of the holy sole comforter,
they may the more freely, and godlily, fasten upon thy mercies, that neither
through Impatiencie, nor desperation, they be forced, then especially, to
think, speak, or do any thing, which may be displeasing to thy will, and in
fine, hurtful to their Souls health, which thy Son Christ has purchased to
thee upon the Cross, suffering for all sinners.

In this name therefore, and for his sake only, grant these my petitions, I
most humbly beseech thee, o Lord God merciful father, to whom be all praise,
glory, honor, power, and majesty, for ever, and ever.

Amen.
27. A Prayer for the King, and the Counsel of state, and generally for all
Magistrates in their several places under the King.
O Lord, the high, and Mighty Ruler, the great Potentate of Heaven, and Earth,
1. Croni. 29. ver. 11. 12.
whose Magnificence, Power, and Glory, shines in all thy works; For all
things are thine, both in Heaven and Earth; Thine are the kingdoms, of all the
world, and thou art over the Princes of the earth, the most sovereign King and
Prince. For as much as the Pro. 21. ver. 1.
Hearts of all Kings, are in thy hands, and thou enclinest them, and turnest
them, like the Rivers of waters, wheresoever it pleases thee.

And for that likewise thou have commanded that 1. Tim. 2. ver. 1.
Supplications, prayers, Intercessions, with giving of thanks, be made for
Kings, and all that be in Authority for the good of thy people, I, most
gracious Lord, according to thy said will, do most humblye and earnestly
beseech thee, to sanctify the mind of our King, with thy holy fear, that in
a true knowledge thereof, he may continually exercise a godly zeal, wholly
devoted to know thee in the greatness of thy glory, and himself in thee, for
the due administration of that his weighty charge, to the maintenance of
Quietness, Tranquillity, and common honesty among his people; That he so loving
his Subjects, as nature binds one Brother to love another, (for thou have
said, that a Kings heart Deu. 17. ver. 20.
should not be lifted up above his Brethren,) he turn not from thy
commandments, to the right hand, nor to the left, but may prolong his days,
in his kingdom, as the days of heaven, he, and his Sons in the midst of
Israel; And employ his whole power and Authority in the preservation of it,
for which cause thou have said: Isa. 49. ver 23.
Kings shall be thy nurcing fathers. Psalm. 17. ver. 2.
Let him behold thy face in Righteousness, that, receiving strength from thee,
against all thine, and his enemies, practicing Treachery, whether openly, or
secretly, against thy Church, his life, and dignity, may be comforted in thee,
and so delivered by thy favorable countenance from out all Trouble, be always
joyful in thy salvation, and praise thee for thy mercies, in Christ Jesus.

Amen.
Prayers Gratulatorie, or of Thanksgiving unto God, for all his Benefits both
Spiritual, and Temporal, as well for others, as for our selves, in the name
of Christ.
Such are as follow.

1. A Thanksgiving to God for our Creation. To Christ, for our Redemption. And
to the holy Ghost, for our Sanctification.
OMnipotent God and heavenly father, who have thy being before all beginnings;
we glorify thee from the bottom of our hearts, for all thy great blessings
bestowed upon us, as namely, for the Creation of all creatures whatsoever have
life or being; Preservation of them by thy great wisdom; and making them
serve for the use of man; But more especially, for that thou have formed us
after thine own Image, endued us with Reason, giving us Bodies and Souls, and
all members beseeming the Body, together with understanding, judgment, and all
the senses, which hitherto thou have and do most graciously maintain in us;
For preserving and nourishing of us in our mothers wombes; and mercifully
protecting us in our Birth; For which we highly applaude thy holy name, thy
Justice, thy Glory, Might, Power, and wonderful works.

O thou bright splendor of the father, who were neither made, nor created, but
begotten before all worlds; We adore, laud, praise, and honor thee, for all
thy benefits, but especially, because of thy mere mercy (without any desert of
ours) when the fullness of time was come, thou tookest humane nature upon thee,
to deliver us, condemned wrethes, from sin, death, and the power of the
Devil, by the bitter passion, of thy most innocent death, shedding thy most
precious blood, for our sakes, thereby appeasing thy fathers wrath, and
canselling the heavy scrole, which was written against us, dispoiling the
powers of darkness, by thy glorious Resurrection from the dead, and purchasing
eternal life, for all such, as in their hearts, do steadfastly believe in
thee. Oh most gracious Savior, suffer not thy dolorous passion, to be
unworthily regarded, of us miserable sinners; but assist us with thy grace,
that we may from henceforth, dye unto sin, and serve thee in righteousness,
for ever.

O God the holy Ghost, which proceedest from the Father and the Son, of the
selfsame, Eternity, power, and divine essence; We thank thee, for all thy
great blessings bestowed upon us, but principally, for that thou have called,
and conducted us (by thy grace) to be true members of the Christian faith,
communicating thy self unto our Souls, in holy Baptism, and pursuing still,
to complete thine own good work in us. We humbly beseech thee, that it may
please thee, to instruct, and guide us in all truth; Nourish and augment, firm
faith in us; Grant us the right understanding of thy word; Sanctify us, in
calling upon, and believing in thee; Give us inward peace of Conscience, with a
settled consolation, courage, and perseverance; write thou Jesus Christ, within
our hearts, and assure us, by thine own testimony, that thou art our comfort,
against the fears, and infirmities, of the flesh; Strongly defend us, against
all accusations, of the evil Spirit; and confirm us so, against despair,
that through thy gracious promises, we may be fortified in faith, because thou
art our only earnest, for inheriting redemption; Grant us true devotion, and
zeal, in prayer, that in full assurance, and filial confidence, we may cry,
and call unto thee, saying, Abba dear Father; Make us simple as Doves, without
bitterness; that so, receiving thy holy unction, the fire of ardent charity,
may be kindled in us; Renew us, in the inward man; make thy word, and
Sacraments, to have that efficacy in us, that we, being newly r^generate, may
be preserved, from all idolatry, false doctrine, error, and heresi^; Cleanse the
impuritie of our understanding; kill, and quench in us, all disordinate desires
of the flesh; suffer not the affections of sin, to reign in our Bodies; But
make thine own abiding in us, bear sway in all our members; And bring us, to
thy true, eternal inheritance.

Amen.
2. A Prayer upon the Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism.
MOst bountiful Lord and Savior, we give unto thee all possible thanks, and
praise, for all thy blessings, and benefits, bestowed upon mankind; But most
especially, for this thy infinite mercy, in regenerating us, wretched sinners,
by this thy holy Sacram^t of Baptism; making thereby, (as many as truly
believe in thee,) coheires with thee, of eternal felicity; Be thou present
good Lord, and give force unto it; work in us, new motions, to the amendment
of our Lives; that may make us, prudent as Serpents, and innocent, as Doves, as
becomes thy children; Open unto us, the gate of Heaven, that in faith, we may
receive the Grace of God, that adopts; The Merit of the Son, that cleanses;
And the efficacy of the holy Ghost, that regenerateth; That our vices, being
through holiness of life, clean put away; we may come safely, to the promised
inheritance, of thy heavenly kingdom.

Amen.
4. A Prayer for thanksgiving, for the restoring our brother to the Church,
with a petition also, for continuing him in the same.
O Most powerful God, King of Eternity, to whom every Knee, both in Heaven,
Earth, and under the earth, does bow, in reverence of thy glorious name; Who,
by the blood of thy dear Son, Christ Jesus, have brought all wandering
sheep into one sheepefoulde, (which is thy Church*) thereby showing, how
desirous thou art, in mercy, to reduce sinners, from their wicked ways, into
all conformity of true obedi^^^ (...) unto thy will. We heartily thank thee,
that i^ (...) ^leased thee, to bring this our brother, out of the darkness of
error, into thy true light, Reclayming him, from the wicked ways, in which he
formerly walked, and instructing him, more soundly in the knowledge of thy
will; Strengthen his heart, by faith, in the love of thy Son Christ;
Vouchsafe him, a perticipation of inheritance, in thy church; Lighten the
blindness of his heart, with the brightness of thy truth, that, shaking of, all
error, and ignorance, he may truly acknowledge, Christ Jesus, whom thou have
sent, to be the only head of the Church, and, that without him, there is no
salvation, for he only is the way, the Truth, and the life. Grant him, the
knowledge hereof, that he may walk, in the said way, unto life, being a true
Convert, by hearty repentance, and so reduced into the sheepefould, of thine
inheritance, may continue, and persevere, in the same, unto the end, to the
glorifying of thy holy name, for ever, in Christ Jesus.

Amen.
5. The Midwifes Prayer, upon the deliverance.
O Lord God, by whom all men and women, are wonderfully and fearfully made. We
give thee humble thanks, that in thy judgment, toward this our Sister, thou
have remembered mercy, together, with a gracious fruit of her body; We pray
thee, to continue thy great good^esse toward her, and to keep her, from all
further annoyance, and dangers of Childbed; Preserve her continually; and when
it shall seem good unto thee, restore her to her former health, and strength,
that she may employ her self in her vocation, according to thy will, with
thanksgiving.

Bless this Insant, newborn, (...) due time, it may increase, in wisdom,
statu^^ (...) favor, with God and man. Make it partaker, of the s^cred Seal
of holy Baptism; that it may be borne anew; by the power of the Spirit, and
lead a godly, and a sanctified life, in this world, and afterward, be made
heir of everlasting life.

Extend thy goodness in like manner, unto the mother of this Babe, that she
may have strength, and means, to bring it up, to thy glory; and may use all
such good endeavors, as do become, a careful, and natu^all Mother to
perform. Give grace, to all this assembly, here present; and make us thankful
unto thee, not only for this thy mercy, and goodness, But also, for our
creation, preservation, and all other thy good gifts, which thou have bestowed
upon us; And so guide us, by thy holy Spirit, that we continually lauding thy
holy name, may walk in sobriety, and holiness of life, before thee, from this
time forth, and evermore,

Amen.
6. A Prayer to be said, After a safe return home.
I Thank thee, most merciful God, that it has pleased thee, so lovingly to
protect me, from all dangers, both of Soul, and Body, which the miseries of
this wretched world do minister; giving me good success in my businesses; and
a prosperous and happy return, from this my journey, to mine own home, where,
I may safely recreate and rest my weary members. I acknowledge it, to be thine
only goodness, unspeakable love, and mere mercy, that I have escaped them,
and that I am not able sufficiently to praise and thank thee, for this thy
great favor. But, sweet Lord, I (...) ^^ee to be pleased, to accept such
humble (...) ^ur, glory, and deserved renown, as my weak^^ (...) yield; And
give me power, and ^blenesse, to pr^^se thee, as of right I ought, through
Jesus Christ, our Lord.

Amen.
7. A Thanksgiving to God, After Victory.
GReat art thou, o Lord, and meruellous worthy to be praised; Thou, even thou
only, art known to be the God of refuge, unto thy people; For thou have
instructed our hands to war, and taught our fingers to fight, in this day of
Battle, when our Enemies came against us, in great multitudes, and with
strong munition, ready to have devoured us, had not thou, o God, fought for
us, and delivered them into our hands; For, as with an East wind, thou brakest
the Ships of Tharshish, even so were they destroyed; As thou art the Lord of
Hoastes, mighty in Batta^le, so art thou, the God of victory, terrible to
thine enemies, and favorable to thy people whom thou will save, to give them
dominion over them. Let the Nations rage never so furiously, and let the whole
earth be moved, yet will we not fear, because o^r trust is in our God, a very
present help in all troubles, who will never fail to defend us, from all
dangers of enemies whatsoever. Though they be ass^mbled together by thousands,
and should be gathered in multitudes, like the Sa^^ of the Sea* yet should they
be as the Kings of Canaan, in Tanaach, by the River of Megiddo, which received
no gain of money. For, our hearts are fixed in thee, o God, because of thy
word, by which we are assured of thy help, and great del^uerance. For all
thine enemies, and such: as have ill will to Zion, shall utterly perish, and be
destroyed for ever: but they y^ lou^ (...) ^^all be as the sun, when he rises
in his might, y^^ (...) more and more, in thy favor. Wherefore, (...) of
thanksgiving into our mouths, o Lord, that we (who^ thou have made
conquerours over our enemies this day, and have seen thy working in it,) may
acknowledge thy goodness, and especial favor toward us, therein not for our
worthiness, but for thy mercy sake; and so, give thee only the praise, and
glory. For, we confess, that if the Arm of Flesh, might have prevailed, we
had all fallen by the edge of the sword, and bin as a preie unto their Teeth;
But thou, o Lord, did vouchsafe us, both courage and protection, in the
Battle; and by the only strength of thy Arm, have we gotten our selves the
victory; For the which, as we now, from the bottom of our hearts, do yield
thee praise, and thanks, showing our selves joyous in thee, the sole and
mighty strength of our deliverance and conquest; so do we, most humbly pray
thee, to grant us thy favor, for a special grace of thy spirit, to be moved
thereby, the more reverently, always hereafter to adore, and worship thy name,
even, for the Majesty thereof, which is wonderful, in all the world. Lord, I
beseech thee, accept this our prayer, and make us at all times, truly thankful
for all thy benefits, spiritual, and temporal, in Christ Jesus, our Redeemer,
and Savior.

Amen.
8. A General thanksgiving to God, for all his Benefits, to Man.
ALl Laud, Praise, and eternal thanks, be given to thee, o Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, three distinct persons, in the Trinity, but in true essence of
Dietie, wholly united, into an holy, and reverend Godhead, one only God, of
equal power, and Majesty, fro^m all (...). To thee, do I render, al humble
and hearty the (...) all thy loving, and unspeakable kindnesses, (...) ^^rably
powered out upon man. And, to begin with ou^ Creation, how greatly are we bound,
to be thankful to thee, for thinking upon us, even then, when we were nothing?
For, we acknowledge, that there was a time, in which we had no being at all
upon earth. How did it then, please thee, to frame, and fashion us, out of the
slime, and dust of the earth, to give us thereby, a being, and motion, through
a right, and truly proportionated composition, of all the members, and senses,
compacted in a Body, aptly fitted to the same, and, not only so, (which
benefit of bodily being, and Motion, thou have co^ferred also, upon other thy
Creatures, who^ thou have subjected to man,) but also, for a greater
manifestation of thy love unto man, and by him, in some sort, to represent the
glory of thy Majesty, here on earth; thou did create him, in thy Gene. 1.
ver. 26.
Image, according to thine own likeness, which was, in righteousness, and true
holiness; giving him thereby, (b) Ephe. 4. ver. 24.
all perfection, even wisdom, Truth, Innocence, power, etc. so as now, thou
did not only give him a body, with a most stately and eminent shape, far
surpassing all other creatures, which was wonderful and gracious; but did in
like manner, more wonderfully infuse into him, a reasonable soul, by it,
making him equal to thy Angels in heaven. All this have thou done to man, when
as then he could not merit thy goodness, (because he was not at all;) neither
in the outward shape of his body, for the parts thereof, nor in the inward
form of his soul, for the powers and faculties, with which thou have blessed
it. And have thou not continued thy goodness ever since toward man? Yes Lord;
It is confessed, that as thine eyes did see him, when he was without Psalm. 139
ver. 16.
form, and did fashion him beneath in the earth, eue^ covered in his mothers
womb; So thou, the very same thy self, who have created him, and none else;
have preserved him in this corporal existence and being, which thon have given
him; causing the Heaven, the earth, the Sea, the Stars, Fishes, Birds of the
Air, Plants, Trees, Fruits, and what else may be accommodated for the use of
man, to attend and wait upon his bodily preservation, so far forth, as thou,
after the rule of thy general and particular providence, have appointed out
their service, for man's good and thy glory; that man seeiug in them, thy thy
wonderful Romans 20.
power and wisdom, might by them also, be brought to the knowledge of thee;
and love of thy most glorious name.

Neither had this thy Image and similitude, conferred upon man in his creation,
been available to him, (It being obliterated, and in a manner clean
extinguished, through the pollution of sin, occasioned by the fall of Adam,)
had not the last Adam, renewed and revived the same; being made a 1. Cor. 15
ver. 22.
quickening spieuen the spirit of life from heaven; descending from thence, out
of thy bosom, to redeem man from the curse of sin, into which he was
fallen. For which benefit of our Redemption, manifesting thy incomprehensi^le
goodness, and surpassing measure of unspeakable mercies extended toward man,
thus lost, and utterly forlorn. I do worthily give thee thanks; As also, for
that thy most ardent, and singular love, with which thou did redeem me,
coming down into the earth, that I might go up into heaven; made man, that I
might become a God; Suffering most bitter death, that I might live by thee, a
most blessed life. O Lord, for this thy incomprehensible love, I confess, in
the heart, all manner of thanksgiving; But, how can my thoughts which are
sinful, comprehend the worthiness of so divine a benefit? Do thou o Lord, open
my lips, that my mouth may pronounce and show forth the praise thereof. For,
in that thou made me at the first of nothing, I would owe thee more then half
my self, ^f I had more to pay for the same. For, to be brought forth unto this
mortal life, had ^ene to no purpose, unless to be redeemed by thee, had much
more bin auailable unto a life eternal. Thus, thou have then created me; thus
have thou redeemed me; yet it is thy grace, that I see further into thy
goodness; For even from my conception, and time of my birth, how have thou
preserved me? For thou did close my flesh and bones in my mothers womb, and
being not prevented by an untimely death, thou did cause me to see the light
of this world, and to be made a member of thy Church, by Baptism; A great
argument of thy love, and much thanks worthy.

Again, what is it to be borne, not among Infidels, and Idolaters, who worship
stocks and stones; not among hereticues, who blaspheme thy name, and
prophanate thy holy Sacraments? but among true Christians, who are thy Church,
and do worship to thy Mai^stie, in a sincere and sanctified faith.

I know not how to proceed in the commemoration of the benefits which redowne
unto man, out of his Creation, Redemption, and Preservation, through thy divine
providence; O my God, my Creator, my Redeemer, my only Protector, and
bountiful Savior.

Thoughts fail me, to conceive thanks; words are wanting to express the same.
I say with thy Lam. 3. ver. 22.
Prophet, It is thy mercies that we are not consumed, because thy compassions
fail not. I say then, in that thou did create, redeem and preserve me,
therein did thy undeserved goodness greatly appear; For, it is much, of
nothing, first to be made the son of man; and then of a sinful man, and
thine enemy, to be freed of all guilt, and to be made the son of God; For
this is a benefit of great glory that arises unto me, from out the merit of
Redemption, by thy son Christ. And here, o good God, (g) 1. Pet. 1. ver. 2.
though I be ignorant how to praise thee, with a song of thankfulness; yet do I
thank thee for my free election, according to thy foreknowledge, through
obedience, and sprinkeling of the blood of Jesus Christ, whereby thou have
effectually called me unto sanctification of the spirit; inasmuch as thou have
Ephe. 1. ver. 4.
chosen me in him, before the foundation of the world, to be holy and without
blame, to the praise of the glory of his grace, in which I beseech thee,
continue, guide, and direct my soul always, that I may in him through faith
be accepted of thee for ever. For all other thy benefits, of grace, favor, and
mercy, depending thereon; I do also thank thee; namely, that thou have
admitted me into the communion and fellowship of thy Saints, by the Sacrament
of Baptism, and since, have brought me up, in the knowledge of thy true
Catholic Faith, making me thereby, a true Christian, partaker of thy heavenly
Supper, in it, feeding and nourishing my soul, with that most precious food,
of thy body and blood, unto everlasting life.

It is thou only, who by these thy two Sacraments, of Baptism, and of thy
Supper (infusing into my soul the graces of thy holy spirit); have regenerated
me into the life of grace; And it is thou only, who also do conserve,
maintain and strengthen the same grace, which thou have given me by them. What
good purposes soever I have entertained in my mind, What godly motions soever
I have felt; What willingness to do thy will, after the rule of thy
commandments, it it is m^erly thy benefit, eue^ the goodness of thy bounteous
gravity.

For no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy 1. Cor. 12. ver. 3.
Ghost; much less do any good work, without the grace of the said spirit;
preventing, following, attending, a^ding and assisting him in the same ^orke.

And here I must not forget, my daily and continual thanks unto thee, ^ God,
my Lord, my Redeemer, and only comforter; (though I am ^ very unworthy thanks
giver) for that th^^ do daily and continually vouchsafe to speak unto me, in
thy will, unto holiness and sanctie of life; such is thy fatherly care, to
preserve in me, that thy Image and likeness; after which thou did first
create man; This o Lord, is an exceeding great blessing. For by preaching of
thy Gospel, (it being the lively food of our souls,) are we nourished unto
life eternal.

O Lord our Savior, make me and all thy children, truly thankful unto thee
for it; That our England, may never feel that spiritual famine, of hearing
this thy Amos 8 ver. 11.
word; which thou did sometimes threaten, by the mouth of thy Prophet Amos,
to send into the Land of Iewrie.

Also, to come unto the temporal blessings (for without them, this corruptible
airie breath, which we daily draw, could not otherwise continue life, in this
earthie, Tabernacle of dust and clay,) I do thy powerful Majesty like
immortal thanks, for that, out of the bounty of thy divine providence, thou
have from my Childhood, even to this present day, sustained and relieved me,
giving thy daily bread, that is, all things necessary for common life, as
food, and Raiment, and whatsoever else, may be asked of thee, and thou
think meet, in thy good time, to minister to the use of Man. For, thou Ps.
145. ver. 16.
openest thine hand, and fillest all things living, of thy good pleasure; Yea,
the Fowls Matt. 6. ver. 26.
of the Heaven, even the very young Ps. 147. ver. 9.
Ravens, that cry unto thee* and all beasts, does he feed; because, otherwise,
but from thee, they cannot be relieved; And therefore, the eyes of all, wait
Ps. 145. ver. 15.
upon thee, to receive their meat, and nourishment, in due season, as thou
have appointed. By which, we learn, to depend wholly on the (...) ^^structed
thereunto, from the mout^^ ^^ thy Christ, ^^^ling us, to Math. 7. ver. 7.
Ask, to Seek, and to knock. Forasmuch then, o good God, as we have nothing,
but from thee, and that, it is to be obtained, by asking* seeking* and
knocking; Grant, that I praying at all times, according to thy will, in the
name of thy Son Christ, may believe, Man. 1* ^ ver. 24.
that I shall obtain, what I so pray for; as thou have promised; so as, my
prayer, grounded upon true Faith, may come before thee, and my faith secured,
by thy word of promise, may accordingly be rewarded; as it is written, John.
14. ver. 14.
If ye ask any thing in my name, that will I do. And here, I most humbly
beseech, thee that at no time, I either presume, in the strength of faith, to
ask, whatsoever seems good in mine own f^ncie, or, not obteyning presently
what I ^ra^e, be thereby led into desperation, and so become distrustful of
thy providence; or through too much caring for the Matthew. 6. ver. 34.
Morrow, contrary to thy word, to increase the present grief, by a
carefulnes, how to provide for the life* in time to come, which is uncertain,
of any time, to come. But because thou art not only, a bountiful Father,
ministering thy daily bread, satisfying all, that call upon thee, with the Psalm.
147. ver. 14.
fat of wheat; but also, a mighty, and powerful God, protecting, and
defending, from dangers: I do most humbly acknowledge the same, in my self,
and accordingly, give thee thanks, for that, from my infancy, and childhood,
even to this present time, thou have delivered me, from many, and great
dangers, of both Body, and Soul, into which, I had otherwise bin plagued; and
that, without any help, of mine own wisdom, or policy, which I confess,
is very weak, either to foresee, prevent, or withstand, the least assault of
man, and the Devil, without thy assistance. And this have thou done, for me,
most worthy, for my great unworthiness, to have bin utterly cast off and
forsaken of thee for ever. What may I say the^ ^ut that thou art my strength,
and song, for thou ^^st bin my Psalm. 118. ver. 14.
deliverance, and have helped me* when my enemies thrusted sore at me that I
might fall. For, in the multitude of the thoughts of my heart, when I was in
great trouble, and distressed, thy comforts, Psalm. 94. ver. 19.
have rejoiced my Soul; For, I ever found, thy present help. Many more are thy
benefits, and good graces, which thou have bestowed upon man; and which I
cannot in particular recite; as being some of them hid, and unknown, unto me.
For which notwithstanding, I give thee thanks, and so much the greater, by how
much the more apparently, has bin manifested in them, the greatness, of thy
fatherly provident care, over me. For, how many times, have thou bin pleased,
to cause thy vigilent, and attendant Eye, to be, as a Night watch unto me, for
my security, against many thousand dangers, which must needs otherwise, have
assailed, and surprised me in my sleep. It is thou only, that causest man,
whether waking, or sleeping, to dwell in safety, under the shadow of thy
wings, Psalm. 91. ver. 45. 6.
so as, he shall not be afraid, of the fear of the night; nor, of the
Arrows, that fly by day; nor, of the pestilence, that walks in the
darkness; nor, of the plague, that destroys at noone day. I do therefore,
give thanks for them, and in them all, do I bless thy name; for, I have ^id
thy promises in my heart. Psalm. 119. ver. 11. 15.
Cause me always, to meditate in thy precepts; and to delight, in the way of
thy Testimonies; that, my Psalm. 71. ver. 23.
Lips may rejoice, when I sing unto thee; And my Soul, which thou have
delivered; because there is no praising thee, but from the Heart, by which,
thou art truly to be glorified. And, forasmuch as we are commanded to make
intercession^, and to give thanks, for all men, 1. Tim. 2. ver. 1.
of what degree soever; I do here also, yield thee, (o gracious good Lord,)
most humble, and hearty thanks, for that thy great, and singular bo^^tie,
which tho^, of thy goodness merely, have particularized, (...) thy infinite
benefits, unto all men; For, thou art said, to be the Lord, Psalm. 145. ver. 9.
good to all. But especially, am I thankful to thee, for thy gracious
kindnesses, extended toward thy children, whose Psalm. 142. ver* ^
hope and portion thou art, in the land of the living; For thou the Lord,
love the Righteous, Psalm. 146. ver 8.
not only, by giving Psalm. ^3^. v^r. 25.
food, which thou do to all flesh; and feeding the hungry; Releeuing from
oppression; loosing out of prison; giving sight to the blind; keeping, and
defending strangers; relieuing, and comforting, the fatherles, and widdowe;
helping them to right, that suffer wrong, being otherwise destitute, of all*
worlsucco (...) which are thy benefits, common to thy children, with all men;
Yea, with such, as do not call upon thy name; and so, are arguments, of thy
general (e) providence, over all; by which, thy power is manifested, to the
sons of men; and thy mercies known, to be over all thy works. I say, not
only, for thy fatherly preserving care, thus generally provident, art thou to
be blessed, in thy children; but, in a more peculiar sort, do I extol thy
name with praise, and thanksgiving, for them. (For these be they, whom thou
do always, as tenderly preserve, as the apple of thine Eye;) These, when
they fall into sin, by infirmity, thou vouchsafest, to call to repentance,
by thy mercy, seeking them, as if it greatly concerned thee, to find them;
Yea, sometimes also, when they fly from thy face, as if it were nothing to
them, to leese thee; Thus many times, does thy grace strive with their
wilfulnes, that in working their amendment; This in refusing to be retained
thereby, as it were, kicking against the prick; But thou ceasest not, to sound
in their Ears, thy mercy; and to knock at the door of their Hearts, to be
let in, till thou have reclaymed (...) from their lewd ways, and set their
foot (...) right pathe, to their salvation. O, great i^ (...), to forgive
sins; and great is the might (...) thy powerful Ma^estie; of Sinners, to
make iust^^ ^^ righteous; for besides thee, none can do it. And see, how many
and excellent are the benefits, that redowne to thy children, out of this one
thing; From hence is, full remission of Sins; Reconciliation, by the blood of
Christ; Charity; All the gifts of the holy Ghost. Now, is that Sinner, made of
an enemy, thy friend; of a Slave to the Devil, thy Son, and heir of
immortality, with thee, in thy kingdom; Now, the Consciences of thy children,
tells them, that they are partakers, of thy grace of Justification; for which,
they do acknowledge themselves, debtors unto thee, of all praise, and
thanksgiving, for evermore. Be thou therefore blessed, o most bountiful Lord,
and giver of all good, even of thine own self, unto thy children; Yea, and
though thou do sometime visit them, with affliction, Hunger, Imprisonment,
and such like, for their trial, yet, thy fatherly love, and tender pity, is
continually attending upon them, blessing those thy chastisements so, as to
them, they appear nothing else, but evident tokens, and indulgent signs, of
thy great love; For, though they walk in the midst of trouble, yet do thou
Ps. 138 ver. 7.
revive them, and by stretching forth thy right hand, thou do save them,
because thou sendest them, no other temptation, then such as thou do enable
them to bear; till thou sendest them, an issue also, out of all; and a safe
deliverance. These are they, whom the Prophet David called, the Blessed;
because, by Ps. 94. ver. 12. 13.
chastising them, thou did teach them in thy law; that thou may give them
rest, from the (...) of evil, whiles the pit is dug, for the (...) surely
thou o Lord, wilt not Ps. 94. ver. 14.
(...) neither forsake thine inheritance (...) in them, for ever; (...) now, o
Lord, h^ (...) of praise, and thanks^^^^ (...) gracious works of thy (...)
out, into the mention of thy great goodn^^^^ and sing aloude, of thy (...)
righteousness, in a true knowledgement, of my weakness, which is not able, to
comprehend thy greatness, and mighty power? I say with David, What is man that
thou visitest him? or the Son of man, that thou should so mercifully
regard him? For, what could he deserve, to be thought upon by thee, in his
Election, before the world was made; in his Creation, after it was made? In his
Redemption, by the blood of thy Son Christ? In his Sanctification, by the
holy Ghost? In his vocation, Regeneration, preservation, from the annoyance of
Sin, and the dangers of the world? The daily feeding, and nourishing us, thy
children, with the fat of Bread, and plenty, in that measure, as thy heavenly
wisdom saw convenient for us, in the way of godliness? When I call these thy
kindnesses to mind, I am meruailously astonished in the consideration of them,
and my very thoughts fail me; Yet do I humbly pray thee, that I may ever
think of them, that at no time, I be an unworthy receiver; but may always
give Ps. 34. ver. 1.
thanks unto thee, and have thy praise in my mouth continually. Grant, o my
God, and my Lord, even for thy names sake, that this my prayer of thanksgiving,
may be accepted of thee, as a morning and evening sacrifice, wherein thou will
be pleased, for ever, and ever, who art the ever living God, world without end.

Amen.
An Index, or Table directorie, for the Contents of the first Book of this
Volume: and first for those in the Preface to the said first Book,
distinguished by Sections 60.
Section. 1. OF the Excellency of Man's Nature, about all (...) Page. 1 2. Of
(...), etc. 2 3. Of (...) unto the will (...) 4 4 Of Prayer to be (...) Christ
his (...). 5 5 Invocation of Saints, derogatiue (...) Christian Faith. 6 6
Adoration of Saints, of like nature, and blasphemous. 7 7 Of preparing the
Mind unto Prayer, etc. 7 8 Of Necessity for Spiritual graces. 8 9 Of
Necessity for Corporal benefits. 9 10 Of Comlynesse in Praying unto God,
etc. 9 11 Of Comeliness in Praying, etc. 10 12 Of appropriating our Prayers, to
the Nature and Quality of that we pray for, etc. 11 13 Of the sundry Names
and Appellations of Prayer. 11 14 Of reducing these sundy Names of Prayer, unto
two only. 12 15 Outward Gesture to be conjoined with the Mouths utterance,
etc. 13 16 Outward gesture (as before) to be used, etc. 14 17 A Transition to a
Treatise of, etc. 15 18 The effects of such Prayers argued by testimonies of
Scripture. 16 19 Argued by Examples out of the Scripture in the old Testament.
16 20 An Objection against Moses Prayer, etc. 18 21 The Allegation of Examples,
etc. 19 22 Joshua heard, for the standing of the Sun, etc. 20 23 Eliah
restored the Widow of Sereptas son to life. 21 24 Eliah his Example in this
case is not for imitation. 22 25 How to (...) imitation of Man, etc. 24 26
Herein, (...) all other (...), Faith in Christ, etc. 25 27 So (...) a^sie, etc.
25 28 A (...) this Miracle, etc. 26 29 (...) Pitcher of (...) etc. 26 30 The
exterior Gesture of these Prophets and Apostles, etc. 27 31 The imitation of
these, and such like, etc. 28 32 Miracles wrought by the Apostles through
Faith. 29 33 Peter, and Stephen, and Paul, work Miracles, etc. 30 34 The End,
for which Miracles are done, etc. 31 35 The Faith of the godly, is by these
examples, etc. 32 36 Works of Miracles, being works of powerful Faith in
Christ, etc. 33 37 Nebuchadnezzar, and Darius, and Cyrus, great Potentates,
caused of God, etc. 34 38 Obstacles and Impediments, etc. 35 39 The good
pleasure of God, is only to be attended upon, etc. 36 40 Causes, for the not
answering our demands as we expect, alleged, etc. 37 41 All Prayers, of what
nature soever, etc. 37 42 Contrariwise all Prayers, consisting, etc. 39 43 God
only, and none other to be prayed unto, etc. 40 44 Yea, if we know that Gods
will etc. 40 45 Murmuring against Gods Chastisements, etc. 41 46 The ungodly,
and the Godly are of a different sense etc. 42 47 It stands with a Christian
duty to pray, etc. 43 48 Enemies to be prayed, and not to be prayed for, etc.
44 49 To pray for deliverance out of Troubles, etc. 45 50 Prayer to be commonly
celebrated, etc. 46 51 Material Churches fitly appointed, for common places of
Prayer, etc. 46 52 Prayer, not of (...) tide to (...) place, etc. 4^ 53 Every
true (...) Temple of God, etc. 48 54 The place (...) etc. 49 55 Daniel, a
special (...)ple of (...) in a Chamber, etc. 50 56 What is meant by Praying in
a Chamber etc. 51 57 It is a Jewish hipocriticall conceit; and condemned of
Jeremy, to (...) etc. 52 58 The Pharizes, and the Publicans manner of Praying,
etc. 53 59 Pharisa^call praying, etc. 54 60 True Devotion of the Heart fit for
the Chamber, etc. 55
Preparatiues 3. Instructing unto Devotion before Prayer
1 TO reekon with our Consciences. 57 2 To consider the Majesty, and gratnesse
of that Lord, etc. 58 3 To bethink us seriously of the things which we aim
at in our Prayer. 58
The Natures, Virtue, and qualities, of Prayer.
Prayer. 1 FOrmed and fashioned of Charity. Page. 60 Nature. Virtue. Quality.
2 Causes the Soul to ascend, etc. 61 3 Feeds both young and old
Spiritually unto Christ. 62
Places of Scripture for Prayer. 63.

Testimonies of (...) Fathers of the Church, (...) of prayer.
Testimonies. 1 SAint (...) Page. 64 2 (...) 64 3 Saint (...) 65 4 Saint (...)
65
Impediments withdrawing our Minds from true Devotion. 7.
Impediments. 1 Our Sins. Page. 67 2 Compunction, and sting of Conscience. 68
3 Delight, and Content in sensual Consolation. 69 4 Overmuch ^aring for
worldly things. 69 5 Wearying both Body and Mind, the one with daily labors,
the other with continual Study. 70 6 Curiosity. 71 7 Deliciousness of Diet,
and Banqueting. 73
The Remedy for the said 7. Impediments.
Remedies. 1 NOt to obey Sin, etc. Page. 67 2 Godly sorrow unto Repentance.
68 3 The Souls only comfort in God. 69 4 To cast our Care upon God only. 70 5
A discrete and moderate using of both the Body and Mind in the vacancie of
Time. 71 6 Sobriety in Matters of Knowledge, and in all outward things. 72 7
Fasting and Temperan^^* 75
The (...)

Helps (...)
Helps for Devotion. 1 AN earnest and vnfei^ed love to seek after heavenly
(...). Page. 78 2 A Resolution for diligent perseuering in the same. 80 3 A
watchful Guard of the Heart and Soul. 81 4 A heedfull guarding of the Senses.
86 5 A continual Remembrance of God. 90 6 A continual Practice of godly
exercises. 93
Meditations Morning.
Meditations. 1 The Preface to them. Page. 103 FOr the Morning. 105 Admonitions
thereto belonging. 106 1 At the first appearance of the daylight. 107 2 At
your rising out of your Bed. 107 3 At your apparelling. 107 4 At your going
abroad. 107 5 At your going about any Business. 108 6 A prayer of
Thanksgiving, etc. 109
Meditations Evening.
Meditations. For the (...) Page.110 Evening (...) Admonitions (...) Prayer for
(...) 112
A (...) 114 A (...) holy Communion, and has (...) 120 Considerations* (...) 1
The Spiritual^ (...) of greater esteem, then the Mater^^^^. 120 2 The purer
our Preparation is, the greater the Grace to be received. 121
The degrees to this belonging. 4.
1 A true Cognition of our State, by 1. Nature, and 2. Grace. 122 2 An
unspotted Faith. 122 3 A true Repentance for Sin. 122 4 A Reconciliation of
our selves with our Neighbors, etc. 122
A Sacramental comparing of 1. Things. 2. Actions.
Things. 2 Things in the Sacrament, sensible and Spiritual. Actions. Page. 125
2 Actions also sensible, and Spiritual. 126
Actions Sensible of the Minister. 4.
1 The taking into his (...) Signs. 126 2 The (...) 126 3 The breaking (...)
126 4 The giving (...) 126
1 The taking (...) 126 The eating the (...) 126
Actions (...).
1 Sealing and Signing Christ, etc. 126 2 Sending him down, etc. 126 3
Subiecting him, etc. 126 4 Offering him, etc. 126
Actions Spiritual of the Receiver, 2.

Actions. 1 Apprehending Christ by Faith. 127 2 Applying him to himself. 127
Motives. Page. Exhortatiue Motives unto Christian Instructions, for the Lords
Supper. 128 A Confession of our unworthiness, etc. 133 A Prayer Consolatory,
etc. 137 Dogmaticall Instructions upon the Lords Supper. 150 Animaduersions
upon the said Instructions. 154 An Exposition upon the words of Christ in Saint
John's Gospel. 6. 51. etc. 164
(...).
1 (...) 171 2 (...) 172 3 (...) 172 4 (...) 173 (...) frail Nature (...)
The Index, or Table contained in the Second Book of the Prayers of this
Volume, digested into four Heads, as follows in their several places.
(...) Page. 1 ^ 4 Prayers of a (...) 4 A necessary, (...) God his ho^ 5
1. Prayers (...), of a (...).
Prayers Petitory. 1 A Prayer to the Trinity, etc. Page. 7 2 A A Prayer for
the obtaining of Faith, etc. 8 3 A Prayer for Sobriety, etc. 9 4 A Prayer for
true Chastity. 10 5 A Prayer for Spiritual joy. ^0 6 A Prayer for Grace,
Wisdom, etc. 11 7 A Prayer for a good purpose, etc. 13 8 A Prayer before the
Catechizing, etc. 15 9 A Prayer after the Catechizing. 19 10 A Prayer before
the hearing of Gods Word Preached. 21 11 A Prayer after the hearing etc. 22 12
A Prayer for the Sabbath day Morning. 23 13 A Prayer for the Sabbath day
Evening. 24
Prayers Supplicatorie, and Deprecatory. 34.
Prayers Supplicatory. 1 A Prayer of the acknowledgement of our unworthiness,
etc. Page. 26 2 A Prayer for remi^^^on of Sin. 27 3 A Prayer (...)
Conscience. 27 4 A (...) ingratitude etc. 28 5 A (...) the Devil, etc. 41 6 A
(...) 41 7 A (...) undertakes a (...) 42 8 A (...) 44 9 A (...) 44 10 A Prayer
(...) 45 11 A Prayer in the (...) for Scholars, etc. 46 12 A Prayer in the
Evening, after Schooling. 48 13 A Prayer general, for any Student, etc. 49 14
A Prayer at the entrance into the Church. 52 15 A Prayer for the fruits of the
earth. 52 16 A Prayer in ti^^ of common H^st^^tie. 53 17 A Prayer of a
General. 54 18 A Prayer of a Soldier. 58 19 A Prayer of Humiliation. 59 20 A
Prayer in tempest^ous weather. 64 21 A Prayer of an Admiral. 64 22 A Prayer
against our Enemies. 67 23 A Prayer to be defended from our Enemies. 67 24 A
Prayer against Desperation. 68 25 A Confession of Faith. 71 26 A Prayer to be
said at a man's departure. 72 27 A Prayer at the burial of any, etc. 73 28 A
Prayer of Widows. 76 29 A Prayer of Orphans, etc. 77 30 A prayer of men
Seruant^. 78 31 A prayer of maid Servants. 79 32 A praer of Teachers. 80 33 A
prayer of one that is afflicted in Conscience for sin. 82 ^4 A prayer, for
the cause of (...) etc. 103
Prayers Interc^^^ (...) ^8.
Prayers (...) 1 A Prayer (...) Page. 84 2 A pray^^ (...) 85 3 A pray^r (...)
88 4 A prayer for the (...) 89 5 A prayer for (...) Palatine, and the Lady
(...) 92 6 A prayer for the (...) 93 7 A prayer for the ^igh Court o^
Parliament. 94 8 A prayer of the Church, etc. 95 9 A prayer for our brethren
that are in aduersi^^^. 96 10 A prayer for the right Honorable the Lord Ma^or,
etc. 97 11 A prayer for the Couns^ll of (...) 116 12 A prayer ^or S^a-sating
m^n. 11^ 13 A prayer for the honorable state of Matrimony. ^22 14 A prayer for
friends, and B^nefactors. 125 15 A prayer to be said a^ all times, for the*
etc. 126 16 A prayer for our brethren Excommunicated. 127 17 A prayer for ou^
brother, truly ^ep^ntant, doing Pe^an^e, etc. 12^ 18 A prayer of a Midwife,
for a woman in travail. 130 19 A prayer of Children, for Parents. 131 20 A
brief Prayer of a Child for his Parents. 133 21 A prayer of a Child, for his
Parents. 133 22 A prayer for Children. 134 23 Another prayer for Children. 135
24 A prayer for such as come to visit a sick person 137 25 A prayer in time of
Sickness. 137 26 A prayer for Prisoners etc. 139 27 A prayer (...) to be said,
when thou go out (...) v^siting them. 140 28 A (...) Counsel of State,
(...) 142
(...) ^sgi^ing
(...) 1 (...) ^o God, etc. Page. 144 2 (...) of the Sacra(...) 146 3 A (...)
^he restoring of our (...) 147 4 The (...) the deliverance. 148 5 A prayer to
be said after a safe Return home. 149 6 A Thanksgiving to God after Victory.
149 7 A Geneall thanksgiving to God for all his Benefits to Man. 151
FINIS.

