English Paradise.

DISCOVERED in the Latin prospect of JACOBS Blessing.

GENESIS 27.27. Ecce odor filij mei sicut odor agri a domino benedicti.

PREACHED AT S. BVTTOLPHS without Aldersgate at London, on the holy Sabbath
commonly called Trinity Sunday, in that ioifull season of the festival
solemnities for the blessed creation of the most gracious Prince of WALES.

LONDON Printed by WILLIAM HALL for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at the
Star at the west end of Paul's. 1612.

TO THE MOST VVORthie Knight Sir John Hollise, Comptroller to the Prince his
highness household, prosperity with aeternitie.
SIR, it is long since you did first look on me with your helpful favor. I
have for twenty years after those times stood below in the common place of
the Church: yet sometimes I have been drawn up above the obscure shades of
the Country, and by forceable entreaty, risen higher then is ordinary for such
an heavy lump of refuse metal. Pistillo retusius.
And being in London at a festival triumph, I was a partner of the common joy
for the joyful prosperity of our most hopeful Prince of Walls. Then and
there I was pressed forth (aere amicabili) with a friendly motion, to become an
actor in that great assembly. I must confess. I was willing on my way, which
made my labor more light, so that I hallowed that holy Sabbath with two
Sermons, as a pair of Pigeons, or two young Turtles. Luke 2.24.
I did wish richer offerings to bestow in such a solemn sacrifice of Vows,
but I brought my best, to testify for my heart. What though I am unworthy of
respect, as the least Bell in the Temple (imo ne tintinnabuli in fi^bria
vestimenti Araonici) not worth a little Bell upon the skirt of Aarons Ephod.
Exo. 28.33.34
Yet I thought it my duty without any entreaty to ring my Bells that day in the
holy place. When I had comfortably ended my days work, it came to pass
beyond my thoughts, that one of my auditors and I exchanged thoughts. He as it
seemed a francke Popeling, of his charity offered me his thought, that I was
too officious. I for a present reward bestowed my thought on him, that I was
excusable, as the man which being requested to go a mile with his friend would
go twain. Matthew. 5.41
I was willing to be warned and to take better heed to double diligence,
abundans cautela non notet. Here I resolved never to perach up to the press,
among the learned sages and holy writers: Vitiligatores tantum extimescens.
therefore did I seriously resist all loving importunities intising me to
venture loose coppies of this and other my weak labors into the hands of my
chief friends.

My reason for my denial was, quia nescit vox missa reuerti: a man may shoot
forth two arrows with more ease and speed, then fetch one back again. Yet
now at the length I have yielded my self, and presumed to send my first fruit
to my first friend living, in your acceptance to live or die. I must confess my
desire is that you would accept it as a welcome present of my humble thanks
((...)) and think my thanks as hearty as I meant them. You have heard the
cause wherefore I stayed these twins at home so long after their birth, with a
centurie of their naked brothers. Agrippo steri^or.
I do willingly acknowledge mine own poverty, by which I thought my self
unable to cloth them with decent apparel. And I was ielous of their rude
education, least I should hear worse of them abroad then at home. If I have
been too slow, I crave pardon with my fear to be too hasty. Ne incalciatus
in montes.
Let it be said of me, that I am too like to many of Adams kindred and mine
own: that I have learned more good rules then I can observe, as that of
Columella: Matura satio saepe decipit, sera semper mala est. Yet I rest in hope
of your love which I have chiefly loved. I might add some expert extenuation
of this service which spark of Art may better become my betters. Namque si
Scotista Rhetoricetur, he is easily espied, vt Graculus inter musas. It is
enough for me in this illustrous age of high Science, and rich Art, Craesi
pecuniae teruncium addere. Therefore to prevent many needless words, in these
few I yield my self to owe so much unto you, that I must remain your debtor
for ever, and

yours Ih. Wh.

ENGLISH PARADISE.
GENESIS 17.17. Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field, which
the Lord has blessed.


IT may be, that some among you, do no more need a Seer, to show you the
mysteries of this Text, then Eagles want spies for the space of their flight:
Job. 39.32.
Their eyes behold afar off. Yet I must make bold to tell you, that which
some of you can scarce believe: That this Text is Paradise. And it is more
likely so, because the head of it is Ecce, and Christ is Ecce, the head of
Paradise, of the Church, as the husband is the wives head. Ephesians. 5.23.
Christus est fidelium domicilium aeternale, vt Paradisus erat innocentum
temporale. The rivers of this Paradise, are these four; Odor, Filius, Ager,
Benedictus, all issuing out of Ecce; as those four rivers which did run out of
the head fountain of Eden. And out of Eden went a river to water the garden;
and from thence it was divided, and became into four heads. Christ is Ecce,
the head fountain of Eden, propter eminentiam, continentiam, influentiam, for
beauty, plenty, and bounty: a fountain opened to the house of David, Zach.
13.1. The riches of Paradise are excellent, for in the floods of one river is
Gold, and Bdelium, and the Onix stone. In the Gold is truth, glory, and
incorruption: Genesis 2.12.
in Bdelium, mercy, sweetness, and medicine: and in the Onix, faith,
advantage for the sight of the eyes, the glass of the soul. 1. Cor. 11.
Come forth ye daughters of Sion, and behold king Solomon with the Ecce. He
shall give you drink out of the river of his pleasures. Psalm. 36.8.


In the Ecce of my Text, Mercy and truth are met together, Psalm. 85.10.
righteousness and peace have kissed each other: all holy streams of
Paradise. Holy streams indeed, for every one of them is a river of this
Garden, Numb. 20.11.
running out from Ecce, for the relief of thirsty souls, as the waters which
gushed out of the rock abundantly.

1 Odor is mercy, all sweet smell of mercy, life to the Church, life in
Christ, Ludolphus. Psalm. 141.2. Vt apes praecique flores quaeritant, ita sancti
misericordias dei. Caietan. Arbor sufficiens and resiciens vt mortui resurgant
or resumpti viuant in aeternum. Ioh. 14.6. 1. Cor. 1.20. Psalm. 42.12.
in whom all our prayers are as incense, and the lifting up of our hands, as
the evening sacrifice, all sweet.

2 Filius is truth, the word of eternal life, and stands here, in the
midst of this little garden, dropping dewes of heaven to water it; as the
tree of life in the midst of Paradise. In caeteris erat alimentum, in isto
etiam Sacramentum: By other trees the body had sustenance, by this the Soul
instruction. Therefore was it called, Arbor vitarum: Christ is the tree of
lives. Behold the tree of life in the midst of the garden, on whom the lives
of all the Saints do depend for ever. Christ is the truth, and the life of the
Church, all sure.

3 Ager, is righteousness: O inualuable righteousness of Christ, where we
gather all our righteousness: for Christ is made unto us righteousness. Iste
est regula, nos regulati: He is our guide, and we his followers, as lives are
guided by their soul. Thus are we made to flourish like the Palm tree, and
to grow like the Cedars of Lybanus, all fair.

4 Benedictus is peace, our healthful peace in our dear peace offering, our
redeemer, whence we receive our heavenly requiem, and rest from all our
labors, all blessed.

Thus we receive our lot of inheritance, Coloss. 1.12. S. Cassianus. Ioh. 20.
among the Saints in light, vnitatem socialem cum angelis in vinculo pacis, The
legacy of the Prince of peace. Irrequietu^ est cor nostrum, O bone Jesus donec
quiescat in te: O sweet Jesus, how our hearts do pant till they rest in thy
peace, that we never pant any more. Here you may perceive a comely Quadrant of
the Sovereign Ecce, like that beautiful type of the Temple, whose borders were
four square. 3 Reg. 7.31.


The Church is also resembled by the Quadras: a precious stone four square, S.
Ambrose.
of despected color, yet of respected virtue. Quadratura significat
stabilitatem Ecclesiae: the quadrant imports sound resolution. But it is likely
that some will ask, where is Dominus, the great Master of the household, he
which is Lord of the smell, the Son, the Shield, and the blessing: In whom, by
whom, for whom, and from whom, mercy, and truth, and righteousness, and
peace, and all things are. Romans 11.36.
(In all things, let me understand what I say, and tell you what I do
understand: S. Augustine.
Omnes vtique naturas intelligere debemus quae naturaliter sunt, neque enim ab
ipso sunt peccata quae naturam non servant sed vitiant: We must mean all
natures which are pure issues in natures for from him are not any faults which
do not conform nature, but deforme it.) Now then, to that question I answer,
that I cannot show him, when he goes by one, I see him not. Job. 9.11.
If I go to the North where he works, yet I cannot see him: Job. 23.9.
he will hide himself in the South, and I cannot behold him. Enoch is said to
walk with God, but he was taken up into the Eagles ned, and no more seen:
Genesis 5.24. 4. Reg. 2.11.
Elias went to walk with God, but he was rapt up in fiery chariots, and no
more seen here, till the transfiguration for a fit. Man here cannot see so
far, as to see what God is. Therefore Moses, when he was on the lower Mount,
did hide his face at this excellens obiectum, Exodus 3.6.
which does dazell man's presumptuous intelligence, more then the Sun does his
piercing eye: the Sun is a creature, God is the Creator, finitiad infinitum.

Some say, that Isaias was therefore slain, S. Hierome.
for saying that he did see God; yet (without peradventure) he did see him,
iuxta possibilitate^ humanam, non vti est, sed vt voluit se videri: so far as
man could see, who cannot see God, as his desire is to see, but as Gods
pleasure is to be seen.

You may remember, when the Lord was asked for his name, his answer was, I am:
wonderful and past understanding. Exodus 3.
We grant in good meaning, that there is meridiana visio, when we shall see
face to face, when we shall know that wholly, 1. Cor. 13.12.
which we know now but in part. But that meridian sight cannot see God fully,
to comprehend or measure him: Deus ad plenum non cognoscitur in via, neque in
patria: Isichius.
The sharpest sight, either at home, or abroad, cannot discern the fullness of
God. We shall know him to the full, S. Augustine.
for the sufficiency of our felicity, which shall be perfect, and to the
capacity of our glorified conceit, which shall be great, but not infinite, as
God is: and so is nothing else. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy
Image. Psalm. 17.15.
Many millions of painful considerations have been enrolled in the monuments
of the Church, of the Secrets of God; which are all, but as all the nations,
Esa. 40.15. Alcuinus.
as the drop of a bucket in comparison, or as a drop to the Ocean. Some
have desired to tell us what God is of himself, and what he is to us. That of
himself he is all length, id est, eternity; all breadth, De us est Sphaera
incomparabilis, cuius centrum est vbique, circumferentia nusqua^.
charity; all height, majesty, all depth, wisdom. That he is to us, our
possessor, he abides within us, and is not contained; our guard, he remains
without us, and is not debarred; our king, he continues above us, and is not
moved; our rock, he supporteth us for ever and is not confined. I might point
out unto you, many glosses of fair show, and all short of that which the
Apostle in few words attempteth to this purpose. 1. Tim. 6.16.
He only has immortality, and dwells in the light which none can attain
unto, whom never man saw, neither can see. Yet in all our walk through this
garden, we shall see his beams shining upon it, and with faith, hope, and
love, admire his presence, whose seat is in the pillar of the cloud. Eccles. 24.
Now then let us proceed to consider, first, the head of this Text, with the
antecedents; and then the four quarters, with their correspondence.

In every part we find three consutes.

1 First, historical narration pleasant, in Jacob. 2 Secondly, mystical
signification splendent, in Christ. 3 Thirdly, congruent application
honorable, in the Prince.
In the head, Behold, I must crave favor to walk a long procession.

The Lord had promised a blessing to Abraham, in the number and honor of his
issues: count the stars, if thou can; so shall thy seed be: numberless as
stars for exceeding plenty, glorious as stars for heavenly beauty. This
promise was sure, yet it came on with leaden feet; Abraham was long without a
child, and Abraham was longer without the child of Promise: Artopaus.
quanta maiora, tanta longius protracta Dei beneficia, vt sint chariora vt
Isaac, Christus and vita aeterna; The greatest blessings seem many times a
great way off, that we may more desire them, and bid them better welcome. At
the length, that Ecce, and wonder of the world was borne (for none of the Lords
words shall fall to the ground) one living fruit of two dead stocks; 1. Sam.
3.19.
his father an hundred, Genesis 17 19.
and his mother ninety years old. Ask his name, it was Isaac, all laughter;
Genesis 21.6.
well may he laugh which winnes, well did he win, which did win Christ, in
whom all the nations of the earth are blessed. Isaac praeludium Christi de quo
fideles rident, Guil. Lugdunensis.
and ex quo omnia Dei dona in fidelibus rident: Isaac was Christ his prologue,
for whom all true hearts have pleasant thoughts, and all fair gifts of God in
his Saints, are through him very delectable. But yet the blessing rests, ad
aras, as if God had every day a consultation with himself for the progress of
this blessing. Isaac was not directed to his wife, till he was forty years
old, Genesis 25.20
and Rebecca was barren till twenty years after. What is Gods promise come
utterly to an end? no: all this stay was the whetting of Abraham's faith, and
the exercise of Isaacks patience, longing for Ecce. Quamuis in Isaac promissa
esset successio, tame^ implenda erat precibus Dei praefinitio: Albeit the Lord
had given assurance of succession in Isaac, yet the performance was so
ordained, by zealous petitions it should be obtained. The prayers of them both
in good time prevail with God though sorrow continue for a night, Psalm. 30.
yet joy comes in the morning, after prayer. They and their assistants pray
for a blessing, and the blessing falls double on the ground. Cant. 7. Genesis 25.
Rebecca's two sons are like two young Ro^os that are twins; for Isaacs wife
conceived, and she bare two nations in her womb. She for a while went
weeping, 1. Sam. 1.8. Psalm. 126.
as Hannah did (albeit she had an husband better then ten sons) and
carried precious seed, yet she did return with joy, and brought her sheaues
double. Vita humana plus aloes qua^ mellis habet. Genesis 26.
I shall not need to fill this Ecce with the various and perisous temptations,
which came to Isaac. If I might show them all, you all might marvel that ever
he could reach this Ecce. Let this one instance suffice, which was a lamentable
distress upon him, Wallensis.
that he had not so much as sweet waters to nourish him: Fidelium profectus
impij non ferunt aequanimiter: Auicetus.
The wicked pine away at the prosperity of the godly. All his enemies labor
utterly to subvert him, and every neighbor seemed to him an (...), Aristotle.
laboring to subvert him, that he might be utterly ruinated: but the Lord was
his deliverance, as he has been ours in an oppression much like, or worse then
this. For what portions of truth we have found in the word of truth, as wells
of living waters, to nourish us and our children, the Popelings vitiate them.
De caudis vulpes cognoscas and de fimbrijs texturas.
They either equivocate upon them (this their double dealings) or hide them by
the ingruences of their multiplied Index expurgatorius (fall shood in
fellowship) or stop them up with glosses and earthly traditions (this their
pack of knackes) lest our Chruch should thrive too fast. But some will say,
why say you so of the Papists, they are our neighbors? It is true, as the
Philistims were neighbors to Isaac: Envied welleth at the next door:
Quotvicinos habemuo totidem hosts.
and a man does often bring his worst companion from home. (...), our kinsmen
are our inbred vipers; as Parsons, and eiusdemfa rinae millenarij: and
thousands of the same unpurged leven.

Here is the cause why we have so much a do to keep clear waters in the
wells which our fathers have dug: Hi sunt qui Ecclesiam in vagientem
extinguere and adultam conati sunt haretics. Genesis 26.15.
they for very spite have filled with mudde, and stopped them up with earth,
which they have dug out of their infernal pits to this purpose. Thus the
Philistims had envy at him, and filled up with earth all the wells which his
fathers servants dug in his father Abraham's time. See then how unlikely it
is for us to hold in the breath of divine knowledge, as for Isaac to abide in
the spirit of life, if God were not with us. Sed a Deo adiuti refodimus puteos
paternos ab inuidis palestinis obturatos: but in the name of the Lord we
discovered our fathers fountains, which Philistinian envy had hidden from us.
Thus the Lord was on Isaacks side: Fear not Isaac, for I am with thee, and
will bless thee, and will multiply thy seed.

Now then to go on with Ecce, behold on thing more strange: Rebecca's two
children were at strife in the mothers womb, like the two Hebrews at strife
in the field. Potuit esse naturalis causa, sed accessit mystica and
supernaturalis: for that wonder, there be reasons rendered in nature, but there
was a supernatural respect above reason. The two younglings are both
wrestlers, Hipolitus.
both wrestling for a wonderful prize, for a blessing, a birthright, a
crown: O blessed crown of immortal glory. 1. Pet 5.4. Rupertus.
Collidebantur paruuli eodem Dei nutupermoti, quo irrationalia pecora and
inanimata elementa futurorum praesagio permoueri solent: The tender younglings
werre stirred to their conflict, by the same motion, in which we sometimes see,
both beasts without reason, and elements without life to stir, that their
stirs might be Calenders of after-claps. Luc. 21.
So shall there be signs in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars. Surely the
guerdon was greater then the wrestlers thought of, yet their thoughts seem to
contend for the prize, which the weaker winnes by grace. The Weezell does raise
his force against the Basiliske for sovereignty in that place where they meet,
and she being armed with Rue, Succus rutae palet contra serpents, vt gratia
Dei ^ontra Diabo^os. Rupertus. ^. Hierome. Septuagine. Symmachus.
prevails in the combat. Thus the younger sapling Iaacob being armed with
the herb of grace, vincit fratrem Basiliscum, he puts his brother to the
foil. The strife is diversely described in the variety of translations: some,
conquassare to shatter, irruere to rush one on another: some, confringebantur,
collidebantur, they did offer mutual violence one to another: some, (...)
ludebant and calcitrabant, they did kick one the other: some, (...) in
similitudinem nauis in superficie ferebantur, they seemed to swim in their
mothers belly. But here a Scholars brains may swim in superficial
observation to little purpose. We yield to that which we read with approved
judgment: Fratrum diuortium portendit ebrionum collisio. ^ucherius. ^aietane.
Sed non omnino est certus modus commotionis infantum: The mutual violence
breathing on those tenderlings unborn, did presage their separation after
their birth.

The good woman perceiving a strife in her womb, as of contentious inmates in
the Bee-hiue, she went to ask the Lord for the meaning of that strife; Genesis
25.22.
Seeing it is so, why am I thus? I may not trouble you with the bundles of
opinions how she was answered, or by whom. It is needless to argue, whether
it was Sem or Melchizedeck, or they both at once; or it was Heber, or (as some
think) it was Abraham, as it is most like, for circumstance of time, place,
and person. His person (above the rest) was of nearest acquaintance, of surest
faith, and evident grace of revelation, for he was a Prophet. Genesis 20.7.
The opinion of the most learned is, that she went to ask the Lord, in the
Science of some famous Patriarch, at that time as Abraham was. Whosoever
resolved her, the Lord sent her word by him what should betide her, and the
Church word by her, what should befall the Church.

These are the rare blossoms of Ecce. Behold two manner of people shall be
divided out of thy bowels, faithful and unfaithful out of one stock, pure
and impure fruit of one tree, true worshippers and heretics in one Church,
sincere holy servants, and profane counterfeit obseruants, as a grape and a
brier-berrie both of one vine, a lamb and a woolfe both of one damme. Beda.
In Ecclesia sunt ficus and vna Christus, tribulus and spina Diabolus; In the
Church are both figs and grapes, for Christ is both figs and grapes; and in
the Church are both briers and thorns, for the devil is both briers to catch,
and thorns to hurt. Job. 1.
And on a day the sons of God came and stood before the Lord, and Satan was
also among them. Abraham's sons are compared to stars and sands. Stars are
the heavenly sons of Jerusalem, as Iaacob: Sands are filij terrae, sons of
the flesh, earthly proud inhabitants of Babylon, as Esau. Behold it was then
posterior dies, melior auis, the latter day, the better bird. The elder shall
serve the younger. Iaacob did excelle his brother, 1 iure primogeniturae: 2
haereditate terrare sanctae: 3 praerogatiua faederis and Ecclesiae: In the
right of the best birthright, inheritance, and covenant. In three fair
pre-eminences. In the first is signified the spirit of adoption, by which we
are sealed. In the second, our heavenly country, Ezech. 37. Tacita. Object.
to which we are called. In the third, the life of the Church, out of which
there is no life. Here our dry bones are quickened. But let this be true, that
thus the elder prerogative was fastened to the younger: yet (non obstante) it
could not be true in their specialties, because still the elder did preoccupate
jurisdiction over his brother. Yes; Respons.
howsoever Esau for a time made a more potent show for prioritie then the
younger, yet was the Prophecy true, both in the letter and the mystery. In the
letter true, for the Idumaeans which were of Esaus issues were tributarie to
David which was of Iaacobs generations. Some do understand it, Comestor.
and ingeniously also, that Esau did serve Iaacob, whilst he did persecute him,
as the fyle does service to the iron, to make it more bright, the fan service
to the corn to cleanse it, and the furnace service to the gold to purify it.
The truth is, that Esau did Iaacob more good then he meant him, as Iaacobs
sons by selling of Joseph to vilify him, did promote him to honor. Deus
aliquandiu impiorum indulget petulantiae, sed modum statuit and Ecclesiae
tandem fontes dilatat, Infideles Ecclesiae ruinas in discinctis vinculis
inte^dunt vt Q. Fabius naues diuidendo aquis immersit. Sed Ecclesia vt
tyrrhenus lapis integer enatat.
vt impiorum furores nihil ei incommodasse appareat quin idem propagasse; God
does sometime wink at the injurious attempts of the presumptuous, but at his
will he does restrain them and enlarge his Church, that her health may shine
out of the bond of adversity, and her enemies blows end in her advantage.
Here I might rejoice, to handle the right hand of Gods provident power, but I
must contain my self within the limits of Ecce in this place. See then the
truth in the mystery, above the letter. Jacob came last, but did ouer-flie his
brother Esau. First, that which is carnal; then that which is spiritual: the
old Adam came first, and the new Adam came after: O melior auis! The Eagle bird
had Eagles wings, and did mount on high above his brother. Such is his
magnificence, That the Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, etc.
Such is the superiority of the second Adam, that in his exaltation he had a
name given him above every name. The elder must serve they younger: and glad
may Adam be, that he and his may do service to Christ; as the sheaues which
did reverence Joseph's sheafe: for in Adam all die, but in Christ are all made
alive. The Scholars of Pyrene, Mystae gentiles.
and the wanton heads of the Temple, infamous at Corinth, did object that
Christ died as did Adam, the younger brother as the elder. The Apostle grants
this for truth, that both died, yet the difference of their death is notable.
Both died and paid the wages of sin: Sed mors Adae poenae peccati mors
Christi hostia peccati, The death of Adam was the penalty of sin, the death
of Christ the redemption of the sinner. This prepotencie was worth an Ecce,
Behold in Christ all things are become new, for with his wounds are we healed.
Fidelis medicus is est qui pro infirmo mortiferum ebibit remedium vt sanetur
infirmus.
And in the reuewe of Jacob and Esau here is Ecce again, Behold white and
black, good and evil, light and darkness, life and death in two sons; as
if Rebecca's breasts did yield two kinds of milk, wholesome milk for Jacob,
as the Hebrew mother; corrupt milk for Esau, as the Egyptian nurse. And now
Rebecca's breasts are not like the Equiuocators text, both true and false, they
are both of one wholesome taste, one hallowed kind of milk. The second
testaments are both one sincere milk of the word of God, they are both of one
truth, and spirit of life: as there is but one Lord, faith, baptism, hope, and
salvation. Christus est veritas aeternalis, and verbum est veritas normalis,
Christ is the eternal essential truth, and his word is our rule for truth.
There is but one God, and one word. Vnus veritatis fons est Deus, and verbum
vna veritas in omnes filios saliens; God is the only fountain of truth, and
his word is the living water flowing into his childrens hearts, as the pure
river of water of life, clear as Cristal, proceeding out of the throne of God,
and of the Lamb. Rebecca's breasts are one holy Scripture, and all holy
Scripture, as one heavenly Canaan, which flows with milk and honey, of one
savor and power of life. But whence then is the difference of these two
brethren? shall I climb up into Gods throne, and sit with him among the secrets
of his incircumscriptible predestination? no, I will reverence the Arc of his
secret treasures, but I will not search it without warrant. Here is abyssius
imperuestigabilis, which S. Paul calls deepenesse, Romans 11.33.
(...) all immense, beyond weight and measure.

Here Pride may busy her self to do much hurt, as some Epicures, Nigidius
figulus. Eudoxus. Auerrois. Esa. 28. 1. Sam. 6. Eccl. 40. Electos and reprobos
certo consilio discreuit Deus, illos ad vitam gratis destinando hos ad poenaem
just ordinando. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 96.13
and other Philosophers, and other Schoolmen have done. But woe to the crown
of Pride, her latter end is worse then the beginning; as the Bethshemites were
stricken in their hinder parts. None can comprehend those secrets, more then a
man can hold the seas in his fist, or measure heaven, or count the sands, or
weigh the mountains. If any bold bayard shall say, there is no preordination,
because he cannot fathom it, it were as if the blind should say there is no
Sun, because he cannot see it. Let this suffice, that God has chosen his in
Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid. If any ask, how? let
the Apostle answer: of his mere good will, forestanding all causes in our own
worthiness. God calls all to the Church, and in eternal and indissoluble
prescience espying vessels of honor, and wrath; the one sort is chosen, the
other left, as light ware at the balance: Thou art waighed in the balance,
and found too light. Unto this point is annexed, the recogitable odds betwixt
the elections of God and man. Those things which man chooses, are therefore
chosen, because they are weight, but the gold of gods choice, is therefore
weight because it is chosen.

Thus did God love and choose Israel, not because they were better people then
other, but they were better, because God did choose them: The Lord thy God has
chosen thee to be a precious people to himself, and All Popish Atheism, and
other blasphemous insuitations against God, for election and reiection of Jacob
and Esau, were easily dashed, if I should prefer Gods prerogative above the
Popes. We are certified long since, Distinct. 40. Si Papa.
that if the Pope do carry many thousand with him into hell, no man may be so
bold as to co^trol him quia cuntos iudicaturus a nemine est iudicandus, etc.
Because the Pope may judge all men, and may not be judged of any. But I have no
pleasure to idle out my precious time with such trifles. One thing I have to
speak out of lowly and reueiled knowledge, in the discussions of the learned,
concerning the Be and the Spider, to manifest the work of grace received.
Whatsoever of the word of God Jacob suckes, the suppe is honey, Esa. 55. 2.
Cor. 2.16.
or wine, or milk, more worth then money, or money worth, all sanctified, the
savor of life unto life. But whatsoever Esau suckes, it turns to humor,
corrupt, and accursed, the savor of death unto death. Ioh. 10. Ioh. 6. Prou. 9.
It is not given to all to know the voice of the shepherd, to taste the bread
of life, or to savor the wine of wisdom; as many in the same garden pass
many wholseome herbs and flowers in ignorance, or insensibilitie, which
others gather in knowledge for smell and taste. Meierus.
Iudicia Dei credentibus mella sapiunt, sed incredulis etiam mellitissimae
promissiones sunt fellis plenae: The judgments of God are an honey comb to
the believers, but to the unbeliever the sweetest promises of God are
bitterness. If any call to me, to know why I call this bane, humor; in
pro^ptu causa est, for the word is of the same fashion with those evil
thoughts, affections, words, and deeds, which our countrymen commonly call
humors. Sunt impij vt venenatae quaedam bestiae and sues bonos odores non
ferentes: The wicked are like some venomous and fulsome beasts, which are sick
with the breath of wholesome smells. Deuteronomy. 32.
Their vine is of Sodom, the poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes.
But since the wicked ones do thus wilfully foreshew their own ruin, let thee
elect be still gathering more joy to their consciences, and rejoice that their
names are written in heaven.

Now then to pass on, Luke 10.20.
lest I should loose mine Ecce in the plain field. Behold, the two twins were
at strife for the blessing, which was a dignity annexed to the birthright, as
an excellency united to the crown: whosoever holds one for ever, must have
both. They strove for the birthright before their birth, and in the very
inslant the strife continued, for Jacob had Esau by the heel. Signum
retardantis eum qui prior erat, Genesis 25.26 L^o^orus.
and fatigantis eum qui fortior and praeualentis in certamine pietatis; It was
a sign that the better should overtake his elder, that the weaker should
overcome the stronger, and true piety win the masterie of false sanctity.
What was their contention ended with their birth? Gen 25.31. Hemingius.
Inaequacior qua^ Glauci and Diomedis permutatio.
no, the strife continued still for the birthright: Sell me even now thy
birthright, and Esau swear unto him, and sold his birth right unto Jacob. Esau
as the fool sells heaven for earth: Jacob as the wise merchant buyeth the
pearl. Now Jacob is become son and heir to the crown of Gods blessings.

The blessing is not yet declared upon him, but he is as sure of the blessing
as of the birthright. Thus was the preeminence of blessing upon Ephraim,
before Iaacob laid his right hand on him, Psalm. 139.16
(for in the volume of thy book were all things written, before there was any
of them,) but it was not manifest till then.

A Doctrine of comfort is this to all which have received that saving grace
which is sufficient. They are as sure of glory as they are of grace, 2 Cor. 12
because glory belongs to grace, as the inheritance to the heir, and the
blessing to the birthright; yet so, as birthright, blessing, grace, and
glory, and all are of Gods gift, Romans 6.14 Mercedem opibus delitam negamus,
gratuitum fatemur, nemo dicat deum debere. 4. talentae quia duo dedit, vel
bominibus deberi gloriam quia impartitus est gratiam. Mar. 14.25 Leuit. 23.39
Gwerricus Abbas.
not of man's merit or worthiness by the Law, for ye are not under the Law, but
under grace. The time of glory is next to the time of grace, in the surety of
succession, as the time of the feast was next to the time of the vintage. This
is now the time of the vintage, the sweet wines of the Scripture and
Sacraments of Christ and the holy Ghost are pressed out, that after we may
drink anew of the fruit of the vine in the kingdom of God. When ye have
gathered the fruit of the Land, ye shall keep an holy feast unto the Lord.
This life is the season of gathering sweet grapes of grace, next is the feast,
the time of glory. But I must remember where I am and bind short all other
circumstantiall tidings together. Esau proud, Esau contemnes his brother (vt
Diobolarem) as the irefull Woolfe the little Kidde. He sold the title but he
purposes perforce to hold the inheritance. In which example were may take a
view of the common Centaures and Cyclopes of the world, which hold al per fas
et nefas, all by strong hand: he will have all lawful which is unlawful, and
will be as the Lion was, his own caruer. Neither was that fraus vulpeculae
wanting in Esaus designs; for to strengthen himself that he might be able to
bear down his brother, he makes matches with two wives, without liking,
consent, or knowledge of his parents. He was as the Scrpent, which was more
subtle then any beast of the field, clandestinas aucupatur consultationes
contra iustitiam et pacem, Brunus.
he puts the snare of the hunter, to overthrow all righteous peace with
noisome pestilence. This is the man which will be more wise then God, his
meaning is otherwise then God meant. He will match especialy, Genes. 12.7 26.3
with the Princes daughters of the Philistines, whom the Lord did purpose to
root out. In these coherences he pretends peace with all men. A peaceable
man is Esau, he will have peace with all the world. It was then with him, as
it was long after with the Arrians and other succeeding Hererikes, in their
subtle contriuements: just as it is now with the Romanists, when their show is
best, their intent is worst. But all this great have to be great, Ose 1.7
was without good speed; and all his confidence in the flesh of man's arm is
vain: for he cannot hold that inheritance by bow, or sword, or battle, or
horses, horsemen, or kins-men; whose tenure was not of the willer not runner,
Rom 9.16
but of the mercy of God. Much like to this was Salomons seducement miscarried
with worldly wisdom, to confidence in carnal power. He concludes matches
with his Egyptian neighbors, Moab, Ammon, Edom, Zidon, and Heth; and yet his
great son and heir for all his fathers cunning, 3 Reg. 11
lost ten Tribes at once of his own kingdom. What says Roboam after the
extinction of his father? 3 Reg. 12
what? My little finger shall be greater then my fathers loins. O Roboam by
me Kings reign, but the arms of the wicked shall be broken. Psalm. 37.17
Afterward when Solomon slept with his fathers, Roboam had a smarting feeling
of Gods power in the proof of Ahijah his Prophecy. 3 Reg. 11
For as the Prophet caught hold on the new garment on Ieroboams back or his
own, and rent it off in twelve pieces; so Roboams new kingdom was rent from
his Scepter, and none followed the house of David, but the Tribe of Judah only.
Had not he cause to cry out as he fled to Jerusalem for fear, crucior bolum
tantum mihi esse, ereptum tam subito e faucibus; I am troubled out of measure,
Psalm. 119.137
to see my meat in spite of my teeth to fall out of my mouth, and my self
unable to withold it: but just art thou O God, and just are thy judgments.
And thus it does often prove with them which make their reckoning without God
as Mauritius did; the cast of their anchor is prevented, their treasures are
but coals, and their nuts but shelles, Psalm. 146
both their pleasures and profits are cut short of their accounts. Therefore
trust not in Princes, nor in any son of man, for there is no help in him.
Think then (if it be thus) that those malepert confederacies of surly Esau
with Infidels, (both against faith and good manners) were as pricking thorns
to Isaac and Rebekah, Ge. 26.34.35
But Isaac after many tedious days of his wearisome pilgrimage (his eyes
being dim) expects his end, and to set his house in order before he die,
he disposes himself to his last will and testament. He knowing also that Esau
was numerous in children, Zeno.
and cunning in his plots; and that Jacob was both childlesse, and wifelesse,
and plain: he does fully purpose to bequeath the great predominancy to the
elder brother. Make me sauoury meat such as I love, and bring it to me that I
may eat, Genesis 27.4
and that my soul may bless thee before I die.

By these thoughts of Isaac we may perceive, that God sees not as man sees
(ante pedes) only, for man purposes and God disposes. All is Gods to dispose
or transpose at his pleasure, as he tranlsated the Egyptian riches to the
Israelites hands, I. Osorius.
that they might handle them better. You know that when Iaacob was to bless
his son Joseph's two sons, so that his right hand was upon the younger son,
and his left hand on the elder: incongrua videbatur illa manuum impositio
Iosepho ignaro prouidentiae Dei, that imposition of hands which was orderred by
Gods providence, looked like an injurious fact to Joseph, not being at that
time acquainted with Gods purpose: Joseph did think his aged father was in
feebleness and error, Genesis 48.17 Iunilius.
and would have changed his hands. Surely a good man was Joseph and a Prophet,
but not always enlightened alike with the spirit of prophecy, nor for all
things; therefore his father being better guided with a superior degree of
light at that time, continues his blessing, and creates Ephraim the son of
his right hand: Genesis 48.19
So that as then the primacy was given to the younger brother, Prouidentia Dei
est ordinatio aptorum mediorum ad finem.
contrary to the fathers desire (the Lord ruling the lots) thus must it now be,
by the disposition of the same power. And now it is plain, that Esau has met
with his match; he is wily for himself, but God is of counsel with Iaacob.
Look upon the contriuement; Esau is sent on hunting whiles Iaacob takes the
prey (coruum delusit hiantem) and is instauled into the blessing.

Here let Esau complain that he has waried himself in the ways of
wickedness, drawing out the cords of vanity, Quid nisi victis dolor. Esaias
59.5 Luke 5.5
and weauing the Spiders web, and at length is become as the fishers, which
labored all night and caught nothing. In a word, these words of my text lap in
the reason of inducement to Isaac to do that which he meant not to have done.
The Lord is such a considerate and powerful agent in the business, that Isaac
does cheerful bestow that good turn on Iaacob which he reserved for Esau.
Why so? S. Bernard. Odor Christi sentitur antequa^ videatur, vt corpus
aromaticum ante patres, et post filios emittit odores.
because he did not smell of the rankness of the sheep-coate, but of the
pleasures of the field.

The blessing does consist of two respects, as a garden of pleasant fruit, and
delicious smell. Here are prayers for Iaccob in prophesies, and promises of
his sweet and wholesome fruits: And here is the praise of Iaccob for his
delightful smell.

Isaac his motive, whereby he was invited to bless Iaccob, is plain in these
words: Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord
has blessed.

Now after all this inference of Ecce, it may be said to me as once it was to
the Citizens of Myndus: viri Myndij claudite portas, shut your gates least your
City run out at your mouth, and your little corporation vanish through your
great heat. Indeed a great gate may be too wide for a little pingle; but albeit
I cannot now cut my door less, yet I may well enlarge this garden plot to
make it greater, so may the proportion be more equal.

First then to fit and finish up this portall, Ecce behold: The word is very
specious in the original Ree, and in the translation vide, but commonly Ecce,
as if the meaning were to call all the world to come and see, Ioh. 1.46.
as Philip called Nathanael to Christ, come and see. The word is sometime of
ostension, sometime of admiration, and sometime of both. Ostension is again
two fold, by their counterfeit shadow, or true exhibition. Of counterfeit
shadow; as behold here is Christ, and there is Christ, Mat. 24.
a counterfeit shadow: of true exhibition: as behold the Lamb of God, John 1.
O true exhibition. Sometime Ecce is of admiration and stands at a gaze, and
does gaze at a wonder: behold a Virgin shall bear a son, miraculum
mirabiliter mirabile; a virgins child and God and man, both one, a light of
all maruelles. A man so weak that he must die, Psalm. 76.3.
a God so strong that he could conquer death: behold, there brake he the arrows
of the bow, the shield, the sword, and the battle. Selah Behold a wonder. In
some places this Aduereb Ecce is of admiration and demonstration both together,
and diversely of diverse strangers, either difficult, or new, or sudden.

Now may you stand upon the top of Ecce as upon a mount, and behold all the
pleasures of this text, as the plain of Jordan watered eueiy where. First the
difficulty of this Ecce is note worthy that ever Jacob could rise to this
blessing, Christ ascend to his glory, and the Prince of Wales attain to his
Principality.

Where was the Ecce of Jacob when his father Isaac was in offering for
sacrifice, Genes. 22. Genesis 27.41.
or whilst his brother Esaus Vow stood on foot to sacrifice his brothers blood
to his fathers funeralles: The days will come shortly of mourning for my
father^ (...) where was the Ecce of Christ, the glory and riches of his
Godhead, Difficultate parts periclitatur ecclesia, sed euincuntur hosts vt
Gorgones a Persio, vel verius vt Draco a Michacle
when as the Serpent in the wilderness, he was lift up upon the cross, and
one of the soldiers with a spear piersed his side?

Where was the Ecce of the Prince, when the Lion and the Lions Whelp were vowed
to the massacre, inconspiratione plusqua^ Catilinaria in the gun
powder treason. We do read of Catiline that firebrand of old, that to fasten
his confederates in their merciless intent, he did mingle man's blood with
wine, as Pilate mingled the blood of the Galileans with their own facrifice.
This drink thus prepared, he carried up and down, to his partners, as the
Priests of Rome do now bear their host and consecrated wedges, here and
there to their abetters. When he came to place and company fit to his purpose,
he did in this drink carowse and swallow up his impious vow: In this draught
all his associates must follow him, to make their sword drunk with the blood
of their Country, and wholly to subvert the present glory of Rome.

But this monstrous Catilines brood among us, Job. 31.33.
was more monstrous in eating and drinking, (as they supposed) the blood of
Christ, to ratify their vows, concealing iniquity in their bosoms. Thus they
did bind themselves in an holy league, like Roman Saints of these days, to
rejoice together for the final expiration of King and Prince, and the
mournful desolation of Church and common wealth. So every man may see, how our
Ecce has escaped fire and sword (by God mercy) for the honor and joy of
England.

But is it difficulty alone? no, it is noucltie also. There are novelties past
in the holy Testament, novelties present in the new children of regeneration,
and novelties to come in the stole of glory. The new Testament was a novelty:
the Lord had written the old law in tables of stone, but that the pen of the
Writer should indite a law in the inward parts of man's heart, this was worth an
Ecce. Nouitas amaena, full of delicate and healthful pleasure. Behold the days
come, Ier. 31.31.
that I will make a new covenant, etc. The wise man said in his time, there was
nothing new under the sun, yet every regenerate man, young or old, Eccles.
1.10.
is a new creature. Both these are true, because our new birth is not of earth,
but of heaven, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, 1. Pet. 1.23.
above the Sun. All the adopted sons of God, are borne, not of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man; but of the will of God, our new birth is
above the Sun.

Thus is Jacob a new man, a new creature in Christ: O Christ Jesus; Gal. 8.
Psalm. 65.11. Vt ignus fortis forti flatu fortius inflammatur minutatim.
all my fresh springs shall be in thee, for thy steps drop fatness. Thus is
the Prince, a Prince of God, Abner his fathers candle lightened with fire from
the Altar, whose sweet conditions, tempered with the oil of grace, bear
witness, that he is not only borne of an earthly king below, but borne
again of an heavenly King above; that the King above, and the king below, may
both rejoice in their son: Behold the small of my son, etc.

But Ecce again, behold a sudden joy: sometimes wonderful things break out
of their closets, as lightening out of the clouds, when there is not any
expectation or hope attending; and sometimes when desire more or less is
waiting for their appearance. Of the first sort was the sudden light which
came down from heaven, outward, before the face of Saul to astonish him; Act 9.
inward, into the heart of Saul, to convert him; that of him it is rightly
said, Tamsubito Cygnus qui modo consonus erat: Who could persuade himself,
that a crow in a trice could be turned into a swanne. Of the second sort, was
that light of angels, and the spirit of God. Luc. 24.4. Act 1.10.
There were some looking for Christ, and behold two men stood suddenly before
them in shining vestures. There were some looking on Christ, and behold a light
did shine suddenly from heaven. Act. 2.
There were some gathered in daily expectation of the comforter (whom Christ
promised to send) and suddenly there came a sound from heaven, Nescit tarda
molimma, gralia. S. S.
as of a rushing and a mighty wind. What then, came those illustrious messages
without hope, or no? Indeed hope was much weakened, as one travailing long is
weary; but it did but seem weak, they hoped still for that vigorous
resurrection, they looked still for that glorious ascension, they longed still
for the gladsome coming of the holy Ghost. Beda.
Yet all those marvelous, virtuous, famous works were sudden. As we all
look for that hopeful appearing of the Judge of quick and dead (and how long
soever his stay may be, with whom a thousand years are but as a day) hope
makes not to be ashamed, Spes est sanctorum baculus, de quo sustinentur, ne
cadant, and sustenta^tur ne deficiant. Matthew. 24.27.
yet for all our serious vigilancie commanded, it shall be sudden: As the
lightening which flies from the East to the West, so shall the coming of the
son of man be.

O blessed Jacob, thy long promised blessing is come suddenly, in a day thou
thoughtest not: our blessed Savior anointed with the oil of grace above his
fellows, was long and often foretold, yet is his coming exceeding sudden:
Therefore call his name, make haste, make speed, Esaias 8.
speed to the pray, and haste to the spoil. Our gracious Prince his honor
has stated long in the glowing ears of ten thousand, whose eyes burned with
zealous desire to behold it. And behold of a sudden the smell of my son.
This is the stem of honor for which great Britain did sacrifice their daily
prayers, our bounteous Queen did breath out her just desires, our renowned
king did yield his sacred promise; and now of a sudden is that joyful day
come, the day of playing of Organes, of singing of birds and sounding of
Trumpets. Now is the day come, in which king James does pay his vows, his
vows to God, his right to the Prince, his honor to the Land, his favor to
the subject, his word to the Queen, assuredly thy son Solomon shall reign
after me. 3. Reg. 3.30.
O King live for ever. Vita hominis sabillum animae, The life of man is but a
small point, and has slipperie hold on earth. Lex mortis firma non abrogatur,
mutatur, Bosquier.
dispensatur, etc. Deaths doom is bound up so fast that it cannot be loosed.
It is set down that every man must die once: Serius ant citius mortem
properamus ad vnam: I am persuaded, Serniamus regi precibus, qui seruit Deo
legibus.
that neither Queen, nor Prince, nor any Impe royal, that none truly noble
or gentle, or true Christian, desires to see thy last day. Yet is man's life
but a span long, and now here is a pawn for the state, a nurserie for grace,
the standard to religion, a beauty to the crown, the peace, health, and
wealth of the land; this is Solomon the Kings son. Behold, the smell of my
son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed.

Thus much for Ecce, the head of the Text, and head of the springs: Behold.

Now to the Smell, the first river of the head. Here might I show you many
delightsome turnings to many wholesome walks in this word. There is odor merus
and metaphoricus. Again, odor metaphoricus est Christiaut Christianorum. But I
must necessarily pass by these paths, till I find other opportunity, and more
leisure. The common partition of Odor is into good and evil; but what have
we to do with evil? Quid argijs cum sacrificijs, quid canibus cum sanctis:
There is no communion betwixt God and Belial: without shall be dogs and
idolaters, Apoc. 21.
all their smell is of the sulphur of Sodom. Et si doctores illi scientissimi
and ductores aulici porcos obscaene defaedatos ne vno digitorum ostendant aut
verbulo corripiant, quid ego miser homuncio aut Balaami asinus. I know that
books and sermons, which are admonitions of other men's faults, as the black
bill, are exceeding necessary in these times of darkness; but they are all
out of my way. All our labor here should be spent in searching out the good
Odours of Jacob, Christ, and the Prince: and thrice happy both they, which have
Christ the savor of life betwixt them. All their sweet smell is of the savor
of his ointments. O blessed Savior, Cant. 2.3. Cant. 1.2.
these are the virgins which delight in thy savor: Thy name is as an ointment
powered out, therefore the virgins love thee. But it is high time to distinguish
of good Odours.

There is a good odor of piety, a sweet sacrifice, Phil. 4.18. 2. Cor. 2.15.
2. Cor. 2.14.
a good odor of good report: so Saint Paul his name had a good smell, a good
odor of the Gospel: so is it a garland all of sweet flowers, a good odor of
zealous prayer: so is it as the perfume of the Censor. Apoc. 8.4.


Shall I tell you more, what a savor is there where all these meet in one
soul, as the incense of one altar; pure religion, sweet conversation, true
faith, and holy love, they are altogether as the offering of Noah's Altar. And
Noah built an Altar to the Lord, and took of every clean beast and of every
clean bird, and offered burnt offerings to the Lord. Genes. 8
How them? what was the issue? Read further: and the Lord smelled a savor of
rest. Such is the smell of all faithful hearts as the smell of Noah's Altar to
the Lord: Iaacobs heart is as Noah's Altar. Behold the smell of my son. But I
have more in my way of my poor readings, in which I find good odours of many
distributions. There is one smell of the flower of the Vine, S. Gregory.
another of the Olive, of the Rose, of the Lilly, of the Violet, and of the
Corne-eare; and all sweet.

The Vine is Faith, the Olive is Victory, the Rose is Charity, the Lilly is
Chastity, the Violet is Humility, the Corne-eare is many corns, good works in
their ripeness all in one odor. Such Vines, and Olives, and Roses, and
Lillies, and Violets, and Corne-eares were the Philippians, Phil. 4.18
an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God. Such
as Israel whilst the dew was upon him, he shall grow as the Lilly, Ose. 14.6.7
and fasten his roots as the trees of Lebanon: his beauty shall be as the Olive
tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

Iaacob had the Vine, true faith in his heart, his father Abraham's faith: not
an agnus Dei about his neck, or hanging in a tablet at his breast, Fides
purificans cor, est vna, integra, vera, viua. Ioh. 12.3
as some abused Saint John's Gospel; but a sound faith growing within and
without his heart, all his affections as the branches of a vine, for his
Savior all the vine as a bower to rest in, and all the bower as the house
filled with sweet savor: what a smell is the smell of this vine.

Jacob had the Olive victory in his faith, Colos. 1.13
against all Principalities, and powers of darkness: he was short of Christ
in respect of circumstance of time, but he had the substance which cheered his
heart at all times, with thoughts of his Captain the Siloe, the Conqueror, the
Lion, Genesis 49
whose paw should be in the neck of his enemies. By this power Iaacob wanne
the victory of the world, so sweet is the smell of this Oil.

Jacob had the Rose-loue in his faith, Ezekiel. 47
whose leaves did not fade, invincible love as appears by his wrestling. Let
me be gone (says the Angel) for the morning appears. Genes. 32
What? let thee go, my life and my glory; I will not let thee go unless thou
bless me. Lord let me love the smell of this Rose.

Jacob had a Lilly chastity, in his faith a fair Lilly, within the borders of
his paradise, Eccles. 50.8
as the Lillies by the springs of waters; white as the light, and fair without
spot. His brother hastened to his Cananitish women, and sent an ill sent into
the souls of his parents; yet Jacob kept his vessel in holiness. O honor,
let me counsel you all to keep the smell of this Lilly. 1 Thessalonians. 4 4


Jacob had the Violet, humble devotion, in his faith the Violet grows low by
the ground, so does humble devotion to daily prayers, Bartholomaes Genesis 17.3 1 Samuel 1.13
as Abraham fell upon his face, and Hannah was humbled before the Lord. Shall I
stay you a while, to hear Iaacobs daily prayers. All ye which live in plenty
or scarsity, remember Iaacobs Vow. We are all in our iourny as Iaacob was, and
desirous as he to come to our fathers house, our father which is in heaven.
Iaacob vowed a Vow, saying, Genesis 28.20
If God will be with me, and will keep me in my journey which I go, and will
give me bread to eat and clothes to put on, so that I come again to my
fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God. Here was sweet
contentment in a lowly estate: humble contentation was Jacobs staff, which did
flourish all with Violets, as Aarons Rod did but with flowers and almonds; with
this staff came I over Iordane. Surely there is an wholesome breath in the
smell of this Violet.

Iaacob had the corn ear the fruits of faith, Nomb 17.8 Genesis 32.10 Gal. 5
Genesis 41.5
those praiseworthy fruits of the spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long Suffering,
Meekness, Temperance, Goodness, all specious upon one faith; as those seven
ears of corn rank and goodly all upon one stalk. Shall I make bold to
inuit you all to taste this corn, for the smell of this corn ear.

Now Prince of Wales, where is thy smell? Have thou neither Vine, Olive, Rose,
Lilly, Violet, nor Corne-eare? Surely then thou art a poor Prince, and they
are poor whom God hates: Behold here, the smell of the favor of God to the
Prince. The Prince has them all as Jacob had them, he is all Suckoth, Suckoth
as the Tabernacles of God, his eyes, ears, lips, heart, all Suckoth; Tents
of godliness, pitched in Rephidim the mansion of the medicines of Gods
blessings. The Philosophers describe an house of desire: non quidem, opulentam
et ambitiosam, stuffed with the pelf of the world, and faced with proud
ambition: No, sed cui nihil testit in se supellectilis, with works not any
thing of necessary use, (...). Behold, here is that house as that happy little
world all furnished with necessaries. And here is one thing more then all those
necessaries and more worth, Luke 10.42 John 13.1
that one thing which is necessary and cannot be taken from him. For whom God
loves he loves to the end. This the smell of my son.

The Prince has the Vine, the Gospel in his faith: it is the fountain in
which he does daily refresh his soul; it is the lauour through which he does
daily wash himself. This is his Basin and Ewre of honor, the Gospel is the
Ewre, his heart the Basin.

This is a Princely Bath, the Kings Bath all perfumed with health, all with
saving health. Let young and old, and all wash themselves in this Bath. Knights
of the Bath, all the which are soldiers in this militant life, under the
banner of Jesus Christ. Christ is the Prince, who gave himself, Ephesians. 5.26.
that he might sanctify you and cleanse you, by the washing of water, through
the word. The Prince is knight of the order of the comely order of King
Solomon, Cant. 4.15.
washed in the springs of Lebanon, perfumed with Spikenard, Saffron, Calamus,
Cynamon, and all sweet spices. Cant. 4 2.
Knights of the Bath, come forth like a flock of sheep, in good order, which
go up from the washing: come forth, as the daughters of Sion, and behold King
Solomon with the crown, in the day of the gladness of his heart. Knights of
the Bath, come forth, and behold your Prince, let him be your looking glass,
as the ruiers of waters are to the fair doves washed with milk. The Prince is
bathed and washed in lordan seven times, the leprosy and luxury which does
commonly cleave to the youth of our age, even to the sides of their house, is
washed away.

It is written of Otho, Suetonius.
one of the Emperors, that he repaired often to his glass to see his face,
that he might keep it clean. The Prince (as report tells us) goes often to
his glass, the streams of the waters of life, Psalm. 23.
the still streams where David walked. Indeed David calls them waters of
comforts, right worthy of that title, where he perceived himself saved, by the
washing of the new birth, in the blood of the vine.

Thus is the Prince washed, Tit. 3.5.
his heart cleansed, his affections purified, his delights sanctified, Nobilitas
morum plus ornot quam genitoru^
all like clusters of the vine: who would not smell at the smell of this vine?

The Prince has the Olive victory in his faith, victorious holiness. It was
told us long, our eyes were blessed with the sight of our most prudent King,
that he has the print of a Lion upon him: I do believe it, though I did never
see it, that the Lion of the tribe of Judah is printed upon him; he has put on
Christ. And lo, here is a lion again, the print of a lion, the son of his
father; the rpint of a lion, the image of Christ, which the most gracious
Saints do rejoice to be. But where is the Lions victory? where but in the
conquest of the Lion of Judah? Thanks be unto God, who has given us victory
in Jesus Christ our Lord: masterie against the sins of the world, suggestions
of Satan, buffets of the flesh, blasphemy, intemperancie, scorn, ire, revenge,
all common serpents brood, yet all killed in shell; all common, as worms in
the fruit, yet all cast away in the budde; the serpents are quelled, the sweet
bud remains: who will not try the smell of this Olive?

The Prince has the Rose love in his faith, a blessed rose, a fair
complexion, the complexion of the fairest, the beuty of the Church, the
colors of Christ, the white rose and the red: My beloved is white and read,
the chiefest of ten thousand. There are diverse kinds of love, as the love of
nature, so love birds one another; love of consanguinitie, so love kinsmen;
love of reason, so love heathens; love of grace, so love Christians, which both
love God, and one another. The Princes rose is Christian love, the cheerful
love of Christ.

It is said, that love makes a man strong, rich, and wise, and here it is
proved; for the Prince his love has done marvelous things for him, whereof
we rejoice. His love is so strong, that with no strength of the old Satan's, he
can be pulled from the truth: Omnia vincit amor. His light so light, it cannot
be turned into darkness. His love so rich, set with the pearls of Gods
favors, and beset with the hearts of the thousands of Israel, that he himself
is as the chiefest of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.
who in all things were made rich, and they all rejoice to think on all places
whereon the soles of his feet do tread. His love so wise, that he needs not
any man to teach him, his annoynting teaches him all things.

It is written of Alexander, that he had a precious stone, which so long as he
kept it, did preserve him from poison. I pass the credit of that story, and
am well pleased to behold the Princes rose, which the rose of roses has given
him for a preservative against poison. No incha^ted tokens of Egyptian women
can deceive him, no mincing, equiuncating pursenets of those Priests can catch
him. Schaenobitae were of old Sophistical old women, which to seem fair,
painted all their spots, and filled up the wrinckles with smooth oil. And now
are the Schaenobitae a live again, Jesuits in their fashion, to put all out of
good fashion, Romish, Spanish, French, Flemish, English Schaenobitae, yet here
they loose their lanthornes. Pauones sunt, some say they are Peacocks, because
they have colors of an angel, the pace of a thief, and the voice of a devil.

These birds have sit so long in such ease on their nests, in the dark places
of the kingdom, that they have hatched here many birds of their own feather.
What are they? Gentlemen, and Ladies, and their followers, Peacockes birds,
begot with child with many children, sins, and errors, treacheries of that
Peacocke of Rome. Thus are there among us many wives and children of
fornication. O say these of their dammes, Ose 1.2.
who cannot be taken, their lips drop honey combs. Prou. 5.3. verse. 4.
O say we, who dare be taken, their end is bitter as worme-wood, and sharp as
a two edged sword. These are Lamiae, witches, which kill those which suck
their milk, Lamiae translated dragons; the dragons draw out their breasts:
Lam. 4.3.
many in Campions time here in England, Amos 3.
did fly to him, as birds to the fowler, and are taken: Can a bird be taken in
the snare if there be no fowler? Let me speak to all our skillful women,
which have turned after Baal, and made Baalberith their God. I would ask this
question, what are your Priests? and say you, you Clergy men in England are
vultures and cormorants, but our holy Priests are harmless gnats. It is true
dear Ladies, for our part, that in some things we sin all, as yours do, and we
arrogate no super-arrogant perfections as yours do: when we have done all, we
are unprofitable servants, we are all compassed with our infirmities, as the
Priests were of old, which were better then your priests: and for the sins
sake, we are bound to offer for sins, as well for our own part, as for the
people. Heb. 5.2, 3.
As for your priests, we grant that it is as true also, they are your gnats,
which humme about your ears, with lullabies of Security to your consciences.
They are gnats indeed, and so, if they be not bruized as they fall, or caught
flying, they sing till they sting; and then as the Waspes, when they have
thrust in their pikes, they fly away, when your rest is gone and your peace
diseased. Thus said a Camaeleon lady of Campion.
Hear one of those Ostriges sound in your ears, O tongue of an Angel. You may
call him Barachel, all blessing, and bowing the knee to God. His name may be
Barionah, the son of a Dove, all spirit of meek enesse, Seruus seruorum, he
will lie like a straw at your foot till the blast come. Vt vipera curuando,
sic iste humiliando ingreditur: As a viper enters his crannie by bowing, so
these enter your hearts by crowching. But though he speak favorably, Prou.
26.2.5
believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart. His name is
minorum minimus, The least of the Apostles: O gentle heart: the minorite is
minimus indeed, vt mus in panario, or as the mouse in the garner, which
minisheth the finest flower, and leaves the brans for them which maintain
them. They love to live like mise and rattes in many men's houses, always to
their hurt, Luke 22.31.
where they fare best. These are Satan's sisters, and Peter, Satan has desired
to sift thee; and at length, this son of a Dove does become an Harpie in the
Church, Bar-Ionah is changed into Barnabas a thief and a murderer. Their
brotherhood does compass our gallant heads like a crown of rose-buds; but in
the end it proves a crown of thorns. Thus might ye all have reported, man,
wife, and child, one to another, of their brotherhood, if their spirit had sped
at Westminster. Ahohi my brother is my thistle and my thorn. These are your
ghostly fathers, these Cymerij, they never see the sun, they will not depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. These make all their
Proselytes Cimerios, they never see the sun, they cannot, Job. 21.14.
they are carried hudwincked: a lamentable estate of ignorance, they shall
never depart out of darkness. Yet these Cymerij, as we read of others, have as
they think, images of the sun, and pictures which are their gods, of
advantage, by tradition, vpon-trust, only believe as the Church believes. If
these holy Catholics thus devoted to images, do by mischance loose their
gods, alack good people, it fares with them impatiently, as it was with
Laban. He searched Jacobs tent, and Leahs, and that of the two handmaids, and
last of all Rachels. Wretched poor Laban, his daughter had a womans excuse
ready to disappoint him, that neither could he find his gods, nor his gods
find him. Surely his gods were dead, or in Endimeons sleep, or at the least
in a slumber with Epimenides, that they could not hearken to their orators, no
more then Baal to his priests. Yet for all those infirmities of their gods,
these holy fathers proclaim openly to their children, omnia been, all their
parishioners are in good health, and they say privately to themselves, A ha, I
have warmed my self: lo these are our Ladies precious gods.

If I had skill in their tongue, I could call them Pedlers in French, dicunt
album and intendunt nigrum; they have an heart and an heart, Ose 10.2.
like those Partridges of Paphlagonia, neither one haunt, nor one way, for
their haunt is divided. There is a question anciently descended, and easily
answered: Why there are so many sheep, and so few wolves, since men and wolves
do eat sheep. Indeed the love of man to man's profit, is a singular
preservative to sheep. But now the question is cross, why the wolves in
crease, and the sheep decrease? Iamdiu inoleuit quaerela de millibus ouium,
and vnitatibus hominum, sed nostra infertur de vnitatibus ouium, inter mill
hominum. Their complaint in the common wealth, is of the pluralities of sheep,
and the nullities of men; but our moan which is made in the Puritan county
of North-hampton (as it has been nicknamed) is for our decayed flocks of
sheep, and our multiplied herds of wolves. Shall I read the cause? Foelix
qui potuit, I have no such skill; yet would I guess at two causes. The one is,
of the adversary against man; the other, of man against himself. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Satan our adversary has more care, pains, watches, devices, for breeding
and nourishing of Wolves, then ours is for the prosperity of the people of Gods
pasture, Psalm. 95.7
and sheep of his hands. And more then so, our conniuencie either to seem not
to see, or to see only when we list, or to see some thing and do nothing, is to
shake hands with Satan, in connubio malorum, that their combinations are daily
stronger, and are christian connexions more weak? Give the holy Prophet leave
to speak in this case. Esaias 26.10
Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness, no
more then the Hog manners, with a chain of Pearls about his neck. I would
willingly speak here, Romans 3
what the Apostle has spoken, both of Authors et fautores, how they are both
guilty. Methodus confessionis.
Or if any angry Pope-ling should cavil, I would wipe of his blow with their
own verdict, which witnesses how many ways one man may be faulty in an
other man's fault.

Consulo, praecipio, consentio, prouoco, laudo,
Non retego culpam, non punio, non reprehendo:
Participo, defendo: meum in caput ista redundant.
All excuses of ancient acquaintance are but idle pretenses in this business,
miseratio effaeminata: and I think it has been called foolish love, to
nourish a Serpent in the bosom, or to suffer Wolves to breed in the Wood to
wast Sheep. Vt iugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones.
Our predecessor could say: odimus accipitre^ qui semper viuit in armis, who
can once love the Kite, which ever lives in spite? I pray you what are the
lives of the Remish wolves? but fire and sword, war and bloodshed. Fare and
softly, Iesuitae faces Romanae: Surely, you English Clergy play the Iauelles
with us, per hoc Ly. For those holy Votarists are goodly torches sent hither to
enlighten our dark thoughts as John Baptist, who was a burning and a shining
candle. Ioh. 5.35
Indeed good patients you answer well for your Physicians, propter hoc Ly.
But there is great odds in these lights: John Baptist was to the Church as the
candle in the woman's hand, to help her to find her lost groat: and the
Jesuits are as the fire which came out of the bramble, Graeta fide volantes.
Esaias 9.16
to consume the Cedars of Lebanon. Yea those mount-backes of Rome, put out many
eyes, and give sight to none, ignes fatui, they walk wild in the dark,
blindfold their followers, misleade them out of the true way, and are too
often as wildfier, but touch and take. Iud. 15.5
We read of Foxes tied by the tails with fier-brands, and sent into the corn
fields to destroy them. It might have bin said of England, John 4.35
look on the regions how all the field is white unto harvest. But out of
question, our field is not so pleasant as it was, for the Foxes fire which has
wasted much corn. They are but tied by the tails, and so they run into
Ladies chambers; it were good that they were tied by the necks, and laid to
sleep in the midst of their own fier-brands.

But shall I turn my thoughts from these witch-blasts, to the Rose of England,
all sweet love to his Savior, all, and all inviolable love to his saving word.
No flatterer has seduced him, no craft has snared him, no canker-worme has
wasted him. Who should not love the smell of this Rose?

The Prince has a Lilly chastity, in his faith a fair Lilly, growing on a
golden pillar, the pillar of honor, the honor of the Temple, the Temple of
God: him that overcomes I will make a pillar in the Temple of my God. Look
all on this Onichinus, this peerclesse Preatle, always clasped in white belts,
fair silver girdles,; the chastity of his mind, body, gesture, conversation,
with the aspect of his eyes, Prou 22.11
and the grace of his lips. This is he which loves pureness of heart, and
for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend. We read of the
Lilly that which we know, that it bears aureum semen within the flowers: the
golden seed is sanctity the seed fell in good ground and has brought forth
an hundred fold. Luke 8. Ose 7. Ose 10.12
Many other have sown the wind and reaped the whirlwind, but he has sown
to himself in righteousness, and reaped after the measure of mercy.

Let every true heart here, call his soul to prayer. The Lord grant when that
time may happily come, that his spouse shall be chosen among the honorable
women, that then the Kings daughter may be brought to him, with joy and with
gladness enter into the Kings palace. So shall we then rejoice, and again I
say rejoice in the smell of this Lilly.

The Prince has the Violet humility, in his faith an elect valley all of
beautiful prospect; so high a Prince, so lowly in his service to think so
highly of God, and so truly of himself: Aquae descendunt ad valles, God gives
grace to the humble, to be frequent at prayers, sermons, holy quiers; as if
his chief desire were as David's was, to dwell in the courts of the Lord; to
be a friend to the Church, and a stay to the Altar, as good Josiah was. 4 Reg.
23
Quanto magis arbor abundat fructibus tanto magis inclinatur: more any tree
does abound with fruit, more does it bend it self to their commodity who are
under it. Thus does he increase in favor with God and man: Charilaus the
peoples joy, all his garments smell of the Sanctuary; his fathers joy, as Jacob
was to Isaac. Who does not joy in the smell of this Violet.

The Prince has the Corne-care, holy works in his faith, as if he had
digested that counsel of the wiseman. All that thine hand shall find to do,
Eccl. 9.8.10
do it with all thy power, for there is neither work, nor invention, nor
knowledge, S. Augustine.
nor wisdom in the grave. Qui vult sine fine remunerari, debet sine fine bonum
operari, he which would have endless reward, 1 Pet. 2.15
must have endless perseverance: for so is the will of God, that by well doing
you put to silence the ignorance of the foolish men; Job. 29
as Job did, who continued an e^e to the blind, and a foot to the lame. If any
enemy think here, he can smell oleum peccatoris, I profess to hate it
splendiduml, ubricum, dulce, damnosum: as ye for slipping, and the cup of a
whore for poisoning. And I dare be bold to give in an instance for mine own
defense, that of al others we poor despised Ministers have cause to bless the
days of the Prince. Why so? for Christ his Mandrakes have sweetened his; and
his Mandrakes have sweetened ours. O heavenly Mandrakes, graces of the spirit,
which dispose to the conception of good works. The Church is Abigaile, her
fathers joy, and Christ has lodged with her; the Prince is a son and heir
in the Church, and Christ has lodged with him by spiration of his holy word,
by inspiration of his holy Spirit; that the Prince may say, Cant. 5.4
as the Church has said: My bowels were mnooued toward him. Here is our true
cause of joy without sophistically oppilations. Therefore seeing his
inclination to good works by those spices of our Savior, which have spiced
him; we all consent in that concent of the Canticle of Christ: Cant. 7.13
Thy Mandrakes have given a smell, and in our gates are all sweet things. The
Princes words are often as the words of the seventh day; words of grace, apples
of gold in pictures of silver; Prou. 2.11 Leu. 25
his works are as the works of the seventh year, works of grace; a goodly tree,
full of fruits. You may know the tree by the fruits, Apoc. 2
and praise the fruits for the smell. This smell is as Smirna, all sweet
myrrh; and we all are refreshed with the smell of this Cornecare.

Now then let us compare Jacob and Jacob, Hebrew and English; vterinos fratres,
two twins both in one womb of the Church, both as Castor and Pollux, Act 28.11.
the badge of our Ship. Castor is descended, and as the Sun gone under a cloud:
he was gathered to his people, and is gone to sleep with his fathers. Genesis 49.33
What then? albeit he sleep he is alive, and shall rise again as the Sun in
his fair horizon. Exodus 3.6
God is the God of the living, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob: But I say
Castor is laid down in peace and Pollux is upon our Ship in daily adventures
for the golden flece. When I was of younger years, Apollonius Theocritus.
I did read of the famous Acts of Castor and Pollux, in that egregious voyage
for the Golden Fleece. But what idle dreams were those, with all their
resolutions, to the high resolutions of religious hearts, for the golden
fleece, the fleece of the Lamb, the Lamb of God, the inualuable
righteousness of the Lamb of God is the golden fleece. Ioh. 1.
Jacob and Jacob are both naked as Adam, before the Lord, without this fleece.
Consider the amplitude of the honor and efficacy of this fleece, Romans 4.
Psalm. 32.
wherewith all our sins are covered. Many, many thousands have yielded up their
blood, for this fleece: hoc expeditionum Christianarum praetium and praemium:
This has been the fair payment for many Christian adventures.

The holy lamb allows us his flesh to feed us, Ioh. 6.1. Tim. 6.8.
his fleece to cover us. Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. Such was Jacobs contentment in his new coat, when he got
the blessing in his elder brothers coat. Christ is our elder brother, our
first borne, a son to Jacob, yet elder then Jacobs grandfather: before
Abraham was I am. A lamb without spot was this Lamb, Ioh. 8
yet that he might lend his spotless coat to spotted Jacob, he was slain,
from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.8.
Behold then a world of wonders in these two, Jacob the elder and the younger,
notwithstanding sundry generations betwixt them, do both part stakes in
Christ; either of them have all their riches of Christ, yet neither of them
have all which is of Christ: either of them have all Christ, for Christ is not
divided; 1 Cor. 3. Romans 11.
neither of them have all that which is Christ's, for Christ is not
comprehended. Christ is the Owner of all in the ship, and of the ship and
all, and they both are but party borrowers of all their parts. So that Jacob
above with Christ in glory, and Jacob below with Christ in grace, may both
sing with that sweet singer of Israel, Psalm. 142.
The Lord is my portion in the land of the living.

But now let us see the distance of perfection betwixt Christ and these two
brothers: Jacob has the vine, and Christ is the vine; Jacob possesses all
those pleasant riches in Christ, and Christ possesses them all himself.

Christ is the vine, the true vine, which runs all mercy and life to Jacob,
and all wither and perish which do not abide in this vine. Ioh. 15.


Christ is the Olive, the true Olive stock, what branch soever abides not in
him, has no life in it; for the branches bear not the root, Romans 11.18.
but the root the branches: all fade and fall away which are not grafted into
this Olive.

Christ is the rose, 1. Cor. 13.
of all flowers the rose is cheifest, and of all virtues love; the chiefest of
those three is love: God is love, and he that dwells in him dwells in love:
out of this habitation there is no health nor safety.

Christ is the Lilly, Cant. 2. Jsidor.
the most delightful Lilly; for he which is the Rose is the Lilly: I am the
Rose and the Lilly of the field: Multiplicis medicinae, to open dangerous
passages, to soften hardness of heart, to heal wounds, Matthew. 6.
and repel venomous infections. O consider this Lilly of the field, for our
chiefest comforts are in this Lilly.

Christ is the Violet, Matthew. 11.
the sweetest Violet, which grows low by the ground: Learn of me, for I my
self am mecke and lowely. This violet was removed from heaven to the earth, to
raise us from the earth to heaven. Some Philosophers hold opinion, that the dew
which falls from the highest part of that Region of the air, works deepest
upon the earth; for being more oily and rich matter, it does more fatten the
ground, and with gentle kisses entice forth the fruits thereof. Hosoeuer this
be of that dew, it is most sure of the fattest dew lesus Christ. This is the
dew of the morning, which comes from the highest, and falls lowest, even
into the center, into the heart of Jacob. The dew of heaven is the cause of the
fatness of the earth, else has the earth no fatness: idest, the divinity of
Christ is the fatness of our humanity. The Lord give thee of the dew of
heaven, and the fatness of the earth. Here, here, is man's blessed abundance.
This is Manna, Exodus 16.
sweet Manna, the bread of Angels, all about the Church, as the dew lay round
about the host; sweet dew, sweet as the violet, and the smell of life was in
it. Christ his humility is our glory, and his lowest step to death, was our
high staire to life. Yea, in his humility we are exalted, Esa. 53.
as with his stripes we are healed. Behold the smell of this violet.

But last of all, 1. Cor. 15.
Christ is the corn ear, the right wheat corn which dies and lives again:
Ioh. 10.18.
of it self it dies and lives again. I have power to lay down my life, and
to take it up again, and all other live by this. The spirit of grace and the
holy Scriptures are the flower of this wheat. The disciples of Christ gathered
ears of corn on the sabbath day, and we here in England every Sabbath day,
travail through the corn field: Jn^erlin. Rupertus.
Spicae Scripturarum Spiritum viuificantem habent: Sentences of Scripture have
the spirit of life in them. Is any man hungry and can forbear gathering?
Ambulant per Sata cum Domino qui in Scripturarum meditatione delectantur,
Rabanus.
etc. They keep the Lord company in his corn field, which walk on in holy
meditations of the Scriptures. Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the corn,
and his Disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and
rub them in their hands, and to eat; common walkers sometimes pluck and
rub, but eat not. These feel no necessity of eating, else would they eat
for hunger, as the Disciples did. If we be Christians, we are far short of
our selves, to care only for necessaries to the body, as the Ant or Mouse make
their provision, not caring if the soul pine and perish for want of Sabbath
days co^ne. What shall we say then to the contentious oppositions of proud
spirits, against the necessity of such sustenance? The Papists themselves,
some of them will say, that the word of God, either read or preached, does
cleanse the unclean, enlighten the blind, heal the broken, and raise the dead.
Yea sometimes overcome with the power of the word of God, they will confess a
matter of truth, Rodolph. Francis.
Verbum Dei maioris efficaciae quam medicinae vel reliquiae sanctorum: The word
of God is the sick man's falue, more effectual then all the drugges of
Traditions. Wherefore think you, did the Prophet Esaie deliver from God that
Sermon of the excellent ability of the word of God, That as rain and snow
makes the earth to bring forth the budde, Esa. 55.
that it may give seed to the Sower, and bread to him that eats: thus the
word of God should hearten and relieve the needy. 1. Cor. 9.16.
Wherefore did the Apostle so much prefer spiritual riches before carnal,
and pronuounce a woe against himself, if he did not preach the Gospel, to
minister the bread of life to the Church. The Lord had commanded him to this
service, and therefore he knew he should be beaten with many stripes, Luc.
12.47.
if he did the work of the Lord negligently. Ad hoc Apostolus tenetur and
quod debuit fecit etiamsi non potuit quantum debuit: The Apostle being bound by
Gods precept to his office, he ought to do as much as he could, albeit he
could not as much as he ought. A learned man calls this dispensation,
Necessitas debiti and iustitiae. Caietane.
It is indeed of justice and duty to distribute the childrens bread to whom it
is appointed. And this is the cause why it is called Necessity of obligation,
and relief: of obligation, in respect of Gods commandment: of relief, in lieu
of the peoples want. Thus to this purpose was it said, That the minister may
ever find causes too many, to cause him to work propter populi indigentiam,
where is more need to bestow more feed. This is the corn which we all need,
for a remedy against ignorance, Gregory.
or error, or sin, or any unbelief: therefore come all and taste, and smell
how sweet the Lord is, what varieties of recreations are in the smell of this
corn ear.

Sithence then it is evident, that there are such store of gentle contentments
in our blessed Savior, that he is all in all, the vine, olive, rose, lilly,
violet, and corn ear, I would beg an Office to bid a feast. Prou. 9.
Let me this once take upon me, to inuit guests for wisdom. Whosoever is
simple, let him come hither, yea whosoever is wise, let him come hither. The
King, Queen, Prince, and all the royal Progeny, the Nobles, Counselors,
Judges, Rulers, Teachers, and all come taste, O dor Christi est Spiritus
sempiterne recreatiuus.
and feel, and smell the kindness of the Lord. He is all word of eternal
life: here is our feeding, he is all mercy, and forgiveness of sins: here
is our healing, he is all fullness of grace, here is our smelling. He is sweet
in speaking, sweet in smelling: sweet in speaking, never man spoke like this
man: John 7.46.
sweet in smelling, all merits and favors of sustentation, preservation, and
of salvation. O bless Savior, in the savor of thy ointments we will run
after thee, that we may be as the King, Cant. 1.
and the Kings son, sweet in thy sweetness. Thus we praise and bless the
smell of the Kings son, and pass here the first river of Paradise, all of
the sweet smell of mercy. Mercies of God to the King, in his gift of this
son: mercies of God to this son, in the gifts of his graces: and mercies of
God to us all, in both these gifts; of the King, and the Kings son: Behold
the smell of my son.

THE SECOND SERMON.
GENESIS 27.27. Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field, which
the Lord has blessed.


I Am returned to remeditate our ioies in the manifold causes of our many
ioies. The son to whom I am next now in my text, does display many ioies; all
causes of joy to us, all, if we all as birds of the day, be in love with this
son.

Now to the second river all of truth. My Son. Here I might deal forth unto
you many multiplicities of the sons of nature, grace, and glory, but here
Laconismus is best welcome. There is a son of nature, and a son of grace,
which both have interest in this river of the truth of God: One as the owner
and Lord Pooramont, the other as tenant and inholder. The son of God by
nature, is Jesus Christ the truth it self, and God of truth, the son of
divine generation, the only begotten son of God, Symbolum Nic^ John 3.
begotten before all worlds. There is a son of grace, the son of
regeneration, borne again of the spirit of God, borne unto glory in the
celestial Jerusalem among the company of innumerable Angels. Hebr. 12.22
Such a son is Iaacob, a pleasant sonbne by the holy participation of the
communicable graces of the natural son of God. Here may we take a joyful
view of our release from the post-fines of sin, both fear and shame. Frigius.
The superbious Stagge cannot but fear the little Dog. Why so? because he is
but nature: And albeit he be procerous in comparison, and bears strong arms
upon his head, yet does he fly with shame. The true Israelite albeit he be but
a yongue stripling, and the least of all his brethren as David was, yet he
cannot fear the roaring Lion. Why so? because he has grace, a privilege above
nature, Why, John 17.12
what is Jacob by nature? a son of the earth, of flesh, darkness, death,
wrath, hell and perdition.

I might show you all these flesh-brands in mine own nature to my shame; but
my short time calls for better matter. What mends has grace made? behold, how
good and joyful a thing it is: Iaacob is a son of heaven, earth abolished; a
son of the spirit, flesh mortified; a son of light, darkness vanished; a
son of delight, wrath abandoned; Mat. 9.15 1. Cor. 15.
a son of life, death is swallowed up in victory; a son of the bride
grooms chamber, death is swallowed up in victory, and all dishonor is exiled
for ever more. Such sons are Jacob and Jacob, Hebrew and English, King
Salomons love betwixt them. King Solomon made himself a Palace of the trees
of Lebanon, Cant. 3.9
all white and sweet as Frankincese of Lebanon. These two are trees of Lebanon,
Suauitate and candore morum melliti, eburnei, saccarati and lactei; sweet and
white as the trees of Lebanon. Lo here is the smell of my son. What is it
think you, a small matter to become the Kings son? Iaacob is Isaacs son, and
the Prince is the Kings son, and they all are Gods sons, Ephesians. 1.14
elected, adopted, sanctified, justified, and sealed, unto the day of
redemption. Thus are they all made wise sons: a wise son makes a glad
father: and he that begets a wise son shall have joy of him: Prou. 10
Prou. 13
as happily the King has of the smell of his son.

Shall I now beg a discourse?

There have been evil sons of evil fathers, as the sons of Cain and
Cham: evil sons of good fathers, as some sons of David: good sons of
evil fathers, as Ezechiah the son of Achah, and Josiah the son of Ammon:
and good sons of good fathers, such were Isaac and Iaacob.

The first sort were a just recompense that they should be served themselves
as they had served others. The second sort were ungrateful birds which stained
their own nest, Judah. 5 1. Sam. 2 17
and caused their fathers to smell ill before the uncircumcised, as Hely his
sons did. He might justly complain against his sons, as the Jews did
iniustly against Moses and Aaron, Exodus 5.21
ye have cause our savor to be loathsome before Pharaoh. The third sort were
a blessed allowance, these snined as light in the midst of a crooked
generation, Phil. 2.15
their fathers before and their sons after, being set upon evil. But the
fourth sort is the chiefest honor and splendour of the Church; Firmamentu^^
veritatu in Christo confirmatum. Apoc. 5.8 Prou. 27.9
good sons of good fathers, all in the Church, as the lights in the
firmament. All these are as the golden Viols full of odors, odoriferous and
delectable to their parents, as ointment and perfume rejoice the heart. You
Nobles, Gentles, Merchants, and Fathers all, what are your sons? evil of
evil, or evil of good, or good of evil, or good sons of good fathers,
which is more to be desired then gold. Try the smell of your children, and
prove whether your sons and daughters have been dedicate to devils, as many
were among the children of Israel. 4 Reg. 17.17
By evil example many give their children to the sorcerie of Popery, and to
all profaneness of opinion and malefaction. Through fire they pass to Priests
and Jesuits, to the orders and disorders of Rome. Ad bullatas nug as magu as^
piciunt quam ad scripturas vt Asint stramina malunt quam aurum.
Many of your children are sent to Lypsius his Ladies to service, and to the
Ignatian Friars to school. The sons of the Prophets were discriples and
scholars of the Prophets, sons of good smell: many of yours are ali
enigenae, cuckoo birds, strangers to your own country Church and Prophets, and
living sometimes even in the midst of all, love not the heart of any. The
King is the head here in his dominions next under God, and the Prince is the
heart under the head: your children love neither of them, no nor their parents
neither, but to serve their own turn, and their great Mistress the Whore of
Babylon. You may too many of you thank your selves, you have yielded them to
their course (as Daedalus did his son in the fiction) with wax upon their
wings, bullis indulgentialibus linitas. H^nc p^rtinaci^ papistica vt
Eutichiana, in hac fide genitus sum etiam vsque hodie vixi et in ea opto mori.
Too many of you have set them in tune, or rather out of tune, to your own
Roman instruments, your hearts. Thus your corrupt children are gone backward,
they are strangers from the womb, even from the belly have they erred and
speak lies, Mandrabuli more, worse and worse. If you think this reason given
of your sons ruins be without reason, hearken to the Prophet. Thy father was
an Ammorite, and thy mother an Hittite, and in thy nativity, when thou wast
borne, thy navel was not cut, Vt e sinubus nubium e^aculantur fulmina et
tonitrua, quibus coloni in aruis affliguntur, ita e co, dibus malorum parentum
euoluuntur pssimi filij suis vicini^ cruente infesti.
nor washed, nor saulted, etc. Good tutors and teachers should perform the
offices of good mid-wifes to your children; these to help them in their
generation, those to further them in their regeneration.

This is the cause that there are among us so many young Amorites and Hittites
for want of holy education. Amorites and Hittites a bitter people, cruel
rebels, yet pratlers, which dare so vaunt themselves, that they are even an
astonishement unto us.

But may I be so bold here, to ask another question. What are such parents
better then Tantalus, Cambyses, or Lysimachus. One of them killed his son of
pride, another of fury, and the third of foolish love. The popish father is
right as Lysimachus, who by the cursed persuasion of a cruel stepmother
killed his son, his valiant son Agathocles. Haud ero securus, dum sit tibi
tanta securis
O Nouerca Roma, thou have intised many a father to murder his own child, and
many children to revolt from God a tender hearted father, Papa caput est
ecclesiae, vt caminus est Domi in se fumos Jesuiticos recipiens, et effundens
vt enecet. Ier 39.3 Apoc. 18 Deuteronomy. 13 Deuteronomy. 18
and the true Church a most loving mother. Yes by thy instigations as the
stings of the Hornet, thou have set to work many a Ragmag and Neregall. These
as a close covered candle have secretly kindled fire upon christian States, to
melt and dissolve all holy government. Ah, thou have employed Ragmag and
Neregall, with all the rest of the Princes of the King of Babell, to tear off
the life, or religion, or peace, or all, from Jerusalem. O Nouerca Roma, Queen
mother, thou say thou art a Queen, but thou art a dreamer, a deceiuer, a
charmer, a regarder of times, a counselor with evil spirits, a stepmother,
as those Lurida terribiles miscent aconita Nouercae, always tampring with
poison for Gods children. Menander.
Did not the Poet dream of thee in those words, (...). There is not a worse
mischief then a wicked stepmother. Per ea quae sunt placida suade^t foeda. 3
Reg. 18.4 4 Reg. 11.1 Quae dedit infidus mella venena puto.
Let thy sisters, either Phaedra or Medea be thy Judges, how thou have raged
against Kings children: or think of them of whom thou art more certain in
holy writ, how thy sisters Iesabel and Athaliah shall rise against he in
the great day, for killing the Prophets and the Kings lineage. Thus died the
mild French King before, thus followed the puifant French King after, and both
died of their mothers knife. If then the sun have reueiled this way of a
Serpent under a stone: is not Rome hasharsheol a Wolfes house, Vbi cascus
cascam duxit.
and your good mother a bloud-sucker? You tell us daily that your father is
holy, his name is holiness; but your mother is a murderer, De Papa quam
plurims quod de hircosis dicunt, quo redolentioribus sese odoramentis
fumigauerint eo tetrius olent hyrcum. Ita pater iste mendax quo sacratioris
titul^ laruam iudueril eo gra uiorem expirat mephitim eius fallacitas.
and therefore we think your fathers holiness is to blame. The Devil has a
wide circle compassing the earth, and that Strix of Rome is angry as the Bore,
which whets his teech because his circuit is not as large as the Devils. Who
sees not also, that Satan and his holiness are agreed to mark all with their
black cole, and brand them for Heretics which bless themselves with Gods
blessing out of their reach. Therefore to requite the Popes kindness, I dare
presume to take a little more room to wrestle one fall with his holiness, for
the wrong done to this name of holiness. I know well that the Popes
solliciters have much confidence in their Champion as the Philistines had in
Goliath; yet must he needs fall which will stand on his tiptoes, vaunting
himself against Gods cause as he did, and more blasphemous then Rabshakeh
arrogate to himself the Title which is proper to God.

This name of God, the type of his incomparable perfection, Exodus 28.
was engraven only in gold, the golden letters being as the letters of a
seal, to signify him, who only by himself, is of himself. It was his
proper name, which being holiness it self, is able to make others holy. God
is more able to make Aaron holy, then fire is able to make the metal hot, or
the sun able to infuse his heat into the day: both these creatures may be
restrained by God, but the Creator by none. God can with hold the natural
powers from the strongest, Exodus 3. Job. 40.4.
and the fairest; so that the fire shall not burn in the bush, nor the sun
shine in Egypt. God can illuminate man with the light of life, and none can
forbid it. Can thou restrain the sweet influence of the Pleiades, or loose
the bands of Orion? has man an arm like God? Shall then challenge of
equality with God, in his matchless name, be made by a weak and sinful
man, whose foundation is dust, and his days vanity. Some of the learned
think it was the ineffable name of God, which was engraven on the plate of
gold; and so they write of the opinion of some of the Rabbines, which being
granted, then the name there written cannot be the Popes. What if Aaron did
bear this name in the Myter upon his forehead, yet was it borne not as Aarons
own name, but his Master his name, whom Aaron served, as it is written,
Holiness to the Lord. Let me yield as much vantage as a wrastler may, and
lend the Pope that hold of an ancient father, S. Hierom. Exodus 28.38.
Totam Pontificis pulchritudinem Dei vocabulum coronet and protegat: But why
so? that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the offerings, etc. This is plain
which was in special commanded for Aaron, and none other, wherein he was the
singular type of Christ, and of none other; who only could take away the
sins of the world, and none other, Ioh. 1: 2. Cor. 5.18. Ibidem.
to reconcile the people to God. We poor Ministers have the ministry of
reconciliation given unto us, but none are reconciled to God, but by Jesus
Christ, for God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself. And he
which has the highest place in the ministration, must be holy, but he cannot
be Holiness: he must be true, but he cannot be the Truth; these are Gods
preheminences. Therefore is this name Gods only, and properly, Quarto modo, to
signify that sovereignty which is above the Popes capacity. But what needs
this attempt (will some say) to cast him down, who has so often cast himself
down, like a blind man, who cannot see, or a drunken man which cannot stand?

How many of the Popes have been, as the beast, for want of heavenly light,
Narthecophori multi, Baccbi vero pauci.
wanting eles, among the infidels, as Sampson did amidst the Philistims, having
their cogitations darkened, and being strangers from the life of God. Therefore
Papacy was called the kingdom of the beast. Lo, where is his holiness?

How many of the Popes have been luxurious, with carnal and spiritual
fornication, that thousands have walked that way in the twilight to the harlots
house. Prou. 7.19.
You may well think that warning piece does reach to them. How should I spare
them for this? Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them which are no
gods: though I fed them to the full, Ier 5.7:
yet they did commit adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in the
harlots house. Therefore was Papacy called the kingdom of the whore. Lo,
where is his Holiness?

How many of the Popes have bin Nicromancers, Coniurers, Inchanters, Wizards,
Krants.
(quimalis artibus adepti sunt Pontificatum) which entered with cruel
effusions of blood, by falsehood, like a Fox, and passing on for a time
lyon-like, or like a Tygre, have at length been drowned like a dog in the
same stream. Their despite was great against the precept of God: you shall not
regard inchanters, themselves being such. There is no sorcerie in Jacob, nor
soothsaying in Israel, much less is Aaron a sorcerer himself. For this sin,
Papacy was called the Kingdom of the Dragon. Numb. 23.21.
Lo, where is his Holiness?

How many of them have been wicked Extortioners, and pillars of many states,
which have shifted their hands like Iuglers, with all kinds of beggarly
tricks, to scrape up the off all of kingdoms, and to empty them of
provisions. Have not their lean kine eaten up the fat, their Monks, Friars,
Seminaries, and Spawne of that monster Abaddon, have sucked as horse-leaches,
and devoured as Locusts. That Prophecy of Hildegardis is worth reading, to
make a show of these holy men, which for their greedy worm, is called the
kingdom of Locusts. Lo, where is his Holiness?

Thus these holy Fathers, taking pains to do evil, by wasting holiness,
have striuen for the title. But their slight counterseits are now so
conspicuous, that we dare to say, which they dare to prove, That they have
too many of them, had no more holiness then the beasts love toward God, the
Whore virginity, the Magitian sincerity, or the Oppressor charity. It is now
manifest, that all their fair shows were but gylden puppies, and your holy
Fathers, Sentinamundi, the most loathsome puddles of all the world. And for
further assurance, we appeal to the records of those writers, which have
espied and lamented the blots of the Popes, as of common strumpets, and the
stench of Rome, as the Stews of Babylon. One seems to compare hell and Popes
together, because neither can be satisfied: Si tibi det sua, S. Bernard.
non repleat tua guttura Craesus. And to the same purpose, a better Monk then
ordinary, gives us all fair warning: Si Bursae parcas, Job Monach
fuge Papas and Patriarchas: he that has an honest care to keep something,
let him fly the Pope and his Proctors, more then any thing. In those doleful
considerations of Romish impieties, some of your own favorites have cried
out, that Rome is Officina fraudum, F. Petrarch.
claustrum irarum nidus proditionum, commendations not worth Englishing: and a
bird of your own feather did fly abroad, crying as a Screech-owle in your
own streets, Exeat aula qui vult esse pius: Lucan.
Let no honest man trust himself in such dishonest company. Lo, where your
holiness is laid on the ground. May not the Popes favorites perceive the rank
savor of falsehood, where was (as they thought in their deluded sense) the sweet
smell of truth?

Is not the Popes impudent ambition easily espied in the unjust claim of the
Popes unlawful title? Hear an ancient speak, Innoc.
Ambitiosus statim vt est ad honorem promotus, in superbiam extollitur,
iactantiam effraenatur, non curat prodesse, sed gloriatur praeesse: praesumit
se meliorem, quia cernit se superiorem: An ambitious man promoted, is blown
about with words, as the Mill-saile with wind, all his turnings are more for
his own glory, then common profit. All his labor is to carry all others in
his stream: Virg.
quae rapidus flammis ambit torrentibus amnis. Albeit pride be the sin of
falsehood against the truth, of Lucifer against God; yet were it more
tolerable, if it were but to show, and not to hurt. Pride loves the fairest
show: qua pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier hic est: It is a fair
gloss with which the Pope shapes his own coat, that among men, he is as gold
above all mettalls, and as far more excellent then Emperor, as Sun above
Moon: this is the sun of the world. If this were all, it were more then
enough; but an Heathen tells us of a worse matter: Seneca.
Colit hic reges calcet vt omnes:
Tantum vt noceat cupit esse potens?
All his love to Kings, is like his love to his best morsels, that he may
devour them all, and keep his foot on their necks.

I have read this question in a Friars Sermon, why there has been peace so
seldom in Westphalia? The answer is, propter malam constellationem martis plus
ibi qua^ alibi se infundentis. If I might interpret that answer, I should deem
the Pope to be Mars inter planetas, Manors among the Princes. Surely many
countries are dangerously climated by the influence of his holiness, and have
less rest by his predominancie in a bloody constellation of Cardinals. The
signs of heaven were appointed for seasons; Genesis 1.14
but this is the sign which by force puts all out of season. Where this
wandering star has rule, there peace may not inhabit in safety. How does
this appear? Shall I tell you how? Elisha wept at the sight of Hazael, and you
would think by his name there is no cause. Hazael is, seeing God, as if none
see God but he; but Elisha wept for the evil he should do to the children of
Israel. It is said that Hazael was ashamed when the man of God wept, 4. Reg.
8.12.
but he went on with his cruel purposes. O Hazael, his holiness is Hazael,
seeing God, but who can count the evils he has done, John de Parisijs.
the strong cities set on fire, the young men slain with his sword, the
infants dashed against the stones, and women with child rent in pieces. I might
go further to prove why this is not incredible, both by the Chronicles of the
Popes wars, and by a reason without reason, that none may punish the Pope for
any fact. Thus impunitas ausum parit, ausus excessum: The Pope is as the wild
ass, which for want of taming does kick down every burden. One evil breeds
another: but there is too much already in word and deed of this badde matter.

Now let us with joy look again on the Kings son, try his spirit hitherto
vnvanquished, smell the sweetness of his precious ointments, which the Popes
dead flies have not yet corrupted. Fathers, behold the Kings son, and see of
what fashion, opinion, and affection your sons should be: he smells as Jacob
did, Jacob did smell of Christ, Psalm. 12.1.
all of truth. I must confess my sorrow of heart, in that just complaint, for
the faith and truth are diminished from among the children of men. There are
many numbers of them, like idols of the heathen, which have eyes and see not;
or in special like Harpocrates the dumb god, which did see (as they supposed)
but could not, or would not speak. To all those, whatsoever they be, we may
truly say, Quid igitur profuit te vidisse veritatem quam nec defensurus es, nec
secuturus: As the nice dame which can look upon the table richly furnished
with sumptuous provisions, and has no stomach to put them up. It has been
urged against the Separatists long ago, that the perfection of the Church is
above, and not below, in heaven, and not on earth. And to this purpose are
instances pressed out of Pater noster, which was all hands without eyes; and
our Father, which is all eyes with out few hands. But see here the true
proportion of true religion, both hands to do, and eyes to see, (...), the
Prince, and the Princess, in mutual arms, embracing and feeding one the
other: as Prou. 8 Exalt her and she shall exalt thee. This son is filius
dextrae, the right son royal, the son of the right hand, compendium
gratiarum, a treasure of the treasures of gladness. The eyes of the multitudes
look on him, and the noblest of all the Nobles say of him, thou art worth ten
thousand of one of us. 2 Samuel 18.3
The true son and true heir to a true King. The son, the heir, the title,
the inheritance, the creation, all savor of truth. Behold, the smell of my
son is as the smell of a field.

Here we must leave the second river, where mercy and truth are met
together in the Prince, as the light and warmth of the sun to rejoice
together as two rivers of Paradise to run one with an other: So that the
Prince may happily say in the end; Psalm. 119.32
I have run the way of thy commandments: and the Lord may say of the
Prince; Behold, the smell of my son.

Now are we come to the cordial waters of righteousness.

There is among men, a Merchants Righteousness. There is among men, a poor
man's Righteousness. There is among men, a proud man's Righteousness. There is
among men, a Christians Righteousness.
The first is the righteousness of a profane Merchant, who selles all his
righteousness for smoke of vain glory. Matthew. 6.1
Take heed of this righteousness.

The second is the righteousness of a proud Lady, a proud heart in a beggars
purse. Thou say, I am rich and increased with goods and have need of
nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, Apoc. 3 Matthew.
5.
and poor. But except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of
Scribes, etc.

The third is the righteousness of the man with a gold ring and goodly
apparel, who must ever be the best of the company. What has God commanded
which he will not do? This man is as the fool, which hearing that God
commanded man to walk straight, neither turning to the right hand nor the
left, he would over hedge and ditch, hills and houses, till he fell and could
pass no further. Eccle. 7.17.18
There is a just man that perishes in his justice, but be not thou just
overmuch.

The fourth is Abraham's righteousness. He believed and it was counted to him
for righteousness

So understand this Scripture that good Christians may put off that slander of
Solifidians. For the true Christan is not fire without heat, or day without
light: No, the way of the righteous shines as the light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day. This is Iaacobs righteousness glistring with his
father Abraham's righteousness, both righteous in Christ. The ground in which
we find this current of righteousness is called a field, where we have of
field room good store.

In the word of God we find diverse fields: the field of the fatherless, the
field of beasts, Prou. 23.10 Psalm 8.7 Prou. 24
and the sluggards field. In the field of the fatherless the wild Boar does
often root, and the greedy Wolf does make subtle entrance. In the field of
beasts Nebuchadnezar lived, all in pride, blasphemy, rapine, lust,
drunkenness, as too many in our times, Psalm. 104
live more like beasts then men; where all the beasts of the field do meet
and the wild Asses quench their thirst. In the sluggards field are thistles
and nettles, as a wicked man's life is all full of offensive transgressions, for
want of Christian exercise. But I have thought to speak of other fields. Luke.
6.1 John 18.1
There is ager frumenti, the corne-field where Christ walked: hortorum, the
field of gardens, where Christ prayed; the field of blood and the potters
field, bought with the price of blood; and ager Meridianus, the sunshine
field, whither Christ is ascended. This Meridian field is the joyful Theater
for all true believers, whither Iaacob and Iaacob are risen with Christ: Colos.
3
the one spe, the other re; one initians, the other initiatus; one in via, the
other in patria; one in possession, 1. Joh. 3.14 Ioh. 5.24.
the other in infallible assurance: For we know that we are translated already
from death to life.

But what field is Iaacob? a corne-field: so have we heard of him in the
corne-eare, that his Corn, and Wine, and Oil increased; Faith, Hope, Cant. 4
16.
and Love. Iaacob is a field of gardens, all of vigent flowers, and pinguous
herbs of grace; that of his own heart he may say with excellent desire: Let
my beloved come into this garden and eat his pleasant things. Let come
prosperity, adversity, or terror, or flattery, or what ill blast soever, Jonah
4 7. Job. 1 Cant. 4.16
as on Ionahs gourd, or Jobs house, yet this field shall prosper, and the more
it is blown, more sweet it smelles. Arise O North, and come O South, and blow
on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow.

Jacob is a field of blood; the undefiled blood of the Redeemer was sprinkled
upon him, Apoc. 14.1
the blood of the Lamb of God which stands on mount Sion. The blood of the
Lamb was let out by his enemies in the field of blood, but it was shed upon
his friends, as water on the thirsty ground to comfort it.

This is the blood of the Testament which God has appointed unto you. Hebr.
9.12
Yea this precious blood was powered out upon the rich fields of heaven and
earth, that we might be all one flock, bought and paid for, and seized into
possession by his precious bloud-shedding: he has set at peace through the
blood of the Cross, both things in heaven, Col. 1 20
and things in earth.

Iaacob is a potters field, Christ Jesus was laid up in this field, 2. Cor. 4.7
that Jacob might die to sin and live to righteousenesse. Iaacob has
heavenly treasure in an ear then vessel: Matthew. 13.4
Christ is the hidden treasure in the potters field, more worth then all the
field.

But shall I say that Iaacob is a Meridian field? yes a goodly sunshine field
of common joy, and profit to the Church.

As the common court of the Tabernacle was upon the sunshine side, a fair and
comely passing to the Church: Exodus 27.9
Thus was Jacob a fair field of common passage for the Saints, for all must
come by Iaacob. This is the generation of them which seek him, Psalm. 24.6
of them which seek thy face O Iaacob. Nostrum est rapere regnum coelorum per
gratiam quod quis nequeat attingere per naturam: our nature being lame, Jerome.
Chrysostom.
we must be strengthened in grace, to hold heaven by violence.

So then, albeit Iaacob be a common field, in whose fair paths and steps of
faith, we repair daily toward the house of God. Yet is he but a figure of a
fairer field; for Christ himself is for us: all our rich fair common field.

He is ager frumenti, where we have all our bread of life. Ioh. 6.
He is ager hortorum, where all the Church has all her spices. He is ager
sanguinis, our mercy, truth, righteousness, and peace, being all died in his
blood, who did tread the winepresse alone. He was ager figuli, a man of earth,
in all things like unto man sin only excepted: he bare the shape of a
servant in our potters field. Yet this was his privilege, that his vessel was
not broken. He was pierced with thorns and scourges, and bored through with
nails and spear, but he could not be broken among the spoils of death: Not a
bone of him shall be broken. Esa. 12.46 Esa. 53.5
He was broken for our iniquities in the separation betwixt his body and
soul; but his body could not be corrupt, because it was never attaint with
sin; with which seal the stay of our field is put together. Thou shall not
suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Psalm. 16.10
When all his enemies had done against him what they could, he won the
masterie from them all, as the sun at none day does win the victory of all
the clouds of darkness, and is thus become our Meridian field. Here stands
our glorious son the King of glory, as the sun in Gibeon on the top of the
hill, whilst the Lord does fight for Israel. Josh. 10 Verse. 13.14 Apoc. 1
The sun abides in the midst of our heaven, as the son of man in the
midst of seven golden candlestickes, and there is no day like this. Christ
Jesus is our common field, 1. Cor. 1.24
and there is neither Jew nor Grecian, nor bond, nor free, shut out, which
have any title in this field, as the righteousness of Christ for a wedding
garment. Matt. 22.11
There are none secluded which making right use of their talents have right
desire to enter into the Lords joy, Matt. 25.21
as the wise virgins, which went in with the bridegroom into the wedding. Here
we all gather plenteous redemption, as Ruth gathered plenty of releese in the
field of Boaz: Ruth 2.15
Let her gather among the sheaues, and do not rebuke her. O blessed Boaz our
Savior, what strength is in thee for us all? what strong charity? what fair
righteousness have thou scattered for us all to gather? As Boaz scattered some
of his sheaues of set purpose for Ruth; Verse. 16
so Christ himself let fall some of his sheaues for us, that we might gather
without rebuke. Ecclesia militans est sancta imputatione, inchoatione,
segregatione, sanctitate multimoda a sancto sanctorum imbuta.
Nay who can tell how many thousand more Christ has done for us, that we may
gather heavenly fruits, and after feed thereon for ever? It is said of Ruth
that she gleaned in the field till evening. Here until evening, till the day
of this life be spent, we gather all our good conditions, comforts, profits,
pleasures; all our mercies, sweet remissions, all our truth, true faith, all
our righteousness, fair beauty, and all our peace; sweet rest until our
everlasting sabbaths rest, in that blessed field of Gods rest for ever.

But all this while where is the Prince? has he no place here, or does he
bear no Arms in this Field? Yes; now let all the worthies of the world look
on him: the Prince is Hur all white; clean hands, and clean heart, and
vpholdeth the arms of his worthy father, as Hur did the hands of Moses, to the
discomfiture of our enemies, (...) he going down of the sun.

The Prince is a field of Corn, Colos. 3.^6 Nom. 24.6 Heb. 10.22. Psalm. 78.39
the Word of God does plentifully dwell in him. A field of gardens, as the
gardens by the rivers side. A field of blood, sprinkled in his heart from an
evil conscience; and yet a potters field. Let him remember that he is but
flesh, and a wind that turns not again.

What then, are all those sanctities lost in him? no, now let my tongue touch
my heart, and let my voice shout out for joy that the Prince is our English
Paradise: Henricus campus meridianus magnae Britanniae: The Lord sent him out
of the North into the South, and now is he become our meridian field, for the
health and wealth of Christendom. The Lord has brought again the captivity
of Sion, Psalm 126.1
and here is the health and wealth of these dominions. Now shake thy self from
the dust, arise, and sit down O Jerusalem, loose the bands of thy neck, O
captive daughter Sion. Shall I compare with that happy time of our blessed
Queen Elizabeth? They which were banished in Queen Mary's time for sowing,
were sent for again in Elizabeth's days to reap: a favorable recompense of
God, Psalm 126 5
that they which did sow in tears might reap in joy. In former time, the
people went down into Egypt, and Ashur oppressed them without cause: but now
how beautiful upon the mountains are the Watchmen, which see, and lift up
their voice, and shout together. Now is our mouth filled with laughter, Verse. 2
and our tongue with joy, our joy renewed, new joy doubled, double joy
multiplied, our manifold joys established in the King, and the Kings son.

Here is cause enough for us all to confess the largess of Gods merciful,
true, and righteous dealing, in the performance of his promise. Leu. 26.9.
I will have respect unto you, and make you increase, and multiply you, and
establish my covenant with you. A most happy performance, that now we have
hope for fear, truth for doubt, righteousness for injustice, peace for war,
right heirs for wrong, as fur trees for thorns, Esaias 55.13
and mirrhe trees for nettles. Now are our fairest rivers in the South, the
fair streams turned hither in righteousness, with joy and honor to
themselves, and all just men. Lord thou have turned our captivity, as rivers
in the South. How did the joys of good subjects hearts sparkle out at their
eyes, attending to the Kings coming, as the Angel of the Lord, to lead his
people. The King came first, and his Angel came after, as the hawke does fly
by thy wisdom, Job. 39.29.
stretching out his wings toward the South. It is written of the South-winde,
that his original is in the North; but when he passes the coasts of the
Zodiac toward the South, there to meet the sun, as the sole Lord of all
those beautiful passages, then is he whot and moist, and yields power to all
the nurseries of Nature, to work, from the worm that creeps, to the bird
which flies. If I do not mistake the likeness, this is a likely president of
the fair arrival here of the King, and the Kings son, to the gladness of
Nature, and Art, and Grace, and to the common solace of poor and rich, both
naked worms, and feathered fowls. Now all true subjects, eased of all their
fears, may sing under their own vines. Lo how our clothes are warm, Job.
37.17.
when he makes the earth quiet, through the South wind. In what corners are
those to be found, which do not rejoice in this joy? Henry Prince of Wales is
our Meridian field, richly mantled with pleasant varieties of high honors. His
Father Apollo, the King, has watered him, his excellent father, his God, his
high father, has increased him in holy infusions of grace, and rich ornaments
of the purest Discipline. Now is the Prince his Court more seemly to behold,
then the banks of the Muses, all bright and famous, with fair fountains of
knowledge, all garnished as a mellifluous garden, where many Bees do gather
honey under the Master Be, Lord of the soil: Behold, the smell of my son is
as the smell of a field.

Some write of the magnanimous adventures of the Holy Land, Mantuan Sotterus.
Eusebius Faber.
some of the spacious propagation of the Gospel, through Ethiopia, Egypt,
India, and Grecia, in the time of the Apostles: some of the wide spreading of
the triumphant banner of Jesus Christ, in these latter times, among the
Arabians, Persians, and Indians: but who can write wherefore God has given
such judgments to the King, and such righteousness to the Kings son; Psalm.
72.
this were worth the Pen of a ready writer. This we all ought to do, to
offer up our hands, and hearts, and all our aid to the King, and the Kings
son. The Gospel is yet in bondage in our neighbor countries and states
remote, and there is no Prince in the world of more assurance for Gods
assistance, Psalm. 144.1.
to teach his hands to war, and his fingers to fight. There is none more
likely to help, by the smell of his field, all zealous piety, and resolute
integrity, that every confident heart may say to him, who knows whether thou
art come to the kingdom for such a time.

In my weak meditations I have found, that God has fowen his diverse kinds of
seeds in three sundry fields: in Paradise, in the wide World, and in the soul
of man. In Paradise a pure man, in the world a pure word, and in the soul of
man pure seeds of grace. In Paradise, the first man Adam was made a living
soul, 1. Cor. 15.45.
without hang-bies of original sin, or inbred hostilities of strong
prevail. Therefore the complaint of man's fall is twofold, one against man's
security, the other against the Serpents envy: whilst Adam slept, the
envious man sowed tares. Matthew. 13.
Thus was man corrupt both within and without, in his body, and his soul, when
the pure Adam received in the impure sting of sin, as Ishbosheth living,
received in his sleep his deaths wound. 2. Sam. 4.6.
Man did not continue in honor, but became like unto the beasts which perish.
Psalm. 49.12.
In the second field, the Lord has bestowed his lively word, of which the
great sower says himself, For this cause was I borne, Ioh. 18.37. Esaias 1.9.
Romans 9.29.
and for this cause came I into the world. Therefore well may we say, Except
the Lord had reserved seed for us, we had been as Sodom, and like to
Gomorrha.

Here then, among many indifferent questions of the Astrologers, I rejoice much
in this one, to know where is the best influence of the heavens. Many men have
many opinions, and if it may please you to accept mine among them all, I think
the best is there where is a most plentiful prosemination of the word of God.
This is the sacred aspersion, wherewith the most parts of our nation is
copiously sprinkled: Therefore Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Psalm 14.7
This was the pleasant meat and drink, wherewith the King of the Prophets did
cheer up the hearts of his friends, and his own: he showed his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with
every nation, Psa. 147 19, 20
all people have not had such wholesome influence. This was Ecclesiae gloria
circumfluens and vbertim mala superans, Pelican.
the satiable riches of the Church. Thus the mercy and kindness of the Lord
does follow us, he makes our cup to ouerflowe. Yea, this blessed influence
fills innumerable orchards full of figge-trees, Christian consciences full of
the favors and delights of God. The word of God is a fig tree worth keeping,
and tending, where we have our daily nutriment and comfort, Prou. 27.8.
For he which keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof. But shall I
speak what I have heard from the clamours of the wisdom of the world, That
this great allowance of the word of God, is abundant and superfluous. To such I
have offered a bold (some will say a blind) answer. That their wisdom is the
sooles babble, which has said in his heart, There is no God. Psalm. 14.1.
Excellentia regiminis Christiani non est ex opinatione politica, sed ex
ordinatione dominica dirigenda. Jac. de Valen. Aqua nobilis ex frigore saepe
gelatur.
There are too many wise men of the West, which hold opinion of common
preaching, as some Philosophers do of the light about the Southern pole; That
as by the absence of the Sun there, the air is not hindered in his light; so
by the want of ordinary preaching, religion is not darkened in her beauty.
Circa polum Australem, per absentiam solis non defieit lumen conueniens ad
vitam felicem. Indeed some to compare much preaching, and too much Sunshine
together. Perpetua aestas omnia exurit: but the danger is more, ne perpetua
hyeme omnia rigerent: lest cold religion should be closed up in frozen hearts,
and in the want of the warmth of the word of God, this times devotion become
cold, and dead as ice.

When I remember this miscreant conceit, it seems to me like a foul
serpent, with a great belly, full of young ones, all deuourers of faith.

Thus may you more easily understand our Saviors question, When the son of
man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? who knows not, that faith may
be starued for want of the waters of comforts, and pined for want of food, and
choked for want of spirit: if thou withdrawest thy breath, then we are gone.
Psalm. 146.4
Thus man's breath departs, he returns to the earth, and his thoughts
perish. What then must we have nothing but reading of the most sure word of
the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19.
to take heed unto? Yes beloved, I would be loath to say that we should be
acquainted with no other business, but reading, expounding, or hearing the
word of God; as those Heretics erred, which would have nothing but praying.
(...).
I grant there must be Ortus and occasus Solis, a time to speak, Eccles. 3.7.
and a time to keep silence, a time to sow, and a time to mow. Yet the word
of God, as the Sun, may not be too long down, lest there be too much
darkness, and cold ignorance, and indisposition to good manners. And for a
parting blow, to those wise men (whose wisdom descends not from above, Iam.
3.15.
but is earthly, sensual, and deuillish) I would commend one answer more to
them, more to the purpose. Their comparison is not well ioynted, because of the
odds betwixt Nature and Grace. Psalm. 58.5.
The truth is clear against all adders which stop their ears, that albeit
there can be too much Sun, (it is pity that ever fair weather should do
harm) too much prosperity, and blasts of wind; yet can there never be too
much faith, love, Matthew. 8.26.14 31.16.8.
obedience, never too much grace. Therefore are there so many complaints of too
little and manifold prayers, that grace may be multiplied upon the Church.

Now must I speak of the third field, 1. Pet. 1, 2.
in which Gods seed is sown: This field is the soul of man, Ezech. 8.
this is Gods field, All souls are mine. The Lord sows seeds of grace
purposely in our souls, that they may grow and out-growe our sins, as seeds
are sown in their seasons to out-grow the weeds. Therefore every one which is
borne of God, does no sin, 1. Ioh. 3.4 Psalm. 47.1.
because his seed remains in him. Here then let all English people clap
their hands, and sing loud unto God with a cheerful voice, for this one
instance of a Princely soul. In the troops of many miraculous conjunctions,
and oppositions, you may all behold some strange ones here. Rare conjunctions
of Majesty and Humility, of Youth and Wisdom, of Temperance and years of
lust to sin. What? Halcyons days in summer? It is reported that the Halcyon
does breed in winter, and then there are days of peace, then wars cease in
all the world. In the days of winter, of old age, then sins cease in
microcosmo, the force of carnal desires are not so fierce against the soul:
When the Almond tree shall flourish, concupiscence shall be driven away.
Eccles. 12.5.
But Halcyons days in summer, in youth health, strength, and plenty, peace
and so brietie, in the times of strong rebellion, insurrections and skirmage; a
passing conjunction: This can come to pass but only one way, by which it is
thus come to pass. The Prince is fastened to the head, Coloss. 2.19
knit with bands and joints, and increasing with the increasing of God. Without
exception this is a singular example of joyful astonishment, as S. Peter's
deliverance was to be exempt out of the chains of darkness, Acts 12.
when his friends thought his enemies were too strong against him. Is it not a
wonder in our days (infidelitate epicurismis luxuriante ac saepius ad
atheismum vrgente) yet this incomparable Prince as a pillar of Gods house to
stand fast, and as a mount that cannot be removed. There are a thousand young
plants in the Kingdom shaken as reeds, and daily wavering, are carried about
with every wind, as clouds without water; Ephesians. 4.14 Jude 12.
and yet still the Prince grows as an heavenly plant, which cannot be plucked
up. Look on him all ye prosapiae nobiles, all whosoever ye be of noble
pedigree, generous progeny, or religious ancestors, are not his active virtues
before you so many Heroes, all singing (...).

Now stir and quit your forces well, Jste primus prodijt in Scenam vt vos
sequamini.

To cut out sin, and cast down hell.
And now look on him again where you may perceive an opposition like rare, as
is the conjunction: duellum perpetuum, a most martial combat betwixt
opportunity and sin. These two are commonly in league, alter in alterius
iactantes lumina vultus: soothing up one another as mutual flatterers. We
shall seldom see these two to meet at any time without shaking of hands as
friends; and hardly are they separated, if the bars of law be not strong, and
of sound use against them. Such is the common greeting betwixt them, as betwixt
Prosperity and Pride, which are seldom persuaded to part company. There is one
grievous sorrow with which may parents are painted, that our youth do bear in
their thoughts (...), not (...), not virgins, but curtesans. Now the least
evil word to young men takes fire: youth is, vt ignis ad torrem, as hasty to
sin as the dry brand to be kindled. There is no need of unchaste songs and
wanton plays to entice youth to wantonness, for they are apt to evil, Et quia
facile vulpes pirum come, as wise to do wickedly, as the Fox for his prey.
Mark then, Plautus. Luke 16.8.
here is an happy mark for you all worth your aim, pearelesse youth with
prudence to fly from evil, when as at the same years others do basely fly
to evil. Is not his praise and statue justly raised, who does mortify his
unruly affections, when with such strong enemies, many of the strong young men
are slain. Many of the beautiful women and strong men have perished in the
power of those enemies, that the Prophet may sigh and lament; O that mine head
were full of water, Ierem. 9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughter of my people. Verily this young Prince does with great
joy draw waters out of the wells of salvation; that though thousands fall on
his right hand, Esaias 1^.3 Psalm. 91.7
and ten thousand at his left hand, yet the plague cannot come nigh him. Say
then this is the fairest white rock of all our Albions white rocks to keep
out the inundations of our enemies. Vt reg^lus apicularum i^ temporibus estiuis
suaueolentes flosculos in prato delibans deliciosa condit m^lla suis colonis:
Sic iste princeps in Ecclesiae Anglicauae mel lificio scripturas poenitissime
depascens, vberrima suis gaudia supeditat. Psalm. 124 4 Reg. 9 Hest. 1.5
In a word, this is the Phoenix bird (de thure viuens) which may teach you all
when to make your flight from sin. Let not your flight be in winter, in the
sorrows of old age, and the sorrows of the gray head. It is a pleasant song
for young men to sing in the spring time of their lives: Our soul is escaped
as a bird out of the snare of the fowler. Who can but praise those birds which
live in innocence (grana comedentes pura) and hate to do evil? Who can but
smile at the prospect of those fields which yield plentiful increase to every
green herb for the use of man, and will allow no room to harmefull weeds?
Lo here Iaacob and Iaacob are those birds, and those fields; birds fethered,
and fields clothed with the righteousness of Christ.

Now compare all gardens with this field: the gardens of the Kings of Judah and
Israel, or of Hashuerosh; all the delicate plots of the Egyptian, Thebanes,
Hesperines; the fields of Semiramis, Alcuines, or Spanish, or Italian gardens,
of all the Roman devices. Some of these were, either fantastical conceits and
never were, or corruptible vanity and are not, or momentarie existence and
shall not be. But these two fields Iaacob and Iaacob with their gardener Christ
Jesus betwixt them, are everlasting fields: their Cedars, their high
enterprises; their hisope, their lowly endeauours of grace shall never perish.
Their leaf shall not fall, and being placed by the water side Jacob shall
bring forth his fruit in due season, Psalm 1 Romans 6.22
his fruit righteousness, and the end everlasting life. Behold, the smell of
my son is as the smell of a field. And here I take my leave of this field.

Now let us lie down in peace: The field which the Lord has blessed. Pacem te
poscimus omnes.


I am at the last to speak of blessing: this the fourth river that runs
softly, in valle benedictionis, in the fall of Gods blessings. This the river
of peace, which runs softly as the waters of Siloe: I could wish you all well
bathed in this water, and so commend you to the grace of our English Paradise.

If I should begin this Treatise as Bonauenture for good speed has taught
me, Luke 2 Ioh. 20 Prou. 3
I might commend the blessings of peace; that it is the language of heaven, the
treasure of Christ, and the fair path of God. By the virtue of peace the
warfare betwixt God and man is well ended, and betwixt man and man is well
decided. He which knew how much the righteousness of God is in love with
peace, would with all his heart desire peace, with this righteousness of God.
This atonement betwixt God and man, which our peacemaker has made for
Iaacob, is concluded in this blessed word blessed as a blessing of all
blessings. The word is ambiguous in our English tongue, and therefore must be
resolved into his proprieties. Sometime blessing is the means to happiness,
and sometime happiness itself. When it is the means, it is benediction, as
it is here; and when it is happiness, it is beatitude, as in other places.
Beatitude est summus finis rationalis creaturae tantum. Benedictio est aliarum
creaturarum. The reasonable creature only can be blessed with beatitude; Hine
Diabolus est simia Dei et Papa Diaboli.
the other creatures also with benediction; as the field, garden, cattle,
basket and store; or the day, as the sabbath, or the journey, as Iaacobs was.
This is short measure in respect of the other, for every beatitude is a
benediction, but they cannot be converted equally. One of these is more common
then the other, as there are many motions to one end. The motions are more
common then the end, for they either few or more may be often hit, the end
seldom, and never but at the last cast. A man may attain to some means, and
to no end, to some benediction, and to no beatitude, as they which run and
run short; or as the archer, which having the blessing of strength, shoots
many arrows at the mark, and all beside. In some places you may find him a
blessed man whom the Lord has enlarged with many gifts; as to increase and
multiply in many children, riches, honors, dominions: Psalm. 144.^^
Happy are the people which are in such a case, yea happy is the man which
has his quiver full of them. This happiness is translated beatitude, and yet
is but temporary, extending to this present life only. But this blessing is
commonly called benediction, Austen. Beda. Thomas.
as the Fathers and Schoolmen expound it. Benedictio Dei est donorum eius
collatio, vel multiplicatio. In some places the blessed man is he whom God
has enriched with eternal blessings: that he is an happy man for the
discharge of his debts, and the accomplishment of his duties. The discharge:
Psalm 32.1
Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven. The accomplishment: Psalm.
1.1.2.3
Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the ungodly, but his
delight is in the law of the Lord. This man thus discharged and accomplished,
is the blessed subject into which beatus and benedictus are united into one. As
in the name of Ascher there is both blessing and happiness, benediction and
beatitude, Genesis 30.13
(...) and (...) Ah blessed am I for the daughters will bless me, and she
called his name Ascher, blessedness. S. Ambros. Interliu. Genesis 49.20
Blessedness indeed if we consider the substance, for Ascher was a figure of
Christ, who enriched us with his riches, that it is said of him excellently:
His bread shall be fat, and he shall give pleasures for a King. To this
purpose are here discussed both an history and a mystery. Cyirl. Colos. 2.3
Matthew. 13.46
In the history diuitiae mundi, in the mystery deliciae Christi: who can be
better understood in the full accomplishment of all the Christ, in whom are hid
all the treasures? He is the Pearl of great prize, which says of himself:
Riches and honor are with me, even durable riches and righteousness. Huius
inopia ditat, fames satiat, mors viuificat. This is Ascher, his bread shall be
fat, and he shall give pleasures for a King: Esaias 25.6
Ipse est panis pinguis qui mentes fidelium impinguat. In this Mountain shall
the Lord of Hoasts make a feast of fat things, full of marrow and wines fined
and purified to all his people. He gives pleasures unto Kings pascit thronos,
Cyril.
potestates, virtutes, angelos; who feeds Patriarks, Kings, Prophets, and the
Princes of believers.

Thus may you perceive blessing and blessedness well met in him, who has in
himself such power of blessing, that he can make others blessed. This
happiness is the high crown of immortality, which we all desire to reach, as
Hester did the top of her husbands Scepter. The means whereby this blessing is
inclined to us, Hester.
and the stairs whereby we climb up to it, are mercies and graces gifts of
Gods blessing. In these the Lord beckneth to us, to come to him as Ahashuerosh
held out the golden Scepter to the Queen: So Hester drew near and touched
the top of the Scepter. Many natural men have troubled themselves in vain,
with many examinations of this blessedness to prove what it is. I may not
stand here to rip up the secrets of profound Philosophers, from whose curious
eyes were hidden those treasures which they never found. Therefore they never
had true peace: Psalm. 14.3
for the way of peace have they not known, they are all gone out of the way.
Their highest point nearest to our truth is this; that man has no true
blessedness until he be joined to the first of all things that can be
understood. This is an high flight, and far beyond the sublunary thoughts of
baser minds, yet far short of the mount of true Divinity. God is blessedness
it self, and to be united unto God is the perfect blessedness of man in
Jesus Christ Emanuel, to know him, confess him, and delight in him. But God
is the object of man's faith, not the subject of his intellect: the heart of man
is too narrow a circumference to compass God in his understanding. Therefore
is Gods name incomparable, I am that I am, in the Present tence, whom no power
can shift out. Some have translated more properly, I will be, who I will be: to
show that God is able of himself to hold his being and happiness against all
rebellion, Stabilisque manet daens cuncta moueri. To this purpose is that
spoken of God; Dei esse est, Gregory.
dissimiliter nunqua^ esse; with God is no variablenes. Here then let us
acknowledge by faith, more then all those deep scholars could reach by reason
that our blessedness is in our union with God, Phil. 4.7.
our peace which passes all understanding.

Among the secrets in the reueiled word, these two are great. One the
hypostaticall union of two natures, that the word is made flesh. The other is
our spiritual (...), Nisi vna persona esset Deus et homo, non recte diceretur:
Dominus gloriae crucifixus est.
our sure copulation with Christ without confusion. That is a mystery beyond
natural capacity, only entertained by faith in the Church. This is also a
great mystery resembled in short patterns of the head and members knit, of the
husband and wife united. In this exact and present work, there are two bonds;
one on Gods part; and the other on ours. Ex part Christi Sp. S. ex part
nostra fides nostra est vnionis vinculum. Thus by the twist of Gods holy
spirit, and our hallowed faith, we are made one with Christ, and he is made
unto us redemption, sanctification, wisdom and righteousness. 1 Cor. 1.29
Wherefore are these wonders come to pass but for our happiness, which cannot
be had any where but in God the fountain of blessedness. There do we daily
tender unto God that payment of sovereignty which we may not yield to any
other. God is sufficient; so is none but he sufficient of himself, so is none
but himself sufficient for himself and for others; so is none other
sufficient for himself and for all, and so are not all beside him, put all
together: This is our God: (Lord who is like unto thee!) Qui sedet in coelo
repletiue; that heaven and earth are full of the majesty of his glory. Psalm.
71.19 Ephesians. 1.23
This is our God (worship him all ye gods) who sits above, and holds
blessedness a fair mark in his hand, for us all to run unto. 1 Cor. 9.
We must all run; this life is the course; heaven is the goal. Expectat nos
Deus pater vt haeredes, filius vt fratres, Sp. sanctus vt vnctos: And here we
are made a spectacle to the world, to Angels, and to men. Will you behold two
runners, Jacob and Jacob both running after the Roe? Christ is the Roe which
runs before them both in the race of happiness, like a Roe on the mountains
of Bether. So did Jacob run, and has obtained by faith: so does Jacob run
that he may obtain by faith. Heb. 11.21
Lord let him so run that he may obtain.

O all ye vacant triflers of the world: why stand you here idle as the men in
the market place? What stand you for gazing one on another as Joseph's brethren.
We must all labor in the vine yard, that we may receive wages, all strive that
we may be crowned, all be exercised that we may be in breath, non
incipientibus sed proficientibus. We must be I organimous, that we may continue
to the end and be blessed. Thus did the Apostle run and continue to his joy:
I have finished my course: qui amat ardentius currit velocius: love and great
reward makes labor light, the reward is blessedness.

But it is high time to step out of this digression, from the mark to the
means, from beatus to benedictus. There are apparent unto us in holy Scripture
diverse blessings of diverse kinds. Some are of the Superior to the inferior,
some of the inferior to the Superior, and some of the equal to the equal.
All these have their special distinctions and use. When the underling does
acknowledge the goodness of the Superior, and sends up to him thanks and
praise for his kindness, Psalm. 103 1 Psalm. 148
this service is called the blessing of reverence. Thus the Prophet does bless
God. My soul bless thou the Lord. And such a sacrifice of praise is that in
the melodious hymme of our prayer book: O all ye works of the Lord, bless
ye the Lord. The other blessing betwixt equals is termed benedictio
charitatis, when one good christian does pray for an other, as Saint Peter's
counsel is bless, and Saint Paul's, yea bless I say and curse not. But here
I may but touch and go.

The first blessing of the Superior to the inferior has this branch also, as
blessing of absolute power, and blessing of authority, committed more or less.
Blessing of absolute power has in himself his preferment above all blessings,
as heaven which droppeth on the highest trees, has his pre-eminence above all
effusions and drops of trees or mountains. Every good and perfect gift
discendeth down from above to the parts below; from heaven to earth, as the
precious ointment went down from the top of Aarons head to the beard, Psalm.
^33.2
and the skirts of his clothing. This blessing of absolute power is Gods only
to give, who at his pleasure can bestow temporal or eternal gifts. Sometimes
temporal, upon the creatures for man, or upon man in the use of the creatures.
Ephesians. 1.3
Sometimes eternal upon the Saints, as he blessed the elect with all
spiritual blessings in Christ, chosen before the foundations of the world.
Aquinas.
This blessing has no match and therefore it is said, benedicere Dei est
causare bonitate^: there is none but God which can create goodness in man. The
other Superior blessing is by commission to Gods Deputies, which blessing is
either more-common, or more rare. The common blessing is prayer, sent as an
Angel to fetch the blessing of God from the top of the ladder in heaven, to
the foot of the ladder on earth. Thus the superiors in the Church (for which
cause we think superiority expedient) do pray for the blessing of God inward
and outward, and ex officio, do show that God will bestow them which are
necessary. This blessing is daily or ought to be, of Kings to their subjects,
Pastors to their flock, and Parents to their children. The blessing of the
King to his subjects, Josh 22 1 Paralip. 16 3 Reg. 8
as Ioshuah blessed the Rubenites: as David blessed the people in the name of
the Lord; or as Solomon blessed all the congregation of Israel. Thus shall the
King prolong his days in the kingdom, and his sons in the midst of
Jsrael. The blessing of the Pastor to the flock, Deuteronomy. 17.20 Nomb 6.23 Leu.
9.23. Hebr. 7.1
ought to be as Aaron blessed the people at Gods appointment, as Moses and
Aaron blessed the people when the glory of the Lord appeared, and as
Melchisedec blessed Abraham, the Priest of the most high God met Abraham etc.
and blessed him. This blessing when it is directed according to the prescript
and allowance of the word of God, is then of great power by the power of God
annexed by promise. The blessing of parents to their children is also of good
use, and commendable among us in England, for the good speed commonly observed
in these blessings. Apud Britannos inprimis sacra antiquitatis vestigia
etiamnum hodie clara in hac part sunt: Hyperius. Raedius Britannicarum
claritatum speciosus.
The Britanes are most honorable above all Nations, for the continuance of
this holy ordinance. This is without all doubt an holy order which the Lord
ordained from the beginning, that children might be preserved within the
compass of dutiful obedience to their parents, and might esteem greatly of
their great office over them. Moreover this observation being a comely
correspondence to the fifth commandment, does thereby approve it self, that in
our religion it should not be neglected or reputed a stranger. And this is more
manifest by the reasons of the Wise man, in which he lappeth his counsels for
the precious estimation of the parents blessing. Eccles. 3.11.
For the blessing of the father establishes the house of the children, and the
mothers curse rooteth out the foundations. I might here lift up some monuments,
on which it has been proved and written, how the blessings and curses of
parents have kindled fire of heaven or hell, as if Gods will and the parents
were all one. In this purpose an heathen speaks as if he had been a Divine,
in the skill of secrets: Si affirmabit pater aduersus nos, pati nos oportet,
quod ille faciat, cuius potestas plus potest. God does justly effect that which
man does justly crave. But of all blessings by commission, that is the highest,
and of most power which is called the Patriarchall, or Prophetical blessing.
With this blessing Isaac blessed Iaacob and Iaacob after blessed his sons.
This is called a blessing of excellency, for that those holy men endued with
the spirit of Prophecy, did bless with the blessing of God, which could not
be supplanted. I have blessed him and he shall be blessed. These blessings were
as delectable nuts in the Church; because in them being words of men, there
was delivered the blessing of God, Cant. 6.10
as the kirnell in the nut: So that Iaacob gone toward his blessing might say,
I went down into the garden of nuts. The Lord had so enacted the covenant of
grace with those gracious fathers, that it did rest in custody, vt sanctum
depositum, as an holy pledge delivered in trust. They by their solemn
blessing, might convey this treasure to their posterities, in whose families
the Church and life of says was to continue till Christ his coming. Thus Noah
blessed his son Sem before, and Moses blessed the twelve Tribes after.
Concerning Noah his blessing the question is asked, wherefore that largess of
Patriarchall blessing was bestowed on Sem, when as Iaphets favorable demeanor
toward his father, was of equal reverence and care for his fathers honor as
Sems was. The answer to this question is plain; that the holy ghost did
foresee how from Sem should spring Abraham, and all his holy followers, of whom
the most blessed fruit that ever did grow was to come into the world.
Therefore to Sem was that great Patriarchall blessing conveyed: yet had Noah an
other blessing for Iaphet, as Abraham had for Ismael, and Isaac had for Esau.
This secondary blessing was far short of the first, as the light of a star is
short of the light of the sun. Yet this blessing might be enlarged to Iaphet,
if he would light his star at the sun, and dwell within the light of the
Church, within the tents of Sem, according to the condition of the blessing.
God persuade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tents of Sem. And thus is it
happily with us Gentiles, converted and persuaded to fetch our light at
Christ, in the tents of Sem: our blessing is enlarged by him, and the Church
with his blessing is enlarged by us.

Now then let me show you how Iaacob the Hebrew and our English Iaacob are a
blessed field. The superior blessing is upon them both, and their blessing is
made manifest unto us in three most worthy allowances. The first is for
situation, the second for plants, and the third for fruitful vantages of
watering. In the first Iaacob is a blessed field, scited in the sun, the
fairest funne the Son of God which always shines. A blessed site is Iaacobs
conscience, thus neighboured with the sun, his conscience is asweet lodging,
sweetened with the ioies of Christ, as his father Abraham's bosom. O blessed
Jacob thy fathers blessing has Iodged thee in the bosom of Christ, as the
spouse in the bosom of her husband. Cant. 2.4
He brought me into his wineseller, and love was his banner over me. God
dwelling with Iaacob and Iaacob, is two ways. One in tabernaculo personali, in
the flesh of man, the other in tabernaculo mistico, in the soul of man. Here
may you see the mysteries applied, which before we admired. In the manhood of
Christ his body is become bone of our bone; here is our pleasant situation
and our sweet neighborhood. This lodging of Christ makes all the faithful
smell sweet, the majesty of his divinity being at rest with our humanity in
his holy incarnation. For this favor Iaacob and Iaacob may either of them say:
Cant. 1.11 4 Reg. 20 Ioh. 11 4 Reg. 2.21
Whilst the King was at his rest my Spicknard gave the smell thereof. Here
Hezechias his sick body recovered, and Lazarus his dead body revived, that
before, and this after, in the same power. Here our bitter waters are made
sweet in our earthly current, that Christ may say to Jacob: I have healed this
water, death shall no more come thereof, nor barrenness to the ground. Christ
as a kind physician did vouchsafe to lodge in the sick man's bed, that by the
touch of his body the poor patient might be healed. Thus the sick are cured
as the diseased woman was, by the touch of his garment when virtue went out of
him. Luke 8.46 4 Reg. 13.21 Eucherius.
And the dead are restored, as the corpse recovered life by the touch of
Elishaes bones. Excellens recuperatio per excellentissimu^ recuperatore^, the
vantage of the faithful. Man was much shaken, torn; and cast down in every
joint of his building, no man's merits could fasten again one man's ioints:
Christus venit in carnem, God became man to repair man, and to make up all his
breaches. In his incarnation he came to Jacobs house as the holy visiters into
Abraham's tent, as a special friend which brought good provision with him, all
his strength, skill, and goodness, to do for Iaccob all kind of good. The
second dwelling which Christ has with Jacob is in tabernaculo mistico, by his
word, sacraments, graces, tokens of his love, by his spirit the bond of unity
and comfortable seal of his sure habitation: thus is Iaacob a blessed field.
Behold, I am with you to the end of the world. Matt. 28.20
Deus accubuit in arca figuraliter, in Iacobo realiter: here is a real and a
royal presence, Gratia Dei nos iustificans inest Deo, subiectiue nobis
obiectiue.
the power and victory of the life and death of Christ is upon all the borders
of the Church. Here is her pleasant situation, scited within the worthiness
of her redeemer, within the court of honor of all his inestimable merits and
mercies. The Churches gains by this proximity with Christ, is the
communication of all his participle graces as courtiers gain many gifts (not
figures only but actual rewards) at the Kings hand by vicinity and near
attendance unto him. Sancti fide illustrati, gratiam in Deo intuentur, vt oculi
lumen in sole, eiusque effecta in cordibus sentiscunt. Cant. 1.13 Haimo. Psalm.
51
A faithful heart has a singular delight to think how Iaacob may raise his
glory and pleasure in this royal presence, as the spouse does. My beloved is
as a cluster of Camphire unto me in the vines of Engaddi. Engaddi habet
arbusculas, liquorem balsami desudantes, here are the most holy drops of most
precious Balm trickling into our consciences, to refresh and ease them in
their burning sores. Here is our clean heart and our right spirit; here we
hear of joy and gladness that the bones which were broken may rejoice. Here
we have our happy benedictions out of this circumfluent spring, our blessinge
which are worthily decanted in Psalms, and joyfully published in Anthemes of
the giver and receivers. The giver is God only, and the receivers are Saints
only. God is the giver only, a quo nil nisi bonum, vt a sole nil nisi
pulchrum, who only gives that only, which is good. The Saints are receivers
only, and none other have any interest, or are capable. Ioh. 8.36.
The Saints only are free (if the Son have made you free then are you free)
none other have any right in the liberties of christian liberty. Thus much for
the situation of the Saints of Israel and England.

The second blessing of Iaacob and his brother, is in respect of plants, the
most lovely plants, the tree of knowledge and the tree of life, both planted in
Iaacob. This is eternal life to know thee, etc. Here is the beauty of
Paradise, Ioh. 17 Ioh. 17.1.22
God in Iaacob, and Iaacob in God. The glory that thou gave me I have given
them, that they may be one as we are one: and thus Iaacob and all the Saints
are one Paradise. Here the Lord made to grow every tree pleasant to the sight
and good for meat; Genes 2
the tree of life and the tree of knowledge in the midst of the garden;
Christ Jesus in the heart of Iaacob in the midst of Paradise. This is the
ancient stock in whom all plants consist, and from whom all the vigorous
plants do grow and spread in the Church; Coloss. 1.17 2. Pet. 1.3 Romans 8.32.
Gal. 5.22 vt supra.
out of his godly power we have all things which pertain unto life and
godliness. Therefore might it well be said, If ye have Christ how shall ye not
with him have all things: Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. These are plants which our heavenly
father has planted, daily increasing with the increase of God in this garden,
Judah. 1 Samuel 23.23
that a little one shall become a thousand, all fair and strong as the
thousands of Judah, and the strong men of David.

The third blessing of the field, is by the daily watering of the plants. All
Iaacobs heavenly gifts, which he has received from the father of lights, are
daily watered with shewers from heaven. Shewers from heaven of such holy
waters, which which our Savior watered his Disciples. John 15.3
Now are ye clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. So long as
we are clasped and bark bound in the unclean scurfe of our corruption, we
cannot prosper in religion; but in the washings of God we being cleansed and
purified, are more prosperous and lovely before the Lord. 1. Cor. 6.11
Thus were the Corinthians bound in their sinful pollutions, till they were
cleansed and purified by the spirit of our God. And thus is Gods garden daily
watered and washed again with daily distillations of Christ his sweat, sweet
satisfaction to the law for Iaacob: Luke 22.44
his sweat like drops of blood trickling down to the ground. Down to the
ground, to the Church the pillar and ground of truth: Psalm. 133 3
his sweat did fall down upon it as the dew of Hermon which falls on the
mountains of Sion. The precious passion of our holy ransom as a welcome cloud
to refresh and comfort our barren and dry ground, is daily melting upon the
Church, in daily prayers, sermons, readings, and conferences. Thus is our field
blessed: for there the Lord appointed the blessing to fall, and life for ever
more It is easily perceived whence all these waterings proceed, ab hortulano
Christo: the good woman supposed Christ to be a gardener, and he is a gardener
indeed more truly then she supposed. This is the gardener which came by water
and blood to nourish his garden. 1. Ioh. 5.6 1. Cor. 10.2
Moses came by water, and so our fathers were baptized in the cloud and in the
Sea. Christ came by water and blood, Ephesians. 4.5
yet without imaginary difference of Baptism, for the fathers were baptized
into the blood of Christ. There is but one Baptism. They were all baptized
into the blood of the Lamb, which was slain from the beginning of the world.
The Apostle affirms of the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.1 Act. 19.
that they were baptized unto Moses: and the Disciples at Ephesus answered for
themselves, that they were baptized unto John's Baptism. And with right
understanding we may readily discern the unity of Baptism against all Idle
suppositions: for Moses, John Baptist, and S. Paul were but Ministers of one
Baptism unto the remission of sins in Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 1.13.14
There was not any one baptized in any of their names (as it is argued that not
any Corinthian was baptized in the name of Paul) that any should believe in
him, or worship him. It might well be said, that those were baptized unto
Paul's Baptism, viz. in the doctrine of Paul, as the Israelites were in the
doctrine of Moses, and those Disciples in the doctrine of John. And thus may
you unloose that knot, that the people believed the Lord and his servant Moses:
Exodus 14.31
that is they believed in God by the doctrine or ministry of Moses. Now then
let Iaacob and Iaacob confess, that they have all their waterings and washings
of Christ. Cant. 6.1
Most happy gardens thus watered and washed by this gardener. Christ is come
into his garden: in the midst of the garden is a fountain of living waters,
Ioh. 4 Psalm. 36.9
this makes the garden blessed. Christ is the well of living waters: O blessed
fountain; with thee is the well of life: and this is the happiness of our
Paradise, that both these brothers may joyfully rejoice with the Saints: Gal.
2.20
thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ Jesus lives in me.

Here might I show you triplicem Paradisum, the terrestrial, spiritual, and
celestial paradise, all well met in Christ. The natural man in the beauty of
his princely I mage built upright with his face prone to heaven, was our terren
Paradise in Paradise before his fall. The spiritual man renewed and borne
again of water and of the spirit, in orient fidei constitutus, set with his
face toward the day spring; he is the beautiful continent of Gods manifold
rich blessings to man; and this is our spiritual Paradise. The holy troops of
Angels and Saints in heaven in their cheerful recreations and melodious
pleasures, are that heavenly Paradise, 2 Cor. 12
of which S. Paul does so triumph, albeit his sight was but at a blush taken up
he knew not how. Here might I discourse further of the earthly Paradise, how it
is changed into a spiritual Paradise in the conversion of the sinner, and how
the spiritual Paradise is translated by Jesus Christ into the heavenly, one
Paradise into an other. But the most exquisite Paradise of all is Jesus Christ
himself, qui est triplex Paradisus. Think of his body without spot, and of
his spirit without stain, and of his divinity without mixtures of feblenesse
and mutability, O triplex Paradisus. Here flourish (without thorns and
thistles) all the fair flowers of Paradise. I would be glad to stay here,
yet I must pass further from this fair contemplation, with an obiectiue
question. What? is Jacob a field without weeds? No, such a field is Christ; but
neither Iaacob before, nor Iaacob after, nor any other man but God. Joh. 3
The envious man is daily sowing his tares, yet there is a wind (which blows
where it lists) daily sent of God to kill those seeds. He which well
considers this work, may well think that Raphael the Angel of God is sent
of purpose to kill those seeds in the quickening, to keep Iaacob, and kill his
enemies. The adversary is daily breeding and feeding Giants, Atheism, Genesis 14
12 Marlorat.
Gentilisme, Mahumetisme, and Papisme, and these are the ringleaders of all
violence against the Church, as the 4. Kings which carried Lot away by force.
These marshal their accomplices with strong hand, and lead after them neglect and
contempt of God, Pride, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Malice, Covetousness,
Prodigality, Drunkenness, and such an innumerous Army of Locusts, that we have
cause to say as the Israelites said, we have seen monsters there. Happy is
that man which takes those Giants whilst they are young, Psalm. 137.
and dasheth their heads against the stones. Satan is always hatching these
Serpents, fiery Serpents in our bosoms; but Christ is the great Physician,
Ioh. 3 Nomb. 21 Ferus.
lift up as the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, to kill those Serpents and
cure them which are bitten. So Moses made a Serpent of brass: Christ is the
Physician, the Serpent without poison, as the brazen Serpent was. And as Moses
lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lift up, that
the wounded might be healed, and the sinner saved. Christ is the Angel of
God, he is more then Raphael, both the Physician and the physic of God to
heal our Jacob of all his hurts, that he may confess of Christ as the other
Jacob did: Genesis 48.16
the Angel which has delivered me from all evil.

Now then shall I offer a challenge in the name of this Angel, to all the
enemies of Jacob? What Serpent, Dragon, Bear, Leopard, Fox, or Woolfe, Tiger,
wild Boar, Lion, Giant, or Devil himself, can root up this field, thus kept
under the shadow of the almighties wings. Psalm. 57.5 Basil.
This vineyard thus fenced with Gods blessings; election, vocation,
regeneration, sanctification, justification, preservation, all sure stakes, and
all preparatiues to glorification, the crown of all Gods blessings.

Here is a pleasant Mount to stand on for the vpshot of this text. The
providence of God is as an high Zodiac over Paradise, where the Lord is
beholding in a pleasant prospect, Psalm. 11 1 Multa sine voluntate Dei facta
sunt, nulla sine prouidentia. Psalm. 46 2.5 Psalm. 76 6 Corda disponen do,
casus commutando, successus ordinando, voluntates moderando, omnia intendo^do
ad finem mel^rem.
all the mirth-full benedictions of this field. This providence has a long
reach, tam ad vermiculos in coeno quam ad angelos in coelo. It is Lorica
castrorum, the fort of defense for all the tents in this militant Church: a
sure defense whither all celestial birds do fly for safety: fly to the
mountain as a bird. This providence did direct Jacob to his Patriarchall
blessing, and maintained him in it. What though all the earth be moved, and
the mountains fall into the Sea, yet shall our Paradise be safe, for God is in
the midst of it. What if all the world stand forth as Senacharibs host,
against the Church, yet shall it stand up: At thy rebuke O God of Jacob, both
the chariot and the horse are cast asleep: here are they fallen, but we are
risen and stand upright. The Church of God is often represented to a ship, and
the providence to a stern, which does direct the Master and his mate, the King
and the Prince, and all passengers in the ship to their several blessings, and
guide them out of all their waiting dangers. Thus are they brought into peace,
external, internal, eternal, into a wealthy place, a quiet conscience, all
clothed as the virgin in wrought gold, all smelling sweet with Gods promises,
and shining with the beauty of the Kings righteousness: Psalm. 37.6 Psalm.
76.4
he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgments as
the noone day. Be the legions mustered against Jacob as strong as the hills of
the robbers, or be they stout and confident in themselves, Anno 1588. Mirabilis
annus. Psalm. 37.20
as that Spanish Armado called the invincible Armado. Yet all their power shall
vanish into smoke as that did. They all ouermatched with the providence of God,
even with the smoke did they consume away: Psalm. 35.9. Faber quas secit
compedes, ipse gestat.
therefore King David did solace himself in the meditation of this providence,
reioising that God had so served a defesance upon the plots of Achitophel, that
his subtilty fell on his own head. And so all the fury of Pharaoh, Sisera, and
Amon was retorted upon themselves, Pape quid hoc est? Papam a Dauide nostro
interfectum, vt Goliath est proprio ipsius gladio interemtus.
as the books and libels of the Seminaries are their own snares, nails on
their own heads, and swords in their own sides. Thus they perished at Endor
in the well which they dug, and became dung for the earth. Here then let us
all clap our hands with the son of Amos, and say: If all people gather
together on heaps and gird themselves, they shall be broken, for God is with
Jacob. How favorably did this providence guide the poor Christians into Pella
that little harbor (when they should all have been eaten up) that they might
sing unto the Lord their high tower, Vt Cadmaei fra tres sese mutuo iugulantes:
Ita Midianitae, Moabitae, Ammonitae, et Papistae, hosts ecclesiae mutuis sese
vulneribus confecerunt. Esa 8.9 Eusebius. 2. Sam. 22.3. Espine. Vt coelum or
bes in suo circuitu omnes complectitur, ita in Dei omnipotentis amplexu, omnia
circuuntur. Angl. Chron. redcunt Saturnia regna.
sure refuge, and horn of their salvation? How happily was that Carolus
Martellus conducted out of al his hazards into the regencie of France,
according to Salomons sentence: for out of prison he comes forth to reign,
whenas he that is borne in his kingdom is made poor. What should I speak of
that Hungarian great Matthius, how miraculouslie he was preserved and
enthronized by this providence. I would willingly remember many (if time could
permit) as well as that famous young Constantine, who prevailed against those
coniured tirants, Dioclesian, Maximinian, and others, and did win that peace to
the Church which had no fellow. All those preuailes were effected under this
standerd the providence of God. But once for all, with what an happy gale of
wind was that reprised Earl of Richmond (after 10. years banishment) conveyed
hither, to ascend up to the throne of Henry the seventh of England. O blessed
providence which by special favor united Isaac and Rebecca for the leading of
this blessed consecration unto Jacob. Which by a dexterous care for Jacob, has
united that Henry and Elizabeth his wife, the white Rose and the red, by whom
this blessing is arrived to our Land for us all thus richly blessed. The beauty
and bands of Great Brittane Psalm. 18.11 Psalm. 68.17
Blessed with the blessing of our incomparable King, our matchless Prince, and
all the King and Queens royal progeny. A blessing brought upon the wings of
the wind, millions of hearty prayers: a blessing brought with Gods own
chariots the thousands of Angels, that we may all say and sing, the Lord has
done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. These are the fairest, sweetest,
most wholesome and welcome blessings, temporal blessings of our field.
Therefore let us all pray, that the father may be blessed more and more in his
son, and the son every day more in his father, that they may both live for
ever partners with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, coheires with Christ, and dear
sons to God our father, that of either of them he may say for ever. Behold,
the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed.
To which blessed God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one holy Unity in Trinity,
and Trinity in blessed Unity; let us to our uttermost ascribe all honor, and
praise, and thanks, for evermore Amen.

FINIS.
The Book to the Reader.
I seem to my self as a man decayed in his senses, or if you will, as an
house shaken in his building. I must confess my copy was of dim sight, and my
handwriting of ill scribbling, like rough timber, knotty, and unready.
Therefore though I be pained in my heart, for my manifold maimes, and look in
the eye of my Reader, like one which comes out of the house with a scratched
face, yet I hope to obtain favor of thee gentle Reader, with desire to correct
some errata, as follows,

Page 1. Line 17. for floods read foulds. p. 2. l. 19. r. as lines are guided
by their rule p. 4. l. 2. for attempteth, r. attexeth. p. 5. l. 28. for (...).
ibid. in margin, r. vagientem in cunis. ibid. adultam necare. p. 6. l. 11. for
at once, r. one. p. 8. l. 33. for and now, r. Answer. No. p. 11. l. 32. for
puts, r. hides. p. 14. l. 11. by their, r. either. p. 16. l. 5. r. coruus
for consonus. p. 18. l. 32. for oil, r. olive. p. 19. l. 2. r. and honor.
ibid. l. 37. for testit r. desit. ib. for with works, r. which wants. p. 22.
l. 11. for and, r. ah. ib. 28. 29. for haunt, r. heart. p. 24. l. 7. for are,
r. our. p. 32. l. 16. r. all of Lebanon. p. 47. l. 14. for (...). p. 48. l. 19.
r. Alcinous.


