THE REPAIR OF HONOR, Falsely impeached by Featlye a Minister. Wherein (by
occasion) the Apostles Disciple S. Ignatius Bishop and Martyr, his Religion,
against Protestantisme, is laid open.

By Ed. Weston Doctor of Theology: In a Letter, by him written unto two
Fathers of the Society of JESUS, in England.



Imprinted at Bruges. ANNO 16^^

VERY REVEREND FATHERS
I most heartily salute your persons, and also joyfully congratulate you, in
regard of your pious and charitable endeavors there in England, for the cause
and right of the Catholic Church. Neither need I, your known zeal
considered, by letters to encourage you to labor in that kind, or with
vndausited minds valiantly to bear the slanders and false reports of the
common adversary: Seeing that as one you embrace, so the other you may justly
contemn, and with great reason rejoice in both.

The cause at this present, of my writing unto you, has been occasioned by
one Featlye a Minister-Doctour: who by a diuulged Pamphlet in print, has
raised a scandal with you, out of a report of the Earl of Warwick, made of
me concorning some words I uttered unto him, at such time as he was here in
Bruges. Featlye then avouches to the world, that the said Earl told him,
that I talking of a disputation in London, passed betwixt you, and a couple of
Ministers White and Featlye, affirmed, that in regard the actio^ was well
performed by you, and basely by them, two English Earls present at your
dispute, thereby to have been converted to the Catholic faith. Wherevpo^
Featlye, as I am told, both to the prejudice of my person, and reproach of the
Catholic cause, has in print avouched, that we by no other means maintain
our quarrel against them, then by lies and false inuentio^s. I have therefore
thought it convenient in few words to express the truth; and also to crave
your assistance, that by your means the same may appear to confront, and
confound the sla^derer.

Concerning then the report of the Earl and Featlye, I protest unto you, and
to the world, upon the word of a Priest, that for the present I cannot call to
mind any such words I uttered unto the said Earl: yet do I not absolutely
affirm, that I spoke the^ not. But this I say for a certainty; that if I told
him any such thing, withal I added; that such a brute was reported to me by
some, that came out of England, and passed by me here in Bruges. Which
particularity, as it seems to me, should have been specified to Featlye by
my Lord, according to the quality of that Honorable Estate he pretends.

Whereupon I affirm, that the dealing of Featlye toward me, although I
utterly contemn it, to have been childish, uncivil, and no small
demonstrance of the great weakness of his Religion, constrained, against good
manners and substance of judgment, to lay hold upon such toys, and mere
aeriall babblements. Which my contempt of such dealing, the world should know
by my silence, if the good of others, impeached by his sca^dall, did not
co^ma^d me to speak.

Supposall the^ be, that I made such a relation to the Earl of Warwick; what
ground, or good occasion proceeds thence to argue against me, or against
Catholics? If I had been in London at such time as the disputation was
performed, where I might have been informed concerning the truth in all
points, then I might have been in some show blamable, if I had vented forth
such a thing; but being in Bruges, and speaking familiarly to my Lord, what I
heard from passengers out of England, there is no appearance of any evil
carriage on my part, or any sinistrous meaning to disgrace either Featlye, or
any of his faction. But something they must say to stop up the gappe, and
breach of their cause, made by our battery, at least to the ears of the
simple, and easily deceaueable popularity.

Assuredly it is not the practice of our Professors to make lies, to raise
slanders for our defense, or thereby to impugn the^: for our arguments to
that effect are copious, pregna^t, and in the view of the best intellige^t.
Rather it is the Protestant, being in affection furious, in judgment
superficial, to invent and blaze out lies, and that in print, to justify
themselves, and impeach us. Let them to this effect take only a view of the
lies, cauils, falsities, discovered of late in the writings only of Hall, and
Collins, by Fa. Coffin and Fa. Fitzherbert, and they shall in their best
judgments, confess them guilty, impudent, moreover disgracious to the
syncerity of England, yea and to mankind. What a villainy was it for one of that
crew to print, that in Antwerp he saw a Priest saying Mass in the sha^bles,
and that in the same place where the Butcher made his slaughter, framing
blasphemously an Antithesis betwixt the Priest, and the Butcher?

But if advantages be to be made absolutely upon reports, doubtless then in
this very present Case we have much for us. I have heard here in this City,
from the mouths of many English lately come from England, that you both were
so eneombred by the Ministers in disputation, that you had not a word to say
for your defense. Which report must needs be most false, both your worthes in
learning considered, and also the quality of the argument, then put in dispute,
examined. For what had you otherwise to do, but out of the Ecclesiastical
History to repeat the ancient and continued profession of the Catholic Roman
faith, from the Apostles times to our days: and out of the same Histories to
require of your Adversaries a like recital of age, and continuance, for the
profession of their Protestantish Religion? in which matter what could be
wanting for you, or sufficient for the^? No History records, ever any man
Ecclesiastical or secular since the Apostles days, to have accorded in all
points with Luther and Calvin. Only this they may say; That what they
maintain now against us, they learned it of Manichaeus, of Heluidius, of
Vigilantius, of Image-breakers, of Beringarius, of VVickcliffe, of Husse, and
such like condemned baggages by the Church of God. The^ was it most
slanderous, what was diuulged by Protestants, concerning your fail in
disputation.

Now then, seeing it has pleased Featlye to work a feate against us, upon the
foundation of things misreported, I shall come near unto his own person, not
upon the maintenance that rumors and news may affoard, but upon that which we
may suppose he has printed by himself, or his friends. I would then have him
understand, that I have seen a Pa^phlet set out, purporting the issue of the
disputation he had with you. And assuredly I never in all my life beheld a
more lively representation of a Ministers folly, short sight, and slight
brains, then therein. Wherefore to omit how according to his own fabulatory
Relation, it is most manifest, that still he flies from the state of the
question, and wholly refuses to make an absolute Catalogue of men, since the
Apostles days, professing his Religion, accordingly as you demanded of him; I
charge him with the assertion of two most notorious lies, made to justify his
cause.

The former consists in this, that he rehearses. you to have been
doubtful, positiuely to affirm, Whether our Savior Christ and his Apostles
were Authors of Protesta^cy or no, and there upon to have refused to make a
demurre with him about their writings for the trial. The falsity of which
report is most evident. For how can a Catholic be unsettled for such a
resolution? He then might have perceived the cause, if he had been sincere,
why you would he should pass from Christ and his Apostles downward to
ensuing Pastors and Doctors in the Church, that he being not interrupted,
might have leave more freely to spin out the thread of his rehearfall,
concerning the ancient Professors of his Religion. Neither according to
prudence, and the state of the Question, ought you to have made stay about the
writings of the new Testament. First for that all Heretics, which ever have
been, have challenged those sacred Records in approuance of their Heretical
doctrines. Then, for that, if you had made stay about them, your principal
intent had been frustrated: and so the Adversary should have been employed in
such sort about inter pretations of the new Testament, and discussion of
several controversies therein expressed, that he should never have had leisure
for the declarance of the ensuing visible profession of his Religion for times
following those of the Apostles. And so with a lie, and a Calummation has he
flatly injured you in this point.

The second notorious lie of his consists in this, that he produces S.
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, and Martyr in Rome, for a Protestant, or a
Puritan; which lie is so shameful a thing in the view of all learned me^,
that Featlye, although assisted with the writings of a Geneuian Scottishman,
yet he shall never be able to make any color to hide, or excuse the impudent
falsity thereof. Wherefore he is to understand from me, that as I herein give
him the Lie;so the same is to lie heavily, and disgraciously upon him, until
he prove these seueralties of doctrine. First, that S. Ignatius with
Protestants or Puritans taught, that one not called and consecrated by the
Pastors of the Present Church, or preaching contrary doctrine unto theirs, may
be a competent Minister of the Word and Sacraments, Secondly, that Kings or
Queens be sovereign in Ecclesiastical affairs. Thirdly, that the Hierarchy
of the Roman Church, consisting of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons,
Exorcists, Acolytes, and others, is not allowable. Fourthly, that all
traditions not written concerning faith or Religion are superstitious. Fifthly,
That in the Church of God, there is neither Priesthood nor Sacrifice. Sixthly,
that the holy Eucharist is nothing else but represetatiue bread and drink.
Seauenthly, that wowed estate of Virginity, in Religious persons, is repugnant
to the liberty of the Gospel. Eighthly, that prescribed fasts of Lent and
friday have no obligation. Ninthly, that one Virtue is not more precious, or
meritorious in Gods sight, then another. Tenthly, that Sins by Justification
are not abolished, but only not imputed, although they remain in the soul
Eleue^thly, that Saints in their own Persons, or Relics are not to be
worshipped. Twelfthly, that God is author of Sin, ordayning the same, as
effects of necessity, in the will of man. Lastly, that S. Ignatius held a
different faith from S. Policarp, from S. Justin Martyr, from S. Irenaeus, from
S. Chrysostom, from S. Augustine, and S. Gregory the great. But if in all
these points we may find this renowned Bishop and Martyr within the compass
only of a few Epistles wholly contrary to Protestantisme, and conformable to
the present doctrine and practice of the Catholic Roman Church, especially
considering that for his ancietry, he might well have seen S. John Evangelist,
for his profession in work and writings, as records Eusebius lib. 5. hist.
ca. 36. to have industriously recorded the Traditions of the Apostles; it must
ensue thereon, that the authority of such a man, in matter of Religion, as it
is in it self most grave and weighty; so also powerful and irrefragable for
us against Protestants.

To examine then the aforesaid points of doctrine concerning Religion, whether
in favor of Protestants they be determined by S. Ignatius or no, we will
begin the trial in order from the first S. Ignatius then epist. ad Trallian.
when he had made mention of Pastors, who govern in the Church, as of Bishops,
of Priests, of Deacons, thus concludes: Quligitur his non obedit, Atheus, and
impurus est, and Christum contemnit, and constitutionem eius imminuit
Whosoever does not obey these, he is an Atheist, he is impure, he contemns
Christ, and impaireth his ordinance By the Judgment then of S. Ignatius, Luther
and Calvin were Atheists, they were contemners of Christ his Law, in that when
they first began, they preached a doctrine wholly contrary to the doctrine of
all the known Pastors in Christ his Church then living, or governing in the
same, for fourteen hundred years before. The^ are all Protestants reproved
by S. Ignatius, who teach, that it is lawful to preach a doctrine by the
private spirit, judged conformable to the Scriptures, although discorda^t from
all present Bishops, Priests or Deacons now therein, or for the time past
having borne rule in the same.

The second point imports Supremacy in Churchly affairs, of which thus S.
Ignatius ep. ad Magnes. and Philadel. Principes obediunt Caesari, milites
Principibus, Diaconi Presbyteris sacrorum praefectis: Presbyteri, Diaconi, and
reliquus Clerus, vna cum populo vniuerso, militibus, principibus, and Caesare,
ipsi Episcopo pareant: Episcopus Christo, and Christus Patri. Princes obey
Caesar, Soldiers the Princes, Deacons Priests, as Prefects over holy
mysteries; Priests, Deacons, the whole Clergy, together with all the
people, as Soldiers, Princes, and Caesar, are to obey the Bishop: the Bishop
is to obey Christ, and Christ his Father. Then as S. Ignatius subiecteth the
whole Laity to the Bishop, so resolves he the Supremacy in the Bishop only
unto Christ.

The third point implies the Order, or Hierarchy of the Church in her Pastors
and sacred officers: and is by S. Ignatius ep. ad Magnes. and Antiochen.
described, where he makes mention of Bishops, of Deacons, Subdeacons, of
Readers, of Ostiarij, of Exorcists. And is this face of a Church then, in her
Apostolical prime, conformable to the present Protestants Churches in their
pretended reformation of England, of Scotland, of Holland, of France, of Geneua?

The fourth point, touching Traditions, appertayning to Faith and Religion, is
thus discussed by S. Ignatius Ep ad Magnefianos. Audiui quosdam dicentes: Nisi
Euangelium inuenero in archiuis, non credo. Talibus ego dico, quod Jesus mihi
pro archiuis est. I have heard some say: unless I find the Gospel in place of
Records, I will not believe. To such I say, that Jesus to me is in place of all
such places of Records. Where he says, that our Savior Christ has taught
his Church not only the Written word of the Gospel, but also by tradition of
himself, and of his Apostles. Whereupon Eusebius testifies, that S. Ignatius
did much labor to lay down the Traditions of the Apostles lib. 3. Hist. Cap.
30. How then do Protestants agree with S. Ignatius, reuoking all matters of
faith to the written Letter of the Scriptures, expounded by themselves in
several?

The fifth point appertains to Priesthood and Sacrifice. Saint Ignatius
makes oftentimes mention of Priesthood in the Evangelical Law, Ep. ad
Trallian. and ad Magnesian. but the Protestants disclaim from Priesthood as
they do from Sacrifice. A ridiculous thing to say, that to preach, to give
memorials of Christ, to baptize is to exercise the office of a Priest, in that
Priesthood imports an office to sacrifice. Whereupon many learned Protestants
affirm, that in the new law no Priesthood is to be found. Likewise the same
S. Ignatius makes mention of Altars Epist ad Magnesian. Omnes velut vnus
quispiam ad templum Dei concurrite, velut ad vnum Altar. All you as one person
go together to the temple of God, as to one Altar. But this word Altar has a
relation to a Sacrifice: whereas bread and wine with Protestants respect a
Communion Table, not an Altar. What needs an Altar for one taking bread, to
think with himself, that as bread nourishes the body, so does Christ the
soul. Whereupon if Turks were Protestants, they were to eat and drink their
communion upon Carpets spread upon the ground or pauement, not at any
resemblance of an Altar. If they say that the Table according to our Saviors
institution be of a divine Institution, they are to understand, that the Table
did principally respect the Supper and Paschall Lamb, not the holy Eucharist
to which belonged an Altar, not a Table. Priesthood then, and Altars mentioned
by S. Ignatius overthrow Protestancy.

The sixth point concerns the holy Sacrament of the Altar, of which S.
Ignatius ep. ad Romanos, thus speaks. Panem Dei volo, panem caelestem, quae
est caro Christifilij Dei. Ep. ad Smirnens. (cited by Theodoret dial. 3.)
Eucharistiam and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam
esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi. I desire the bread of God, that
heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ the Son of God. They allow not
oblations, for that they will not confess the Eucharist to be the flesh of
our Savior Jesus Christ. Wherein if he had deemed, that only bread was to
be found as Protestants do, he had not fliled it, the flesh of Christ; neither
should he have had any just reason to rebuke those Heretics in such terms as
he does.

The seventh point appertains unto religious Viginity, of which thus he
writes Ep. ad Philadel. Vxores Maritis subditae sint in timore Dei, Virgins
Christo in puritate, non abhominantes nuptias, sed id quod Praestantius est
amplectentes. Let wives be subject to their Husbands in the fear of God,
Virgins to Christ in purity, not detesting marriage, but embracing that which
is more excellent. First then against Protestants have we, by the Record of S.
Ignatius, practice of vowed Virginity; in regard whereof the same S. Ignatius
Ep. ad Smirnens. saluteth Virgins that live in perpetual virginity, which
estate of perpetual virginity, for that it employed a vow, therefore unto it he
requires Jurisdiction of the Bishop: Siidipsum statuatur sine Episcopo,
corruptum est: If this purpose of perpetual virginity be decreed without the
Bishop, it is void. The cause was, for that the Bishop was to consecrate
their virginity unto almighty God. Wherevpo^ Epist. ad Antioch. thus he
speaks: Virgins agnoscant cui seipsas consecrarunt: Let virgins know to whom
they have consecrated themselves. The other thing of remarke is, that the
estate of vowed virginity is better then that of marriage: quod praestantius
est amplectentes, Virgins making choice of that which is more excellent. Are
these documents suitable to the Protestants Theology? or rather Carnalitie?

The eight point touches the decreed Discipline of the Church, concerning
fasting upon certain days, of which S. Ignatius makes mention Epist. ad
Philip. namely of the fast of Lent, of Wednesday and Friday. Is this also, I
pray you, conformable to the doctrine and practice of Protestants, who refuse
to be tied by any such obligation; yea who seek in those seasons, means of
secret eating, and of barrocadoes, to avoid the penalty of such prescribed
fasts, especially of Lent?

The ninth point comprizeth the Catholic doctrine of VVorth, or Merit in good
works, and also in those particulerly, as are termed by us Counsels, not
commanded in the Scriptures, having in them a peculiar value in the judgment
of Almighty God. To which purpose entreating of perpetual and vowed virginity,
S. Ignatius avouches Epist. ad Philadelp. that virgins made acceptance, of
that kind of life which is better then the estate of marriage: Quod
praestantius est amplectentes: Embracing that which is better. Ep. ad Heronem.
he uses these words: Virgins serua, ut praetiosa Christi monilia. Guarde
well the uirgins, as the precious jewels of Christ. Again. Ep. ad Tarsen. Eas
que in virginitate degunt in praetio habete, veluti Christi Sacerdotes: viduas
in pudicitia permanentes, vt altar Dei. Make you great reckoning of such women
as live in virginity, as it were the Priests of Christ: also of widows
persisting in modesty, as the Altars of God, Accordingly. Cypr. ep. ad Virgin,
calls vowed Virgins, The flowers of the Christian flock. Is not all this
wholly contrary to Protestants, who make all works of virtue equal, and all
indifferently, through the corruption of Nature, mortal sins, and worthy of
eternal damnation? To which foul doctrine they add two blasphemies: one that
the holy Ghost by his Grace stirs up these works in men: the other that
God in heaven is to give them a reward.

The tenth point respects the nature and effect of Iustificatio, which is to
abolish our clean the spots of sins, before found in the Soul. Of which S.
Ignatius Ep. ad Romans thus writes: Per dentes bestiarum molar, vt panis mundus
Dei inueniar. I shall be grinded by the teeth of the Lions, to the end I be
found pure bread of almighty God. By which words he mea^t that Charity in
Martyrdom should purify him from all stains of Sin, and present him as
most white bread, acceptable unto the divine eyes of Almighty God, and
consequently as an object passing gracious and amiable unto his will and
affection. With which doctrine Protestants are at defiance, determining, that
Justification takes not away Sins in the Soul, but only excuses them, that
although remaining, for Christ his sake they be not imputed.

The Eleventh point belongs to Honor by us to be performed to Saints:
about which custom of piety we may understand the doctrine of S. Ignatius by
the actio of the faithful presently performed after his martyrdom, and
translation of his relics from Rome to Antioch. S. Chrysostom sermon. de S.
Ignatio reports, That by the faithful, his Relics were repaired unto, as
to a perpetual treasury. Sanctis ad se accedentibus benedicens, fiducia and
strenua alacritate, magnaque fortitudine remittit domum. Itaque non hodie
tantum, sed quotidie confluimus, spirituales ex eo fructus percipientes.
Quisquis enim ad illum cum fide accedit, magnis afficitur beneficijs. Sanctorum
enim non modo corpora, sed and loculi, and monumenta spirituali gratia conferta
sunt. He blessing all that come to him, sends them home replenished with
great alacrity and fortitude. Whereupon not only to day, but every day, we
come to his tomb, receiving thereby spiritual commodities. Whosoever comes
to him with faith, is rewarded with great benefits. For not only the bodies
of Satncts, but their Coffins also, and Sepulchers are replenished with
spiritual grace. No doubt but S. Ignatius in his life consorred with these
pious persons, and with himself in glory, both in doctrine and action. For S.
Augustine lib. 20 cont Faust. Cap. 27. makes Manichee that Arch-heretick the
first that denied veneration to the Relics of Saints. Is this conformable to
the doctrine and custom of Protestants and Puritans?

The twelfth point designeth the Nature of sin. Of which Protestants and
Puritans determine, that it is performed by necessity of the will, without free
consent. Whereupon does it evidently follow, that God, Author of that
necesiity, is also Author of Sin. To which blasphemous doctrine S. Ignatius
has declared himself an utter enemy. And for that purpose seeing certain
Heretics, as Nicolaites, and Basilidia^s, teaching a necessity of committing
all manner of wickedness, he Ep. ad Trall. does inueigh most bitterly against
them, and wills all good Catholic Christians to avoid them. But especially
amongst other Heretics, of whom S. Ignatius gave notice unto the Church, and
whom with detestation he rebuked, were Basilides and Carpocras Princes of the
Catharists, that is Puritans, in the primitive Church; who, concerning
Concupiscence contained in the frailty of man's disordinate nature, through
originiall sin, broached forth two heresies: one, that by virtue of a divine
precept, man was bound to yield consent unto Concupiscence. To which purpose
that Protestants may understand, how loathsome Heretics, and filthy
companions have alleged Scripture to support their foul and erroneous
doctrines, Carpocras cited this text of our Savior his own words Matthew. 5.
Luke 12. Be thou agreeable quickly to thy adversary, whilst thou art in the
way with him, least perhaps thy adversary give thee over to the Judge, and the
Judge commit thee to the Minister, and be cast into prison. Clem. Alex. 3.
strom. The other Heresy ensued heereon, to wit, that no consent or yealding to
concupiscence, did endommage a believer, either in regard of the present estate
of his justice, or future guerdon in Heaven Clem Alex. 4. Strom. With which
Puritanicall Basilides and Carpocras, Protestants do accord, in the second
Heresy. For they teach with Luther and Calvin, (Luther in Ep. ad Gal Calvin. 2.
Inst. Cap. 16. n. 18.) that no consent of will to inward Concupiscence
depriueth a true believer of his now possessed grace of Justification, attained
by the sole act of faith remaining; or if it do, yet that such a loss is only
but for a time to endure, in that, as assuredly as God reigns in Heaven,
before the moment of death, the self same Justice is to return to the Soul.
Whitaker lib. 1. and 2. de peocat-origin. So that in reckoning of Heavenly
bliss, no wickedness of concupiscence by their verdicts is domageable. Seeing
then S. Ignatius was a professed enemy of these Archhereticks, how could he
accord with Protestants, who consort with such damned miscreants, reproached,
and reproved by his writings, and that not long before his Martyrdom, being
then in his way the Roman Theater, and extremely burning with desire to
encounter with the beasts of that place, and become for Christ his sake refined
Manchet in their mouths.

The last point imports, that it belongs to Featlye to prove, that S.
Ignatius held a contrary doctrine to S. Policarp, to S. Justin the Martyr, and
to such Doctors as flourished in the second hundred years, after Christ: which
thing as it is impossible for him to perform; so is more manifest and
reproachful his assertion, that S. Ignatius was a Protestant, or a Puritan.

Assuredly S. Ignatius in all points was so perfect a Roman Catholic, that
if now according to his profession in the Primitive Church, he should live,
and practice in England, as being sent thither by S. Peter, our late
Parlamentarians, in their tumultuous humors, so cruelly disposed against the
Church of God, would instead of lions in Traian his Theater in Rome, find out
Butchers at Tyburne to cut him in pieces.

Wherefore Reverend Fathers, I rejoice with you, that you have such
Adversaries, who be the vowed enemies of Truth, who be, as speaks S. Ignatius
of some, rather Christempori quam Christiani. Ep. ad Trallens. that is, rather
Christetymers, then Christians. Neither need I inform you about their manner
of proceeding in the cause of Theology, or encourage you to continue in your
Combat against them; in that your learning for the one, and your known zeal
for the other, need no supporte from my writings or informations. Only this I
have endighted to remove a scandal raised by Featlye, and in this quarrel to
join with you. Hoping that as now we be Combattants against the enemies of
Almighty God; so shall we one day in his presence, and Court enjoy him, and
the fellowship of one another. In the mean season I remain most entyrely
affected to both your persons, and yours

In Christ JESUS, ED. WESTON.
From Bruges this present Feast of S. James the Apostle. 1624.
FINIS.

