Wits A. B. C.

Or A Centurie of Epigrams.

AT LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorp, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Tigers head in Paul's Churchyard.

To the intelligent Reader.
IF I should go about to fashion a title, on a fit block for bellua multorum
capitum, the many headed multitude, it would be hic labor, hoc opus, as hard
as to paint a Camelion, (which is very variable in his color) or to fit
Proteus with a suit, who is always changing his form. As for the common
titles, kind, gentle, loving, and courteous Reader; they are so stale (and
therefore out of fashion) that they would scarce be respected, so near of a
size, that they will hardly fit such variety of sconces and therefore I refuse
them: and though I should turn over whole volumes of Synonimaes, I should not
find any so significant, to be correspondent to the fashion, or faction, of
the rabble of Readers, for some you shall have, so high in the forehead, that
the Tankard fashion will be too low, and they will be pushing at me: some
Weesill pated, having little heads, and less wit, and yet with their dudgen
judgments they will generally stab at what-so-euer their slender capacities
cannot conceive: other there are, whose heads indeed are of a block in Folio,
but their wit is in the least decimo sexto, so that it must be that Locus is
not aequalis locato, and by consequence a great vacuum, or else their skuls are
of such an extraordinary thickness, that one must (as artificers do when they
would enter a nail into a hard piece of wood) bore a hole, before he can make
a jest have clear passage, into their gross Caputs, and they will stand with
hum, and ha, three parts of an hour over one poor Epigram, and at length
(because Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis) they will give
sentence that it is dull. Such a number there are of these sorts of unmerciful
judges, that it is enough to make a man turn Satyr, and tear them limme
meal with bitter words. But for my part, I appeal from their censures, and
not liking them, I will leave them, and come to my purposed Reader.

Intelligent Reader, having at idle times scribled a few rimes, or Epigrams,
and being willing to set them out to the view of the world, as Apelles did his
pictures. But not being able to lie under the bulk of every man's censure (as
he did) and so to mend any thing I see is a fault, as also to reprehend any
prating Cobbler, with ne suitor vltra crepidam. I have chosen thee my only
reader if it were possible, at least my patron against all causeless
fault-finding fools, hoping that (being it is the first lesson I have taken in
Wits-schoole) thou will favor me if I be not witty. (The first time I have made
a show of Poetry) thou will pardon me, if I be not Poetical. But howsoever,
non mihi Suffenus ero, whether thou speak with me, or against me, I will
subscribe to thy judgment: and so wishing thee as much pleasure in reading my
Epigrams, as I had recreation in writing them, I rest.

Thine as I find cause,

Author ad Musas.
GReat Jove's fair Daughters, loving Sisters nine,
Behold me prostrate at your learned shrine;
You heavenly Nymphs keeping Pernassus hill,
Inspire my mind, and eke direct my quill.
Grant me your wills, with Wit that I may write,
And teach me Wit, your wills for to endite.
And that I may the sooner perfect be;
Let me straightway begin Wits A. B. C.
Wits A. B. C.
Liber ad Lectorem. 1.
I Hardly did escape the Printers Press,
It did so rudely crush my tenderness:
And now I fear more harm will me befall,
If I long lie upon the Stationers stall.
Some-time I shall be nayld unto a post,
And som-time rashly torn, pincht, scratcht, and crossed:
Reader therefore, in kindness let me woo thee:
To free me hence, sixe-pence will not undo thee.
O Mores. 2.
FOlly has lately crowned Fashion king,
Fashion commands, fashion rules every thing.
In court, in country, in city, and town,
Old, young, men, women fear fashions frown.
For ask your Satin swaggring Caualiere,
Wherefore his purse contains scarce one deniere?
Or why he walks dinnerlesse in Paul's,
As if he prayed for departed souls?
Heel say it is gallants fashion, and that purse
And belly both, for fashion fare the worse.
Ask him again why's suit is quite out-wore,
Before he has dischargd the tailors score?
Or why he does his nose with soote vp-choake?
But none forbid a man to feed himself,
Does Phagus well (I pray you tell me) then?
Who often uses swearing for his need,
Some times with oaths, he does his belly feed.
In Croesum, 7.
CRoesus has got a pretty trick of late,
To coosen any needy borrowing mate,
Two chests he has, the one stands in his hall,
And that the world, the other he his friend does call,
The which is in his closet cramd with gold,
But that chest he calls world, noe cross does hold,
And when that any borrower does come,
Asking to borrow any greater sum,
Then well upon his credit he dare leave,
With this his new found trick heel him deceive,
I swear quoth he (sitting on's empty chest)
I am not now with so much money blessed,
For in this world (my want this time is such)
I know not how to get you half so much,
The man thinks he means plainly, does depart,
Although perhaps but with a heavy heart:
If it be one whom he entends to friend,
Upon whose credit he dare so much lend,
Then thus: I have it not, but this I Will do,
I Will if I can my friend for so much woo,
And up unto his gold cramd chest he goes,
Which stuffed with many golden crowns, oreflowes,
His friend is kind, and pressed at his command,
Take what he will, he will not him withstand,
Then down he comes, and tells what he has done:
How with entreaty he his friend has won.
The other thanks him much, and thinks him kind,
That he has took such pains to please his mind.
Nay thank my friend (says he) for your good speed,
For he it is has helped you at your need.
In Cottam. 8.
COtta when he has dined, says Lord be praysd,
Yet never praises God for meat or drink;
Since Cotta speaks, and not practices,
He speaks surely, what he does not think.
Tobacco. 9.
THings which are common, common men do use
The better sort do common things refuse,
Yet Countries cloth breech, and Court velvet hose,
Puff both a like, Tobacco through their nose.
In Superbum. 10.
RVstique Surperbus fine new clothes has got,
Of taffata, and velvet fair in sight:
The show of which has so bewicht the sot,
That he thinks Gentleman to be his right.
But he is deceived, for true that is of old,
An ape's an ape though he wear cloth of gold.
Gentility, 11.
IN former times were none called Gentlemen
But those whose higher spirits fame did win,
Either in learning passing other men,
Or else whose valiant acts had famous bin:
Learning, and Valor, then were known to be,
The only fountains of Gentility,
These Eagle like, could gaze against the Sun,
By them conioynd all brave exploits were done.
But now the world is changed, the Kite is crept
Into the Eagles nest; each baser swain
Has undeserved name of credit reapt.
For such as have [Experience shows it plaine]
More wealth, then Wit, more vailes, then valor are
In gentle blood now thought to bear a share.
But wrong it were unto true Gentle blood
It should be staind with such a bastard brood.
A Paradoxe. 12.
Dives his house has cost a thousand pound,
For he has built it newly from the ground:
It Is fairer now then when his father lived,
It Is better built and better far contrived:
But yet of late I saw a poor man weep:
Saying his father a better house did keep.
Wherefore to me A Paradoxe it seemed,
That what was worse, could yet be better deemd.
In Gallum. 13.
GAllus who was so long unmarried,
Has now at length [he thinkes] a maiden wed,
She is not old, he hopes she will bear a child
To be his heir: but sure he is beguild:
For ground leaves of to bear, which long has bore,
And she has borne so much, she will bear no more.
In Lycippum. 14.
LYcippus you will yield your wife's a whore,
Your self a cuckold, but you grante no more,
I say then you must a whore-master be,
That you deny, i will prove it openly:
Who loves, lives with, likes, and lies with a whore
Is a whoremaster, you do this therefore
You needs must yield, although with much ado,
That a right cuckold's a whoremaster too.
A Little thing. 15.
SImon, and Sisse his wife are fallen out,
He Is kind enough, yet she laughes him to scorn,
She scolds, and frowns, and calls him ass and lout,
Swearing that she will make him wear the horn*
And yet the cause as Fame the news does bring,
Is all about a very little thing.
In Alphonsum. 16.
ALponsus lately went to learn the French,
For Linguam mulierum well he loved:
And where his teacher lay, he found a wench,
Though part he liked, the whole he more approved.
In Quandam. 17.
IF Grace step out of doors into the street,
But toward Church, or with a friend to meet:
What is the cause it may be some will ask,
Why she still goes hooded in her mask;
Grace is afraid, although to her disgrace,
The wind, or rain will mar her painted face.
In Baldum. 18.
ARt mendes nature, Baldus can tell as much,
And by experience his skill is such,
For had it not been so, as 't well be fald,
He knows his false hayrd head, had yet been bald,
But when that nature was deficient,
Therein, Art presently her succor lent.
And therefore head, and beard do not agree,
Cause nature, and art much differing be.
In Gelliam. 19.
GEllia has been at Cookry, many a day,
A Cooks her father, so her master is:
Then she must needs dress flesh well you will say,
It Is probable, but yet you judge amiss.
For She so much from all good chookry's turned,
That flesh has come from her, half raw, half burnd.
In Quandam. 20.
IS she that Merchants wife? I know that face,
And sure have seen it, in some other place;
Lets see, did I not meet her on the way?
Or se her at a Sermon, or a play,
Or where was it? in faith it would please me well,
If I for certeinty the place could tell;
Oh now I haue't, (...) not worth a louse:
It Was but her picture, at a baudy house.
Misogunes his Inuectiue against women. 21.
THE are called women quasi woe, to men;
The which is proved to true, now and then.
And diverse men, by getting of a wife,
Dove often hazard living, lim, and life,
For they are faithless, cruel, and unkind;
Unconstant, and disloyal, still in mind
Thei'le hate you deadly, when you would swear they love,
When you most trust them, they unfaithful prove.
Women are proud, immodest, and unchaste,
Vice reigns in them, virtue's quite defaced,
Their faults are many, though they them disguise,
All which I Will truly thus Epitomize:
Sirens in show, in word, and deed they are devils,
The only fountain of all human evils.
Philogunes his answer. 22.
BLack mouthed Zoilus, base Misogune,
Monster of men, infernal progeny,
Whose cancred soul to naught is circumflexe,
But wrongfully to abuse the femall sex:
One tale is good until another's heard,
When mine is ended, thine will quite be mard.
Women are fellow-helpers, men's relief,
A comfort, and copartners in their grief:
A man when once he has obtained a wife,
Does after live a quiet, pleasing life,
For they being faithful, loyal* and most kind,
Do rid all sorrows, from a grieved mind.
They love men dearly, constant is their love,
Though you mistrust them, they most faithful prove
Women are sober, modest, humble, chaste,
Vice they defy, virtue in them is graced.
Their praise is great, the which in brief I Will tell,
[Let them control me if I do it not well]
In show they are Saints, in word and deed most kind
The sole perfection of the human kind.
Philologus his moderation. 23.
MIsogunes who hates woman's name,
Does what he can that sex for to defame,
And being wronged by some, says constantly,
That all women want shame and honesty.
In brief heel falsely swear, in his mad mood,
That never any of that sex proved good.
But Philogunes on the adverse part,
Being mild in word, and far more mild in heart.
And having of that sex some favors had,
Says never any woman was known bad.
The one does wrongfully them all despise,
The other does extol them to the skies:
The one most churlishly does all miscall,
The other soothingly commends them all.
Thus both do err, being both in the extreme,
For all men err, who do not keep the mean.
Wherefore let me [free from affection]
Being not wronged by any, yet bound to none:
Speak freely what I think, and end this strife,
Without displeasing widow, maid or wife.
The fairest garden, bears some stinking weed,
The fertil'st ground with wheat brings Cockle seed.
But why do they then use that Bacchus weed?
Because they mean then Bacchus like to feed.
Good-fellowes. 30.
THey that will haunt the Tauernes day by day,
And drink till they cannot a wise word say,
Are not accounted drunkards now adays,
But they are called good-fellowes (as their praise)
And right they are called, for they good-fellowes be,
Good fellows for a drunken company.
In Bacchum. 31.
POt lifting Bacchus to the earth did bend
His knee, to drink a health unto his friend:
And there he did so long in liquor power,
That he lay quite sick drunk upon the flower.
Judge, was not there a drunkards kindness shown?
To drink his friend a health, and loose his own.
In Flaccum 32.
FLaccus being young, they said he was a gull,
Of his simplicity each mouth was full:
And pitying him they would say the foolish lad,
Would be deceived sure of all he had.
His youth is past, now may they turn him loose,
For why the gull, is grown to be a goose.
In Bembum. 33.
BVshy chind Bembus, in his angry mood,
Against one [offending him] who by him stood,
Called him boy, meaning his great disgrace,
Why boy? because he had no hairs in's face,
Bembus great beard does sure his wit empaire,
If he think manhood, does consist in hair.
A rich man. 34.
He Is rich that has great In-comes by the year,
Then that great bellied man is rich i will swear:
For sure his belly nere so big had bin,
Had he not daily had great commings in.
Paynters. 35.
APelles heretofore began Venus paint,
But durst not finish out so great a saint:
Painting of Venus then you see was rare
That Apelles to do it would not dare.
But age has made her youthful beauty fade
And of Apelles now she would be glad:
For, he being dead, what shift [poore soule] she makes
Not liking others she her maidens takes
For Painters, they the art of painting learn,
And by that art, they praise of beauty earne:
Venus held them so close unto their trade,
That they by use are perfect painters made.
How cunningly they can a wrinkle hidd,
A spot, a mole, a scarre, a pockhole wide,
And die their cheeks, and lips, with blushing red,
Where never any naturally was bred,
To paint so common is among female kind,
That few women's true faces now we find.
In Caluos. 36.
COrnutus asked me, how such hap befalld,
His brethren of the town, that most were balld,
I told him thus (being loath to say him nay)
Their cruel horns, do fear their hayres away,
If it be so (quoth he) dissolve this doubt,
Why hind part's hayrd, when forepart is without?
I said, though leasser fear the greater might,
Yet then they are secure, when out of sight,
So hayres may be in that place, without fear,
Because their horns, cannot epsy them there.
Aenigma, 37.
Among burden-bearing creatures there is one,
That diffreth from the rest, is like to none,
They when they take their burdens up, do griue,
And to throw't from them earnestly do strive,
And being disburdned once, then they rejoice.
But this I mean is diffring in it is choice,
It takes, and bears most willingly, being easd,
Then, then alas it is most of all displeased.
Thou shall be Oedipus if thou not miss,
To tell what kind of creature this same is.
A winding hound. 38.
THat puppie has some ex'lent virtue sure,
Thy Mistress can with her so well endure:
No great virtue Sir, but it is a winding hound,
They say brought lately, from the land new found.
My Mistress loves it still with her to have,
Because it does oft-time her credit save.
The reason why, if you do seek to find,
My Mistress indeed, is troubled with the wind.
In Clotum. 39.
NEw married Clotus to the Fence-schoole goes,
Which makes each wonder that the matter known
That he who did it not (before) delight,
Should now at length, being married learn to fight.
Some think that one has challengd him the field,
And fears his want of skill will make him yield,
Or that he does his skill in fighting mend,
That he the better may his wife defend.
This may be true, but I dare lay my life,
The yongster does it now to match his wife.
In Morum. 40.
MOrus whose fame cried cuckold to his face,
Both to his own and's wifes no small disgrace:
Heard one read lately in Philosophy,
That what had horns from teeth above was free,
Is It true (quoth he?) Philosophy say so:
Then henceforth for a cuckold i will not go,
If cuckold. I had horns* if horns? no teeth
That I no cuckold am then each man sees?
To speak more plainly to each foolish daw,
Let them feel have teeth in my vper iawe:
Morus that's wife is honest now will swear,
And of a horn he stands not in fear:
As long as his old rotten teeth do last,
Heel think he is not with forked order graced.
Horns. 41. Husband.
WHen thou art whorish I do wear the horn,
But why should I for thine own faults bear skorne?
If thou offend, do thou for it be blamed,
And let not me for thine offense be shamed.
Wife.
IF I have horns, I on my head must bear them,
Tha'rt my head, and therefore thou shall wear them:
In Papam. 42.
THe Pope of all the world is supreme head,
As he him self and Papists testify:
He is condemned as one with error led,
That dares gainesay his sole supremacy,
And sure he erres, that is not of this belief,
That amongst sinners, he is supreme, and chief.
Monks and Friars. 43.
Monks and Friars, are holy Fathers named,
Nor may they that do call them so, be blamed:
For the great number of their bastard breed,
Shows they are wholly Fathers al indeed.
A Puritan. 44.
A Certain fellow of the purest sect,
(Who outwardly did holiness respect)
Could not endure a surplice in the Church,
But lately he was took in such a lurch:
That he that could not with a surplice bear,
Did now himself in the church a white sheet wear
A Bible-bearer. 45.
A Brother of the Bible-bearing trade,
Me to his sect did earnestly persuade,
Saying it was good from wicked men to abstain,
And follow rather his Sects holy vain:
We holy men (quoth he) by the spirit live,
It guides our deeds, it does us council give:
Judge 't is not true, if I be not beguilde,
Some spirit moved him to get's maid with child.
In Papam. 46.
THe Papists say the Pope is Peter's heir,
Has Peter's power, and sits in Peter's chair,
In part it is true, the Papists have not lied,
For he like Peter has his Christ denied.
Problema. 47.
WHat Papists maintains, Protestant does defend,
Why then do not their controversies end?
In Immeritum. 48.
Immeritus has got a benifice,
Alas poor fool, I know it is all but lies,
It is impossible, such an ass as he,
Should so much in a Patrons favor be;
No man of wisdom I think is so mad,
To accept of him whilst scholars may be had.
Tush scholars are not esteemd: and he can,
Give money fort, as well as any man.
That's not the way for then he is forsworn,
And perjury by the law cannot be borne:
He swore that he was free from Simony,
Either directly, or indirectly.
Had I bin by, I would have been so bold,
To have said that he a direct lie had told,
For whether or no you call it Simony,
In it most plainly you money see.
With money he swore he did not buy it,
Yet with money's worth he did come by it,
For he has twenty tricks (who'd think the daw
Had so much wit) to fallify the law,
Heel give you forty pounds for a good horse,
And that with his patron for a jade heel skorce,
Or for a jade (as he unskillful were)
Heel give his patron twenty times too dear.
Or else heel give (rather then want a shift)
Thus much still yearly for a new-yeares gift,
Or lay a hundred pounds, in ieopardy
With His patron he shall never parson be
Of such a place, perhaps then vnsupplied:
Both stand to th'bargaine, till the truth be tried,
But's greedy patron straight on him bestows
The living, so he does his money lose.
Thus whilst Desert sits closely at his book,
Immeritus takes all with golden hook,
No more i will tell, least that some learn of me,
Whilst that I carpe at such base knavery,
But such a patron, such an vnletterd ass
For fit companions, thorugh the world may pass.
In Indoctum. 49.
WHat I have bought 's mine own, none will deny
Indoctus then got 's living lawfully;
[Though some say no] for this I can be bold
To say, that it was truly bought and sold.
Fortune favors fools. 50.
POets say Fortunes blind, and cannot see,
And therefore to be borne withal if she
Sometime drop gifts, on undeserving wight:
But sure they are deceaue'd, she has her sight:
Else could it not at all times so fall out,
That fools should have, when wise men go without.
Ad Fortunam. 51.
Unconstant Fortune, follies favorite,
Worlds turning weather cock: true mirits spite
Goddess whom none but only fools adore,
Patroness, whose aid wisemen nere implore,
Favor those worldlings that do fear thy looks,
He that is wise will nere come in thy books.
In Crispum. 52.
AMongst those Fortune favors some excel,
And from their fellow fools do bear the bell,
Whilst some climb up by th'spoakes of Fortunes wheel,
Crispus did suddenly her favor feel,
For only by food favoring fortunes might,
Before he is Gentleman, he is made a Knight.
A new art. 53.
THe fame were great of golden Alchymy,
Were not it is the Actors beggary:
An Art found out by th'gallants of our days,
Were honest, did deserve far greater praise,
Who practice that, thereon their substance spend.
Who practice this, thereby their substance mend.
That is not strange, cause it is by learning wrought:
But this, by such, scarce er'e of learning thought,
For Ciuet gallants bearing Thrasoes looks,
Can extract ^
thousands out of Merchants books,
Is it not wondrous rare, speak as you think,
To draw wealth out of Paper, Pen, and Ink?
Ad Lectorem. 54.
IF Seigneur Satin chance on this to look,
And fuming draw his poyniard, stab the book:
If (finding's art reueald) he curse, and swear,
What he would to the author were he there.
Entreat him kindly, and his patience crave,
Saying thereby he shall more Scholars have.
In Theologum quendam. 55.
VAcuum, and Infinitum are denied,
To have a being in Philosophy,
One body cannot see it self divide:
To have at once more places properly.
Although all this be true in general,
Yet our Theulogus will all confute,
Not by learning, or wit Sophistical,
But by appearance, though be quite mute:
All things considered if he come in view,
I know you will yield the subsequents are true.
His great, great head a Vacuum does contain,
Of wit I mean, as by his talk appears,
His belly Infinitum, does retain,
For it unmeasurable compass bears.
His proper place his multiplicity,
Unto his neighbors very well is known,
Him to have many places who will deny,
That has so many livings of his own.
Now I pray judge whether this man be wise,
Being subject to that Philosophy denies.
In Quosdam. 56.
MAny have two livings (two places then)
The which is hated much of learned men.
And it is noe marle if scholars do defy it.
Since that Philosophy does quite deny it.
In Proteum. 57.
PRoteus will now at length a surplice wear,
But yet with hood, and cap he will not bear,
Some think it strange why he would that digest,
Being all indiffrent and not like the rest.
But it was in policy, because he knew,
He should wear none had every man his due.
In quendam. 58.
YOu do him mighty wrong now by this light,
But Esquiere, and take the wall of him being knight
Content your self, I hope noe harm is done,
Though he be Knight, he is but a Yeomans son.
In Musicos. 59.
TIme is a jewel far exceeds all cost,
Yet stays not long ere suddenly it is lost,
It Is time, that brings both learning, wealth, and wit,
And every one wants those that wants it.
What is there wished for by the humane kind,
That not in time we easily may find?
How happy men were then, if time would bide,
How happy men if it would not from them slide?
Thrice happy they then who can it command,
With nod of head, with stamp, with stroke of hand
And whilst some moaning their lost time do weep
Can singinge merrily, it with them keep,
So little they, not keeping time, do fear.
That over it they prouly dominere.
Sometime they make it slow, now faster run,
Now triple that, now as they first begun,
Sometime they will have it brief, now large, now long.
Or what they please and all this for a song.
In Eosdem, ad quendam. 60.
MOunseiur Crotchet me thought was very blithe,
At this, and mouing's lips did show his teeth,
Smiling to hear himself and 's art in rhyme,
To be so much admired for keeping time,
But Crotchet d' ye hear? though time a jewel is,
And though you seld in keeping time do mis:
Yet such you are, that when you keep time least,
Then it is mainfest you keep time best.
When you keep time (though strange) then time you loose,
Time slides, when you a time to keep time choose,
Beside mark what unto your fellow's fald,
How time at length has made his cockscomble bald.
In Grillum. 61.
Cards, Dice and Bowls, and every idle game
Grillus does use and them his pastime name*
That he lives wondrous idely that does show,
For time will pass not idely spent, we know.
The Shepeards dog, 62.
THe Shepeards dog should bark, and bay,
That he may fear the coming wolf away,
He should be watchful, and not given to sleep,
And swift, quickly to turn the straying sheep,
But if the curre being dumme can no noise make,
Then will the wolf away the youngling take:
If he be grown so fat he cannot go,
Then in the sheepe-fold will there be great woe,
If he be sluggish, and will do no good?
Let him be hanged, let other have his food.
In Varum. 63.
VArus they say is a rank Papist known,
How ere in works, in words it is not shown.
For if you mark his strange protesting vain,
How deeply he protests in matters plain,
And how he does with pretestations mix
His common speech, still I protest betwixt,
You Will say how ere to others he do seem,
That you him a great Protestant do deem.
In Leucum. 64.
LEucus loves life, yet lives wickedly,
He hates death, yet wishes he may die
Honestly, and well: so what is naught he loves,
And what he would have good he not approues.
Problema. 65.
Since bed, and sleep do figure death and grave,
And of them both all men such practice have,
And seeing that practice makes each man excel,
Tell me why every man does not die well?
In Loquacem. 66.
BIg bombast words Loquax did disgorge,
As if he were more valiant then Saint George:
And swore that he in fight would never fear,
Knight, or Esquier, or what soever he were,
But being tried he quickly ran away,
Whereby I found that he the truth did say,
I none will fear said he, and true he said,
For none of such a cow will be afraid.
In Extremum. 67.
EXtremus is extremely proud of late,
And yet for wealth he may be Irus mate,
He has as little wit as heretofore,
And in good qualities he is very poor.
What then is it that makes the foolish ass,
Without all reason thus in pride to pass?
Why he can swear well, and has got good cloths
And is proud of's apparel and his oaths.
In Pisonem. 68.
AGe and diseases threaten Piso's life,
And yet the aged sier will have a wife,
One foot already 's placed in the grave,
And yet he will a female fellow have,
Wherefore I think (a thing but seldom seen)
Although his head be gray, his tail is green.
Fast, and Pray, Feast and Play. 69.
FAsts, and Feasts exceeding diffring be,
And yet in name they almost do agree,
To Pray, and Play are actions different,
And yet in found but little dissident,
Add E excess to Fast then it is a Feast,
Change Religion.
R. for Licentiousness.
L. so Pray to Play is wrest.
In Glaucum. 70.
GLaucus you say does Hebrew learn, and Greek,
And with great pains the skill thereof does seek,
But pray tell Glaucus this that he take heed
Least that his learning do his danger breed:
For Grecians p, and Hebricians
Have many brought to an untimely death.
In Pansophum. 71.
Pansophus is a scholar wondrous rare,
Beside his skill in tongues, is past compare:
For he can speak some of Italian, Dutch;
English, Spanish, French and Greek his skill is such*
In a word, he speaks some of nine or ten
As for example he can say Amen.
In Galbum. 72.
I Saw a letter which from Galbus came
Wherein he wrote three letters for his name;
I was told also that it is still his use,
Therefore (me thinks) the more his own abuse:
For every one that haps the same to see,
Will think him a Homo trium liter^^^^.
three lettered man to be.
Tobacco. 73.
T. TImes great consumer, cause of idleness
O. Old alehouse haunter, friend of dronkenese
B. Bewitching weed, vainest wealths consumer
A. Abuse of wit, stinking breaths perfumer,
C. Cause of entralles blackness, bodies drier,
C. Cause of natures slacknesse, quenching her fire,
O. Offense to many, bringing good to none,
E. Ever be thou hated till thou be quite gone.
In Gracchum. 74.
GRacchus his house has chimnies round about,
Yet there is no smoke at all that does come out
Which made me wonder often what cause might be,
Why from so many I no smoke could see,
But now I hear, that he to favor those,
Makes all the smoke in's house go through his nose.
In Crispam. 75.
CRispa brags of the sweetness of her breath,
And that it like a Panthers is she says,
Indeed when I her countenance behold,
I am persuaded she the truth has told,
For likely it is that nature to do her grace,
Gave her a Panthers breath to her Panthers face.
In Floram. 76.
THough Flora swears shes fair, believe her not,
For beauty never yet fell to her lot,
Or if it did; then sure in her it was sin,
To cover beauty with so foul a skin.
In Cretam. 77.
CReta does love her husband wondrous well,
It needs no proof, for every one can tell,
So strong's her love that if I not mistake,
It does extend to others for his sake.
Pope Ioane, 78.
THe Pope is God the Papists dare not say,
Yet that he is merely man they do denay,
But all of them in this thing do agree.
Him something nether God, nor man to be,
Their reasons for it are but small, or none,
Unless they seek to prove it by Pope Ioane,
And so indeed they may bring it to pass,
For she (nor God, nor man) a woman was.
In Eandem, 79.
A Pope may be deceived I see it now,
Their Synodes to may err I Will show you how,
If that Pope Ioane for certain had foreseen,
The time when her deliverance should have been,
She would have shunned a thing so far unmeet,
And not have fallen in travel in the street,
Could not their Synodes err from the truths scope
They never would have made a woman Pope.
In Pontum. 80.
It Is true that whence a thing at first is bred,
With that it is ever after nourished,
As Pontus being made Gentleman by wealth,
By wealth keeps his Gentility in health.
For if you take away his fortunes good,
He has not then one drop of gentle blood.
In Clytum, 81.
CLytus to get himself the greater fame,
Braggeth of what an ancient house he came,
Of what good blood: that you may him believe
The better I this testimony give:
Clytus his blood is surely good indeed,
Cause he will cry straight if (being hurt) he bleed:
The house so ancient was where he was bred,
That it was like to fall on's fathers head.
In Mopsum, 82.
MAnnerly Mopsus fearing to offend,
Does with Sirreuerence his speeches mend,
Sir-reuerence if he speak of's shoes, or hose,
Sir-reuerence if he say he blowd his nose,
Sir-reuerence if he name his cart, or plough.
Sirreuerence if he tell of Pig, or Cow.
In brief almost what ere he means to speak,
Before it sir-reuerence the way does break.
Such manners sir-reuere^ce, Mopsus learnd at schole,
That now sir-reuerence Mopsus is a fool.
In Caluum. 83.
CAlvus leave of your often vncouerie,
That you were bald at first time I did see,
Keep on good Calvus, pray be covered,
I had rather see your hat then your bald head.
In Sophistam. 84.
SOphista says he can prove, ay marry can,
A stock, a stone, or tree to be a man;
Black to be white, water to be fire,
Earth to be air; or what you will desire:
Yea all things you do think impossible,
He easily can prove them possible.
Then pray let us hear (with all his fallacies)
If he can prove himself or rich, or wise.
In Maritum. 85.
MAritus has skill in Philosophy
They say, but I imagine him to be
Philosophy it self; my reason's this,
Cause Corpus mobile his subject is.
In Graium. 86.
GRaius, now says that his wife, and he
After long strife, like quiet sheep agree:
A fit comparison: I think the same,
For why? his horns show he is like a Ram.
In Pretum. 87.
THE old disease will Pretus sure betide,
I see that he the horne-plague must abide,
For but a while he has been married,
And he already has a velvet head.
In Biscum. 88.
I Pray you sir give Biscus leave to speak,
The Gander loves to hear himself to creake.
In Claium. 89.
CLaius while's father liue'd to school was set
The knowledge of arithmeticke to get,
Which he obtained: his father being dead
He since has it in order practiced.
And first he Numeration began,
Which all the parcells of his wealth did scan,
Next by Addition in sum he made,
The worth of all he in possession had,
But before he these two had practisd well.
He foolishly unto Subtraction fell,
That he found easier then the other two,
And parted from't with very much ado,
But yet at length from it he got him gone,
And past unto Multiplication,
By it he should have multiplied his store,
From which he had subtracted late before,
But unto him so difficult it was,
That he by no means could bring it to pass,
Wherefore he to Division went,
In practice whereof so much time he spent,
That he assayd Reduction in vain,
Being hard to join divided wealth again,
And foolish it was to try Progression,
Having no matter left to work upon,
Unless he would prove Arithmetician right,
And name something when nothing is in sight.
In Eundem. 90.
CLaius does know all Arithmeticke well,
But in Extracting roots he does excel,
For in his fathers late, well wooded ground,
Scarce any roots of trees can now be found,
Aenigma. 91.
THere is a certain flower the earth does bear,
Which upon it the Princes name does wear,
It has no pleasant sound, no taste, no smell,
Yet pleases ears, and tongue, and nose full well,
No curious subject for the touch, or sight,
And yet both hand, and eye it does delight.
It Is operation is exceeding strange,
In men, and humane things it causes change,
It makes some masters, and it makes some slaves,
(According as each man himself behaues)
Sometime it causes peace, and sometime war,
It makes some men love, and some men jar,
In breife, it is cause of many contraries,
Now what this flower is, do thou devise.
In Priscum. 92.
WHy does Priscus still strive to have the wall?
Because he is, often drunk and fears to fall.
Ad Cinnam. 93
WHy how now Cinna down upon thy knees?
This scarce with thy profession agrees,
Thou seldom do bow down thy knees to pray,
What is it now that makes thee thus obey?
I am about to drink whole boules of bear,
Unto mine own sweet mistress health I swear,
Upon thy knees? what do thou surely think
Thy legs will hardly bear up so much drink.
And is thy mistress sweet, a piece so dry,
That her good health does in much liquor lie.
In Cacum ad Lectorem. 94.
CAcus will dice, and drab, and steal, and lie,
Be drunk, and curse, and swear most horribly
And yet he would have me I should him commend
Unto his father, brother, uncle, friend;
I do confess it is a common thing
Commendations from friend, to friend to bring
But (Reader) first I pray thee let me learn
If thou think he does commendations earne?
Ad Musicos discordantes. 95.
NAy fie, Musicians and at discord fall,
The wrong to your profession is not small:
You say that discord's sound most harsh to' the ear,
Then why do you now with a discord bear?
You do profess a skill in Musickes ground,
Yet do you Music wrong by discord's sound?
When you do sing, and play you do agree,
And when you say, and do will it not be?
This makes me think since play, and song's but sport
That you do but agree in jesting sort.
In quendam, ad Lect. 96.
I Pray gentlemen pacify the man,
And mitigate his choler if you can,
I fear he will do harm to some one by,
If that his choler do abide so hie.
Aenigma In Dondellum ad Gal: Ling. stud. 97.
Drowsy Dondellus has no voice to sing
No skill to set prove, prick, or any thing
That may be said to singing does belong,
And yet great practice he has had in song,
And thereby he has profited full well,
But how this same may be, let us hear you tell.
A sensible man, ad Logicos. 98.
CIuis commends the chiefest of their town
Saying he to excel the rest in wisedome's known
Nay more (says he) I easily prove it can
That he is a very sensible man:
Yea each that would his friend for wisdom praise,
That he is a sensible man he says:
But is it true? is nature now grown poor?
Are axioms false? is man worse then before?
And do you think that it is possible,
That being men they be but sensible?
If it be true, what asses are the rest?
When as the wisest is but like a beast.
In Mathum ad Academicos. 99.
Look not that Mathus will come for's degree,
For I am sure he never will master be,
Not that he wants will, but as they say
His wife does privately his grace denay.
Unhappy chance, and least it may be so
To you* Be masters before you thence do go.
Ad librum. 100.
IF that Seuerus my Epigrams do see,
And frowning say that they be idle rimes,
I prithee tell Seuerus this from me,
It Is true, for they were made at idle times.
Claudite iam risos Musae, sat turba biberunt.
FJNIS.

