Jacobs Well:

Jacobs Well: OR, A SERMON Preached before the Kings most Excellent Majesty
at Saint Albans, in his summer progress 1612.

By WILLIAM WESTERMAN, Bachelar of Divinity, and Chaplain to the most
Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, his GRACE.

LONDON, Printed by John Beale, for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Fox. 1613.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, GEORGE, by divine providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, primate of all England, and Metropolitan,
one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, my very good Lord.
MOst Reverend Eather, and my very honorable good Lord; I will not say it was
my hap, but the providence of God, and my happiness, to preach this Sermon,
before my dread Sovereign, in his summer progress, at Saint Albans: where,
beside, that I was an eare-witnesse of the wisdom of Solomon, and a divine
Oracle, speaking through his gracious lips: I did also experiment it to be
true of his highness, which was once uttered concerning a Roman Emperor: Qui
apud te audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant: qui nonaudent, bumanitatem.
Senec. controu. lib. 7. contr. 8.
He that dares speak before him, knows not his greatness, and he that dares
not speak before him, knows not his goodness. For such is his Majesty, in
Attention, and Attention in Majesty, as is able to make the most Audacious
Timorous, and the most Timorous Confident. What I then delivered, by reason of
so high a presence, so great an Audience, and so ample a Church, has left such
an Echo behind it, as has caused many to hear the sound of it, that heard
not the voice it self: many to report diversely of it, and some earnestly to
desire Copies of the whole Sermon. To satisfy all, and to prevent my often
trouble, and others miss-reporting, who either better it, or worse it in the
rehearsal; I am bold at last to commit it to the Press, and to present it to
your Grace, under the banner of whose patronage and encouragement, as of a most
worthy and eminent Captain in the Israel of God, I am pressed, although an
unworthy Soldier of Christ Jesus, to tender the utmost of my service toward
the benefit of his Church. Now as this Sermon, at the first hearing thereof,
received a most favorable preiudgement, and acceptance, from the deep wisdom
of highest Authority, for the work sake, to the which his Majesty's religious
disposition was seltly-inclinable: so my trust is, that your Graces great
Judgment and learning, for a zeal to the same work, will kindly accept of it
(how small a piece soever,) bearing the stamp of his Majesty's approbation,
and let it pass for Current under your Graces countenance, with more facile
examination, and easy Censure. Touching the Royal purpose and promise of his
Majesty, whereby the repair of the decated Church of Saint Albans, is made
possible, and (I trust) feazable, least any should 2. Cor. 12. 6.
think or speak more then they see, or hear in me, I cannot say that I was
either Author, or any principal means or Mouer in it, except with the fly
upon the Coach, I should cry Ecce quantum pulueris excito: behold what a dust
I made, when I did nothing to the purpose. For who am I first; or indeed any
man; that I, or they, should be able to move the deep thoughts of a Kings
heart; which by a transcedent peculiar, is in Prou. 21. 1.
manu Dei, in the hand of God, to turn as the rivers of water, and to manage
as it pleases him? Nay further, there can be neither action, or Intention,
will, power, or purpose in any man, that is good (how little soever:) but it is
to be reputed as Omne quod habemus bonum gustue est domini. Hieron: ad
Ctesipbont.
gustus Domini, a gust of the Lords goodness, a touch of his finger, whose
providence is the first Mouer, whose Grace is the Center, and whose glory the
Circumference, between which the lines of our lives, and best intendments,
when they go right and straight, are leuelled. And touching the means or
mediating of the business, I can claim little, others much more, and yet none
very much: for such was the religious (...).
propension of his Majesty's royal heart, readily prepared, (as our sweet
Savior sitting at Jacobs well) to do good, that the humble petition of his
loving subjects in St. Albans, was but the discovery of a desperate sore, to a
merciful Physician, who was more ready to cure, then they to complain. Indeed
I confess, that the way being made for me to preach at that time, by that My
Lord of Li^hf. and Covent.
Right Reverend Father then attending his Majesty, (being also an especial
favorite of the motion) I did as a blunt whetstone perhaps a little sharpen the
razor, which had edge enough of it self, and like a Horat: Athletaesuis
incitatoribus sunt fortiorcs, and tamen manes deb^l^or, vt pugnet fortior.
Hieron.
weak stander by, only yield an applause and acclamation to my Sovereign, as
a worthy Sed neque ille exbortatione aliorum indigebat, non magus sane quam
generosissimi pugiles, putrorum acclamatione. Bapl Athanas.
Champion running on so good a race, with so fair a course. Since which time
how constantly his majesty has proceeded, how well the whole business was
speeded and prepared for the public dispatch by that worthy Knight and Sr
Christoph. Parkins.
Mr. of the Requests, formerly acquainted with Church-building, how many
honorable favorites have seconded the proceedings, it were over long to
express. But I cannot pretermit the forwardnes of that right honorable Earl of
Northhampton (so much adorning high Nobility, with exquisite learning, to whom
our Church and state is bound for a Monument in writing of eternal Memory
against all traitorous Romanists) who has richly approved and improued his
godly desire and former promise toward the repair of that Church, with a
freewill benevolence, and first-fruit offering of double weight according to
the Sycle of the sanctuary, as a luckie hansell and example to others, graced
as the best gifts are, with speed and maturitie: so much is S. Albans
beholding to his honor, for a short time of his youthful years there
employed. And what worthy assistance your Grace has afforded toward the
effectual accomplishment of his Majesty's pleasure, not only in this
business, but in that Religious benevolence of late for Prague in Bohemia, all
true Christian hearts do see and acknowledge to the glory of God, cheerfully
contributing to such several good works, and blessing God for the holy
desires of his Majesty toward the Gospel at home and abroad; as also for
your Grace, whose vigilancie standing Centinell upon the highest watchtower of
the Church under God and his Maiestic is ready to apprehend all occasions for
the Advancement of Religion, Charity, and Learning. Neither are the Religious
purposes of his Majesty, thus happily springing up in his royal heart, so
carefully streamed out by your Graces Expedition, but they are answerably
speeded and passed along through the Land, by the most vigilant Prelates.
Especially that My Lord B. of London.
Right Reverend Father, our most worthy Diocesan, Caelestis tuba. Ambros.
that heavenly trumpet, Eloquentiae Regia: Greg: de Basilio.
and Kingly Palace of divine Eloquence, has not only excited many our
brethren to the diligent prensation of the Charities of the better sort, as a
prosperous wind breathing forwardnes into them (that I may use his honors own
words) according to a trust reposed in his Lordshippe, but also does continue a
most honorable care, and cautelous respect to the faithful employment of all
Collections made for that work of Saint Albans, so happily begun, without
anierubs or interruptions, save only such as may serve to make the proceedings
more circumspect and sound. Yet if this work so well becoming the
Magnificence of a Christian King, Letters patents.
(as his Majesty acknowledges) and commended by your Grace for a Christian,
Religious, an holy and acceptable work, should have no opposites, it were
seeing the reedifying of Nehemiah 4. 1.
the Temple had many enemies: and our age is not without many, impugning the
good success of suchlike buildings. The Anabaptist cannot but distaste the
erecting of Churches, and houses of Gods public service, because he stands
upon his own private Inspiration, and never aspireth higher then a conuenticle
at the most. The Libertine who lives at large, cannot but esteem the Church a
Prison, the public Ministry a Sessio^s of Inquiry, where he supposes
himself arraigned, and condemned, and therefore the graves and Tombs are as
the shadow of death, occasioning fear and horror before he comes to execution.
The Popish Recusant, who had wont to make more of the Cage, then of the byrd,
and more of a material Church, then the spiritual Exercises, is out of love
with our houses of prayer, because therein their Mass Priests, and strange
language is silenced, their Images defaced, their Jewish sacrifices, Idolatrous
Inuocations, and Adorations are abandoned. And above all these, the Covetous
politician, cannot choose but be a Church-enemie, whose Mammon is his God, whose
private estate is his Idol, to whom only he buildes his house as a Temple,
and intends all his service: as Jeremy says of such like: Ierem. 22. 14.
he buildes himself a wide house and large Chambers, he makes himself fair
windows, and seeling with Cedar, and paints it with vermilion: but if he see
any thing bestowed on Gods house, or on the Ministry, he cries with the
officious purse-bearer in the Gospel, Mark. 14. 4.
Quorsum haec perditio? To what end is this wast? A less living would suffice,
a lighter Cloak would serve Jupiter, and a less Church would serve the people
to assemble in. Of this sort are they, that by farre-fetched Trenches closely
carried, do seek to undermine and overthrow all, as Eusebius de vita
constant. lib. 1. c. 46.
Licinius in the days of Constantine, underafaire pretense (that the air
without the City was more wholesome then the air within the City where the
Churches stood) would have drawn the people to serve God in the fields, that
he might have Cogitans euer^ionem Ecclesiar^^s, ibid.
demolished the Churches in the City. Neither are they protestants only, as
the Romanists would have it, that would pull down Churches: but the Covetous
politician, whatsoever mask of Religion he puts on, like an Atheist, and,
worse then an heathen, aymeth at the spoil of his God, if it may serve for his
private Emolument. For who were they that first incroached upon Churchliuings,
and drew away the tithes and maintenance from the secular priests, and so by
consequence from the Ministry, under the name of good men, and Religious, but
Monks and Friars? It was Cardinal Wolsey, who by authority from the Pope, to
satisfy his Covetous or Ambitious desires, or both, did pull down sortie
Monasteries, and ransacked them of their wealth. And as by credible testimony,
I have heard it often related, the same Cardinal being sometimes Abbot of the
Monastery of Saint Albans, sent to the Prior and Covent there, that they
should convey up their plate to London, such as being massiue and old, was
grown out of fashion, under color that he would take order for the new
reforming and refyning of that unfashionable silver, which being sent up
accordingly in carts, did so wast in the melting belike that vestigia nulla
retrorsu^, there came nothing back again that ever was heard of. And
whatsocuer face the Papists do make of Church building, yet it seems they
prefer policy before their own devotion, for every where, says a late
Obseruant Trauailer in the low Countries, Mr. Joseph Hall: dec. 1. ep. 5.
Churches fall, and Jesuits Colleges rise; so that not only the fury of
war has ruinated Churches, but even superstition for advantage, does that
among st them, which covetousness would feign do among st us, rob God of
his houses, and service, of his tithes and maintenance. Wherefore the great
Cardinal, who accuses us, to have Angelis and hominibus caelum tenentibus
omnia and illis delita and nobis salutaria Monumenta eripuerunt. Bellar. In
pretat: de lib. Arbit.
bereaved both Saints and Angels in heaven of all Monuments due to them, or
heathfull to us, may a little turn his complaint upon his own friends and
sectaries, and tell them of the spoil and dilapidations occasioned in sacred
and holy things, by their own covetous and ambitious policy. But to leave
their Ruins, and come to our present building: I find several objections
made, a little hindering the forwardness of wel-disposed people toward a work
so good. 1
Some doubt least their should be superstition in building up Churches, seeing
(as they say) we find neither the name of Church in Scripture, nor the
building of Churches commanded. 2.
Others find fault that an Abbey Church should be reedified. 3.
Some are offended with the greatness of it, because a less would serve the
people. 4.
And some again suspect the faithful employment of the money collected. To
all which, seeing I have already exceedeed the length of an Epistle, under your
Graces Reformation, I am bold to answer. 1.
The first, who doubt superstition, and find no Scripture for Churches, I
would desire to remember that, even the Name Church (in our tongue signifying
Church, Kyrith, Dom: the Lords house Angl. Scott: Ger:
Gods house,) is read for the (...) 1. Cor. 11. 18.
place of Christian Assemblies, in St. Paul to the Corinthians: and the
Commandment for building and preparing such places of prayer is included in
that general rule: 1. Cor. 14 26.
let all things be done to edifying; (...) 1. Cor. 14. 40.
let all things be done honestly and by order: which must needs respect the
comlines of the place, if possible to be obtained. And therefore when some at
the first erecting of comely and spacious houses of prayer, in the time of
Constantine cauilled at their greatness and decency, because in pers^cution
they were more homely, the Gangren Council made a Canon against such as should
affirm, that the houses of God ought to be bare and Contemptibiles. Hieron:
Zanch. in prec. 4.
contemptible; for they may be simple and bare upon occasion and necessity,
but they ought not to be so, when there is peace, opportunity and authority
to illustrate them. And whereas it is objected, that there is no express and
particular charge in Scripture for Churches: no more there was for Hospinian:
de orig. Templ. ca. 4.
Synagogues in the law, yet they were builded, and frequented, by the servants
of God, and even by Luke 4. 15. 16. John. 18. 20.
Christ Jesus himself, and the As 15. 21.
Apostles, and they were worthily commended, who did build Luke 7. 5.
Synagogues, when the destruction of them was much lamented. But to free our
selves from suspicion of any Superstitious conceit, of material Churches, we
are not so inamored of them, as the Jews were, or the Papists are, who suppose
an inherent Ps. 74. 8.
holiness in their stones and ornaments, that the building of them is
meritorious to salvation, expiating murders committed; and that private prayers
are Bellarm: de cultu sactorum lib 3. cap. 9.
bettered, when they are uttered within a consecrated Circle. we know that
Christ Jesus is our true and Chrisius verum and catholicuon Dei Templum.
Wolsius in 2. Reg. 12. ex Tertull.
Catholic Temple, which sanctifies our prayers when they are made in him
only; and that through him our bodies and souls, are made Temples of the holy
Ghost, and wheresoever our Supplications are offered in spirit and truth, they
are alike acceptable to God. For what Quid sanctitalis hi lapides habere
poturrant. par: in dedic. Eccl.
sanctity can there be in stones says Saint Bernard, much like a Protestant,
but that Sancta sunt anima propter inhabitantem spiritum Dei in nobis, sancta
sunt corpora propter animas: sacta est ctiam propter Corpora domus. ibid.
the place is made holy by the bodies of Saints there assembled, the bodies are
sanctified by the souls, and the souls by the holy Ghost dwelling in them.
Neither is Churchbuilding a work of it self acceptable to God, but as it is
referred to his service, as it is used for the Assemblies of holy men to
Hospinian: de orig: Templor. 6. 6.
praise God, to pray to him, to hear his word, to administer the sacraments,
and to nourish faith and charity amongst Gods people. Therefore Saint Hierome
reprooues the vanity of great buildings, when men have no care of other
duties and virtues; when they Ad Demetriad: ad Nepolian: Ministrorum nulla
Electra. ib.
adorn their Churches, and make no good choice of Ministers, nor regard the
service of God how slightly that is performed. And Saint Chrysostom
commends building of churches upon this condition, that if a man do it with
other graces and virtues, it Cum cateris bonis additamentum est benis, sine
cateris bonis passio est sacularis gloria. clnys. oper. imperf. in Matt. 23.
is an addition to his other virtues and goodness: but if he have care to
build Churches without other good works, it is but a passion ofsecular and
vain gloris. And when they are built with greatest state, if the word of God
be silenced in them, his service and sacraments polluted, then with Saint
Halirie; we affirm that the Montes mihi and lacus and ^^rceres and 10. ragines
tutrores sunt. Hill contr. Auxent.
Church of God is not bound to fair buildings: but mountains and lakes,
prisons and gulphes, are safer then they. Yet with the truth, and right service
of God, which by his great blessing we enjoy, they are excellent Ornaments,
holy to the Lord, and Tabernacles amiable to all faithful hearts: and with
St. Austin, we say, that Hodie malibomines qui coua^tur si sieri possit, non
esseecclesias vbiillis praedicentur praecepta des, noune and ipsu^ Christium
occiderens, si in terra viuentium inuenirent? August. ser. 220. de tempore.
such as would have no Churches where the Ordinances of God should be preached,
it is likely they would even kill Christ, if they found him again upon the
earth. 2. Secondly whereas some object that the purpose is to reedifie an Abbey
Church, as though it were some needelesse forlorn Monument of superstition; It
is far otherwise: for this Church was reserved from the spoil, purged from
the abuses, and purchased by the inhabitants, for a parish Church, so created
and consecrated to Gods divine service, in the time of Reformation, and by the
Authority of King Edward the sixth of blessed memory, and so has continued,
with the frequent resort of many passengers, and a great people inhabiting the
town. 3. But a less Church (will some say) would serve the people. It is
true, but the^ who should have the parings and the shreds? Arbore deiecta qutuis
colligit ligna.
When a Trce falls, cuerie one gathers up the sticks. Great things by that
means come to little. When his Majesty was pleased to provide for the repair
of this Church, he knew well that a less coat would have served the little
boy in Xenophon, Xenoph. Cyropad.
then his own, and the greater would have fitted the bigger; that a less
Church would have served the people perhaps for fitness, but yet his high
wisdom deemed the preservation of a property to be best Justice: and would
have Suum cuique, every one, his own, were it great or little: supposing it to
be et pessimi exemplinec sui saeculi, a bad example Traian: apud Plinium,
vnbecomming his peaceable and religious government, to suffer the
limme-poling of such venerable Monuments, especially being so necessary for
the recourse of his loving subjects, and bearing witness of the first entrance
of the Christian faith into this Realm, by the blood and Martyrdom of Saint
Alban, being a true story, although something disfigured by the fabulous
Additions of the superstitious. And lastly, touching the fear and suspicion of
the faithful Employment of the money collected, Although I cannot say as the
Prophet, in the time of King Iehoas so peremptorily, there need no account
be taken of the men, to whom the money is delivered for the workmen, because
they deal faithfully: 2 King. 12. 15.
yet it is certain, that hitherto, they have proceeded very carefully,
provided their materials very frugallie, and forwarded the work very
industriouslie, not desiring to ingrosse the money, further then the necessity
of the work requires, and still keeping a book of accounts, therein ready to
exhibit all their proceedings, to the examination and censure of those worthy
Knights adjoining, or to any other well-willer to this business, who shall
request it. For the continuance of which faithful diligence, considering how
strong a motive the vigilant eye, and abundant caution of the Right Reverend
Father, my Lord Bishop of London will be to the under-takers, I dare promise
all good dealing; yet if standers-by may do any good, both I and others have
vowed to be inquisitiue into the business, and (finding any miscarriage,) to
inform and clamor against the faulters. But I rest in hope of a better
Office, wherein I may rather commend their doings, then find fault. In the
mean time, ceasing to be further troublesome to your Grace, I humbly take my
leave, never ceasing to pray, as duty binds me, for the prosperous and
victorious reign of our dread Sovereign, and his royal issue, that the
weakest in his house may be like David, and his house a sure house, like
David's, even like Gods house, and as an Angel of the Lord, before the people:
And for your Grace, that after many successe-full labors in your pastoral
Charge, by ruling and teaching the Church of God, accompanied in this life,
inwardly with comfort of conscience, outwardly with double honor, you may
receive an incorruptible Crown of righteousness and glory, from that great
Shepherd of the Sheep, Christ lesus, our Lord and Savior, Amen.

Your Graces most humble and duetifull Chaplain William Westerman.

JACOBS WELL.
JOHN 4. 6. And there was JACOBS WELL.


LET it not seem absurd that I read this short Chorography, and brief
description, of a matter, in appearance, so small, before this most Illustrious
Audience. Rich treasure may be hidden in a room unlikely, and such a narrow
well as this, may afford much comfortable. water. There was no pin in the
Temple of God, but was serviceable to some holy use: neither is there any jot
or tittle in the scripture of truth, but is profitable for some instruction. At
this fountain, once the King of heaven (veiled in the flesh of our infirmity)
refreshed himself, when he was hungry, wcarie, and thirsty, although rich in
himself, above all: And let my Sovereign Lord, so great a King upon the
earth, in his dcuotions thirsting after the water of Life, at the beginning of
his happy progress, vouchsafe his first repose, out of this well, by the
draught of his unworthy servant, although his own precious heart, be (like
Solomon's) 1. King. 4. 29.
large as the sands, and deep as the waters of the Sea. In this well here
spoken off, the Patriarch lacob left a memorial of his Charity and care for
succeeding ages: and at this well, the God of Jacob left a mirror of his
thirst, for the conversion and comforting of souls. Now to preserve the
remembrance of both, did the Evangelist set down this particular note, in his
holy Map. Out of which, let me be bold, according to the number of the words,
to observe three especial Occurrences: First of the place, There: Secondly, of
a Monument in the place, a Well: Thirdly, of the Author and founder of it,
Jacob: Jacobs Well. A place of note for many circumstances, and this
especially, of our blessed Saviors presence. A monument, not great, but of
good use and benefit, in those dry countries, A well, A founder of much
reverence for his faith, for his works of piety, and charity, as also for
his great Antiquity, Jacob. There was Jacobs Welll.

The first of these occurrences (whereof I purpose to speak least) is the site
and Landship of the place, modelled, or rather folded up in this brief local
demonstratiue, There: but explicated more at large for History and Geographie,
before and after, by former circumstances of Jacob, and later of Christ. For
first the place is bounded out, as being interiacent between Iudaea and
Galile, in the midway between them both. Secondly, the name of the Region,
Samaria, and of the City, Sychar, (so called Maldonat.
for Sychem) is expressed, which was a chief City, seated at Mount Josephus.
Garrizim, where Jacobs sons once made their furious Massacre. Thirdly, the
bordering vicinitie is laid down, as being near to the possession, Genesis 34
that Jacob gave to his son Joseph, which he Genesis 33.
purchased of Hemor, Shechems father. And lastly is described the departure of
our sweet Savior from his own countrymen and brethren, this way passing along
as his journey led him, and here as it were De torrente in via bibens. Psalm,
1 10.
drinking of the brook by the way for his refection. In whom we may behold
that prophecy of Jacob made to his son Joseph more lively verified, then in
Joseph himself Ramus faecunaus iuxta fontem. Genesis 45 22.
He shall be as a fruitful branch by the Well side: for never did Joseph take
personal possession in this place, but Heb. 11. 22.
by faith, or by the translation of his bones, and in his posterity: and they,
Alas! how often interrupted, and at the last exterminated quite. Insomuch as
this place, even this City and Country may be pointed at for a Theater (I will
not say of Fortune) but of Gods justice in the conversion of State, and
alteration of Religion. For notwithstanding that this was Jacobs purchase,
Joseph's inheritance, by promise, by legacy, by prophecy confirmed to the
faithful; Yet beside the former sacking of this City by Jacobs sons, and
the abandoning of the same by Jacob himself, It was first Judge. 9.
fired by that Ambitious bramble Abimelech, then the whole Region perverted by
the Caluish Religion of 1. Kin. 13.
Jeroboam, in whose defection this City was 1. King. 12. 25
suddenly built, and as suddenly left. Then Samaria it self 2. Kin. 6.
besieged and famished; and at length all harrosed, dispcopled, desolated; and
being 2. Kin. 17.
replanted with Idolatrous inhabitants fearing not GOD, they were wearied with
Lions: When being better taught, yet at their best, as they did fear God, so
they still worshipped their Idols, continuing in a confused Meslin of Religion.
And this race of sirangers, Mongrels, and Neuters remained here till this
approach of our Savior, who now as a Cant2. 2.
Lilly amongst the thorns, and as the Churches dearest spouse: here fed,
and Cant. 1. 6.
rested himself at noone, thirsting in body, but more in soul for the
salvation of mankind, August. in hunc locum.
petens and promittens bibere, praying and yet promising drink: being Egens
tanquam accepturus, and affl^ens, tanquam satiaturus. vbi supr 1.
in want as one that would receive, and flowing over as one that would
replenish others. But I wrap up this description of place again, with these
three brief notes upon it. First, that there is no certainty of continual
prosperity in the most settled estates of the world, whereof let Sichem and
Samaria be pregnant witnesses. Secondly, that sin privileged, and corruption
of Religion authorized, although but in policy, as it was by Jeroboam (who
knew better) yet is the bane, and ruin of the most flourishing commonwealths
and churches. Lastly, that neither the Church of God visibly, nor the spirit
illuminating that Church infallibly, is bound to any place, city or sea, there
to reside in the succession of persons: for Joseph's possession was inhabited by
Idolaters, Osc 4. 15.
Bethel became Bethauen, Turks and dogs have surprised the holy land,
Antichrist sits in the 2 Thessal. 2. 4.
Temple of God: where was light, there is darkness, where it was day, now it
is night, the faithful Isai 1. 21.
City is turned harlot, Nequie blandiatur sibi dc loco: Barn:
Least any should flatter themselves in the inherent holiness of the place.
And thus we leave wandering at large about the place, and settle our selves in
view of a little Monument in the place, where our blessed Savior did vouchsafe
to sit.

Secondly, In this place there was a well, or a spring: for every well is a
spring, although cuery spring be not a well. A Spring or a fountain may be in
Augustine.
superficie, easy to come by: A well is in profundo, deep to be drawn at,
and so was this. A seasonable Commodity of public use, and long Continuance,
serving for Jacobs children, and their Cattle, although now for strangers.
Water in a thirsty Lord must needs be a benefit of great Conuenieucy, unknown
to them that have enough. No greater care had the Petriarchs in temporal
things, then to furnish themselves and their people with water. Wherefore the
Genes. 26. 25.
Philistines could not show their spite in any thing so much to Isaac, as to
stop up his wels. Neither (that we may speak of later times) did the Romish
Philistin in any thing so deeply discover his malice, as when he sent
paisoners to intoxicate and corrupt the fountains and waters of the Protestant
Countries in Germany, whereof, we may read, Sleidan: Comlib. 18.
how the Princes and Noble men did much complain. A well therefore, and in
such a place, was surely a benefit much graced by the Concurrency of those
four Circumstances, whereof the Senec. de. benef. Necessaria Vtilia Iucunda
Mansura,
learned speak: for it was necessary, profitable, pleasant, and permanent.
What more necessary then water? No, not a friend, for all the proverb. Who can
live without it? What, more profitable then such a well, in a dry scorched
Country, for them that live, or dwell, or travel there? And so pleasant is
water, that Prou. 23. 25.
Solomon likeneth good news out of a far Country unto cool waters
comforting a thirsty soul. The first and greatest cause that made the
Israelites to quarrel and mutin with Moses, was for want, or for bitterness
of their water, as Exodus 15. 24
Marah, Exodus 17. 7.
Massah, and Meribath can witness. One and the same word, (as the Learned
observe,) in the sacred fountainetongue is set for an eye, and a spring, which
may not unfitly teach us, that as the eyes are necessary and beautiful
springs, to grace the little world of our bodies: so fountains of water, are
as eyes to beautify and solace the greater world of the earth. Our sweet
Savior, who at this well asked temporal water, and offered spiritual water
of life, has promised a reward to a Cup of cold water, given in season, for
his sake. And what is a Mat. 10. 42.
Cup of cold water, to a well of water? Yet a well of water is no great
thing, neither in it self, but that as Nazianzen speaks: (...). Nazian:
Monastic.
That little, is not little, when it produces much. But above all, that which
adds an Improuement to the necessity, profit, and pleasure of this well, is
the Continuance and perennitie of it, holding out, even till the time of our
Savior, out-lasting so many changes, generations, and monarchies: and yet
still there was Jacobs well. Monumentum aere perennius: Hor.
A monument more durable then brass.

But this is not all: we are yet too shallow: And our dear Savior has
taught us to draw deeper, and fetch our hence more then Ordinary, and vulgar
water: For by this well he took a fit occasion to proffer and give a taste of
that spiritual water of life, whereof he himself is the euer-lasting, and
vnexhausted fountain. Wherefore I cannot seem to bring water out of mine own
brain unto this text, nor from the words thereof to wring out blood, by
fotcing them, if following the example of the greatest Doctor, Christ himself,
I take occasion from this well, and this water to speak of all the Commodities
and Emoluments of man's life, which the Beneficence of worthy men, founders and
Benefactours, has bountifully streamed out for the public use and Benefit of
many.

In the Survey of which Commodities; as we pass along, because Monuments are
so called, as Monentia Augustine: Moncns mentem.
mentem, monitors of the mind. let me behold by them, monere and mentem and
memorem, to advertise the mind and the mindful, how that first some
Monuments, on the left hand, are vain and superfluous; Secondly, some, in a
degree further, Impious and superstitious; Thirdly, some, on the right hand of
Contrary nature, Charitable and Religious. And first vain Monuments on the
left hand I call them not according to the vanity, wherewith Solomon has
branded all worldly things, for so the best ofsprings of man's Industry are
vain: But vain, I mean Idle, without any intended benefit or profit for the
wealth of the people, or the service of God, only showing forth men's pride or
folly, the superfluity of their riches, and their security. Of this sort was
Genes. 11.
Nimrods Babel, 2 Samuel 18. 18
Absolons pillar, the Theaters and Pyramides of Egypt, being but Regum
pecuniae otiosa and stulta oslentatio: Plin
an Idle and foolish Ostentation of the wast money of great Princes. But not to
triflle about those merely vain and Prodigious follies, I come to a more
necessary Survey: namely, what vain profusion of money and labor has been
Employed, first in houses and mansions for the living, secondly in tombs for
the dead, Thirdly in superfluities about the houses of prayer, fourthly in
Monuments of writing. And first touching mansions and Vain Monuments.
dwelling houses for the living, no doubt they must and may be built for Arles
necessity, for pleasure, for defense, for state and splendor. But the venime
of the spider makes a webb of little worth, and the corruption of the builder
taints his work with a touch of vanity. May you be pleased to see how? First
when he lays the foundation in a Presumptuous confidence of perpetuity,
supposing his house and habitation shall Psalm. 49.
continue for ever, and therefore calls it by his own name. Secondly when he
situates his house, and inlargeth his prospect upon grounds depopulated and
incroched upon, so that 1 King. 21. 2.
Achabs pleasureable garden, swalloweth up Naboths heritable vineyard. Thirdly,
when the mortar is tempered with the sweat of poor men's brows, and the
timber wrought without wages: so that the Abacuk. 2. 11
stone in the wall cries, and the timber ecchoeth out a woe to the builder.
Fourthly, when all the care and expenses run out in Temporal buildings, and
private garnishments, and there is no respect of the Agge. 1. 4.
house of God lying wast, or of the state of Religion either standing or
falling. Lastly when those great houses, which should be wels and fountains of
Rehefe, and conduicts of comfort to the hungry and needy, serve only as
only Beacons on a hill to be leene a far off, where there is cold standing
and much waiting, but seldom any fire or smoke, except upon some rare and
strange occasions.

From the mansions of the living, I hasten to the Tombs of the dead: wherein
we may behold how expensiue and Ambitious vanity, has also showed her self.
Not, but that there ought to be a godly care, even in such Monuments: because
they are not only, solatia, Comforts, but also, Monita viuentium,
Aduertisements to the living. The man of God had his Tomb with the inscription
preserved by King Josias; 2 King. 23. 18
Let him alone, (said the King) let none remove his bones. The Acts 2. 29.
sepulcher of King David remained til St. Peter's days, for all the rage and
Cruelty of Gods Enemies. Such respect there was in the making and keeping of
the Memorials of worthy men. Wherefore precious for ever in life and death be
the memory of our blessed Josias, who has not suffered the title, and (as I
may say by Imitation) the Manes of our deceased Deborah, and late Mother of
Israel, to be defaced, but has revived and preserved them, as in other lasting
Monuments of high wisdom and deep learning, so in a Tomb answerable to the
Princely worthiness of Queen Elizabeth. But the vanity is when men in their
life, conceive an Immortality of their renown and fame, not in any substance
of virtue, but in such after shadows planting their heaven; as the Egyptians
rearing their Pyramides, called them Pol: virg: ex Diodor^.
Sempitcrnas domos, houses cuerlasting. Or else when great Personages like Isai.
22. 16.
Shobnah, (or perhaps Wolsey) false to God and their Country, yet hew out
their Tombs in excelso, aloft in the rock, making falsehood and Confederacy
with foreign Princes their Refuge, although a scourge should pass thorough
the land. But the Lord evermore bandie and role such as bals out of their
Country, and turn their conceited glory into deserved shame. Besides when
men exceed in the garnishment of the Tombs of the Dead, either madly
advancing the Names and Memorials of Traitors, and the unworthy, as Becket,
and such like: or ouersumptuously building up the Tombs of godly mon and
Martyrs, as the Pharisees did the sepulchers of the Prophets, and the
superstitious world, did this of St. Alban, our worthy M. Cambden: Fox.
Stephen and protomartyr of England, not regarding the faith or Imitating the
Religion of Saints and Martyrs, but superstitiously adorning, nay adoring them,
and offering to their shrynes as to Idols, wearing out the stones with their
knees, and gracing them with forged miracles. Forged miracles I may well speak
of in Fox: 705.
this place, for here it was, that thu Noble Protector Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester discovered a fiction of one that fained himself borne blind, and
suddenly recovered of his sight by the help of St Alban, whereat, there was
great Triumph, and ringing of Bells: But the good Duke not so credulous as the
vulgar, questioning this miracle, made trial of the vanity of it by
propounding the difference of colors, which when the party, that never saw
any thing before (as he said) could name and distinguish, the Duke found him
out for a Counterfeit, and commanded his due punishment. Pity but this
worthy Protector, lying interred in this Church, for this and many other good
deeds, should have his Tomb preserved, and a better Inscription or Epitaph,
then there is upon it, for had there been many such Duke Humpbreds, a brief
Register might have saved the turn for popish miracles.

Thirdly, because ever since the first Christian Martyrs were slain by their
persecutors, or buried and remembered by the faithful Confessors, there has
been a kind of Confinitie between the Tombs of Martyrs, and holy men
deceased, and the places of prayer: I next observe how vanity creeping into
those most necessary monuments, and houses of prayer and Gods service, has
been, B^r^a^d: ^d Gui^: Abb: Apolog.
non vanior quam insanior, not so much vain, as plain mad, in building and
guilding the material walls and temples, neglecting the true Temples of God,
and the living members of Christ. I must not stand to fetch in the manifold
Testimonies of the Fathers, only let us a little hear St. Bernard, who lived
when such things wereswolne biggest, and grown to the greatest ruff. I omit
(says he, and yet he taxes them) Vbisupra.
the huge Altitudes of the steeples or spires, the Immoderate longitude of the
Church-bodies; the superfluous latitudes of the Isles, the sumptuous
garnishments, and curious paintings, resembling after a sort the ancient rite
of the Jews. Yet those things he passes by the more lightly, because
perhaps they might serve (in some sort) to the honor of God: But the In
sacroquid faci^ aurum? ex. Persio.
gold and other corporal ornaments, and bodily oblectations, he soundly
reproves, questioning with himself what fruit these vanities might bring,
whether stultorum admirationem, or simplicium oblectationem: the wonderment of
fools, or the delight of Idiots; or whether Christistians had perhaps learned
of the heathens to serve Idols: But at last he resolves, that all that
prodigal cost and wast, was but an Tali quadam. art spargitur as vt
multiplieetur: expenditur vt augeatur: and effus^^ copiam paril. ibid.
art, and a lure to get lucre, and a bait cast out to angle for more
abundance. So whereas Churches should have been wels of heavenly comfort and
Salvation, they were turned into gulphes and pits, swallowing up the fruit, and
fat of the Land, being like Exchaunges and Burses of Merchandise, dens of
thieves and lurchers, money-chaungers, doue-sellers, masse-mongers,
waxchafferers, worthily driven out at last by Christian Magistrates. But let
me now be sparing in this point, seeing these Monuments have been so purged
of their peccant humors, that they are grown weak in their vital parts. They
have so been let blood for their temporal superfluities, that from a
pleurisy, they are fallen to a Cachexie, from a swelling to a d shriueling and
a shrinking in the sinews. e Dumque nimis iam putrida membra recidit, Excessit
Medicina modum: Lucan. lib. 2.
They had indeed heretofore bodies ful-fed and pampered, now behold they are
pined, vix ossibus haerent, scarce do the stones hang together: neither ever
were they so foggie, but they are now as gant; not ever so surfetted, but they
are now as hungry and thirsty, having sustained long penance, in nakedness
and want for all their former excess, and having indeed regorged, and made
restitution of more then all. And what hope of tolerable recovery can there be?
seeing those wels and fountains of Bounty, that had wont to ouerflow in
temporal lands and goods toward the Church for superstition; are now in the
neape tide, at a very low ebb, and running from the Church, when they should
further the mainteinance of true Religion. Wherefore I may cease to speak of
vain and superfluous excess in these Monuments of Gods service, and rather
plead for supply of their most necessary supportance and continuance.

vain monuments, which are books; excellent monuments, if they be good, most
pernicious, if bad: Idle and vain, if they be like those volumes either in
quantity or quality, whereof Hist: ceelesia lib. 7. ca. 27.
Socrates makes mention, quae neque doctis neque indoct is prodessent, which
never were profitable to the learned nor unlearned; and yet the Author had
entitled them with the name of a Christian history, divided them into some
thirty six books, every book having many Tomes, near a Thousand in all,
and the Argument of cuerie Tome, almost equalling the Tome it self. Of such
books, surely, there was neither end of good purpose, or profit, nor almost of
stynt or measure, and therefore most vain and Idle: with which perhaps I might
raunge the Books of many, that have stuffed the Christian world, with
maculature and wast paper: only (as Father Maximus once said) S. p. Max: pr^l.
ad Elpidi um.
adlectorum defatigationem, to the tiring and wearying of readers. But in have
I conclude this point, with this compl^int only, that it is shame and pity,
that the Pen and Print, which should be as wels and fountains of Comfort,
Torcularia diui^nitus monstrala: ^ibliander de ras: Ling.
wine-presses to distill the sweer licour of wisdom and Religion, should be
made to vent out the froth and foame of idle words, and misseimploied brains
(that I say nothing yet of that poison and mischief, which often is dispersed
by ungodly books.) And thus much for vain monuments.

But vain and superfluous is a degree 2 Impious Monuments.
short of Impious and superstitious, or Idolatrous. And yet such Impious
Monuments they are, originally naught in the egg and in the bird, in the
intent and effect, being invented as sinkeholes, and trappes of the Devil,
wherein God himself had no destinated part. For what else were those nurceries
of vice, the houses of the Sodomites, Topheth, and Hinnon, the horses of the
Sun, the mount of Corruption, the Idols of Indignation, the groves, altars,
and houses of Abomination devoted to false Gods and goddesses, or indeed to
the Devil, under the titles of Baal, Astaroth, Chemoz, Milchom, Jupiter, i 2
King. 23.
Diana, and infinite such gulphes of sin, and prouocations to Idolatry? I
might here insert, the Agrippa.
stews of Pope Sixtus; (Veneris monumenta nefandae,) together with the filthy
books written to such purpose, as Incitements of lust. I might add all
monuments of writing of Atheism, or heresies, the golden legends of loud lies,
the Turkish Alchoran, Vlpians seven books, de torquendis Christianis, of
torturing christians, the discourses of Kingkilling, being as Tutors to
murders and treasons, the treatises justifying Equivocation, and the hellish
and devilish books of sorcerie and curious Arts, such as the Acts 19. 19
believers burnt at their first conversion: But I pass them over with contempt
and silence, because in those things, the Devil seemed to have unmasked himself
and showed his horns tothe very affrightment, and execration both of the
Christian and Civil World.

But I must be bolder to insist upon those Monuments, which Religion, and
Reverend Antiquity has destinated either in the particular, or in the
general unto holy uses, and yet superstition and Idolatry has abused and
disguised: wherein the Devil has endeavored like an hypocrite to sitvpon the
skirts of Christ's roate, and to plant his Chapel so near, that it might
incroch upon the house of God, and his service. So subtle is the Devil, that
as Arles de Mundo: sieve Theoph:
Phydias, the excellent Caruer did cunningly inchase his own countenance in
the shield of Minerua, so that it could not be razed out, but the shield it
self must be spoiled and disfigured: even so more or less in the Churches and
houses of God, in the wels of salvation, in walls, windows, tombs,
monasteries, yea in common wels and fountains he has left an infectious
leprofie, and deep impression of Idolattie and superstition, being the
resemblance of himself, such as hardely can be pulled away or purged, but with
great discretion and wisdom, least all be defaced. No such workmen has the
Devil had in this business, as the Romish painters, Caruers, writers and
Enginers. For by their false fingers, and deceirfull brains he has fraught
the Hospiniax: de orig: templorum.
Temples of God, with heathenish rites, and Jewish Ceremonies in their
dedications; and in their use, with tempting and seducing Images, with
Relics, Masses, Altars, holy waters distilled out of their own Inventions.
They have Ierem. 2. 13.
forsaken God the fountain of living waters, and Christ Jesus the Zech. 13. 1.
spring opened in the house of David; for sin and for uncleanness, and they
have dug pits unto themselves, which will hold no water of salvation, or true
soule-comfort, in selfe-merits, saints-merits, in supererogations,
satisfactions, pardons, indulgences. The pure fountains of the sacred
scriptures they have endeavored to slander with imperfections and obscurity,
and to stop them up with traditions, glosses, froathie legends, lying
fictions, and miracles. The sacramental water of Baptism, being the fountain
of our new birth, they have puddled with salt, oil, and spittle. The
Sacramental fountain of Christ's body and blood, they have stuffed with a
mass of abuses, Idolatries, Adorations, Eleuations, reseruations; driving the
laypeople, as unclean beasts, from the mystical stream of his blood in the
Cup. To be short, what sacred Order or Ordinance is there, which they have not
stained and defiled more or less, with the dung and filth, of their own
inventions, superstitions, or Idolatries? But praise be to God that these
Monuments of greatest Piety, those wels, and fountains, of true Religion, so
mudled, and stopped by those Philistines, are cleansed and restored to their
purity by the Religious Authoritic of our princely Patriarchs, and faith
defenders. In regard whereof, I may bid auaunt, all vain, and all
superstitious Corruptions of Idolatry abolished, that we may with comfort
behold the Monuments of Charity, and true Religion, graced and protected by
the highest president of piety and bounty (under God) the Princely Jacob.

Behold then how provident 3 Monuments of Charity and Religion.
and Ingenious charity has been in all provisions serving for the benefit,
and relief of the people. She like the good huswife wrought by day; (by the
light of the Gospel) neither did her Prou. 31. 18.
Candle go out by night, no not in the night and darkness of Religion, for
still she was doing, when her sight was dim, and saw not the right end of
her business: By a kind of custom and habit the hands wrought according to
the fashion of the first Christians, although the eyes were out. It was the
Lord, who works his pleasure Posidon: de vita Augustin^^
per scientes and nescientes, whether men know or not know what they do, for
Augustine: de vera relig. c. 17.
Minima species boni a Dco bonoest: The least show of good issues originally
from God, that is all good. Walk then thorough the Circuit of charity, and ye
shall find plasters for every soarc; here Hospitals for the sick and the lame,
there Almeshouses for the poor and Impotent: here schools for her Children;
there Refectories for her old folks: here workehouses for the able, there
places of Correction for the Idle: here trades for the unskillful, there laws
and orders for the unruly: here Entertainment for strangers, there high ways
passable for Trauailers: here provision for poor Maids marriages, there Relief
and Comfort for prisoners. Neither am I afraid to say, that even Charity in
her best Intendements, had provided Nibil aliud ^lim ^rant Monachorum
Monasteria quam Collegia in quibus alebantur studiesi: Hier: Zanch: in 4
precept:
Monasteries by their first Institution for Casaubon: ad cp. Card: per. 37.
schools of sciences, and Pseudomartyr.
shops of manufactures and laborious trades; howsoever abused since. And sundry
such Wels of Comfort, has the Charity of laeobs sons invented and left
behind them, teaching us not to be idle in the day and light of true Religion.

And yet further behold, how Religion uniting faith and Charity together, has
not only provided for the supply of Temporal necessities, but has been
provident and exuberant in wels and fountains to further her children, and
disperse and propagate her self. Behold her universities and schools, her
Colleges, libraries, books and lectures for the sons of her Prophets,
whereby they replenishing themselves, may water others. See her Churches and
Oratories consecrated to God, and his service, by the primitive intent of
Religious Princes, howsoever profaned sometimes by injury of time, or by
default of people, yet repurged again by the favor of God and the highest
Authority, from their corruptions. But above all, behold the pure fountains
of sacred scriptures, streamed out by writing and printing, Religiously
preserved, faithfully translated, being as wels for the deep sense, and
fountains for the easy precepts, wherein not only the Eras. in psalm. 22.
Elephant may swim, but the sheep may wade: whence not only the learned may
satisfy their deep desires, but even the wild Asses may quench their thirst,
the Ignorant Prou. 1. 4.
increase their knowledge. For thereunto serve so many graceful, and laborious
Expositions, Commentaries, Harmonies, precepts of tongues and arts, and
exercises of an established Ministry, as Buckets provided to draw up water out
of those wels of salvation. Besides I may add hereunto the wholesome laws
enacted for the furtherance of Religion, as also those wels of maintenance by
tithes or otherwise, ordained for such as minister in holy things, howsoever
unluckily diuerted in a great part by the popish Philistines, Pilkinton:
exposit. of Agg: Reinald: sermon: on Obad.
who robbed parishes to feed Idle Monks. But even in this case, we have
experience of a zealous desire in our princely Jacob, and other truly Religious
Christians, to restore those provisions to their pristinate use, if the
Iniquity of time did not make so strong and difficult obstruction. But these,
and many like these, are the Monuments of Charity and Religion, dug in this
world as in the wilderness 2 Ps. 84. 6.
and vale of Bacah, by worthy Benefactors, and replenished by the blessing of
God for his service, and the benefit of his people; in the founding or
furthering, the repairing or restoring whereof, they are happy that like Jacob
have had hearts to affect, or hands and means to effect any good. And thus
from the well, we are come to the Author, from the Monument to the founder,
Jacob: It was I acobs well.

The name of the Patriarch Jacob 3 The founder.
was reuerenly rehearsed by the Samaritans in this well, although they were
strangers to him, and to his faith, making only a benefit of this temporal
Commodity, but none of his example in the better things. But (which is a
greater grace) the holy Ghost by the Evangelist has registered him, (as else
where for Heb. 11.
his faith,) so here for this benefit, bearing his name: Jacobs well. So that
in this little Monument of Charity, lives Jacob, as in a Reverend Record, when
many great Mountains of pray, and treasures of vanity, together with their
Polyd. Verg.
founders name, are vanished, and lie in the dust, or if they remain, they do
but stink in Prou. 10. 7
rottenness and Corruption. Such honor do men Religious and charitable
attain unto: according to the Psalm, Ps. 112. 6.
They are had in everlasting remembrance: Prou. 10. 7.
their memorial is blessed, as says Solomon. Works of mercy and piety
leave a long and a sweet savor behind them, even when the works themselves
sometimes do cease, yet Iustitia manet in aeternum, the righteousness of the
Author is written in heaven, and preserved in the earth. Contrariwise, the
builder of Genes. 11. ^
Babel lives in perpetual dishonor; he that reedified Jericho, was marked
with a Joshua 6. 26.
Curse; and the like shame and curse is upon those that go about to build up
the Romish Babylon, to advance Idolatry, or set up false Religion. Jeroboam is
branded for ever with this note, that he 1 King. 16. 26
made Israel to sin. Judas bears the indelible badge of a traitor to his
Master. And indeed the plots and exploits of mischief are like monstruosi
partus, misshapen birthes of Monsters, imperfect, unpleasing, like Rob. Winters
dream in Littletons house.
crooked steeples, and disfigured faces in the dream of a traitor, full of
horror to the Authors while they live, and of Infamy when they are dead. So,
ingloriously, and in detestation lives Gowrie, and the powdered Traitors, not
as founders, but as professed Confounders, who like beathnish Cannibals, had
vowed this day of the week, the Tuesday, to Dies Martis
bloody Mars, (or rather to him that was a murderer from the beginning;) which
day notwithstanding in memory and thanks to God, for their frustrated
Imaginations, is our duplex festum, doublic consecrated, to the honor of the
Almighty, the savior of his Anointed. It was not a well of water to comfort
their Country, which they went about to dig, but a Hell of fire, to consume
us all, and make us like Sodom and Ghomorra. Neither did the Traitors sing as
Israel, Nom. 21. 17
Rise up Well, sing ye unto it; but rather, they thus whispered in their damned
spells; Rise up Hell, that Englands Capitol, the Parliament house, where so many
wholesome laws have been concluded, might make a Feu de foy: my L^f
Northhampto^s speech to Gamet.
bone-fire, of Joy and triumph for Traitors and Rebels to sport themselves
withal. But far is it from the sons of Jacob to dig such pits of
mischief, to seek for glory in shame, merit in murder and villainy, or heaven
in hell. These were bloody Edomites, that cried of Jerusalem, Ps. 137. 7.
down with it; but they are the blessed race of Israel, that consult how to
Amos 7. 2, 5.
raise up Jacob when he is little or low: and that do Ps. 122. 7.
pray for, and procure the peace of Jerusalem and the prosperity of her walls
and palaces.

And within this calendar of Jacobs sons, I do not only inrole the most
magnificent founders, but also the Conditores, legislatores, liberatores,
benefactores: Sr Fr. Eacons Essaies.
makers of laws, defenders of the faith; m-inteiners of virtue, and
benefactors by any good means, to any good work: nay even fathers of children
well disciplined; for as the wise man says; Eccles. 40. 19.
Children and the building of a city, make a perpetual Name: and indeed they
are streams much gracing the fountains whence, and comforting the city where
they flow, if they be kept clear and uncorrupted. Nor must I leave out the
most laborious Authors, and Collectors of the Solaque non norunt haec monumenta
mori: Martial. lib. 10,
longest lasting Monuments in books and necessary writings, then which, the
world cannot show morefruitfull benefits for all posterity. But do I speak
only of those that do build and plant, alteri seculo; for the age to come?
Do I not also give them their due honor, and the title of Benefactors, who
are ready to help, and relieve the present wants of people in distress,
making themselves hands to the helpelesse, Job 29. 15.
eyes to the blind; feet to the lame? or do I think it only charity to
build Hospitals, or Religion to raise Temples? nay rather when necessity
requires, it is charity to cloth the naked living stones, to provide for the
true temples of God, to redeem poor captives, even with the Ambros: de offic.
Socrat. bist. eccl: lib. 7. c. 27.
treasures of the Church. And further, I do add to this wel-deseruing number,
not only those that give, but also those that take away; Such as Idem. lib. 5.
c. 18.
Theodosius, who partim dando, partim auferendo, partly by giving benenefits,
partly by Abridging many Abuses and Corruptions, was a benefactor to the City.
To conclude I proclaim all those happy, that by their abundance have had
opportunity and will to do much good, or by their mediocritie have had power
to do less good, yet some; or if some of their bare necessity and extreme
poverty have striued to do much good, although it has fallen to little, yet I
exempt them not. And here might I have done with this observation of the
founder, but that I perceive some rubbes interrupting the passage of my speech
and the charity of the wel-disposed fit to be removed. The first is a doubt,
that when men have established any good thing for posterity, to leave behind
them, least as Jacobs well, is now in the hands of wicked Samaritans, to whom
he never intended it, so their benefits may serve in time for bad people, or
else be Interuerted, misse-imploied, and wasted, contrary to the meaning of the
Donors. Indeed this disquieted Solomon, Eccles. 2. 19.
that he should leave his travails to the man that should be after him, not
knowing whether he would be a wise man or a fool; verse 21.
nay homini otioso quaesita dimittit: a man leaves his gettings to a sluggard
sometimes, to a fool, that has nothing in his hand. But if this be vanity to
perplexe a man's self in his private substance for fear to leave it to an
ungracious heir; how much more is it a folly in public commodities to be
ouercurious, in forethinking, who may in time inherit his favors, or abuse
them? It is such a thing, as Jacob could not prevent, nor Solomon with all his
wisdom; nay the Lord himself, that foreseeth all changes, yet made the world,
where wicked men and degenerates should dwell, and continues his benefits of
the Math. 5.
sun shining, and raineraining, upon the righteous and unrighteous. It is his
perfection to be good to all, both good and bad, to be rich and bountiful to
them that misspend his favors, as well as to others that use them well. Let us
learn this perfection, and not be Gal. 6. 9. 10
weary of well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not: while
we have time let us do good to all men, but especially to them that are of
the household of faith. whatsoever become of the gift, or the work, the fruit
shall remain to further our Reckoning, if it be done with a godly purpose and
for the glory of God.

But another doubt there is, that 2 Doubt.
when such as the Samaritans, bad and superstitious people, have been once
possessors of such wels and monuments, provided by faithful Patriarchs, like
Jacob: how men Religious may use them again, seeing they were heathens, who
usually dedicated their wels to Gods and Goddesses. Howsoever this Well had bin
abused, our blessed Savior (we behold) sits by it, and asks water at it.
Now let me be bold before this high presence, (passing by the free use of
civil things granted even with Idolaters,) to go further and suppose our
Churches, Chapels, the tithes and maintenance of Religion, and the service of
God, to be wels and fountains, that were sometimes in the hands of Idolaters,
polluted and defiled by their Corruptions. Is it not lawful for us to use them
in the service of God, upon the Recovery? Can we doubt this; seeing we use the
Augustine. ep. 154.
same fountains, the same air, that has been polluted, with I dolatrous
sacrifices, and Incense offered to Devils. Yea seeing the Temples and other
Commodities, ib.
that have been profaned by Idolatry, may we employ, not indeed to private
uses, for covetousness, but unto a public benefit, for ib.
the honor of God even as men, when they are converted from being sacrilegious
and impious persons to the true Religion, are to imploie themselves and their
members to serve the Lord: I ibid.
speak out of Saint Austen. Saint Paul did eat and drink and converse ibid.
in Athens a City consecrated to Quia Ciuitas erat Minerua eiusih numini
consecrata. Acts 17. 5.
Minerua an heathnish Goddess, and he sailed in a Acts 28. 11.
ship having the badge of Castor and Pollux.

Our savior vouchsafed to frequent the Temple, after it had been profaned,
and that Temple which Herod had Iosepbus lib. 15.
reedified for populer vain glory; nether did he (that did al things well)
forbear to imploie the John 2. 7.
water pots of the Jewish and superstitious purification, in the work of his
gracious miracle. This am I bold to speak, for their sakes, that are in no
liking with aunciently built Churches, and make a maine point of their
Religion, either not to enter into them, or not to call them by the former
names of saints, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Saint Alban; that first for
distinction, the scripture uses the names of Ac^s 28. 11.
Castor and Poilux, false Gods without scruple: and the Churches of all ages,
have been content in the translation of the words of the Lord in Job. 38. Amos
5. 8. Giegor. Mag: in Job. 58.
Job, and in the Prophet Amos, to use the heathenish appellations of the
stars, Pleiades, Orion, Acturus, notwithstanding they had fabulous and
poetical Originals. So that, if the names were worse, then those of Saints and
Martyrs, a well reformed Conscience, might utter them for distinction sake
without offense. But now seeing they are the Names of Saints and Martyrs, to
whom although as to protectors and tutelar Gods, we dedicate no Churches, nor
offer supplication or service, yet for their virtues and victorious sufferings,
we may love them, rehearse their names with Reverence, and imitate their
faithfulness. It is not with us as the Papists Bellar: de eccles. triumph.
object, that with D. Reinald: de To: eccl. ldol: lib. 1. c. 8.. 2. 3.
Eustathius we detest all temples, and especially those that carry the names
of Martyrs, and like only Conuenticles in private? or that with the Eunomians,
we refuse to go into the Churches entitled with the names of Apostles and
Martyrs? This may be the fanaticall whispering of some wandering house-creeper,
and the conceit of some seduced separatist, but We, that is, David our King,
our priests and people, frequent those howses of prayer, call them by their
former names, enter into them willingly, having antiquity, and all reformed
Churches for our precedents to do the like. For who knows not that the City,
and University of Geneua have their chief Church retaining the name of Saint
Peter, one entitled Saint Magdalen, another Saint Geruase Vbispra.
the Martyr, whither they usually resort to Zanch: in 4. praec: to this purpose.
holy exercises. Neither is it altogether vain, that the holy Evangelist here
in this place, calls that same Jacobs well, which the Samaritans so named and
termed before him, making no question but that Jacob had dug it, although
the tradition came from the Samaritans. Nay our blessed Savior is not
scrupulous to rest himself at this Well, or to grant it for Jacobs, howsoever
(which is for our example) he will not be drawn, by the Names and titles of
Jacob, to John 4. 22.
approve of a counterfcit Religion, wherefore let us leave curiosity in such
small matters, and conclude this point, first, with praise to the Lord that
these wels, these Monuments and other benefits for the furtherance of Religion,
sometimes in possession of Samaritans, and the superstitious, and by them
corrupted and made unwholesome, are again so cured and restored, that now we may
draw and drink our fill in them, even of the pure Rivers of the waters of
life. Secondly, if it should be proved, that any of these Monuments were
founded and erected by the superstitious, yet then we must acknowledge our
selves, much bound to God, that we may drink of the Dent. 6. 11.
wels we dug not, dwell in houses that we builded not, enjoy these
Churches, which we prepared not, as Ludolph:
Noah had the benefit of that Arc, which was framed by profane shipwrights,
and Sampson was refreshed with sweet honey out of the dead Lion, that living
would have killed him; So that we may say with Samson, Judge. 14. 14.
Out of the strong came sweet, and out of the deuowrer came meat. Romish
Samaritans interrupt us, and first object, that our faith buildes no Churches,
digges no such wels: but their Religion, their Pater noster (as they call it)
founded all. Churches, nay brag that themselves are the Catholic Church,
because of the Monuments and names of godly men, that were sometimes pillars of
the Church. build no Churches, do no such works, but they have been all the
doers, and are so still: I answer briefly that the Apostles and first Martyrs,
who planted the Church, did build no material temples, and yet they are
worthily styled Au^entinus
Religiosis simi mortales, most Religious men, none being comparable to them
since. They as the former planters of the Gospel, edified and built up the
people of God, Ephesians. 2. 20.
as temples for the holy ghost to dwell in, upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Christ Jesus being the head corner stone, and wanted peace,
wealth, opportunity, and the favor of Princes to erect any Churches and
houses of prayer, either public or costly. Secondly, more largely I answer,
that when the Lord vouchsafed, to call Kings and Princes to the knowledge of
the truth, then by their Authority, and out of their Abundance, they in the
profession of our Religion, of Aedes sacras, (sacred houses) erected Basilicas,
Kinglike palaces, thereby the more to honor God with their substance, and
provide for the more conueniencie of holy Assemblies. Now these first
honorable founders, were not of the Romish Religion, for they did not use such
Jewish and heathnish Ceremonies in their Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib. 10. c. 3
Church-dedications, nor such Invocation or adoration of Saints or Images, as
the Roman Church has since brought in. This plainly appears by the example
of Constantine and by the best Antiquity, who, with Saint Austen, speak thus
like Protestants: Augustine: de Ciuit dei lib. 8 c. vlt.
We ordain no Churches, no Priesthoods, no rites nor sacrifices unto Martyrs,
we do not cry at the altars, O Peter, O Paul, O Cyprian, we offer unto thee
our oblation: but at their Memorials we offer to God, who made them men, and
Martyrs, giving thanks for their victories, and encouraging our selves by
calling upon God, to the like Crowns of Martyrdom. And his is our Religion
just; for although we are content to preserve the memory of Saints, where they
have suffered and are buried, yet it is not to call upon them, but to remember
their constancy to the praise of God, and imitate their virtues, as occasion is
offered. In which sense we are bold to preserve the Reverent Remembrance in
this place, of our prime-martyr Saint Alban, by the loss of whose life, the
Gospel first made entry into this land: insomuch as I may call this place,
the Ose: 2. 15.
vallie of Achor, the door of hope, and the first fruits of England in
suffering for the faith.

restorers, then founders. Deucalion was thought to have done as great an act,
as Prometheus: Noah is as much reuowned as Adam; and it pleased the second
Adam, to be a restorer of mankind, which is a greater title, then to be the
first Author, as Adam was. I am sure that the work of our Redemption,
excels our Creation, and therefore it is true, that we Plus debe^ pro me
refecto quam facto: Barn: ^ract: de dilig deo.
owe to the Lord more for our selves reformed, then first formed. losias was
blessed for purging the Temple: Zorobabel for reedifying the same, as well as
Solomon, who builded it. Other former Princes, and great Men, have brought
forth, as first Parents, these and such like Monuments, which in process of
time had more feeding then teaching, and therefore grew out of fashion: But it
is the honor of our Religious Kings and Princes, as principally they are
nurcing fathers and mothers of the Gospel, so to draw their breasts, and
suckle these and such like Orphan-Churches, that by their Princely bounty, they
may be necessary and accessorie helps to Gods service. In natural children
the chief care is, or ought to be, of the soul, the next of the body: first
nurture is to be respected, then Nature: and so in these Monuments, chiefly
Religion is to be regarded, then the building: first must a Church be
beautified in Barn:
moribus, then in marruoribus, in manners, then in the marble, and other
Ornaments. And this is the course of our Religious Princes, first to cleanse
these houses of prayer, from Corruption, and then to raise them from their
Ruins. I may speak sensibly, and if it please God effectually, in respect of
this place, this ancient, and now drooping Church, under whose roof we
notwithstanding are happily present before the Lord, and his anointed Jacob.
Never did poor Orphan-Church, standing in such need of a royal nurcing
father, more seasonably enjoy the hopeful presence of so great a Monarch. And
above all, this benefit she does with other her sister Churches already
enjoy, and must ever, with all thankfulness acknowledge, that by her royal
Jacobs means (next under God,) her children may daily drink of the water of
life, suck at the breasts of our sweet Savior here offered, and receive the
comforts of public prayer, of the Ministry and Sacraments, being the most
essential parts of a Church, and benefits, as much exceeding the most
excellent building of lime and stone, as the pure spring water exceeds the
workemanshippe about the well: and such as our forefathers would have reioiced
to enjoy, in fields, in woods, m Cottages. But yet seeing this Monument, this
building is now the place, the palace, the temple, Genes 36. 22
Rehoboth, a large well of receipt, and room enough, where where the servants
of God do assemble for water of comfort, it pittieth them to see the work of
it so ruinous, the brinke so dangerous, the steening fallen in, and a Monument,
thus venerable, upon the wast, so that all that pass by are ready to spoil
her, both the Rich covetous, and the poor irreligious, both in desire
sacrilegious: In regard whereof, sometimes her sons do wish that she were
rather a Augustine.
Zacheus, with a sound body, then Goliath, with this crazie, hectique
Consumption: because her paralyticque members (as a great body unsound) rather
burden, then beautify; and yet the resection and cutting off, of an Integrall
part, even in the greatest body, is a maime and disfiguring, neither ever used,
but as vltimum refugium, in diseases desperate. It is a spectacle of much
remorse, to behold a noble personage, high-borne, so in distresle, that for
want of friends and means to support her, she is ready to fall, and lie on
the ground, as subject to beggerie, scorn and shame. Even 2 King 9. 34.
King Iehu, had commiseration in extremis upon Iesabel, quia filia Regis,
because she was the daughter to a King, although a 1 King. 16. 31 daughter: to
E^^^aal K. of the Zidomans.
wicked daughter of a heathnish King. And may not I call this Church, a Kings
daughter, and in that respect look for pity, to whom M. Cambden:
Off a a King Christian, gave the first being, and other Egfrid: Elbelred.
Henric. 1. manuscr. Regist.
Kings after him, this co^spicuous Amplitude? She has already met with Iehu,
who having severely punished her for all the fornications and witchcraftes; the
Idolatries and delusions of Monks and Friars, wrought in her, could not choose,
but now, if he beheld it, remorse her humble estate, the rather, because she
is filia regis, and Basilica, a Kings daughter. But Iehu took pity when it
was too late, and when Iesabel was almost devoured of the dogs: This Church
is yet more happy, who though she has had many blows, yet having not
received her deaths wound, she stands capable of the mercy and favor of a
peaceable Solomon, a blessed Josias, a Kingly Jacob, to give her life and
health again. And it is no ordinary help, nor vulgar hand, that can heal her
sore, because, as she was the daughter, and is the nurce-child of a King, so
her disease is the Kings evil, and requires the speedy assistance of a most
Catholic and Imperial Physician, to cure her wounds, or else his sacred
Authority (if her estate be found desperate) to cut of her mortified limbs,
and bind up the sounder parts for Gods service. Yet it is indeed the Recovery
of her pristinate health and soundness, that her sons on their knees desire:
(which if it may not be obtained) their last Refuge and next Petition must be
(that which gracious Princes do not love to hear) Isai. 3. 5.
Ruina haec sub manu tua: Let her fall be under the hand of highest Authority:
being the mournful note of people when they had no Respondebit dicens non sum
medicus ib.
King to help them.

But who am I, that I should enter into particulars, before my Lord the King? I
confess with St. Barnard, De consideras: lib. 2.
Non est meae humilitatis dictare sic autsic faciendum: It stands not with the
meandness of my place to prescribe this, or that to be done. Yet this let me
be bold to speak, that the sun gives comfort and luster, where it shines:
fountains make barren grounds fruitful, where they pass along: Our sweet
Savior, both the Sun of Righteousness, and the fountain of truth, meant
some good to the place and persons, when he went thorough Samaria, and sat at
Jacobs well: and who knows, what our most Royal and Religious Jacob may
intend for us, seeing God has given 1. King. 5. 4.
rest on every side (as to Solomon when he built the Temple,) and there is
neither adversary, nor evil to resist.

Samaritans, (who like Sanballat and his Confedcrates despise our building,)
mock at our hopes, as Idle and frustiate, because these are no days, to build
or repair Churches, or do such like works, as they say. In further answer to
these deceitful workers and talkers, let me be bold a little to boast our
faith in this point, which has not been so Lame nor idle and unfruitful in
the works of Charity and piety, as they reproach us. Let our chief City
London speak to the praise of God, and the Justifying of our faith by such
works: Nay let her only show, what M. D. Willet.
three Hospitals of incomparable foundation and provision for 1. Christ's
hospital.
friendlesse children, 2 St. Thomas hospital.
Impotent people, and 3 Bridewell.
inor dinate walkers, she enioieth by the happy Reign of that truly
virtuous King Ed: the sixth, of blessed memori^: besides many other provisions
daily increasing toward the comfort of prisoners, mainteinance of the poor,
and ministry. Let those two. glorious Eyes of our English body, the two
fountains of Learning and Religion, Oxford and Cambridge, utter their
knowledge, what the light of the Gospel has done for them, within the
compass of not many years. Our Mother Oxford might claim for the Gospel,
the foundations, or the finishing or establishment of her See Crowly. Try and
then trust.
Christ-Church, her Trinity College, and St. John's, as she does for her Jesus
College: But she cannot but speak her Joy for her Copious and excellent
Library, her Divinity school so adorned, so augmented, her Waddam College,
newly founded, richly provided for, many fair Enlargements in the most
Colleges, in buildings, Exhibitions, and domestical Libraries, for the
furtherance of the sons of the Prophets. Neither may I forget, the new life,
which Oriall College, when she was almost at the last gasp, and on the
hazard, received by the royal Charter and Confirmation of our euer-blessed
Jacob, at his first entrance. This and much more may Oxford speak to Gods
glory; and the other sister Cambridge speaks as much in many points. She
has brought forth her Twins, her Emanuel and her Sidney Colleges. She may
demonstrate to the honor of the Trinity, many Cells converted into one glorious
house of Learning and Religion, so beautified, and replenished, that it seems
to be the Via lactea of that University, where there is a Concurrency of many
stars, shining together as in the firmament. Neither may she be silent of
her Saint John's, which daielie grows from a fountain to a flood, the head
whereof not willing to be known to the world, but the Abundance is from God
thorough the fruit of the Gospel, to the only glory of his name. But it is
both hard, and beside my purpose to make an exact Catalogue of all those worthy
Monuments, of the late foundations, increasings and Enlargements within those
sacred Nurceries. And who can reckon up the Almeshouses, hospitals,
freeschooles, and other beneficial and Charitable Provisions for the people of
God, and his service, through the whole Land, even under the Gospel? I should
forget my self, if I remembered not, that this place is not without a
freeschoole, as a little spring, where youth may drink in, the first licour of
wholsomlearning, flowing from the bounty of a gracious Princess, now with God,
by the Mediation of that worthy Lord Keeper, Bacon; so much honored for
wisdom and Religion. If I should be silent, the late Statute ann 7o Iacobi Re
gis.
statutes would tell you of that royal Jacobs College, newly founded, and
daily increasing, for the furtherance of sacred studies, and deepeest
learning. And the Christian world proclaims those worthy Monuments, partly
written by an Apolog. pro Iuram: fidel. praesat. monitor.
Imperial hand, partly by Bishop Jewel. Winchester. Elie. D. Keinald: D.
Whitac. D. Fulke. D. Abbot. D. Field. D. Moorton. D. Hacwill. my L. Cook: many
others.
learned subjects, for the mainteinance of true Religion against falsehood and
Rebellion: I need not speak of them. The Northern borderes praise God for that
Kingly work, the Erection of their Church in Arthuret: The Church of Bath,
which long stood naked and bare, is richly clothed by the bounty of a right
L. B. of Bath and Wels.
Reverend and Religious Prelate. The Irish and Virginian Plantations can
witness how willing our royal Jacob is to propagate the Gospel together with
civility and trades: And daily beholding a gracious King so forward, and so
many worthy subjects, stirred up by his example; Quid non speremus? What good
thing is there, but we may expect? Wherefore our adversaries cannot say, that
our faith is altogether Idle, in rearing or repairing Monuments of this Nature.

Disciples of our Savior, when they behold such Monuments as this: Behold what
Mark 13. 1.
goodly buildings of old! Be pleased therefore to take notice, what we can say
for this, not in envy to our Ancients, but in love to the truth. Our
forefathers, Princes, and People, were long in gathering stones together, and
now at one instant the Romish favorites show us great heaps piled up,
without mentioning with what leisure and distance of time they were gathered
together: as though Rome had been builded all in a day. This Church may seem
Eclesia mirandi operis. Beda.
a wonderful piece of work to the beholders: yet when it shall be understood,
that it had many Kings, successively founders, many rich Contributors, many
Eldred, Eadmer, Poulus, Ricard. Ioannes de Cetta, Willm. Hugo, Michael, Thomas,
Abbots.
fat Abbots and Priors, Benefactors for many years, beside the ransacking of
the old City Veru^am, to advance it, and that it was at the least fourscore
years before it was perfected, and then but of a rude brick neither, and
after again the brick about to be turned into marble, and Ioannes Stilbnach,
prior. Manuscript. M^ Cox.
so never finished neither (for pendent opera interrupta, the workmanship
remains but abruptly still, as the pillars witness:) then is the wonder not
so great, and we well perceive, that superstition in the greatest heat had Sub
Will. Ab. 22. siontale huius eccl. tediosam moram traxerat.
tardiora molimina, slower progresses; longer travail, and not so quick
delivery as they would make us believe. But Date crescendi copiam: Let the
Lord give leave, and peace to the Gospel, and prosperity to our religious
Princes, and then after such distance of time, let the Adversaries call us to a
reckoning, what fruits our faith has produced. Now be pleased to remember then
in brief, and lay altogether: first that the primitive Christians founded no
Churches, for want of means and opportunity, yet they did buiid up the Church
of God with their doctrine, with their lives, and blood, and so did our
Religious Forefathers under persecution. Secondly that the first founders, who
began to erect Churches, were of our faith, and not of the modern Romish
profession. Thirdly that it is as honorable, and often more necessary to
repair those Monuments, then to build them at the first. Fourthlie, that our
faith obtaining freedom under religious Princes has been Active and Abundant
in good works for necessary purposes. Lastly, that those great Monuments which
our Adversaries boast of, had a longer time to their accomplishment, then they
would have us imagine: And in regard of these premises, those worke-vaunters
have no such great advantage over our faith in founding and building, as they
would make the world believe.

One thing more I observed, which 2. Ob.
is, that as the Romanists lay claim to our Churches, so they entitle
themselves to the Catholic Church it self, pretending that they are undoubted
heirs and successors of all Ancient founders. And as the Samaritans pleaded,
that they were the true worshippers, and Jacobs children, because they had
Jacobs Well, whereof he drank; the mount where he worshipped: so they have
the names of Peter and Paul, and the places, where perhaps they preached and
sufered; they talk of the Apostles and Martyrs, of the Fathers and Councels,
they ingrosse to themselves the name Church and Catholic, yea they have the
Scriptures, as the Jews had, in their books; or as the Judges 16.
Philistines had Samson, in captivity, fettered, shaued and blinded. But shall
we believe that they are the only Catholics and Children of the Apostles, for
these probabilities and presumptions? Or that they are the only spouse of
Christ, because they show the Mr. White, out of Jsidor: pref.
sheathes, and Caskets where the Ornaments and Jewels of the husband once lay?
Or because like the madde-man in Athenaeus, they take an Inuentory of all goods
in the Church for their own; as he did in all ships that arrived there, are
they the right owners? It is not sheep clothing that transformes the wolf,
nor the Lions skin that alters the Asses Nature. They are not therefore right
Christians and good Catholics, that boast of names and titles, Places and
Remnants: no more then Dion. Nicaeus.
Vibius Rufus was a good Orator for having Ciceroes wife: or a great Emperor
for having Caesar's saddle: or that foolish smatterer a Lucian.
good Philosopher, who studied by Epictetus his Candlestick: or Fox contra:
Osor.
Neanthus the Iangler, a good Musician, for carrying the harp of Orpheus. Nay
the Samaritans seemed on a better ground in some things then the Romanists; for
they indeed had Jacobs Well: but these obtrude unto us, Relics of Christ, of
the Apostles and Martyrs, which are but mere Impostures and for geries. Their
usurping Prelate must be Christ's Vicar, Saint Peter's successor, when he
succeeds him, but as Mr. D. K. ex Nazianz:
night does the day, a tempest a calm, sickness health: Yet his D. R.
Conference.
prerogative must be Peter's, his dignity Peter's, his patrimony Peter's, his
robes and royalties Peter's, his Ring Peter's, his sea Peter's, his keys Peter's,
his pence Peter's. And as the Samaritans said, Jacob gave us this Well: so they
say, Christ or Peter or the Emperor gave us these wels, this honor, these
crowns, these promotio^s. So poor Peter has rich heirs: And this is the
Gorgons head, which astonished the world a long time; 2. Tim. 3. 9.
sed vltra a no^ proficient: They shall preuail nolo^ger, for their madness shall
be made manifest to all men.

But we leave these seducing and seduced Romanists, to see their errors, if it
please the Lord, and with the Samaritans to be converted to the sound
knowledge of Christ our Savior. And I return to our selves, to whom the Lord
has given now the possession of I acobs Well, the use of many temporal and
spiritual benefits to further us in his service, if we take our opportunity.
For first our God has revealed unto us that rock and fountain of our
salvation Christ I esus, wherein are all our Ps. 87. 7
fresh springs of hope and Comfort, the knowledge of whom by the scriptures
translated read, and preached, as by streams and Conduits, do continually Ps.
46. 4.
glad and refresh the City of God. And to perpetuate these blessings, the Lord
has fauoted us with a gracious King, whose heart is a Wel-spring of wisdom,
Counsel and Justice: And so blessed him while he drinks the Water of his own
lovely Cisterne, that thence issues a happy River of Royal Apparent
succession, as from a blessed fountain, which the Lord grant, may run on, in
grace and glory, for the comfort of all true Christian hearts, to the end of
the world. In regard of which inestimable favors, let me be bold, without
offense to the royal patience of my Lord and King, to speak a few words, to all the worthy children and subjects of our Princely I acob, here assembled; and so
I will conclude. Seeing the Lord has granted us to reap the fruit of many
favors, sowed by former Benefactors of al sorts, and Isa. 66. 12.
has extended peace over us as a flood, and the Gospel as a flowing stream:
Seeing the true faith comes unto us not solitary and alone, but accompained
with infinite blessings; so that we have example and encouragement from the
highest Authority to do good, and many opportunities to effect the same: let us
be ready to show forth the inward fountain of our faith, by the outward
streams of our Love. Especially do Ye, the most eminent in note, endeavor to do
most good, whose private wels are answerable to your wills, and substance to
your desire; Let some water of comfort flow from you, to the Putei dum
bauriuntur speciosiores suns. Basil.
public benefit of the Church and Commonwealth. They that would have their
wels to be wholesome, do draw them often: and ye that would have your riches
blessed, must distribute them often. Think what Oceans of wealth run over the
back-in weeds and shreds, and thorough the throat in puddle, and pamper; how
much is wasted by many, in vain pleasures, private buildings, fruitless
exercises; by others in superstitious and Idolatrous Aduancements: and turn
some of the streams of your fountains at last, into the barren fields of the
poor, and to the watering of the Sanctuary. Pass not thorough the world as
arrows through the air, and ships thorough the sea, leaving no mark nor trace
behind you; unlade the weight of your burdens, that your reckoning may be the
lighter: Here and every where are havens, to ease your Journey, and speed
your arrival toward heaven. Let not Leah reproach Rachel for barrenness, nor
blind superstition reprove our Religion for lamenesse. Let us try it out
with our Adversaries by action, as well as by profession; Spectemur agendo.
They wrought for their own sakes, in confidence of merit; Let us work for Gods
sake in regard of duty. Can ye not build Churches? yet repair the^. Can ye
not preach the Gospel? yet further the Gospel. Can you not build Hospitals?
Yet refresh the poor members of Christ: when like their Master, they sit
hungry, weary, and thirsty by your Wels. Trifle not as the woman of Samaria
did, when Christ asked water; pretending Religion to save you purses, as the
Samaritan did to save her Pains. In a word let us be ready to do good, to
distribute without murmuring and reasonings and Lay up store and a good
foundation for the time to come, that we may be the sons of lacob, Disciples of
Christ Jesus, the fountain of life, the giver of living water; who with his
abundance vouchsafe to make our souls, like a well watered garden, like a
spring, whose waters fail not: and bless our princely Jacob, going out and
coming in, from this time forth for cuermore.

FINIS.

