A CAVEAT FOR THE COVETOVS. OR, A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross, upon the
fourth of December, out of Luke. 12.15.

By WILLIAM WHATELIE, Preacher of the word of God, in Banbury.

The love of the world is enmity against God.
You cannot serve God and Mammon.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Man, and Matthew Law, 1609.

TO THE COURTEOUS Reader.
CHristian READER, Nothing is more lamentable than the worldliness of us
Christians. Our life is little else but a breach of our most solemn vow to the
Lord of life. We renounced the world at our first entrance into the Church of
God, deuoting our selves to the service of Christ. (These were good words, if
there were any thing besides words in the most of us.) But being grown we
renounce Christ, and return to the service of the world in all our actions.
Our deeds prove that we do but only talk of God and Christ, and heaven: for
what has God but our breath? and with what do we seek heaven, but with the
tongue? the world has heart and hands, and (if not all yet) most of all our
strength. Being therefore (against my will, and earnest entreatie to the
contrary) commanded to speak unto this great congregation, I thought I could
not discharge mine own duty, and profit the present auditorie better, than if
I did labor to beat down this vice, which has gotten more ground against
the power of godliness, (I think) then the devils whole host of lusts
besides. If I have offended in any thing, it is in being too plain: which
whether it be a fault, yea or no, in a preacher, I cannot determine with my
self, but I know well it is less faulty, then that other extreme which in
our times is more in price and use. Yet me thinks the Apostle Paul has given
us a very good direction, saying; it has pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save the believers. 1. Cor. 1.21.
Does the Apostle disgrace Gods ordinance by giving it such a name? or does he
not rather deride men's censures that so miscall it? For not the wise, not the
learned, not the witty, not the eloquent kind of preaching, does help men's
souls to heaven; but that kind, which the greatest part (out of their
fleshlinesse) esteem base and foolish, because it wants the excellency of
words, and the enticing speeches of man's wisdom, as elsewhere the same
Apostle says; If I should aim at any other end in preaching, then the
salvation of men: were I not accursed for doing Gods work negligently, or
peruersely? If aiming at this, I should use any but his own means, were I not
foolish, that would prefer mine own thoughts to his? If this kind of preaching
please God, why not speaker? why not hearer? why not all? If it save men, why
should it not content those that come, the one to offer, the other to seek
salvation? To say the truth, I do not unwillingly confess, that my learning
is but small: For much learning requires much reading, and much reading many
years, which all that know me, know to be wanting unto me. Wherefore to make
show of much (by the help of an index or such like) when I have it not, were
but a cousoning trick, and a pranke beseeming a bragger or a bankerout, of
whom Solomon says, There is that makes himself rich and has nothing. But
say I had had the greatest abundance of learning, yet it behooved me to
remember, that a pulpit is not a place to show schollership in, but
faithfulness, nor to declare how well read we are in other authors, but how ill
practiced the hearers are in the will and word of God the best author.
Preaching was not appointed to tickle the ear with a gay speech and learned
oration, but to pierce the heart, with a sharp reproof and earnest
exhortation not to win credit and applause to the speaker; but to work
knowledge and obedience in the hearer: not to make the auditorie commend us,
and say, sure he is a good Scholar, a man of good wit and great reading, etc.
But to condemn themselves, and say we have been bad men, men of polluted
hearts and lives. In a word, not to draw men to admire the gifts of him that
speaks, and offer him preferment; but to repent of their own sins, and
offer submission unto Christ that sent him to speak. This if the Minister aim
at, he is happy, and the people also, if he attain it; but whosoever aims at
credit or profit in preaching, may go from the Pulpit to hell, and take his
wages with the hypocrite to whom it is said, that he has received his reward.
Loath would I be to buy praise or profit at such a price, neither did I dare to
hazard my self unto God, for misintending his ordinance, and handling his word
in a wrong manner. With this determination did I come to speak; with this
determination should every Christian come to hear. And if any twit me with the
name of an English Preacher (a name taken up to disgrace the foolishnes of
preaching which God commends) I have to answer, that I speak to Englishmen,
and, the most, no Scholars, otherwise it had not been hard to have heaped up,
and learned by heart, and spoken readily many a Greek and Latin sentence fit
for the purpose: but who would loose labor and time, and make two speakings
where one would serve the turn? And in this plain manner (Reader) have I
encountered, by the sword of the spirit, this capital evil of the world, which
is worldliness I was willing to publish, being spoken, what I was not willing
to speak, hoping to help some man against the sin, (which I speak against)
besides mine hearers, if but one Christian grow less earthly by benefit of
this labor, my recompense is sufficient; if not one, yet I have this fruit
that I intended to do good and endeavored it. Now Reader, if thou meet with
any fault, censure it with favor, for I am but a man, and in reading apply
nothing to any, but to thy self, and I have my desire. Thus I commend thee,
and thy grouth in virtue, to the help and assistance of our gracious Father.

Banbury, January. Thine in all Christian affection, William Whately.

M. VVHATELIES SERMON, PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS.
Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness, for though a man have
abundance, his life consists not in his riches.


THese are the words of our Savior Christ, uttered upon occasion of a
certain accident related immediately before. Two brethren were at variance,
about their fathers lands. It seems that one would have had all to himself,
and left very little or nothing to his brother. Hereupon the party that thought
himself wronged, entreats our Savior by good counsel, to compose the
controversy betwixt them, and to bring his brother to some more equal course
of division. Our Lord that always regarded the the soul more than the state,
perceiving covetousness to be the cause of this contention, refuses to
intermeddle with the parting of their lands, and falls to cure that disease of
their souls which procured all this distemper. This he begins to do in the
verse present, and prosecutes more at large in the sequel of the Chapter. These
words divide themselves into two parts: The first, Christ's exhortation, Take
heed, and beware of covetousness. The second, the reason wherewith he backs
his exhortation taken from the ineffectualnesse of wealth, the object of
covetousness, for though a man have abundance, etc. that is, if any man
should heap up all superfluities, he shall find no more safety, quiet, or
contentment of life, from this his copheaped plenty of outward things. The
point of doctrine which our Savior Christ aims at, direction, and show their
hope of salvation by practice of obedience, must shun and avoid with all
diligence this hateful sin of worldliness; one word of Christ should be
sufficient to a Christian soul, but he was not so scant of words as once only
to warn us of such a capital evil. The same spirit spoke in his Apostles,
that in himself and by their mouths he has given us many like
aduertisements, whereof some one or two it shall suffice to have mentioned.
Colos. 3.5. The Apostle speaks to Christians in this manner. Mortify therefore
your earthly members, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which, (to provoke our greater hatred) he
calls by that hateful name of idolatry. And well might he so call it, for it
causes a man to repose his hope of safety upon riches, which should be wholly
and only fixed upon the Lord of hoasts, seeing it is impossible that any thing
should secure a man from danger, unless it do surpass all other things in
power and in greatness: this sin is you see a capital enemy of our
salvation, which in our Christian warfare we should fight against, and strive
to slaughter in our selves. The Apostle also, Heb. 13.5. has said to the same
purpose, Let your conversation be without covetousness. The word is in the
original, without the love of money. But all comes to one reckoning. And it is
obseruable that he says (your conversation,) to meet with the deceitful
hollownesse of those that content themselves in some few actions to appear not
covetous, whilst in other actions at other times they be wholly polluted with
this sin. Their counterfeit and maimed diligence, answers not the large extent
of this commandment. A good man's life if Gods counsel might be heard, should
not in one or two alone, but in all the parts thereof, be free from the
stains of this wickedness. More places might be produced for the proof of
the same truth, if it were as needful, as easy so to do. But the chief
difficulty in this thing will be, not so much to win consent of judgment
to the point, as conformity of practice to the judgment. Wherefore to the
intent that Christ's speeches may be more profitably regarded, and this fault
more carefully shunned by you all that hear me this day; I will in few words
set out some of the most harmful effects that ensue upon this vicious
disposition of mind that Christ calls covetousness.

First, brethren, that even attentive hearing without meditation will not
ingraffe the word into your hearts, it will not profit the soul more, than
much getting when a man keeps nothing can benefit his estate. Well may it
increase swimming, but not saving knowledge: it may furnish ones head with
words and matter for honest discourse, but not ones heart with uprightness
and sincerity for godly conversation. Thus then stands the case. The Lord
offers thee his word to enlighten thy mind, to sanctify thine heart, to
convert thy soul, and make thee a true Christian: Covetousness opposes it
self, and will not suffer the word to dwell in thine heart, nor thine heart to
ponder upon the word, and so causes thee to be but an hypocrite at the best,
should thou not avoid it?

Secondly, Colos. 3.2.
The Apostle Paul wishes us to set our affections upon the things that are
above, and not upon the things that are below; intimating an utter
impossibility to do both; as if he had told us that there be 2. sorts of
objects, after which men's affections are carried, some are of the earth
earthly, momentanie, transitory, and unable to give any sound and lasting
contentment. Such are houses, lands, goods, money, in a word, worldly things.
Others are from heaven, heavenly, substantial, constant, immortal, truly
profitable to the whole man, such are faith, repentance, the spirit of prayer,
the favor of God, in a word, Christ and his benefits. And we must understand
this, that the body may ascend and descend at the same time, as well as the
soul or affections go earthward and heauenward both at once; Where the
treasure is, there will be the heart, be it in heaven or in earth: no man has
two hearts, two treasures, the one is but counterfeit, if any at all. Now this
covetousness as an arrow shot from hell, does nail the heart to the very
ground, that it cannot be lifted upwards, and as a lime-twig set by the Devil
so intangles the wings of the soul, that it cannot possibly fly upward toward
its proper home. The worldly man is so taken up in courting and wooing his
harlotry mistress, the world; which has taken him with her eyelids of gain,
and inueigled him with her naked breasts of commodity, that the suite for
heaven and things thereof, is altogether neglected and forsaken. Therefore the
scripture calls the worldling an adulterer, because as the whoremaister leaves a
beautiful and wel-conditioned wife, to embrace a common and polluted curtizan,
so does he abandon God and salvation, to satisfy himself with this most
deformed and misshapen world. And is it not the highest degree of unhappiness
to be robbed of ones understanding; and be so far forth infatuate as to
exchange heaven it self for a few shillings, yea farthings; and be more
painful and earnest to get a little glistring silver into the chest, than the
glorious image of Jesus Christ into the soul? for though God do often cast
these outward things upon those that take no great pains for them and the
world falls into the mouths of many before they be aware of it, (as we say)
yet it is not so for heavenly things. God never spilles such treasures, nor
parts with them to any without suite, without thanks. He must call for
wisdom, and dig for understanding that will have them, and strive to enter
that hopes to find a place in heaven, and miss of his entrance that strives
not. The case stands so therefore with thy soul, God offers himself and
eternal life unto thee, upon condition of convenient diligence in using the
means to get it on thy part: the world steps betwixt, draws thine heart,
diuerts thy thoughts, cares, desires, an other way, and so causes thee to
forfeit even an eternal kingdom, not for want of means, but of care and
pains to attain the same. Ought thou not as Christ bids, to take heed
thereof? but yet more evil proceeds from this master evil: neck between
his fingers speedily. And indeed no hawke is better trained to the fist of the
cuning fawkner, than the worldly man to all the Devils ways; whatsoever sin
he would have him commit, let him but hollow and cast up the lure of
commodity, he stoupes presently and falls upon it. Would he have him lie,
promise him profit; then begins he to hem and haw, and faulter in his speech,
and equivocate, and at length proceeds to downright lying, and impudent
facing out a known untruth. Would he have him perjured, the same art does that
also; show him commodity, use silver persuasions, he will assay and go back,
and fear, and sweat, but at last hardens himself, and cares not to pollute
the name of God, with a thousand falsehoods, and a thousand oaths. Yea, the
Devil can make such a man wade up to the chinne in a stream of warm blood,
with the glistring show of gold, and cause him to leap headlong into the
bottomless and burning pit of hell, with the large hope of enriching his
estate. In a word, there is not the rankest of all Satan's poisons, but he
will greedily devour in the sweet broth of commodity. Those unnatural crimes
which would make the soul aghast, if they came barefaced, send them in a
gilded vizard, as it were in a mask to the covetous man's house, he will
entertain them kindly with a kiss, and fears not to embrace them even in
both his arms.

Those hideous and enormious evils for which hell it self does gape upon the
conscience with an open mouth, are (we see it with our eyes) even fearelesly
committed in hope of advantage. And therefore the Scripture calls this sin,
not a branch, but a root, which it self, has many large, and big, and
fruitful branches, and that not of some one or two, or few, but of all evil:
because there can be no sin named so hateful, which profit has not made the
lovers of profit, either to commit themselves, or, which is all one, to consent
to in others. The worldling is a fit piece of timber for any place in Satan's
building. This mercenary soldier does never think himself too good for any
service in all the Devils camp, where pay and booty may be gotten. He can
make an Image-worshipper, and a defender of Image-worshippe, a perjured person,
a Sabboth-breaker, and a maintainer of them that do it, a killer of Father and
mother, a murderer of Kings, a blower up of Parliament houses, a staruer of
souls, a whoremaister, an harlot, a more polluted wretch, a robber, a
forsworn accuser, and what not in the highest degree against any
commandment? This sin is like a great beast that makes a large gap for any
other beast to enter in at afterward. This is the Devils great Ordinance
wherewith he makes such fearful battery upon the walls of the conscience,
that there are many wide breaches for all his army of other lusts, to give an
irresistible assault thereat, upon the heart and life and so to win the same
to himself. So that whereas God forbids all sin in pain of damnation, the
Devil may persuade thee if thou be covetous, to any sin, in hope of
commodity, and should not thou abhor this most pernicious vice?

But neither yet is this all. like the wicked woman that Solomon calls more
bitter then death, whose heart is as nets and snares, and her hands as bands to
keep a man fast in the ward and prison of the devil. For in the fourth place,
whosoever is ouer-ruled by this sin, cannot tread one of the sure steps
toward heaven: and in what measure this lead is tied to any man's heels, he is
utterly disabled from climing up the ladder of blessedness, which the Scripture
has framed for us. You know that our Savior Christ has showed eight
beatitudes, as it were so many stairs up to the throne of heaven; to be poor
in spirit, to mourn spiritually, to be meek, to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, to be mercifully, to be pure in heart, to be a peacemaker, and
to suffer persecution for righteousness sake. Now the covetous man cannot lift
up the legs of his soul to any one of these stairs, and therefore whilst he
continues covetous, there is no possibility of his ever coming to God. Poor
in spirit he cannot be: For he is so taken up with fear of poverty in
purse, and the sense of the misery which want will bring, that his soul
grows altogether senseless of the misery into which the fall of Adam and his
own sins have case him. Spiritual penury is not felt there, where want and
poverty are so extremely pinching. Again, he can never mourn truly for his
sins: for either carnal joy) which he takes inordinately by seeing the
increase of his worldly substance (as the rich man in the Gospel, when he
thought he had riches laid up in store for many years) does so tickle and
warm his heart that the stream of tears is dried up, which should be spent in
bewailing his sins: or else that worldly sorrow and vexation (that stinges
him upon the sense of outward crosses, and the disappointment of his hopes in
earthly matters) does turn the stream of weeping quite another way, that it
cannot come to the washing of his soul, and purging of his conscience, Then
meek he cannot be, for he is always possessed with one or other passion of
carnal joy, or grief, or envy, or the like, which as a storm or tempest on
the sea does fill him full of rage and distemper. The spirit of God has called
him a trouble house, saying, he that is greedy of gain troubles his own
house, and it is impossible that his heart should be meek and quiet, when as
he cannot suffer his house so to be. Also for hungring and thirsting after
righteousness, it cannot be that his appetite should stand that way, for the
doges-hunger, and dropsie-thirst of wealth does so gnaw and torment his soul,
that he has no leisure to long for Christ, and the imputation or communication
of his righteousness. So that he may freely lap in the filthy puddles of the
world, he never cares for the sweet and wholesome streams to which Jesus
Christ does inuit him, and if the may gorge himself with the foul garbage of
ill gotten goods, the pleasant and delightful food of the soul is but
unsavory to him. And like as one that has the green sickness, or some other
such disease, will leave the best meat, to feed on salt, oat-meale, or some
such like unwholesome thing: so the palate and stomach of his soul is in
that measure disordered, as he will reject righteousness it self, to surfeit
upon filthy lucre. But as for being merciful, that stands not in any sort with
his profession, if he should suffer his heart to relent at the miseries of
distressed men, and open his purse to relieve them, that would surely lessen
the heap of his money, which he must not dare to do. A piece of money goes
from him as drop of blood from his heart, with such a lively feeling and pain,
that he cannot be well pleased with that whatsoever, which draws it away. And
therefore he has either no pity and mercy, or else but by starts and fits
now and then, which is as good as none. Now for purity of heart, how can it
be conceived that he should have it, whose soul is as nest for the devil,
or a cage of unclean birds, in which sin and Sath an may sit, and hatch,
and hurke, and bring up all their broodes of damnable lusts and practices, if
that they will lay now and then a golden egg or two among, for the satisfying
of his greedy humor? He that has the root of all evil in his heart, cannot
have a pure heart. Moreover for peace making, cross him in his penny, and he
will trouble all the world, neither can he put up a wrong that touches him in
his commodity, without, being avenged. All the world can tell that
covetousness is the father, mother, nurse and all, of most debates and
strifes, for it makes a man set against every man, from whom he may wrest any
prsofit, and stand against every man also to whom he should pay any dues. And
for the last step of all, which is to suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, this he will never do, his goods are his God, and if it come to those
terms that either he must leave riches or righteousness, with true religion
and the practice of it, he loves God well, but his money better. Alas, he must
be borne with, God gives good words indeed, but a man cannot live with words:
his money he can feel and see, that pleases his sense so well, that he
thinks it folly to part with it, for such a matter. And therefore as the young
man in the Gospel, he hangs his head in his bosom, and goes his ways with a
sad countenance, something sorry that he cannot please Christ, and keep his
wealth both, but what ever come of it, he must keep that. The world is his
mistress, and he must embrace her, then farewell righteousness and religion.
So that now a man might very truly turn the speeches of our Savior Christ
against the covetous man and say: Cursed be the covetous for he is not poor
but proud in spirit, and therefore the kingdom of hell is his: cursed be the
covetous, for he cannot mourn for his sins but for his losses only, and
therefore he shall never be comforted. Cursed be the covetous, for he is not
meek but froward in heart, and therefore he shall not inherit the earth which
he so much wishes. Cursed be the covetous, for he does not long after
righteousness, but after riches, and therefore he shall never be satisfied.
Cursed be the covetous, for he is not merciful, but hard-hearted, and therefore
he shall find no mercy. Cursed be the covetous, for he is not a peacemaker
but a makebate, and therefore he shall be called the child of the Devil.
Cursed be the covetous, for he is not pure but filthy in heart, and therefore he
shall never see God. Cursed be the covetous, for he cannot suffer the loss of
his wealth for righteousness sake, and therefore the kingdom of hell is his.
Must you not then needs yield brethren, that this is a sin much to be shunned,
which does annihilate the saving power of the word of God, steal away the
heart from the love of heaven, and the things of God: force the heart to the
harboring of the most foul temptations, and hinder the heart from attayning
any part of blessedness, yea plunge it into such a multitude of curses?

Seeing then it is apparent that this vice is most enormious, and pernicious to
the soul, let us make some use of this point to our consciences. First then
upon this ground we may safely build an exhortation to all and every of you,
that you do search your own hearts and lives, to find how far this filthy
sin has found entertainment there, when Jesus Christ does so precisely
forbid an evil, no Christian can deny, knowing his nature to be inclinable to
all evil, that it behooves from such exhortation, to take occasion of
examining himself, how far forth he has offended or does offend in that
kind. Christ would not give warning of a fault to his servants, if they were
not also subject to it, and if we be subject to it, what can we do less than
look to it, if it be breeding in us yea or no? So then, seeing you have heard
and perceived the vileness of this sin, I beseech you every one not censure
another, but to consider of his own heart and life, and to observe diligently
if the have not been at the least tainted and blemished with the same, though
not wholly polluted with it, which exhortation is so much the more needful, by
how much the practice of most men is more contrary thereto; we come for the
most part very ill affected to the word of God. When any sin is there
disgraced, and showed to be dangerous, we labor to post off those speeches to
another man and sending the eyes of our mind abroad, which might have been
far better busied at home; we seek a fit man to bestow such a lesson upon,
choosing rather to cast it upon any man, than to learn it our selves. We are
too full of courtesy at these spiritual banquets. When such a dish as this is
set before us, namely the discountenancing or discommending of a fault, we lay
that liberally upon every man's trencher, and no man almost will carue to
himself, because that meat is indeed less toothsome, though nothing less
wholesome than the rest. I beseech you brethren that it may not be so with you
in this point. Do not say, (as it is an hundred to one that diverse of your
hearts have been busied in saying.) if covetousness be such a sin, how shall
such a man and such and such a man do, for all the world knows them to be
covetous? Nay, hear not so idly, the Lord spoke to thee, and intended the
exhortation to thy soul, and would have thee say to thine own lelfe, is
covetousness so vile a fin, how careful should I be to find it, and drive it
out of mine heart, and my conversation? Do not I practice it, do not I live in
it? let me look narrowly, for as it is dangerous, so it is crafty, and will
not appear in it own name, but (like a tray-tour that has escaped out of
prison) will miscall and diguise it self, and take twenty titles, and names,
rather than that wherewith it should be called. Men are willing to cloak their
sins, and to shift their hands of seeming to be naught, not being so. And as
when the plague is rife, every man desires, though it be in his house, yet to
keep it close, and say it is any other disease because it will be some
hindrance to be shut up for it: So for this disease of filthy lucre, which as
an infectious pestilence has spread it self over the world, into all Cities,
towns, and villages, scarce any will be known to be diseased with it, fearing
the disgrace rather then the danger. Some would confine covetousness to rich
men's houses only, as if it were not possible to be earthly minded, unless a
man had much earth in possession. But these men are exceedingly deceived about
the nature of this evil, as themselves might well perceive had they but
consulted with the wise man, that says, The sluggard lusts and has nothing.
A man may have a strong lust to wealth, albeit he have none of it. yea, though
he be frozen up in the cold dregs of idleness, and laziness, so that he will
not adventure to set his foot upon the cold ground for it. Nay, such men are
most desperately covetous, for because their sloth serves them not to take the
ordinary pains for getting it, therefore their lusts drives them to hunt and
seek for it, in the secret and unbeaten ways of cousonage and villainy. I
would to God there were not a great number of such slothful lusters known in
the world, perhaps also present in this place, whose covetousness is no less
then other men's, out it is ouer-borne by some other lust that is more then
quarter master with it. For this you must know, that this vice may be after a
diverse manner in diverse men; in some it is the chief Lord and sovereign,
bearing rule and commanding for it self; in others it rules as an under
officer to another lust, and is as I may say, the putueyer, or take for
idleness, ambition, or prodigality. Sometimes it is whole master, sometimes
half, sometimes quarter master with these sins before named; sometimes as
servant to all or some of them, for though these sins cannot well agree among
themselves, yet they can all agree well enough against godliness and piety of
life. Some scrape to keep and look upon it; some scrape to scatter and
mispend it; the one of these is as violent in his courses, as the other, and
this sin is as hurtful, yea, and more hurtful to the parties self, to the
Church and Common weal, when it is kept as a retainer to an other sin, than if
he had the chiefe-dome and Lordship it self. Let not the prodigal, let not
the ambitions, let not the sluggard say, that he is not covetous. I dare be
bold to affirm, that if he had the grace and wise. dome to search into
himself, he should find this wicked vice as great a doer in his soul
inwardly, and in his carriage out wardly, as in theirs, whom with great scorn,
he disgraces by the name of absolute chuffes, and mere misers: Send therefore
I pray you brethren, each man his own most serious considerations, as it were
searchers into his heart and life, (and take an oath of them, to deal truly,
and impartially) to see and observe, whether or no, he have the infection of
this pestilent sickness, which also the words of Christ do import, for he
says, look and ward your selves against Covetousness: as intimating, that
there is no escaping it, if we do not look to it. Now to the intent you may
not be deceived through error in this search, I will stand a while to give you
some directions, which by following, you shall be sure not to mistake in
examining and judging our selves as concerning this matter. To this end it
shall be needful for me to declare unto you both; What covetousness is.
First, What covetousness is: And secondly, What be the marks and tokens of
it: which being known, it shall be easy for him that is not wilfully blind,
to pass an upright sentence of himself.

First, therefore to show what covetousness is: It is the dropsy of the
mind, an horse-leach humor after wealth, which evermore cries give, give. It
is that that makes the heart as a grave for money, or a devouring sepulcher, or
a hell for goods, that will not be satisfied though you cast very much into it.
In few and plain terms, It is the desire of having more than what a man has
already, that being sufficient for necessary maintenance. If the Lord has
bestowed upon any man means enough to feed himself, and those that belong to
him, with food wholesome and competent, though perhaps somewhat course, as
also to cloth himself and his, with warm clothing, though neither of the
finest not in the fashion, if his desires do not here stay themselves, but
still cry more, more, this man is covetous, this sin is covetousness. He
that would have more then he has, having that which will suffice for his
honest maintenance, though not in such gay and frolike manner as his flesh
desires, this is the covetous man, and so the word that is used by Christ
signifies, vz, an having disposition: when a man so longs for more then he
has, that he is still ready to take, (which cannot but follow) more then he
should have. For covetousness and true contentment, are one opposite to the
other, as night and day, white and black, and therefore we may well know what
covetousness is, by the contrariety which it has with true contentment. Now
the Apostle does describe true contentment in these terms, 1. Tim. 6.6
saying, If we have food and covering, let us be sufficed or satisfied with
these, that is, let us count that even sufficient. These be the bounds which
the Holy ghost has made to hem and keep in the unruly desires of men in
respect of outward things, as it were wild Bucks within a pale or park Now if
the wishes will not be ranged within these lists and limits, but break through
them, or leap over them, to find a larger walk, it cannot be denied that the
sin of covetousness is committed. For the desire that is in ordinate is
this, that Christ forbids, and it is then inordinate when it exceeds the rule,
order, Heb. 13.5.
and precincts that God has set and appointed for it, which are, to think the
present things enough (and stop themselves from straying any further) when they
will afford meat, drink and cloth, sufficient to content nature, in it
moderate use to keep ones self out of debt, and so bring him well to heaven,
his iourneis end, as it were enough money to bear his charges in his travail
toward God. Now if any man object against this and say, if covetousness be that
which you have described it to be, where will you find a man that has it not,
where can one be brought quite free from it? To this question I must answer.
No where, not under heaven, not within the compass of the whole earth, for
this sin as well as other is bred in our nature, and cleaues as fast to the
soul of every son of Adam, as his skin to his flesh. Why? but may some man
further object, is every man then subject to those enormious effects and
hideous curses, which you before showed to follow upon covetousness? I
anfwere, in no sort, but alone those men in whom this sin is suffered to be
with allowance, is yielded to, and followed. In some men as I showed you
before, this vice is as a soueraign Lord; in others it rules under ambition,
and prodigality, in both these, all the bad effects named before, will
certainly follow, all the curses denounced are to both these sorts of men
certainly due. In other some it is as an unwelcome guest that intrudes
himself, it is like a bad tenant that is often warned to go out, and will
take no warning, it is not suffered to have command, but it is striuen against,
resisted, complained off, and has many a supplication put up, and many a suit
commenced against it, in the court of heaven, for usurping in an other man's
right. To such it is exceeding cumbersome and tedious, and does them marvelous
much annoyance, but yet it can neither produce those vile effects, nor bring in
those horrible curses. In a word, some have it, and do beware and take heed of
it, as a disease that is applied with medicines. These it molests, but kills
not. Others have it, and never suspect, fear, nor take heed of it, as a
disease that a man carelessly lets go without medicining: to these it is not so
toyle-some, but more dangerous; for it slayes their soul, by bringing forth
those bad stuits before named. And thus as plainly as I could, I have showed
you what covetousness is in the very nature of it, considered without respect
of the degrees thereof.

Now I come to show you the marks and tokens of it The signs of it.
which was the second thing I promised, to the end men might know themselves,
by which a man may also see in what measure or degree this sin is in him; for
if these things be found in his life, rarely and seldom, then covetousness
has some secret and unknown allowance, through the deceitfulness of his
heart; but it is not wittingly and wilfully maintained: if they do appear
often and ordinarily, then covetousness rules there, and is by him favored,
loved, yielded unto, and obeyed; it is Lord of his soul, though perhaps he be
so full of hypocrisy as not to see or confess it. And indeed it is a thing
very needful to show these signs plainly, because when out of our evil
will we censure other men, we call them extremely covetous, upon these grounds
which will bear no such accusation or action. As namely, if they be painful
in their callings, if they have more dealings in the world than our selves, if
they will not give at what time we would have them, or such like. But when in
our fond self-love we are to speak of our selves, we will not dare to
conclude, we are very covetous, no not upon the soundest grounds and surest
proofs.

To return therefore to the point, There be 4. sure and infallible signs and
marks of this vice, which do as certainly prove it to be in the soul, as the
yelow hair in the law did the leprosy, and as the carbuncle does the plague
The first of these is carking and caring, 1. Carking
which is a note most easily seen and selt in men of lower place; for as some
diseases have their diverse signs, in diverse constitutions, so have also sins in
diverse conditions and estates, diverse marks to know them by. Now this carking
is for men of meaner estate, principally to try themselus by. He that does
grieve and molest himself for the fear of want and misery to come hereafter
(for that is a proper description of carking, it is sorrow conceived upon the
doubt and suspicion of that need that may come) the man I say, that does so
vex and trouble himself, is in that degree covetous that thus grieved. For
the affections of our heart, are in their several working so joined and linked
together, that the working of some will not appear, but upon the precedent
working of other. No man can inordinately sorrow for fear of wanting that in
the future time, which he does not inordinately desire for the present time.
And for this cause our Savior Christ, where he intends to overthrow
covetousness, both in this Chapter, in the sequel of his speech, as also in
Mat. 6. falls upon the matter of carking, and dwells much upon that, saying: Care
not what you shall eat, what you shall drink, Matt. 6.25.34.
and what you shall put on: and after, care not for to morrow, bringing also
many reasons to that purpose, as well seeing, that this sin and covetousness do
always go hand in hand, in the poorer sort chiefly, and sometimes also in
the wealthy: and that those arguments which are of force to beat down the one,
are also fit and able to subdue the other too. And therefore also in the
Parable, he calls covetousness by the very name of the cares of this world:
because wheresoever it is strong, there it does encumber the heart, and pester
it up with a throng and multitude of most noisome carkings.

So then, if any man do find himself to stand so disposed in mind, that
having enough for the present time, yet he does eat up his heart, break his
sleep, disquiet himself, and turn into gaul, that comfort which he might
have in his life, by this unprofitable and ouer-reaching thoughtfulness: Ah
how shall I do if a dear year come? how, if I have so many children? how if
I live till I be so old, or till I be lame or blind? sure I shall spend all, I
shall consume all, I shall be undone, I shall die a beggar, and come to great
want and extremity, and such like terrible dreams: if any man I say stand
thus affected, these things do most rankly savor of covetousness: this vice
plays the Lord and Tyrant in that man's soul, when he that is not assured of
life till to morrow, nay, that ought to be ready to depart this life before to
morrow, will thus turmoile himself with fruitless and unprofitable fear about
that which his dreaming conceit tells him may befall, many a day, nay, many a
year after (so not suffering himself to be free from a burden, when he may,
because he fears he shall not be free when he would) this man is most
notoriously and violently covetous, and so must know himself to be, whether
he be rich or poor.

A second note of covetousness, is niggardice, 2. Niggardice. Pro. 11.14
which is the fault which Solomon points out, when he says; he that spares
more then is fit. When a man is so ouerchary of his wealth that he cannot
suffer a grain to be diminished from the heap hereof, with any willingness,
no not then, when good, just, and reasonable causes do require expense, when
he keeps his wealth to feed his eye, and saues his money to look upon, this
is a fit that proceeds from the desiring of earthly things overmuch, and does
plainly declare an excess of that humor. This the wise man sets out, when he
says; Eccles. 6.1.2.
There is an evil seen under the Sun, a man to whom God has given riches
and treasures, but he has not the power to cate thereof. This neerenesse, and
immoderate saving, shows that a man's sou, e has the dropsy, and that not
alone when it grows to such extremity, as a man will pinch and deprive his
own person, and his wife, children, and servants of those comforts and
benefits that he might enjoy, but even then also, when a man is pinching
toward the poor, and so closefisted, that he will not part with a part of
his substance for the relief of those which are in need and necessity, by
him (which is indeed the true end, why God gives to one man more abundance, to
an other less) even this hardness, I say, to the poor and needy, does prove
a man to be very dangerously covetous, though he do never so liberally, yea,
and perhaps ouer-liberally bestow upon himself; of which we have a clear
proof in the words of the Apostle, that says; Whosoever has this worlds
goods, 1. Ioh. 3.17
and sees his brother want, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? That man, you see, that is so much given to
hold and keep, as when God calls for it to relieve the distressed coming
as it were to borrow in and by them) he will say him nay, and turn him away
empty, or poorly served, the love of God does not dwell in that man,
whatsoever show he may make; and therefore consequently the love of this world
has taken up the holt of his heart, I do not mean, (ney there does the
Apostle) that he which gives not to every vagrant rogue, or idle beggar which
comes to his door, or meets him in the way, may presently be termed unloving,
and covetous: Nay there be two sorts of poor; Gods poor, whom his hand
crossing them any way, has brought to want, though they be laborious, and
thriftie: and the devils poor, upon whom their own idleness, riote, and
sinful courses have forced necessity: now for these last, unless they will
settle themselves to labor, and live honestly, they should be relieved with
punishment and correction, and helped out of their sin, not maintained in it,
by abusiue mercy, or rather foolish pity: but the former sort of men, are
those whose case we should pity and tender, as our own, and therefore both
open our hearts in compassion, and our purses according to our power in
liberality, to succor and to help them. Gods poor must have God alms, and
for those that in such case can go slincking, and trudging away, not extending
their charitable contribution to the refreshing of their bowels, and comforting
their hearts that are pressed with want, they must either give the Apostle the
lie, or confess, that the love of the world has choked the love of God, and
of their neighbor, in them; yea when soever any needful thing does require us
to be at some cost and expense, either for the maintenance of Gods worship, or
of the common good, as in public services, payments, and the like, but chiefly
for works of mercy, then to mutter and grudge, and murmer and pinch, and hang
back, and complain; is a certain sign of an heart greedily disposed toward
earthly things; he that thinks himself ouercharged by such expenses, is
certainly ouercharged with worldliness. As he is prodigal that spends when
the Devil and his lusts call for it, so he is covetous, that spares when God
and good uses call for it.

The third note of covetousness, 3. Too much business in the world.
is to clog a man's self with too much outward business, and to prosecute
these earthly affairs over eagerly. When a man falls into that sin which.
Solomon forbids saying, Pro. 23.4.
Toil not thy self to be rich: then it is sure that he has cast his eyes
upon that which is nothing, that is, set his desires ouer-strongly upon those
outward vanities that have no true substance in them. If any man for get the
rule of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7.31.
that bids us use this world as if we used it not: and fall to such
immoderatenes in his dealings, as if he had never heard of a better world to
prepare for: it is an unquestionable truth that he desires the things of this
world more then he should do. Now then any man's business is ouer-plentifull
and excessive, when the multitude thereof does hinder him from the careful and
constant performing of all or any of the good duties appointed by God, for the
salvation of his own, or his families souls. For the Lord has composed man
of two parts, the one a body which is fading and mortal, to live here for a
few days, and then yield to the stroke of death, and of corruption: the other
a soul incorporall, spiritual, immortal, which cannot die, nor suffer
corruption. And the Lords will is, that a man living here in the body, should
make all careful, wise, and godly provision for his soul, that that departing
hence out of the body, may not be cast into the torments of eternal vengeance
(which are prepared for such as in this life use not all good diligence to
escape them) but may rather enjoy its portion in that everlasting and
unspeakable bliss, which is also made ready for all them that do constantly
and with honest hearts use the means to attain the same. And the means of
attaining this happiness, are faith and repentance, and the continual increase
of these graces, by praying, reading, and meditating in the word, and good
conference daily, as also hearing the word preached when occasion is offered,
and sanctifying unto the Lord for these uses every seventh day. For the former
of these, are to the soul of him that has a true living soul, as I may so
term them, daily repasts and meals wherewith his inward man is strengthened
and refreshed, growing daily from grace to grace: the latter, that is, the
celebration of the sabbath, is as I may say, a solemn feast day, and a great
banquet for the soul, wherein all bodily labors so far as mercy, necessity
and comeliness will permit, being set apart, the soul should have liberty
after a more then ordinary manner, to solace and delight it self in God, and
feed upon Jesus Christ, in the word and Sacraments, and other holy exercises,
that it may grow fat, and well liking in all graces, and chiefly faith and
repentance, the two principal graces.

Now these being the means of Gods own ordaining to attain sound grace here,
and glory hereafter, daily to pray, read, and meditate, and confer of good
things, and weekly to sanctify the Sabbath, he that does so surcharge
himself or his family with outward business, that he has not leisure daily to
perform the daily duties, and weekly, that weekly duty in such conscionable
sort as God does require at his hand, for a purpose so profitable and most
excellent, cannot deny that he loves the world too much; being that he seeks
not, as Christ commands: first, the kingdom of heaven, but first the
worthless things that this earth can afford, and leaving that which is the
true and proper end of his being here; that is, to get grace and salvation,
employes himself too much about that which was but a secondary end, and to be
done only by the way, so far as might be helpful to the former, and no
further. Every man will yield that he desires earthly things inordinately,
which desires them more than eternal life: and it is as certain, that he
rather wishes wealth then eternal life, which suffers the means of attaining
that, to shoulder out and exclude quite, or else drive into a very narrow
corner, and small room, the means of attaining this: for the desires rule the
actions, and that a man longs most for, which he most labors for. As he
that suffers hawks, hounds, and vain, though in themselves lawful pastimes,
so to devour his time, that he has little or no leisure for the performing of
the forementioned religious duties; is convicted before all impartial Judges
to be a lover of pleasure more than a lover of God: So he that suffers buying,
selling, bargaining, reckoning, travailing, and any such business lawful in
it self, but unlawful in the immoderate use of it, to rob him of leisure for
the same exercises, must needs be condemned to love wealth more than God, by
the verdict of any man that will speak the truth, according to his conscience:
and therefore be it noted as a sure rule, that every man is in that measure
covetous, that ouer-worke-some and laborious about worldly things, and in that
measure ouer-laborious, that he suffers the plenty of these things to withdraw
him from the conscionable, constant, and holy performing of better things,
tending more directly to a better life. 4. Injustice of which.
Now folfows the last note of covetousness, and that is injustice, or the using
of injurious and indirect means to get wealth. For must it not needs be
yielded, that he desires wealth too much, which will dig to hell, and fall
down to the devil for it? And what else is it, but a falling down to the
Devil for it, when a man does put the regard of obedience to God, of charity
to his neighbor, of honesty in himself, behind the respect of enriching his
estate; to al which things, does he not manifestly prefer money that will do
wrong to win it? God forbids wrong, charity, honesty, and every man's
conscience forbids it, only the Devil and lucre command it: Is he not
worthy to be called a money-slaue, and a slave to the devil, that will disobey
all these, to serve the desire of being rich, for is not every man his servant
to whom he does obey? And does he not obey lucre abiectly, that will rebel
against the most high Lord, and the conscience his officer for these things
sake?

So then every man is so far forth covetous as unjust in his dealings. 1 In
general.
Now all those practices are unjust and unequal, which be not conformable to
two general rules set down in Scripture, that by them we might square out al
our particular actions. The first is, to do to every man as we would have him
do unto us. Not as we out of our disordered and distempered passions sometime be
content to have another deal with us, so we may deal with them; but what in
the true sentence of our judgment, Mat. 7.12.
grounded upon due and deliberate consideration of the things we would approve
of being done to us, that we must do to our neighbors: so that whatsoever
thing a man would condemn in his judgment, not in his passions, being offered
to himself, that is wrong and iniquity, if he offer it to another.

The second rule is, Gal. 5.13. 1 Cor. 13.6
to serve each other in love: for love seeks not it own things: meaning only
without regard of another, but does so equally and indifferently consider
another with it self, that it would not profit it self with this
endammagement; therefore whosoever is wholly possessed with selfe-regards, and
has his eye so fixed upon his own advantage, that he cannot look upon
another man with any even regard of him; this man in all such dealings walks
injuriously, because uncharitably, and shall be condemned (though not by the
strict law of humane justice, yet by the perfect rule of Christian charity)
for a wrong doer. And by these 2. rules wisely applied to each several action,
it will be easy to spy out injustice, though it hide it self under never so
fair and colorable pretexts. But we shall not have sufficiently pressed this
sore, if we deal with it alone in such general terms, wherefore it is our
purpose to speak more particularly thereof, and leaving these practices that
are of all men condemned as odious and vile, 2. In particular of such injustice
as is found.
and practiced alone by the vilest men in corners and in darkness (such as are
stealing, robbing, forgerie, and all manner of cousonage, so termed:) we will
speak of those which have been practiced in the world usually, with more
applause and in the Sun. shine; yea and some of them perhaps also defended, as
if they did not deserve the censure of vninstice. And because the things be
many whereof we must speak, we will rank them into certain heads, according
to the nature of the subjects in whom they be most often found, for the relief
of our own and your memories. Some wrongful actions therefore are found in
ministers of justice, some in ministers of the Gospel, some in tradesmen, some
in landlords, some in all men without respect of their several callings; of
all which, we will speak somewhat in order, and briefly to the intent that by
them, every man may (as we hope, every Christian man professing religion will)
search himself to the quick, and impartially. First then, for ministers of
Justice, (by which name I term all those that have any thing to do in the
administration of public equity) in them unless they be careful, Ministers
of injustice
there will be found very often three notorious points of wrong through the
desire of gain. There first is briberie, or the receiving of gifts, 1. Taking
a gift.
though it be from the innocent, to have hearing and justice. For a bribe, is
any gift taken by him that has to deal in matters of justice, of those which
are to come under his censure, whether for matters penal or capital, whether
they be offenders, or not offenders. And therefore the holy Ghost has flatly
forbidden to them the receiving of any gift at all: Exodus 29.8
and in more then one or two places, has cried out against those that love
gifts, and take gifts A gift of this kind is a thing of very ill name and note
in the writing of the Spirit of God, who shows his anger, saying: Fire shall
devour the houses of bribes. Job. 15.34. This does even as it were build a
nest for injustice and falshoode, wherein she may come with allowance, hearing,
and entertainment, to lay all her subtle and crafty devices and tales, for
the forestalling of a true narration, that might else clear a case to the
full. This fills up the ear with the earewaxe of partiality, that truth
cannot have liberty with approbation to show her mind and speak for her
self, unless she use a golden earepicke first: and therefore God himself
says, Exo. 23.8.
That it blindes the eyes of the wise: let a man have never so good skill and
knowledge in the law and matters of Justice, if he suffer this dust of a bribe,
to be scattered in the eyes of his judgment, this will surely follow, his
eyes will (as I may say) water and twinckle, and grow worse and worse, till at
the length he can see nothing, but becomes as blind as a mole or bat. And
indeed this kind of gain must needs in Gods account, be as stolen goods, for
the party receiving the same, has no manner of right or interest into it. For
if the man that gives it be innocent, to the knowledge of the magistrate, he
should have his cause heard and sentenced aright, even for his innocence sake,
though he gave nothing: If the magistrate know him to be nocent, a world of
goods should not keep his sin from being made known and punished: If the
magistrate do not yet know either his innocence or faultines, he should not
make himself blind with a blinding gift, before he come to look upon the
cause. And if any think that the will of the giver does transfer right to
him that takes in such case, he must know himself to be deceived in so
thinking, for it is not a pure and voluntary will, but forced, because he
knows the humor of the man to be such, that he will not do right unless he
be hired to it. Even as a man is willing rather to give this purse to the
purse-taker, than to venture his life or lim: so is he to give a bribe to the
bribe taker, rather than adventure his cause: and therefore I dare boldly I say,
and the God of heaven will justify my words, at the last day, that a thief
has as much true right to the money that he takes by the hye way, as the
magistrate to the gift that he takes even of the innocent party for a day of
hearing, or the like: yea though it come not immediately unto his own hands,
but be given to the wife, or son, or servant, or friend, by his appointment
or allowance; which is but a little more cleanly conueiance of a bribe. Should
Justice be made as an hackney, that stirs not out of doors but for hyre, or
as a mercenarie Soldier, 1. Perverting justice or reward.
that will not draw his sword but for his pay? A second thing incident to this
calling, is perverting of justice for a reward, which is a thing different from
the former; for a man may be said to take a bribe, though he pass true
sentence, and do justice for it: but this that I speak of is worse, when a man
will go against equity for wages sake, and this the scripture does also
plentifully condemn in many places. If the judge for something that he has
already received, or has couenanted, or hopes to receive hereafter, for him or
any by his procurement, will find a knot in a rush, and condemn the cause which
he should maintain, but maintain that which he should condemn; or if those
that are to plead and declare matters in that truth which they see in them,
will for an ouer-abundant fee, set a fair color upon a false cause, and paint
over a lie with shows, that it may seem truth, (as by concealment of some
circumstances and the like) to delude right; (which is, to call evil good, and
good evil; light darkness, and darkness light, a thing that the holy Ghost cries
woe upon, whatsoever the wit of a covetous man can say, to make it seem
lawful,) or when other officers that have the execution, or helping to execute
orders, will for a piece of money find out delays and shifts and devices, (as
for example, frustrating or changing the order or decree, in setting it down,
and twenty such other ways that I know not, but their consciences can tell of
that practice them, and God does also see) all to shield and defend the wrong
doer from the verdict that equity has passed against him; these, and every of
these practices, to pervert judgment for advantage sake, are notorious and
palpable wrongs, and such as every man would condemn and abhor, if they were
offered to himself.

A third action of injustice on such, is Extortion, 3. Extortion.
which also the laws of the Land do forbid, when he that has his allowance
allotted him for his pains, in such mesure as is thought by the law competent,
(which also he may very lawfully and justly take, so that he perform his
duty for it,) when such one I say will do nothing, or as good as nothing unless
this fee be doubled or perhaps trebbled, or perhaps will take fees on both
sides, one to speak, another to hold his peace, or speak nothing to the
purpose. This is vile unjust dealing, the eye of nature can see it, the eye of
grace can abhor it, this is to take that which is none of ones own. If any
present have or do offend in these or any of these points, or any like to
these, be it known to him, that he lives unjustly and couetously, and these
actions shall stand up before God and the world at the last day and witness
against him, saying; thou did harbor this covetousness which Christ
condemns, thou art the covetous man which the scripture says cannot go to
heaven.

Now come we to such injustice as is found in ministers of the Gospel, 2 In
Ministers.
as a witness of their covetousness, for God and man would cry shame upon us
for partiality, if we should not tax this sin in men of our own coat, as
well as others; seeing all the world can testify, that it finds harbor in
them also. Now the first sinful and unjust course used by Cleargimen, is
called Simony, 1. Simony.
when a man buys a Church-liuing, he shows himself to serve covetousness in
the sum, not God, because he comes in rather by the help of money than by the
calling of God. And not alone is this sin then committed, when men be such
bunglers, in managing their matters, that the law will catch hold of them, but
then also when there is Art in sinning, and as we say craft in daubing, when
the man that is desirous of living, does not come with a downright bargain,
for fear of law: nor says; Sir, if you will be my friend, and help me to
such a benefice or promotion, I will give you so much money, or yield you, or
your younger son, or your servant, or friend, so much commodity out of it, and
so forth. But either in great good will, (to his own preferment. I mean not to
the patron) will send him some goodly gift, or else in good earnest will lay
some wager with him, purposing to loose the wager, rather then, not win the
living, or else we sell him too good a penniworth in some thing, taking far
less than it is worth, or buy something of him, for much more then it is
worth; or use any such like tricks to delude law and cosen equity: these
devices be also Simony, as odious in truth as the most plain kind of bargain
that can be made; under which rank also comes for the most part, that usual
course of buying aduowsons, for he that buys, must sell, that every man
knows, or else he must live by the loss, which men of this stamp, will
seldom or never do if they can choose. And in this fault, the patron has as
great a share as the Minister, yea, and greater too; because the fountain of
the fault is in him; for if he would give freely, no man need to buy it, and he
should be able to discern that such a covetous harpie as is willing to pay for
it, were in no sort fit for the place, and therefore should in no sort bestow
it upon him, much less set it to sale to him, being that the laws have
committed this care to his charge, not that he should make a commodity of it,
for then it had bin fitter to give it unto poorer men, whose low ebb did
require to be filled up by such helps, and not as it is commonly, to the Lords
of the places, whose revenues if they were not grossly either covetous or
prodigal, might well suffice them: the laws, I say, have laid the care of
presenting a fit man upon him, not because he should pass it over to another
for money, or himself make a gain of it; but because he should do faithful
and profitable service unto the Church and Commonweal, in providing a man of
good parts and competent gifts, as being thought the most of ability to judge
of such an one, and to seek him out. Here therefore a covetous Patron, and a
covetous Minister, must be content to divide the fault betwixt them, and endure
to be called unjust and worldly, for making bargain and sale of the
maintenance of Gods worship.

A second fault and that far more notorious in men of this rank, is, 2. To
feed themselves and not the flock.
when they do feed themselves, and not the flock, through idleness, or
carelessness, do seldom or never drive the sheep of Christ unto the green
pastures, or the still waters, that the Lord has provided for them.

When I say, such a thing as this is done, it is of all the particular
vniustices which I have named, or shall name, the most abominable to God, and
ought to be so accounted also amongst men. For the Church-liuings are, as it
were, the revenues of Jesus Christ, and his endowments, to be disposed by him,
and it is his order that those should live of the Altar, not which loyter, but
which labor at it and therefore those that labor not have no interest from him
to eat of the fruits, and if they presume to do it, they fill and fat
themselves with stolen and ill gotten goods, which though they taste sweet in
the mouth shall prove gravel, yea worme-wood, yea, poison in the bowels. Now
the labor that the holy Ghost requires at the hand of the Ministers of the
Gospel, is apparently set down in Scripture, that no man can without wilfulnes
be ignorant of it. Mat. 29.19.20.
Go preach and baptize all nations, teaching them to observe all things that I
have commanded you; And again woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel; 1 Cor
9.16 2. Tim. 4.1.2.
And again, I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus, who shall
judge the quick and dead at his appearance, and in his kingdom, preach the
word in season, and out of season. Reprove, exhort, rebuke, with all long
suffering and doctrine. An other part of his function is, Tim. 2.15.
to read the word unto them publicly, as the Levites did in former time, for
God forbid we should disallow this so profitable and comfortable an ordinance,
Act. 8.31.
because many content themselves with this alone. And another part is, to pray
with them, and be as it were their petitioner to God in public. Another is, to
administer the Sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper. An other part of
his duty is, in private to ouersee their ways, comforting the weak,
strengthening the feeble, and admonishing the unruly, that so he may give a
good account to God for them, who will require them and their blood at his
hand. Now he that feeds upon the living, and does not in some good measure set
himself to do those things which God calls upon him to do, he is a
loyterer, he is an hireling.

To take Gods wages, and not do his work at all, or else negligently, is a
great and a cursed wrong, and so much the more hurtful then other wrongs, by
how much it does more nearly and dangerously touch the souls of men, who must
(for any thank that is due to him) perish for ever; when the means of God
appointed to save men, is not used by him the Minister, whom God sets as a
watchman, and puts in trust with such a weighty employment. And all such men
shall have the blood of the parties perishing through their default required at
their hand. It behooved me to have my nostrils strangely stopped with a poze of
prejudice, if I had not smelt these practices to savor rankly of covetousness,
and to have had my mouth basely musled with partiality, if I had not freely
reproved it: and therefore if any in the ministry be present, that uses these
courses to enrich himself by, be it known to his face, yea, to his soul, that
these sins shall arise before God, with the assent of his own conscience, and
with a loud and shrill voice, proclaim in his ears, to his shame and
confusion, if he repent not. Thou have harbored this covetousness that Christ
bids beware of, thou art the covetous man, that can not inherit the kingdom
of God.

Now let us proceed to Tradesmen, 3. Tradesmen.
who are occupied in buying and selling, and show how indirect courses are
incident to their place, as testimonies of a worldly heart.

The principal are these. 1. False waights and measures.
First, to use false waights and measures, that is, when the waights and
measures, by which they buy or sell, either are not of the same content,
extent, and height that the law requires they should, and they are by custom
taken for, or if they be, yet there is cousonage used in applying of them, by
iogging, shaking, turning and swift conueyances, that I cannot name, but men's
hearts can tell that use them, and so also can the Lord that sees the heart.
Now such, the light of nature Ioaths, and God condemns with a woe, and says,
Pro. 11.1.
false waights (and they be as bad as false that are falsely used,) are an
abomination to the Lord, and he would not abhor them, if they were not
unjust.

The second is, to sell, corrupted, false, sophisticated, and insufficient
wares, 2. Insufficient wares.
such as are not in quality as good, or in substance the same, that the seller
would have the buyer to take them for; which sin is most grievous in
Apothecaries, because there it may also have a spice of murder, mixed with
injustice, and for such dealing as this, seeing every man will exclaim and
grudge against it, being offered to himself, we will seek no other proof but
his own confession, to condemn it in himself.

The third is, to engrosse, or forestall, 3. Ingrosings.
that is, to buy up any commodity before hand, when it is, or might be cheap,
to the foreseeing of a future dearth, that so he may make his gain at his
pleasure afterward. It is lawful to buy up the ouer-plus of any commodity, I
mean the residue, when men's turns are served in the time of plenty, as Joseph
did; that a man may have it to help the common weal in time of dearth, with
some good and moderate gain to himself also; but the ingrosser in stead of
laying up the superfluity of plenty, to prevent and help a dearth; does hoord
up the store of plenty, to procure one, which is to cut the throat of the
common weal for his own advantage sake: And therefore Solomon says, Pro.
11.26
Him that hoords up corn the people shall curse. And seeing the same reason is
of all things in their degree, I may say the same of all, the ingroser shall be
accursed, and he could not be so, if he were not unjust.

A fourth thing injurious in such men is, 4 To abuse the simplicity or
necessity of men.
play and prey upon the necessity or simplicity of men, either in thrusting a
thing upon them for much, that a man's self knows to be worth little; or in
getting a thing from them for little, which he knows to be worth more; because
they know not the thing, or else must needs have it, or part with it. In a
word, any exacting of too much, or giving too little, chiefly when we abuse the
ignorance or the need of our neighbor to this end; is to serve ones self in
self-love, and not his brother in love, and therefore is unjust.

Now if any ask how I can inform their consciences concerning the increasing
or diminishing of the price, I will refer him to the first general rule
forenamed, and wish him to ask as little, and offer as much as himself, if he
were in the same case, would willingly, not by compulsion have taken of him, or
given to him, all things considered in due manner; to deal otherwise then so,
is to deal injuriously and unrighteously.

The fifth to this condition of people, 5. To get away another man's custom or
bargain.
is to get away another man's custom by odd tricks; as for example, to offer
and sell him a very cheap pennyworth, yea, cheaper than can be afforded for
once or twice, which a man purposes to fetch out at some other time,
afterward, when he has gotten him in, and such like, and so to take an other
man's bargain out of his hand, is in the same kind for the buyer, that this
named for the seller: for such dealing no man can take in good part, when it is
done to himself, and therefore the law of nature and God both, do condemn
it, as naught and unequal.

The last injustice in men of this condition, is to live by wicked trades, 6.
Using unlawful trades, or abusing lawful.
which serve directly to the supporting of vice and wickedness: as for
example, by keeping dicing houses, filthy houses, bowling alleys, and such like
places of hellish resort, which are as it were the devils houses of office: the
hot and unsavory steames whereof, do provoke heaven, and defile the world. And
such is also the abuse of lawful trades to the same purpose, as in Painters or
the like, in making idolatrous or filthy pictures as fit instruments to provoke
spiritual or bodily fornication. So of Stationers, in selling and dispercing
filthy and lascivious pamphlets: and here the common sin of Vintners and
Ale-hous-keepers be severely taxed, in that they permit brutish creatures worse
than swine, to sit and swill, and wash away their reason and discretion, til
the house be made a sink of filthy vomiting the baseness of which men, and
loathsomenes of which practice no man would suffer within his doors, but that
the sweetness of gain makes him ready to give welcome to the blackest fiend of
hell, that shall come with a full purse, and a lavish hand to mispend the same.

Now these, or all, or any of these, if any tradesman present use, be it known
to him without doubting, that they shall all stand up to his condemnation in
the presence of God, and cry out upon him, saying; Thou do entertain this
covetousness that Christ forbids: thou art the covetous man so much condemned in
the word of God, whose soul cannot be saved if it so continue.

And now must I go on to speak of those euilsin landlords, 4. Landlords, as
that having much themselves, set or let grounds, or livings, or houses, which
do proclaim the soueraignetie and dominion of covetousness in them.

The first is, to rack Rents, 1. To rack rents.
and exact immoderate and excessive fines, I mean not the requiring of more
rents than have been accustomed in former times, to be paid; for it is
doubtless lawful to improve land; but I mean, lifting them to such an high
and unreasonable rate, that the tenant shall not live any thing comfortably
thereby, but in extremity of toil and want, being forced either to use
unlawful shifts, and base niggardice, or else to dash himself upon the rock
of penury and need. This is to grind the faces of the poor, and it is that
sin of oppression, so much spoken against in men of this place, by Gods word.
Now if any man ask what rule may be set down out of Scripture, as a sure
direction for the prices in such cases? I answer, let him set himself in the
Tenants place, and what he would then give (voluntarily, not upon constraint
and extremity, all things laid together according to the quantity of the
thing, that, and no more than that, must he take, and not suffer himself to be
transported by the sweet tongue of every flattering servant, and insatiable
desire of getting money, to fling away upon his pleasures, or else augmenting
the revenues for the next heir. He that will not make himself a pattern of his
dealing to others, is condemned by his conscience to deal not righteously.

The second fault of Landlords is, to burden and lade their tenants with
carriages and like services, more then was agreed upon in the covenant betwixt
them, 2. To burden the tenant with carriages etc. more then condition.
without paying him for it as an other man will do. As for example, to carry
stone and timber for his building, to plow land, to inn hay and corn, to
fetch fuel or firewood, to remove household stuff, and all this gratis. The
Landlord may not challenge this privilege over the Tenant, to make him work
for nothing, where he is not tied by the condition of his lease, nay, nor then
neither, if it be unreasonable, and tend to his undoing. For this the Prophet
Jeremy durst condemn in a King; and therefore I need not fear to condemn it
in a landlord, of what place soever. For so says he of the King of Judah,
Iehoachim son of Ioshuah. Ier. 22.13.
Woe to him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers without
equity, and wherein stood this lack of equity? he uses his neighbor (or
makes him setue) without wages, and gives him not for his work. You see this
sharply reprehended by the Prophet long ago, as void of equity, that no man
may diride it as a toy of our own head.

A third injustice among Landlords, is by fraud or might to deprive the
tenants of any part of their duties, as of some green, or common, or wood, or
such like, that appertains unto them: this is that which the Prophet
condemns by the name of coveting a field, and taking it by force. Now these
courses specified, or any of the like kind, if any Landlord present accustom
himself unto, be it plainly spoken unto him also, that these his actions,
shall make appearance, and give in evidence against him before the great Judge,
ringing this grievous outcry in his ears, and saying; Thine heart has lodged
the forbidden sin of covetousness, thou also art that covetous man, that so
continuing cannot be saved. Now we come in the last place to set forth the lewd
practices that are common to all men, without respect of their several places,
and these are four.

First, 1. Promise breaking.
to make deceitful promises, or to break promises and covenants. When a man
looks to his profit more than to his truth or honesty; and therefore will
make his bargain or promise in such slippery or doubtful words or manner,
that still he will find some evasion to pull out his own neck, when he has
made another to serve his turn, as by pleading that he meant not so, or so;
or that such and such a thing should be understood; or that he has forgot it,
or such like: albeit he had wit enough to express his meaning fully, and
plainly, if he had would, and needed not to have reserved something for
after-claps. Yea, and has sufficient memory, if he had sufficient honesty
to bear it in mind too, but chiefly when he will come to a plain refusal,
being destitute of all shifts and excuses, this is monstrous injustice, which
the blind light of nature can see well enough and challenge. For an honest man,
much more a Christian, should stand to his lawful word, though to his own
hinderance, and that according to the true meaning and intent, expressed in his
promise, and understood by the party to whom it was made. 2. Usury.
A second notorious injustice is usury. When a man makes a gain of lending,
and binds the party borrowing, without consideration of his gains or losses,
to repay the principal with advantage. For whereas there be three sorts of men
that use to borrow, either poor men, whom necessity drives to it, or
unthrifts, whom prodigality drives to it: or sufficient men, that hope to
make a commodity of it: It is apparent by the confession even of those that
would seem to say somewhat for this usury, (as if it were not a sin simply)
that it is wicked to lend on use to the poor needy borrower, Deuteronomy. 15.7.8.9.
for God has flatly commanded to lend unto him freely; and for the unthrift,
it is also certain that he should not be lent to at all; for that is to feed
his issue with ill humors, and to put a sword into his hand wherewith to
destroy himself; and thus the usurers most accustomed and greatest gains are
cut off. Now for the third kind of men, of them to exact gain vnconditionably,
not respecting their loosing or getting, is altogether against the law of
charity and equity both. For the light of nature will not suffer any to deny
this principal of equity: that he which will have part in weal, must also
have part in woes; and he that will divide the sweet, must also divide the
sower: he that will take of the good success, must also take of the bad: and
the light of religion will not suffer him that has any of it, to deny this
principal of charity; that Christians must serve one another in love, and not
themselves alone in self-loue; both which principals are directly contrary to
the very trade of the usurer, for he makes sure for himself to have a part
only and infallibly in the profit, and therefore serves himself alone, and
also his brother; and for this cause the usurer is set among those that cannot
come to dwell in the mountain of God, which be should not be, were he not
unjust. So then, the usurer whether he do it plainly or underhand, as men have
a thousand policies to cover their sin in this respect, must undergo the
imputation of living by wrong and injury.

A third injustice in any man, is, to withhold dues from those to whom they
belong, as debts, wages, and the goods of orphans, and such things as have
been given for charitable uses, and the like. These be so openly evil, that I
see not how any man can open his mouth with any show, or color to justify
them. When a man will pay his hireling nothing, but keep his own from him by
fraud or put him off with ill words, and post him away from time to time, or
make him because he is his tenant, etc. take one or two pence in a day, less
than others give, or pay him very grumblingly, who could brook such dealing,
and not say, fie upon it, it is stark staring wrong? So when a man has
wherewithal to pay his debts, in some measure at least, and yet will break
and not discharge them so far as it will go, or when being a rich man, he
sends away the creditor all to be rated and shaken with ill words, and empty of
money, but laden with reuiling speeches; yea, though he have to discharge it:
what man does not loath to meet with such usage to himself? but chiefly when
the fatherless child or widow have not the portion bequeathed to them, and
committed in trust to a friend, reasonably, fully, and readily paid in unto
them, this every man sees to be bad dealing. In a word, to retain any part of
another due, is indignity.

For Solomon has said, Withold not the goods from the owners thereof. Prou.
3.27 To live vpo^tenths, chiefly not providing for the maintenance of Gods
worship.
Another injustice of this kind in laymen, is possessing of tenths, or
church-liuing, specially without any care, to have the duty of the ministry
faithfully and sufficiently discharged. For not to stand upon that question,
whether tenths be due by Gods law to the minister, (which yet I think) might
probably and sufficiently be defended, even against a cauilling and witty
obiector, because the Apostle saying, that he which is taught in the word, must
make him that teaches him partaker of all his goods; Gal. 6.6.
does thereby interest the minister into some portion of his peoples substance.
Now seeing none other part was ever assigned him, either by the law of nature,
or the law of God, but this, does not it probably at the least follow, that
even under the Gospel this is his due? but I say not to dispute this question,
we have another reason to convince apparently, that the tenthes cannot, by that
true right which will hold good in the courts of conscience, and of heaven, be
detained from the ministry, without some full requital other way; for
whatsoever has once bin given and consecrated to the maintenance of Gods
worship, and the true religion established by him, that is, invested into the
person of God, or entangled unto Jesus Christ (as I may so speak) who will never
acknowledge any fine, and has this royal prerogative, that whatsoever is once
his, the same is always his; and whatsoever is given to him can never be taken
from him: neither is there any prescribing against him, seeing he has neither
superior, nor law above him, and therefore can forfait no right; Pro. 20.25
so that it is always destruction to devour holy things and after the vow to
require. Now that these tithes were given and devoted by men well disposed to
the maintenance of the true worship of God, even before gross and heriticall
popery had ouer-clouded the face of the world, is a thing that I think no man
will or can deny. Wherefore the conclusion follows ineuitably, that they be
Gods still, and not to be bestowed any other way than in his service. So many
laymen therefore as serve themselves with Church-goods, deal unjustly with
God and men's souls, and cannot escape the blot of worldliness, if knowing
this, they reform it not. The last injustice that I will name as common to all
sorts of men, is gaming in hope of gains. Neither let the the gamester except
that his riotous humor cannot come within the compass of covetousness, for
he does therefore venture unthriftily that he may get more unlawfully, and
his manner of gaining is most palpable wrongful. He takes that to which he
has no right at all that might make it his. He pleads none other title but
that he won it, that is, played better than another, or perhaps not so, but
only cast the lot more luckely, and all the wit under heaven can never set a
color of lawfulnes upon this plea. I must have his money, because I played
better than he, or threw the dice more happily. If he allege the covenant
betwixt him and the party that plays with him, that is nothing to the
purpose. Foreuery lawful covenant is the expressing of some lawful right that
was in nature before the covenant, as the ground thereof, which he cannot name
any, and therefore the covenant is unlawful, and cannot give him lawful
possession of any thing. If he fly to the mutual will of them that play, let
him not urge that will, but the ground of it; which is to get another man's
goods, and therefore it is wicked, and cannot be the foundation of a just
covenant. Indeed all will transferring right, must either be free will (and
then the thing so passed over is free gift, of which nature he will not
acknowledge the thing that he wins, neither can he call it so if he would) or
else will grounded upon some lawful and equal consideration, which the
gamester cannot for his life make shift to name any: and therefore this will
that he speaks of, is either none or naught, and so he plays the thief with
another, when he winnes, as with himself when he loses. And whatsoever man
he may be in presence, that accustomes to any of these last named things for
his riches sake, let it be certified to his heart, that these things shall
condemn him before the Lord and say; Thou also do yield to this sin of
covetousness, and thou art the covetous man that so continuing, cannot enter
into life eternal. Thus have we at the last brethren, showed you both what
covetousness is, and the notes of it, viz, carking, niggardice, greediness in
dealing, and all injustice: whether in Magistrates, Ministers, Tradesmen,
Landlords, or any men: Be you exhorted now to deal plainly and faithfully
with your own souls, and by these notes, search, try, and examine your own
hearts, that you may know your own estate truly in this behalf: and be not
deceived, God is not mocked. What will it avail thee to say, I am not covetous,
if God will say thou art, shall not his word and sentence stand? And let this be
the first use.

Secondly, and be content by a bitter medicine to be healed of a poysonfull
disease. I know that that is very true which David says; The covetous blesses
himself, none more, and his hand has gotten wealth; no man must find fault
with him, that were inequitie; but by how much he is more sparing to himself,
by so much must we with more loudness and vehemency, sound forth the
trumpet of Gods vengeance against him: and let him hear it to his
affrightment, if his hard heart would feel any thing, that he is as loathsome
in Gods eyes as any, and as subject to his curse as who is most subject. And
whereas the prints, and footesteps of this enormious crime, are apparent almost
every where in every condition of men, I must be bold in Gods name, to
pronounce a woe against their souls, and tell their consciences which will
also bear witness to my words, that they are as abominable in gods eyes, as
the world is precious in theirs. Ah what a shameful thing is this, that a man
professing the gospel of Jesus Christ, which would be esteemed his faithful
subject, should yet harbor in his heart, and serve in his life, this vile
traitor which Christ has prescribed long ago, and would have exiled and
banished, yea, and quite chased out of the world, chiefly out of the hearts of
all that call themselves by his name, Christians? Is this agreeable to the
profession of Christianity, to have thine heart thus wedded to the world, still
earthward, earthward, always looking to the things that are below? have thou
so learned Jesus Christ? Does he deal so vnlouingly with thee, as not to give
thee better, more lasting, and comfortable things to delight in? or dealest
thou not most vnlouingly with thy self and him, that having an offer of that
most precious treasure, ioyest rather to lade thy self with this thick clay?
With what words shall I sufficiently condemn and disgrace this folly? it is
madness, mere madness, and worse then the worst lunacie that is. When will thou
learn to be ashamed of thy self, and to blush in consideration of thy
childish dealing, yea, thy wicked demeanor in this respect? Did we ever learn
any such thing in the school of Christ, or in his example? did his
conversation ever savor of covetousness? yea, did he not willingly choose to
want all things almost for our sakes? to teach us in his own person, that
poverty is no such matter, and wealth no such desirable things as we make
them in our conceits? Must we not then needs blame our selves, that have
rather chosen to follow our own corrupted affections, and the sinful fashion
of the wicked world, than his most wholesome direction, and most holy pattern?
What must Christ say unto thee, when thou shall appear before him in another
world? or art thou so very an Atheist, as not to dream of such a day? must he
not strike thine ear with a chiding and unpleasant voice, and say; Disloyal
and unfaithful servant, would neither words nor deeds work upon thee? I
commanded; thee to beware of covetousness; I commanded thee first to seek the
kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof; I commanded thee not to labor
for the things that perished, but for the things that endured to eternal life.
Mine example also taught the same things, thou never read of any carking in
me, though I had not an house to put mine head in, thou never heardest of any
niggardice, toyling, or injustice in all my life: yea, I did contemn these
things as trifles, not worth looking after, and refused a kingdom, when it
should have been thrust upon me. Can thou be ignorant of these things without
wilfulnes, or knowing, neglect them without rebellion? and yet will thou call
thy self my servant, when thou regardest neither deeds nor words of mine? What
could the Heathen have done more, or worse? Say it had never been told thee,
that there was a God, a Heaven, an eternal Kingdom; say thou never had
heard, or suspected any happiness to be found, besides wealth, and outward
abundance, could thou have bin more cold, and drousie in seeking the one,
more fervent and eager in pursuing the other? could my word profit thee no
more, to divorce thee from the love of this world, to persuade thee of the
baseness of earthly things, and the perfect excellency of heavenly things? Go
then and take thy reward with worldlings; Consider brethren, what a most
terrible word it will be, to be bid then depart from Christ, to the devil and
his angels, whether we will or nay; because we departed from him wilfully
before to the world, and its doung and dross: and know you that as sure as God
is true, so you shall find it at the last day, a covetous man shall not go
for an honest man, or good Christian more than a whore or thief. Flatter not
your selves with being neither whores nor thieves, harlots and adulterers:
thieves and robbers shall as soon come into the kingdom of God as your
selves, and yet you know that such shall never come there.

But if the covetous man disdain comparison with such foul companions, and
think himself wronged, in that such loathsome men are equaled with him; Let
him hear what Saint Paul says; This you know, that no fornicator, nor
unclean person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God and of Christ. Lend thine ear and be affrighted, O thou
worling, is this Scripture, or is it not? Art thou an Atheist to deny it, or
one of Salomons fools to despise it? But yet for more assurance hear again
the same Apostle saying; No fornicator, nor Idolater, nor Adulterer, nor
wanton, nor Buggerer, nor thief, nor extortioner, nor covetous man, nor
drunkard, nor rayler, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Lo thy companions
and fellows, and know what thou art in Gods account, does he not tie thee, as
a malefactor, in the same chain, with those whom all the world cries shame
upon, and whom thy self do loath and scorn? will thou not see thy self
also to be a limme of the devil, because a darling of the world, and as far
from heaven as she that lives in the stews, and he that robs by the high
way-side?

Now if perhaps any will stand out and say he is not a covetous man, let me
call God, and the world, and your own consciences and your deeds to witness
against a number of you, that you be so in extremity. Do not many of you
carke, and care, and pine your hearts almost with needless doubtings, and
suspicions of necessity to be hereafter, when your own being is uncertain,
even for a day, and are you not covetous? Are not many so pinching and
miserable, that no mercy, no liberality, no bounty can be seen in their
lives, and the time is to come that ever they did voluntarily bestow any thing
for the relief of the needy, or if any thing, it comes out pinchingly in
pence, and twopences, when God has given it in greater abundance to do more
good, and yet are you not covetous? Do not a number lade themselves so
burdensomely with worldly dealings, that God and Religion, and a better life,
can find no place in their serious considerations; and that either they never
pray, read, meditate, or else so drousily, and coldly, and shortly, as if they
thought every hour ten, till they were returned to their work; yea, does
not the world enchroch upon the greatest part of the Sabbath, in many men's
tongus and hands, that would be thought Religious, and are you not yet
covetous? Is not all injustice rife? Ask your own hearts you Magistrates, and
answer in secret, but in truth: Do you not take gifts? Do you not often
force your Consciences to think what they should not, and your hands to do
what they should not, in defending, sentencing, writing, executing any thing
for a reward? and will you deny that you are covetous? question with your
hearts, ye tradesmen, will they not tell you that you do engrosse, exact
sophisticate, and use false weights, measures, and words, and perhaps also more
dark tricks, that Gods eyes see, and can tell of, and are you not covetous?
Do not you Landlords rack your rents, burden your tenants, defraud them,
oppress them, grind their faces: and will you say that you are not covetous?
Do not some of you Ministers, come in by Simonie, and being entered, loyter
and neglect a flock or two, feeding the Lords sheep more carelessly than you
would be content to have an heard of your own swine fed, and are you not
covetous? Are they not common amongst all sorts, to lie, cosen, and break
promise and shift, to give your money to usury, to withhold the goods of
others in your hands, to live by Church-liuings, and care not for the Church,
and are you not covetous? I would to God brethren, that these things did not
cry out in the ears of the Lord of hosts, and the ordinary practice of them,
like the roaring of many waters, complain unto him of our earthlinesse. Yea I
would we did not complain too much one against another; and he that practices
covetousness in one thing, seeks to make himself seem honest, by exclaiming
against as bad pranckes in others. Magistrates cry out of tradesmen, and they
of Magistrates; they of Ministers, the people of Landlords; almost every man
of another for this sin, and will you not see it in your selves, and be
ashamed of it? Let me discharge a good conscience, and without fear, tell the
covetous man, I mean him in whom any of these things do bear sway, that he is
a counrerfeit Christian, an hollow-hearted protestant, and a dissembling
professor, that makes gain his godliness, and his wealth his God: and know
thou again, that heaven is shut against thee as fast, as against the fowlest
sinner that the earth holds. Hearken O covetous man, whosoever thou be, and
see, that thou shall surely die in this thy sin, if thou do not speedily
amend it: the love of the world will pull thee down to hell, unless thou make
have to cast it off, and be thou also among the other crew of presumptuous
sinners, accursed in the name of the Lord. But ah my brethren, do we delight
in threatenings, or is it our pleasure to rake in the wounds of your soul, with
the nail of a reproof? nay we desire to heal them, which we could not do
without wiping forth this festred water: and for none other end show you the
danger of your estate, but that you may get out of it; and therefore for the
last use, do beseech you all, that see what is amiss to reform your selves.

There be two degrees of covetous men, some so fully possessed with the spirit
of the world, that God is their enemy, and they his, and so they cannot
possibly be saved. Such are those whose custom it is to run through thick
and thin, to get riches, and who live in the ordinary practice of known
evils for wealths sake; namely, those which I have before named, or some like
to them. If thou be one of these, to thee the curse denounced does certainly
belong; and shall cleave to thy soul so fast, that neither men nor Angels
shall separate the same, unless thou do speedily amend. Pity thy self
miserable man, pity thy self, leap not into hell, it is a place of torment,
both fearful and eternal. Cast not thy self into the flames of damnation.
Why will thou die, and have been warned? Is all the world worth one soul? Ah
make not such an hard bargain, but have compassion upon thy dying soul.
Bewail and confess thy sin before the Lord, leave and forsake thine unjust
courses, and covetous desires. Be it sufficient that thou have been all this
while a slave to the world; now lay hold upon this liberty of the sons of God:
shake off this yoke of Satan; weane thy self from the breasts of the world,
and cast from thee the too much liking of those things that are more base, than
that an eternal spirit should build it delights upon them. But if I cannot
prevail with this near and absolute worldling, if he will needs be guilty of
his own damnation, and refuse to commiserate himself, what remedy, who can
help him that will not help himself? let him perish. And let me with more hope
of success, turn my speech to the second degree of covetous men, such as
though they be not wholly excluded the hope of salvation, because this sin is
not absolute Lord of their lives, yet are hindered from many necessary comforts,
and come into many lamentable evils; because they be not careful enough to
purge themselves of this vice. Of this kind are many professors of true
religion, that have given some good testimony of their uprightness and truth,
and made good proceedings in the ways of God, which yet for want of sufficient
care to resist and reform this fault in themselves, have been shamefully
foiled by Satan, and drawn sometimes to most unjust and discommendable
courses, such as the wicked world has even taken notice of; and as I may so
speak, has showted and howted at them, glad to take any exception, and
therefore much more rejoicing that so just a cause of evil speaking has been
offered. It is an outcry of the world, that those which would be accounted most
forward professors of religion, those that do seem to make so much account of
preaching and sermons, and so forth, even these are as hard, as unjust, as
covetous in their dealings, as the worst of their neighbors. And surely
brethren, though the world (willing to report the worst of things) do use a
trick of rethorique in aggravating, yet it cannot be denied that your lives
has given matter enough to work upon; It is a true complaint of many that
make great show of religion, that though they be not as covetous as the worst,
yet they be too notoriously covetous; and the ouer-abundance of this evil
weed, does dissauour all the graces and virtues which are or seem to be in
them. Why will thou if thou fear God, suffer thy self to be so basely
carried away with the desires of these things, that here-hence thou should
run into courses of that nature as make thy profession evil spoken of, as open
the wicked mouths of clamorous men against thee, as renders thy name, a white
or mark, for all those that are willing to cast out the venomous darts of
oblequie and reproach against the same; as gives wicked men occasion to shelter
themselves from all reproves by retorting thy bad actions in the face of the
reproouer, as make sinners to applaude themselves in their sins, and think,
though I make not such a show as such an one, yet he is as covetous, as I am
otherwise faulty. Yea, as do cause all good men and religion it self to
receive disgrace, when they can say (though lyingly, yet badly enough, having
the example of some such to pretend as evidence against all) that such are all
the sort of you. I beseech you brethren if any of you that fear God, have
been ouerled with these earthly things, let him now see and consider of these
many and grievous inconveniences, and see what the immoderate following of the
world can yield him answerable to the loss of all those comforts that his
heart should enjoy if it were rid better of this sin, and to those good
affections, and praises that he should have from good men, if he did overcome
this sin, and to that freedom and safety from the scourge of the tougues of
lewd men, that might come to him, had he not given them the advantage against
him, by vnmuzling their mouths, with the too too gross practicing of this
sin.

Now then consider this with thy self, whosoever thou may be; Disgrace thy
self, disgrace religion; dishonor Gods holy name, cause wicked men to exult,
thy friends and Gods servants to be grieved no more. Do no more I say rush upon
all, or any of these inconveniences, through the too much dotage after these
base and contemptible things. If I cannot prevail with them that have been
wholly worldlings, and altogether men of this earth, yet with thee that have
some good things, some sparks of Gods spirit, some truth of religion, and hope
of a better life, let me, yea, let God and Gods ordinance prevail to make thee
reform thine heart and life, in this behalf, in coming to this place, and
lending your ear to Jesus Christ, speaking in his own ordinance; you make a
show to intend obedience to his word, who by his spirit stands in the midst of
you searching every man's hidden heart; you make a show of obedience, the end
of hearing is doing. Show me that you were not hypocrites in coming to the
sermon, let your lives speak for you, that you did in sincerity present your
selves before the Lord, and were neither fools to come hither to no end, nor
dissemblers to come for a wrong end. I doubt not but every one of your
consciences, which has with any reasonable attention hearkened, is, I am sure
it ought to have been sufficiently convinced of the loathsomeness and
vileness of this sin; yea, and of our own faultiness in it diverse ways.
Show forth the fruit of the word, gain a blessing, be doers, not hearers
alone.

Now you have looked in the glass of the word and seen the spots and stains
of earthlinesse discovered, go home and purge and cleanse your selves of them
hereafter. Be not like him that looks in a glass, but washes not his face; be
not so, but let the word of God be to you in power, cast this monstrous evil
and the dregs of it out of your likings and your lives. But will some man say,
is sin so easily left? or can we so soon preuail against it indeed, as you
speak against it? no but there must be some pains taken about it, and then I
do not doubt, nay, dare promise to a christian soul, the victory against this
sin, and that it shall go down the wind, and be of the loosing hand. And
that you may the better amend your selves in this matter, I will stand a while
to show you these two things.

First what be the causes of covetousness: Secondly, The causes of covetousness
are misconceiuing of God and of wealth.
what be the remedies against covetousness, which if any man will apply wisely
unto himself he shall find a marvelous cure, and that in a short space,
wrought upon his heart.

First then, the maine and principal procreant causes of covetousness, are
two errors in the understanding or judgment: For indeed such is the nature of
the affections, that they do seldom or never offend, but through the former
faultiness of the mind. Seldom does the desire, or love, or hatred,
ouer-shoote themselves, but through the deceit of the understanding part, that
being first disordered it self, disorders those that are as servants to it;
ouerhastie to the worst, and ouer-slow in the best actions. And in the
particular, therefore the desire is inordinately and unlawfully carried after
wealth, because the eye of the mind mistaketh it mark, in these two respects:
First, it does not apprehend in God such abundance of power and will to save,
help, and deliver, as indeed there is in him, and every man should acknowledge
in him, and so the mind being by this falsehood driven from the strong hold of
Gods name is feign to cast about for some other place of defense, and then
wealth offers it self to help, as the bramble to the king over the trees, and
the mind still dazeled, and judging after the appearances of things, not after
the truth, does conceive that riches are indeed able to help. Now upon these
two gross mistakings, it follows, that the desire which is ready pressed to
pursue that which is esteemed helpful and profitable, sets forward it self,
with all it might to pursue after wealth, and this is the original of
covetousness. So is this foul evil begotten of the mind; it is the dark
and blind brood of an erronions and deluded judgment. And both these causes
are laid open clear enough before us in the Scripture.

The first in Heb. 3. where having warned us of covetousness, he says, for he
has said, I will never leave, etc. By this coherence, sufficiently intimating,
that covetousness comes, because one thinks God will not be sure enough to
him, but too quickly and lightly leave him to himself. And the second cause
Christ notes in this Text, saying: for though a man have much, his life
consists not in his wealth: as if he had said, you desire much wealth, because
you think it can make you live more comfortably and safely, but indeed it
cannot. You see now the true causes of covetousness. I know men are willing to
make show that this their desire of wealth is of better parentage, but the
truth is, it is as I have said, the base brood of ignorance and error.

Now come we to show the remedies of this sin, 2. The remedies. 1 Apply the
word to it in serious meditation.
and how it may be consumed out of us: First, there are four remedies in all.
The first is, to meditate upon the word of God that forbids it. Applying the
reproves, and threatenings, and commandments, against any sin in the word of
God to a man's own soul, by serious meditation, is a common remedy against all
sins, and so also against this. The word of God is the sword of the Spirit,
serving to keep out all lusts from coming within us, and to cut, wound, and
slay them; to which purpose it is then effectual, when it is weelded as it
ought, by turning the precepts and reproves of it into earnest complaints
against our sins, and strong petitions for our selves before the Lord in
secret. Indeed lamentable experience drives us to confess, that the word of
God is of little operation in most men for God: and whence is this? even from
their own folly, that out of their sinful hollownes, will not lay it as a
plaster to the sores of the soul: but be this spoken in assurance of truth,
and let the heart of every godly man give consent to it, that whosoever he be
which takes the word of God in any particular matter, and alone betwixt God and
his own soul, stands to consider, saying: Lo how plainly the Lord has
forbidden this sin, what sharp reproves he has uttered against it, how
great the danger is, that he has threatened shall arise from it, why do I
commit it? why do I live in it? Do I either not believe his word, or not fear
his displeasure? And then turning himself unto the Lord, does earnestly cry
out against himself, saying: Ah Lord God, how wicked have I been to break
this thy law, and to endanger my self to thine indignation, and rush upon
thine anger so ouer-ventrously?

Now Lord give more wisdom, more grace, strengthen me to do thy will, which I
see and know, but of my self cannot obey: whosoever I say, does in this or the
like manner spread the plaster of Gods word upon his own heart, let him count
the promises of God but leasings, if he find it not able to heal any lust,
though never so cankered and inueterate; to quell any corruption, though never
so strong and violent. Do thus therefore brethen, for covetousness, we have
showed you sufficiently, what an hurtful and unlawful thing it is. Enter into
thy closet as Christ bids thee; ponder of these things; set down your own
hearts with these reasons, and convince your selves of the wickedness thereof,
and accuse your selves before God with indignation against your selves, that
are so basely enclining to this world, when the Lord bids the contrary; Yea,
and beseech him to strengthen and sanctify your hearts now, that seeing his
will, you may yield to it: and that these reproves may be present with your
hearts to control them, and check them sharply, when they so offend, and that
it would please him to incline your hearts to his testimonies, and not unto
covetousness, and he that thus does constantly day by day, or as often as
occasion is, let him be bold to promise to himself, that the word will prove a
word of life and power unto him. It will knock off these clogs of worldlines,
from his soul, that his affections shall be no longer so fettered with them.

The second remedy against covetousness, Get assurance of eternal life.
is to labor for more and more assurance of the favor of God and everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ his son: and every man must have his happiness and
delight. And if any man's heart be not set upon the true felicity, it will be
seduced by false; and one gilded vanity or another will steal it away from
him: but let a christian endenour to make his calling and election sure, and to
be steadfastly resolute of this, that God for his dear sons sake, pardoning
all his finnes, will beslow eternal happiness upon him, and cause him to reign
as a king with his Son, in a throne of immortal glory; where is no sin, no
sorrow, no trouble, nothing to grieve or vex him; but the fullness of joy at
Gods right hand for evermore; and the sight and comfortable expectations of
this estate, will so ravish his heart, and take up his desires, that this vile
earth will appear to be as it is, and he shall be able out of his own feeling
to call it dung and ashes, as the Apostle does, not suffering it to carry the
name of a treasure in his estimation. Yea, and his soul from this maine ground
will draw another conclusion of no less force to beat down the rising of
worldlines, saying; If God will give the flesh and blood of his son to be the
food of my soul, will not he give me bread and drink to sustain my body? If
his love were so infinite that he spared not his most beloved and only begotten
son for my sake, how shall he not with him give me all things? He that will
save the soul, will he not feed the body? will he deny dross, that gave gold?
will he say nay for a pibble, that so liberally scattered pearls? Nay sure, if
our Lord would give Christ for us, and to us, for our salvation, it were madness
to doubt whether he will give earthly things for maintenance, so far as is
good (and further what Christian can wish them) for God is always suitable to
himself, in all his dealings: Get good reasons to trust God with thy foul,
and thou will never fear thy body and thine estate. Have evidence strong
enough for heaven, and thine heart will not desire earth, and much less doubt
of having sufficient therein.

The third remedy against covetousness is, to consider advisedly, 3. Consider
well Gods temporal promises.
of Gods gracious promises abundantly made and written in his word to his
servants, even for provision of temporal benefits: we have his word, yea, his
deed, his testament sealed and delivered unto us in the presence of all his
Saints and Angels; we have his bond, under white and black, saying: The Lions
shall be hunger-starued, but they that fear the Lord shall want nothing. And
again; Psalm. 34.10
The Lord our God is a Sun and shield, and no good thing will he with-holde
from them that walk uprightly. And again; Psalm. 84.11
The Lord is my shep-heard, I shall want nothing. Psa. 23.1.
And this the Author to the Hebrews presses, saying; Let your conversation be
without covetousness, Heb. 13.5.
and be content with that that is present. Yea, but we cannot be content, we
have good reason to desire more; For how if hard times and dangers should come,
who should then provide for us? Who should provide? Why, are you Christians, yea
or no? if no: strive to be so first of all. If ye know that God is not so
wretchlesse a father, you are not left to shift for your selves, nor cast over
to your own providing. Nay, you have one to care for you, and that for ever,
if you can but believe his word. He, the God of mercy, the God of wisdom,
the God of truth, the God of power, the God of wealth, the maker and owner of
all worlds, the God all-sufficient, he has given his word for your surety.
We give much credit to a man's promise, and think we are in good plight if a
wealthy friend, specially if he be trusty also, do undertake to help us. This
is not man that may be changed, but the unchangeable God: not man that may
deceive, but God that cannot lie: not man that may be hindered, but God whom
none can resist: not man that may die, but God that lives for ever. And he has
said, I will never leave you, not in age, not in sickness, not in a dear
year, not in hard times, not when you be friendlesse, not when the world is
naught, and the days hard and evil; he will never leave you nor forsake you;
never cast you off, nor cease to do you good. O faithless and unbelieving
hearts, if we do not rest, build, and repose our selves, upon a promise so
plain, so firm, so plentiful; and fools and absurd, if believing this we
will give our hearts to the world Heap wealth together whilst thou will, it is
not thine but Gods, he must give it thee out of thine own chest, as well as
another man's. And if thou have never so little, he has never the less, and
can give thee out of another man's chest, as well as thine own. What need
thou offend God, wrong man, and trouble thy self to get that which is provided
for thee in Gods keeping long before? and thou have it as much if it be in any
man's custody, as if in thine own. But prodigal children will not live at
their fathers finding, till their own ways make them teturne weeping home:
and we are loath to stand to Gods simple provision forsooth, it suffices us
not, we must have more, though we pierce our selves through with woeful
temptations for it, because we seek riches more then his favor. When will we
cause our lives to witness that we believe God is true? yea, when will we
cease to call him a liar actually, by coveting for our selves, and not trusting
on him that cares for us. Think we on these promises, have them in a
readiness, and when our hearts do troublesomely question within us, who shall
help us when we be old, or in adversity, if we do not now scrape together?
set them down and say, God will care for me if he be true; and if he be not,
it boots not to get wealth, for then the world and all in it must come to
nothing, together with his truth, which is himself. 4. Consider rightly what
wealth is to which care, mark.
Now the last remedy against covetousness, and as needful as any of the rest,
is, to inform our selves truly as concerning the nature of wealth. For none
can love it but through ignorance, nor desire it, but through love. Look upon
it as it is in it self, without the paintings of opinion, and our desires will
of themselves despise it, and as it were scorn to be captive thereunto. Now the
contemptiblenes of wealth will be manifest, if we set our selves well to
consider of these things following. First, what kind of men have most of it.
Secondly, how uncertain. 1. What men have had most of it.
Thirdly, how unprofitable. Lastly, also how hurtful it is. For the first
then, let the stories be asked both of holy writ and profane authors, and let
them speak, who be the men, and what have they been which have waded through
the sea of the world, in the greatest and the tallest vessels, have not many of
them been the most brutish men, the veriest beasts, and the most loathsome and
abominable creatures that ever breathed air, or saw the Sun, and such as a
Christian man cannot name without hating? Kaynes; Nimrods, Cams, Ismaels,
Esaus, Saules, Ahabs, Nebucadnezars, Baltazers, Herod's, Iudasses, Devils? And
in other authors, Nero, Commodus, Heliogabalus, and other monsters of men?
Indeed I deny not, but good men have also been wealthy, but that which is so
common to good and bad, that for the most part, the worst have had most of it:
cannot if God be the disposer of things be the true treasure. What is that that
a wise man does commonly cast to dogs, but bones or carrion; that he gives to
swine, but draffe or husks; what is that God gives to such as are worse than
swine, or dogs; but worse I mean, more base than draffe or carrion? Think we
that the God of heaven is so unwise a dispencer of good things, that he would
cast pearls to swine, or good things to dogs? Surely were there so much
excellency in these matters, as we foolishly dream of, they should not be
flung to those whom God hates, and purposes to fat as Hogs for the day of
slaughter; but rather most upon his children, whom he does intend to glorify
with himself. God feeds them full with these things, whom he will throw to
hell; thou may be a rich man, and yet a devil for all that; go then and
desire wealth, if thou think it yet the true treasure.

But yet further consider we how unprofitable it is. 2 How unprofitable it is.
Take wealth as we mean it, for the ouer-plus of things necessary to competent
maintenance, and you shall not be able to deny (set opinion aside a while) that
it is a thing of naught: Will you not yield that God is wise enough to call
things by their right names, and to entitle every creature after the true
nature of it? Ask then the scripture the voice of God, what this gold and
silver, these lands, and linings, and rich possessions, this god Mammon should
be called? Will it not answer A shadow saying: Psalm. 39.6.
Man walks in a shadow, he troubles himself in vain, every man heaps up,
and knows not who shall gather it. Will it not say, A flower? 1. Pet. 1.24.
for all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of grass. Will
it not say, lies? Psalm. 62.9. Eccle 1.2.
The chief men are liers. Will it not say Vanity? for All is vanity. Will it
not say Nothing? as Solomon, Prou. 23.7
Will thou set thine eyes upon it, and it is not, it has no being? Either
challenge God of folly, or falshoode, which has called this wealth shadows,
flowers, lies, vanity, nothing; or else yield that we have been deceived in
thinking better of it Will we not see our error, and confess that we have
been cousoned as children, with gawdes, and now begin to trust our fathers
judgment? But you shall see that it is not without cause vilified with these
titles, and if you will but lend an heart to judge, as an ear to hear, you
shall perceive as clear as noone day, that they be as unprofitable as any
shadow. What will you term that, that can do no good, to soul, body, name,
state, nor keep any evil from soul, body, name, state, nor mittigate such
evils as a man is pressed withal, in any of these respects? Every man will
yield it may well be called a thing of naught, and cannot well be called by a
better name. Believe not shows and conceits, and then be your selves judges,
if wealth, I mean overplus of maintenance, can do any thing in any of the
forenamed respects. 1. Soul, for getting good things of it
What is good for the soul, but faith, repentance, the spirit of God, the
answering of our prayers, the pardon of our sins, and the attaining of
eternal life? And I pray you, can you buy these things for money? can you
purchase them with Jewels? or get them for exchange of goods? will God give
heaven to any man, if he will morgage a fair living to him for it? Will he
give him faith, that can bring a rich Jewel, or a purse of gold for it? or
will he hear his prayers any whit sooner in his need, that is clad in cloth of
gold, and has thousands by the year, than if he went in mean apparel, and
had not twice twenty pound, nay twenty pence yearly? or is there any commuting
of penance in heaven? or can we by a great fine answer for a fault? Indeed if
any of you be so blockish, as to believe the palpable deceits of popish Rome,
some of these things are set to sale there, and there you may buy indulgences
and pardons: but we know well enough that Rome and heaven stand a good way a
sunder, and they be not ruled by the same laws, neither will God stand to those
bargains that the Pope makes for money. You have all yielded, now that for
soul, money cannot bring any good to it. But what? 2. Body for the same
respect.
cannot it profit the body more? Ask experience. Will wealth buy health? will
it purchase ease, or a good nights rest, or an hours sleep, or a good
stomach, or any of these things that are less then these? Answer what you
know by proof: will wealth buy these things? and what is the body the better
for it then? But yet perhaps the name may be more beholding to it. 3. The Name.
It will surely bring credit, and good estimation. Indeed here, if in any
thing, the rich man magnifies himself above the poor, because he takes
himself to be in better reputation. But here if in any thing he is most of all
deceived. I confess it makes him think much better of himself, but neither God
nor man do think the better. Yea, God and good men think the worse of him
for this. If it come in by violence, oppression, robbery, and injustice, you
will yield that no man has the better liking of one for such wealth. But say
that a man has not waded through these filthy and stinking guzzels to get it,
but have come unto it in the most cleanly manner, as some, but not the most
do, it shall be plain, if any reason will rule us, that it cannot get a good
name or credit. For say, what will you call credit? to have cap and courtesy,
and a bended knee, and a few complements of behavior acted unto your silken
coat, or before your self it may be, or to be looked after and gazed upon by
the deceived multitude, and to be followed by a great number of hangbyes that
run after you, as Eagles after a dead carcass to feed upon you? Is this
credit? is this estimation? to be crouched unto as a little curre does to a
mastiffe, to be soothed up, and hear fair words, to be all besprinkeled with
courtholy water every day; in a word, to be stabd with the cutthroat kindness
of flattery? If you call this credit, and if this be the good name you talk
of, it is even a fit thing to be gotten with wealth, an unprofitable credit,
an uncomfortable credit, an hurtful credit, with unprofitable, uncomfortable,
and hurtful riches.

And if any man have but a grain of wisdom, he will see that this is sar from
credit or a good name. But if it be to be well esteemed of in the hearts of
men, to find reverence in their souls, to have their consciences commend one,
and their inward man set him (as it were) in a good room of the affections,
and their private thoughts, to yield a good testimony for him: If I say, this
be accounted credit, as it is indeed, a man is never a whit the nearer to it
for abundance of goods. That will make men fawn and wag the tail, as a curre
upon his master that is at dinner, to get a bone, yea, and perhaps also to
lick over his sores, with a poisoning, not an healing tongue (for in this a
flatterer is ten times worse then a dog; yea, he is a venimmouthed dog) but
behind his back, and in his absence none shall be more ready to talk of his
saults, to deride them, to blaze them, to disgmce them, than he that crouched
so much in his presence, and did him so much (as you please to call it) credit
to his face; yea, and in the midst of all this crouching, no man's heart does
more loath, abhor, scorn, and contemn him, than the man that is so servile
and officious because of wealth.

And this is all that wealth can procure for the name, but nothing under heaven
can make the hearts of men to reverence any, and their souls to have in good
account, yea and prefer him (in their mature judgment) even before themselves.
Nothing can do this I say, but grace and virtue, true piety, true holiness,
and godliness of conversation, to which money cannot help a man. A poor man
that fares but reasonably, and goes in ordinary attire, and cannot show either
money or lands of his own in any great abundance, shall yet if he live
virtuously, and walk in the fear of God, and in the obedience of his holy
commandments, be more respected by many degrees, in the souls and consciences
of all that know (yea of those also that do slander and envy, and malign
him) than the most wealthy man under heaven wanting these things. John had more
reverence in Herod's heart, then Herod amongst all his courtiers and seruitors,
though he wanted all that cap and knee wherewith Herod imagined himself to be
lifted up to heaven in estimation. Yea, and if a rich man have this credit (as
David, Job, Abraham, and others had,) it is not his wealth but his goodness
(which does nothing at all depend upon his wealth) that brings the same unto
him: for a low estate gives occasion to exercise as many virtues, and show as
much grace, (let Job be witness) which they that be wise (whose commendation
alone is desirable) will also see and observe, as the most high and exalted.
And wherein then is wealth to be regarded for credit sake? but that we are
foolish, and miscall that credit which is but flattery; or at the least but
complementall trouble and vexation? But if it can do no great good, 2. For
removing evil from thee.
yet I hope it can keep away much evil from me (will some man think) and
make me safe in the day of danger. Let us a little consider seriously of that
point too; and if you find that it be as little able to defend against any
harmful thing, as to procure any good, you will not then surely deny, but that
it may well be called a lie, as the holy Ghost in this respect does term it;
because he is never a whit the safer that has it. Now then all evils are
either spiritual or temporal, ghostly or bodily. The ghostly, are first,
Sonle.
sins and lusts of our soul, as ignorance of God and his will, pride,
unbelief, envy, malice, filthy desires, frowardness, injustice, a lying, a
blasphemous tongue, and the like. And will a golden plaster heal these
diseases? Let experience speak, and let the heart of every one of you give
answer to this question. Will a plaster made of gold and silver heal these
diseases? Ah no, no: the whole world can tell it does the contrary: rather
causing them to fester and ranckle; yea, and building a strong castle for every
inordinate affection, to possess the heart of them that have it, with so much
more might and tyranny: wealth makes a warm neast for sin to sit and hatch in,
as we shall show anon. A man shall not overcome his lusts a whit the sooner, or
the more easily, when his purse is full, his house furnished, his grounds
stored, his revenues doubled, not these temporal, but spiritual weapons, the
edge whereof is rather dulled by wealth, does overcome such enemies. It is
weeping, mourning, praying, and crying to God, it is even godly sorrow, that as
a good plaster heales the soul, and wealth does rather fill men full of
laughter and Iollity, and earthly delights, in which he that lives is dead
whilst he lives: that Christ might well say; Woe be to you that are rich, woe
be to you that laugh. And Saint James, Howl ye rich men, for ye have lived in
pleasure: and by consequent in sin up to the ears, seeing Christian
mourning, only keeps a Christian soul in good temper. Yea, that one lust of
covetousness which wealth seems most of all able to vanquish, yet it cannot.
Money will not cure covetousness, more than wood and oil can quench fire. We
see it and wonder, that even this lust is not lessened, but increased rather
with it, as thirst with some harish and ill-brued drink, or wine which the
Vintner has adulterated with brimstone, or some such like geere. The more a
man drinks of this, the more drought. The more a man has, commonly the more
worldly. And for the devil and an ill conscience with the horrors of it, we
know that Satan can shake, affright, and terrify a rich man as soon, and as
much, as a poor. When God sets the devil and an ill conscience loose, they
fear not an heap of gold, a fair house, a silken coat, a great living, nay
not a throne and Scepter, but will as tormentingly, gnaw the soul of him that
has all these things, as if he wanted all. A garment of tissue can no more
keep a broken bone from aching, than a rich estate an ill conscience from
vexing. Yea, and the scorching flames of hell will burn, fry, and consume the
soul of such, with as hidious torture as the poorest varlets. Witness the
rich glutton Dives in the Gospel. So that the soul is no whit the more
exempted from sin, from temptation, from horror, from damnation, because of
wealth, and is it not sufficiently proved, that wealth is worth nothing? But
what say you to temporal evils, will not money preserve a man from their
danger neither? Not at all, common sense can tell us.

For it cannot drive away the gout, the stone, the strangury, the colic, the
fever, the plague, the headache, the toothach; Yea, a fellon, or a whitloe, or
the ache of a finger, nor the greatest, nor the least diseases of body, will
be afraid of riches, his foot will stumble at a stone, his skin, his bones,
break as stone, that has them, as that wants them. These griefs, as the
frogs of Egypt, enter into rich-mens houses, creep upon rich-mens bodies, yea
they are rather more subject to diverse evils, because of their ouer-abundant
fare and daintiness, and yet do not enjoy their plenty, because they are
commonly cloyd with too much, and to him that is full, an honey comb is bitter.
So that these men's houses are as much troubled with badde stomachs, with
consumptions, with Ohs, cryings, and complaints, as the meaner sort. If you say
but they can hire physicians, I answer, it is true, but the physician cannot
heal the disease: yea, sometimes he kills them with too many drugs, and the
poor man has better physic, better cheap. His painful labor, and his
moderate fare, is better to him, than a college of physicians.

Also imprisonment, restraint, 3. Estate.
confining and banishment, does as soon befall to them, as to their less
wealthy neighbors, as all ages witness, and all stories. Nay, I will yet add
one thing more, that seems more strange than all this; wealth cannot keep a
man from poverty, from beggary. And because I know you will all deny this, I
will bring in 70. Kings at a time, to take their oaths upon it. Look in in the
first of Judges, and there you shall see 70. Judges 1.6.7.
Kings with their fingers, and toes cut off glad like whelps to lick up crumbs
at another Kings table. And then a little while after, you shall see that the
same King which made all them so poor is used in the same manner himself. What
beggars-brat, could have come to more need?

Now deny if you can, that a rich man may die a beggar, as well as he that is
so borne. And I pray you do but ask your own memories, if they cannot tell
of diverse in their own knowledge, that from great wealth came to a morsel of
bread, whose youth swimming in dainties, their elder years would have snapt at
a crust, as we say, and been glad of any relief, and that also in many, not
through their own default. And yet is not wealth unprofitable? Again, for
inward troubles that be natural, as griefs, cares, iealousies and fears, 4.
Mind for natural respects.
we know that as cobwebs breed sooner under wainscote and fair hangings, than
upon a plain wall: so these arise in greater measure to them that are most
clogd with plenty, as whose lives in all men's sight do most show it, and if
they do at any time want them, not their money but some other thing does free
them from the same. But yet perhaps wealth may mittigate the pain of a cross,
though it cannot keep it off? Indeed of all the profitable effects, 3. For
mittigating any evil.
this is the least and lowest; but wealth is too base and weak to effect any
such mittigation. When a rich man lies sick of any disease, has he one pang
less? or is he able to bear one pang more patiently, because he can make a
greater Inuentory than his neighbors? or when he is fallen into poverty and
decay, does it assuage? (nay does it not rather augment) the sorrow that once
he was in this and this place and abundance? If a libell or a false report be
cast out against him, does it sting or nettle him, less, or not rather more
than another? Nay do we not see, that because it makes the heart bigger, it
makes also the cross heavier commonly? so that a meaner man could with fewer
cries and lamentations lay five Children in the grave, than he can carry out
one. A poor man could with less vexation, bear an hundred ill words and
raylings than he the least crosse-word. Of all men ordinarily none vex
themselves more under a cross than the wealthy, because they least look for
it: and wealth we know cannot buy patience, because not wisdom and godliness
that are the mothers and nurses of patience. But yet will some man say, the
rich man has a fire when another man sits cold; the rich man is warm clad,
when another is subject to wind and weather; he fares well, when an other is
hungry. I answer, he is as free from cold that goes in frize or carsey, as
he that is in satin and velvet: and it has not yet been brought to light,
that the warmth of velvet is more wholesome, or more comfortable, than that of
frize. Also he sleeps as well that lies upon a flockbed, or a pad of straw,
as he that has his down-bed and pillowes, and his Arras covering, and the
softest sheets. Yea, and he that has but one dish, or perhaps only bread and
cheese, and now and then some warm meat, feeds as sweetly, and with as good
an appetite, digests as wholesomely, and with as sound a stomach, as he that
has dainties brought to his table from the furthest quarters of the world: so
that herein the man that has but enough for food and raiment, is at least his
equal, that has an overplus; and not the rich man's superfluity, but his
competency does afford him these benefits, which diverse times are made more
unsavory, never more able to comfort and content by their ouer-plentious store:
and we took in hand to show, not that sufficient for meat, drink, and
cloth, to content nature (which is the measure wherewith God limits our
desires) but a superfluity of things (which covetousness aims at) is
unprofitable, and worth nothing. Which seeing it can bring neither health,
contentme^t, nor good name, neither grace, virtue, nor forgiveness of sins,
seeing it cannot drive away sin, Satan, hell, death, sickness, pain, sorrow,
yea, or poverty, nor extenuate the torment of any of these, as every man's
heart will tell him that it cannot: In a word, seeing it will not make a man
live one whit the longer, or with more comfort, nor die one whit free for pangs
and grief, nor gain heaven, nor escape hell the sooner when he is dead? will
you not see and confess it to be a thing of naught? And may I not say, cease
from wealth, which has no breath or strength at all, for wherein is it to be
esteemed?

And therefore though thy crooked heart is not willing to yield, How fickle and
uncertain it is.
yet thy judgment cannot choose but be convinced of this, that great riches
are unprofitable, and not worth a rush. But say it were not so little
commodious, yea say that it could do any of the fore. named things, yet I will
prove to your consciences, that it is not worthy your desires, because of the
next property thereof, which is uncertainty. It is like a runnagate servant, a
fugitive, a plain vagrant, which though he be bigboned and strong and
skillful, and able to work, yet no man greatly cares for, because he will be
gone when a man has most need of him, and perhaps also take something away
with him that was more worth than all his service. So wealth will take its
heels when a man has most use for it, and carry contentment away too, which
is more precious than all the false happiness that it could procure whilst it
remained with us. This wealth hops from man to man, and place to place, as a
light winged bird, from tree to tree. And no man can say where it will roust at
night. The holy Ghost has compared it to a wild foul, most swift of wing,
and strong in flight, saying; Prou. 23.5.
Riches takes it self to it wings, and flies away. Not like a cock or hen, or
some tame house-bird, that a man may follow and cath again, no nor like an
hawke that will show where she is by her bells, and be called again with a
lure; but like an Eagle, that mounts aloft past sight, and is carried away with
so much have that nothing will recall her. And where is the man that can clippe
the wings of this eagle, when it is in his own custody, that it shall not be
gone from him when he thinks least of it? If it could procure any benefit to
your lives, you see it were not yet worth your wishes, nor your toil, for it
departs when you should use it; and that without taking leave: and then as he
that rises from a stool, and thinks to sit down again, the stool being
removed, takes the more dangerous knock; so the mind that relied on wealth,
when it misseth it, is more tormented with vexation by the untrustiness
thereof. And surely who has lived so little a while, but he has seen wealth
run away from many a master, and never came at him again to his dying day?
Yea, and ofttimes also leave him to hunger, thirst, nakedness, and all misery
and reproach: yea, though here his forefathers have been at great toil, and
perhaps hazarded a soul or two to get it. Yea it has served many a Lord,
Nobleman, and great Prince thus vntrustily, and yet will we not take warning
but trust it, doat upon it? The holy Ghost calls it a lie, because it will
surely play him such slippery prankes, that has confidence in it (as every man
has in that measure he desires it) and a shadow, because every cloud that
flies over the Sun may (and that which is not to a shadow) irrecouerably cut
it off. No man can promise himself to be wealthy till night, one coal of fire,
one unadvised word, two false oaths, of two false villains, (and how many such
be there in the world) may make him a beggar and a prisoner both at once? or if
not so, yet he may go from it in a moment, as the rich man of whom Christ
speaks immediately after my text, whose soul was called for, that night that
he sang down secure to himself, and when a man has gotten goods not by
right, and dies in the midst of his days, and leaves his wealth to another
perhaps he knows not, whom does he not prove (that of himself the which was
true before, but neither himself nor others would see, namely) that he was a
stark fool? But all this is a little in comparison of that which I have to
speak against it. It is not alone unprofitable, 4. How hurtful it is too.
but hurtful also, and exceeding dangerous to him that possesses it, creating
much evil to his body and his soul, which harmfulnes proceeds not from the
nature of wealth, but from the corruption of men; as cold drink in it self is
good, but not to him which has the fit of an ague, yea to him, it is almost as
bad as poison; and so, some meats are naught for men of some constitutions,
which they love, but love not them, and of these men are accustomed to take
heed. Neither is this danger a whit the less, because it comes from our ill
nature, not from wealth it self, seeing this corruption of nature cleaues to
our soul, as fast as the skin to the flesh, and we shall as soon cease to
be, as to be so evil. Yea, most of all, is it harmefull to him that most
desires it; and howsoever others may escape the hurt of it, yet he cannot
escape, seeing the ouerprizing thereof brings forth the desire, and both
together cause the danger. It may therefore very well be likened to an
artichoake, a little picking meat there is, not so wholesome as delicious, and
nothing to that it shows for; more than the tenth part is unprofitable leaves;
and besides there is a coare in the midst of it, which will choke, not feed, and
strangle, not nourish, if a man do not pick warily what he puts into his
mouth, better it is that God give us our portion, than set the whole dish
before us; we shall well-neare choke our selves with it; and such a thing is
wealth: yea, it is like some kind of fishes, so full of small and unseen
bones, that no man eats it without great heed, but with great danger, but a
child cannot escape peril if he venture to eat it: and where shall we find
a man not a child in understanding? if any other be past a child, yet
certainly the man that loves wealth is not, It is like an headstrong and
lusty horse, that casts the weak and unskillful rider, to the breaking of his
bones, if not his neck: and though children desires to be on horseback, yet
the father had rather keep them a foot: and certainly few have the strength to
bridle and the skill to sit and manage this restie steed, it is sure none that
loves to be upon the back of it, has skill in this horsemanship. Bodily estate.
But wherein is it so dangerous will some man say? I answer, it is very
troublesome to the outward man, and like a luggring carriage makes him sweat
and puff that goes under it. The rich man's plenty will not let him sleep, his
variety of dishes brings him to surfeiting, and that to many noisome diseases,
and unquiet nights, and days; and besides, his eyes, his ears, his hands, his
heart is not his own, he cannot be where he would fainest, nor speak nor
think of what he most desires, being called away by multitude of affairs, too
too many streams of business do drive him by force even from himself, and
he may well be called any man's servant, rather than his own; so that in
outward regards, when wealth grows very large, it is like a long coat or a
garment too side, that a man treades upon often, and catches a fall, when
another goes upright, either he must hold it up (and were it not as good be
cut shorter?) or else it will bring him down; yea, it makes men obnoxious to
envy, and so subject to malice, that none are more. As a tree that has thick
and large boughs, every man desires to lop him; besides that, the sidenes of
his garment makes his own feet stumble: others also can more easily tread upon
it, and give him a fall; But all this is nothing, a man might well either bear
or prevent such troubles. There follows another rank of mischiefs out of the
rankness of wealth, that are more pernicious to the soul and cannot so well
be shunned.

It breeds many noisome diseases to the soul. 1. Soul. 1. Begetting evils,
False confidence.
First it makes the soul very vainly and falsely confident. Men think
themselves so much more safe, by how much more rich, and cannot be content to
have wealth, unless they do also trust upon it; as David on his hill, which
yet deceived him. The rich man's riches is a strong tower to his imagination,
says Solomon; he takes himself as it were walled and moated about by them,
though indeed he lie as open to danger as other men. Secondly, it swells the
heart with loathsome pride, 2. Pride.
making a man think himself also so much the better, by how much, he
possesses more. This disease as well as the former, the Apostle notes, saying
to Timothy, Charge them that be rich in this world, 1. Tim. 6.
that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches: As if he had
told us that these two maladies, false confidence and an hautie conceit of ones
self, the pursinesse of the mind, do so quickly ensue upon great possessions,
that few or none escape them. None can miss them without many warnings, many
earnest exhortations, nay, nor scarce with them. This wealth is like strong
drink to a weak brain, which sends such hot and fuming vapors up into the
same, that a man imagines he can hit the sky with his head, when he cannot
stand upright upon his feet, yea, scarce keep himself from tumbling in the
mire. The monstrous violence of fiery passions into which, (as into fits of a
burning ague) every small crossing by an inferior or equal, drives men of
wealth, shows what big conceits they have of themselves. In a word, let
examples here make the case plain. Name a man almost that did not wax proud
by wealth, unless God so sauced his sweet meat with the sour sauce of
affliction, that it was even made unsavory to him. It bred this frenzy in
David, Vzzia, Asa, Hezekiah, the best kings that the Scripture speaks of; and
if such men could not bear it, what are we? If any think though it made
others worse, it shall not make him so, let him know that this very conceit
shows him to be proud when he has it not, and how would he be then if it were
in his hands? thou art now conceited when thou art in a lower estate, will thy
conceit of thy self diminish with the increase of thy substance? Do thou
think God is so ill a disposer of things that he would not give it thee, if
he knew thou could use it most to his glory? Give God leave to know what is
in thee better than thy self, as the Physician knows the state of the
patients body when he knows it not. What child does not think he could use
a knife well? but the wise father knows his conceit arises from ignorance: so
I say to thee, that dreamest wealth should not make thee worse. Art thou better
than David and Solomon his son? To say as the thing is, therefore God does
not give so much of this wealth to his children, because he knows they would
hurt themselves with it, but gives a low estate to most of his servants: for if
they had more wealth, they would be so drunk with conceit, that they would
think themselves too good to serve him, as many men do that have it. And no
wonder that riches bring a man to great pride: for they make him utterly
distaste religious exercises, which should weane the heart from conceit of it
self. He cannot have while to pray, read, meditate, for following his
pleasures, or seeking to add more to that he has, so that none do seldomer
visit God in their closet, with true devotion and fervent cries than these,
unless the Lord fetch them in by a sore cross, and then themselves can see
what harm their prosperity did unto them.

Then from pride grows security; 3. Security
as a dead sleep from drunkenness. Those that have their barnes and houses
full, as the rich man after my text, if they be not so wholly past sense as in
words to take up his note, and say; Soul, soul, eat and drink, and take
thine ease: yet indeed fall just to this practice, nuzling themselves in this
world, as an hog in straw, and giving themselves to seek their pleasures,
profits, and promotions, and are so possessed with their own thoughts, viz.
how to get such a living, such a fair house, such a match for this daughter,
such a thing for this son, that scarce once in a month or an year, they can
have time seriously to think of getting heaven for themselves, or for their
children; yea, and though they have some good thoughts put into their hearts by
a good sermon, or good exhortation, they die all, like a spark of fire for
want of blowing; and adding too more fuel; I would these things did need any
proof, and it were not so plain, that all can see it, but those that feel it.

Yea sometimes wealth breeds that notable licentiousness (where it is grown
to a great flood) that it makes men not to care what they do, 4.
Licentiousness.
but commit whoredom, and other as foul sins, even openly, because no man,
scarce their ministers, whom they will likely choose for their own turn,
scorning to suffer the wholesome plainness of him that scorns to flatter;
scarce I say, their ministers dare tell them they offend. Yea, they promise to
themselves, by money and friends, to outface Justice it self, and pervert
righteous judgment; so that when none keeps them from sin by reproof, nor
draws them to repentance by just punishment, they may go to hell without rub,
as a bowl down an hill in a smooth place, the matter being referred to the
last judgment, and the judge of all flesh, who will judge them so much more
severely, by how much they boar out sins on earth with more quietness and
safety.

And least men should think only the worst men fell to these sicknesses, by
fat pastures, behold David, a man after Gods own heart, who in his abundance
stood upon his hill vaunting himself, and saying, He should never be moved;
and suddenly fell to adultery, to murder, to such hardness in both, as not to
confess them of a long time; and had not God strangely turned him, wealth
would have brought him to the devil; and this is the good it does even to good
men, except God do chastise them every morning and every night, and make them
sober by many tribulations, that a poorer man shall escape. In one word
therefore, the richer any man is, unless he pray more, and bewail his sins
more, and think more of his latter end, the worse he is, and if God do not
cross him more than others; he will pray less than others.

Wherefore unless his wealth be allayed by more pinching afflictions, and then
who would wish it? 1 Hindering.
he cannot but be a greater sinner than other men. And say he be Gods child,
yet he grows far slower in grace: others profit more at one sermon than he
at ten; others make more fervent prayers, and have more holy meditations in a
month, than he in a year; and think more of heaven in a day, than he in a
month; so that Christ may well call riches the thorns that do even choke the
word, and therefore they do also make the way to Heaven harder. 1. Grace
The same means that draws poorer men to salvation, will not do him: hardly
can a rich man go to heaven, it is as thick clay in his journey, that makes a
man go softly. Not many rich men are saved, says Paul. And how hard it is for
him that has riches to enter into heaven? says he that cannot lie or be
deceived. Now let them go and boast of their happiness, that makes them more
proud, secure, and licentious than other men, and makes the way of grace, and
the way of life to be much more difficult and tedious to them than other men;
and who would be so greedy of that which the more he has, the less virtuous
he shall be, if he be not more afflicted, and shall find it more difficult
to be saved: wherefore if any of you have doated on wealth heretofore, let him
seriously consider and ponder upon this, how fickle it is, how little good it
can do, how much hurt it will do; and I assure my self and him too, he
shall soon grow less in love with it, if he will be led by reason and truth,
not by fashion and opinion. Conclusion of all.
And thus Brethren I have according as I was able, showed you what
covetousness is, the causes, effects, signs, and remedies. Try your selves by
this description and these signs, fright your selves from it by these causes
and effects, and heal your selves of it by these remedies. Suffer your souls
to be wrought upon, and let the success of your hearing be good, you are
nearer damnation by this Sermon, if you mend not the fault reproved, nearer
salvation, if you will take warning: let not the word be a savor of death to
any of you. It comes to my mind, what is said in the Gospel, when Christ had
spoken against covetousness, the Pharisees that were covetous heard these
things and they laughed him to scorn, as if he had disgraced covetousness
only because he wanted wealth. If these speeches find no better effects, how
ill have we bestowed our time? Be not as bad as Pharisees, I beseech you,
contemn not the speaker, deride not the word of God, but hear it, believe it,
practice it, condemn the sin, leave the fault, beware of covetousness, and
be that which no covetous man can be, true Christians, and true blessed men:
which God grant for his Sons sake Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

