

THE School of VERTVE, the second part: OR, The Young Scholars Paradise.

Containing very good Precepts, wholesome Instructions, the Highway to good
manners, dieting of Children, and brideling their Appetites. Godly Graces, and
Prayers.

Very fit for all Children to learn, and the elder sort to observe.

LONDON, Printed by Edw: Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop being the sign of the Bull, near S. Austins-gate by
Pauls-Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1619.

To the Reader.
(...)Ightly conceive me, and observe me well,
Do what here is done for Childrens good.
CHrist in his Gospel (as S. Ma^ke does tell)
Has not forbidden Children, nor withstood
ANy that should but ask the ready way,
REgarding Children, not to say them nay.
DIrecting all that came, how faith should be,
WHat they should crave of Gods high Majesty,
Even Salvation, through their faithful Prayer,
SEnding their contemplations into the air,
TO his high throne, whose love so guide us all,
Even to the end we never cease to call.
Eternal Father Patron of true piety,
Bless us O God we pray, even by thy deity.
A Table of the points principal contained in this Book.
1 A digression for children how they ought to be instructed. 2 How they ought
to prepare themselves in the morning when they rise. 3 Their morning Prayer in
meeter. 4 The charge of Children in their carriage and behavior. 5 Their
charge in going and coming from school. 6 Laying the Cloth, and making ready
the Table. 7 Godly Graces before and after meat in meeter. 8 Their manner of
demeanor in serving at the Table, and Dinner being ended, and the allowance and
disallowance of certain misdemeanors in company or presence of their betters:
as in Silence at the board Serving or filling Drink Going on errands Going to
school again. Keeping close the lips Yawning Laughing Biting the lips and
tongue. Using the brows The eyes, the forehead The countenance The nose, the
breath. Spitting Hammering in speaking Belching Uomiting. Snuffling in the
Nose, Neesing, color of the Cheeks natural Keeping close the mouth. Keeping
clean teeth, and kembing the head Hanging down the head Carriage of the body.
Hanging the head aside Privy members Urine, or wind Sitting, courtesy. Gate
in going Apparel, etc.
9 Behavior at the Church. 10 Forbidding walking or talk in the Church. 11
Rules for Children in guiding them for apparel. 12 Ordering Children in their
diet and drinking. 13 Moderating Childrens appetites from sawcines. 14
Thanksgiving with godly Graces and Prayers for Children.
The School of Virtue.
A digression for Children how they ought to be instructed.
CHildren (draw near) attend what I say
Observe well these precepts,
and mark them I pray,
Though many rules formerly
have been set out,
To quicken the spirits of Children in doubt,
Yet youth is so fickle, and loath to be taught,
That being observed, it is unseemly and naught:
For Childrens instructions in virtue and good,
Four things must be noted, and many withstood.
The first to be marked, is so that the mind
Be seasoned with virtue, and godly enclind.
The second to aim at the liberal arts,
To practice and exercise Schollerlike parts.
The third, to be taught as times do require,
All moderate actions this age does desire.
The fourth that coming to more years and strength*
That all to ciuility he bend at the length,
Observe well the rules which now shall ensue,
And find them right wholesome, delightful, and true.
How thou ought to prepare thy self, when thou risest in the morning.
WHen moderate sleep thy head has possessed,
And given thy body his natural rest,
Shake sluggishnesse off, bethink thee of things,
That for thy souls health sweet melody brings.
Seven hours for a child is temperate and good,
If more, it offends and hurts the blood.
With heart then unfeigned, to God first of all
Frame well thy petition, and thus to him call.
Morning Prayer.
THou father of mercy and majesty great,
That sit above in superior seat,
Cast down on me (God) thy pitiful eyes,
And order my doings when I shall arise.
O Father omnipotent, do not permit.
My thoughts to be wavering, bad or unfit:
But that my heart may go with my tongue
In prayer devout; and though I be young,
Assist me (O God) with wisdom and wit,
That in this day following, whether I go, or sit,
Or stand, or what ever my thoughts shall conceive,
It all may be done with thy favor and leave.
So guide me with virtue and love of thy will,
That no wicked temptings my purpose may spill;
Bless me and my doings with favor and grace,
O Lord let not Satan thy Gospel deface:
Nor lead me to wickedness by night or day,
All this of thy grace I do heartily pray,
That when it shall please thee hereafter to call me,
No subtle devices of Satan enthrall me:
Lord guide me with godliness, then shall I sing
Praise only to God our heavenly King.
Amen.
The charge of children in their carriage.
THy prayer so commended to God: have a care
To wash hands and face, and to kembing thy hair,
And then for the school bethink thou to go,
The secrets of God the better to know.
In entering to school, let eyes be vpcast,
To God for his blessings formerly past,
To endue thee with godliness, virtue and piety,
Sent thee from heaven from God in his Deity.
For without his help can nothing be done,
Nothing be finished, nothing begun.
Then mark thou with diligence being so provided,
What shall at school be said or decided.
Let not thy thoughts go wandering about,
And not minding thy practice, abroad for to scout:
And answer with shamefastness what is required,
For modesty in youth is chiefly desired.
Deserve not correction, as near as thou may,
Nor to thy Schoolmasters give any distaste,
Nor yet thy companions, or schoole-fellowes kind:
Observe what I speak, and bear it in mind.
Be ready to teach, and not to confute
Thy schoole-fellowes arguments, when you dispute.
Let Christ have his library placed in thine heart,
And ever of Scriptures be reading a part.
Let all be well measured what thou shall read,
Not posting away with it, or making much speed:
For haste overthrows the mind and the wit,
Eschew and abandon then things so unfit.
If all at an instant thou not comprehend,
To morrow seek further, thy fault to amend.
Desire of Authors to read of the choice,
Of such, as for eloquence carry the voice;
As Cicero, Salust, Gellius, and Terence,
Quintilian and others, great Authors of reverence.
Observe all with care and diligent ear,
Thy learning the greater shall grow and appear.
The charge of children in going from school and coming.
IN going from school, observe it full well,
In streets stand not staring, nor tales see thou tell,
What has been at school, said, spoken, or done
Among thy companions: but home get thee gone,
And unto thy parents fee duty thou do,
With reverent carriage and modesty too,
Not bold or unmannerly, gentle and mild,
And show them the office of a dutiful child.
If that thou have time, ere dinner begin,
Rehearse to thy self the lesson or thing
Thou heardst at the school, let time be well noted,
The deeper with wisdom thy brains will be quoted.
Laying the cloth, and making ready the table.
BE sure to be ready, the board to prepare
At times: as accustomed with diligent care:
The table-cloth first see fairly be spread,
Fair trenchers, clean napkins, the salt and the bread,
Let glasses be scowred, in country guise,
With salt and fair water, and ever devise
The place most convenient, where they may stand,
The safest from breaking and nearest at hand.
Grace before dinner.
BLessed is God in all his gifts,
And holy in all his deeds,
Our help is in the name of the Lord,
From whence all good proceeds,
Who gives repast to hungry hearts,
And comforts rich and poor,
His name be ever sanctified,
From henceforth evermore,
Bless us (O Lord) and this our meat,
By thy grace to us sent,
God grant we use it moderately,
Our bodies to content. Amen.
Another.
THe Lord, who sends to all men's use,
In all their time of need,
Providing all and every thing,
His children for to feed,
Bless us (O God) and these thy gifts,
Of thy great mercy sent,
Lord give us grace to use them well,
And grace for to repent,
And eke amend our wickedness,
In time while we have space,
So shall our souls for evermore,
In heaven with thee have place. Amen.
Grace after meat.
GLory and everlasting praise be given to the most high and mighty God, the
most holy and blessed God, and the great King of heaven, who has fed our
hungry bodies in such abundance, and given us this so pleasant and comfortable
refection. Fill us (O Lord) with grace and gladness in thy holy Spirit, that we
may also be found worthy to taste of thy spiritual and heavenly food: and be
for evermore dwelling in thy presence. And that we never be ashamed or
confused, when thou shall be pleased to call us to account, every one
according to his deeds, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Another.
WE give thee thanks most gracious God,
Which by thy power and might,
Have all provided graciously,
And sent all things aright,
Who give strength to Christians all,
To magnify thy name,
Grant that for these thy benefits,
We all may do the same,
And in thy lasting Kingdom (Lord)
Uouchsafe that we may taste
The food of immortality,
And heavenly sweet repast. Amen.
Dinner ended.
Think and have a careful mind,
To help the poor, the lame and blind,
Remember God, who sent thy store,
Whose name be praised for evermore.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble.

He that takes pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and look what he
lays out, the Lord will repay in his kingdom.

Demeanor in serving at the table.
STand straight upright, and both thy feet,
together closely standing,
Be sure on it, ever let thine eye
be still at thy commmanding.
Observe that nothing wanting be,
which should be on the board.
Silence.
Unless a question moved be,
be careful: not a word.
Serving or filling drink.
If thou do give or fill the drink,
with duty set it down,
And take it back with manlike cheer,
not like a rusticke Lowne.
If on an errand.
If on an errand thou be sent,
make haste and do not stay,
When all have done, observe the time,
serve God and take away.
To School again.
When thou have done and dined well,
remember thou repair
To school again with carfulness,
be that thy cheifest care.
And mark what shall be read to thee,
or given thee to learn,
That apprehend as near as may be,
wisdom so does warn.
With steadfast eye and careful ear,
remember every word
Thy School master shall speak to thee,
as memory shall afford.
To use the brows.
Let not thy brows be backward drawn,
it is a sign of pride,
Exalt them not, it shows a heart
most arrogant beside.
The eyes.
Nor let thine eyes be gloting down,
cast with a hanging look:
For that to dreamers does belong,
that goodness cannot brook.
The forehead.
Let forehead joyful be and full,
it shows a merry part,
And cheerfulness in countenance,
and pleasantness of heart.
Countenance.
Nor wrinckled let thy countenance be,
still going to and fro:
For that belongs to hedge-hogs right,
they wallow even so.
The nose.
Nor imitate with Socrates,
to wipe thy sniuelled nose
Upon thy cap, as he would do,
nor yet upon thy clothes.
But keep it clean with handkerchiffe,
provided for the same,
Not with thy fingers or thy sleeue,
therein thou art too blame.
Blowing or breathing.
Blow not alowd as thou shall stand,
for that is most absurd,
Just like a broken winded horse,
it is to be abhord.
Snuffling in the nose when you speak.
Nor practice snufflingly to speak,
For that does imitate
The brutish Storke and Elephant,
yea and the wralling cat.
Neezing.
If thou of force do chance to neeze,
then backewards turn away
From presence of the company,
wherein thou art to stay.
The Cheeks.
Thy cheeks with shame faced modesty*
dipped in Dame Natures die,
Not counterfeit, nor puffed out,
observe it carefully.
Breathing.
Keep close thy mouth, for why, thy breath
may hap to give offense,
And other worse may be repayd
for further recompense.
Lips.
Nor put thy lips out like a fool
as thou would kiss a horse,
When thou before thy betters art,
and what is ten times worse.
Yawning.
To gape in such unseemly sort,
with ugly gaping mouth,
Is like an image pictured,
a blowing from the south.
Which to avoid, then turn about,
and with a napkin hide
That gaping foul deformity,
when thou art so aside.
Laughing.
To laugh at all things thou shall hear,
is neither good nor fit,
It shows the property and form
of one with little wit.
Biting the lip.
To bite the lip it seems base,
for why, to lay it open,
Most base dissembling doggednesse,
most sure it does betoken.
Biting the upper lip.
And so to bite the upper lip,
does most uncomely show,
The lips set close (as like to kiss)
in manner seem not so.
The tongue.
To put the tongue out wantonly,
and draw it in again,
Betokens mocking of thy self,
in all the eyes of men.
Spitting.
If spitting chance to move the so
thou can it not forbear,
Remember do it modestly,
consider who is there.
If filthiness, or ordure thou
upon the floor do cast,
Tread out, and cleanse it with thy foot,
let that be done with haste.
Hammering in speech.
If in thy tale thou hammering stand,
or coughing twixt thy words,
It does betoken a liers smell,
that is all that it affords.
Belching.
To belch or bulch like Clitipho,
whom Terence sets forth,
Commends manners to be base,
most foul and nothing worth.
Vomiting.
If thou to vomit be constrained,
avoid from company:
So shall it better be excused,
if not through gluttony,
Keeping the teeth clean.
Keep white thy teeth, and wash thy (...),
with water pure and clean,
And in that washing, mannerly
observe and keep a mean.
Kembing the head.
Thy head let that be kembd and trimd,
let not thy hair be long,
It is unseemly to the eye,
rebuked by the tongue.
Hanging down the head.
And be not like a slothful wight,
delighted to hang down
The head, and lift the shoulders up,
nor with thy brows to frown.
Carriage of the body.
To carry up the body fair,
is decent, and does show
A comely grace in any one,
Where ever he does go.
Hanging the head aside.
To hang the head on any side,
does show hypocrisy:
And who shall use it trust him not,
he deals with policy.
Privy members.
Let not thy privy members be
laid open to be viewed,
It is most shameful and abhord,
detestable and rude.
Urine or wind.
Retain not urine nor the wind,
which does thy body vex,
So it be done with secrecy,
let that not thee perplex.
Sitting.
And in thy sitting use a mean,
as may become thee well,
Not straddling, no nor tottering,
and dangling like a bell.
Courtesy.
Observe in courtesy to take
a rule of decent kind,
Bend not thy body too far forth,
nor back thy leg behind.
The gate in going.
In going keep a decent gate,
not faining lame or broken,
For that does seem but wantonness
and foolishness betoken.
Apparel.
Let thy apparel not exceed,
to pass for sumptuous cost,
Nor altogether be too base,
for so thy credit's lost.
Be modest in thy wearing it,
and keep it neat and clean,
For spotted, dirty, or the like,
is loathsome to be seen.
This for thy body may suffice,
how that must ordered be:
Now at the Church thou shall observe
to God how all must be.
How to behave thy self at the Church.
AT all times, as often as to Church thou do go,
Remember what duty to God thou do owe,
Discover thy head, and humbly bow
To God, for his mercy to send it thee now:
Thus humbly, thou being on bended knees,
Art bound to pronounce such words out as these:
O Father of mercy and God of all good,
Which have sent thy son to shed his dear blood
For my redemption and safety from hell,
Where my mortal enemy the Devil does dwell,
Great God (of thy mercy) so guide thou my heart,
That hell nor his fury in me have no part,
Me thinks that with millions of Angels so bright,
My heart so enriched by thy heavenly light,
Thy Gospel assuring thy wonderful powers,
And feeding my heart so with spiritual flowers
And Manna from heaven, assures salvation
To such as repent and make contemplation.
Good Lord (of thy mercy) my gracious maker,
Of all thy good gifts let me be partaker,
Enrich me with wisdom, and guide me with grace,
And with thee in the heavens assure me a place,
Lord prosper my doings in worldly affairs,
Protect me from tedious and troublesome cares:
From hands of my foes (good Lord) set me free,
That enemies none may have power of me.
Amend thou mine enemies, and give them a space,
And hearty repentance to call for thy grace,
Forgive their faults, Lord, thou their hearts turn,
To wail their offenses, and earnestly mourn.
This prayer and others,
when as thou have said,
Rise up with devotion,
and be not afraid.
Observe to demean thee,
so reverent in place,
That God may adorn
thee with mercy and grace.
Not to walk in the Church.
IN seat sit thou quiet, and walk not about,
For it is most unseemly, without any doubt,
It Is fit in a fair, or in some market town,
And not in Gods house for to walk up and down.
The Church is ordained for sermons, orations,
And prayers divine for the souls recreations.
And not like a play house, unhallowed to be,
Despising the reverence to Gods Majesty.
Give ear most attentive to what thou shall find,
For Gods word is light to the godly in mind,
Great ease comes (out of the reverent text)
For troubled in heart and in conscience perplexed.
Do all this with duty and reverend heart,
And God will reward thee full well for thy part,
Observe well the times, for to stand or to kneel
The more inward ease of thy heart shall thou feel,
To kneel on the ground with one knee alone,
Is even as comely as though it were none,
How can thy devotion be hearty and sound,
If thou do refuse to lay knees to the ground?
It Is like to the Soldier, who mockingly came,
Saluting our Savior, and gave him the name
(Hail King of the Jews) his knee was so bent,
Not with any duty, nor godly intent.
If thou in the Church alone chance to be,
Still let heart and thy tongue be so free,
As never to cease: but with due veneration,
To call to the Lord with unfeigned contemplation.
Let neither thy tongue be talking nor tattling,
Nor settle of any thing to be a prattling,
Nor let thine eyes walk, nor cast them about,
For of that devotion there is a great doubt.
Necessary rules to be observed for the guiding of children in their apparel
and otherwise.
LEt not children have their pleasures in the ordring of their garments, some
delight to have them iagged and cut: but such fantasticknesse ought to be
reformed by wiser and elder, considering their foolishness is beyond measure,
if all may be done at their pleasure: and ancient writers repute them out of
their wits and mad men that favor it.

Again, painted and gaudy apparel is not so fantastic in childrens eyes;
but as costly to the parents purses, whereby ancient writers proclaim such
parents fellow-fooles with their children.

The modesty and decency of the vestments of children are strong and good, not
curious to the eye alone: And such as are clean and without fowlnesse or
filthiness: Which after the estate and means of the parents ought to be
principal, so long as by the crafts man it be made with reasonable, and good
form and fashion.

How to order a child in his diet for drink.
FOr a child to make the beginning of his dinner drink, is a good way to
breed him up to drunkenness. Especially, if he take it for wanton custom, and
not for necessity of thirst. It is dishonest to be suffered, and anoysome to
the health of the body of a child.

Let not a child drink after he has supt hot broth, immediately upon it;
much less if he have been fed with milk.

Let not a child drink above twice or thrice at the most at one meal, and
that gently, and not without reason: who bestows wine and beer on his child
beyond reason, defameth and abuses him more by dishonouring his reason, and
provoking him to an unreasonable diet.

To moderate the appetite of a child from sauciness and being liquorish.
SOcrates being old, would not drink of the first cup: for why? his brain
was light, and the first drink is ever the most fuming and ouercomming.

If thy child be set with his betters, let his hand be last in the dish. And
that he do it not at all, unless he be first bidden. Neither suffer your
children to put their hands or fingers into brothes, sawces caudles, or such
like, at the table especially. Other wise let correction bridle their
wantonness.

If he be of sensible years, let him forbear his fingers in a dish, and use a
knife without choosing at his pleasure: for it is unseemly.

Homer often reprehendeth sauciness in these (...) such like words, They
boldly put their hands into the meat that is set before them. And as it is
unseemly to a liquorish person to train his hands to every side of the dish,
so is it more vile to turn the best morsels in a dish toward thy self.

To gnaw bones belongs chiefly to dogs, but is is a civil thing to pick
them clean with a knife.

The licking of a dish belongs to cats and dogs and not to children nor men,
be the relics never so sweet, and betokens liquorishnesse, not manners.

To drink or speak with meat in the mouth, is most uncivil and dangerous
withal.

Let the children rise from the board when nature is sufficed, either by asking
leave, or withdrawing themselves.

Let children bear away with them their trenchers, saluting their parents, and
first the chief in the company, then the rest.

When the dinner is ended, let children ever be ready to give God thanks:
every man holding their peace, let the children turn their faces reverently to
him that sits uppermost at the board, saying:

Grace after meat.
O Reverend, most holy, and immortal father of heaven, power down thine
inestimable blessings upon these thy creatures, which thou have given us
moderately to feed upon, for the sufficing of our hungry bodies: Give us grace,
to call upon thee everlastingly, and grant us, we humbly beseech thee, for ever
to obtain thy continual favor and comfort, for our needful sustenance,
soberly to use thy loving gifts, and willingly to adore thy holy name, through
our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen. God preserve thy universal
Church, the King and Queens most excellent Majesty's, the Prince and Nobility.
God send us peace and truth in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace before meat.
Bless us (O Lord) we beseech thee with thy celestial favor, and sanctify
these thy creatures, which (of thy loving mercy) thou have bestowed upon us:
adorn them with thy favor, enrich us with thy continual grace, and so
possess us with reverence to thy most blessed Majesty, that what we receive
may be thankefully taken, thy holy name for ever blessed and worshipped, and
our hungry bodies sufficiently recreated through the same, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen. God preserve, etc.

Grace after meat.
GLory and honor be to thee (O God) which have fed us since our creation and
tender years: now (blessed Lord) enrich us so with gladness and joy, that our
hearts may rejoice to consider of thy tender care ever had over us, and
continuing still thy former favors: O Lord increase our faith, and grant us
thy everlasting peace. Amen.

Grace before Supper.
AS day does pass, so night does come,
and man still waxes old,
Which warns us our lives to mend,
in sin not to be bold.
For suddenly the Lord will come,
his trump will us awake,
And then from world and worldly things,
our farewell we must take.
Lord grant us that we may in time,
so far embrace thy love,
That evermore we may receive it
of thee from above,
Bless us (O Lord) and this our meat,
our King and Queen defend,
And grant thy people may enjoy
thy peace unto the end. Amen.
Grace after Supper.
AS we have felt thy grace (O Lord)
abounding in the gift
We have received from thy hands,
so we our hearts do lift,
Proclaiming honor to thy name
with reverent heart and hand,
Desiring thee to bless and keep
us with thy holy hand.
That when we have refresht our selves
with sleep and quiet rest,
We may extol with reverence
thy name so holy blessed.
Preserve, O Lord, thy faithful Church, etc.
Grace before meat.
OF Dives and of Lazarus
the Scripture tells plain,
How Dives lived in wealth and ease,
and Lazarus in great pain,
The rich man he was clothed well,
and fared of the best,
But Lazarus for hunger great,
could take but little rest:
But crying aad lamenting still,
for some man to relieve him,
With crumbs that fell from Dives board,
whereof no man did give him.
Thus perished poor Lazarus,
and that by want of food,
And also the rich glutton died,
for all his worldly good:
Where he in torments punished
with everlasting fire,
May move our hearts to charity,
and prayer with full desire,
That God he may inspire our hearts
to love and help the poor,
Whereby we may most sure in heaven,
be blessed for evermore,
Where we may reign with Lazarus,
with joys that be incomparable,
Even by the love of Jesus Christ,
unto our souls most profitable. Amen.
Grace after meat.
NOw we (O Lord) have had repast,
and eke our bodies fed,
O Lord preserve us with thy grace
at board and eke at bed:
O Lord behold the comfortless,
and send us grace, that we
May help the poor, according as
Our states and wealth may be. Amen.
God save, etc.
A Prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Most gracious God, In the name of thee, and thy Son, and the holy Ghost.
Amen.

O Lord God bless, preserve and keep us, and have mercy and compassion on us
this day following, and for evermore. Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the
kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Most gracious and everliving God, Creator and Maker of all the world, by
whose power we have received comfortable ease and rest, without interruption of
any mean or inferior power, and have permitted us quietly to come to the
beginning of this day: Protect us and keep us (O Lord) within the same by thy
might and majesty, and through thine eternal power. And keep us (Lord) that we
may be possessed with no sinful thought, nor incur any manner of wrong,
nor rush into any kind of danger, either of the soul or body: But whatsoever
we do (O Lord) that it may wholly redound to thy honor and glory, and to the
advancement of thy everlasting name, and that by thy government we may be
ordered to do all in equity and righteousness, according to thy holy will and
pleasure: to thy honor and glory, and to thy everlasting praise, from this time
forth for evermore, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer for children ere they go to School (to be said.)
Everlasting God, which of thy free abundance have bestowed upon all mankind
all things needful, and have provided for all men, such sundry graces, as in
thy fatherly wisdom are meetest: Power upon me (thy most unworthy servant) the
spirit of understanding, knowledge, and utterance, and reveal unto me (O Lord
God) the hidden secrets of thy glorious Gospel, that whatsoever I shall study,
read, think, say, or do, it may redound to thy honor and praise: O Lord
guide my heart and tongue aright, that I may (with sense and reason) comprehend
what I shall read, or what I shall be taught: To the end, that understanding
the right, I may not any way err: But with pureness and sanctity of heart I
may ever praise thy most magnificent and everlasting name, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by children after they have studied, at their going to bed.
I Give thee most humble and hearty thanks, O most gracious and blessed Father
of heaven, in that it has pleased thee, of thy most gracious goodness, to
hear my request. O Lord still give me grace to go onward in understanding and
knowledge, that I may evermore praise thy holy name, and grant me thy grace to
amend my life, and to return unfeignedly unto thy service. And for as much as
no creature can breath without thy protection and favor, vouchsafe to extend
thy mercies unto me this night, that I may peaceably and quietly take that
rest, which thou have appointed for the refreshment of my body and mind, the
night and darkness being by thy goodness ordained, as a time convenient to
take the same in, and to cease from our bodily labors. And grant unto me (O
Lord my God) who of my self am neither able to lie down, nor being laid able
to rise up, thy especial assistance and help, that I may repose my self, and
receive (at thy merciful hands) sweet and comfortable rest, not according to
the greediness of corrupt nature, but as shall be most expedient for the
comfort and refreshing of my wearied body and mind, that both may be
strengthened and enabled to go forward with that study and exercise, which
thou have ordained and appointed for me. Lastly, grant me true repentance for
my sins, bless and defend my parents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolk,
neighbors, and others, whom thou would I should commend to thy fatherly
protection, wheresoever they remain, and for the more true and zealous calling
unto thee for these things, give me grace in faith, to say that prayer which
thy son Jesus Christ has taught me saying, O our Father which art in
heaven, etc.

FINIS.

