Westward for Smelts.

OR, The VVater-mans Fare of mad-merry VVestern wenches, whose tongues albeit
like Bell-clappers, they never leave Ringing, yet their Tales are sweet, and
will much content you.

Written by Kind Kit of Kingstone.

smelting scene

LONDON, Printed for John Trundle, and are to be sold at his shop in Barbican,
at the Sign of the Nobody. 1620.

TO THE READER.
READER, for thy pleasure have I (this once) left my Oar and Stretcher, and
stretched my wit, to set down the honest mirth of my merry Fare Fishwiues: if
I have pleased thee, I am fully contented, and ask no more for my Fare: if
not, I have lost both my labor, and the reward I hoped for from thee, and do
vow never more to trouble you with any other words than, Will you have a pair
of Oars? But my hopes are better, cause you (looking at my hands) for no other
then Fresh Water Poetry, shall not be deceived: and therefore not offended. So
without any fawning tricks (which are things used too much in these times) I
take my leave, wishing thee health; and if thou sit hard, my Boats Cushions.
Farewell.

Yours to command, Kind Kit of Kingstone.

VVESTWARD FOR SMELTS.
IN that selected time of the year, when no man is suffered to be a
Mutton-monger, without a special privilege from those in authority: and no
man is licensed to enjoy a flesh-bit, but those who are so weak, that the very
sight contents their appetite: yet every man desires flesh that is no
whore-master. When Butchers go to Beare-baytings on Thursdayes, leaving their
Wives and Prentises making pricks, in shops half shut up, like houses infected
of the plague: when at the same time Fishmongers are in their height of pride,
dashing water in their ill-sented street, like a troop of Porposes at Flushing
head. When the Cooks spits are hung up like Pikes in a Court of guard, and
their dripping pans (like Targets in a country Justices Hall) be mouldie for
want of use. At this time of the year the Pudding-house at Brookes-wharfe is
watched by the Hollanders Eeles-ships, lest the inhabitants, contrary to the
Law, should spill the blood of innocents, which would be greatly to the
hinderance of these Butter-boxes. In brief, it is the Kitchin-stuffe wives
vacation, which makes them run to the hedge for better maintenance. Every
one knows this was Lent-time, a time profitable (only) for those that deal
with liquid commodities: for none but Fish must be eaten, which never does
digest well (as some Physicions of this time hold opinion) except it swim
twice after it comes forth the water: that is, first in Butter, so to be eaten:
then in Wine or Beer after it is eaten: Now how chargeable this last liquor
is, ask in prisons of prodigals who have paid well for it: and how profitable
to the sellers, ask of those Aldermen that have had their beginning by it.

In this time of Lent, I being in the Water-mans Garrison of Queene-hiue
(whereof I am a Soldier) and having no imploiment, I went with an intent to
encounter with that most valiant and hardy Champion of Queene-hiue, The Red
Knight is an Alehouse Sign at Queene-hiue, where the Watermen use to tipple.
commonly called by the name of the Red Knight; one who has overthrown many,
yet never was himself dismounted, or had the least foil: yet does he deny to
grapple with none, but continually stands ready to oppose himself against
any that dare be his opposite, against whom he has always the better: for if
they yield to him in the right of his conquest, he takes from them a certain
sum of money, according to the time that they have held out: but if they
scorn to yield, he not only takes from them their goods, but likewise with
his sore blows he takes from them their senses, making them often to fall at
his Castle gate for dead: voiding at the mouth abundance of filth caused by his
strokes.

I had not long held combat with this Knight, but my man came running in,
telling me he had a Fare Westward. This news made me give over the combat,
but with some small loss, for he would not lose his ancient privilege; so I
giving him two pence, had free liberty to pass his gates, where I found my
Fare, which were a company of Western Fishwiues, who having made a good
market, with their heads full of Wine, and their purses full of coin, were
desirous to go homeward. We agreed quickly, and the Boy laid the Cushions: I
put them in the Boat, and we lanched into the deep, Neptune be our speed,
Westward for Smelts. Having passed the troublesome places of the Thames (where
the Wherries run to and fro like Weauers shuttles) and being at Lambeth, I
might perceive all my Fishwiues begin to nod. I fearing they were in a sound,
with my Oar sprinkled a little cool water in their faces, which made them all
to awake: which I perceiving, bid them rowze themselves up, and to continue
their mirth, and keep them from melancholy sleep, and I would strain the
best voice I had. They prayed me so to do: but yet not to clay their ears
with an old Fiddlers Song, as Riding to Rumford, or, All in a Garden Green I
said, I scorned so to do, for I would give them a new one, which neither Punke,
Fiddler, or Ballad-singer had ever polluted with their unsavory breath: the
subject was, I told them, of a Seruingman and his Mistress. They liked the
subject well, and entreated me to proceed, promising that each of them would
requite my Song with a Tale. I said, I was content, and would think well of
their requitals. So they being all still, I began in this manner: FAirer then
the fairest,
Brighter then the rarest,
Was the comely creature which I saw.
Her looks they were attractiue,
And her body active,
All beholders senses for to draw.
I honor still this comely creature,
And ever will do while I live:
And for her grace and goodly feature,
All honors due to her I Will give.
When I first beheld her
O had Cupid willed her,
For to favor him that loved her best!
Joys had me possessed,
Sorrows had not pressed,
On my grieved heart that takes no rest.
I think on her with adoration,
I musing set upon her beauty,
On her is all my meditation,
Yet more to her were but my duty.
She her self is witty,
All her parts are pretty,
Nature in her form has showed her skill:
Her bright beauty mazed me,
All her parts well pleased me:
For of pleasant sights I had my fill.
Then 'gan her hand for to uncover
Her whitest neck, and roundest pap:
Then began I farther to discover
Most pleasing sights, yet wayl'd my hap.
Still I stood obscured,
And these sights endured:
Yet I to this goddess durst not speak.
Had I made a trial,
Her most sad denial,
My obseruant heart oh it would break.
Therefore will I rest contented,
With private pleasures that I viewed,
And never with love will be tormented,
Yet love I her, for that she showed.


Having thus ended, I asked them how they liked my Song? They said little to
it. At last, Well, quoth a venerable Matron (or rather a Matron of Venery) that
sat on a Cushion at the upper end of the Boat, let us now perform our
promises to him in telling every one her Tale: and since I shall land first, I
will begin first: so the Waterman shall be sure of his requital promised by
us, which shall be Fishwiues Tales, that are wholesome, though but homely: so
sot merrily to Brainford, my masters.

I liked this well, and cause I would hear them all out, I made but slow
haste: And 'cause you shall have some knowledge what rare piece this Fishwife
of Brainford was, I will describe her best and outward parts.

This Fishwife stout,
That led the rout,
At Brainford dwelt.
She sometime dealt,
With flesh exchange:
But now (though strange)
She gave it ore,
And knew no Whore.
She was well set,
Her body met,
Two yards was found:
Her head from ground
Was not so hie.
She went awry.
Her face was great.
She stunke of sweat.
Let it suffice,
She had large eyes:
And a low brow,
Much like a Sow
That sindg'd had bin.
Appeared her chin:
For it was hayr'd.
Her nose was marred
For It had a gap,
By great mis-hap:
As you shall hear,
Then give good ear.

The Fishwifes Tale of Brainford.
IN Windsor, not long ago, dwelt a Sumpter man, who had to wife a very fair
(but something wanton) creature; over whom (not without cause) he was something
jealous, yet had he never any proof of her inconstancy: but he feared he
was, or should be a Cuckold, and therefore prevented it so much as he could by
restraining her liberty: but this did but set an edge to her wanton appetite,
and was a prouocatiue to her Lust (for what women are restrained from, they
most desire) for long he could not hold his watchful eye over her, 'cause his
business called him away, which always lay far from home. He being to depart
from home, bethought himself what he were best to do: put another in trust
with his wife he durst not: (for no greater shame is there to a man, then to be
known jealous over his wife) himself could tarry no longer at home for fear
of losing his place, and then his living was gone: thus was h^e troubled in
mind, not knowing what to do. Now he repented himself that he had used his
wife so ill, which had given her cause to hate him, and procure him a
mischief: for he saw that he had no other way now to take, but to put his
credit into his w^^es hands: therefore the day and night before he went from
home, he used her extraordinary kindly, making more on her then the first day
they were married. His wife marvelled at this sudden change, and though she
liked this usage well, yet she thought never the better of him in her heart,
and in her outward carriage bare her self as before: which was ever modestly
in his sight. The morning being come that he was to depart from home (after
many sweet kisses, and kind embraces given by him) he said: Sweet honey, I
cannot blame thee, that thou take my usage heretofore unkindly: but if thou
knew (as I mean to show thee) what my intent was, thou will change that bad
thought for a better liking of me. Know then, my love, that I used thee thus
strangely, to know how deep thy love was settled on me: (for to use a friend
frowardly, tryes her love, in forbearance of his injuries: and in seeking to
please him) which I have found by proof immovable. Oh my more then dear
wife, thy love is fixed sure on me, and not to be removed by any cross
whatsoever. Thus did he seek to vnsnare himself, but was caught faster: for
his wife perceiving his jealousy, vowed to be revenged, and give him good and
sufficient cause to think himself a Cuckold: and with very joy to see him
creep to her after this manner, she let fall a few tears, which proceeded
rather of inward laughter, then any grief. He seeing this, thought they
proceeded from pure love, yet did he not thoroughly trust her, but minded to
return ere she was aware of him. To be short, they broke their fasts together,
and lovingly parted: His wife being glad of this, sent for a woman in the
town, one that was the procurer of her friend, to whom she told all that had
happened between her Husband and her self: requesting her in all haste to give
her friend notice that her husband was now from home, and that she would meet
him, when and wheresoever he pleased. The old woman glad of this, gave her
Lover to understand of this good hap, who soon met her at a place in the
town, where they usually met, where they plumed the Sumpter-mans Cap: there
she gave the old Woman a key which would open her door, by which means she
might come to the speech of her at any time of the night without knocking: so
careful was she to keep her self clear and spotless in the eyes of her
neighbors: who would not have thought well of her, if they had heard noise at
her door in the night, and her husband from home; having passed the time away
in loving complements, they parted, each going their several ways: not any
one of her neighbors mistrusting her, she bare her self so cunningly modest.
Her husband being on his iourny, following his Sumpter-horse, thought his wife
at home working like a good huswife (when perchance she was following a Stalion
she took more delight in, then he poor man did in his) yet put he no more
trust in her then he was forced to do: for he dispatches his business so
soon as he could, and returned three days sooner then he promised her. When
he came home he knocked at the door: there might he knock long enough for his
Wife, who was knocking the Vintners pots with her Lover. He having no answer,
began to curse and ban, bidding a pox on all Whores: his neighbors began to
persuade him, telling him that she went but new forth, and would return
suddenly again: and just at that instant came she homeward, not knowing her
good man was returned, for she had appointed the old Woman to come and call her
that night: Seeing her Husband, you may judge what a taking this poor Woman
was in: back she durst not go for that would have but sharpened his rage: and
if she went forward, she was sure of some severe punishment: yet taking
courage, on she went: Her husband entertained her with half a doozen gadding
Queans, and such like words, and she excused her self so well as she could But
to be brief, in a doors they went: then made he the door fast, and came to
her (who was almost dead with fear that her close play now would be descride)
saying; Thou Whore, long time have I doubted this loosenes in thy life, which I
now have plain proof of by thy gadding in my absence, and do thou at this
present look for no other thing at my hands, then reward fit for so vilde a
creature as a Whore is. At these words she would have skreeked out: but he
stopped her mouth, pulling withal a rusty Dagger from his side, vowing to
scowre it with her blood, if she did but offer to open her mouth. She poor
creature forced more with fear, then with duty, held her peace, while he
bound her to a post hard by the door, vowing she should stand there al night,
to cool her hot blood. Having done this, about ten of the clock he went to
bed, telling her that he meant not to sleep, but watch her if she durst once
open her mouth: but he was better then his word, though he held it not, for he
was no sooner in bed but he foll fast asleep, being wearied with riding. Long
had not he been so, but the old Woman came and opened the door with the key
that the Sumpter-mans wife had given her, and was going to the bed which the
Sumpter-man lay upon, to call his Wife: but as she passed by, the poor woman
that was bound to her good behavior, called her by her name (yet very softly)
saying, Mother Ione, I am here, mother Ione, pray go no further, and speak
softly: for my Husband, mother Ione, is a bed. This good old Woman went to her,
and finding her bound, asked her the cause: to whom the afflicted Wife related
(with still speech, which is contrary to women's nature) every circumstance, for
she knew her Husband fast enough for three hours. Is that all, said the old
Woman? then fear not but you shall enjoy your friends bed: with that she
unloosed her. The Sumpter-mans wife marvelled what she meant to do, saying,
Mother, what mean you? this is not the way that I must take to clear my
self. Alas, should he wake and find me gone to morrow he will kill me in his
rage. Content you, said the old Wife, I will bide the brunt of all: and here
will I stand tied to this post till you return, which I pray let be so soon
as you can. This wanton Wife praised her counsel, and embraces the same, and
leaving the old Woman bound (as she desired) in her place, she went to her
lusty Lover, who long time had expected her: to whom she related her husbands
unlucky coming home, her ill usage, and the old Woman's kindness: for all
which he was sorry, but could not mend, only he promised to reward this
kind woman, called Mother Ione: so leaving that talk they fell to other.

The Sumpter-man, who could not soundly sleep, because still he dreamed of
Horns and Cuckolds, wakened not long after his wife was gone: and being
wakened, he fell to talking after this manner: Now you queen, is it good
gadding? Is your hot blood cooled yet with the cold air? Will your insatiable
desires be allayed with hunger and cold? if they be not, thou arrant Whore, I
will tie this thus up, not only nine days, but nineteen times nine days,
till thou have lost this hot and damnable pride of thine: I Will do 't, Whore, I
will, I swear I will. This good old Woman hearing him rail thus frantickly,
wished (with all her heart) her self out of doors, and his Wife in her old
place. She durst not speak to him, for fear she should be known by her
speech to be another, and not his Wife: and he lay still calling to her,
asking if her hot desires were cooled. At length he hearing her make no
answer, thought her to be sullen: and bid her speak to him, or else she should
repent it: (yet durst not the old wife speak.) He hearing no speech, rose up,
and took his knife, swearing he would mark her for a Whore, and with those
words he ran to her, and cut her over the nose: all this the old Woman
endured quietly, knowing her words would have but increased her punishment. To
bed went he again, with such words as he used before, saying, that since her
blood would not cool, he would let it out. Having lain a while, he fell
asleep, leaving old Ione bleeding at nose, where she stood till three of the
clock in the morning: at which time this honest Less (the Sumpter-mans wife)
came home: when she had quietly opened the door, she went to the old Woman,
asking her how she had sped? Marry, quoth she, as I would wish my enemies to
speed, ill: I pray unkind me, or I shall bleed to death. The good wife was
sorry to hear that she had received such hurt, but far gladder that it did
not happen unto her self: so unbinding her, she stood in her place. Homeward
went the old Woman, bethinking her self all the way how she might excuse that
hurt to her Husband: At last she had one (for excuses are never further off
women then their apron strings) which was this: she went home to her husband,
who was a Mason, and went every morning betimes to work out of the town: him
she calls, telling him it was time to go to work; the silly man rose, and
being ready to go, he missed a Chisell (which his wife had hid) and went up
and down groping for it in the dark, praying his Wife to help him to look
it. She made as she had sought for it, but in stead of that, she gave him a
sharp knife (which a Butcher had brought to grinding) he catching at this
suddenly (as one being in haste) cut all his fingers, so that with anger he
threw the knife to the earth, cursing his Wife that gave it him. Presently upon
ye fall of the knife, she cried out that she was hurt. The Mason being amazed,
went and lighted a Candle, and returning, he found his wives nose cut. The
silly man (persuading himself that he had done it with hurling the knife)
entreated her for to forgive him, for he protested that he thought her no hurt
when he did it: then fetched he a Surgeon who cunningly stitched it up, that
it was whole in a short time. The Sumpter-man all this while did little think
how he was beguiled: who when he was awaked, lighted a Candle to see what hurt
he had done his Wife in his rage: he coming near her, and seeing her face
whole, stood in amaze, not knowing what to think on it, for he was sure that
he had cut her nose. His Wife seeing him stand in this manner, asked him what he
did ayle, and why he gazed so on her as though he knew her not? Pardon me,
Wife, quoth he, for this night has a miracle been wrought: I do see plainly
that the heavens will not suffer the Innocent to suffer harm. Then fetched he
his knife which was all bloody, saying, Dear Wife, with this knife did I give
thee this present night, a wound on the face, the which most miraculously is
whole: which is a sign thou art free, and spotless, and so will I ever hold
thee. His Wife said little (for fear of laughing) only she said, she knew
heaven would defend the Innocent: so they went to bed lovingly together, he
vowing never to think amiss on her. So had she more liberty then before, and
the old had gold for her wound, which wound was so well cured (I thank God)
that you can scarce see it on my nose. Hereat they all laughed, saying, she had
told a good Tale for her self: at which she bit her lip, to think how she was
so very a fool to betray her self. But knowing that excuses would but make
her more suspected, she held her tongue, giving the next leave to speak.

The next that sat to her was a Fishwife of Standon the Green, who said her
Tale was pleasant, but scarce honest: she taxed women with too much
immodestie: to salve which, she would tell the adventures of a poor
Gentlewoman, that was used unkindly by her Husband. They all liked this well,
and entreated her to proceed: which she willingly consented unto.

The description of the Fishwife of Standon the Green.
This wife was lean,
She went full clean.
Her breath not strong,
Her body long.
She looked pale,
Yet loved good Ale.
Her teeth were rot,
Her tongue was not.
Well could she chat
Of this and that.
Her lips were white,
And sharp her sight.
Her cheeks were thin,
So was her chin,
And something hooked,
Her nose was crook'd:
They would have kissed,
But that they wist,
Her mouth was let,
That twixt was set.
Twice thirty years,
Sha'd past with cares,
And honest life,
And still was Wife.
This Wife was wise,
But not precise:
Thus began she tell:
Pray mark it well.

Her Tale.
IN the troublesome reign of King Henry the sixth, there dwelt in Waltam (not
far from London) a Gentleman, which had to Wife a creature most beautiful:
so that in her time there were few found that matched her, (none at all that
excelled her) so excellent were the gifts that nature had bestowed on her. In
body was she not only so rare, and unparalleled, but also in her gifts of mind:
so that in this creature it seemed, that Grace and Nature strove who should
excel each other in their gifts toward her. The Gentleman her Husband thought
himself so happy in his choice, that he believed, in choosing her, he had
took hold of that blessing which heaven proffereth every man once in his life.
Long did not this opinion hold for current; for in his height of love, he began
so to hate her, that he sought her death: the cause I will tell you. Having
business one day to London, he took his leave very kindly of his Wife, and
accompanied with one man, he rode to London: being toward night, he took up
his Inn, and to be brief, he went to supper amongst other Gentlemen. Amongst
other talk at table, one took occasion to speak of women, and what excellent
creatures they were, so long as they continued loyal to man. To whom answered
one, saying: This is truth, Sir: so is the Devil good so long as he does no
harm, which is meaner: his goodness and women's loyalty will come both in one
year, but it is so far off, that none in this age shall live to see it.

This Gentleman loving his Wife dearly (and knowing her to be free from this
uncivil Gentleman's general taxation of women) in her behalf, said: Sir, you
are too bitter against the sex of women, and do ill (for some ones sake that
has proved false to you) to tax the generality of women-kinde with
lightness: and but I would not be counted uncivil amongst these Gentlemen, I
would give you the reply that approved untruth deserves, you know my meaning,
Sir: construe my words as you please: excuse me, Gentlemen, if I be uncivil: I
answer in the behalf of one, who is as free from disloyalty, as is the Sun
from darkness, or the fire from cold. Pray, Sir, said the other, since we are
opposite in opinions, let us rather talk like Lawyers, that we may be
quickly friends again, then like Soldiers which end their words with blows.
Perhaps this woman that you answer for, is chaste, but yet against her will:
for many women are honest, 'cause they have not the means, and opportunity to
be dis-honest (so is a Thief true in prison, 'cause he has nothing to
steal:) had I but opportunity, and knew this same Saint you so adore, I would
pawn my life and whole estate, in a short while to bring you some manifest
token of her disloyalty. Sir, you are young in the knowledge of women's slights,
your want of experience makes you too credulous: therefore be not abused. This
speech of his made the Gentleman more out of patience then before, so that with
much ado he held himself from offering violence: but his anger being a
little over, he said, Sir, I do verily believe, that this vain speech of
yours proceeds rather from a loose and ill manner'd mind, then of any
experience you have had of women's loosenes: and since you think your self so
cunning in that (devilish art) of corrupting women's chastity, I will lay
down here a hundred pounds, against which you shall lay fifty pounds, and
before these Gentlemen I promise you, if that within a months space you bring
me any token of this Gentlewomans disloyalty (for whose sake I have spoken in
the behalf of all women) I do freely give you leave to enjoy the same:
conditionally you not performing it, I may enjoy your money. If that it be a
match, speak, and I will acquaint you where she dwells: and besides, I bow,
as I am a Gentleman, not to give her notice of any such intent that is toward
her. Sir, quoth the man, your proffer is fair, and I accept the same: so the
money was delivered into the Oast of the house his hands, and the sitters by
were witnesses: so drinking together like friends, they went every man to his
chamber. The next day this man having knowledge of the place, rid thither,
leaving the Gentleman at the Inn, who being assured of his wives chastity,
made no of her account but to win the wager, but it fell out otherwise: for
the other vowed either by force, policy, or free will to get some Jewel or
other toy from her, which was enough to persuade the Gentleman that he was a
Cuckold, and win the wager he had laid. This Villain (for he deserved no
better style) lay at Waltam a whole day, before he came to the sight of her: at
last he espied her in the fields, to whom he went and kissed her (a thing no
modest woman can deny:) after his salutation, he said, Gentlewoman, I pray
pardon me if I have been too hold, I was entreated by your Husband which is at
London (I riding this way) to come and fee you, by me he has sent his commends
to you, with a kind entreat that you would not be discontented for his long
absence, it being serious business that keeps him from your sight. The
Gentlewoman very modestly bade him welcome, thanking him for his kindness,
withal telling him that her Husband might command her patience so long as he
pleased. Then entreated she him to walk homeward, where she gave him such
entertainment as was fit for a Gentleman, and her husbands friend. In the time
of his abiding at her house, he often would have singled her in private talk,
but she perceiving the same, (knowing it to be a thing not fitting a modest
woman) would never come in his sight but at meals, and then were there so many
at board, that it was no time for to talk of lone matters: therefore he saw
he must accomplish his desire some other way: which he did in this manner: He
having layne two nights at her house, and perceiving her to be free from
lustful desires, the third night he fained himself to be something ill, and
so went to bed timelier then he was wont. When he was alone in his chamber, he
began to think with himself that it was now time to do that which he
determined; for if he tarried any longer, they might have cause to think that
he came for some ill intent, and waited opportunity to execute the same
therefore he resolved to do something that night, that might win him the
wager, or utterly bring him in despair of the same. With this resolution he
went to her chamber, which was but a pair of stairs from his, and finding the
door open, her went in, placing himself under the bed: Long had he not line
there, but in came the Gentlewoman with her maiden; who having been at prayers
with her household, was going to bed. She preparing her self to bedward, laid
her Head-tyre and those Jewels she wore, on a little table there by: at length
he perceived her to put off a littel Crucifix of gold, which daily she wore
next to her heart: this Jewel he thought fittest for h^^ t^^ne, and therefore
observed where she did lay the same: At length the Gentlewoman having vntyred
her self, went to bed: her Maid then bolting of the door, took the Candle,
and went to bed in a withdrawing room only separated with Arras. This
Villain lay still under the bed, listening if he could hear that the
Gentlewoman slept: at length he might hear her draw her breath long: then
thought he all sure, and like a cunning villains rose without noise, going
straight to the Table, where finding of the Crucifix, he lightly went to the
door, which he cunningly vnbolted; all this performed he with so little noise,
that neither the Mistress nor the Maid heard him. Having gotten into his
Chamber, he wished for day, that he might carry this Jewel to her husband as
sign of his wives disloyalty: but seeing his wishes but in vain, he laid him
down to sleep: happy had she been had his bed proved his grave. In the
morning so soon as the folks were stirring, he rose and went to the
Horse-keeper, praying him to help him to his Horse, telling him that he had
took his leave of his Mistress the last night. Mounting his horse, away rid he
to London, leaving the Gentlewoman in bed: who when she rose, attiring her
self hastity ('cause one tarried to speak with her) missed not her Crucifix:
so passed she the time away, as she was wont other days to do, no whit
troubled in mind, though much sorrow was toward her: only she seemed a
little discontented that her ghest went away so unmannerly, she using him so
kindly. So leaving her, I will speak of him, who the next morning was betimes
at London; and coming to the Inn, he asked for the Gentleman, who then was
in bed, but he quickly rose and came down to him, who seeing him returned so
suddenly, he thought he came to have leave to release himself of his wager:
but this chanced otherwise: for having saluted him, he said in this manner:
Sir, did not I tell you that you were too young in experience of woman's
subtilties, and that no woman was longer good then she had cause, or time to
do ill? this you believed not, and thought it a thing so unlikely, that you
have given me a hundred pounds for the knowledge of it. In brief, know, your
Wife is a woman, and therefore a wanton, a changeling: to confirm that I
speak, see here (showing him the Crucifix:) know you this? if this be not
sufficient proof, I will fetch you more.

At the sight of this, his blood left his face, running to comfort his faint
heart, which was ready to break at the sight of this Crucifix, which he knew
she always wore next her heart, and therefore he must (as he thought) go
something near, which stole so private a Jewel. But remembering himself, he
cheeres his spirits, seeing that was sufficient proof, and he had won the
wager, which he commanded should be given to him. Thus was the poor Gentleman
abused, who went into his Chamber, and being weary of this world (seeing where
he had put only his trust, he was deceiues) he was minded to fall upon his
sword, and so end all his miseries at once: but his better Genius persuaded him
contrary, and not so (by laying violent hand on himself) to leap into the
Devils mouth. Thus being in many minds, but resolving no one thing, at last he
concluded to punish her with death, which had deceived his trust, and himself
utterly to forsake his house and lands, and follow the fortunes of King Henry.
To this intent he called his man, to whom he said; George, thou know I have
ever held thee dear, making more account of thee, then thy other fellows, and
thou have often told me that thou did owe thy life to me, which at any time
thou would be ready to render up to do me good. True Sir, (answered his
man) I said no more thne, then I will now at any time, whenever you please,
perform. I believe thee, George (replied he:) but there is no such need: I
only would have thee do a thing for me, in which is no great danger, yet the
profit which thou shall have thereby shall amount to my wealth: for the love
that thou bear to me, and for thy own good will thou do this? Sir (answered
George) more for your love, then any reward, I will do it, (and yet money
makes many men valiant) pray tell me what it is? George (said his Master) this
it is, thou must go home, praying thy Mistress to meet me half the way to
London: but having her by the way, in some private place kill her: I mean as I
speak, kill her, I say, this is my command, which thou have promised to
perform: which if thou performest not, I vow to kill thee the next time thou
come in my sight. Now for thy reward it shall be this, Take my Ring, and
when thou have done my command: by virtue of it, do thou assume my place till
my return, at which time thou shall know what my reward is, till then govern
my whole estate: and for thy Mistress absence, and my own, make what excuse thou
please: so be gone. Well Sir (said George) since it is your will, though
unwilling I am to do it, yet I will perform it. So went he his way toward
Waltam: and his Master presently rid to the Court, where he abode with King
Henry, who a little before was enlarged by the Earl of Warwick, and placed in
the Throne again.

George being come to Waltam, did his duty to his Mistress, who wondered to see
him, and not her husband, for whom she demanded of George: he answered her,
that he was at Enfield, and did request her to meet him there. To which she
willingly agreed, and presently rode with him toward Enfield. At length they
being come into a by way, George began to speak to her in this manner,
Mistress, I pray you tell me what that Wife deserves, who through some lewd
behavior of hers, has made her Husband to neglect his estate, and means of
life, seeking by all means to dye, that he might be free from the shame, which
her wickedness has purchased him? Why George (quoth she) have thou met with
some such creature? Be it whomsoever, might I be her Judge, I think her worthy
of death: How think thou? Faith, Mistress (said he) I think so too, and am
so fully persuaded that her offense deserves that punishment, that I purpose
to be executioner to such a one my self. Mistress, you are this woman, you
have so offended my Master (you know best how your self) that he has left his
house, vowing never to see the same till you be dead, and I am the man
appointed by him to kill you; therefore those words which you mean to utter,
speak them presently, for I cannot stay. Poor Gentlewoman, at the report of
these unkind words (ill deserved at her hands) she looked as one dead, and
uttering abundance of tears, she at last spoke these words: And can it be,
that my kindness and loving obedience, has merited no other reward at his hands
then death? It cannot be. I know thou only tryest me, how patiently I would
endure such an unjust command. I Will tell thee here, thus with body prostrate
on the earth, and hands lift up to heaven, I would pray for his preservation,
those should be my worst words: for deaths fearful visage shows pleasant to
that soul that is innocent. Why then prepare your self (said George:) for by
heaven I do not rest. With that she prayed him stay, saying, And is if so;
then what should I desire to live, having lost his favor (and without offense)
whom I se dearly loved, and in whose sight my happiness did consist? come,
let me die. Yet, George, let me have so much favor at thy hands, as to
commend me in these few words to him: Tell him, my death I willingly embrace,
for I have owed him my life (yet no otherwise but by a wives obedience) ever
since I called him Husband: but that I am guilty of the least fault toward him,
I utterly deny: and do (at this hour of my death) desire that heaven would
power down vengeance upon me, if ever I offended him in thought. Entreat him
that he would not speak ought that were ill on me, when I am dead, for in
good troth I have deserved none. Pray heaven bless him, I am prepared now
strike prithee home, and kill me and my griefs at once.

George seeing this, could not withhold himself from shedding tears, and with
pity he let fall his sword, saying: Mistress, that I have used you so roughly,
pray pardon me, for I was commanded to by my Master, who has vowed, if I let
you live, to kill me: But I being persuaded, that you are innocent, I will
rather undergo the danger of his wrath, then to stain my hands with the blood
of your clear and spotless breast: Yet let me entreat you (so much) that you
would not come in his sight (lest in his rage he turn your butcher) but live
in some disguise till time have opened the cause of his mistrust, and showed
you guiltless, which (I hope) will not belong.

To this she willingly granted (being loath to die causeless) and thanked him
for his kindness; so parted they both, having tears in their eyes. George want
home, where he showed his Masters King for the government of the house, till
his Master and Mistress return, which he said lived a while at London, 'cause
the time was so troublesome, and that was a place where they were more secure
then in the Country. This his fellows believed, and were obedient to his
will, amongst whom he used himself so kindly, that he had all their loves.
This poor Gentlewoman (Mistress of the house) in short time got man's apparel
for her disguise; so wandered she up and down the country, for she could get
no service, because the time was so dangerous, that no man knew whom he might
trust; only she maintained her self with the price of those Jewels which she
had, all which she sold. At the last, being quite out of money, and having
nothing left (which she could well spare) to make money of, she resolved rather
to starve, then so much to debate her self to become a beggar: with this
resolution she went to a solitary place beside York, where she lived the
space of two days on Herbs, and such things as she could there find. In this
time it chanced that King Edward (being come out of France, and lying
thereabout with the small forces he had) came that way with some two or three
Noble men, with an intent to discover, if any ambushes were laid to take him at
an advantage. He seeing there this Gentlewoman, whom he supposed to be a Boy,
asked her what she was, and what she made there in that private place? To whom
she very wisely and modestly withal answered, that she was a poor Boy, whose
bringing up had bin better then her outward parts then showed, but at that time
she was both friendlesse, and comfortless, by reason of the late war. He
being moved, to see one so well featured (as she was) to want, entertained her
for one of his Pages, to whom she showed her self so dutiful, and loving,
that (in short time) she had his love above all her fellows. Still followed
she the fortunes of K. Edward, hoping at last (as not long after it did fall
out) to be reconciled to her husband. After the battle at Barnet (where K.
Edward got the best) she going up and down amongst the slain men (to know
whether her husband, which was on K. Henry's side, were dead or escaped)
happened to see the other who had been her ghest, lying there for dead: she
remembering him, and thinking him to be one whom her husband loved, went to him,
and finding him not dead, she caused one to help her with him to a house
there-by: where opening of his breast, to dress his wounds, she espied her
Crucifix; at sight of which her heart was joyful (hoping by this, to find him
that was the original of her disgrace) for she remembering her self, found
that she had lost that Crufix, ever since that morning he departed from her
house so suddenly: But saying nothing of it at that time, she caused him to be
carefully looked unto, and brought up to London after her, whither she want
with the King, carrying the Crucifix with her. On a time when he was a little
recovered, she went to him, giving him the Crucifix, which she had taken from
about his neck: to whom he said, Good gentle Youth, keep the same: for now in
my misery of sickness, when the sight of that picture should be most
comfortable, it is to me most uncomfortable, and breeds such horror in my
conscience (when I think how wrongfully I got the same) that so long as I see
it, I shall never be in rest. Now knew she that he was the man that caused the
separation twixt her husband, and her self; yet said she nothing, using him
as respectively as she had before: only she caused the man, in whose house he
lay, to remember the words he had spoken concerning the Crucifix. Not long
after, she being alone, attending on the King, beseeched his Grace to do her
justice on a villain that had bin the cause of all the misery she had suffered.
He loving her (above all his other Pages) most dearly, said; Edmund (for so
had she named her self) thou shall have what right thou will on thy enemy;
cause him to be sent for, and I will be thy Judge my self. She being glad of
this (with the Kings authority) sent for her husband, whom she heard was one of
the prisoners that was taken at ye battle of Barnet, she appointing the other,
now recovered, to be at the Court the same time. They being both come (but not
one seeing of the other) the King sent for the wounded man into the Presence:
before whom the Page asked him, how he came by the Crucifix? He fearing that
his Villainy would come forth, denied the words he had said before his Oast,
affirming he bought it. With that she called in the Oast of the house where he
lay, bidding him boldly speak what he had heard this man say, concerning the
Crucifix. The Oast then told the King, that in the presence of this Page, he
heard him entreat, that the Crucifix might be taken from his sight, for it did
wound his conscience, to think how wrongfully he had gotten the same. These
words did the Page auerre: yet he utterly denied the same, affirming that he
bought it, and if that he did speak such words in his sickness, they
proceeded from the lightness of his brain, and were untruths.

She seeing this Villains impudency, sent for her Husband in, to whom she
showed the Crucifix, saying, Sir, do you know, do you know this? Yes,
answered he: but would God I never had known the owner of it? It was my
Wives, a woman virtuous, till this Devil (speaking to the other) did corrupt
her purity, who brought me this Crucifix as a token of her inconstancy.

With that, the King said, Sir, now are you found to be a knave: did you not
even now affirm you bought it? To whom he answered (with fearful
countenance) And it like your Grace, I said so, to preserve this Gentleman's
honor, and his Wives, which by my telling of the truth would have been much
indamag'd: for indeed she being a secret friend of mine, gave me this, as a
testimony of her love.

The Gentlewoman, not being able longer to cover her self in that disguise,
said, And it like your Majesty, give me leave to speak, and you shall seem
make this Villain confess, how he has abused that good Gentleman. The King
having given her leave, she said, First, Sir, you confessed before your Oast,
and my self, that you had wrongfully got this Jewel: then before his
Majesty, you affirmed you bought it: so denying your former words: Now you
have denied, that which you so boldly affirmed before, and have said it was
this Gentleman's wives gift. (With his Majesty's leave) I say thou art a
Villain, and this is likewise false: (with that she discovered her self to be
a woman, saying) Had thou (Villain) ever any Strumpets favor at my hands?
Did I (for any sinful pleasure I received from thee) bestow this on thee?
Speak, and if thou have any goodness left in thee, speak the truth.

With that he being daunted at her sudden sight, fell on his knees before the
King, beseeching his Grace to be merciful unto him, for he had wronged that
Gentlewoman: therewith told he the King of the match between the Gentleman and
himself, and how he stole the Crucifix from her, and by that means, persuaded
her Husband that she was a Whore. The King wondered how he durst (knowing God
to be just) commit so great Villainy: but much more admired he, to see his Page
to turn a Gentlewoman; but ceasing to admire, he said: Sir, (speaking to her
Husband) you did the part of an unwise man, to lay so foolish a wager, for
which offense, the remembrance of your folly is punishment enough: but seeing
it concerns me not, your Wife shall be your Judge. With that Mistress Dorrill
(thanking his Majesty) went to her Husband, saying, Sir, all my anger to you I
lay down with this kiss. He wondering all this while to see this strange and
unlooked for change, wept for joy, desiring her to tell him how she was
preserved: wherein she satisfied him at full. The King was likewise glad that
he had preserved this Gentlewoman from wilful family, and gave Judgment on
the other in this manner: That he should restore the money treble which he had
wrongfully got from him: and so was to have a years imprisonment. So this
Gentleman and his Wife went (with the Kings leave) lovingly home, where they
were kindly welcomed by George, to whom for recompense he gave the money
which he received: so lived they ever after in great content. How like you of
this woman? Some praised her (as she deserved) extraordinarily.

But (said the Brainford Fishwife) I like her as a garment out of fashion; she
showed well in that innocent time, when women had not the wit to know their
own liberty: but if she lived now, she would show as vild as a pair of
Yorkshire sleeves in a Goldsmithes shop.

But we being come almost at Brainford, I asked if any of them would land
there? They all cried, No: persuading the two wives that dwelt at Brainford,
and Standon the Green, to go to King-stone, whither they purposed all to go
and be merry. Little entreating served them: so putting their Fish-baskets
aboard a Fisher-boate, they cried, On to King-stone. I being well content
therewith, set forward, and the Fishwife of Richmond proceeded in telling of
her Tale: but first I will tell you what manner of creature she was.

The Fishwife of Richmond.
This Richmond Dame
Was void of shame,
She was a scold
At ten years old:
And now was held
The best in field,
At that same fight
'T was her delighs.
Her Husband kind
(A silly Hind)
Durst not gainsay
Or once say nay,
For what she craved:
For then she rau'd
And called him fool,
And with a stool
Would break his head.
Often in the bed
If he her tutch'd,
His Beard she clutch'd,
And clawed his eyes:
Yet in no wise
Durst he resist
Her cruel fist.
This Wife was young:
Only in tongue
She was deformed:
Had that been charmed:
She had deserved
A King to have served.

Her Tale.
NOt long agone, in a town not far from London, dwelt an old Widdower, which
took to Wife a fair, young and lusty Damozell, over whom his own weakness
made him jealous, so that continually his eye was on her, and she could not
look away, but with most spiteful words he would revile her, calling her so
many Whores, that it was impossible to make him so many times Cuckold: This
poor wench lived so miserable a life with him, that she rather wished to be
with the dead, then to live with so froward, and such a doting old fool: but
her wishes were in vain, and her misery still increased: For he complained to
her friends, how that she showed not that duty to him, which other Wives did
to their Husbands, but flighted him as if he had been a stranger, and that
she delighted in other men's companies more then his.

Upon this complaint of his, she had likewise the ill will of her friends, who
told her they would continue her foes, till they heard she used her Husband
with more respect. At this she grieved more, then at her Husbands frowardnes,
having their hate without a cause: and being one day at Church she made moan to
her Pew-fellow (which was a wench that would not be out-faced by her Husbands
great looks) telling her how ill her Husband used her, for when he was within
doors, his eyes were never off her, so that she could not speak to any
friend: and if he went forth, he would lock her in the house like Pusse-Cat;
and every night he locked the door himself, laying the key under his pillow.
Why, said her Pew-fellow, wherefore have you hands, but to take the key when he
is asleep, and to go whither you will, only you must be careful to come in
at the hour he uses to wake? Fie, I am ashamed, that you have no more wit:
do as I tell you, and since he barreth you of your liberty in the day, take
it your self in the night: for company take no care, come to me; and if we
cannot find sport to pass away the time, we will sleep for company.

This young Less thanked her for her counsel, vowing to put it in practice the
next night what soever did happen: so returning from the Church with her
husband, she went home, where all the day she sat demurely in his sight, as
she was wont to do, yet could she scarce have one good word from him.

Night being come, he locked the door as he was wont, and going to bed, he
laid the key under his pillow, falling quickly asleep, which she perceiving,
softly took the same, opening the door therewith: away she went to her
Pew-fellow, where she reuelled that night, till three of the clock in the
morning, at which time her Husband used to wake: then coming home, she softly
opened the door, locking the same again with as little noise as she could:
then laid she her self down by her good man, who when he waked, never
mistrusted that his Wife had stirred from his side: This did she many times,
and never was so much as suspected for such a matter.

One night above the rest (her good fortune having made her bold) she tarrying
a little longer then her hour, her Husband chanced to awake; who presently
missing her, called her by her name, thinking she had been in the house: he
hearing no answer, rose and went about the house to look her, but he could
not set his eyes on her, and to ask for her was in vain, for his Cat could
not speak, and he had no other to inquire of: for his Cat, his Wife, and
himself, was all the household he had.

To bed went this old man again, where he looked for the key, but could find
none: there he lay, vexing and chafing himself, ever and anon feeling on his
brows, which he persuaded himself were in their Springtime, and would
shortly bring forth fruit: though the rest of his body were in Autumn. At
length he might hear a noise, and lying still, he might perceive his Wife come
stealing to the bed, to whom he said nothing, hoping one night to take her out
of the doors, where he would keep her to her everlasting shame, and give the
Parish notice of her night-walking: so taking no notice that he knew any thing,
he used her that day very kindly, which made her to believe that the Proverb
is true (Cuckolds are kind men) for before she played loose with him, she
never had that good usage at his hand, as she had that day found.

This encouraged her to go on in these her mad prankes, so that the same night
she purposed to walk again, which she did, taking the key from under his
pillow (as she was wont to do) she unlocked the door, and away she went to
her Pew-fellow: he perceiving it (for he slept For sleep) went down, and
bolted the door after her, so that she could not come in, but he must know of
it: when he had so done, he laid him down to sleep.

His Wife ending her Revels, at her usual hour, returned home, and very
quietly assayed to open the door: but perceiving that it was bol^ed on the
inside, her heart was dead (as a spent prodigals, at the sight of a Sergeant:)
then repented she that she had taken that wanton course, knowing a severe
punishment would follow her sweet pleasure: Thus she, poor soul, stood at
the door shaking with fear, more then cold: but at last (having no other way
to get in) she resolved to knock: so laying her hand gently on the ring of the
door, she knocked twice or thrice before he would hear her. At last, he
looked out of the window, asking who knocked at the door? It Is I, kind Husband,
(answered she) that have been at a woman's labor; prithee sweet heart open
the door. All these kind words would not get her admittance, but gained this
churlish answer at his hands: Have thou been at a woman's labor? Then prithee
sweet heart return, and amongst the residue of the wives, help thou to devour
the groaning Cheess, and suck up the honest man's Ale till you are drunk, by
that time 'twill be daylight, and I will have thy friends at thy return, who
shall give thee thanks for thy charity.

The poor woman knew his wicked mind toward her; by these his mocking words,
yet sought she to pacify the same; saying, Alas, kind Love, these things are
done already; therefore pray open the door? No (quoth he) auaunt Whore; damned
Whore, auaunt. Here is no place, your labors have not deserved such fruits at
my hands: No, I have taken you, you are intrapt, you are snared, your friends
shall now know, and all the world see, that you are a most cunning Whore:
therefore rest quiet, for there you shall stand till morning.

This sharp answer of his killed her heart; but she quickly revived the same
with a trick which she hoped would get her admittance, which she put in
execution after this manner: Am I rewarded thus (quoth she) for my charity
toward a poor distressed woman? and is this thy thanks thou give me for
all my care which I have had of thy old and crazed carcass? I see it is,
therefore will I live no longer, but presently will make away my self, and
with my self thee, for the world judging thee to be author of my death, will
give thee the punishment that is due unto a murderer.

At this the old man laughed, bidding her proceed. Which she hearing, took up
a great stone, going therewith to a Pond which was within a yards length of her
house, and standing at the brink, said these words: Oh blessed element of
water, it is thou which wast ordained to end my misery, and to revenge me on my
wicked husband: therewith hurled she in the stone which made a great noise:
then placed she her self hard by the door. Her husband thinking she had
leaped in, and considering what danger he might come in if she was drowned,
ran hastily out of door to help her: which his Wife seeing, stepped in,
bolting of him forth.

The old man stood a long time looking with his Spectacles on the Pond: but
perceiving nothing to stir, he thought her to be drowned, and with that
cried out he was undone. Long enough might he cry, for no neighbors dwelt
near him: at length his Wife pitied him, saying, Alas, good man, what would
thou have? He hearing it to be his wives voice, was glad thereof: yet
continuing his churlish speeches unto her, he bid her open the door, calling
her dissembling Queen.

To all this said she nothing: but at last she took occasion to empty the
Pis-pot on his head, and then said, There is some Cuckolds Urine to cool your
tongues heat; I Will warrant thee it is right, it is of my Husbands making: so
prithee, fellow, be gone and let me sleep.

This abuse of hers, made the old man to rail more then before: but at last,
seeing he could get nothing thereby, thee gave her good words, entreating her
to let him in, and he would forgive all that was past, never letting her
friends understand of her night-walking.

She seeing him so meek, said, Old man, I could well afford thee shelter in my
house, though thou have not deserved the same: but in so doing I shall break
my oath, for I have sworn that thou shall not come through the door not this
five hours: now to save my oath, and do thee pleasure (in taking thee out of
the cold) I will open the window in the lower room, that thou may come in
that way. Her husband being glad any way to get out of the cold, thanked her
for that kindness.

Down came she straight and opened that window: the old man glad thereof,
thrust in his head, praying her to help him. She now thinking it time to be
revenged on him, took hold of his Beard, and with her other fist batterd his
face, and scratched him in such pitious manner, that the old man thought she
would have killed him: and therefore pulling his head out of the window, he all
be battered the Casements with stones, calling her a hundred Whores.

At this she laughed, and bid him be a patient Cuckold, for his greatest
misery was to come; so going to a back window, she espied a Boy, whom she
called, willing him to go to such a ones house (naming her Pew-fellow) and
entreat her straight to come and speak with her. The Boy doing her errand, her
Pew-fellow came: to whom she told (not without great laughing) the whole story
of her good hap; willing her to go to her Mother, and the rest of her friends,
and (as she could well enough without her instructions) frame a complaint, how
that her Husband of a long time had used to go on whore hunting in the night:
yet she having no just proof of the same, was loath to speak: but now it was
her hap to take him forth of the doors, where she would keep him, till they
came to take some order that she might be separated from him, for she feared
her life.

With this Tale ran her Pew-fellow to her friends (which dwelled not far
off) to whom she told such a pitious story) of the miserable life their poor
kinswoman led, with that known and proved old adulterer; that her friends
moved with the wrong she sustained, got the Parson of the town to go with
them to their Kinswomans house, that he might be a witness of her wrong.

When they came thither, they found the old man sitting at the door, with a
face more deformed (with beating and scratching) then ever was any Witches. The
Mother to this lusty Less, seeing him sit there with such a deformed face,
raised her voice to a high key, saying: Ah, thou old Knave, thou Whore monger,
thou decrepit Lecher, Have thou always complained of my Daughter, making me,
and other that are her good friends (not only to reprove her, but more which I
speak to my grief) to hate her, for her neglect of duty toward thee, when
the fault was in thy self, when thou gave her right to others? but see, now
it is come home by thee, she has intrapt thee in thy snare; then art come
home with thy face mangled like a true Ruffian: now thou art the true Picture
of a brothell-house companion: thou have the Seals on thy face, which those
creatures (called Whores) do give: thou have, villain, thou have.

He wondering to see her Mother so against him, of whom he hoped to be righted,
said: Mother, I confess, these seals are the seals of a Whore; but of what
Whore? Even of what whore thou will (quoth she:) thou knave, hold thy tongue,
confess not here, keep that for the gallows. Bear witness, good Sir John,
and the rest of my neighbors, that see how my daughter is abused: for I
purpose to teach this knave how to use his wife better; and not to abuse her,
and then threaten her with death, if she complain: come down my child and
speak for thy self, and let the knave touch thee if he dare.

The young Wife liked this well, who came down as her Mother bid her; and
falling at her feet, entreated her (with fained tears) that she might be
divorced from her wicked husband, or else she said her days were but short,
for he assuredly would do her a mischief.

Content thee, Daughter (said her Mother) I will have him consent to let thee
go, giving thee that portion he had with thee; or else I will sell Cow, Coat,
house and all, to go to Law with the Knave. The old man (her Husband)
perceiving) that they were all on her side, and how that they would not hear
him speak in his own defense: likewise thinking if that he lived with his
Wife again, he must be a contented Cuckold, said, Will you hear this? Take
your Daughter with you: and I will presently give her that portion I received,
and take all this wrong.

This pleased them all; so the Priest drew a Bill of divorce between them, and
the old man delivered back her portion, being glad that he was rid of his
Wife. His wife on the other side was glad that she had escaped that punishment
which she deserved: so they all part^^ seeming friends.

I ^^rry (quoth the Fishwife of Brainford) this was a wench worth talking of;
she deserves as much praise as those women called Amazones, who out of a brave
mind cut their husbands thr^ates: and so made themselves, rulers of themselves.

But what praise (quoth the wife of Stand on the Green) had she deserved, if
she had been discovered, or failed in this attempt? Nothing but curses in my
mind, for she had given cause to all men to speak ill of us women: it is not
the event, but the honesty of the intent, that iustifies the action. I think
so too, said a Fishwife of Twitnam, I do not like this foolish hardiness: and
men are apt to speak ill of us without cause: therefore to make amends, I will
tell of a virtuous and chaste Dame, one whose life may be a mirror for all
women.

The description of the Fishwife of Twitnam.
Not old, not young,
Not sharp of tongue
Was this same Wife.
She loved no strife,
Nor much would prate,
But loved her mate.
Yet loved she lap:
If It were her hap
To meet with those,
She knew from foes,
She Would spend her quart
With all her heart.
Well loved she Mass.
Her time she would pass
In working good:
If neighbors stood
In need of ought
She sold or bought,
They should it have,
If they did crave.
This Wife mannerly
Spoke thus soberly.

Her Tale.
SOmetime in Britain there reigned a mighty Prince, called Oswald, who for
his just government and holy life, had the name of Saint given him. This Oswald
took to his wife a virtuous Maiden, named Beblam, daughter to Kynygils King of
West Saxons: by whom he had one son, after whose birth they willingly agreed
(that they might the better serve their Savior) not to touch one the other
after any carnal manner.

Thus lived this virtuous couple until their deaths, only esteeming the
service of God, and the avoiding of worldly tentations for their chief
pleasure. A Hermet being envious at the report of his holy life, one day went
to him, asking the King how he could live so holy, and yet live with a Wife?
To whom the King answered: Marriage is no hinderance to holy life, for therein
do we but follow the institution of God, which he ordained for the increase
of the world: but further to satisfy thee, that it is no hinderance to my holy
life; take thou this King, and go to her, bidding her use thee as she would
use my self.

The Hermet glad of this (hoping to have kind entertainment at his Queens
hands) went merrily to her, delivering her the King: and told her, that it was
her Husbands will that she should use him in all respects as she would use
himself, if he were there.

To this the Queen was willing, and bid him welcome, telling him he should be
served in all points as the King her Royal husband was. When the time of
supper was come, and the Hermet expected some delicate cheer, he only was fed
with bread, which was served up in a stately manner, by diverse Gentlemen that
did attend him: likewise when he called for drink, they gave him wholesome
water to cool his hot desires: no other cates got he, yet was it no worse
then the Queen her self ate of.

This stately service, and homely fare, scarce pleased the Hermet, yet still he
hoped for better, but his hopes were vain, for the cloth was taken up, and one
asked him if he pleased to go to bed? To this he was willing, hoping now to
sleep out the remembrance of his hard fare: but being come to his Chamber, a
sudden joy extinguished the grief he would have slept out; for he saw no
worser woman then the Queen should be his bedfellow. So quickly vndressing
himself he went in bed to her (not forgetgetting in his thoughts to praise her
for obeying her Husbands will) where having line a while, thinking of some
strange things, lust and the evil disposition of his mind began to infect
his soul so, that with as kind embrace he besought the Queen to show some
mercy toward his hot affection.

This virtuous Queen seeing this Hermet basely lascivious, rung a Bell: then
presently came in four women, who took this Hermet and cast him in a Cisterne
full of water, that stood in the Chamber: he being well cooled, they took him
forth, placing him in the bed as they found him. There he lay shiuering with
cold a good space; but at length his blood being heated, he fell to thinking
with himself: how perchance the Queen showed her self thus chaste, to take
suspicion from her women, and that she might all the night after play the
wanton securely: His burning Lust, seconding this Opinion, made him once more
^enter a ducking: so turning himself to the Queen, he began with this speech:

Most rare, beauteous, admirable, and vnparalelled woman, I will not only
commend thee for thy beauty, and greatness of Birth and place; but also I will
adore thee with more then humane worship, for the extraordinary understanding
which thou have above others of thy sex. With what a grave and sober carriage
do thou hide thy hot affections, which inwardly do burn thee? Oh it is
strange! therewith not only blinding the eyes of strangers, but also thy
nearest attendants: now I conceive why thou command me to be hurled in the
water Cisterne, it was thy policy (thou wonder of thy sex) to avoid suspicion
in thy servants.

I knew this well, and therefore did willingly endure the same, that I might the
more freely enjoy thy beauty now: therewith 'gan he lo clip her in his arms;
which she perceiving, rung the Bell: her women presently coming in, took
this Yongster, ducking him twice so much as they did before, so that they laid
him in the bed half drowned: and having done, presently voided they the
Chamber.

The Hermet being come to himself, had a better opinion of K. Oswald and his
Wife, for he then held them for the holiest people in England: and his hot
blood being cooled, he lay still that night, not daring to stir, lest she
giving the alarm, his enemies would come upon him and put their cruelty in
execution.

The morning being come, he kindly took his leave of the Queen, telling her
he had sufficiently tried the Kings severe and holy life, and would ever after
give testimony of the same: so went he to his Cell, being ashamed of this his
foolish attempt, and never after would look into other men's lives, but mended
his own.

She having ended her Tale, they all said, This Queen was a virtuous woman,
and worthy to be had in memory, but she was not to be any president for them,
seeing she was a Queen, and they were but Fishwiues.

Truly (quoth a Fishwife of Kingstone that fate next to her) if we would be
thus chaste, alas, our husbands would not suffer us to continue to; therefore,
for my part, I will never go about it: I will tell you a Tale of one that was
a great woman (though she was no Queen) and yet kept a friend besides her
husband.

The description of the Fishwife of Kingstone.
This Kingstone wife,
Loved little strife.
She was a bosse,
That loved to toss
The Ale pot round.
Few was there found
Could with her drink,
But they would wink,
And fall asleep:
Till she would creep,
She Would not give ore,
But call for more.
Loving the pot,
All lost she not:
For she had got
A nose full hot,
And red as blood.
Within it stood,
Di'monds shining.
Lower declining,
Stood a Rubie.
If I true be,
There were more
Then half a score,
Which showed like
The sparks you strike,
From forth a flint:
Such heat was in it.
Men might suppose,
(Seeing her nose)
What broth she loved.
When she had moved
Her self, and spit,
She spoke this writ.

Her Tale.
A Certain great Lady, having to her husband a man old and unfit to satisfy
her youthful desires, asked her Confessor whether she might not enjoy (her
desire being hot, and her husband unable) a friend which might supply her want,
caused by her husbands weakness? The Friar (hoping she would make choice of
him) told her she might, for the sin was but little, and did deserve little
or no penance. She thanked him for this kind absolution, telling him she only
took this careful course, that her husband might not die without issue,
having his memory buried with him in the dust.

The Priest (still hoping he was the man she would select) said, her care was
good, and no whit offensive, if she chose a friend that would keep it from the
world. She said, her diligence would choose such a one, and so they parted: the
Priest being still in the mind that he should be the man.

But this Lady meant otherwise: for she chose a Gentleman that sometime had
been a suter unto her, who loving her dearly, and she him, they enjoyed each
others company without suspect of any, only two of her trusty servants knowing
of it.

The Priest perceiving he was not the man appointed for this business, vexed
himself in thinking what a fool he was, that he did not make proffer of his
service, when she first opened her mind unto him. Thus thinking of her
beauty, and his neglect, he vowed to perform something which might give him
content; with this resolve went he to a pleasant walk thereby, where
oftentimes the Lady used; there having obscured him self, he might perceive
her with her Lover coming that way. He lying close, and listening to hear
something that might be for his advantage: amongst other things he heard her
ask, why he had chosen Hercules for his watchword, seeing there were many
words, and names, which were more proper to that business? The Priest stayed not
to hear his answer, (thinking he had enough in knowing of that word which had
the power to bring him to her bed) but closely got him home, waiting the
coming of night, which he prayed might hasten on, that he might enjoy the
pleasure he so wished for.

To be short, her friend and she parted when they saw time, and night being
come, she went to bed, where she lay alone: (for her old husband was at Court:)
long had she not lain there: but the Priest (being well acquainted with all
the turnings in the house) came to her Chamber door and knocked: She asked who
was there? Hercules, quoth the Priest. With that she rose, and (thinking it to
be her Sweetheart) let him in. The Priest caught her in his arms, kissing and
using other dalliance, so long, till he had fully satisfied his hot desires:
Then quietly took he his leave without words, which she wondered at.

Long had he not been gone, when came her Sweetheart, who softly knocked at
the Chamber door: she hearing it, asked who was there? Hercules, said he. She
wondering at his sudden return, opened the door, and asked him why he came? To
enjoy thy sweet company (said he) and to pass away this night in such sports
as shall content us both.

She wondering to see him, and he not knowing what she meant, (and thinking
she mis doubted his loyalty) prayed her to tell him the meaning of those
words, which seemed more strange to him, then rattling Welsh, or wild Irish:
and he protested likewise, that but even then he came from his Chamber.

The Lady now knew that she was deceived, and that some crafty knave had got
at her hands a more then ordinary kindness: and 'cause he should suspect
nothing, she told him that she dreamed she had inioyed his company that night,
and that he parted from her after an unkind manner.

Tut, said he, dreams are but false shadows: now have thou the substance
those shadows did present. With such loving words passed they the night: and
morning being come, her friend kindly took his leave, secretly going to his
Chamber.

She being vexed in her mind that she was deceived, and not knowing by whom,
passed away that day, hoping ere long to entrap her cunning Lover.

Night being come, after her usual manner she went to bed, where she had not
long been, but the Priest (his appetite being rather sharpened, then any way
slacked) came to the door, softly knocking. She hoping it was he she looked
for, went to the door, demanding who was there? Hercules, said the Priest: she
knowing it to be him (by his voice) that had deceived her, prayed Hercules to
come in and act a new labor: and under color of using him kindly, she felt
by the short hair on his head, that it was the Priest.

Being glad she had found her too officious friend, she entreated him to repose
himself on the bed, till she cleared the house of some servants that she
heard up in the next room: to which the Priest was very willing, being loath to
be descryed at his going forth by any of the household servants.

But she had another meaning: for she called by her two servants, servants
which she trusted with her chief secrets, bidding them go into her Chamber,
where they should find the Priest, whom they should bind, and with a sharp
knife (which she gave to them) cut out one of his genitours. They obeying her
command, rushed into the Chamber, where they found the Priest (fearing the
noise be heard) crept under the bed, whom they drew out by the heels, and
bound his hands, and feet. The Priest seeing them handle him thus roughly,
entreated them to forbear, saying, he was a Churchman, and it was sacrilege
to offer him violence. He seeing this prevailed him nothing, set out his
throat: but they soon stopped the same, and with a sharp knife, and a quick
hand, made him lighter by a stone.

Then called they their Lady, who seemed to pity Sir John, and bid them bind
up his wound, putting thereto salve which she gave them. They having done this,
she hung a paper about his neck, bidding them unbind him, and turn him
forth the doors: which they performed, and shutting the door after him, they
went to bed laughing. The poor Priest hyed him home, getting to bed, where he
took little rest for the pain he felt; but he passed away the night in
cursing the Lady, on whom he could not tell how to be revenged. The morning
being come, he espied the writing which hung about his neck; he opening the
same, found therein this written: Priest, if that thou chance to tell,
What pleasure through thy wit befell:
Likewise report not without care,
What thou have lost, and what they are:
But never grieve there is none that can,
But must confess thou art half a man.
But leave thy riding, lest that stone
Be carved too, then have thou none.
So Sir, farewell: thou have made amends,
For thy deceit: and we are friends.


At this the Friar bit his lip, wishing he had as much power over her life, as
he had over that paper: but not knowing how to mend himself, but by looking to
his wound, he rested himself content, and ventured to steal no more flesh:
and the Lady inioyed her friend quietly, being never after troubled with the
Friar.

Now tell me (quoth this Fishwife) if this Lady be not as much praiseworthy
for her wit, as the other was for her honesty? Most of them confirmed her
argument to be sound, and the rest confirmed it by their silence. Then the last
Fishwife which was of Hampton, said, but for a woman out of the abundance of
her wit, to abuse any man, or her self, in such dishonest courses, I think it
not good: 'cause oftentimes the harm which she intends, and the shame which
she deserves, lights on her self: which I will make good by this example.

The description of the Fishwife of Hampton.
This same creature
Had a feature,
Would have moved
A man to loved.
A body sound.
A face full round.
A forehead hye.
A full black eye.
A soft bright hair.
A skin full fair.
A color ruddy:
And not muddy.
A chin dimpled.
Nose not pimpled.
She had a lip,
Would make one skip,
To have a bit:
So sweet was it.
She Would not lowre.
And look sour.
Nor in feasting,
Be protesting
She was no such:
But she would bide tuch.
Beauties rich store.
And eke much more
Of honest goodness:
And hated lewdness.

Her Tale.
IN Devonshire (sometime) there dwelt a maiden, to whom nature (having been
something liberal) gave such beauty, that she in all men's judgments was held
the comeliest and fairest creature in all those parts: she being a right woman,
took notice of her good parts, and withal grew so proud, that she rewarded
all those which honestly sought to enjoy her love, either with scoffs or
unkind denials.

A young Gentleman of that country, long time loved this same unkind and
unmatched creature, but never could he receive better comfort at her hands,
then unkind answers, or scornful looks. One day (not willing to live
longer between hope and fear) he resolved to have of her either a flat
denial, or firm grant; and with this resolution went to her, to whom he spoke
after this manner:

Fair Millisant, long time (amongst other of your suitors) have I dearly loved
you, yet never did I receive the least token of acceptance at your hands:
disdain you my Birth? I am a Gentleman, though not descended of the highest
houses, yet not of the meanest. Mislike you my wealth? I have enough to
maintain a private Gentleman. Mislike you my parts of body? They are as nature
gave them, I could wish they were more pleasing to your mind. Do you
mis-doubt my love to you? Set me some task in man's possibility to perform,
and it shall confirm the same. Tell me for what it is you cannot love me, and
I will reform the same, and by fashioning my self to your liking, give you
testimony of my love.

No whit was she moved with his pure love, but after her usual manner
determined to abuse the same; and to that purpose she answered him thus:

Sir, such little liberty has our sex, and men such corrupt judgments, that
our mirth is counted immodesty, our ciuillest looks lascivious, our words
loose, our attires wanton, and all our doings apish: to shun these slanders,
it behooves us to be careful over our selves, and not through our kindnesses
to give inconstant and dissembling men occasion to speak ill. I tax not you
with this common fault; yet have I bad no proof that your love is any other
then dissembling; therefore till I have made proof of the same, by your
obedience in executing my will, look not for any kind favor at my hands.

These words gave him some hope: and he being willing to express his love to
her, desired her to acquaint him with that task whose performance would give
him that great happiness of her love: and he vowed to do it, excepting no
danger.

She seeing him thus blind with her love, that for her sake he would undergo
any danger, with a cruel and unmerciful heart uttered these words: Sir, I
shall try you whether your love is of that pureness you praise it for; I
charge you, as ever you did respect me, or hope to enjoy me, for this two
years coming to keep a voluntary silence, not speaking to any creature
living, or to sing, or use any kind of sound, whereby your meaning may be
understood: this is my pleasure, which if you perform not, never see me: if
you will do it, let your silence and sudden departure be sign of consent.

The Gentleman hearing this unkind task, was almost struck dead with grief,
yet said he nothing, but observing her command, presently departed with silence.

Being thus silenced by that unmerciful Maid, he left his friends, and went
into Cornwall, where he was entertained by the Duke (he being an excellent
Musician) to teach his children to dance and play on sundry Instruments wherein
he had skill: In his service he bore himself so worthily, and used such
diligence (...) the child on that the Duke delighted in his com-paring (...)
other Gentlemen and sought all the means (...) his speech? (...) seeing all
(...) cost was in vain, and that the (...) did him no good, he caused it to be
publisshed that whosoever could restore his speech, ^^ue (...) pounds should be
their reward: ^ut they not performing (...) (...) should give the Duke so much
(...) or else have imprisonment till they paid it. This large, but ^ea^efull
pro^^se, was (...) that ^o think that she could with one word do that which so
great a Duke could not undo, with all his exp^^^^ and care She knowing it was
in her power to restore his speech and being covetous of the great reward, she
went into Cornwall, proffering her self before the Duke to perform the cure,
or undergo the punishment.

The Duke being glad that he had one that would undertake the cure, bid her to
take her time for the performance of it; She set down three weeks, and that she
not performing it in that time, was liable to his sharpest punishments: so with
a g^^^ courage did she begin her cure.

The Gentleman seeing his hard-hearted Love come to be his Physician, would
neither by sign, or any word make known, that he had any remembrance what she
was but seemed to her as to a strong (...) though she gave him many kind
words, ex^^^ing her (...) folly in that she knew him not to be of that worth
and estimation, which she now saw he was of. All this would get never a word
from him; which she sheeing, entreated to break that rash and foolish ^ow she
had caused him to make, (...) she would give him sufficient (...) of her love;
thus continued she the spa^e of twelve days, but could never get any
cheerful look at his hand: she now fearing he would be revenged on her, and
by his wilful silence suffer her either to pay the money, or else to lie in
prison with a kind and loving countenance said these words to him:

Sir if ever you loved me (as you vowed you did) let not my (...) be any longer
cause of your neglecting me, (...) are sufficient testimony of the grief I
have for it, and (...) offer up my love to you as satisfation for my former
fault: Oh then be merciful, and loving me, (...) sense, and through my loving
duty, let me (...) good opinion of me: with these (...) (...) ^oying to cause
him (...).

All this predaa^^ed her nothing, for he (...) A^ her one word: yet with a
seeming unwillingness did he accept her embraces, when he (...) enjoyed, (...).

But to be (...) come, and she could not for (...) and the Duke seeing her
folly (he undertaking his (...), and not performing it) caused her to be (...),
(...) (not being able to pay the money (...) she had cured him) till she (...).
That time being come, he went to the Duke, (...) him to pardon his long wilful
silence, paused by (...), withal felling (...) and how he had (...).

The Duke was exceeding (...) to (...) him speak, (...) praised his wit for
using so ungentle a person so untowardly: yet blamed him withal, for keeping
so (...), and unreasonable a vow so straightly: (...) both having had (...)
enough for their folly, he (...) them both, continuing his love to the
Gentleman, and rel^^^ng her, who by that (...) has got a great belly with her
awise physic, but he that owed the ^rait, would not acknowledge it: so that
she was to looke^ new customer, or else endure the open shame belonging to a
S^^mpe^: which of them she did, I know not, either of them was bad enough: and
had that Gentlewoman had no better fortune in abusing the Friar, then this by
exercising her with on this Gentleman, she had deserved no more then this
foolish woman does.

It is ture (said the Brainford Fishwife:) and since it conernes us not, let us
leave this pro and contra, let every tub stand on it own bottom: and so our
mirth and ^ourney ends about one time: for yonder is Kingstone, whose large and
conscionable pots are praised throughout England; whose Ale is of great
strength and force, as our Western Watermens sick brains can witness. Then
since it is so near, let us not be factious, and contend for trifles; but let
us seek to enjoy that which we came for, mirth; that best preserver of our
lives: so land us with all speed, honest Waterman.

They hearing her speak but reason, agreed to be ruled by her, and therefore
gave her the name of Captain. With all haste (and ease) as I could possible,
landed I my merry Fare of Fishwiues, who went straight to the sign of the
Bear, where they found such good liquor, that they stayed by it all night:
where I left them, and so ended my journey, Westward for Smelts.

FINIS.

