THE CVRE OF A Hard-heart. First Preached in diverse Sermons, by Master
WELSTHED, Resident at Bloxford in Dorcetshire. Since digested into Questions
and Answers for the Hungry.

Showing Hardness of Heart what it is, with the Causes, Effects, and Remedies.

Uprightness has boldness.

IEREM. 8.22. Je there no Balm at Gilead? is there no Physician there? Why
then is not the health of the Daughter of my people recovered.

LONDON, Printed by Will. Stansby for Samuel Man, dwelling at the Sign of the
Swan, in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

bookplate of Emmanuel College Cambridge Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae


TO ALL THOSE Who for the present are hard-hearted, or heareafter may be, all
softnes, comfort, and speedy deliverance.
WHen I considered the multitude of Enemies, which enuiron and fight against
our souls, in this our Pilgrimage, marching out of the Wilderness of this
world to our heavenly home: me thinks then that all aids, furtherances, and
armours which may help to conduct and guard us this way in safety, covering
our heads in the day of our spiritual Battle, are too few (be they never so
many) in regard (as the Apostle speaks) we fight but not against flesh and
blood only; against Principalities and Powers, etc. the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil: who goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. By reason of whose surpassing subtlety, variety of shapes,
tentations, inticements and the like: (sometimes transforming himself into an
Angel of light) do what we can it comes to pass (whilst we watch not, gaze
too much on outward things delight therein, mistake, abuse, mis-apply some
things, delay some, either slacking, omitting, or slubbering over holy duties,
grow negligent, dull, weary of goodness, venture on evil company, and on small
sins; as being little ones) that we are overtaken with this most dangerous
disease of Hardness of heart, which if it continue uncured, proves to be the
forerunner of Everlasting Destruction. Wherefore this being a disease, whereof
in one kind, the whole Church has formerly complained (Isa. 63.17.) and yet
may. That I might both help my self (who have most need of all) and others
thus ouer-taken: I have for this cause sent forth this small Treatise unto the
light. The Notes whereof (by Gods Providence coming to my hands:) were
digested thus into Questions and Answers for the more Perspicuitie and
Distinctions sake, and satisfaction of the meanest Capacity. Wherein if any of
you shall find a word in due time: to comfort and refresh your weary souls:
Give God all the Glory, and pray for those who had a hand herein; that they may
yet be a further means of help to the distressed.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, I. HEART,

The Cure of a Hard-Heart.
S. GOod Sir, you are well met; if you are at leisure, I should be glad to
have little Conference with you.


M. With all my heart; I can afford to be at leisure at any time, when my
conference may do any good. But what is the matter that you look so heavily
this evening? is there any thing troubles you?


S. Yes truly: I have been disquieted in my mind a long time; but especially
since this morning, when I was at your Sermon; wherein by occasion of Gods
hardening of Pharoahs heart, you discoursed of the nature, and kinds, and
consequents of hardness of heart. Which I must confess, I understood but
confusedly, yet that which I did understand has much troubled me: and
therefore now I should think my self much beholden to you, if you would
inform my judgment therein a little more distinctly.


M. Your desire is good, and God forbid that I should be wanting to you
therein. I could wish that all that understand me not at any time, would take
the same course in enquiring farther of me after this manner.


S. I pray God we may be thankful for so great a benefit, as we enjoy in
your public Ministry: and as I perceive by this your readiness, we might
make better use of it, then we do in private Conference.


M. Well sir, I pray what is the thing that you most stick at in my mornings
Sermon?


S. It is not one, but many things; and therefore if I shall not be
ouer-troublesome, I would gladly be more distinctly informed by you touching
the whole point, that you then handled.


M. I am very well content it should be so; neither shall I account it any
trouble at all, if thereby you may receive any farther satisfaction. Wherefore
propose your doubts in order, and I shall endeavor as God shall enable me, to
resolve them.


S. First then I would entreat you to show me what is that same hardness of
heart, that you spoke of?


M. For you better understanding hereof, you must in the first place know, that
this phrase of speech is not proper and natural, but borrowed: neither of the
terms being taken in their original, and native signification, but by a
figurative translation, pointing out other things then at first sight they
seem to offer to our view. As, first, by the heart you may not understand that
fleshly substance in man's body, which Philosophers observe to be Primu^ viuens,
and vltimum moriens, although in that sense the word be sometimes used in
Scripture, as, 2. King. 9.24. but that more spiritual part of man, which is,
as it were, the heart of that heart, that is, the soul, with all the powers,
and faculties thereof, the mind, will, and affections and that which is in a
sort compounded of them all, the Conscience: which because it keeps its
chiefest residence, and exercises its most principal operations in and by the
heart, is usually in Scirpture known by that name, as Pro. 23.26. Ier. 17.9.1.
Ioh. 3.20.


S. But how can the Soul, whch is a spiritual substance, be hard, or hardened?


M. That is it, that I was about to show you in the second place. Whereas
hardness and softness are qualities properly belonging to compounded bodies,
resulting from the different mixture of those first qualities, drought and
moisture: they are likewise figuratively applied to the heart, or soul of man,
which being a spirit is not capably of bodily qualities. Now what is meant by
this hardness we now speak of, you shall the better conceive, if you consider,
first, the comparison whence this appellation is originally deduced; secondly,
the contrary, by which it is yet farther illustrated.


S. Show me then I pray you, what the comparison is, from which this
appellation is drawn.


M. The soul of man confirmed in sinful courses, is compared in Scripture to
a stone, as in express terms to an Adamant, Zach. 7.12. Which as it is the
hardest of other bodies, so it has sundry properties arising from, or joined
with this hardness, which do notably set forth the disposition of the soul in
such a state, wherein it is usually said to be hardened.


S. What are those properties, wherein the heart of man is so fitly resembled
to a stone?


M. A stone you know, is a dead, and senseless body, cold, dry, incapable of
moisture, vnpliable, vnyeelding* nay resisting, and beating back whatsoever
lights on it.


S. True; but how do these properties express the disposition of man's heart?
is that also a dead, and sensles body?


M. No; but many times it is said to be dead in sin, destitute of the life of
grace, 1. Tim 5.6. Reu. 3.1.
even whilst alive to nature; in as much as it is altogether inactive to the
performance of any good, nay insensible of any thing that may tend to the
spiritual good thereof. And hence it is that men are said to be blind, deaf,
in a dead sleep, Reu. 3.17. Romans 11.8.
or slumber; to have gross, fat, brawny hearts, 2. Tim. 4.3.
feared Consciences, and as it were a think skin drawn over their hearts,
such as is on the laborers hand, and trauailers heel, which though it be
pinched, or pierced, scarce feels any thing. For men in such a case, though
they be laden with a burden unsupportable of their own sins, and Gods wrath,
yet groan not under it; nay, being every way most wretched, and miserable,
Reu. 3.7.
perceive it not: let the judgments of God, as loud and terrible, as
thunder-clappes, sound in their ears, they start not; nay being brought
within view of Gods judgments, yea, within the reach of them, they never
stir, or hasten to escape; but lie still like Jonas in the tempest, Ion. 1.5.
Pro. 23.34.5. See Isa. 29, 9. Ier. 25.16.
or the drunkard on the top of the Mast. As for the sweet and gracious promises
of God, though sweeter then honey to the taste more delightful then music to
the ear, more pleasant then the sweetest odours to the smell, they neither
taste, nor relish, rejoice, nor delight in them, they are not at all affected
with them, or moved to long after them. Thus are they like Nabal, 1. Sam.
25.27. Zeph. 1.12.
when his heart died in him, and he became as a stone altogether dead,
senseless, frozen in their dregs.


S. But suppose they are for the present dead, and senseless; are they also as
a stone, incapable of impression for the time to come?


M. Surely yes, so long as they retain this disposition of theirs unchanged;
except the supernatural power of Gods spirit in a manner miraculously change
them. The natural man, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2^^4.
perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them;
Ier. 4.22. Mar. 6.52. and 8.17. and 16 14. Ioh. 3.4. and 4.11. and 12.37. Isa.
48.4. Zach. 7.11.
he cannot so long as he continues in his natural deadness, and
senslesnesse, how quick and apprehensiue soever he be in other things.
Neither is he in himself apt to be wrought upon, or farmed to any good, by
any means whatsoever. In which respect he is more fitly resembled to a stone,
as the learned observe, then to any other thing; for though iron and steel be
as hard as stones, yet fire will so mollify them, as to make them pliable to
any form, or fashion whatsoever; only a stone, well it may be broken, or
ground to powder, it will never be softened, or made to bough or bend. Notable
examples hereeof we have in Cain, in Pharaoh, in Jeroboam. How little does
Caine relent, Genesis 4.
either by being fairly forewarned, or after more severely called or account?
How far is he from either shame, or remorse, reverence of Gods glorious
presence, or fear of his terrible threatenings! The like may be said of the
other. There is one property of a stone behind, which some men also come not
short of; and that is resisting whatsoever falls, or is cast upon it. Hence men
are compared to the deaf Adder, Psalm. 58.4
wilfully stopping their ears; and that which is usually rendered the Spirit of
slum^er, Romans 11.8.
is not unfitly translated by some, the Spirit of compunction, implying a kind
of fretting, Reu 11.18.
chafing, and violent stirring against the Word rebuking: Act. 5.33
as in those that brast for anger at the Apostles, that gnashed with their
teeth at Steven. Cap. 7.54.



S. We have heard enough of the comparison; let us see now, how this is
farther illustrated by the contrary.


M. We shall find the contrary to a hard heart, (which by the rule of
proportion must needs be a soft, and tender heart,) set forth in Scrpture by
sundry properties; as that it is Romans 2.29.
a circumcised heart, Luk 8.25
an honest and good heart, Psa. 51.26
a broken and contrite, Eze. 36.26
a fleshy and relenting, 2 King. 22 19.
melting, Isa. 66.^.
trembling, humble, and obedient heart, ^. Pet. 1.2
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, Eze. 36.25
washed by his grace, Mat. 3.11
heated, and inflamed by his holy spirit; All which by the contrary show what
are the properties of an hard, and stony heart.


S. Can you out of all that you have said, gather me a brief description of
hardness of heart?


M. Hardness of Heart what it is.
Yes, and I think it may fitly be described thus That it is an indispotion of
the soul of man, whereby his mind being blinded, his wil-peruerted, his
affections enthralled to sin, he is prone to commit any wickedness without
reluctance, or remorse; and to neglect, or resist both admonitions from
without, and the motions of Gods spirit within, which might withdraw him
therefrom.


S. Well Sir, now I understand reasonably well, what this hardness of heart
is; I would willingly learn of you in the next place, to whom it is incident.


M. Before I show you that, I must first aquaint you, with the several kinds,
The kinds of Hardness of Heart.
and degrees of it; which as they are different in themselves, have likewise
for their residence diverse, and very different subjects.


S. Why? are their more kinds of it then one? how many, I pray; and how
distinguished?


M. There are three kinds, distinguished by their proper and immediate causes;
first, Natural; secondly, Voluntary; thirdly Judiciary or penal.


S. What hardness of heart is that, 1 Natural.
which you term Natural.


M. It is that which men naturally bring with them into the world, derived from
the corrupt loins of old Adam, who by voluntary Apostasy from his allegiance
first hardened his own heart in sin, and then propagated the same hardness of
heart to all his posterity, making that unto them hereditary, and natural,
which was first in him voluntary, and personal.


S. Who are subject to this natuturall hardness of heart?


M. Even every child of Adam, that is, all men in the world, that ever have
been, are, or shall be, (Christ only excepted, who as he was supernaturally
made of a woman, Gal. 4.4.
not begotten by the virtue of man, after the ordinary course of natural
generation, so was in all things like unto us, Heb. 4.15.
sin only excepted;) so that herein both elect and reprobate share alike:
Ephe 2.1. and 4 18.19.
the one as well as the other being dead in trespasses, and sins naturally;
having their understandings darkened, because of the hardness of their hearts;
which being past feeling, have given themselves to wantonness. Whence God
makes that promise generally to his chosen, who are to be renewed by his spirit,
Ezech. 36.26.
that he will take out of their bodies the stony hearts, which they have by
nature, and give them an heart of flesh.


S. Why? but, do we not see many good natures, which even vnrenued, are of a
milder and more ingenuous temper, as if they were even, made of softer metal?
me thinks you should not account these naturally hard-hearted.


M. This is a common error of ours to commed good natures, as if there were
any goodness at all in men by natures? indeed all are not in there natural
dispositions equally bad; and there is some appearance of goodness in some; which
yet is not from nature, but from restraining grace; nor yet that such, as
argues any true spiritual tenderness; the best being as far (for all their
ingenuitie) from yielding to the gracious motions of Gods spirit till they be
changed, as they that are of more rough, and froward natures.


S. Is there no way then to avoid, or prevent this natural hardness of heart?


M. Truly no, expept a man could prevent his being borne, or being borne of
corrupt, and sinful parents: since that which is borne of flesh, is flesh.
Ioh. 3.6.



S. What say you then to the children of the regenerate? are not they freed
from their hard, and stony hearts, as their parents are?


M. The regenerate indeed are freed in a sort from the natural hardness of
their hearts, but not entirely, only in part; and they beget children not by
virtue of that part which is regenerate, and spiritual, but by the virtue of
that natural power, which remains yet tainted with sin. So that it comes to
pass in this case as it does in the growing of your corn: you sow clean
corn, threshed, winowed, and purged from that straw, and chafe, that grew up
together with it; yet the corn that springs thence grows not without both
straw and chafe. So, albeit it in the regenerate there is a kind of
threshing, and winowing away of that natural corruption that grew up together
with them, by the work of Gods grace; yet the issue, that proceeds from them,
receiving its benig not from grace, but from nature, retains the old
corruption of nature still.


S. If there be no way to ^^uoyd this contagious evil, (...) good may the
consideration teach us?


M. We may learn from the consideration thereof;

1. To lay the fault of our obstinacy upon our selves, not on God, or any other
Agent without us: for howsoever God is said to harden, yet hence it is evident he
does it not by making hard that, which was soft before; but only leaving a
man, who was hard-hearted naturally, to be farther hardened by Satan, and his
own corruption.

2. To be thankful with all humility unto God for his grace, if we find
our selves in any measure softened.

3. To show our selves meek, patient, and compassionate toward those that yet
continue hardened. Tit. 3.2.3.

4. To Take heed of giving way to, or favoring our selves this in our natural
hardness, least it prove actual; 2 Voluntary, or Actual.
and voluntary.


S. What is that hardness of heart which you call actual, or voluntary?


M. This is properly, when men having means of grace, yet wilfully abuse them,
or neglect them; securely going on in their sins, till by custom in sin
they loose all sense, and feeling of it, or of Gods judgments against it, as
Zach. 7.11.12.


S. To whom is this kind of hardness incident.


M. It is pecular to those that have, or may have the means of grace: but
among them common in a sort both to the elect, and reprobate, but with great
difference.


S. Wherein consist this difference?


M. In the reprobate this hardness of heart, is both total, that is, in the
whole mind, will, and affections; and final, that is, ever to continue without
all change, or alteration. In the elect it is otherwise, whether we consider
them before their conversion, or afterward. 1. Before their conversion the
difference is not so much in respect of themselves, or their present
disposition; they being then (to all seeming,) even as reprobates, wholly auerse
from God, with rheir whole heart resisting his will, abusing his goodness, and
for the time waxing worse and worse, even by the means of grace; but only in
Gods purpose, who intends not to leave them thus still, but in his good time to
reclame them, as he did Paul, Zacheus, and others. 2. After their conversion
the difference is more evident; their hardness of heart being then not total,
but in part, mixed with softness and tenderness, even through every part of
the soul; so that though they sometimes resist God indeed, neglect the means
of grace, profit not as they should, and might do, by his Word, and Fatherly
corrections; yet this is not out of wilfulness, or with full consent, but from
ignorance, error, oversight, weakness of faith, frailty of the flesh, the
subtitle of Satan, and strength of his tentations; not without some reluctance
for the present, and when they come to themselves, repentance.


S. But what is the danger of being in this estate?


M. The danger hereof is very great, and that many ways.

1. In it self it may seem an evil great enough, depriving a man of his
Synteresis, the light of natural Principles, wherein he becomes equal to a
beast; nay, of all touch of conscience, wherein he is worse then a Devil. And
so long as one continues therein, he still grows worse and worse, without all
stay, till he comes to the very height of all impiety. In which respect this
evil is worse then any outward calamity. Jobs miseries were no way comparable
to it, for by them he profited, and out of them all he had a gracious issue
nay, all Pharaohs plagues besides come short of it; for had this been away,
they all had soon been at an end. Even a wounded spirit comes somewhat
behind it: for though it be an evil unsupportable, yet it sends a man to
Christ for remedy, while this lulls him asleep, so that he perceiues not his
misery. 2. But it is most aggrauated by the fearful consequents; it being a
high way to that unpardonable sin, Mar. 3.29. and once grown to the height,
a plain mark of a reprobate; Romans 11.7. Deuteronomy. 2.30. and 1. Sam. 2.25. Romans
2.5.
and consequently, a forerunner not only to temporal, but to eternal
destruction.


S. What I pray you, are the means, and degrees, by which men usually come to
this great, and dangerous evil, and ascend to the height of it?


M. The causes of it are many; whereof some make way for it, others more
immediately lead a man into it. As, 1. Natural hardness of heart is the root
of all actual hardness, so that if that be let alone unmortified, the branches
will soon bud forth, and show themselves.

2. Ignorance is a great means of confirming, Ephesians 4.18.19. Ioh. 3.19. 2 Pet
3.5. Job. 21.14* Prou. 1.24.
and increasing that natural hardness; specially if wilful, joined with
contempt of knowledge, and the means thereof; blindness is usually
accompanied with boldness.

3. Unbelief, and distrust opens a great gap to farther obstinacy: an
unfaithful heart, soon grows an evil heart, to depart away from the living
God, ready to be hardened by the deceitfullnes of sin. Heb. 3.12.13.


4. Judging according to sense and reason, maruailously strengthens
infidelity; as when from present impunitie, men take occasion to presume on
Gods lenity; Psalm. 50.21 Romans 2 4.
as dissoulte scholars bear themselves bold upon their Masters gentleness; Isa.
57.11.
or to despise his threatenings, Eccl. 8.11.
because they are not presently executed, as birds do a scarcrow, because it
moves not; or else when from the afflictions of the godly men, are ready to
call Gods providence in question; Psalm. 73.13
or lastly, upon observing of eminent gifts of learning, or civility in
Heritikes, and profane persons, to sooth up themselves in superstition, and
profaneness; Exodus 7.22.
as Pharaoh seeing his Sorcerers do the same miracles that Moses did, hartned
himself in his impious contempt of God.

5. Committing of some gross sinnne is like a blow in the brainepan, or fall
from a Tower, which stuns a man, and leaves him as dead for the time;
stupifying his conscience, and making a man suffer shipwreck of his faith; 1 Timothy 1.19
as we may see in David's adultery and murder.

6. Hypocritical hiding of sin helps to draw a skin over the conscience,
Pro. 28.13.
and to set a bar against the grease of God: as we may see in the same
example of David, according to his own confession, Psalm. 32.3.4.

7. Custom in any sin by little and little insensibly takes away the sense
and feeling of sin.

Mat. 13.22 Luke 21.34
8. Pride of heart, worldliness, and voluptuousness cause the heart to swell
or so lull it asleep, that it becomes insensible of any thing.

9. We are led into all these evils for the most part by neglecting our watch
over our own hearts; for the preventing of sins deceitfulnes; which steals
upon us, and beguile us;

1. In the doing of good, by

Heb. 3.13.
1. Delaying, and putting off good purposes to another time,

2. Contenting our selves with the good we have, and standing at a stay, Heb.
6.1.4.
a dangerous forerunner of a downfall.

3. Suffering good motions to cool after some extraordinary fit of zeal or
forwardnes, through pride, and neglect of former jealousy; as in David, and
Hezekias. 2. Sam. 11. 2. Chron. 32.25.
Hereby we grow, 1. to use religious exercises perfunctorily; 2. now and then
without necessity to omit them; 3* at last quite and clean to forsake them,
and all desire unto them; in which case if God should leave us, we should be
like that empty house, Mat. 12.44 45.
which was not long without a tenant.

2. In the avoiding of evil, by

Mat. 26.41 Heb. 3.15.
1. Omitting preservatives against it, as, watching, prayer, Christian
admonition, etc.

2. Giving way to the first motions of it, as David when he gave himself leave
to be idle, and to look wantonly abroad; or dallying with it, as Eve did with
the devil.

3. Remitting by little and little our former hatred against it. Hence it comes
to pass that sin which at first seemed an insupportable Psalm 3^.4.
in time proves, first, less heavy, we are sorry for it, but not so cast
down with it as in former times, Pro. 30.20.
light and easy, it Psalm. 14.4. Iere. 5.3.
altogether insensible we perceive it not, fourthly, Job. 20.12.
it gives us good contentment. Hence men fall easily, first, to customary
committing of it, secondly, to excusing of it, thirdly, to defending it,
fourthly, to glory in it, which is the height of impious profaneness and
hardness of heart. Every one of these declining steps is dangerous, and
therefore happy is he, that can keep his heart in that perfect hatred of sin:
he that descends to the first step is in some danger, yet not excluded from
the gracious incitation. Mat. 11.28. if he stay himself in time: he that goes
on to the next is in greater danger, yet in possibility to be reclaimed, if
Christ look back upon him, as he did upon Peter. But if one come to the
third, his estate is already deadly, almost desperate; the forth and last step
helps only to make up the measure of sin, and to lead a man the more
quietly and securely to hell.


S. Why? but must a man needs come to this height, that gives but a little way
to sinful delights? me thinks a man may do this, and yet detest sins extreme
impiety.


M. 2 King. 8.13.
Just this was Hazaels conceit of himself; he thought it strange, that ever he
should do such horrible things as the Prophet foretold of him, and rejected it
with a kind of abomination; yet after came not one jot short of fulfilling it.
Alas? we are not able to conceive, whereunto the wickedness of our hearts may
bring us, if we give way to it, and therein be lest unto our selves.


S. But how may a man know whether he be overtaken herewith or no?


M. Some light hereunto a man may have from that former descrption of hardness
of heart, and the several degrees thereof: But it may be discerned specially
by these signs, or makes.

1. A man's senssesnesse of his own estate. For where there is no sense, their
commonly is no life. If you have a stone in your bladder, or reins, you
presently complain, and are exceedingly troubled. And is it possible, think
you, that a man should have a stone in his heart, and be alive, and not
perceive it? You have heard that we have all by nature hard and stony hearts;
and this hardness in part still remains in the best. So that they, whosoever
they are, that never complain hereof, nay, that having never been humbled
hereby, can rest secure of their present and future well-doing; show evidently,
that they are dead and senseless still, and consequently ouer-whelmed still
with hardness of heart.

2. The read^nesse of the conscience to do its office in checking for sin.
If a man can swallow omissions of good duties; careless performances of them,
ordinary slips, and sometimes grosser sins, and his heart never smite him, or
suffer it self to be controlled for stirring, he is in a very dangerous, if
not desperate degree of hardness of heart.

3. The effect that those means take which God uses to work upon the heart;
a sign a man is in an ill case, when they prevail not, but God, as it were,
loses his labor in them: as,

1. The Word, Gods powerful arm, his hammer, his two-edged sword, then
preuailes not, when it is heard unprofitably, being either not attended to, or
conceived by the understanding, not retained by the memory, not entertained by
the affections, but resisted, choked, detained in unrighteousness, or not
seconded with reformation.

2. The works of Gods ordinary Providence, which should be as a glass for us
to behold the Majesty of God himself, and his will derecting us to diverse
duties; then fail of their due effect, when we in stead of growing more
familiar with God by occasion of them, grow rather daily more and more
estranged from him.

3. Civil Laws, by which God keeps men within their compass, then come
short of their end, when they must be feign to stoop and yield to our humors;
as, Mat. 19.8. and among us, in the case of biting Usury, etc.

4. Extraordinary favors, or judgments, which should stir us up, and make
us look about us, then want their success, when we are not affected by them,
as we should; but instead of thankfulness for the one (as Genesis 39.9. 1. Sam.
1.28. Psalm. 18.1. and 116.12.) applaud our selves in our secure and sinful
courses, as Deuteronomy. 32.15. and in stead of due humiliation by the other, Isa.
1.5. and 9.13. Iere. 5.3. Pro. 27.22.
rather moved to think that God must needs love us, because he corrects us,
though we are never a jot bettered thereby.

5. Inward motions of Gods spirt, sent to encourage and strengthen us in good
courses, then return void, when they are not entertained, and cherished with
good affections, and seconded with good endeavors.


S. Now I pray, what should a man do, if by these signs he find himself
ouer-taken with this dangerous evil? Is there any hope of his recovery?


M. Yes questionless, there is hope of his recovery, so long as he has any
sense of his misery, any desire to be freed therefrom. 1. Sam. 14.14.
God has appointed a menanes, not utterly to cast out from him, him that is
expelled. In this case therefore it will be good for a man that finds himself
thus over taken, with all care to betake himself to these remedies following.

1. Let him come, and bemoane himself, Psalm. 77.1. Isa. 63.15.16. Rom 7.14.
and his miserable case before God: the Cure is in a wonderful forwardness,
when a man can bring himself once to this. For besides that our corruptions
themselus like thieves or traitors are ready to fly, upon discovery and
persuit; Isa 63.9. Judge. 10.16 and Ier. 31.18.9. Isa. 61.1.
God is exceeding ready in such a case to be moved with compassion toward us,
to be in^^or: troubled in our troubles, and bind up our broken hearts. Only
here we must be sure; 1. That we dissemble not with God, but unfeignedly desire
the remouall of our own hard-heartednesse. 2. That we be earnest, with him,
and press him instantly, with such arguments as he is accustomed to yield
unto: 1. his ability, 2. our necessity: 3. his promise, and consequently his
glory.

2. Let him use no other plaster, Zach. 13.1. 1. Pet. 1.2. Ephesians. 5 25.26.
but that which God has given and appointed unto us even the blood of his own
Son, by which he softens and reconciles unto himself, all that are softened,
Heb. 10.11
and reconciled. For as Euah came out of Adams side sleeping, so the Church
continually proceeds out of the heart blood of Christ dying. For want of
this, Cain, Pharaoh, and other reprobats perish in the hardness of there
hearts.

3. He must be sure to get that hand which alone can receive, and apply this
heavenly plaster, Zach. 12.10 11.
Faith; by which we look on him whom we have pierced, Number. 21 9
and are at once both wounded and healed, as the Israelites were cured of the
stingings of those fiery serpents, by looking on the brazen serpent erected by
Moses. This softens as well as purifies the heart. Act. 15.9. 1 Pet. 1.22.


4. To this end, it will be needful to make use of those instruments, by which
God usually works faith in our heats; those are specially the Word, and
Sacraments, the one being that fire by which our hearts are melted, and new
fashioned; Ier. 23.19.
the other a singular means to knit us nearer unto Christ, from whose fullness
we all receive grace for grace.

5. Hereunto if he add the due observation of Gods judgments, both upon
himself and others, and make a holy use thereof, he shall find a great help
thereby both to the opening of his ears, Job. 33.16.
and to the softning of his heart.

6. After all these he must wait for Gods spirit to make all other means
effectual; without which the two-edged sword of the Word, and what ever else
may be added for the strengthing thereof, may prove but as Sca^derbegs sword,
which was able to do little or nothing with out Scanderbegs arm.


S. Well, suppose I find by these means, that in some measure God hoth begun
to soften mine heart; What am I then to do?


M. You have then great cause to be thankeful to God, who has therein given
you a sure pledge of his love, and an assurance infallible, that he will never
forsak you, Isa. 66.2. Psalm. 147.3. and 34.18. and 25.9. Isa. 57.15.
but ever look upon you, with an eye of tender compassion, to bind up, and
heal all your wounds, to deliver you from all dangers, to guide you in all
your ways, to abide and dwell in you, as in his Temple for ever.


S. But may I securely rest in this, and never fear any danger of
backsliding?


M. By no means; since, 1. we are never in greater danger, then when we are
thus secure, as we may see in David, and Peter. 2. Psalm. 30.6. Mat. 26.36
It will be a more difficult thing to recover out of this danger, then to
prevent it; as appears by those that being given over to any sin, hardly are
brought to reform it. 3. We may provoke God to inflict on us that other kind
of hardness of heart called Judiciary, or Penal, by which men are usually
sealed up unto condemnation.


S. These indeed are forcible motives to a man to look about him, and in stead
of giving way to security, to furnish himself with the best preservatives
against sins dangers: But before I come to enquire thereof, I would feign know
the utmost of the danger; and therefore I pray you tell me, what you mean by
that last kind of hardness of heart, which you call Judiciary, 3. Judiciary
or Penal.
or penal.


M. This is, when God as a just and angry judge takes vengeance on man's wilful
rebellion, by giving over his heart, which was hard by nature, and farther
hardened by voluntary abuse of the means of grace, to be hardened yet in an
higher degree by Satan, and his own corruption, and there by sealed up unto
eternal condemnation. In this case the soul of a man being wholly infected,
and poisoned, and the spirit altogether quenched: neither light of nature, nor
motions of grace, private council, nor public admonitions, mercy, nor
judgment is ever likely to stay that violence of his sinful courses: wherein
he runs on without all scruple or remorse, till either God strike him with some
exemplary plagues as he did Pharaoh; or he plunge himself into the gulf of
despair with Judas; or death steal on him without repentance, as on that rich
man, Luke 16.


S. What sort of men does this kind of hardness befall?


M. Only reprobates, 1 Ioh. 5.13.
whom God suffers to lie in wickedness; whereas all the elect being given by
God unto Christ, Ioh. 6.37. Job. 17, 9.
and by Christ commended again unto his Father, are secured from this great
evil; and in good time endued with that sanctifying spirit, by virtue where of
they keep themselves so; 1 Ioh. 5.18.
that the wicked one touches them not.


S. But if this befall reprobates only, Isa. 63.17.
how does the Church complain, O Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts from
thy fear?


M. This is not to be understood of all hardness of heart: for we have showed
before, that there is a kind of hardness of heart natural, common to al by
nature without exception: and there is a voluntary or actual hardness, incident
even to the elect, and that in full measure for the present extent before their
conversion, and after too, in part, though then joined with some reluctance;
and of this the Church complains, and desires that God would not leave her
therein; (for God has a hand in the ordering of this, and thereby many times
chastises the neglects and errors of his children;) But it is that total
final hardness, which to natural and voluntary rebellion, has joined an
universal giving over of God, which is more properly termed Judiciary or
Penal, that befalls only the reprobate. A thing hardly to be discerned for the
present, in as much as that other voluntary hardness, incident to the elect,
especially before their conversion, comes very near it for the present; yet in
part to be guessed at by these properties accompanying it. 1. Obstinate
disobedience against the known warnings of God, not in one, but many things,
and that constantly. 2. Sensles security, without all manner of relenting by
promises, or threatenings, benefits, or corrections, 3. Waxing worse and worse,
more careless to please God, more desperate in offending him after all means
used either in mercy or judgment, continually.


S. Why, but we see few or none thus hardened; even the most obstinate that
ever were have discovered some relenting: Cain hangs down his head, Esau
weeps, Pharaoh yields, Balaam desires to die the death of the righteus, Ahab
puts on sackeloth, Judas repents, Felix trembles, and Simon Magus desires to be
prayed for.


M. 1. All reprobates do not fall into this kind of hardness of heart, Romans
9.18. c. 11.7.8. 2 These. 2.10
but only such as have abused the means of grace and stubbornly resisted Gods
working by them.

2. All that are hardened, come not to this height; some stay in lower degres,
yet sufficient to seal the^ up to condemnation.

3. Those that do come to this* do it not suddenly, but by degrees.

4. Those that are already come thereunto may yet perhaps have now and then
some flashes, pangs, fits of better motions; like the sweating of a stone in
moist weather, which yet retains its natural hardness, and dryness. But 1.
these proceeed not from any true tenderness of heart, as fruits of Christ's
spirit; but only from some passion, touch of consceience slavish fear, or
present feeling of Gods judgments; no argument of grace, but rather a taste of
hell. 2. Being once over they leave no impression; but they that had them,
return presently like a stone to their natural dryness; God justly giving
them over thereunto; 1. That they who will not be guided by his gracious
Spirit, 2 These. 2.10 Deuteronomy. 18.43
and holy Word may be swayed by the tyrannical government of Satan, 1. Sam.
16.14. 2 Chronicles. 12.8.
and their own corrupt natures; as Saul by his wicked spirit, Rehoboam by his
young Counselors, and after by Shishag. 2. That they may be plagued in thath
very thing, Pro. 5.22. Deuteronomy. 32.19 Ier. 7.19.
wherein they went a bout to anger him; a singular means to meet with men's
unthankfulness, and to discover their folly and madness in resisting God.


S. But God never gives over the elect in this manner; so that if a man be once
assured of his election, he may rest himself secure, and never fear this
dangerous downfall.


M. It is true indeed, the elect are freed from possibility of falling thus
far; yet they that take themselves to be assured of their election, were not
best set up their rest in such a resolution. For,

1. This fear and care is a special means appointed by God to keep us from
this danger; Pro. 28.14
into which the best might easily fall, had they no better a keeper then
themselves, as we may guess by their often looking, Psalm. 73.2.3.13.21.12
and readiness to go the same way with wicked men. That any man sits not down
in the scorners chair, he is to ascribe it to the free grace of God, who
withholds him according to his good purpose. Now God accomplisheth his good
purposes toward his children by working in the^ desires, care, endeavors,
answerable thereunto. Hence are those admonitions, Romans 11.20. 2. Cor. 7.1.
Ephesians. 4.30. Phil. 2.12. and. 3.13. 2. Tim 2.19. 1. Pet. 1.17. And to this end
God sets before us the examples of reprobats, (as Magistrates hang up
malefactors in chains, and parents tell their children of executions) yea
makes us in some degrees see and feel the terrors of hell, for the preventing
of those dangers, whereinto the wantonness of our flesh might otherwise carry
us.

2. For want hereof, God may give over his children so far, that they may see
but little odds between themselves, and the veriest reprobates, seeming to
themselves utterly destitute of all spiritual life, as if rhey had never
tasted of the grace of God, nor felt the quickening power of his spirit. Psalm.
51.10 12.15*
And in this case they may endure many a bitter pang, many a perplexed thought,
Pro. 18.14. Psalm. 51.8.
even to the renting of the heart, and breaking of the bones, as it were;
before they can come back to the state* wherein they were at first. Who would
buy the sweetest pleasures of sin at such a rate? Who would not rather keep
himself sound, and whole, then cast himself into a dangerous disease in hope
of recovery, though he were never so sure of it?

3. Such desperate resolutions are hardly to be found in Gods children. It is
the Devils Logic that makes such graceless inferences; Let us continue in
sin that grace may abound: Romans 6.1. Luke 12.19
and, Soul take thine ease for thou have much good laid up for many years.
Gods spirit rather concludes in the hearts of the regenerate, 1. Cor. 7 1
Having such precious promises, let us finish our sanctification in the fear
of God, etc as in the forementioned admonitions. So that howsoever a man has
formerly bin persuaded, that he is one of Gods elect, by some sense and
experience of Gods renewing grace, yet if he find his heart now giving way
unto, or entertaning such presumptuous conclusions, he may well fear, that all
his former persuasions were but delusions, that the spirit of God never ruled
in his heart, but rather that Prince of darkness that rules in the children of
disobedience. Ephe. 2.2.
They that are farthest from this danger, are most afraid to adventure on the
ways that lead unto it: And such as fear it least, are either already
overwhelmed with it, or most likely to fall into it.


S. Alas! then is my case desperate, that am already quite over whelmed with
this hardness of heart, a plain sign of a reprobate, reicted by God and to be
damned for ever.


M. Soft and fair; you are a little too rash and hasty in concluding this
against your self 1. You may mistake in conceiving your self to be farther
hardened then indeed you are, and so prove guilty of false witness, bearing in
the highest degree 2. Suppose you be so far hardened, as may be, for present
actual hardness, totally! yet are you not certain that this hardness shall
be final which alone is the mark of a reprobae. This is a thing that you
cannot know, except you could look into Gods decree of reprobation, or had
some extraordinary revelation from him.


S. Why! do you think a man may not judge of his own, or another final
estate, by this Judiciary or penal obduration, or hardening* how then is man's
condemnation said to be sealed up thereby?


M. It is sealed up in Gods counsel, as men's salvation is in his decree of
election. 2. Tim. 2.19. but not manifested to us, more then other future
things, the knowledge whereof God makes an argument to prove himself Jehovah.
Isay 41.21.
Nay of all future things God sees special reason to keep this from us. 1.
least the knowledge of it should be a bar to that mutual society which he
sees sit to be between good and bad in the world: 2. that the mouths of
wicked men (which otherwise would be more opened then they are against the
decree of reprobation) might be stopped, while they are left without excuse in
the neglect of those means of grace, which during their abode in this life are
offered unto them. Whence it is, that we find this ever proposed, as a thing,
Romans 11.34
whereof we are ignorant Who has known the mind of the Lord, or been his
Counselor? Joel. 2.14.^ Jonas 3.9. Amos 5.15 Romans 14 4.10.
Who knows if he will repent? it may be he will be merciful unto the remnant
of Joseph. Who art thou, that condemnest another man's servant? And the whole
time of this life is called The day wherein a man may work; Ioh. 9.4. and
12.31. 2 Cor. 6.2.
The day of grace; the time of Gods merciful visitation; and death only, and
the time following after, Luk 19.42
The night, wherein no man can work; when the Sun of righteousness sets, and
shines no more to men for their conversion; Mat 25.11 12.
the door of grace is shut, so that as many as are not then already entered,
are thenceforth for ever excluded, and their final doom pronounced never to be
reuersed. So that as long as life lastes, we are still to hope for, 1 Cor.
7.10.
and to endeavor the conversion of the most desperate; Act. 8.10.
praying, and waiting, if at any time God will give them repentance: Tim 2.1. 2 Timothy, 2 25
And ^f for others, certainly much more for our selves.


S. Alas! What comfort can one have to hope for any good of himself, that is
thus dead and sensles, altogether ouer-whelm'd with hardness of heart, as I
am?


M. Are you more dead then the dust of the earth: yet out of that did god form
Ada, and breath into his face the bread of life; Genesis 2.
and he can even of stones raise up children unto Abraham: Mat. 3 5.
are not all things possible to him? Cap. 19.26.
and is not his promise, that will prore water upon the thirsty, Isa. 44.3.
and floods on the dry ground? And what I bray you, were all the generation of
the just before their conversion? were they not all as hard-hearted as you
imagine your self to be? See Ezechiel 36.25.26. Isaias 1.10. Jeremy 3. and 4.
Chapters, Zacary 13.1. Luke 15.11.31. 1. Corinthians 6.9.10. Ephesians 2.1.2.
Tit(...).3. And to what end, 1 Timothy 1.16
thy(...) you are these examples Regarded, but that Christ might show his long
suffering (...)m to the ensample and encouragement of all those that in time to
come should believe in him to everlasting life.


S. It is some encouragement indeed to see others (...) have recovered out of
those dangers wherein one finds himself to be But in the mean time, this
danger is such as many have perished in: so that I am in great hazard
st(...)ing at length into everlasting destruction, so long as I am in this
case, and not certain, that I shall recover out of it.


M. Your hazard were great indeed, if this were your case; though even herein
you might with some hope use the means for your recovery. But I have some
better comfort for you then this; and that is, that you may be deceived in
judging your self thus for the present quite over whelmed with hardness of
heart.


S. Do you think it possible, it should be otherwise with me?


M. Nay I have very great reason to persuade me, that it is otherwise; and your
present persuasion is a great mistake, and gross delusion.


S. Oh how happy were I, if you could upon good ground so persuade me. I fear
this is too good to be true; but I pray, what induces you to conceive so?


M. Truly I have very many strong inducements, which perhaps when you shall
hear, may be a means of persuading you too,

1. How do you think, it should come to pass, that you are so sensible of
your own hardness of heart as you seem to be? A senseless stone does not
feel its own hardness; neither does he that is soundly asleep perceive that
he sleeps* Sense surely is a sign of life, and of life in action; and life
in this kind, spiritual life is never joined with total hardness. That
tenderness of heart which you complain you want, what is it, but a disposition
of the heart apt to perceive, and do, that which tends to ones spiritual
good? Ephe. 5.11 Ioh. 16.8. Romans 7.9.
Now it is the light of Gods spirit that discouers to a man his own darkness
and conuinceth him of his own deadness: this must needs argue at least the
beginning of the life of grace; which certainly will not fail of due perfection
in the end; this very feeling of spiritual wants, which is the first act of
spiritual life, being a great furtherance to the supply of the^, in as much it
is usually accompanied with care to seek, to which is annexed by Christ's
promise grace to find. Mat. 7.7.


2. Whence is this complaining of yours? does a hard heart complain of its
own hardness? or does nature teach a man to complain of his natural
corruption? Natural men may feel and complain of outward temporal
calamities: but it is only the work of Gods spirit in those that are renewed,
and softened, to complain of spiritual judgments, ^er. 31.18.
with Ephraim to lament former sins, and with sorrow to remember their own
wicked ways, Eze. 36.31
while they look on him whom they have pierced. Zach. 12.10
Thousands are in that state that you imagine your self to be in, and never
complain, but go on the broad way with pleasure and contentment. And surely,
this very complaining of your hardness, is an argument sufficient, that your are
not wilfully hardened. The child that cries to his Mother, I fall, shows his
danger, not his determinination; as the Disciples crying to their Master, Mat.
8 25.
We perish, discover their fear, not their porpose and the Church confessing
that She sleeps, Cant. 5.2.
her infirmity, not her resolution. And here you have S. Paul joining with you
in the same complaint, being as it seems, in the same case that you are, Romans
7.15. to the end.

3. What means your struggling, praying, using all means against this hardness
of yours, to subdue it, and to be freed from it? Are not these evidences
sufficient, that you do not yield to it, and consequently are not wholly
ouer-whelmed with it? Yes certainly, Gal. 5.17.
for it is only the spirit, that lusts against the flesh; and it can be no
other then some taste of the grace of God, that makes you so earnestly long
after it. Christ must first put his hand to the hole of the door, Cant. 5.4.
before the Spouses heart is affectioned toward him. And God never fails both
to cherish these desires, Mat. 15.28 Psalm 20.4. and 11.2.
and in the end to satisfy them, yea, to give us even above, and beyond our
desires. Ephesians. 3.20.
So that if you can but prove your desires sound and sincere, you need not
fear; all is safe. For,

Firist, When God has a purpose, to give any thing, he gives us a desire to
ask; Dan. 9.2.3. Act. 12.5. Psalm. 10.17
he first prepares our hearts, and then bends his ear unto us; and asking thus
according to his will, 1. Iol. 5.14.
how can he but hear us?

Romans 8.26. and 34.
Secondly, Christ's intercession in heaven and the requests of his spirit in our
hearts, ever go together, and therefore cannot possibly fail of speeding. All
this I trow, is sufficient to put a difference between your state, and the
condition of them that are wholly hardened.

First, You being sensible of your own estate, they altogether sensles.

Secondly, Psalm. 12.4. Pro. 10.23* and 14.9.
You complaining thereof, they rather boasting therein, making a mock, and a
pastime of sin.

Thirdly, You praying and using all means to be freed from your present
hardness they desiring still to rest, Isa. 56.10.
and sleep therein securely, and impatient of any thing that might awaken the^.


S. But for all my feeling, complaining, striving, I can find nothing in my
self, but hardness of heart, no manner of tenderness at all; and therefore
surely you are deceived in your charitable conjecture.


M. Feeling, complaining, striving? and yet no tenderness? all hard still? This
is very strange. Why, this very striving, complaining, feeling, is tenderness it
self, or the effect of it. Neither is it possible to complain or pray against
infidelity, Mar. 9.24.
but by faith; against hardness of heart, Psalm 51. and 119 83.
but by the mollifying spirit of God And grace many times is hardly discerned
in the beginning, or nonage thereof, but by such effects as these.


S. I, but what can you say to this, that I cannot at all relish the Word of
God, have no heart to private Conference, meditation, prayer, or any exercise
of Religion, but altogether loath and distaste them? Is it possible, think you,
that these things should stand with any tenderness of heart, or any sanctified
affection?


M. This were a hard case indeed, if it proceeded from a man's habitual
disposition, not from some extraordinary distemper. But considering how far a
man may be swayed by occasion of some outward cause, and how far he may be
deluded in discerning his own estate: it is not always safe for one to judge of
himself by his present sense and feeling: but especially in these three Cases.

1. In the time of his first conversion; when grace is as seed newly cast into
the earth; and a Christian like an Infant for want of exercise, and experience
it may be, scarce knowing what he has. Then as the land newly sown, little
differs from other ground in show, so a Christian seems little different from
other men: or as childrens complaints are not ever to be taken for Rules, so
the complainings of such a one, do not infallibly euince the want which he
complains of.

2. After the committing of some gross sin, or neglect of the means of grace,
and lying therein without remorse for a time. Then a Christian is as on in a
swoune, or fast asleep: if his life be in him, it scarce appears, at least he
perceiues it not himself; the spirit though not extinguished, yet intermitting
his work for a time.

3. In some vehement perturbation of the mind, either by tentation, or
melancholy, which many times is seconded by tentation too; whereby Satan
labors to blind the eyes of a Christian, that he may not see, and take
comfort in his own happiness. Then, as in War, the noise of a Cannon
stupifies the bodily senses, so while Satan is continually buzzing in a man's
ears, his violent and importunate tentations, he is not able to hearken to the
gracious promises of God, or any thing that might sound to his comfort. Nay, as
it falls out sometimes in natural melancholy, that men have strange
imaginations, as to think themselves dead, to have no heads, etc. So, and much
more then so are men deluded, when Satan seconds their melancholy conceits with
strong delusions which may well take the deeper impression, by how much the
things conceived, are less subject unto, and consequently hardlier confuted by
sense. In such cases as these, a man may have grace, and yet not discern it,
may persuade himself, and peremptorily stand to it, that he has none at all.


S. Yea? what say you then to that of the Apostle; If our heart condemn us,
GOD is greater then our heart?


M. It is true indeed, when the conscience rightly informed, does check,
accuse, condemn, there is no hope of avoiding the sentence of God, by any
close carriage, by which we might think to shift, and hide our selves, and our
actions from his eyes. Yet this hinders not, but that sometimes the conscience
may condemn, where God does not. For though it always judge for God, and on his
side, yet it does not always judge with God, and according to his direction: but
sometimes, Job. 13.9.
it may be with Jobs friends it makes a lie for God: not purposely indeed, but
through misinformation, or prejudice, while it looks on the wrost that
appears, as the quality of a sinful action past, or present indisposition
of the heart; not on the best, which is in part concealed, the sincere
disposition of the heart generally, which how weak soever, might be supported
with that gracious promise of Christ, Isa 42.
Not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax.


S. Yet by all this you cannot persuade me, that I have any thing in me, but
deadness, and hardness of heart: since I feel the effects thereof
continually in the dying of all good affections in me, and the corrupting of
all good duties, that proceed from me.


M. It is even time then to fall from comforting to chiding of you. What? Must
you needs have such perfection of holiness, as God affords not to his Church
militant, or else will you be unthankful, and impatient? Why, you must know,
that our sanctification here is but begun, the accomplishment of it is reserved
to the state of glory. If we here have any perfection, it consists in the
imptation of Christ's righteousness, God gracious accepta^ce of our imperfect
obedience, in comparison of others; or at most in the perfection of parts, and
sincerity of our endeavors. It is indeed a commendable care, that no iniquity
reign in us, but intolerable pride, to think strange, that any remains in
us. What madness were it, to burn the corn, because some weeds grow amongst
it? for an ulcer in the skin, to thrust a lancer into the heart? in punishing
the guilty mother, to destroy the innocent babe in her womb? And is it not as
bad, falling out with the flesh, to wrecke your anger on the spirit? through
hatred of corrupt nature, to offer violence to the new creater? in a word, to
give oueral, and take no comfort in any thing, because all is not as you would
have it What if God be pleased by this present indisposition, to labor the
cure of some more dangerous disease in you? will you quarrel with your
Phisician? You may remember perhaps, there was a time, when you had a vain
conceit of free will, and natural ability to believe, and repent at pleasure;
and of this you have not yet thoroughly repented: if this be so, what can God
do less the^ by your present deadnes to show you, Ier. 13.22. 2. Cor. 3.5.
Phil. 2.13.
that you live only by his grace; that he alone is all in all, both in your
first conversion, and in the final accomplishment of your salvation. It may be
it is something else, which he corrects in you, and would have you correct in
your self.


S. What then should I do in such a case, when I can feel nothing in my self
that may afford me comfort?


M. Oh, is it come to that at last? then I have some hope of doing good with
you, now you begin to be inquisitiue. This you must do.

First, Labor to find out that particular error, or corruption, which God may
aim at in this withdrawing the light of his countenance from you; and be
humbled for that: perhaps when that cloud is dispelled, the Sun will show
forth his beams again.

Secondly, where your feeling fails, try what your other senses can discern;
whether they can discover any fruits or effects of that grace, which is in it
self insensible.

Thirdly, If you can discern nothing in present, have recourse to the times
that are past; and therewithal remember, that Gods love is unchangeable, our
comfort and happiness depend not on our feeling, but one Gods never failing
promise; not so much on this that we know him, as that we are known of him,
Gal. 4.9. Phil. 3.12.
and held fast by him, who has taken the charge of us Faith is the evidence of
things not seen, 2 Timothy 1.12 Heb. 11.1.
Rom 4.18.
nor felt; by which we believe under hope, against hope, and trust in GOD,
though we have nothing for the present but denialls from him, Mat. 15.
Job. 13.15.
feel nothing but the effects of his wrath; so that it is a kind of
Infidelity to believe no more then we see, Job. 20.29.
and feel; nay, reason it self is sometimes deceived in arguing from sense
negatiuely; as if a man should conclude, their is no Sun, because he sees it
not at midnight, or when it is under a cloud. Here Iehosaphats examples worthy
our imitation, who, when he knew not what to do, looked unto God. 2. Chro. 20


Fourthly, If all this will not serve the turn, do as Phisicians are content
to do when they are sick themselves, be directed and ordered by others. Rest
for a while on their judgments, whom you take to be faithful, and likely to
deal impartially with you.


S. I think I must be feign to make this last my refuge; especially for the
present; and I know none likely to deal more faithfully herein then your
self. Wherefore I beseech you dissemble not with me in a case of this
importance; but tell me sincerely, do you think it likely, that any grace
for the present harbors in this hard-heart of mine?


M. I told you my mind herein heretofore, and acquainted you with the grounds
of my persuasion; and now for your comfort I tell you again, I am certainly
persuaded, that there is that true seed of grace in you; that will grow up to
everlasting life.


S. Certainly it must be very little grace, that is so insensible, that I
cannot discern it.


M. It may be greater then you are aware of; as may perhaps appear in good
time. But suppose it were as little as you can imagine; you have no reason to
be discouraged, if once it be true, and sincere. All grace is little at the
beginning, as a grain of Mustard Seed, a little Leaven, the Mornining-light;
but it has these three properties.

First, It is a remaining, seed, Ioh. 4.14. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
a living spring, that shall never fail.

Secondly, It is still growing, Mar. 8.22.
and increasing.

Thirdly, 1. Ioh. 4.4.
It will in the end overcome all that ouer-shadowes it.


S. It thank you Sir, for the great Comfort which you have been a means of
procuring me; me think I find already some case to my preplexed heart. But
I remember, you told me, that howsoever Gods children are free from the danger
of falling into this desperate estate of hardness of heart, yet they must use
all good means to prevent it. Wherefore for conclusion, I pray you aquaint me
with the best preseruatiuies that you know against it.


M. Preservatives against Hardness of Heart.
I will, Sir, most willingly; and I am heartily glad, that you are come to this.
The preservatives in general are the same with those which were formerly
prescribed, as means of recovery out of those other kinds of Natural and
Voluntary hardness of heart, which I will now briefly propound to you in
these Rules.

Frist, Carefully avoid all the degrees by which men fall into hardness of
heart, before mentioned; especially take heed of pride, and wantonness in
prosperity.

Secondly, Labor to keep your heart under the hammer of Gods Word
continually; joining with the public Ministry, private reading, meditation,
conference.

Thirdly, Be glad of plain and faithful admonition; and be not back-ward to
give good Counsel to others, that God may not punish your neglect of others
with others neglect of you. In this kind, good use may be made of the
exprobation of enemies. Malice is a good informer, though an ill judge.

Forthly, Let no affliction on your self, or judgment of God upon others,
pass without due observation and use, both for examination, and humiliation.

Fifty, Cherish in your self a dislike of all sin; aggravating it by all
circumstances, which may make it more odious; as,

1. Gods infinite wrath against it, expressed both by the fearful consequents
thereof, judgments threatened, and executed, and by the infinite price that was
paid for the ransom of it.

2. Gods wonderful mercy to us in Christ.

3. The profession we have undertaken, and the covenants that we have made.

4. The sweet comforts of sincere of obedience, and the woeful effects of our
halting therein.

Sixthly, Walk always as in Gods presence, with Henoch, and Noah; and of often
remember the straight account to be made to him at our departure hence.

Seventhly, Be frequent in prayer to God, ever therein bemoning (yet without
murmuring,) the remainders of corruption: hereunto add sometimes fasting,
which is like scouring, ever now and then to be joined with ordinary washing.

Eighthly, Survey every day your steps: and let no sin pass unconfessed
unlamented. And ever and anon have recourse to those marks and properties of a
tender heart, which you must endeavor to find in your self. Where you find the
least declinning, renew your Covenant, and take faster hold.


FINIS.

