A Care-cloth: OR A TREATISE OF THE CVMBERS AND TROUBLES OF MARRIAGE: INTENDED
TO ADVISE THEM THAT MAY, TO shun them; that may not, well and patiently to
bear them.

By WILLIAM WHATELY, Preacher of the Word of God in Banbury, in Oxfordshire.

1. Cor. 7.39, 40. The Wife is bound by the Law, as long as her Husband lives:
but if her Husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will,
only in the Lord.

But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment, and I think also that
I have the Spirit of God.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man. 1624.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
GOod Reader: Most gravely does our Communion Book admonish such as come to be
married, that they ought to enter into this estate, not rashly, lightly,
unadvisedly, to satisfy their carnal lusts and appetites, like bruit beasts,
that have no understanding; but discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the
fear of God. Needful it is, that this counsel be sounded often in the ears of
the unmarried, and not alone in that instant, when they are now about to
consummate marriage. For want of heeding this counsel, how common is it, and
withal how mischievous? For men to offend in an ouer-sudden and ouer-hastie
undertaking of Marriage, without the due meditation of two special things
(namely, what be the duties of Marriage, and what the difficulties,) it is as
impossible to be well prepared for that estate, as to fly without wings, to
go without legs, or to see without an eye: yet scarce one man or woman of a
number will put themselves to the pains of informing themselves beforehand, of
either of these two things. Thus having blindly and headlongly cast themselves
into marriage, either not at all (or with no firm and settled knowledge)
knowing, what belongs unto it, what services they are called to perform, what
burdens to sustain in it: it follows (as needs it must) that with much
hazard to their own souls, and much unquietness to themselves, families and
neighbors, they prove utterly careless of their duties, and extremely
impatient under their crosses. Hence it comes to pass, that marriage proves
to many, just as the stocks unto the drunkard; into which, when his head was
warm with Wine or Ale, he put his foot laughingly, and with merriment: but a
little after (having slept out his Wine, and cooled his head with a nap,) he
longs as much to get it out again. Hence it is, that diverse houses are none
other, but even very Fencing-Schooles, wherein the two sexes seem to have met
together for nothing, but to play their prizes, and to try masteries. Hence it
is, that many husbands and wives do fare almost always, as Job fared, when
the Devil had smitten his body with boyles and ulcers, cursing their
Wedding Day, as much as he did his Birthday, and thirsting after divorce as
much, as ever he did after death. Hence it is, that many wedded people brook
their wedlock in none other fashion, then a dog does his Chain, at which he
never cease snarling and gnawing, that he may break it asunder, and set
himself at liberty. Hence it is, that the little child is no more weary of
his fine new gilded book, now a little ouer-worne and sullyed (yea, that the
prisoner is no more weary of his gyues, nor the Gally-slaue of his oars) then
many an husband of his wife, and she of him, within an year or two, and
sometimes within a month or two, after their wedding. In a word, from this
fountain, such a stream of bitter waters do issue, as make the lives of a
number in marriage, like the soiourning of Israel in Marah, where almost
nothing could be heard, but murmuring and complaining. To redress or prevent,
if it might be, at least, some of these many mischiefs, I have been bold (as
once Moses did cast a piece of wood into the waters of Marah to sweeten them,
so) to publish already to the World, some few directions about the duties of
the married, and do now adventure again, to put forth some other
aduertisements, about the troubles of Marriage. Neither let it seem
superfluous to give men tidings of troubles before they come, seeing they are
always so much the better borne, by how much they are more expected. Men are
indeed desirous to please themselves rather, with the sweet thoughts of
comfort, then to imbitter their minds with fore-fearefull conceits of misery.
Also, to a mind fully bent upon a course, disswasions prove tedious; and he
that foretells inconveniences, may seem to dissuade. But let it be observed
withal, that likely none do meet with more crosses in marriage, or bear
their crosses more untowardly, then those that most dream of finding it a very
Paradise: For they strange above measure at the cumbers they never forethought
of, and are put out of all patience, by being so far disappointed, as to find
thick mire and dirt there, where they would tell themselves of nothing, but
fair and pleasant way. And indeed none show themselves less resolute in
vnder-going misery, then those that make themselves most resolute to rush upon
it. The same vices that breed stiffenesse in ones course, will breed impatiency
under the crosses that he meets with in his course. Wilfulness and
frowardness, grow like two evil branches, out of one root of folly. But
wariness of mind, in foreseeing, and forefearing evil, brings quietness of
mind, in bearing and sustaining evil: and the expectation of misery makes it,
at least, seem lighter, because the mind is somewhat acquainted with it by
contemplation. When Israel would needs have a King to rule over them, as other
Nations, the Lord commands Samuel to testify unto them, what should be the
manner of their King, and so he tells them, what heavy burdens their
much-desired Monarch should lade them withal. No doubt it is as needful for
marrying persons, to know what burdens their wedded condition is like to bring
upon them. Wherefore I will make bold to foretell those that will enter into
Marriage, that they must make account in changing their estate, to change for
the less easefull; and will advise him that will follow mine advice (if not,
let him follow his own mind, and say ten years after, whether was the better
counsel) To go unto Matrimony with fear of the worst, and to know
beforehand, that there grow Briers and Thorns in this way, whereon he must
needs tread, that will travail in it. Yet is not this written by me, to make
any man forbear marriage, whom God calls unto it; nor to make men hazard
themselves to wickedness, for fear of the cumbers of Matrimony: but alone to
make those willing to want marriage, that may want it without sin, or hazard
of sin; and to make men careful not to marry, before God calls them to it; and
withal, being called, to fit themselves for it; lest if they marry sooner, or
with less warines, they discredit Marriage after a while, as most do that are
married, by wishing themselves single again. Some man, perhaps, upon occasion
of these words, may desire to have this demand satisfied, When does God call a
man to Marriage? I answer: First, when he sets him in such a condition, that
he may marry, without wronging any other person, that is, when he is now
become his own man, not bound by covenant to continue another man's servant:
for God never crosses himself: whom he has called for a certain time to be
servant unto a Master, him he does not call, during that time, to break from
that service, without his Masters liking; and to think of making himself a
Master, before he have fulfilled the duty of a servant. Secondly, when God
furnishes a man with some convenient means to maintain a Wife and Family,
and not before: for God calls no man to any place, until he have granted
him some means of discharging the duties of that place; and it is one part of
an householders duty to provide for them of his household. The Lord sends not
soldiers into the field to fight, without some weapons, nor men to
housekeeping, without some means to keep house. Lastly, when a man, after
diligent labor, convenient watching, due abstinence, earnest prayers, and a
careful shunning of all times, places, companies, exercises, that may provoke
ill affections, does yet still find his heart so restlesly possessed with these
desires, that he cannot withold his will, at least, from often consenting
unto them; and so is disabled from serving God in duties of Religion and his
calling, with comfort and cheerfulness: to whom God, after all these means
used, vouchsafes not the power of containing, him he calls, to enter into
Matrimony. But he that is so tied in other respects, that he cannot marry
without wronging another, or wants all fit means to maintain a wife, or in
regard of any other let, cannot attain a wife, shall without fail attain the
gift of continency, if he be careful to use the forenamed means, and the
like, that God has appointed to subdue lust. Indeed if men force themselves to
an unmarried life, either by superstitious vows, or incredulous fears, or the
like, the Lord will likely punish their presumption or diffidence, by not
yielding his powerful help, and so will make them find their own folly and
weakness. But such is the wisdom of God to proportion his own actions to
his own ends, and cause, that all his deeds shall hold agreement each with
other; and such is his truth and goodness to them, that faithfully call upon
him that whom himself debarreth from Matrimony, him he will enable to live
chastely and purely out of matrimony, upon condition of his upright and careful
endeavors to get this ability. Wherefore whosoever is yet a servant to
another, or is wholly destitute of all means, to provide for a wife and
children, or is otherwise so hindered, that he cannot have a wife, must say to
himself thus; God has made me a single man, and would have me so to continue
as yet; I will not be wanting to my self in striving for continency, and Gods
blessing shall not be wanting to mine endeavors, in giving continency. And he
that is at his own disposing otherwise, and enjoys convenient means of
providing for a Family, shall, for all that, do best to forbear Matrimony, as
I suppose, if he perceive no need of marriage for the preventing of sin, or
other important consideration. For albeit in such case the Lord has left a
man's conscience at liberty (so that he sins not either by abiding in his
present estate, or altering it, which he likes best) yet it may seem the
wisest way to make choice of that part, which the Scripture rather of the
twain does seem to commend, saying, 1. Cor. 7.1. It is good for a man not to
touch a woman. 7. I would that all men were even as I my self. 8. I say to the
unmarried and widows, it is good for them, if they abide, even as I, that is,
single. 27. Art thou loosed from a wife? Seek not a wife. 38. He that gives
her in marriage, does well; but he that gives her not, does better. 40. The
Widow is happier, if she abide so, that is unmarried, after my judgment, and
I think that I also have the Spirit of God. But yet if God lead any man to
marriage, let him follow him, yet so, that he follow him with prudence and
discretion. He whom God shall will to fight with an enemy, must furnish
himself with fit weapons. David gate himself a sling, and smooth pibbles out
of the valley, when he went to encounter Goliath. So men must arm and furnish
themselves for marriage, that they may not dishonor this honorable estate, by
turning back from it, in their minds and wishes. Specially, he that will be
married, must arm himself with patience against the troubles of that kind of
life, and resolving, that he shall meet with them, must determine, that he
will behave himself, not alone quietly, but even chearefully, though they come
apace about him. Digest in the serious consideration of thy mind, the cause of
trouble, sin; the use of trouble, the healing of sin; the Sender and
Moderator of trouble, God; the end and issue of trouble, glory; that thine
heart may neither faint nor fret, because of trouble; yea, tho some heavy and
more then ordinary calamity should betide thee; much less, if thou meet
alone with those usual matters, which (like spirtlings in a dirty way) will
surely come to the lot of every man, in every Family. For to see a man so
foolish and absurd, that having made himself the Governor of an household, he
can bear no disorder of wife, children, servants; no disaster in goods,
cattle, dealings; without chasing, and fuming, and storms, and without those
pangs of a base and feeble mind, vain wishes of having never known this wife,
or so forth, is a spectacle of that nature, as may justly move disdain, as
well as pity in the wise beholder. What was he, trow you, a reasonable man, or
a bruit creature, that rushed so foresightlesly into marriage, as never to say
to himself, that some of these things must needs befall all that are wedded: And
if a man do know, that such things must needs happen to all that will marry,
is it not a strange indiscretion to take on, that they have happened to
himself, who would needs marry? Make reckoning therefore of crosses in thy
matrimonial condition, and then be careful to prevent them so much as may
be. For which end, let me commend unto thy consideration, these two things
following: When thou art married, if it may be, live of thy self with thy
wife, in a family of thine own, and not with another, in one family, as it
were, betwixt you both. And in all thy worldly dealings, trust no more then
thou must needs; nor otherwise, then upon due security. The mixing of governors
in an household, or subordinating or uniting of two Masters, or two Dames under
one roof, does fall out most times, to be a matter of much unquietness to all
parties: Youth and Age are so far distant in their constitutions, that they will
hardly accord in their conditions; and how to make the young folks so wholly
resign themselves unto the elder, as not to be discontented with their
proceedings; or to make the elder so much to deny themselves, as to condescend
unto the wills of the younger; or to make both so moderate themselves, as to
meet in the midway (without one of which three things, there is no
maintaining of concord) is a matter in the best natures, and most discreet
persons, exceeding difficult; and in the common sort of people altogether
impossible. Wherefore, as the young Bees do seek unto themselves another Hiue;
so let the young couple another house, that they may learn to live of a
little, to know what is their own, and how it becomes their own, and to use
their own to their own best advantage, that whatsoever come, they may never
fall into that unhappiest of all vnhappinesses, of either being tormentors of
their Parents, or tormented by them. And for ones worldly affairs, let him
trust as little as is possible, and then also upon Gods assurance. It is most
certain, that the most of those with whom a man shall deal, will always be
ungodly, and unrighteous, serving themselves altogether, and ready to advantage
themselves by deceit. It were an uncharitableness, to say before trial, Such
a man will deceive me, therefore I will not trust him: but it is wisdom to
think before trial, This man may deceive me, therefore, if I may, I will
forbear to trust him; if not, I will trust him on such terms, as he may not
be able, if he should be willing to beguile me. Boldness to borrow, boldness
to lend, boldness to trust, and to be trusted (which likely come from this
original, that men would ouer-faine, either to be rich, or seem so,) have
plunged many families into great misery, which else might have sailed through
the World with a constant tenor of prosperity. Let a man therefore be willing
to lay his foundation low, to content himself with the employment of his own
portion, not delighting to make himself a servant, by making himself a
borrower, nor to hazard himself (more then he must needs) upon the
doubtful honesty of such slipperie servants, as most times borrowers prove to
be. But forbearing to give further counsel, I commit the book following to
thy censure, praying thee to read it with judgment and favor, and to be the
same to the writings of another, that thou would another should be to thine.
So with my best wishes to God, to make the troubles of thy marriage (if thou
be, or shall be married) as easy as is possible (and the more easy, by
means of that advice which this Treatise will give thee, if thou will
vouchsafe to read and consider it) I leave thee to the guidance of him, that
gives his gifts to every man as seems best to himself, and remain

Banbury, Feb. 19. 1622. A wel-willer to the peace of thine heart and house,
William Whately.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
Understand, good Reader, that in a former Treatise about the duties of the
married, entitled, A Bride bush, I did occasionally deliver two positions: One
this; The sin of adultery dissolueth the bond, and annihilateth the covenant
of Matrimony. Another this; The sin of wilful desertion does likewise
dissolve the bond of Matrimony. Give me leave now to advertise thee of such
reasons, as have been objected unto me against these two positions. Against the
first thus: Whatsoever man and woman may lawfully converse together in
matrimonial society, betwixt them the bond of matrimony remains
undissolved: for upon this bond, the lawfulness of that society depends, as
upon the next and immediate cause thereof. Now man and wife, even after the
sin of adultery committed by one, or both of them, may lawfully converse
together in matrimonial society: For who can think, that David sinned, in
knowing any other of his wives, after his offense with Bathsheba? Or if any man
or woman having transgressed in this kind so secretly, that none does know of
it, shall after forsake the sin, and without revealing it to the yoke fellow,
continue to render due benevolence; who can say, that such society is
unlawful? Therefore betwixt man and wife, even after the sin of adultery,
the bond of marriage remains undissolved, and therefore the contrary position
ought not to be holden. Against the second thus: He that puts away his wife not
for whoredom, and marries another, is guilty of wilful desertion, (yea, and
of adultery too:) For, is it not all one to depart from ones wife, with a mind
of never returning, and to put away his wife from him, with a mind of never
reaccepting her? Now after such putting away of a man's wife, and marrying
another, the bond of matrimony remains undissolved: for our Savior says,
That he which marries a woman so put away, Mat. 19.9.
commits adultery; which could not be, unless the bond betwixt her, and her
former husband remained undissolved. Therefore at least after some desertion
(yea, and adultery too) the bond of matrimony remains undissolved; and
therefore the contrary position must be denied. Sweyed by these arguments (to
which, I confess, that I cannot make a satisfying answer) I depart from these
opinions, wishing that I had not written them, and that no man, by what I have
written, would imbolden himself, in such cases, to take at least a doubtful,
and an hazzardfull liberty. So praying God to give us a right understanding in
all things, I bid thee farewell.

A Care-cloth: OR A TREATISE OF THE CVMBERS AND TROUBLES OF MARRIAGE, intended
to advise them that may, to shun them; that may not, well and patiently to
bear them.
1. Cor. 7.28. If thou marriest, thou sinnest not; and if a virgin marry, she
sins not, but such shall have trouble in the flesh.


CHAP. I. The opening of the Text.
THe Apostle, in this Chapter, makes answer to some questions, which the
Corinths had by Letter propounded unto him, and that specially concerning
matter of marriage: and he gives his directions, first, indefinitely, to the
unmarried, married; and all sorts of persons in the former part of the Chapter;
then specially and particularly to Virgins, from the 26. Verse to the 39. to
Widows in the two last Verses. To Virgins he addresseth his counsel in this
order, first, in a brief preface, declaring the purport of his words, viz.
that he did not give a precise Commandment, as of a thing that bound the
conscience strictly, but alone advice and counsel, as of a thing most fit and
commodious. Secondly, he propounds his counsel in the 26. Verse, which comes
to this purpose; That it is good for a man and woman, in regard of the
necessity and distress, to which in this present life they are subject, to
forbear marriage, and to continue in Virginity. Lastly, he amplifieth and
inlargeth this matter, more fully explicating himself, which explication he
begins in the former Verse and this, interrupts by a pertinent digression in
the three following Verses: and lastly, goes on in, and finisheth in the five
next.

Here then the Apostle is about to make his meaning so manifest (in that
disswasion from marriage, which formerly he had used) that no occasion of hurt
might grow from the mistaking thereof. And as in the former Verse he had
advised men, neither to be weary of marriage, if they were married; nor yet to
be covetous of it, if they were loose; so here he shows, in what respects he
discounselleth it, viz. (first, negatiuely) not as a sin (nay, he plainly
confesses the lawfulness of it, saying, If thou (being a man) shall marry,
thou sinnest not; and if a Virgin marry, she sins not) but (secondly,
affirmatively) as a matter of more outward and bodily trouble; for such, says
he, shall have trouble in the flesh: but, says he, I spare you; that is, I
will not use more earnestness to dissuade you from that, that most me^ are
unwilling to be dissuaded from. To spare, is not to press them ouer-hard to
that, whereto they would not be drawn, without some backwardness. The thing
then that the Apostle delivers in this verse, is in effect this, That marriage
is not to be forborne, as a matter sinful, but troublesome, and virginity to
be embraced, not as a state of life more holy, but alone more easefull; and
that he disswadeth marriage, not as if it were in any sort to be reputed
unlawful to marry, but alone, because it is commonly attended upon with more
difficulties then single life; in which regard also he forbeareth to urge the
forbearance of it any thing earnestly. Now we have Paul's meaning, let us see
what instructions his words will yield us.

CHAP. II. Containing the first instruction.
Paul's so plain and precise disauowing of any conceit of the unlawfulness of
matrimony, and endeavoring carefully and expressly to prevent such an opinion,
we may inform our felues thus much, That it behooves men to take heed of
accounting those things sinful or unlawful that be not so. No man must make
more faults then God makes. Our judgment should be always so clear and
sound, that we might esteem of things as they be, and call that lawful which
is lawful, as well as that wicked which is wicked: and as in the tribunal of
humane Justice, a guiltless man must not be sentenced as guilty: So at the
bar of humane reason, a faultlesse action must not be wrongly burdened with
the censure of faultiness. Whosoever reads this text, will yield this point:
yet we shall have it made good by a voice from Heaven, Acts 19.15.
viz. that that was spoken to Peter in his trance, That that God has cleansed,
call not thou common. The Lord had removed the distinction of meats (in regard
of conscience to him-ward) which was of force under the Leuiticall Law. That
Peter might be informed of this needful truth, whereof he was yet ignorant, he
is bidden (in a Vision wherein all manner of beasts were offered to him being
hungry) to kill and eat: he refuses, because the things were such as the Law
condemned for unclean and common. The voice tells him the second time, that it
was not for him to make that common, which God had made clean. Lo how the
cleanness or uncleanness of things is not to be ordered by man's authority,
no, not by the authority of Peter himself, so that a man would wonder how he
that calls himself the successor of Peter, should adventure to do that,
which to Peter himself is prohibited. And what was the sin for which the
Pharisees are taxed by the Lord? Matt. 15.2. etc.
was it not this? that they would needs deem it a great fault and pollution,
to eat meat without washing of hands first; whereas the Lord in his Law, had
never forbidden such eating. The point is undeniable, and needs no more
proof; there is a negative superstition (consisting of Touch not, taste not,
handle not, etc. that is, Do not this and that, for fear of offending God, and
hurting your soul, though the Lord have never condemned it) as well as an
affirmative superstition, standing in Do this, or do that, that you may please
God, and benefit your soul. That we may be more careful to avoid the fault of
coining faults, let us consider, what evils will ensue from such mistaking.

regard, as being persuaded that it is sinful. Thus does a man cast himself
ineuitably upon a necessity of sinning, and so upon unquietness, perplexity,
and much inauoydable misery, to the great trouble, not of himself alone, but
of others also, with whom he lives, to whom his entangled conscience will not
suffer him to perform his duty with love and readiness, as he ought to do.



Paul's time, the men that would not eat, were always forward to judge and
condemn those that would eat. For when a man, out of an erring conscience,
forbeareth those things, in which another uses his liberty, he must either
condemn himself, or another, or else leave another wholly to God: self-loue
will not suffer men to blame themselves, selfe-conceitednesse will not suffer
them to refer the matter wholly to God: wherefore of necessity (in the most
part of men) judging, condemning, censuring, and hard conceits must follow
thereupon.

wiser and iuster then he; and darkness will make it self believe, that it
has discovered more, then light it self did discover; and a blind person will
bear himself bold, in the place of a guide and leader in the way. All these
mischiefs ensue, upon the reputing of sinlesse things sinful, and therefore
it is not without just reason, that our Apostle is so plain and express in
this matter; He sins not: She sins not.

CHAP. III. Containing the use of the point.
causing some men to defend, and practice they care not what, worshipping of
Images, common swearing, the use of Enchantments, traveling and profane
sporting on the Lords day, and diverse more abominations against every
Commandment. But there is also another extremity, which clogs a man with
scrupulousnes, so as he starts back almost from every thing, as if it were a
sin, and becomes so timorous and doubting, that he dares scarce adventure
upon any action, if it be not on the other side as clear, as the Sun in his
Noone-height. The one of those is like a careless man, that believes every man
who speaks him fair, though be a very coozener; the other is like a
suspicious and distrustful man, that will believe no man, be he never so
plain and upright. Though this latter be the less dispraiseable extreme, yet
without doubt it is a great fault, the breeder of many woeful evils, being
commonly the testimony of an unstayed, and insufficient judgment, ouer-ruled
by prejudice and by passion. Therefore you are as well to be dehorted from the
one of these evils, as the other; which though you have not, perhaps, so well
considered of heretofore, yet now let the Apostles words make you take diligent
heed unto it. It is an offense against God, a wrong to thy self, an hindrance
to thy comfort and serviceableness, a gawling to thy conscience, and a
procurer of much unhappiness: to conceive falsely within thy self of any thing,
This is not lawful; If I do this, I shall sin against God, when indeed thou
shall not sin; as to conceine falsely, This is lawful for me; This I may do,
when indeed thou may not do it. Know now, that both these are bypath, both
are out-strayings, and that in the wilderness of this World, thou may as
quickly, and wel-neere as dangerously wander in the one of these ways, as the
other; and therefore be thou as careful and desirous, not to step awry in the
one, as in the other path. I press this the rather, because I have observed in
experience, that many men become irreclaimeable, in regard of this
scrupulousness, out of a conceit they have, that there is little or no danger
in it. But they are deceived; A man may hurt himself, offend his brethren,
dishonor God, trouble the world, and cast himself to hell, by strayning at
Gnats, as well as by swallowing Camels. To do a thing, in many cases is no
sin, neither is it a sin to forbear; but to condemn a thing not worthy to
be condemned, to stretch ones wits, to make a lawful thing seem wicked, and
to be stiff in such a forbearance, this is always naught, and always
dangerous. What mischief has come into the world, by making marriage a sin to
some men, to whom it was no sin? How has the world bin pestered with
troubles and contentions about things of no moment, because some men would not,
or could not see, that lawful things were lawful? In a word, I know not
whether the Church of God do not as much smart and bleed, by the wounds that
scrupulousness gives her, as by those which inconsionableness gives her. Oh
that once she might be cured of both at once!

And that you may the better preserve your selves from such mistaking,
Directions to keep our selves from making no sins, sins: first, general.
I will deliver some few directions; first general; then special. In general
observe these five Rules:

First, in judging of points controuerted, let a man place his mind in a flat
indifferency, and make it merely neutrall; for if a man shall bend his will
and affections one way, desiring for some respect, to have this part rather
true, then that in a matter questioned; this desire will carry him away, as the
bias does the bowl, many times against the truth. Unequal balances will do
wrong in weighing, though the weights be equal.

Secondly, when the mind is brought to this perfect neutralitie, pass not
sentence hastily, but upon serious deliberation, taking advice (if by any
means occasion serve) whether by reading or conference, as well, as much, as
often, with those that hold on the one side, as on the other. He that speaks
first, is commonly righteous, but his neighbor comes after, and finds him
out: He shall never be an indifferent Judge betwixt party and party, that is
loath to hear the allegations of the one side, and willing to hear all that
can be alleged on the other; neither shall he ever discern aright betwixt
opinion and opinion, that is glad to be acquainted with any reasons that may
make for the one opinion, but if discontented (at least not very well pleased)
if he hear that contradicted, and the contrary maintained.

Thirdly, Hearken to all such distinctions and limitations, as have ground and
warrant out of Scripture: for as the cause of licentiousness is, for the most
part, a boldness to frame distinctions or limitations, without ground from the
written Word; so scrupulousness does commonly arise from hence, that men
either heed not, or will not yield unto those distinctions and limitations,
which God himself has led us unto in his Word.

Fourthly, let nothing be counted a sin, which Scripture does not condemn as a
sin, and what the Word (the rule of truth and falsehood) does not show us to
be unlawful, that let us hold to be lawful. Safely may one conclude in all
manner of actions, I will take that as warrantable, against which I find
nothing written. Yea verily, it is more then a probable reason, the Word of God
has left a thing in such doubtful sort, that many godly, virtuous, and learned
men do think it lawful, and therefore I will incline rather to think it
lawful, then otherwise: for hardly would it stand with Gods goodness, to leave
sins so doubtfully discovered, as that wise and godly men, when the matter
comes to discussing, should not be able to see the sinfulness thereof.

Fifthly, beware of suffering prejudice, example, humor, to sway you, in
judging the lawfulness or unlawfulness of things. Be ready in matters
controuerted, to change opinions, to think otherwise then thou have thought,
otherwise then thou have been long known to think, otherwise then men of great
esteem with thy self have thought; and beware that choler and melancholy do
not dazzle thine eyes; and to that end, if thou be inclined to either of
these humors, be afraid of them, and yield less to thine authority because
of them: for stiffenesse in opinions (a fruit commonly of the three forenamed
things) is nothing praiseworthy. Constancy in express truths is a notable
virtue; peremptorinesse in matters not plainly revealed, is a vice, and not a
virtue.

And these be five general Rules, which will conduce much to the true freedom
of the judgment. I will add as many more special Rules, which are these.

Firt, 2. Special.
example of good men in Scripture do not bind conscience, but only (supposing
them not contradictorie to precepts) warrant it; they do not make a thing
needful, or sinful, but alone declare it indifferent and lawful: so, what I
can show some godly man in Scripture to have done before me (no precept being
for, or against it) that (not I must do, or else I sin, but) I may do
without sin. Abraham made a great feast at the weaning of Isaac; yet is no
father bound so to do, though any wealthy father may do so, if he please. Our
Savior being invited to a Wedding feast, did go to it; yet is no man tied to
do so, but alone allowed. When our Savior preached solemnly in the Synagogue
at Nazareth, it is noted, that he stood up to read, opened the book, read the
portion of Scripture out of the book which he minded to speak of, then shut
the book again, and sat down, and spoke unto them: yet to these
particularities is no man's conscience bound in preaching, but he may, if he
will, sit in reading his Text, or if he will, he may say it without book, and
not read it, and may stand up and interpret, and apply it. So in many other
particulars. In this case the Scriptures are clear; Romans 3.20, 4.15.
By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. And again: Where there is no Law,
there is no sin. Now the Law is a commandment of some person, that has
power to command, and not an action of any man under authority. This rule is of
admirable use, in judging of things: for many a man does clog up his
conscience, by binding himself to mere examples, 1. Cor. 15.56.
whereas the strength of sin is the Law.

Secondly, humane inventions are not therefore unlawful in the forms, order,
circumstances, solemnity of Divine Service or worship, because they are mere
humane inventions, unless in some other respect, some sinfulness be found in
them, no, nor though some kind of signification be aimed at in them. For
example, In some Churches I have seen a Flower set up by the houre-glasse on
the Pulpit, to express this conceit, that the preaching of the Word is even
the Flower of the place, yet cannot think any man so scrupulous, as to think
it unlawful. In other Churches, has a Lantern been fairly engraven over
the Pulpit, with this word above, Thy Word is a Lantern to my feet; yet I
hope no sin committed. In most Churches of great Towns, you shall see the
Bible held up with an Eagle; (no question, at the first this was done, to
express some conceit of Gods carrying his Word upon Eagles wings) yet I never
heard man that found fault with that Image in the service of God. So in
swearing, we use to lay our hands upon the Bible, and to kiss the Bible, in
token of that reverence we owe to him, by whom we swear according to the
contents of that Book; yet no man that I know, has picked a quarrel with
this usage, although an oath be well known to be a worthy service of God, if
it be duly performed. So you may note a solemnity in swearing, used by Abraham
and Jacob, of putting the hand under the thigh. So there was a solemnity
accustomed in reading the Law, Nehem. 8.5, 6. which the Law it self did never
prescribe. For when the Priest opened the book, all the people stood up, then
did Ezra bless God with a loud voice, then did the people bow down their
heads and worship: surely such standing up, such blessing, such bowing down is
no where commanded in the books of Moses, neither any where else, yet no man
will say, they were sinful. So had the Jews Synagogues in their Cities, and
portions to be read out of the Law and Prophets, some on such a day, some on
such a day; yet for these the Law takes none order at all, neither for all
that did the Jews sin in having Synagogues, and the Word in such order read
in them. So in the manner of celebrating the Passover, the Jews had diverse
orders, by name these; first, that they should neither stand, nor sit upright,
but lie along upon beds, to signify their present security, that eat it at
leisure, not in haste, as at the first; secondly, that the Master of the feast
in the end of the Supper, should take a loaf and break it, and bless, and
them distribute to all those that were present, and also should take Wine, and
bless, and distribute to all that were present; thirdly, to wash their feet in
that supper; fourthly, to sing an Hymn (with some others.) Now our Savior
Christ did use all these rites, and from one of them, took occasion to
institute his last Supper our holy Sacrament; and yet none of all these is
prescribed or mentioned in the Law, but rather the seeming contrary, an eating
in haste with staves in their hands. So Neh. 5.13. when that holy man
pronounced the curse against exactors (in the making of a solemn covenant that
they should cease their extortion) he shook his lap, and said; So let God
shake him that does not perform this covenant, out of his house and labor. No
manner of precept for this sign and solemnity in pronouncing a curse: yet
doubtless it was lawful. So Nehem. 11.27. He ordained a solemn dedication of
the wall of Jerusalem, and performed it with solemn Processio^, of two troops
of the holy Musicians with their Instruments, going one troop one way, the
other another, and meeting both in the Temple. Surely no such thing was
appointed in the Law, yet no man blamed this as a sin. So David in remoouing
the Arc, used diverse solemnities: for himself followed, clothed in a linen
Ephod, all the Musician attended also, clothed in linen Ephods; and when the
Liuites that bare the Arc, had gone six paces, he offered Oxen and Fatlings,
even seven Bullocks, and seven Lambs, as appears, comparing 2. Sam. 13. with
1. Corinthians. 15.27. the Law required no such number, or order of offering, no
such garments, either for him or them. It is manifest then, that if humane
inventions of these kinds, be not made parts of worship by any false doctrine,
or false opinion about them, and neither be such as for multitude, or other
consideration, do darken and obscure the service of God, rather then add any
solemnity or celebritie to it, they are not to be accounted unlawful.

Thirdly, things in themselves lawful, but abused to superstition or Idolatry,
are not by the such abuse of them, made unlawful to be used (of those that
know the truth, and are free from such abusiue conceit of them) either in
civil life, or in the solemnities of Divine Service. For example: Churches
built and dedicate to Idols, may lawfully be converted to the service of the
true God, and there is no necessity of pulling them down, and building other
in their rooms. Lying along on beds, and feasting in that manner, was greatly
abused of the Romans in their public Idolatry, called Lectisternia, yet the
Jews did keep that gesture in their Passover, and our Savior co^formed
thereto, yea, though then, many of the Romans lived among them, and they were
under the government of the Romans. Meat offered to Idols, might be eaten at
any feast (save in the Idols Temple) yea, at their Loue-feasts, which were
accustomed to be made, when they met to receive the Lords Supper: for now to
the pure, Tit. 1.15.
all things are pure, and now it is lawful to become all things to all men,
yea, to him that is without Law, 1. Cor. 9.21, 22
to be made as without Law; which could not be, if his abusing of a lawful
thing to superstition, made it unlawful for me to conform with him in that
thing. For indeed, the strict and precise commandment, whereby God did inioyne
the Jews to shun the customs of the Gentiles, even in things otherwise
lawful, because by them abused, was proper to the times of the Law, as being
part of that partition wall which Christ has broken down, that he might make
of both one.

Fourthly, scandals, offenses, inconvenient effects and consequents, do not
prove any thing to be unlawful, but alone inexpedient, and cannot conclude,
that such and such a thing may not lawfully be done, but alone; may not in such
a place, at such a time, before such a person, be conveniently done: and so
not the thing is unlawful, but the doer sins in doing a lawful thing
vnexpediently. Eating meat offered to Idols, would scandalize some weak ones,
yet the Apostle never condemns it as a sin to eat meat offered to Idols
(yea, he allows to eat whatsoever is set before a man,) but he says, To him
that eats with offense, to him it is sin. Romans 14.20.
Therefore consideration of such scandals cannot bear a man out, in not doing
what the Magistrate commands. Scandal should cause me to forbear alone, in
things left to mine own will and choice; but in things commanded by a Governor,
I must not so far heed scandals, as not to submit my self; for this (at
least appearance of) disobedience, is worse then any scandal. A scandal is
properly the abuse of Christian liberty, through indiscreet and uncharitable
doing of a thing, in it self lawful, without regard of my neighbors hurt
that may come thence. Now, when I am commanded by authority of Governors, to
do a thing lawful, then do I not, either indiscreetly, or uncharitably, use
my liberty, but according to the bond of conscience laid upon me by God:
wherefore to be offended at my so doing, is an indiscreet and uncharitable
part of him that is offended.

Fifthly, things that have a general allowance by Gods Word, without restraint
or limitation, may lawfully and warrantably be applied by men's appointment to
any particular time, place and action, that they shall see fit so to apply
them. For example: To sing a Psalm, is sufficiently warranted in Scripture:
therefore it is lawful to ordain, that a Psalm shall be usually sung before
or after Sermon: neither can any man find fault with such order, as if it were
will worship. So to pray, is warrantable by the Word; therefore to make an
order, that Ministers shall make a prayer before or after their Sermons, or
both, is not sinful, nor cannot be blamed, as a matter of voluntary
Religion, though in all the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, we never
read, to my remembrance, that either Christ himself, or any Prophet or
Apostle did so. So to adore Christ, by bowing of the knee unto him, is lawful,
and has general warrant out of the Word of God, as all yield (for to me shall
every knee bow, is a thing that God has sworn;) therefore it cannot but
follow, that to bow the knee to him, in the act of receiving the Sacrament, is
also lawful; for generals not limited by God, do give our consciences warrant
to their uttermost generality, so far as they may not dash against some
other Commandment.

These directions (Brethren) I am bold to propound unto you, as undoubted
truths, so far as my judgment reaches; and, O that God would please to
settle you in your just freedom of conscience! the enjoying whereof, would be
no less comfortable and profitable unto your souls, then the walking at
large, without having chains upon your legs, is delightful and beneficial to
your bodies. And (Lord) now guide all our minds in such sort, by thy good
Spirit, that we may know what cheerful liberty thou do vouchsafe us, and
may not sin against thy sovereignty, by false-imprisoning our consciences,
without thy warrant.

CHAP. IV. Containing the second doctrine.
Paul is always of the same mind, and therefore says agreeably in another
place; Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is (not alone lawful, but which is more) honorable among all men.
It is not alone such a thing as may be done without sin, but without any the
least disparagement; nay, of the two, being well performed, it rather wins
more respect then otherwise. 1. Tim. 4.1, 2.
For this cause Paul does elsewhere condemn the forbidding of marriage, as a
doctrine of Devils. Never any heretics did forbid marriage universally to all
men; he must needs therefore point at them, who forbid it to some sort of men.
And if the condemning of marriage be from the Devil, the allowing of it is
from God, and so have all sorts of men universally a full allowance from God to
take the benefit of this estate.

Adam in his best estate (when he stood as a common father to all mankind) did
marry, and by Gods own appointment did marry; and therefore it must needs be
lawful for any of this posterity to marry.

needs either come to an end within one age, or else be replenished with
bastards. From this fountain flow all the clear streams of legitimate
children, of whom alone, all good and worthy hopes may be entertained: from
this root, spring forth all the strait and fruitful branches, of an honest
and unblemished posterity. Debar marriage, and you bring the being of the
World to a full point, yea, to a final conclusion. Debar marriage, and you
shall have no families kept, no names maintained amongst men, but either this
great habitation, the world, must fall, for want of lawful heirs, to beasts
and birds alone to possess it, or else, which is worse, be intruded upon by
base and mis-begotten men. We must have to World, or but a beastly and
confused world, if marriage were not; therefore it must needs be lawful. And
let it be taken away from any sort of men, and that sort of men will grow, by
little and little, full of filthiness and uncleanness, and all viciousness;
by being forced to forbear beyond strength, they are driven to yield to
corruption beyond measure; and in affecting an inattaineable purity, they fall
into a most extreme impuritie. Solomon says, that to eat too much honey, is
not good: for why, it will breed the bitterest choler; and to affect too much
cleanenesse, will breed the foulest uncleanness: for when men cannot marry,
be they are forcibly hindered, nor cannot contain, because they are forcibly
tempted, they must needs burn at least, if not flame forth into all execrable
villainies. This therefore must be held for certain. No man or woman, in any
kind or condition of life, may be blamed as sinners, because they have ceased
to live singly.

CHAP. V. Containing the first use of the point.
To the unmarried.
and also of the married. To the unmarried we have a double instruction: the
first is this; that he prefer not a sinful single life, before a finlesse
marriage, as some have (foolishly and filthily) done, either our of a covetous
mind, or of a licentious mind, or both. Many a man looking with an ouer-carnall
eye, upon the troubles that attend matrimony, and considering the many
adversities which do commonly tread upon the heels of this estate (whereof
also we shall speak at large anon) do choose rather to poison their souls with
the deadly poison of whoredom, then to be a little encumbered in this present
life. But I pray you my brethren, be not so ouer-warie for your carnal ease:
Take not leave to your selves to live in frequent pollutions and impurities,
rather then in honest matrimony, for scare forsooth, of those diverse
inconveniences, with which marriage, because of sin, is usually accompanied.
Marriage is no sin, whoredom is. He that takes a wife, offends not God,
endangers not himself to hardness of heart, and eternal damnation: but he
which takes an harlot, or defiles himself with other pollutions, both
prouokes Gods wrath against himself, and also casts himself into the very pit
of hell, so much as in him lies. Wherefore if any man's necessity be such, that
he cannot restrain his desires, nor keep his wishes within compass, but that
in spite of all his earnest endeauours to the contrary, they work and boil
within him, let him pray unto God, to make convenient provision for him, and
embrace marriage with some misery, rather then sweet sin, that is to say,
deadly poison, because it pleases in the taste. None inconveniences, none
encumbrances, are answerable to the grieuousnesse of sin. It is Gods
wonderful goodness, that (knowing the temper and disposition of men in this
kind) he has debarred no man from this ordinance, but has allowed them a
remedy against sin, which it self is no sin. Remember the Apostles saying
in this place, He that marries, sins not; and compare it with other
disorders, which men fall into for want of marriage. He that commits
fornication, sins; he that commits adultery, sins; he that defiles
himself with other more unnatural commixtures, sins; yea, he that burns
(that is to say, lives in perpetual strong and masterfull desires, prevailing
against all his resolutions, and carrying away his will, though not his body,
he also) sins: but he that marries, does not sin, Therefore it is better
to marry, then commit fornication; it is better to marry, then to commit
adultery; it is better to marry, then to commit uncleanness; it is better to
marry, then to burn; it is better to adventure upon trouble without sin,
then upon sin without trouble. I speak not this, to make any man less
carefll, in striving against his own desires, and in using all virtuous and
holy means of beating down his lusts, neither would abate any whit of a man's
earnest endeauours, to live chastely in single life, and so to continue single:
but I speak it, to show, that if any man find his passions too strong for him,
and perceive that he cannot, but either marry or sin, he should rather marry
without sin, then sin without marriage. It is no wise course to rush upon
hell hereafter, to avoid trouble for the present. But, if the fear of
trouble, should not make a man forbear matrimony (that cannot otherwise
continue chaste,) how much less should the unwillingness to be confined to
one person, make a man continue vnyoked, that he might more freely give over
himself to his wandering and insatiable appetite? This were a notable cntempt
of Gods ordinance, and a selling of ones self over to work uncleanness with
greediness. He that of purpose forbeares the medicine, because he would not
have his disease cured, must needs perish by the disease, when God allows
all men to marry, that cannot contain; he that refuses marriage, because he
would nor contain, does yield himself so far at length, to the power of
incontinencie, that even marriage it self will be unable to repress his
unruly desires; and thus he brings upon himself extreme hard-hearrednesse,
even so, that he is without feeling, as the Apostle speaks, and by selling
himself up to sin, causes God in instice to give him wholly over to the
lusts of his own heart, and to the effectual working of Satan's temptations,
till at the end, his lust be beyond remedy, because at first he refused the
remedy, for the love of lust. O let none amongst you be so wicked, as to
forbear to live a married person for the nonc't, that he may live a beast. But
whosoever he or she be, that is not of power to contain, let him acknowledge
and enjoy the goodness of God, and prevent sin, by that which is no sin,
even by marrying.

CHAP. VI. Containing the second use.
To the unmarried.
that they may lawfully marry, from which also there follows unto them a
secnd instruction, to wit, that seeing they may lawfully marry, they take care
to marry lawfully: for even a sinlesse action, may be made sin, to him that
does it in a sinful manner. When Paul affirms; If thou marriest, thou
sinnest not: He means this, of marriage it self; in it self considered, nor
also of the manner and other circumstances of marriage: for in these, whosoever
disorders themselves, does sin grievously, though marriage it self be not
sin. Let us therefore propound some necessary directions, which if the
unmarried observe, in the making of their marriage, they may be sure to do
this lawful work lawfully. And, forbearing to mention those, which are common
to al actions ( viz. that the doer be in Christ, do them in faith, aim at the
right end, and such like) let us name alone those that do particularly
concern this present matter. Two things necessary, that a man may marry
lawfully: first, in the persons to be married: secondly, sufficient distance of
blood.
Whosoever then is yet unmarried, and would be sure to marry lawfully, must
have special care of two things: First, that he marry with a fit person:
Secondly, that if he have parents, he take their consent with him. Now, in the
persons to be thus joined, three properties are requisite; the first two being
so absolutely needful, that without them, marriage is no marriage, but alone
in name: the third, in such a degree needful, that it cannot be neglected,
without great sin against God. Of these three, the first is, sufficient
distance in blood and affinity; the second entire freedom from all other
persons; the last, agreement in the same true Religion. For the first of these,
the Lord has expressly prohibited men and women, to come near any the kindred
of their flesh. Whosoever therefore presumes to be joined to any such, does
nothing else, but cloak the foul sin of Incest, with the fair title of
Matrimony. And because affinity is a shadow and resemblance of kindred (for by
marriage, two become one flesh) therefore also, some are debarred marriage
together, in that respect. Now this matter of consanguinitie and affinity will
be cleared, by the due observation of these brief and plain rules following.
Rules for the clearing of the questions about affinity and consanguinitie.
First, No man or woman may lawfully marry any of those, that touch them in a
direct line upwards or downward, to all generations. As Adam, if he were
alive, and a Widdower, might not lawfully marry any woman in all the world,
neither might Euah, if the were alive and a widow, be lawfully married to any
man. The reason is, because in all these, the same blood does run along still
undivided, and so they are properly the kindred of their flesh. Secondly, No
man or woman may lawfully marry the brother, or sister of any his successors,
or predecessors in a direct line, to all generations. So Abel, being Seths
brother (of whom all the women in the world are directly proceeded) might not,
if he were alive, marry any woman in the world. So the brother of a woman's
father or grandfather, or great grandfather, may not lawfully marry that woman.
The roason of this is also plain: for the brother and sister of ones father or
mother, is to him or her in place of a father and mother. And in these also the
same blood remains undivided; for brothers and sisters are one and the same
blood. Thirdly, No man or woman may lawfully marry his or her natural
brother, or sister, either by the whole, or by the half blood. As neither
Ruben that had the same father and mother, nor Joseph that had alone the same
father, might lawfully marry Dinah their sister.

Fourthly, What man is so near in blood to the husband, that he might not
lawfully marry him, if the sex did serve; him neither may the wife marry after
her husbands death; and so contrarily. So I might not marry mine uncle (if I
were a woman;) therefore if I were dead, my wife might not lawfully be married
to mine uncle: so my wife, if she were a man, might not lawfully marry her
sister; therefore if my wife were dead, I might not lawfully marry her sister,
of which the reason is plain, husband and wife are one flesh, and therefore
with what persons kindred would not suffer one of them to marry, neither will
affinity suffer the other. But whatsoever persons are not by these four rules
debarred from matrimony each with other, they may lawfully marry together
without scruple, so far as I can discern. Only for this matter, I refer
every man, to the table of degrees authorized by our Church, and publicly set
up in every of our Churches. And so much of the first thing required in the
persons that shall be linked in wedlock.

The second is likewise to be spoken of, Secondly freedom from all other
persons.
and it is the freedom of both parties from any other: for if any man take a
woman, who is either espoused, or wedded to another man, is it not plain, that
he takes his neighbors wife? and therefore in show, lives in marriage, but
indeed lives in adultery. The Lord would have men and women enter into
matrimony, as it were leasurely and with deliberation: and for this cause it
is his ordinance, that the covenant should be perfected betwixt them in two
degrees; the one is Espousall, or betrothment, which they call, Making sure,
and is nothing else but a giving the right of each others bodies, by a solemn
and serious promise of marriage hereafter to be consummated: the other is
Wedding, called also by the name of Marriage, and is nothing but a giving of
the possession of each others bodies, by a solemn and serious promise to live
together during life.

Now the Scripture, in the two and twentieth Chapter of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy.
22.22, 23, 24.
does as well call the betrothed woman, a wife of him that betrothed her, as
the wedded woman, of him that wedded her; and does appoint a betrothed maid to
die for violating her espousals, by lying with another man afterward, as well
as the wedded wife, for violating wedlock: so it is manifest, that if any man
or woman have betrothed him, or her self to any one person, it is become now
utterly unlawful for them, to marry with any other person, unless the
contract be lawfully dissolved (by the falling out, or revealing of some thing
after the contract, which may disanull it:) as Joseph supposing Marie to have
been with child by some other (before his espousing her) now that he found her
to be bigbellyed, resolved to put her away. And it is much more manifest, that
he or she which have been married to another person, are bound by the Law, so
long as such person lives: so that if they marry any other, they shall commit
adultery, as the Apostle tells us in express terms. But thirdly, Romans 17.2.3.
Identitie of Religion.
no man or woman of the true Religion, may lawfully marry together, with those
of a false; 1. Cor. 7. last.
as Christians with Turks or Pagans: as Paul also tells the woman, whose
husband is dead, that she is at liberty to marry whom she will, but only in
the Lord; and she marries not in the Lord, if she marry one that is not of the
true Religion of our Lord. 2. Cor. 6.14.
Yea, Saint Paul does absolutely forbid the being unequally yoked with
Infidels, asking, What communion the Temple of God can have with Idols? Which
prohibition, if it be not to be understood only of being yoked with them in
matrimony, yet at least, as a general, must include that particular, and
principally that, as being the principal yoking together that is. It is not
good plowing with an Ox and an Ass, as also the Law did typically forewarne.
And these things are required, in regard of the persons contracting matrimony.

It is further necessary, Secondly, that if they have Pa rems, they have
Parents consent.
that such single persons as have Parents, and are under their tution, be
matched together by their consent. A son or daughter honor not their
Parents, if they presume to match themselves, without the priuitie or good
liking of their Parents, unless their Parents forfeie this part of their
authority, by abusing it, in not suffering them to marry in the Lord, but
offering to force them marry against the will of God, or else to abide
unmarried. No gift of any thing is good, unless all those persons that are
interessed into the thing given, do give their consent, as reason does euince:
for no man can pass away another right, without his liking. Now, the father
has interest into his child, as into his goods: for God allowed, that the
children also should be sold to pay his debts; which had been a most unjust
thing, if the Parents had not had as much interest into them, as to any other
part of their substance. Therefore marriage being a contract of giving and
receiving, the child's giving of himself, me thinks, should be of small force,
without the Parents good will, who have so chief a right into him. Surely
those whom God has not joined, are not lawfully joined. Now God joins men
alone two ways, either mediately, or immediately. Immediately he joins not
any in our times, therefore if they be not by him joined mediately, they be
either vnioyned, or ill joined. Now, unless their Parents give consent, they
cannot be said to be joined by God mediately: for why, when God has put any
person, as it were, in his room, as his assigns to doelany thing, it is not
done by him, unless that person do it, whom he has so authorized. And the
Scripture does manifestly give this power to Parents, when it says to them,
Give your daughters to sons, and take daughters for your sons. And again:
You shall not give your sons to their daughters, nor take their daughters to
your sons. Therefore, me thinks, it follows undeniably, that whom the
Parents join not, God does not join; and so their marriage is sinful, and
their living together very filthiness and uncleanness, until by submission
they have procured an after-consent, to ratify that, which ought not to have
been done before the consent. And these be the things which unmarried men and
women must principally look unto; all which we sum up in this brief manner:
A man or woman, with the consent of Parents (if there be any alive) marrying a
free person of the same true Religion, not touching him or her in too near
degrees of kindred or assinitie, marries lawfully, and may say, as Paul, I
have married, and not sinned. Thus the unmarried have heard their instructions.

CHAP. VII. Containing a third use to them that are married.
To the married.
whom it behooves sowel to inform themselves by this and other Scriptures, of
the lawfulness of their society, that they may both holily and with good
conscience, enjoy this ordinance, and also fence themselves so much the more
strongly against all wandering and inordinate desires. All creatures must be
sanctified to the users, by the Word of God, and by Prayer: and how sinlesse
soever any thing is in it self, yet does he sinfully abuse it, that cares
not in this sort to sanctify it. Now that is sanctified to a man by the word,
whereof his conscience is truly informed by the testimony of the Scriptures,
that it is warrantable and welpleasing unto God, so that he can do it with an
heart, resting it self in this assurance, that God is not offended the rewith.
And by prayer that is sanctified, for the using of which, a man does humbly beg
the favorable and gracious leave of the Lord, that he may not by his sins,
be excluded the comfort of Gods benefits; but through the grace of God
forgiving his sins, may enjoy his liberty, and the comfort of the creature.
And that is sanctified by thanksgiving, for which the vser (taking notice of
Gods goodness and wisdom, and other excellencies) does return the tribute of
praise unto him, ascribing all honor and greatness to him, as to the
fountain of all comfort. Now seeing he that is married, has not sinned in
marrying, let him sanctify this lawful ordinance unto himself, that he may
be sure to find the blessing of God upon it, and upon himself. A man may
truly say, He that eats, sins not; yet if any man eat profanely (not
considering that God has vouchsafed him the freedom of partaking in his
benefits; not praying God for his blessing; nor returning praise unto him for
his goodness,) he shall sin in so eating. The like must needs be said of
marriage, which being a lawful ordinance, is much abused, if it be not used
(as all lawful things should) in an holy manner: for sinlesse things
unsanctified, do become sins. And this is the rather to be pressed upon men's
consciences, because the neglect of it is very dangerous, causing matrimony to
be ineffectual for its proper ends, for want of Gods blessing; which, how can
we have, if we do not crave it? A profane and licentious taking of good
things at Gods hand, does as much offend him, as we are offended at the rude
and unmannerly behavior of our servants, when they come to receive a good
turn or gift from our hands, whereby we are caused so to give them the thing,
as that we do also sharply rebuke them for their indecent carriage. Things
are not truly comfortable to the soul, neither do they afford that spiritual
fruit to a man's heart, which else they would, when his heart is so carnal,
that he regards not to use them spiritually. If marriage be loosely used, it
will dispose a man to more looseness, and inflame those passions, which it
should quench: it will breed a sacietie and dislike of each other in the
married, and make their affections to straggle, so as they would rather accept
of strangers then themselves. If marriage be holily used, it will indeare the
yoke-fellowes each to other, it will keep their desires in order, and cause
that they shall be well satisfied each in other, as in Gods gifts. Neither can
there be any one truer reason rendered, of the little good affection that
passes betwixt many husbands and wives, and of the little comfort they take
each in other, then because they abuse Gods ordinance; and why should he bless
it? Let it therefore be observed (by all those that would keep a good
conscience in all things, and do desire to approve themselves honourers and
fearers of God in their very souls) that as well marriage as food, must be
made lawful and profitable to them, by the Word and Prayer. And let it be also
further urged upon the conscience of the married, (that which nature it self
will teach them,) that seeing the Lord is pleased to allow them marriage, they
should obediently accept of his allowance, and not imbolden themselves, for
their filthy lusts sake, to take forbidden pleasures. If God, having planted in
man that natural inclination which he has planted, for the increase of the
world, should have debarred him matrimony, it had been doubtless an unjust
rigor in God, and would have much extenuate man's offenses in that kind: but
when he has given an husband and a wife each to other, and commanded them to
leave all others, and cleave unto themselves; now what excuse have they to
allege for their sin? Therefore let all married persons resolve to live
chastely, else shall the lawfulness of matrimony extremely aggrauate the
sinfulness of their impuritie: for why should not thou (O man) be satisfied
with thine own wife, and thou (O woman) with thine own husband? By taking
Gods gift in marriage, thou neither rebellest against him, nor woundest thy
conscience, nor defilest another, nor pollutest thy self, nor breakest thy
covenant, nor wrongest thy family, nor transgressest the Laws of men, nor
dishonestest thy name, nor procurest any other evil: But in embracing a
stranger, thou bring infamy one thy name, a curse upon thy posterity, a
sin upon thy soul, and wrongs at once, God, the Church, the Commonweal,
thy yoke fellow, thy self, and many others more. Ah, why should a foolish and
unreasonable fancy, so far transport a man that has understanding, as when
the Lord affords him an honest, lawful, blameless, harmless, content; he
should neglect that, and prefer before it, a reprochful, dishonest, wicked,
and banefull pleasure? As if a man, seeing two cups of wine, and know the one
to be wholesome and unmixed, should let that stand still, and drink of
another, which himself did know to be poisoned alone, because the cup,
perhaps, that contained the poison, were finelier wrought on the outside. Or
as if a man having sufficient store of money in his own thest, would not make
use of that to buy necessaries, but go and rob for it by the highway side,
that he might spend another man's money. The adulterer is a needless thief, to
whom it is no reason that any favor should be showed. He may be compared to
the man, that having stoe of Dear in his own Park, would yet needs steal a
Buck out of his neighbors ground, because he was so follish as to glory in
his shame, and to brag, that he durst steal one: What pity could a man
show to such an one, if either he should miscarry in his stealing, or be
severely punished for his stealing? So the adulterer, that having a lawful
wife at home, shall give his unlawful lusts scope to range abroad, to the
wines or daughters of other men, is worthy all sharpness of punishment, as a
man that has hearkened to the oration of foolish folly, which persuades her
guests, saying, Stolen waters are sweet, and hidden bread is pleasant. But
far, far be it from any Christian man or woman, to poison and destroy
themselves with such pleasant bread, or sweet waters. The pleasures of
filthiness are like the bread of deceit, which gives a delightful relish in
the mouth, but is nothing else but very gravel in the belly. Thou have
solemnly promised before God, the Angels, and the Church, that forsaking all
other, thou will keep thee only to thine own yoke fellow. Seeing God has
allowed thee this comfort, wallow not sinfully in forbidden pleasures. And for
the lawfulness of marriage, so much. I come now to speak of its
troublesomnesse, which few will believe, till they find; and few can bear,
when they have found.

CHAP. VIII. Containing the third point.
Such shall have trouble in the flesh. First, in their whole outward estate.
Whosoever marries, must look for more trouble and adversity, then in single
estate. Mark all, and be persuaded; for it Paul were not deceived, you shall
all find it true. The married estate is more encumbred with troubles and
afflictions, then the unmarried. The man and woman that join themselves in
matrimony, shall commonly meet with more adversity outward, then whilst they
continued without Matrimony. The Apostles words are evident; he does in
manner engage his word, affirming and foretelling prophetically, Such shall
have trouble in the flesh. You must conceive him to write as a reasonable man,
to such as were also reasonable, and therefore to mean comparatively; else it
were easy to reject his argument in this wise: Paul, you dehort us from
marrying, not because it is sin, but because we shall find trouble in it;
why, do you not know, that the single life has also its thorns and briers? I
do (would Paul answer) but my meaning was, that this estate does outwardly
bring more trouble, for else I had used an vnforcible argument, and spoken
little to the purpose. You must therefore conceive the Apostles meaning to be,
as has been said, if the state of marriage, and of single life be compared
together in such respect, the former is the more troublous. Proofs are
needless in a manifest and express truth: but, I will show you the cause why
it is so, and after, stand a little ore largely in describing unto you the
chief troubles of marraige.

in the pot of pottage, which the Prophets servants had made, that caused the
eaters to cry out, Death is in the pot. This is that stinking weed, which
dissauours all our sweet flowers: This is the imbitterer of all estates,
bringing forth such, and so many disorders in men and women, as make them to
bring forth trouble each to other. In marriage, a man is engaged to more
businesses and duties, then before; occasioned to deal with more humors, then
before; and to stand in need of more things, then before; so will sin and
corruption show it self more, then before; and so must he meet with more
affliction, then before. This I speak, to free both God, the Author of
Marriage; as also Marriage, his ordinance, from all manner of blame and
accusations. For if all the hardness wherewith we be molested, do grow from
our sin, and our sin arise from Satan's temptation, and the abuse of our
own free will, as all these things are most undoubted and certain, why should
God be faulted for our misery, seeing he made us not miserable, til we had
made ourselves sinful? And why should any estate of life be blamed for our
misery, seeing if we were not sinners in it, we should not reap any misery
from it?

Take notice then of the true cause of all the cumbers, An explication to the
point.
which incumber married people; and secondly, let me inform you also, at
least of some, and the chief troubles of marriage, which you must know, that
you may expect them; and expect them, that you may prepare for them; and
prepare for them, that you may not be made impatient by them; and by
impatiencie, make them much more cumbrous, then else they need to be. These do
all arise from four maine heads: The persons married, their children, their
servants, and their estates; of all which a man might spend more then four
days in speaking, it taking counsel of experience, he would borrow a little
help of Rhetoric, to set out the matters to the full; but I will alone touch
them, and away. Every man and woman have their faults: those will breed
trouble: they may be sick, and that is another trouble: one of the two die
first, and leave the other behind, and that is to some the worst of all
troubles. In the souls of men there breed vices; in their bodies, diseases;
and at last, death; and the fruit of all these must needs be grief and sorrow
each to other. Some men are churlish, sour, and unkind; some, wrathful,
passionate, and furious; some hard, miserable, and niggardly; some wastefull,
riotous, and unthrifty; some unclean, insatiable, and ranging after other
women; some suspiciious, mistrustfull, and jealous of their own wives; some
rash and hare-brain'd; some fond and giddie; some simple; some subtle; some
idle; some toylesome; some carking; some careless; yea, twenty, and twice
twenty sinful and offending dispositions, show themselves in all the sons
of Adam; and what woman can meet with a man in all the world, in whom some or
other of these disorders do not dwell? Nature and education may hide them out
of the way, that they shall not be seen; Grace and sanctification may in part
subdue them, that they shall not reign: but neither nature, nor grace, shall
quite and clean abolish them, that they shall not be; and to obtain an
husband free from all of them (yea, not subject to more then one, two, or three
of them,) it is altogether impossible; and as impossible to live with one that
has them (though never so much mortified, as the state of men on earth can
reach) and not be troubled, and exceedingly troubled with them, as to go
barefoot upon a ricke of thorns or furs, and not be pricked and pained
with them.

In like sort, some women are proud, arrogant, and scornful; some, violent,
headstrong, and masterfull; some, sullen and dogged; some, scolding and
snappish; some, talkatiue; some, tongue-tied; some, light; some, coy; some,
finish; some, sluttish; some, ouer-spending; some, ouer-sparing; some, lewd and
unchaste; some, raging and jealous: yea, an hundred, and a thousand faults, do
lie hid in the painted box of the bosom of every of Euahs daughters. Good
bringing up may conceal them; good instructions may diminish; and good nature,
for a while, may keep them under, and keep them secret: yea, the work of
grace may mortify, quell, and ouer-master them; but nothing can altogether
root them out, so long as flesh and spirit do strive together in one soul;
that is, so long as soul and body do live together in this life. A woman
void of some, yea, diverse of these faults and follies, no care, no pains, no
diligence, can help a man unto; and from trouble by these faults, where they
have a being, and a working: no wisdom, no love, no piety, can altogether
free him, more then from being stung by the handling of Nettles with naked
hands. It were good therefore for the woman that is to marry, to put her self
in mind of these things beforehand, and to demand of her self in these, or
the like questions: What if mine husband should prove unkind, and disregardfull
of me? What if he should be bitter and ragefull toward me? What if he
should rate me with words of disgrace, more then ever my Father or Master have
done? What if he should lay upon me with his vnmanlike fist? and that when I
seek to give him all content? Or what if he should strike me with a more
paineful and mischievous weapon, though I gave him no cause? How should I bear
railing, taunting, or cutting terms, at his mouth? How cruel, fierce, and
causeless blows at his hand? But yield that he prove not so mad, and mankind;
How if it fall out yet, that he be careless and unkind? What if he deny me
the reasonable liberty which I desire, and should enjoy? and will not suffer
me to have my will in things convenient? How if he show me a lowering
countenance, and an estranged carriage, and that also undeservedly? How if he
grumble and grudge at mine expenses, though far from being lavish and
immoderate? What if he be toylesome himself, and put me also to harder
labor, then ever I endured, being a daughter or a servant? What if he think
much to allow me necessary helps and comforts, in my weakness, sicknesses,
and lying in, and be then most unkind, when I need most kindness, because his
niggardly humor can bear no charges? Or what if he be diverse, and tetchie,
so that nothing in the world can please him, but he will still be brawling,
chiding, and finding fault, though I be as careful as I can, to ekepe my
self from faults? Or what if he prove a voluptuarie, a drunkard, an epicure,
spending that riotously, and wastefully, which were better saved, to provide
for me and his children? What if he be an haunter of Alehouses, or Tauernes,
and come home half drunk, half mad, and power forth all his rage upon me and
my innocent children? What if he consume himself in sports, pastimes, and
gaming, and make us all beggars by his unthriftiness? How could I suffer all,
or any of these troubles, in the flesh? How tedious? How bitter? How terrible
would they seem unto me? Or, What if out of an hateful ouer-louingnesse, he
make himself suspicious of mine honesty, and (in a furious and blind
apprehension of, I know not what, slender probabilities) be ever vpbraiding
me with being such a man's whore, and such a man's whore? How keen? How
cutting? How stinging? How piercing would these terms be unto me? But, ah,
what if he should become unclean and filthy? given to whoredom, embracing
the bosom of strangers, and bringing home unto me the fear, if not the
feeling of loathsome diseases? How should I undergo this heavy burden, which
yet I see many compeld to undergo without remedy? Thus should the woman
consider beforehand in her thoughts, the evils that may be fall her in
marriage.

So like wise should the husband bethink himself in his most serious thoughts:
What if my wife should prove careless, and vnhuswifely, wanting forecast and
skill to make the best of things, and so become an hindrance, rather then an
helper to mine estate? What if she be dainty and lavish, and will not content
her self with mine attire and my fare? What if she be sluttish and
uncleanly, and work loathing in me, by the ill ordering of those things that
should give me most comfort? What if she be froward and snappish, and return
my words unto me with advantage? What if she prove a blab, and withal
inquisitiue, so that she will be ignorant of nothing, and yet can keep no
counsel? What if she be sullen, and sour, and will give me no good
counenance, unless she have her unreasonable will performed in all things?
What if she waste my goods in vain, costlinesse of attire, and in idle
meetings amongst her Goffips? What if she be loose and wanton, and discredit my
family with an evil name? What if she be a very harlot, and defile my bed, and
fill mine house with bastards, so that I be feign to breed up y^ seed of an
adulterer, in stead of mine own offspring? What if she be mischieuously
jealous, and think that I am naught with all I speak to, laying whoredom to
my charge, when I never meant it, and almost enforce me to be wicked, by
putting that into mine head, which I never dreamt of? How should I brook this
life? How should I sustain this burden, and undergo this trouble to the
flesh? And this for the vices of the mind, whereby many times a bad husband, or
a bad wife, do vex and torment their yoke fellow.

But if the mind be not infected with these inward diseases, yet may the body
prove weak and sickly, and become little less trouble some. Wherefore of this
also should the woman consider well beforehand, and so should the man. What if
mine husband should languish away in pain and sickness, so that my life must
be spent in attending a body still dying, and as it were, vnder-propping a
rotten house always falling? What if he lie thus by me groaning, and tossing,
many days, weeks, months, and some years? How shall I undergo the watching,
attendance, charge, grief, discomfort of an husband, neither dead nor alive,
but betwixt both? Or for mine own part, What if breeding be roublesome, so
that I scarce enjoy an healthie day from conception to quickening, from
quickening to travel? What if bringing forth be so tedious and painful, that I
never become a mother, but by going through the torment of an hundred deaths in
one, besides a long weakness after? What if God multiply my sorrows this
way, and give me an evil stomach, pale cheeks, a wan counenance, faint legs,
and a feeble body, liker a carcesse, then a living woman? How shall I bear
headache, heart-ach, back-ach, stomack-ach, etching, casting, longing,
loathing, quawmes, pangs, swoundings, and twenty deaths a day?

The husband also should think thus: How if my wife become infirm and feeble,
lame, impotent, powerless, able neither to got, nor keep, to labor, nor
ouer-fee, nor to do any thing, but groan, and sigh, and hold her sides, and
keep her bed, to mine excessive charge and grief, without being any way able
to be an help and comfort unto me? With what patience should I hear her
groans? With what quietness should I look upon her pangs, and even be sick
in her sickness? But in conclusion, death will approach, and divorce the
husband and wife each from other, of which, either should think before it come
to either, yea, before themselves come together: How can I tell (may the wife
say,) but that if I be married to this husband, he may leave me the mother of
some children, and nwo great with another, and (sending his soul to heaven)
give me alone his cold corpse to put into the earth? How shall I do to see the
breath go out of that beloved body? How shall I endure to see those eyes
clozed, and all those lims and joints now under the arrest of death? How should
I bear the desolate name of a widow? of one that had an husband? where the
cross is aggrauated by the goodness of him, whom I have lost?

So must the husband think: What if either in travail, or otherwise, the Lord
do take away my dear wife from my side? What if she live with me but a few
days, and then death come and make an irrecouerable separation? How shall I
behold those cheeks wan, those lips black, those hands cold, that body
breathles and liuelesse, and fit for none other habitation, but that of worms,
the dark grave, the Kingdom of corruption, the territory of rottennes? How
shall I lay that beloved body, forsaken of the more beloved soul, into the
bowels and entrals of the all devouring sepulcher? Indeed, brethren, so far
as I see, now adays men and women can well enough answer to these questions:
for they can bury and marry, and all in a month, an hastiness deserving to
be deeply censured. But if thou love thine husband; if thouloue thy wife, how
can thou brook this final separation? But we go forward, to show you the
troubles you may meet with, in respect of children.

Sometimes barrenness does cloze up the womb, and suffers not the married
persons to become parents. Sometimes the fruit of the body is granted indeed,
but blasted with sickness, and with speedy death. Sometimes they live but a
few days, or a few years, and then leave the parent more sorry for the
less, then glad at the receiving of them. Sometimes they live to man's age, and
out-liue the parents, but only to be their parents tormentors and murderers,
by their evil and lewd conditions, so disquieting their hearts, that they
would count it an advantage to have been barren, and do often wish they had
laid them in their graves, before ever they had used a tongue to speak. Many a
child puts his mother to after-throes more terrible, then those with which she
brought him into the world at first. Many a father is in travail of his old
child, that knew not the labor of his first bringing forth. Sometimes they
prove stubburne, sometimes riotous, sometimes unclean, sometimes false, and
sometimes bring themselves to infamous punishments, and untimely deaths.
Sometimes they belewd before marriage, and vex the parents, with beholding a
bastard of their names. Sometimes they be wilful inmarriage, and will make
their own foolish choice, against the knowledge or consent of parents. Set
them to learning, they learn nothing but vanity: set them to labor, they
labor for nothing, but to undo themselves; running away from their Masters;
it may be also robbing them; and having run themselves out of breath, come
home ragged, and miserable, but not penitent, ready to do as bad again, and
put their parents to extremity of care; so that they are even distraced, and
at their wits ends, not knowing what course in the world to take with them,
because both fair means and foul means have been used, and none will
avail. Sometimes again, a child seeming towardly, so wins away the parents
affection, that he gives him almost his whole estate, and is content to be at
his finding; and then lo, the monstrous Viper begrudgeth his parents food and
attire, is weary of his old age, and counts his weakness ouer-cumbrous, and
sticks not to show by words and deeds, that he wishes his death with all
his heart; then which (I think) no cross in a child can be more stinging.

Think of these things, you that are, or would be married: What if you prove
dry Kyes, and bear no fruit? How could you brook a life wanting issue, the
most desirable fruit of marriage? Or, What if God give thee children to look
upon for a week, or two? or to play with for a year or two? or to be charged
withal for a doozen, or a score of years, and then send death to fetch them
to himself again? With what quietnese of mind could thoui resign these
gifts into the hand of him that gave them? How could thou endure, to see the
sickness of thy sons or daughters, to see them burn, toffe, tumble, waste,
consume, languish, and pine away? to hear them groan, sigh, complain, cry
out, and roar, and scritch, and fill thine ears with rufull lamentations? How
can thou frame thy self, to see thy branches, as it were withering, half
cut off, and ready to fall from the body of thy family? What shift could thou
make to bury two, three, four, half a dozen, half a score sons or
daughters, some at a day, some at a week, some at a year, some at a dozen,
some at twenty, or more years old? Or if thou escape these petit crosses, in
thy children, how could thou brook a stubburne, rebellious son, or daughter,
that will interchange words with thee, and snap thee up short, and chide faster
then thy self? that will cast upon thee a leering, horse-like, contemptuous
eye? and will stab thy soul, with a lowering, pouting, scornful look? with a
dogged, barking answer? yea, that will steal thy goods from thee, and consume
it in ill company, whores, and drunkenness? that wastes all that thou have
gotten, and given to him? and takes such untamed courses, as do deeply
threaten thine heart and eyes with that worse then deadly spectacle, to see him
one day preaching upon a ladder, with a rope about his neck, because such a
life can hardly conclude in a better death? How will thou suffer this corzie of
a wicked, riotous, ungracious, ungrateful Viper in thine house? who does
nothing else, but strive with abominable words and deeds, as it were with
poysonfull teeth, to gnaw out thy very heart, and devour thy bowels and
entrals; for whom, thou can neither eat, or sleep in quiet; nor be at home
nor abroad in peace; a very Absalom, that would kill his father, to get his
Kingdom? With what resolution could you parents undergo the burying of a
good child, or the living of a bad? But let it be granted, that a man's children
shall prove at least indifferent and tolerable; there is yet another necessary
member of a family, which may make the hear of the family ache exceedingly;
these are servants of both sexes, men and maids. Some servants be idle, and
slothful, and will do little; some be hollow and deceitefull, and will do
nothing but when the governors eye is upon them; some be rude and rebellious,
and will do what they lust themselves for all their governors speeches; some
be false and untrusty, and will purloyne their goods if they can; some be
careless and forgetful, and procure exceeding loss by their negligence; some
be riotous and wastefull, have a sweet tooth, and will have their good cheer
of their Masters cost, but without his priuitie; some be stragglers,
licentious, out-lyers, that lodge not in their Masters families on nights, but
frequent their meetings in the time of sleep, and take their sleep in the time
of working; some he surly and saucy, and will deserve reproves often enough,
but will never recerue them with patience. Some are soft and slow, and though
they seem to be willing, yet are able to dispatch little; some be simple and
indiscreete, and will be doing, but without foresight and wisdom, and so do
little to the purpose; some be quarrelsome and snarling, and always making
brawles with their fellow servants, which needs must end in their masters loss
on both sides. Now let all that affect marriage, ask themselves, What shift
should I make to bear with a slow, drumbling, lazy servant, whose work is
not worth his meat, but he goes about his business, even just like as a tired
horse, fair and softly? Or how should I break a servant, as nimble of his
tongue, as of his hands, that will be my master, and have his own way in all
things, or else he will dispatch nothing? that will be as loud as my self, if
I begin to reprove, and tell me plainly, that he will not mend for chiding,
and I see plainly, that he will not mend without it? How should I live with an
improvident, heedlesse servant, that will lose more on a day, then his labor
is worth in a month? and lets all things go to wreck and ruin under his
hands, only for want of pains and care, that is ever grumbling at his work,
and disliking of his diet, and still thinks that his labor is too painful,
and his fare too hard; that will prig, steal, and lie, and cares not how he
coozens me, so that he can either impudently outface, or craftily beguile me?
In a word, How could I bear slothfulnes, sullennes, wastefulnes, carelesnes,
whereof some are in all, and all in most servants? How could I suffer this
affliction in the flesh, which those that are married, can hardly escape? And
now leaving the persons in the family, let us consider the things thereof, even
the whole estate of men, and see what burdens may thence be cast upon the
shoulders of the married couple.

Who does not know, how troublesome a thing it is to want necessaries; and
withal, how common of those, which when they lived in single life, abounded in
all things, and never knew (nor thought they should know) what it was to need
a penny, but have fared abundantly, and been attired comelily, and had still
something to spare, for the satisfying of their own desires? Very many after
marriage, be put into the close stocks of misery, want, and necessity, not
having wherewithal to provide convenient food and raiment for themselves, and
for their charge, which unawares, and without foresight, is now grown heavy
upon them. It is an easy thing to fill one belly, and cloth one back, and
keep something in the purse, when but one hand must fetch out of it: but to
provide diet and attire for a wife, for many small children, for some servants;
to pay for house-rent, and fuel, and candle; to disburse the compelled
charges of the weakness of a wife, of children, of servants, and to bring up
many with the fruit of one man's labor and industry; this does oftentimes
prove far less easy, then men in imagination can deem it to be. Neither
does this necessity attend alone upon persons of lower rank, that must get
their living by their fingers ends, and live upon their hard and toylesome
labor; but many a man also, that flourishes at first, with a good stock of
his own, and a good portion of his wives, at last, by means of crosses and
losses in diverse kinds, does run through all, and (proving banquerupt,) ends
his days in a prison, and leaves his wife and children to be poorly provided
for, by the cold bounty of friends, or the common stock of the Town or
Parish: yea, many a man that has house and land of his own in good quantity,
and promises himself a liberal maintenance, does yet meet with so many
hindrances, by loss of cattaile, ill bargains, ill debtors, ill servants, or
his own fore-sightlesnesse, that before he thinks of it, even on a sudden,
he runs into debt and danger, and sticks so fast in the Usurers Wax, that he
cannot wind himself out again, until his dying day? How often is it seen
in the world, that riches prove like wilde-fowle, to him, on whose bushes they
sat for a little time, and (taking the advantage of his carelessness, or other
inauoydeable crosses) do fly quite from him, and never return again? yea,
even of those which are not absolute beggars, yet many run so far in debt,
and are so entangled with borrowing and lending, that their entangled estate
does become extremely troublesome, because they want things necessary to
maintain themselves according to their own rank; though for a man of another
condition of life, the things they possess, would even more then suffice.
Run through an whole Town and Country, enquire into all the households, and
search into all the estates of the greater number, and you shall find them
broken, encumbered, low, dejected, and even sticking fast in the mud and mire of
want and penury. Need then fights against the sons of men with eagerness,
and (like an harnessed man) does use violence, and will not be repelled, but by
great labor, and great care, and continual diligence; in which strife, though
a man get the better, and save himself from falling into the hands of poverty,
yet (as it were a bloody victory) it gives him little cause to rejoice in the
conquest. Married men must care for the things of this world, how to please
their yokefellowes, how to maintain their families, how to live amongst their
neighbors, how to pay every man his own; how to get something for their
children; in which care, though they prosper so much, as to bring to pass the
thing cared for, yet is the labor great, and the burden heavy, and the
trouble much unto the flesh. Wherefore the single person must use his eyes to
look, before he leap, and muse thus with himself: Now I am a child, or
servant, I have all things in store and plenty; I have none to care for, but
my self, or scarce my self to care for, being maintained rather by the care
of others, then of my self: when ever I shall marry, the case will be much
altered; I must take pains, and use forecast for my self, and for many
others, besides my self: I must get food for children, and wages for servants;
I must look that nothing be lost, but that something may be gotten; mine head
must guide all, mine eyes must see all, mine hand must be set to every chare,
and nothing will go well forward, unless my self do put a finger, or rather
a shoulder to it. What should I do, if God should cross me, and the World
frown upon me? How should I suffer such extreme penury, as such and such
have done before me? How should I go (as it were in a shoo too straight for my
foot) in a state too little for my mind and education, as such and such have
done? How should I descend to coorser fare, to meaner attire, to smaller
attendance, to lesser respect, then what I was wont to enjoy, in the house of
my Master, or my Parents? How should I do to make hard shifts, to borrow of
one, to pay another, to labor, and toil, and buy, and sell, and live by the
loss? and to see mine estate still tumbling lower and lower, as one, whose
foot has slipped on the side of a steep hill, that can never recover
himself, till he come to the bottom? Oh, how painful is it to strive with a
broken estate, yea, or to keep an whole estate from breaking? If the wife be
not huswifely, if the servants be not trusty, if neighbors be not honest, if
success be not happy; how easily will the sea of wants break in upon me? and
how much ado shall I have to swim against the stream, and save my self from
being even drowned in penury and need? To see the state go back ward, is a
great trouble; to make it stand at a stay, or go forward, is a great trouble:
How shall I be able to wrestle with all these difficulties? And so at last (my
Brethren) have I passedouer this rugged way, and in going along, have pointed
you at a few of the many encumbrances, that, like evil waiting-men, do press
themselves in with the state of Matrimony: and know you, that this which we
have spoken, is but, as it were, a Map before your eyes, or as an imperfect
narration, of a dangerous and troublesome voyage, which your experience will
make you feel, to be ten times more troublesome, then any words can describe
it. And now I will go on to give you some instructions, from this most
approved, and most plainly manifested truth.

CHAP. IX. Containing the first use of the former point.
ANd this troublesomenes of marriage, gives cause of giving counsel to the
unmarried persons, as also to the married. The former must be advised to use
wariness before marrying, and to provide themselves well for each of these
troubles, when they do marry. The other must endeavor so far as is
possible, to prevent the troubles, and to be thankful, if his lot have been to
meet but with few, or at least, the easiest of them. Now then, those amongst
you that are yet single, must be taught to lay this point well to heart, that
they may keep themselves from an unnecessary hastiness to enter upon this
ordinance; I mean, before they be called of God thereto; that is, before they
have carefully used all other means of ouer-ruling themselves. It falls out
many times, that rash and indiscreet Youths (finding a little trouble, in
being subject to their Parents and Masters) entertain a strong conceit, how
happily they should live, if they were married. Hence, having so shallow and
silly a brain, as not to be able to conceive of more, in discourse of reason,
then they can see and feel with their bodily senses, by and by they run
together, come of it what will, and afterward wish bootelesly, that they had
entertained their former estate with more contentedness: yea, some that have
lived long in virginity, and see almost all their youngers married before
them, and therefore also set above them in meetings, and more familiarly
entertained then themselves (not knowing how hard a peniworth this honor is to
them, that have paid for it) are moved with envy, to become wives or husbands,
and (as if it were a disparagement for them, to have lived virgins) do but
even long for an offer, to make an ill bargain, and sell away their own rest,
for a thing of nothing. And there are found also in the world some persons,
that no sooner feel a little moving of natural desires to the wedded
condition, but that they yield straight to their own luxurious fancies, and
will never be at pains to resist such motions, because they desire rather to
satisfy them. Now al such persons should be persuaded to take into their
thoughts, and to consider most advisedly of these words of the Apostle; Such
shall have trouble in the flesh. Marriage is a Rose indeed, of sweet smell, of
goodly hiew; but it wants not its Briars, to fetch blood of their fingers, that
are ouereager to crop it. It is a day not all our so fair and sunshine, but
that a man may be wet to the skin, with the storms that arise in it before the
evening. Wherefore before a man resolve upon an entrance into this estate, let
him lay both ends together, as they use to speak; let him cast all things into
the balance of his judgment, and then judge indifferently, and out of the
direction of reason take that course, which shall be most for his comfort.
Thou are now weary of being under the command of a governor; If thou be a
maid, take heed thou meet not with a worse governor, and more hasty, though
bearing a fairer title; If thou be a man, beware thou meet not with one to
govern, who^ it shall be ten times more hard and troublesome to rule, then to
please almost any ruler. It is tedious to thee, that those are now wives, which
were girls when thou wast marriageable; and husbands which were boys, when
thou wast grown to man's estate; thou think it much, that they carry away
the account from thee, and are in show more set by. Well, take heed, lest in
catching after such honor, thou stumble not upon so many troubles, as shall
make thee wish again, to sit at the lower end of the board, and to give place
to thy youngers in such complements, rather then to be equal with them in
such cumbers. Thou find it a war within thy self to keep down lust; take
heed it be not a greater war, when marriage has assuaged lust, to keep
down impatient risings at the troubles of marriage, or to hold up thine heart
against sinking, and discouragement under those troubles. This estate (as sure
as Paul was a wise man, and a true speaker) has as much sour as sweet; as
many bitter morsels, as pleasant; as much tribulation, as contentment: try it
whosoever well, have shall never find the Apostle false. Therefore be not a fool,
to take up thy self with an ouer-greedie thinking of the benefits thou look
for, not troubling thy self to confider the miseries also, that will affront
thee: but look well to both, and take notice of both, and accept of that,
which judgment shall most incline thee to, not which passion. I confess,
brethren, it is a certain truth, that our Apostle has before delivered in
this Chapter; Better marry, then burn: That is to say, be perpetually
molested with an inconquerable desire of marriage. And therefore I pray you
conceive of these my words, as nothing contrary to those I spoke in the former
point; for this exhortation and that, belong to different kinds of men. If thou
be one that feel in thy self a necessity of marriage, if thou be
one, whose bodily constitution is such, that the best means will not otherwise
keep thy mind in a well-contented chastity, then lay aside all the fear of
troubles; and pray to God to provide thee of a fit yokefollow, fellow, and
accordingly endeavor (after his counsel, and with his blessing) to enter into
this estate. But if thou find power over thy self, and can be master of
thine own will, and have the ruling hand over thine own affections, so as
though some motions do arise within thee, yet they be neither many, nor
violent, nor any, but such, as quickly with a little abstinence, and fervent
prayer, thou can quench and keep down from breaking forth into a flame of
sinful wishes or attempts; now do thou consider of Paul's speeches, embrace
the more easy kind of living. Gallop not into a brake of thorns, from which
thou can find no way out; and be not ouer-venturous to rush upon trouble.
Let not a certain foolish weariness to be under government; let not a fond
conceit, that it is a reproach to thee, to continue so ancient a Maid, or
Bachelor; let not a vein of envy to see others wedded, and thy self (their
elder) living single; let not the desire of accomplishing thine own desires,
or of following the example of others; let not a lothnesse to labor for the
gift of continency; let none of all these things, nor any like to them,
persuade thee to fly to marriage; that is to say, to leave rest and ease, and
run upon trouble. Beware, my brethren, of accounting that a carnal reason,
which you see to be Gods reason. Saint Paul argues thus; Better be single (if
you can without sin) because marriage is a state of more affliction.) It is
(you see) a godly, holy, spiritual reason, beseeming the pen of him that was
inspired from above, we may well take boldness to enforce it upon your
thoughts, and to tell you, that you err exceedingly, if you count it either a
weak, or a fleshly reason: for we all confess, that the God of Heaven uses
neither false nor weak reasons. You may, perhaps, tell me, that Paul meant it
of those times of persecutions, and not of all times indifferently. But I can
certainly tell you, that you shall find, he meant it of all times indifferently,
though it be principally true of such times. The present necessity is not to
be restrained to the days of open persecution, but enlarged to the distresses
of this present life: for else the argument had been unfitly framed for the
state of the Corinthians, seeing at this time they were not assaulted with any
such te^pestuous weather. Wherefore I will be bold to undertake, to persuade
all you unmarried people, Widows, Maids, Batchelors, Widdowers, if you can,
without the far greater mischief of burning; that is to say, of being
carried away with vnsubduable wishes of this kind, to keep you as you be, and
not to procure misery to your selves by a needless change of your estates.
You may, perhaps, imagine, that the comforts of marriage will abundantly
requite the troubles. So all things seem fair afar off, which are not so
nearer hand: but if you will be well advised before you conclude, you shall
find, that indeed the comforts are not worth the troubles. For I pray you, what
be the comforts you talk of? A wife, children: these two be all, and yet I
have told you before, that often these two be the greatest cumbers of
marriage; so that these are but uncertain comforts, and may prove otherwise.
But say that they prove in the best sort; yet I assure you, that they are
far too light, to ouer-weigh all the leaden weights of trouble that lie in
the other scale. If a wife be unto thee a remedy against sin, and a
preservative against fornication; I yield indeed, that the good that thou have
by her, does far more then recompense all the miseries that marriage brings
with it: and if thou have lawful children in Wedlock, to save thee from having
mis-begotten children in whoredom; now thy children do sufficiently requite
all thy pains, care, trouble about them, and thine estate for them. But if
thou have the ability of containing, and could without danger of sin
forbear Matrimony, I am in mind, that all the comfort which the best husband,
or the best wife, and the best children can afford thee, by their best love,
duty, and good affection, can no more counteruaile the troubles of marriage,
then the child's smiling and laughing in the morning can counteruaile the Nurces
breach of sleep all night. If it were otherwise, Paul's argument were not good:
He disswades marriage to them that can contain, because it is more troublous.
If it brought comforts beyond the single estate, which did exceed the cumbers
it brings beyond that estate, our Apostle had made a feeble and ineffectuall
reason: for who cannot say, that what brings more profit, then loss, must be
done, though it bring some loss? And what brings more comfort, then trouble,
must rather be done, though it bring some trouble. Indeed, you must conceive,
that the Apostle here does speak of things, as most times, and usually they
fall out; not intending to point at every particular pair of wedded people,
that ever shall be; but, for the most part, for the far greater number of me^.
Marriage is a fea, that yields more tossing, then the land would do by
far. You may think then; How comes it to pass, that so many do marry
continually? I answer, First, because the most are led by example, or passion,
and do that in haste, which they repent by leisure. And again: The Lord (that
intends to store the World, and made man, not to take ease, but to do service,
though it be with trouble) does not afford to most men, the gift of
continency. But all those men or women, to whom this singular and excellent
gift is afforded, let them take their rest, when God gives them leave, and not
bear a yoke when they may go free.

Some will object, that we seem to set Gods honor below troubles; for
Marriage increases mankind, the increase whereof, is more to Gods glory.

I answer these persons, That Paul was as careful of Gods glory, as they can
be, and yet he disswadeth Marriage, and forbear it. And I answer again; That
what children shall be borne in the World, or what increase of men shall store
the World, is one of the secret things, that I am not to care for, but may
enjoy the rest that God allots me, though thereby I forbear to increase his
number: only if he call me to marry, then am I with willingness to seek
his honor in that kind of life. Wherefore again and again, let Virgins
remember Paul, and keep them where they be; where they have no cursed or unkind
husbands, or wives; no sick or stubburne children; no slothful or froward
servants; no needs and cares of estate to afflict them. And this is the
counsel we give to them that can receive it. But if any for all this, find his
need and desire such, that he must, and will marry: good leave let him have
from us, and good speed from God alone; so that he take the following
instructions with him, which are two.

CHAP. X. Containing a second use.
For the unmarried.
observing such due care therein, that he may in his very entrance cut off the
root, and stop the fountain of very many troubles. They say, the beginning of
a business being well performed, is as good as one half thereof; and the most
important matter in buildings, is to lay a good foundation. Doubtless it is so
in this matter of marriage, whereinto he that makes a godly, and wise entrance,
shall find his proceeding to be much more easefull and comfortable, then any
aftercare could make it, without this first care. Now in setting about
marriage, wisdom and piety both, command these two principal things: first,
that the younger people, sons and daughters, do take the counsel and
consent of their Parents and Governors. Secondly, that they labor to make a
due choice of their yoke-fellowes.

For the first, Gods blessing is largely and firmly promised unto those
children, that do honor their Parents; but his curse must needs follow them
(by the law of contraries) that shall dishonor them. If therefore a man, in
the very Preface, as it were, to his Marriage, shall thrust the blessing of God
from him, in refusing to honor, and shall pull the curse of God upon him, in
dishonouring his Parents (the chief instruments of his being, under God, the
conduit Pipes, by which God has derived all the benefits of Nature unto him,
and to whom he stands most deeply, and vnrequiteably engaged, by the receiving
beforehand, of many and great comforts and good turns;) how is it possible,
but that he must create a world of mischief to himself? He goes to marry
without, and against Gods liking, that goes to marry without, and against the
liking of his Parents, only so, that his Parents do not abuse their power
over him against the will of God. For it is abundantly plain by the
Scriptures, that God has committed his power, of giving a daughter to a son,
or taking a daughter for a son, unto the Parents of that son or daughter,
saying to the Parents of Israel; Thou shall give, or not give thy daughter;
thou shall take, or not take a daughter to thy son. Wherefore a child's duty
in this case, is not to suffer his, or her affections to be wedded unto any
person, before the Parent have showed his good liking; or if any affection to
any particular person shall arise in them, then to do as Samson did, go unto
the Parent, and request their consent, and help. Yea, even the son of Hamar,
an Heathen, had learnt this lesson, and caused his father to be his spokes-man
to Jacob for Dinah. Yea, that child that shall find a need of marriage, ought
not to conceal his need from his Parents, no more then from God, whose deputy
the Parent is in that behalf, but to crave of God first, and then of the
Parent, to provide a remedy for his disease. Religion and Discretion, Nature
and Grace, do all concur, in requiring of children this duty, and
prescribing this rule unto them in marrying. If crosses come, whither must the
afflicted person run for comfort, but to Parents and friends? Which, how can he
do, if he have refused their direction in marrying? When sorrows pinch, what
ease is there, but in craving help of God? which how can one do, without a
sting to his soul, if in entering upon that state, he have neglected the
commandments of God? So he shuts up Heaven and Earth against himself, that
wrongs his Father in Heaven, and father in Earth, by a rash and preposterous
rushing into Matrimony, and leaves himself no harbor to enter into, against a
storm arise. Be wise therefore, and be godly, ye children; let judgment rule
you, and not passion; neither give your affections, nor your selves, nor follow
your passions in bestowing your selves, but with the priuitie and good
allowance of those, from whom you had your selves. Not one marriage in an
hundred has thriuen well, that was not ordered according to this rule; an
error (such so gross an error) in the beginning of an action (and such an
important action) can hardly, or not at all, be corrected afterward.

But, secondly, a fit person must be chosen with whom to couple ones self.
Though all the griefs of marriage come not from the vices and disorders of the
yoke-fellowes, yet the most grievous, and most bitter of them do. To have a
fit yoke fellow, will prevent many matrimonial troubles, and will make all
easier. Now in a yoke fellow, the maine matter to be desired, is virtue and
godliness; and he that in choosing, vouchsafes that the first place, shall
surely be blessed in his choice: but whosoever sets other, and baser things
before that, does deal preposterously and foolishly, and setting the Cart
before the Horse (as the Proverb has it) can never drive comfortably forward
in the way that he would go. A virtuous, godly person, will allow no sin,
will hearken to counsel, will receive admonitions and reproves. In a word,
such an one has no incorrigible fault, all his diseases be curable. But a
wicked and ungodly person has a deaf ear, a wilful heart, an incurable
soul; nothing will make him mend his faults. The curse of God pursues the
wicked man, how can any thing, but cumber, and attend such a person into the
family? Who would therefore admit such a companion, though laden with precious
Pearls, or painted with the fairest painting in the World? Beauty is but
painting, age and sickness will wear it away, why should any man make that
his guide in choosing a wife? No soldier would choose a leaden sword, because
the scabberd is Velvet, and the hilt gilded. A fair countenance will no more
help to the happiness of a married couple, if grace and virtue be away, then
a fine Haft will make a knife cut well, if it be of evil metal. Wherefore
follow not the eye, the most fickle and fond of al senses, in a matter of so
great consequence, as the choice of a wife or husband. And surely for wealth,
what is it but luggage? If wisdom and virtue be absent, it burdens, and does
not comfort? Better a man without money, then money without a man; could the
Heathen say. Should Christians be less judicious? Let not covetousness
conduct thee into marriage: It is a blind vice, and will surely lead the man
into the pit, that will wink and follow it. A virtuous woman is above Pearls.
Solomon said so, that knew the worth of all Pearls. A virtuous man must needs
be as worthy as a virtuous woman. The holiness and good conditions of a
companion, are ten times more available for the comfort of those, with whom he
must converse, then the color of his skin, or stuffing of his purse. He or she
shall live worse the^ poorly, that lives with a rich Nabal. Parents, destroy
not your children, by matching them to miserable riches. Young men and women,
destroy not your selves, by seeking a good outside, but let both parents and
children judge, as God judges, and follow his counsel, that says, Not the
rich, not the fair, but, The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor.
He takes the best course, to gain content in marriage, that chooses not the
finest body, the sweetest face, the greatest state, the largest portion, but
the holiest heart, the richest soul, the beautifullest spirit, and the most
virtuous man or woman. This is the foundation of welfare in marriage; lay this
at first, thou can never else rear up a comfortable building. Secondly, in
other things (if with the former it may be), an equal yoke fellow would be
taken, of due proportion in state, birth, age, education, and the like, not
much under, not much over, but fit and correspondent. Those matches do seldom
prove but uncomfortable, where this rule is not observed. The rich and noble
will likely despise, or set light by the poorer and meaner: so will younger do
the aged; and there is nothing but misery in marriage, if the yoke-fellowes
neglect one another. David was hardly drawn to be a Kings son in Law, being
himself a mean man in Israel. His wisdom made him not hasty to
ouer-preferre himself. Disproportioned marriages are seldom made, but out of
sinister and corrupt intentions, and such intentions do never, almost, fail,
to bring wretchedness to such, as are led by them. God himself has set us
the best coppie of marriage that can be: he made Euah meet for Adam; she
answered him, and he her in age, birth, and all things: he shall speed best,
that follows nearest, this first president of Matrimony. We cannot have a
wiser counselor, then the Author of all wisdom; and he is surely deceived,
that thinks to do better then God. Take therefore a yoke fellow meet for
thee; for the agreement of the married folk, is the best help against all
troubles, and this is the surest way to procure agreement. And so you have
heard the first instruction, concerning a discreet entrance to prevent trouble.

The second follows, and that is as necessary, even to expect trouble, and
prepare for it. When God foretells any thing, we should make account of it.
Future things are known to him that disposes all things; wherefore it is
folly to flatter ones self with hopes, contrary to his predictions.
Expectation of an enemy, is half an arming; but suddenness adds
terriblenesse unto a cross, and makes it insupportable. Say then to, and
within thy self: I find that God does lead to marriage, and I will follow
him; but he forewarnes me also, of what I shall find in marriage, and I will
believe him. I know I shall have more trouble, then before I had; but by Gods
help I will bear it with all quietness. And, Lord, seeing this world is a
world of trouble, and all estates are full of briers; now that thou have called
me to Matrimony, give (I beseech thee) a willing and able mind, to brook well
the adversities of Matrimony. Most folks run into marriage, as boys into a
crowd, to fee some sport, never forethinking how troublesome it is to stand in
a throng; and when they be almost pressed to death by the press of people,
then do they cry out, and would feign get out, if they knew which way. Oh
(says one) if I had known before, that I should have met with such a deal of
sorrow, I would never have married! Why, thou improuident fool: How was it
that thou knew not that before? This Scripture was not kept from thee, was
it? The Apostle speaks plainly enough; thou might have read, or heard it,
if thou would thy self, Such shall have trouble in the flesh. Did thou
never read this Scripture? or never mark it? or never believe it? If thou
readdest it not, it was thy profaneness; if thou markedst it not, it was thine
heedlesnesse; if thou did not believe it, it was thine infidelity: every
way it was thy folly, not to know before, what God had told thee before, that
marriage would be more full of afflictions, then single life. Now you that are
to marry, rush not thus headlongly into Marriage, that you may not afterward
make bootelesse complaints against it. Feed not your selves with windy hopes
(this feeding will breed no strength;) I hope mine husband will prove a very
kind man; my wife a very dutiful wife; I hope I shall not breed and bear with
so much pain and grief, as such, and such; I hope I shall not have such
weakly and sickly children, and so forth. Fond body! Where be the grounds of
thine hopes? Upon what props are they built? To hope without ground, is to play
the merry fool. No, it is better, as the Proverb has it, to fear the
worst, that the best may save it self, and to arm up thy self in this wise:
Like enough I shall have as many crosses as such, and such: But what if I have?
I do not run rashly upon them, God leads me, my Parents guide me, I follow
sure directors, God will also strengthen me; and by his mighty help, I will
go chearefully under these troubles: for why should not I be subject to the
decrees and statutes of the King of this world? If he will send trouble, shall
I murmur? Shall I faint? No, I will not, but sue to him for strength, and stay
upon him for help, and comfort my self in him, in all these cumbers. Think
of trouble, look for trouble, resolve to be quiet under troubles, and pray
for strength to be so; and then marry if thou see good; then shall thy
troubles exercise and increase thy patience and other graces, not corrupt and
overthrow them, as else they will.

CHAP. XI. Containing one use to the married.
To the married.
Now you that are married, hear your part of instructions. And first, be
advised to take the best course that may be, of preventing so many as may be
prevented, of the troubles of marriage. I know, you will all confess at first
hearing, that this is good advice: but strait you will ask further counsel,
and say, How shall I do this? I will therefore show you the way, see that you
walk in it. The first means to prevent the troubles of marriage, is this, to
fear God, and walk in his ways. This is a common help to make all estates
comfortable: for the blessing of God attends them that fear him, and comfort
attends his blessing. The man that fears God, has this promise from God,
that his wife shall be like the fruitful Vine, comfortable as well as
fruitful: His children like the Olive plants, profitable and beneficial, as
well as many. Godliness is good for all things; it has the promises of this
life, and of that which shall be, and these promises must needs be fulfilled.
An holy conversation of life, a well ordered and religious carriage, in the
whole frame of life, this makes life sweet, and all the comforts of life
comfortable. If thou walk in Gods ways, he has undertaken to make all you
do, prosperous. Lo, a sure way of attaining as much happiness, as this lower
world can yield. For why does God send troubles, but to correct sin, and to
redress disorders, and to draw men to godliness? If they follow godliness of
their own accord, by harkening to the counsel of his Word, fewer afflictions
will be needful, and fewer shall be sent: for he corrects not willingly, but as
Parents give bitter draughts to their children, even for the health and profit
of their children. But secondly, the man and wife that would live cheerfully,
must love each other tenderly and plentifully. Much, hearty, and holy love to
one another, will sweeten all crosses, and keep out the worst and greatest
crosses. Let the husband love his wife, as Paul enioyneth, and let wives be
lovers of their husbands, as the same Apostle prescribes, charity will cover al
things, and hope al things, and believe all things, and suffer all things, and
so will mend very many things, y^ else would surely go amiss. Wherefore strive
more to store thine heart with love to thine yoke fellow, then to fill thy
coffers with gold and silver: for grace is more available to felicity then
wealth; and charity is the King of graces. And that you may love each other in
large quantity, and after a spiritual manner, pray often each with other, and
each for other, and that will breed much love. Do much good to the souls of
each other, and you shall not choose, but be kindly affectioned one to another.
Thirdly, instruct your children and servants in the fear and knowledge of God,
laboring to make them Gods children and servants, and then they will prove to
you good children and servants; or if they prove otherwise, the testimony of
your consciences, that your diligence has not been wanting to make them such,
will comfort you much in their badnesse. Dutifulnes and obedience to God, will
come attended with dutifulnes and obedience to you: care of pleasing God, will
breed care of pleasing you: a good conscience toward their chief Governor, will
beget a good carriage to you their inferior governors. If piety dwell in your
hearts and houses, it will chase the greatest troubles out of doors, and keep
the rest from breeding much vexation. And if you seek to plant and water it in
your families, it will likely grow there; or if it should not, yet the doing of
duty will comfort the heart, though success be wanting to endeavor. Lastly,
for your estates, let your hearts be moderate, and your hands diligent. Labor
about the things of the world, else an idle person must walk upon an hedge of
thorns. Love not the things of the world, else a person greedy of gain, shall
trouble his own house. The diligent hand will bring sufficiency, and the
moderate heart will bring contentment, and then the troubles of a man's estate
must needs be made few and easy. He that, for Gods sake, applies his calling,
and not for wealths sake, shall have Gods favor in his calling, and either
shall not be crossed, or shall not be vexed by crosses. So have we showed you,
as good directions as we could, to keep afflictious out of doors. But no care
will altogether shame them. You must therefore set your selves in the second
place, to bear them patiently, and not to faint under them, nor to be
distempered by them. Never vnwish marriage for the cumbers of marriage.
Had-I-wist, is seemly in no man's mouth. O that I had never married, is a most
indecent thought in an husbands heart, and a fond word in his lips! Why should
our wills oppose Gods will, when he has made it known unto us? Paul says
before; Art thou joined to a wife? seek not to be loosed. A valiant soldier
does never repent of the battle, because he meets with strong enemies; he
resolves to be conqueror, and then the more and stronger his foes, the greater
his honor. So must the husband and wife resolve to conquer the troubles of
marriage, and use the buckler of patience against the blows of adversity,
that they may conquer. But here also you will ask how? and I must tell you
how. The means to get patience in the cumbers of the wedded estate, are
chiefly these: first, to resolve, you must and will be patient: secondly, to
pray that you may be patient: thirdly, to consider your comforts, as well as
your crosses: and fourthly, to look up to God, as the Author, and Heaven, as
the end of your troubles. A firm purpose of will to do, or suffer any thing,
does greatly fortify the soul. He that often thinks, I am bound to bear my
part of trouble quietly, seeing every man alive has his portion in troubles;
and seeing we have brought troubles upon our selves; and seeing these troubles
are but short and light in comparison of those we have deserved; and therefore
I will even buckle my shoulders to the burden, and not give way to shrinking;
this man shall find, that an hard load will lie lighter upon a resolute heart,
then an easier burden, upon an irresolute spirit. Whatsoever a Christian man
does constantly tell himself, that he has great reason to do, shall have
much good by doing, and must needs do, or do worse; and therefore inacts this
statute in his mind, By Gods help I will do it; that shall he be able to do
in good measure, and God will pass by his failings. Do thus much for the
matter of patience, inure your minds to think much of the reasons that should
induce you to it, and upon those reasons to conclude, that through the gracious
assistance of God, you will be patient, and you shall be so. But resolutions
without prayer are presumptuous, and God does use to chastise presumption, by
making it find its own weakness. Wherefore you must pray much and often, as
well as resolve. Strong resolutions, joined with strong supplications, cannot
be in vain. Lord, must thou say, by nature I am impatient, apt to fume and
fret, or else to faint and quail: but, O, let me be strengthened with all
might, according to thy glorious power, unto all long-suffering and patience
with ioyfulnesse. Lord, strengthen me against all infirm and impotent fallings
of heart, against all furious and violent risings of spirit: and seeing thou
have brought me into marriage, enable me to bear the burdens of marriage. The
frequent renewing of such acknowledgements of our own feebleness, and
petitions to be fortified by the might of Gods Spirit, will cause, that we
shall find the grace of God to be sufficient for us in the bearing of trouble,
as well as in the resisting of temptation. But thirdly, taste of the sweet, as
well as of the sour of thine estate. Call to mind what contents and benefits
thine estate affords, as well as what calamities. Doubtless, brethren, the
comforts of marriage are very desirable. Many benefits are found in this
estate, that are wanting in the other. We must reckon as well our gains as
losses, as well our profit as pains, and this will help to make the losses and
labor to seem little. Job said, Shall we receive good at Gods hand, and not
evil? Lo, the speedy remembrance of what prosperity he had enjoyed,
enabled him to be quiet in his present tribulation: so must the married persons
do in their estate, for Job is our president for patience. Thine yoke fellow
is often froward, but is he not kind sometimes? Some children die, or are
sick; are not some and more alive and healthie? so in the rest. Wrong not God
and thy self so much, as to forget what good he has done for thee; or if happily
the contents of Marriage will not (as think in most they will not) answer the
troubles; yet refer thy thoughts (for I speak to men that fear God) to
those spiritual and celestial privileges that thou do now in part, and
shall hereafter more largely enjoy. Look to thy Father, chastising thee in
this world, but ready to crown thee in the other world. I have a bad wife or
husband, but a good God, and a rich inheritance in Heaven. My children be
naught, but God has made me his child. My servants evil, but my self
admitted into Gods service. My state low and penurious here, but my sins
pardoned, and a most glorious, honorable, and happy estate laid up for me
hereafter. The Lord that now does exercise me with these trials, will afford
me so much the more glory in Heaven, by how much I have more trouble in
earth; and shall I not manfully, and chearefully bear that affliction, which
will add to mine heavenly bliss? Not only troubles suffered for
righteousness sake, do make the Crown of glory more bright and weighty,
but all troubles patiently suffered, are the seed of great rewards to come.
Job did not suffer persecutions for righteousness sake, yet his miseries have
wonderfully augmented his happiness. Not only, though principally, are they
blessed that suffer for Religion and well-doing, but if we suffer patiently for
Gods sake, blessed are we in these sufferings, what-euer be the occasion of
them. Lo, now I have taught you how to be patient in the adversities of
Matrimony. I have one word more to say unto you, and so an end. These whom God
has pleased so to prosper in Matrimony, as that their troubles have been but
very few and light, in comparison of the general case of men in this respect,
must be earnestly admonished, to be heartily and often thankful. Benefits
lose their chiefest fruit, if they come not into our hearts and mouths, as
matter of praise. A greater outward blessing, then a peaceful and prosperous
living in marriage, what think you, can God give unto a man or woman? Let not
this goodness be slighted, if God have vouchsafed it to any of you. We cry
out for anguish, if we be crossed; Why do we not also shoute forth into
praises and thanks, when we are comforted? If God have given thee a virtuous
yoke fellow, in whom there are few vices, and those so soundly mortified, that
they break forth but little to thy grief: will thou not give thanks for
this? What would he that has a shrew, a waste-good, an harlot, give to have a
wife of such conditions as thine? What would she that has an unthrift, a
tyrant, a whoremonger, part with, for an husband of thine husbands qualities?
Think thou that little worth, which another that wants, would prize at so
high a rate? O, let us not forfeit Gods benefits, or the comfort of Gods
benefits, for want of esteeming, for want of acknowledging the^. I have
insta^ced in case of husbands and wives; enlarge you your own thoughts to
children, servants, estates, and all other like particulars, and when you see
that in any, or all of these, the Lord has spared you from much of that
anguish, which matrimony has laden others withal, then break forth into his
praises, and say: Lord, the most that will marry, do meet with much cumber in
marriage; but such has been thy goodness to me, that this yoke has been very
easy to me, and my comforts have been as great, my crosses as few, as I could
well expect in marriage: O, therefore make me more obedient to thee then
others, because thou have made my Matrimony more easefull to me then many
others. True thankfulness must be rooted in the heart, and blossom in the
tongue, and fructify in the actions.

(...).
FINIS.
Mortification.

A SERMON PREACHED UPON THE THIRD TO THE COLOSSIANS, THE fifth Verse; Mortify
therefore your members that are on earth.

By WILLIAM WHATELY, Preacher of the Word of God in Banburie.

Apoc. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne, says
the Amen, the true and faithful Witness, the beginning of the Creation of God.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man. 1623.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND RELIGIOUS Lady, the Lady IOANE HERICK, all health and
happiness.
MAdam: This simple Treatise is yours in all right; therefore it offers it self
and its service unto you: But at your request, it had not been preached, where
it was; But for your importunity (you know well) it had much less been
printed, as it is. Seeing it is yours, I beseech you accept it, and make much
of it, and (if it be fit for so good a purpose) make much use of it. Howsoever,
I pray you continue to wish well to him that sends it, who does much approve of
your graces, and respect your person, and will always continue to pray for the
welfare of your self, and all yours, resting ever,

Your Ladyships in all Christian duties much bounden, William Whately.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GOod Reader: to deal plainly with thee, I was long afraid and ashamed to put
pen to paper, about this theme of Mortification. Not because the point is not
exceeding necessary to be handled; but because I found my self very
unworthy and unfit to entreat of it. Being guilty to my self, of being
far from having done any thing worth the naming, in the practice of the
duty, I thought it scarce likely, that I should do any great good in writing
of it, and I was even ashamed to publish any thing of mortification, finding my
self, alas, so little mortified. At last yet, I resolved to adventure on this
work for two reasons: One, because I am privy to my self, of having
indeauoured (in some poor degree, and with some truth,) to perform my self,
what here I have taught, and that also, not without some little success, tho
far short of what I ought, and (but for mine own carelessness) might have
attained. Another, because I conceived, that as a man, which having but a small
stock, can himself make but small gains of its return, may yet give husband
like directions to him that has a larger stock, by which he may improve his
ten talents to more advantage, then else he could do: so a man, that having
but a small quantity of grace, can do little himself, may yet give sound
directions to those that have received a greater measure of Grace, to further
them much in their spiritual thrift. And as he that by some disease or wound,
is half lame, and can go but a slow pace in the known right way, may yet
direct others to the right way, and quicken their pace, by calling upon them;
so may he, whose corruptions suffer him to proceed but slowly in the ways of
holiness, show that way to others, and hasten them therein. In a word, he may
be a good Drummer or Trumpeter in the war, that has but a weak body, and
feeble lims to fight. Hinder not thy self therefore, from profiting by this
Work, by looking on the weaknesses of him that wrote it; strive thou to run
apace in this path, I will either follow after thee, or bear thee company, or,
if I can, go before thee, as fast as I can. Fight thou valiantly at the sound
of this Trumpet, and I will also strive to use the hand, as well as the mouth;
and the Sword, as well as the Trumpet. So committing my self and thee, to the
good favor and grace of our common Father, and requiring a few of thy prayers
for my self in special, I rest

A wel-willer to thy victory against thy spiritual foes, William Whately.
Banbury, Feb. 17. 1622.
MORTIFICATION.
Coloss. 3.5. Mortify your members which are upon the earth.


CHAP. I. Opening the Text, and showing the Doctrine.
IN this brief precept (to omit all speech of the coherence, because the
meaning is plain enough without it) the Apostle delivers a most necessary
point of Christian doctrine. Three things obseruable in the Text.
For the better explanation of his words, we must in them consider three
things. An action to be done. The object of this action, and the persons to
whom the action appertains. The action is, Mortify, or to speak in plain
English, Put to death. First, an action to be done, Put to death.
In this phrase the holy Ghost seems to allude unto the ancient sacrifices,
whereof, so many as consisted of things having life, were appointed to be
slain by the Priest, before they were offered up upon the Altar, as a type of
our killing the old man, before we can become an acceptable sacrifice unto
God. Now to slay sin, is nothing else, but to labor with all our might,
utterly to subdue it, that it may have no command, vigor, working, no, nor
being in us. It is a constant endeavor of causing our corruptions to cease to
stir, to move, or to abide in our hearts, as a dead man is no longer a man,
nor can perform the actions of a man, and is said no longer to be amongst
men. We must not surcease striving against sin, till we have utterly
abolished it; our desire and endeavor must be to use it, as a venomous
creature, even to knock it on the head, and make a clean riddance of it. We
must not account it sufficient to fine our corruptions (as it were) or to
confine them, or to imprison, or to bind them, or to hurt, or to maime them (as
some kind of inferior offenders are chasticed) but as a capital offender, a
mortal enemy, an irreclaimeable traitor, we must see execution done upon it,
and make a final and an utter dispatch of it.

2. 2. The object of the action, Your members on earth.
This is the action enjoined. The object of the action is, your members that
are upon earth. By these earthly members, he means our manisold, corrupt,
and sinful dispositions, according as himself does make manifest, by
instancing in some for all, saying, Fornication, uncleanness, etc. There are
in every man's soul, an innumerable company of disordered inclinations,
contrary to the will of God and our duty, as ignorance, unbelief, pride,
folly, worldliness, silthinesse, and all that rabble of evils, which we
commonly call vices. Now all and each of these must be pursued with a mortal
hatred, and assailed with the same earnestness and fury, as we would do an
enemy in the fields, even with an intention of slaughtering him if we can. It
will not be amiss to consider of some reasons, why our corupt lusts should be
called members, and why members upon earth. There seems to be a threefold
reason of this name.

3. First, the whole corruption of our evil nature, Why Lusts are called,
Members.
is in Scripture compared to a man's body, and called, The body of death;
wherefore the several corruptions are fitly termed members, or parts,
concurring to the full constitution of the whole body. You know, that Nature
has prepared for man, head, shoulders, arms, breast, belly, thighs, legs,
feet, and the rest; in the fit and apt joining together of which, the being
of the humane body does consist. So does our wickedness consist in many
particular disorders, pride, unbelief, rebellion, impatiency, hypocrisy,
carnal sorrow, carnal confidence, wrath, uncleanness, earthly-mindednes, and
diverse others as bad as these; the joining of which together, does make up the
universal sinfulness of our nature, called, The flesh and the old man.
Again, they are called members upon the same consideration, wherein our
Savior (inioyning the same duty that here the Apostle) is pleased to use this
figurative kind of speech; Mark. 9.43, etc.
If thy eye offend thee, pull it out, and cast it from thee: if thy foot
offend thee, cut if off, and cast it from thee: and if thine hand offend he,
cut it off, and fling it from thee. Because to a man now corrupted, his
corruptions are as natural as his members; he brings them into the world with
him, together with his hands, eyes, feet; they begin and grow in him, with the
beginning and growing of his lims, and, in his account, they are as necessary,
useful, pleasing, and as dear and tender to him, as his arms, or his legs,
or his very eyes, yea, the apple of his eye. Nothing in the world is more
precious to the unsanctified and unregenerate man, then his lusts; he could as
easily part with the joints of his body, as with them, yea, with his whole
heart, he would be content to redeem the liberty of following them, by the
loss of his eye. Well are they termed members, because to the carnal man,
they are as well-beloved, as his members; and he will as lothly part with them,
and as il spare them, as his members; yea, a man already in part sanctified,
finds it as much to do to wrestle against them (till they be not thoroughly
mastered, as it were a member mortified and deadned) as if he were to wound and
mangle his own flesh, and with the right hand to chop off the left. Lastly,
they are called members, because they do as it were dwell, and work in our
members, showing their wicked force and strength in them, and striving by them
to break forth into act, carrying them captives, as weapons of
unrighteousness. For example: Fleshly lust shows it self in the eye, in the
hand, in the foot, in the tongue, stiuing to come to that strength, till it
may drive a man to speak, or work something in the parts of his body, that
makes for the expressing, feeding, pleasing, satisfying of the same. Because
our corruptions have their residence and operation in our members, therefore
have they justly borrowed their name, James 4.1.
as being the lusts which war in our members, and that other law in our
members, which fights against the law of our mind, and leads us captive to
the law of sin, Romans 7.23.
which is in our members, as elsewhere the scripture speaks.

4. Moreover, Why members upon earth.
they are termed our members upon earth, because they are exercised upon things
of this earth, as their proper object, drawing and carrying our minds to these
matters, that are here below, base, trifling, vain, and terrene, but hindering
and diuerting us, from raising up our souls, to the pursuit of the things that
are high, heavenly, celestial, excellent, above with Christ our head, there
where he sits in glory. All, or in a manner, all the disordered
inclinations that are in us, tend to the making of us earthly-minded (eager to
attain these mirie, dirtie things, that may be had in this lower region of
the world, as pleasure, profit, credit, ease, and the like,) fitly therefore
are they named earthly. And in another regard is this title duly given to them,
because they will continue with us, during our natural life and abode upon the
earth; nor ever shall they be quite separated from us, till we be translated
to a more noble and glorious habitation in the Heavens. The vices that are in
us, all the while that we are in this world, will hang like Lead, or some other
weighty thing, upon us, and with a kind of violence, pull and hale us
downward, to the sensual and corporal good of this present, short, and
momentany being, which the Apostle well knowing, called them our members upon
earth. And this is the object of the action.

The persons that are enjoined to perform this action, 3. The persons that
must perform the action.
upon this object, are the Colossians; men already called to the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the belief of his glorious Gospel; and men
already sanctified, and regenerate in part, yet had they need (and therefore so
have all Christians also) to continue wounding, and thrusting through these
lusts, which have (as the Proverb speaks) nine lives, and will not be
killed with one blow, or with one dart. So the meaning of Saint Paul is, as if
he had without all figure, taken up a larger exhortation in this wise: O ye
Colosians, Professors of the true Religion of our Lord, know ye, that it is
your duty (whereof I enjoin you to be mindful and careful) not alone to
make some slight and slender opposition to those corrupt and vicious
inclinations of your hearts, which you shall find still stirring in your
members, and always thrusting you forwards, to the seeking of the transitory,
and momentany things of this life; but also with all your might and power, to
strive to overcome them utterly, with a mind and purpose to continue so
striving, till you have totally freed your selves from their loathed and
troublesome working.

All Saints must study mortification.
All the Saints of God, must with all earnestnes, study their mortification.
Those that profess the Gospel of Christ Jesus, must take incessant, and
unweariable pains, with constant and perpetual endeauours, more and more to
subdue, beat down, and vanquish al and every of these wicked, sinful, and
unlawful affections, lusts, inclinations and habits, which are in them
(drawing them to things terrene and earthly) till they have even pulled them up
by the roots, and cast them quite out of their hearts. Scarce any point is
more plainly and frequently required, not an Epistle almost, wherein it is not
commended to the Saints: Romans 8.13.
If ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye shall live, says
the Apostle in one place. Lo, without it there is no living, it is a
necessary condition, required to the attainement of salvation. And again,
They that are Christ's, Gal 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. He takes it as a
thing granted, that all true Christians have in part performed this work, and
therefore will go forward to bring it to more perfection. Ephesians. 1.22.
And in another place, he says; Put off the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceivable lusts. These lusts are like to unclean and filthy
rags, which the children of God must fling from them. It is for Rogues and
Vagrants, to wrap up themselves in rotten and foul clouts; the Sons and
Daughters of Nobles and Kings, must array themselves with costly, clean, and
sightly garments, befitting the honor of their birth and place. A beggars
dirty, patched cloak, does no more beseem a Princes back, then the practice
of sinful lusts does become a Christian. We must not shame our selves with
such vile, and base things, but cast them far away from us. 1. Pet 2.11.
Another Apostle also wills us, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against our souls. As men that are wise, will not converse with their mortal
enemies: (specially strangers traveling in a far country, will not willingly
associate themselves with those that hate them, and conspire their death;) so
the people of God, must have nothing to do with sinful lusts of any sort; for
these do nothing else but seek the ruin of their souls, what ever flattering
show they may make.

CHAP. II. Declaring some reasons of the point from the necessity of the duty.
But what should I heap up Texts of Scripture, to confirm a most confessed
truth? reasons of the point.
only for the better provoking of your souls to the practice of the duty, let
it not seem amiss, that I stand somewhat largely, to acquaint you with store
of sound reasons, why you should do it. Know then, that this work of
mortification, is a work needful, profitable, equal, and successful. Need
compels, profit allureth, equity conuinceth, and success encourages. You
must do it, or do worse; you shall be gainers by doing it; it is most
righteous that you do it; and in laboring about it, you shall not lose your
labor; therefore about it with all speed, and with all diligence.

2. First, 1. Fromthe necessity of it.
for the necessity of mortifying our earthly members. This arises partly from
Gods commandment, partly from the great danger that will surely befall us,
upon our negligence herein. We all yield, that the commandment of a superior,
does tie those that are under his authority, In regard of Gods commandment.
and makes that thing needful for them to do, which before was left to their
own pleasure and liking. His commandments therefore, that is the highest
Superior, do lay the most absolute necessity upon his inferiors. Must is
for the King, we say; How much more for the King of Kings? His commandment
binds our consciences, and imposes upon our souls, a necessity of doing,
what he commands: so nothing can be thought more needful, then to do what
God requires; and we have showed you before, that God has often, and
expressly required you, to plye this work. Unless therefore you will become
extremely rebellious against the manifest will of the greatest Commander that
is, or can be; you must endure the pains (though a paineful pains it will
prove) of putting your lusts to death. This is none of the things which you
may do, if you please; if not, it is at your liberty; the matter is not great,
if it be left undone. Nay, the strongest bond in the world does oblige you to
it; the bond of your duty to God, that made you. We may make use of Paul's
words in this matter; Necessity lies upon you, and woe unto you if you do it
not; for the commandments that require this duty, will never admit of a
dispensation.

3. In regard of the danger that will else ensue.
But if God did not command it, yet the mischief that will follow, if we be
careless of it, will make a wise man to perceive a necessity of doing it. We
say in our common speech, That we must needs do that, the not-doing whereof
will procure us such inconveniences, as a man of understanding should not be
willing to hazard himself unto. Now doubtless, if we set not forward the
work of mortification with constant care, the mischiefs that will ensue, are
insufferable; for we have a whole world of corruptions in us, which, if we
fight not against them continually, will gather strength, and become mighty,
to the great disquietnesse of our souls. He that finds many diseases growing
upon him, says, He must needs take physic to cure those diseases: he that
has diverse deadly wounds in his body, thinks he cannot choose but use
plasters to heal those wounds: and we that have many corruptions, must needs
take care to keep under those corruptions. For tho the servants of God, at the
time of their regeneration, do receive power over their corruptions, yet they
be not wholly ride of them. The dominion of sin is taken away, at the
conversion of our souls to, God, the presence of them is not taken away: they
rule no longer in us, but still they remain in us; and that so, as, if they be
not with daily labor kept under, they will grow violent and headstrong, and
go near to recover their ancient sovereignty, at least, to bring us into
great thraldom, as the remnant of the Canaanites did the Israelites, that were
slack in rooting them out. As therefore they that have many enemies, must
fight, so must we; the case standing with us here, as with soldiers in the
field, or with combatants in the lists, that must kill or be killed, at least
kill, or be wounded. For, besides the aptness of our lusts to gather
strength, we have the devil also (a crafty, and a watchful enemy) always
seeking after all occasions of increasing and stirring up our corruptions, and
laboring both to put fuel to the fire (as it were) and also to blow the
coals too; that, if it be possible, he may make them flame forth into some
noisome disorder. Wherefore, if we do not use some proportionable care to
keep down sin, it cannot go well with us. A King that has not alone many
mutinous persons in his Kingdom, but also a strong enemy without his Kingdom,
ready to take all advantages of inuading his dominions, and to draw those
Rebels together unto his party, for the conquering of his Kingdom, must needs
be at the cost and labor, to maintain an Army and Garrisons, to resist such
an enemy, and repress such seditious persons. Doubtless, our case stands in
such terms. It is all Satan's business to make our lusts grow mighty, he
cannot hurt us but by them, and therefore it is his greatest labor to
strengthen them, by all the ways he can invent. What can betide us then, but
much misery, if we be slack to perform on the contrary, what in us lies,
to infeeble them? Doubtless, those many disordered passions that are in us,
through the manifold devices of Satan used for that purpose, will gain to
themselves a great deal of strength, and from their growth in strength, will
do us a great deal of hurt, unless we follow the Apostles counsel, to
mortify them.

4. Grieuing the Spirit.
Amongst, and above many other, four evils will spring from hence: First, we
shall grieve and quench the Spirit of God that is in us, and cause it to
withdraw it self (as it were) and to forbear those comfortable operations,
which it once did work for our good; in so much, that at length, we shall have
no feeling of it, and scarce be able to discern, whether it be within us at
all, yea, or no. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and these two are contrary one to the other: now the growth of one
contrary, is the diminishing of the other; so when the Saints are careless to
resist the flesh, they perceive little or no power of the Spirit in them, and
sometimes also come to that pass, that they be in a great fear and doubt,
whether ever they had the Spirit, because they think it is now so quite
departed from them. If we fight mafully on the spirits side against carnal
lusts, then the Spirit of Grace will work, and show it self mighty in us; if
we sit still, and give the flesh leave to have its way, then the Spirit will
leave us, and alas, it is woe with us, when that is caused to forsake us: for
then our comfort, our peace, and our very life is gone.

5. But besides this (and immediately upon it) our communion with God will be
interrupted, Interrupting our communion with God.
and that comfortable sense of his love (wherewith he was sometimes pleased to
cheer up, and revive our hearts,) will be taken away from us. It is sin
alone, that can make a separation betwixt God and us, and (as a very makebate)
sets us against him, and him against us. So long as we continue, to use some
good measure of care, to quell our wicked lusts, the Lord does give himself
(as it were) to be seen and felt of us; our souls enjoy him, and do taste
the unspeakable sweetness of his grace, resting abundantly assured of his
love, and satisfied in it; and finding him ever and anon, sending messages of
kindness unto our souls, as a General that comes amongst his soldiers, when
they fight valiantly, and hartens them up with his presence and his speech: but
if the Lord find us dealing falsely, and treacherously with him, entering parley
(as it were) with that Enemy, that he does irreconcileably hate, and detest,
and ready to make a truce with that foe, with whom he would have no truce
taken, no, not for a moment; then does he cease to speak friendly unto us (as
there is great cause) and begins even to chide, and reprove, and threaten, and
send us tidings of great displeasure. And ah, what soul can conceive a more
grievous loss in this world, then the loss of the light of his countenance?

6. Committing of gross sins.
But sometimes there follows a far greater mischief, namely, that he which
gave sin leave to get head through carelessness, is at last so foiled by the
wicked lusts of his heart, that he falls to commit some gross and grievous
sins, very foul, very loathsome, very disgraceful. For you must not think,
that the man regenerate, is out of the danger of being overtaken with heinous
offenses. Indeed, whilst he is earnest, in beating down his unruly passions,
though he find trouble, yet he enioyes safety; and though his lusts struggle
and annoy him, yet they cannot break forth in extremity; but if he once
become heedlesse, and think it too much, to be at the pains of continually
mortifying them, then they raise up themselves, and carry him captive, and
cause him to give his members as weapons of unrighteousness, prevailing so
far at length, that if God himself did not (out of his unchangeable love)
come in to his rescue, he would be brought back again into Egypt (as it
were;) his soul would be quite slain, the life of Grace would be quite
extinguished, and he would return the second time to be dead in sins. And,
ah, what wise man would suffer his sins to become so violent, as to carry
him into such enormous deeds, as David, and Solomon, and Asa, and Vzziah, fell
into, and all for want of mortifying these members? A man once sanctified, may
assure himself upon his faithful and constant endeauours in mortification,
that he shall escape such fowls: but if he grow slack in this duty, he can
expect nothing, but to have his conscience thus wounded. Is it not more then
needful for us to look to our selves?

7. For lastly, Sore afflictions.
to the preventing of far greater evils, our not-sufficiently mortified
lusts, will bring upon us exceeding sore afflictions, because the goodness of
God is such, that he will not see us perish by them, as we should perish, if he
did not apply such corosiues to cure them. If afflictions come not betwixt,
neglect of the duty of mortification will produce the evil effect I last
named, viz. the perpetrating of some vile and notorious wickedness; sometimes
the Lord makes haste to strike us, for the preventing of such falls: but if we
be once fallen, then is there no way of recovery, but by some bitter cross,
either inward or outward, or most times both ways. So we do enforce the Lord
of necessity to afflict us (unless we would have him lose us quite) when we
wax careless of seeking, to prevail more and more against sin. A crazie
body, having disordered himself in diet, must needs have very sick fits, and
some sicke-making physic he must needs take, or else death would follow his
intemperancie. So our weak and crazie souls, being brought to strange
distempers by our folly, in not resisting the sinful and inordinate
dispositions of our souls, could never be brought again to any tolerable
soundness, if God did not, by heavy calamities, help to purge out those
evil humors, which we had suffered to pester up our souls, as we may see in
David and Asa, after their sins. And certainly, the far greater number of
crosses which befall the people of God, do come from hence, that their
heavenly Father is feign (unless he would see them damned, which he will
never do) by misery to keep down lusts, which they might (but will not,
without misery) keep down, by the careful exercise of mortification, and to
draw them to repentance for those loathsome sins, which for lack of
mortifying their earthly members, they have fallen into, and would never repent
of otherwise: so that if we will not be content to put our selves to the
labor of working out our salvation, by crucifying the flesh, God will put us
to the pains of bearing heavy crosses, that shall help to crucify them (in
a manner) whether we will or no. And do we not see a necessity of
mortification?

CHAP. III. Showing the profit of the duty.
NOw because necessity going alone, 2. From the good will follow, if we doeit.
does drag rather then lead, and so (as an hard and rigorous commander) is
obeyed indeed, but backwardly, and against the hair; therefore let us
discourse a little of the fruit that will arise from our labor in the work of
Mortification, that seeing profit as well as need, the difficulty may not
hinder us from doing it, even with cheerfulness. Now the mortifying of the
deeds of the flesh will ring with it four exceeding great, and desirable
benefits.

2. The first is, Great peace.
unspeakable peace and quietness of soul. The heart will be at one with God
it self and all men, so long as it holds variance with sin. He that is at
war with his lusts, shall not be at war with his Maker. If we fight his
battles against our corruptions, he will not fight against us. Nothing
causes the God of Heaven to frown upon man, but sin; while the World was
free from sin, it was also free from all tokens of Gods displeasure;
therefore it must needs follow, that the surest way to keep our selves in even
terms with God, is to be diligent in resisting sin. He is not of so ill a
nature, as to pick quarrels against us without a cause; himself tells us, that
he corrects not willingly, Lament. 3.33.
nor of his own accord. Sin then, being the sole cause of moving him against
us, we shall be sure to find him so far loving toward us, as we are
careful to preserve our selves from sinning against him, which is best and
most attained, by the study of mortification: so all will be well above our
heads in Heaven, if we follow Paul's direction. Now the conscience is Gods
officer and deputy, and that, that will make him gentle and quiet to us, will
make it also quiet and gentle. The conscience never should (and seldom does)
rise up in arms against a man, but when he has given leave to some corruption
to grow headstrong, for want of opposing it in due season and order. As there
is no distempered motion in the body, till the humors be immoderately stirred,
by some inward or outward occasions; so neither is there likely terror,
amazement, disquietment, in the conscience, till the lusts of the soul have
disordered it, for want of holding them under. so that as war abroad, is
found to be a present remedy, against civil dissentions of subjects; so war
with sin, is the cause of our tranquillity with our selves. When clouds are
dispelled, the beams of the Sun will shine comfortably upon the earth, and
then the earth is richly garnished with pleasant and profitable herbs; so when
sin is chased away, the warm beams of Gods favor do sweetly refresh the
conscience, and the conscience so refreshed, does bring forth the sweet and
wholesome flowers of unspeakable consolation. The Spirit of God will tell our
spirits, and our spirits will tell us, that God is our Friend and Father, that
he loves us, and delights in us, so long as we be have our selves to sin, as
to an enemy, hating, loathing, and resisting it. Thus are we most friends to
our selves, when we be most foes with our corruptions. And this fighting with
sin, will make us live quietly also with our neighbors. He that is busy in
finding out, and subduing his homebred corruptions, shall have little or no
leisure, to take causeless unkindness, to pick needless quarrels, and to
provoke others against him by injurious behavior; so shall he shun the
greatest company of iarres and brawles, that use to set men together by the
ears. Saint James says; James 4.1.
That wars and fightings amongst men do come from their lusts, which war in
their members. We may, if we will, deceive our selves, and attribute things to
false causes; but the Spirit of God, that understands all things aright, and
cannot be deceived, points to lust, fighting in the members, as the most true,
proper, and immediate cause of contentions and stirs betwixt man and man.
Therefore the more any man does quell, subdue, vanquish, weaken, and beat
down these lusts, the more calmely shall he pass through the sea of the world,
and the fewer storms of discord. and enmity, shall he meet withal. When
soldiers lie idle, and are not employed in marching against the common foe,
then they mutiny, and fall out with each other: so when men set not their
grief and hatred, and other affections ou work, to make war upon sin, then
they quickly take occasion to grieve at each other, to sigh one against
another, to hate one another, and to vex and gawle each other, and trouble
themselves most of all. But soldiers agree among themselves, whilst they lend
their powers against a common foe; so when we have strongest and hottest war
with the devil and sin, then do we nourish most concord with one another.
Thus shall the soul enjoy unutterable quietness every way within and without,
from God, and from man, and one weeks life, led in such comfortable and happy
concord and amity with a man's own soul, and all about him, is more worth,
then the lasting of a whole twelue-moneth, torn and rent asunder with the
civil broils and commotions of a grudging, froward, and distempered heart.
Who would not do that, that will make his soul to dwell at rest?

3. Again, the study of mortification, Patience and loy in affliction.
will enable a man with inconceiueable patience, yea, and cheerfulness, to
bear any affliction that God shall lay upon him; yea, to look death it self in
the face, though it come clothed in never so terrible attire, and with never so
terrible weapons; for the sting of death, and consequently of all crosses, is
sin: now, pull the sting from out of the Serpents mouth or tail, and then
there is little fear, or danger in incountring her. What was the cause that
the Apostle Paul was so exceeding quiet and joyful in all his calamities? but
because he had in great measure subdued, and was more and more busy in
subduing the corrupt lusts of his body, knocking it down, 1. Cor. 9. last.
and bringing it in subjection, as himself speaks. He that holds strong
fight against the evils of his own heart (out of that peace with God and his
own soul, which we said before that he should enjoy) has freedom of Spirit,
to pray unto God in his afflictions; he can run boldly to the Throne of
grace (as having allowed nothing within him, that should grieve the Spirit of
Grace) he can fly to the tower of Gods name (as having kept himself in the
paths of righteousness, whic those that do, know themselves to have all good
allowance, to come thither) and when a man can freely power forth his heart
before God in crosses, then does he also comfortably enjoy God, and then the
sharpenes of the cross is gone. The thing that makes crosses intolerably
bitter (so that the soul cannot endure the bitterness of them) is the
admixture of the gawle of Gods displeasure; so far as we are entire and
resolute in fighting against sin, our crosses are pure from this admixture,
and so they be not (to himself that bears them, howsoever they may seem to
the lookers on) by the hundredth part so tedious and troublesome, as that
composition would make them. So the mortified man gains this by his trouble in
mortification, that the Lord will suffer him to escape many troubles, and those
that he must (for his own good) suffer, he shall be able to go under with ten
times more quietness, and gladness, and contentedness; as an whole shoulder
bears the same burden with more ease, then a sore, or swollen shoulder. It is
therefore a very profitable labor that we bestow in mortifying the members on
earth; that is to say, in healing the sores and diseases of our souls.

4. Thirdly, Certain freedom from gross sins.
the man that applies the work of mortification aright, shall attain certain
freedom from foul, gross and scandalous sins. A sanctified man may
assuredly promise to himself (upon his constant and diligent endeauours, to
abate and hold under his sinful affections and dispositions) to be (for his
whole life long) so kept and sustained by God, that he shall not rush into any
loathsome, palpable, disgraceful, soule-wasting wickedness. We are never
overtaken with those kind of evils, but upon our very palpable carelessness of
mortifying the deeds of our flesh. Whilst we do that, that God bidsvs, to slay
sin, he holds it under, according to his promise, and it has not dominion over
us, neither does reign in our mortal bodies; so that we are sure enough, that
sin shall not bring forth the fruits of shame and reproach unto us, until we
begin to be remiss in following Gods directions, to purge out the old leaven.
And, Oh, what a benefit is this, to escape those blemishes and stains,
wherewith many of Gods children (perhaps also of greater strength then ones
self) do defile and disgrace themselves? What a privilege is it to be so
supported, that never in all his life, he shall run into any witting,
enormous, and presumptuous crime, after God has called him to the knowledge of
his truth? What an ease and comfort, to live always free from those blows and
strokes of our spiritual enemy, wherewith some of Gods people are wounded
almost to death? Doubtless, the remembrance of such foyles, does bring so much
shame and forrow to the hearts, and often blushing and palenesse both
(successively) to the cheeks of diverse of Gods people, that they now account
freedom from such blots, a thing of more worth, then all the riches and honor
in the World, and wish with all their souls, that they had taken any pains,
and suffered any misery outward, to have been delivered from such inward
wretchedness? Why should we not be wise beforehand now? and by labor, win to
our selves the comfort of having prevented that, which if once we should feel,
we shall wish (but all in vain) that we had labored night and day to prevent.

5. Lastly, Good esteem from man.
much true credit and good esteem will follow to the Saints of God, from the
work of mortification, both with the household of faith, and with strangers
also. The mortified man affects the hearts of all that behold him, with
admiration, and the less he couets the credit of men, the more he wins it. Who
is he, that seeing a man able to hold down anger, injustice, revenge, lust,
when strong occasions do provoke them to work, does not find his soul cleaving
to him, at once loving and wondering at him? Heathen men, that have for their
credit sake, so far dissembled mortification, as, in something a notable
fashion, to forbear evil doing, have been more famous for that in aftertimes,
then for all their wealth and victories: for it is more truly prayse-worthy to
be good, then great; and therefore an high degree of goodness, will more honor
a man in the hearts of men, then the highest degree of greatness. The soul
will not stoop to other things, though the knee do crouch; but the very soul
of the highest person that is, will even bow to the name of a man, that is
excellent in mortification. What made Herod honor John Baptist? but this, that
he saw him so thoroughly mortified. Every man is enforced by his conscience, to
esteem worthily of one, whom he sees doing that, which he knows himself
should do, but finds he cannot. Now every man's soul (in a manner every man's)
is convinced, that he should conquer ambition, revenge, covetousness, lust;
and his experience tells him, how little he is able to perform in this
business; wherefore, when he sees another ever conquering that sin, whereto
himself is a perpetual vassal, and of which he is ever conquered, he
strangeth at him, and looks upon him, as upon some extraordinary, and
miraculous person. Indeed sinners are many times so transported with the love
of sin, that (as Owls hate the light which they cannot look upon, so) they
nourish in themselves, even enmity, against these excellencies, which they
cannot imitate: but then, when they are out of their mad and drunken fits, when
they are themselves, when they know what they do and say, as in the day of
affliction, of sickness, of death, they cannot but show themselves, to bear
more hearty reverence, and unfeigned respect to him, whom they have seen
careful and able to mortify the deeds of the body, then to all the rich and
mighty men on earth. Brethren, you might well save the cost of hanging your
backs, with ouer-gorgious attire, and making so much ado, to trim up your
bodies; the careful fighting against sin, and prevailing against it (which
will follow fighting) would do you more honesty amongst all your neighbors,
then all the fine clothes under heaven. If thou could thrust thy self into
a garment, made all of gold and Diamonds, and come garnished also Kinglike,
with a Crown and Scepter, the hearts of men would not entertain thee with so
much esteem, as if they see thee (as it were god-like) in ouercomming the
sins, that overcome the greatest of the sons of men. A good name is a
precious ointment, and a precious jewel, which nothing will get so soon, or
so surely, as goodness. Wherefore fight against sin, that thou may have
honor in the consciences of men, and some kind of authority and command in
them (as I may say) by virtue of this honor.

CHAP. IV. Showing the equity of the duty.
WE have heard how needful, Thirdly, from the equity of the duty.
and profitable mortification is: let us see also how equal it is. No need,
nor profit should draw us to that, which is unequal; but when equity is
joined to profit and necessity, then should the work be done, without further
delay. Now it is most equal that we kill our sins, whether we consider God,
or Christ, or our selves, or sin it self. For sin is Gods enemy.
First, for God; He is our Sovereign Lord and King, and sin is his most
mortal enemy: wherefore it is most equal, that we should fight against it;
for subjects must oppose the enemies of their Prince, with all their power. The
Scripture tells us, Duet. 13.6, 7, 8, 9.
that if father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or kinswoman, or friend,
should go about to draw a man from God, his hand should be first against them,
to put them to death. Now sins of all sorts, do seek to draw us from God,
wherefore our eye must not spare them, neither must we favor them, but we
must be severe against them, and as it were, stone them with stones, until
they be dead. It is a most righteous and equal thing, that notorious Rebels
and malefactors should be slain without pity; and lusts are the grossest of
all malefactors, which do most provoke God, and oppose themselves against his
honor. Therefore if we have any regard of his honor, what should we do, but
lay hold upon them, and pursue them to the very death? Should we spare, or
forbear to kill the foes and adversaries of the Lord our God? were not this to
make our selves his enemies also?

2. Again, has not our sin slain Christ, Sin is a murderer of Christ.
and shall not we, in an holy revenge, be eager against it, to kill it? If any
man have slain our Parent, or Brother, or Sister, or Child, we think it our
duty to follow after him, and persecute against him, till we have brought him
to a well-deserued end. The next of Kin in the Law, was always the auenger of
blood, and to him it appertained to hunt after the murderer, to bring upon his
head, the innocent blood that he had shed. If therefore we will show our
selves brethren, or sisters of Christ, or any thing of Kin unto him, we must
even be auengers of his blood upon sin; for, for our sins was his blood
shed, and these are the things that have slain him, and for which he made his
soul a facrifice. A thief, a traitor, a murderer, ought in all reason to be
executed, and every man will think it fit to lend his helping hand, to the
dispatching of one, that has so many ways deserved death. Sin is a thief;
for it robs God of his honor and glory. It is a traitor; for it strives to
thrust God from his regal authority and dominion. A murderer; for it slew
Christ Jesus our elder brother, and seeks to slay our own souls; for these
be the lusts that fight against our souls, as Peter tells us. What can be more
equal, then that we strive to destroy utterly, and to root out, and make a
clean riddance of so vile a thing as this?

3. And for our selves, does not equity require, that a man should faithfully
keep all good and lawful promises and covenants? Now we have couenanted with
God in our Baptism, We have vowed to forsake sin.
to fight against the devil, and all sinful lusts. In that Sacrament we did
bind our selves (as by a solemn military oath) to be the soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and to fight under his Banner, against the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh: Shall we become foresworne and perjured persons, as it were soldiers,
forsaking their Colors, casting down their weapons, and running away from their
Captain? God forbid. Do we not often renew in the Lords Supper the Covenant
we made in Baptism? It is certainly one part of the duty, whereto we tie
ourselves in that holy Sacrament, to seek the death of sin in us that
procured the death of Christ for us. Seeing we have often reiterated our
Covenant of God, of fighting against these lusts, let us be ashamed to be found
breakers of so many, and so just promises. Seeing we have taken Christ's liuerie
upon us, and have given our names to him, to be soldiers in his Camp, it is
most fit and equal, that we should be true and valiant soldiers, manfully
resisting his, and our enemies, the greatest, and principallest of which, we
know to be these members upon earth. Let us therefore arm our selves to this
battle, and make no peace with the things, with which God will never be at
peace, and abhor to show our selves either perfidious and false, or timorous
and faint-hearted soldiers.

4. Last of all, let us consider what sin is, Sin is an unreasonable thing.
and we shall find it most righteous to subdue and destroy it. Sin is a most
vile and absurd thing, contrary to all right, and to all true reason, alluring
us to it self, with none but false, vain, and counterfeit enticements;
nothing therefore can be more equal, then that a thing so most unequal be
resisted, and striuen against, with utter dislike. Sin does a man no good at
all, but much harm and mischiese: it is like a disease, good for nothing but
to vex and torment him, in whom it breeds. It allureth us with shows of
profit, pleasure, credit, ease, and the like: but it is a mere coozener and
deceiuer, and evermore beguileth us in the end, and we shall utterly miss of
our hopes, if we trust to its offers, and follow its allurements. It will bring
us loss, in stead of profit, even the loss of an heavenly Kingdom. It will
reward us with torment, in stead of pleasure, even with the torment of eternal
fire. It will requite us with shame, in stead of credit, even with everlasting
reproach and confusion; in stead of ease, it will procure anguish; for
tribulation and anguish shall for ever lie upon the soul of every one that
works wickedness, upon the Jew first, and also upon the Gentile. Can any
thing be thought more equal, then that so egregious a coozener, so errand a
liar, so false a companion, that is made all of lies, guile, fraud and
imposture, should be even apprehended, and hanged up out of the way (as we use
to speak) that it may beguile us no longer.

CHAP. V. Showing the certainty of good success in fighting against our lusts.
But let us hasten to an end, Fourthly, from the certainty of good success.
and consider, in the last place, what success we shall be sure to meet
with, in this fight, if we arm our selves with a constant resolution to
continue fighting, and never, for any fear, or any cause to give over. We
shall lose nothing by mortifying the flesh.
First, we shall lose nothing at all, that is worth having. A man may enjoy all
lawful conents, profits and pleasures, and whatsoever is truly needful to the
comfort and welfare of his body, mind and state; though he follow Gods
direction, and mortify these members that are upon the earth: and nothing
shall we get by following, feeding, and nourishing them, but that which for the
present is idle, vain, needless, superfluous, and might better be spared then
had; and for the time to come also, will prove mischievous and banefull. A man
may see well enough without that eye, that Christ bids him pull out, and cast
from him; he may well enough walk, and live, and perform all actions of life
for his benefit, without that foot and hand, which our Lord does bid us to cut
off, and fling from us. If it seem to bring blindness, lamenesse and
maimednesse, it is but a conceited and imaginary lamenesse, blindness, and
maimednesse, that appears so to us, and is not; as he that is borne a monster
with six fingers, might very well cut off one, and yet still have a perfect
hand, and better for use, then that that had such superfluity of members. Adam
and Euah might have filled their bellies in Paradise, though they had never
come near to the tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; God had provided them
store of fruit to please their eye and taste, and feed their bodies, though
they had utterly forborne that forbidden fruit. So does the Lord allow to the
sons of Adam, sufficient store, and variety of lawful and warrantable
things to enjoy; so that we may have as much good, as our souls can wish,
though we cast from us all sinful lusts, and refuse to follow the inclinations
of them. The inordinate affections of our soul, are like the unnatural
desires of the stomach, when it longs for things that are sour, and naught,
and unwholesome, as it were for raw flesh, unripe fruit, or things far worse
then these. There is wholesome and necessary food enough in he world, though a
man should never eat dirt and coals, as some have longed after. So we can be
no losers, by healing our selves of these diseases of the mind, which carry us
after nothing that is worth the having, if we did measure things by a
well-ordered judgment.

2. But moreover, God will accept our labor to mortify sin.
we shall be sure to find acceptance with God, in this our endeavor of
mortification, though we come far short of perfection, so long as we do
heartily and sincerely strive to perfection. He that fights resolutely against
sin with spiritual weapons, shall be accounted a good soldier, though he
be wounded in the battle, and knocked down, and taken prisoner, and the Lord
will redeem and ransom him again, and not suffer him to perish, or be made a
bond-slaue in that captivity. If we cannot make our corruptions grow so weak
as we would, yet if we be still drawing forth the weapons of our Christian
warfare, and using them so well as we can, to fight against our lusts, we
shall enjoy the esteem and reputation of faithful subjects, and God and our
consciences will give us this comfortable and honorable title of good
soldiers of Christ Jesus. And what an encouragement ought this to be, that we
are certain, our Lord and King will take well our pains, in fighting these
battles of his, so well as we can, though in many things we come too short?
The will and endeavor in this spiritual combat, is taken for the deed; he
that earnestly desires, and heartily labors to conquer his beloved
corruptions, is accounted a conqueror, even though, as yet, he be none. He
that resolves, he will never give over the fight, but will up again after all
foyles, and buckle his harness to him again, though the law of his members
do sometimes draw him captive, after the law of sin that is in his members;
he, I say, that so resolves, and so renews his resolutions and endeauours,
is reputed by the mercy of God in Christ, to have done that he would have done,
and to have accomplished that, that he desired to accomplish. Assurance of good
acceptance of the weakest endeauours, so long as they be true, may make the
weak, as the Prophet speaks, to say he is strong, and forgetting his
weakness, to set upon the work as if he were strong, because even his
weakness shall be accounted strength, if his desires, purposes, wishes, and
resolutions be strong. There is nothing that can animate a man more to march
after Christ, then this consideration. 1. Sa. 30.21, 25.
David had two hundred soldiers that were faint, and could not follow the
Amalekites that had burnt Ziglag, but were feign to stay behind, and do a
meaner service, of attending on the stuff and carriages. Some of those that
fought, and vanquished the Amalekites, would have had these faint ones, to have
been turned off, without any part of the booty. But David's answer was; Who
will hearken to you in this? And he made it a law in Israel, that he which
tarried by the stuff, should share of the spoil of the enemy with him that
fought in the battle. Our King, our David, keeps this law, If a man's heart be
good to follow, and kill these Amalekites, though his body faint, and he be
driven to stay by the stuff, he shall enjoy the prey, and divide the spoil. O,
who would not serve such a General with all his might, where an vnvoluntary
fainting, an vnpurposed weakness, shall not deprive him of the honor, or
comfort of the victory!

3. Further, God will reward our pains taken in mortifying sin.
we shall be rewarded, as well as accepted, if we fight these battles with
an upright heart. Sin is like a traitor, whose head is set to sale; he that
can bring it, shall have a large recompense. The Lord has set a great price
upon the head of our lusts; kill them, and we shall be greatly comforted here,
and have so much more glory and happiness in heaven, by how much we have
taken more labor and pains here. Pay will make any soldiers fight: If
Christ's soldiers will but stick to it courageously, they shall want no pay of
comfort, glory, immortality; and if they fight, they shall be crowned. When
Caleb fought against Debir, he made this Proclamation among his soldiers;
Judge. 1.22.
To him that smites, and takes the City, will I give Achsah my daughter to
wife: and quickly Othniel was encouraged, and took it. Now how much more
excellent are the promises which the Lord has made, to encourage us in this
spiritual battle, saying? If you mortify the deeds of the flesh by the
Spirit, ye shall live? What wife, or what portion with a wife, is comparable
to this blessed and glorious life, which God has promised, and will give to
those, that take their lusts and smite them? Why then should we not animate our
selves, and do valiantly, to take and kill these spiritual Canaanites, and to
destroy all the Cities of them? If any say, This promise is made alone to those
that overcome, and how shall we be certain of victory? The answer is, that
it is true indeed, those alone that overcome, shall obtain this reward; but
every one that will fight resolutely in this battle, shall overcome. And that
is the last encouragement, in respect of our success; as we shall lose
nothing, and be accepted, and be rewarded; so we shall prevail also, and get
the better of our foes.

4. Sin shall surely be slain, We shall surely overcome sin, if we fight
against it.
and fall down dead before us: It cannot possibly defend or save it self
against the blows, which by the weapons of God are given unto it. It has
already received its deaths wound from the death of Christ; we fight against an
enemy that is more then half discomfited, and slain unto our hands. Through
God we shall do valiantly, and he will tread down our enemies under our
feet. When Israel fought against the inhabitants of Canaan, the Lord fought
for them; and though their enemies were strong in body, and many in number, and
had Cities fenced and walled up to heaven, yet they prospered whithersoeuer
they went, and none was able to stand against them. This was a figure of our
good success in fighting against the lusts of our flesh. They cannot escape
our hands, if we give them not leave to recover themselves. So mighty is the
Word of God, so strong the Spirit of God, so certain the divine assistance,
that we are sure of an happy victory, if we cloathe our selves with courage
and confidence, and persist in the battle to the end of our lives. The Lord
that fought for Israel, will fight for us, and work great salvation. The land
of Canaan was inhabited with Giants, and men of huge stature, but all these
fell before the Host of God; our Giant-like sins shall be but meat for our
swords, and we shall prevail against them, though they be never so many and
strong. Wherefore let us conclude with the words of Joshua to the me^ of
Ephraim, Josh. 17.18.
Thou shall drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron Chariots, and
though they be strong: And with the words that the Priests were appointed to
use unto the people in the day of battle; Hear O Israel, Deuteronomy. 20.3.
you approach this day unto battle against your enemies, let not your hearts
faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified, because of
them; for the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to fight for you against
your enemies and to save you. And thus have we cleared the point, and laid
before your eyes abundance of good reasons, to induce you to this battle. Now
that we may make way for the uses, and that you may better practice the duty,
we must give you some directions about it, showing you three things. First,
the degrees of mortification. Secondly, the means of mortification. And
lastly, the manner of using these means that we may speed by them.

CHAP. VI. Showing the degrees of Mortification.
FOr the first of these, Two degrees of mortification.
we will show both the lowest degree of mortification, (that without which no
man can be saved) and also the highest degree of mortification, beyond which a
Christian cannot reach, in this present life: and these two being known, the
middle degrees betwixt these, will appear of themselves. Know then, that the
lowest degree of mortification is that, which has attained two things, which
whosoever has not attained, is not at all mortified; he that has attained
them, is in truth mortified, and then must strive forward, for greater
perfection.

The first thing is, 1. To forbear the usual practice of gross sins.
to forbear the ordinary practice of gross sins, such as are expressly
condemned by the letter of the Word, and by the light of nature, and such,
wherein the members of the body are given as weapons of unrighteousness. No
man can say he is truly mortified, till he have gotten so much power against
his corrupt lusts, that he be not usually and commonly overtaken with those
palpable deeds of the body, swearing, cursing, lying, railing, drunkenness,
wantonness, revenge, deceit, and the like to these: for those that do such
things, Gal. 5.21. Ephesians. 2.3.
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: and the Apostle says, That in time
past, when we were dead in sins, we had our conversation in the lusts of our
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the mind, and of the flesh, and were by
nature, Titus 3.3.
children of wrath. And again, We our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice,
and envy, hateful, and hating one another. 1. Pet 4.3.
And again, Peter says, The time past of our lives may suffice us; to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts,
excess of wine, reuellings, banquetings, and abominable Idolatries. And Saint
John says, 1. Ioh. 1.6.
If we say we have fellowship with him, (as every mortified man has) and
walk in darkness, (as he that lives in the usual practice of such things
does) we lie, and do not the truth. Colos. 3.6.
For as the Apostle says, For these things sake, the wrath of God does come
upon the children of disobedience. It is plain enough, you see, that he which
is a worker of wickedness, and does give himself leave to go on in the
common practice of these abominable evils, is not translated from darkness to
light, he is not made partaker of the virtue of the death of Christ, he is not
buried with Christ by Baptism into his death, nor made conformable unto his
death; so that it is in vain to flatter our selves with a false opinion of our
being good Christians, so long as these things do so strongly bear rule in us,
hat we give our members as servants unto them ordinarily: for the good man
must not walk in the counsel of sinners, nor stand in the way of the ungodly.

2. But secondly, 2. And the allowance of the least sin.
a godly man must prevail yet further against sin, even so far, as not to
allow, defend, excuse, extenuate, and carelessly let pass the smallest known
sin, yea the first risings, and motions of sin; but must constantly
observe, oppose, confess, bewail, and be humbled for them, before God: Math.
5.8.
for no man can be blessed, till he be pure in heart; and he that must ascend
into the hill of the Lord, and stand in his holy place, Psalm. 24.4.
must have (as clean hands, so) a pure heart also, as David says. Now the
heart is not pure, so long as any the least sin is winked at, allowed,
maintained, covered and made light of. Therefore the Apostle says, (not alone,
Romans 6.12, 13.
that we must not give our members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin,
but also) that we must not obey it, no not in the lusts of it. Now he that
gives way to evil motions in his heart, and makes nothing of them, nor
lamenteth and resists them, does serve sin in the lusts of it; as well as
he that rusheth upon the gross and external acts of evil usually, does give
his members as instruments of wickedness. It is therefore apparent, that grace
must so far change us, and subdue our corrupt disposition, as that we must
crucify the flesh, with the very affections and lusts, or else we are not
planted with Christ into the similitude of his death, nor can truly take to our
selves the name, or enjoy the privileges of men that do mortify the deeds of
the body. And this is the least degree that will serve to entitle a man to the
comfort of one that is truly mortified.

3. Now the highest degree that is in this life attainable, 2. The highest
degree of mortification.
stands also in two things; first, in preserving ones self so much and
constantly against sin, To be ever kept from any gross sin.
as never to commit any gross, or palpable sin; never to curse, rail,
swear, lie, deceive, revenge, dally, or any other like manifest and notorious
offense either in word or deed. Iam. 3.4.
And Saint James tells us, That he which offends not in word, is a perfect man.
This perfection, by the help of grace, a godly man may reach to in this life;
and O how beautiful and happy a life were it, to go, even thus far, in the
subduing of sin, that one should be wholly and altogether free from all
blemishfull and reproachful sins! But a good man may proceed to somewhat an
higher degree of perfection, even to keep his heart free from any settled
liking of any evil motion thereof, To be free from any settled liking of an
ill motion.
so that he shall never take any stayed or deliberate content in any of the
sinful inclinations, and dispositions that do stir in him. I do not say
only not to give any consent unto them, or to yield his will to them, but not
to have his imagination settledly and deliberately pleased and delighted with
them; but that he shall presently quench, reject, and detest them; but to be
void of all evil motions arising from the flesh, or of all sudden passions
within, or of all sudden delight in them, or of all deadness or backwardnes to
good things by reason of them; that is, so far as I can learn out of
Scripture, an higher pitch then that any man can touch it in this present
world. For surely, whilst we live, the law of our members will be working, and
the flesh will be lusting, and every man shall find cause to complain of a
body of death; every man shall find cause to say, Who can say his heart is
free? And he shall but deceive himself that says he has no sin.

CHAP. VII. Showing the natural means of Mortification.
Moderation in things indifferent, a means of mortifying sin.
The one is, moderation in the use of natural delights and contents. The
other, discretion, in the shunning of outward occasions of evil, though the
things in themselves be not evil.

2. For the first, he that is not moderate in things indifferent, can never
prevail against his lusts, to any purpose; for at the excess of these lawful
things, do our natural corruptions begin to take advantage, and to feed
themselves, and to gather head. He that will hold under his lusts therefore,
and put them to death, must be sparing in meat, drink, attire, sports, and
must even cut himself shorter in many of these things, then that which he
persuades himself (and perhaps also truly) that he might lawfully do, even
of purpose to keep himself, that he may not be brought under the power of
any thing, as the Apostle speaks. We must learn of the Apostle himself this
means; for he tells us, that he did keep under his body, 1. Cor. 6.12. 1.
Cor. 9. last.
and bring it in subjection. The corruptions of the soul find great
furtherance from the humors of the body, as a man does find from a good and
fit tool or instrument: we must keep the tools of sin dull, (as I may so
speak) that sin it self may do us less harm by its working. If the body
be still humored and pampered, by letting it have all the ease, fine fare, gay
attire, sensual pleasures and pastimes, that it wishes (and that a man can
make to appear lawful and warrantable,) it will not be kept in subjection, it
will not be held in order. We are therefore in these thins to call upon our
selves, to be very temperate. Be a little more mean in thy garments, then
thou think it absolutely needful to be: use a little less liberty in games
and pastimes, then thou conceiuest that in strictness of conscience thou
ought to do. So I say for fare, ease, sleep; If thou do not, from the
utmost confines of lawful liberty, there is but a small step to the border of
unlawful delights, and soon may thou be drawn to step that step, and when
thou have once transgressed, thou shall find it hard to come into the right
way again. He that goes in a river, where he knows that a deep pit is, will
not come so close to it as he may, but by keeping himself upon sure ground a
good way off, will be sure to save himself from being overwhelmed therein. It
is much more safe, in things of this nature, to keep our selves a good deal
within compass, then to stand upon the edge of our liberty (as I may so
speak.) By abridging our selves of some thing that we are allowed, we cannot
likely receive any hurt: by taking all that is allowed, we may soon slip into
excess, and well-neere mischief our selves, and by doing all we may do, so
engage our selves to our affections, that they will carry us away, to that we
should not do. Austerenesse is not necessary to mortification, moderation is.
To go wooll-ward, or in haire-cloth, is a foolish destroying of the body; to
go in less costly attire then one might, is a due keeping under of the body.
To make ones self lean and wanne with fasting, is to tyrannize over ones
self; to fare less delicately, and eat less liberally, for the most part,
then one might, is to prevent the advantages of sin in the body. The
hypocrite, often, does place all his mortification, in being cruel to his body;
wherefore he keeps no measure this way; and because it is a thing much looked
after, and easily seen, it is a fit thing for an hypocrite, to beguile both
the world and himself withal. The godly man does make his abridging of the
body, a furtherance to the cutting off of his lusts: wherefore he is not
excessive in his rigor to his body, nor will offer violence to nature, but
alone deny her that, which she may well spare, and scants and mints himself
in the use of his liberty, not as not knowing it, but as knowing how easy it
is to abuse it, and by abusing, to take harm. And thus, by keeping his body in
order, he finds it more easy to keep the mind in frame also, which does
much make use of (and as some think follow) the temperature of the body. And
let any man under heaven be so wise, as to observe himself, and he shall
find, that unless he deny himself some lawful liberty, he shall quickly
grow sensual: and sensuality is an enemy to mortification.

3. A second natural means of mortification is, a careful shunning of the
occasions of sin. Shunning the occasions of sin, necessary to mortification.
Opportunity of time, place, company, and the like, does greatly incense and
provoke corruption: and he that will not, (for every man in this matter,
because it is but natural, can if he will) deny himself in such things, can
never prevail against his corruptions. He has not gone yet so far as nature
may go, and how then should he look to find the help of grace? The
withdrawing of a man's self from these things, is a pulling of the fuel from
the fire, and then it will surely go out. The aduenturing upon these things,
does blow the coals, and administer fuel also, and then must sin of
necessity, both burn and flame. In these occasions, the senses have strong
allurements offered unto them, and they be vehement in their workings, burying
the understanding for a time, and captiuating the thoughts to their present
pleasing objects, so that a man can think of no good thing, that may serve to
resist bad desires; and when the soul is so disarmed, how should sin but
prevail against it? He that does thus hazard himself, thrusts himself out of
Gods protection, for he walks not in his own place, therefore he can look
for nothing but ruin. Satan assures himself of victory, when he sees men
so careless of themselves, and so becomes vehement in tempting, (as hope of
success incourageth every one to labor) and then how soon is a man foiled?
Indeed, the heart has given a secret consent to the desire of evil doing, so
soon as ever it consents to adventure upon the occasions of evil doing, and
it is but the very guile and dissimulation of the soul, (whereby it is apt to
coozen it self,) that makes one think, I will go where I shall meet with
strong prouocations to sin, but yet I will not sin. Now the consent which
was secret, and as it were implicit before, so soon as occasion and tentation
have stirred corruption, grows manifest and open, and shows it self, and so
a man sins, when he thought (but he thought amiss) that he was resolved not to
sin. Betwixt a resolution to do a thing, whereby the will does choose, and a
resolution not to do it, whereby the will does refuse, there is a middle kind
of action, an irresolutenesse, a suspense, neither choosing, nor refusing, but
betwixt both. Now this indifferency of the will, is half a yea; and he that
makes half a grant, when none importunity does press him, will make a full
and total grant, when he shall be (as upon such occasions he shall be)
importunately urged: and it is sure, that a man never does wittingly put
himself upon occasions of evil, until he be at least irresolute whether to
do it or not. Wherefore every Christian man must be wise for his soul, and
not alone determine to forbear all things that are sinful and flatly
condemned; but if he have found by his own experience, that such and such
things (in themselves indeed lawful) are, to his corruption, strong
prouocations to evil; he must also determine to deny himself in these things
also. In one word, this direction is so necessary, that all the labor in the
world will not subdue sin, if it be not backed with this part of circumspect
walking. For if the heart be hollow, nothing will make it strong against sin:
and every man's heart is so far hollow, as he is willing to play with the
occasions of sin.

CHAP. VIII. Showing two spiritual means of Mortification: Prayer, and
Meditation.
These spiritual helps are four: Prayer, Meditation, Fear of our selves,
and Watchfulness. By Prayer, we get strength from God; by Meditation, we
become Gods instruments, to work strength in our selves; by Fear and
Watchfulnes, we put to use the strength which we have gotten. Frequent and
fervent prayer needful to mortify sin.
First then, if we will kill sin, we must be frequent and fervent in prayer
unto God against sin; and what particular sins we are most molested with,
and had most need to beat down, those we must assail most often and
earnestly with our prayers. Now when I say prayer, I mean prayer, and all the
parts and additaments of it. If a man had never sinned, he should need only
petitions and thankesgiuings; but having sinned, he needs also confession and
lamentation, to be joined with the former, as it were buttresses to the wall of
the house, to make it stand stronger, and a staff to a weak leg, to make one
go the more steadfastly. So all these parts of prayer must be used.

2. We must plainly acknowledge, and heartily bemone our selves in Gods bosom,
for our sinfulness, and wickedness of heart and life, and with all due
aggrauations, and condemnings of our selves, must lay open before the Lord, the
corruptions and vices that we find in our selves, confessing withal, that we
are weak and feeble, and slaves to sin, and of our selves cannot subdue
them, and so, with the heauiest hearts that we can, lament our miserable
weakness. Look what Iehoshaphat did, when he heard of the coming of the
Lubims and Ethiopians against him and his people; the same must we do, when we
see the innumerable troops of corrupt lusts, that do seek the destruction of
our souls: 2. Chron. 20.12
We have no might (says that worthy King) against this great company that
comes against us; neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. So
must the Christian soul sigh out its complaints before the Lord, often, O I
have no might to overcome all these strong lusts, (and by name such and such)
that fight against me daily, and I cannot tell what to do, but, Lord, mine
eyes are to thee.

3. Then must he take to him petitions and requests, begging help from
heaven, crying earnestly for the Spirit of God to help him, (for by the Spirit
alone can we mortify the deeds of the body) urging and enforcing upon the
divine Majesty, all his comfortable promises which he has written in his Word:
Romans 6.14.
(Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law, but
under grace. Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Romans
8.2.
The law of the Spirit of life in Christ, has freed me from the law of sin
and death. And specially, that excellent branch of the new Covenant, Heb. 8.10,
11.
They shall all know me, from the least to the most, and I will put my law in
their hearts, and in their minds will I write them,) and so, suing with the
greatest feruency of desire that he can attain, say, O Lord, perform these
promises: O let no wickedness have dominion over me: O make me sound in thy
precepts: O incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not to such a sin.
When God is thus importuned by the cries and prayers of his servants, he
cannot but stir up himself, and come and help them, and hear the voice of
their prayers when they cry unto him. When Israel felt the oppression of their
outward enemies, and cried unto the Lord, (as it is often noted in the book of
Judges) the Lord had pity upon them, and raised them up a Judge and a
deliverer: shall he not be much more attentive to the voice of their
supplications, when they cry unto him, against pride, vainglory, lust, wrath,
and those spiritual enemies that seek to oppress them? Certainly the Lord
will remember, and will up, and help, and set them at liberty, whom sin and
Satan had ensnared.

4. And to the two former must be added, praises and thanks for the help
already received. If one find that he has gotten some power against his
sin, that he has more ability to oppose the lusts of it, that he is
seldomer overtaken with any breaking forth of it then before, that he has been
able to withstand some notable tentations to it: in a word, that the force of
it, is in any measure abated; he must return with the praises of God in his
mouth, and triumph in God, that has helped him so far against his spiritual
foe. The Lord deserves praise, and looks for praise of his Saints, for
treading down those lusts that rise against them: and it is a service very
pleasing unto him, when we offer the facrifice of thanks. Yea, it does
exceedingly animate our selves to this battle, if we take notice that we have
in some degree prevailed, and with the voice of joy and thanksgiving do run
before the Lord, and give away all the praise from our selves to him. There is
nothing can more rejoice the spirit of a Christian, then this heavenly joy will
do. The joy of the Lord is our strength. Sorrow, Nehem. 8.10.
when we have been foiled, is no more available to confirm us against sin,
then holy reioycin, when we have stood fast and resisted. It is a more sign of
self-love, to grieve for that we are weak, but a greater sign of true love
to God, to rejoice in him when he makes us strong. Wherefore, as a godly man,
if he find himself any day to have yielded to sinful desires in any
sensible degree, must humble himself, and confess and cry out against
himself: so if he find that any day he has not been foiled, but has been
able to repress and destroy evil motions, especially if having occasion or
tentation, he have been strengthened to resist, he must then lead his
captivity captive, and at night sing a new song of praise unto the Lord, and
even ride in triumph over his corruptions, boasting himself in God, and
setting up his banner in the name of the most High, and with as cheerful a
soul as he can, offer up humble and hearty thanks to his heavenly Father,
that has made him to do valiantly. The prayers of Gods servants, thus
consessing their sins, craving power against them, blessing God for the
beginnings of help, are weapons so mighty through God, that they will wound
the strongest corruption, and pierce the soul of any lust: and whosoever will
begin and continue, thus to resist and pursue his sins, shall find them (as
the Philistims before Samson) to fly, and fall down dead before him.

5. Holy meditations to mortisie sin.
After Prayer, or with it, holy Meditations must come in, both to quicken, as
also to back it: and amongst all matter of mditation, against particular
sins, we must accustom our selves specially to four general meditations,
that are indifferently and equally forcible against every sin. Of Gods holy
nature.
First, of the most holy and pure nature of God, how great, wise, just, true,
merciful he is, that he has an all-seeing eye, and an all-hearing ear, in
every place beholding the evil and the good, and pondering all the paths of
the sons of men, that he hates sin with a perfect hatred, as being
contrary to his most holy will and Commandments: that he will punish it with
most severe punishment, as being the righteous Judge of all the world, who
cannot endure iniquity, nor will hold the wicked innocent: that he is most
gracious and loving to the penitent sinner, and will spare him as a father does
his child: that he will keep all his promises, and make good all his
threatenings, with all faithfulness, and not suffer one tittle of his Word to
fall to the ground. In a word, that he is every way most holy, and most
excellent, and will reward all that seek to him, and obey him; and avenge
himself upon all that stubburnely rebel against him, and forsake the ways of
his Commandments, to walk after their own crooked devices and inventions.

2. Secondly, Of Gods terrible threats.
we must often call to mind the most terrible threatenings of God against sin
in general, and specially, against that special sin, which most molesteth us.
Ho much evil God has denounced against the committers of it; and how much woe
and misery it has brought upon others, and will bring upon our selves, if we
take license to live in it. We must consider sin in the evil effects of it,
and so convince our selves of its vileness, and mischieuousnesse: for God has
from Heaven manifested so much wrath against the workers of iniquity in
general, and against each particular lust and sin that men live in, that if
we could press these things upon our own souls, and cause our hearts
steadfastly to believe the same; we could not but hate wickedness, and tremble
before the Lord, and so abate the power of corruption, and even drive our
selves out of the evil courses of sin. Wrath and anger, tribulation and
anguish, Romans 2.8, 9.
shall be upon every soul of man that works wickedness, upon the Jew first,
and also upon the Gentiles. For these things sake, Ephesians. 5.6.
the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience: upon the wicked
God will rain snares and tempest, fire and brimstone, and storm, Psalm. 11.6.
that shall be the portion of their cup. Mark 9.46.
Their worm never dies, and their fire never goes out, their smoke shall
ascend for evermore: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
And cursed is every man, that continues not in the whole Law to fulfill it.
So horrible, so grievous, so intolerable are those things, that God has
menaced in his Word against all the sons of Belial, and all the workers of
unrighteousness, that whosoever will even bind these things to the tables of
his heart, and apply them to himself by faith, shall stand in awe, and not
sin, and shall find the Judgments of God so terrible unto him, as that they
will beat down his corruptions, and make him to fear and depart from
wickedness: for the end of these things is death.

3. Of Gods gracious promises.
Thirdly, we must often call to mind the gracious promises that God has made to
those that leave sin, and the admirable comforts, that both here and hereafter,
the God of truth has undertaken to reward them withal, that for his sake
deny themselves, and crucify their sinful lusts. Then shall we see, how
vain and frivolous the pleasures and profits of sin are, and by tasting the
fruit of holiness, should be well enabled, to despise the offers of sin. What
comparison betwixt the good we get by doing evil, and the unspeakable Joy of
the holy Ghost, and the immortal Joys of Heaven? What made Moses to set light
by the honors and delights of Pharaohs Court; but that he considered the
rebuke of Christ to be greater riches? What made Paul to count al dung, that he
might win Christ; but because he looked to the far most excellent weight of
glory? We must not suffer our selves to be forgetful of the wonderful
benefits, which the Lord will bestow upon us, if in obedience and love to him,
we can be content to cast away our sinful lusts. He that forsakes any
profit, or credit, or comfort, for Christ's sake, shall be rewarded an hundred
fold. The man that refuses to walk in the paths of the ungodly, shall be
blessed upon earth, his soul shall dwell at ease, the Lord will deliver him
out of the hands of his enemies, God will be a Sun and shield unto him, and no
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. His heart shall
delight it self in God, and he shall see the shining of the loving countenance
of his Father. His soul shall be satisfied, as with marrow and fatness, and
he shall become like a watered garden. If man forsake him, the Lord will stand
for him; and though parents cast him off, yet God will gather him up: the Lord
will cover his head in the day of battle, the Lord will feed him in the time
of famine, the Lord will turn his bed in the time of his sickness, he shall
see the face of God in righteousness, and when he awaketh, shall be
satisfied with his Image. O how excellent is the loving kindness of God to
them that wait upon him! they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of his house, and he will make them to drink of the Rivers of his pleasure: he
shall delight himself in the Lord, and God will give him the desires of his
heart. Let us often renew these meditations in our selves, and say with David;
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that fear thee, before the sons of men!
Surely the sight of this goodness of God, will make the labor of
mortification seem easy. If those that try masteries, be continent in all
things, for a mortal Crown, what should we be for an immortal? If the hope
of booty will make a souldler hazard his heart-blood, what should we do in
this battle, where the favor of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven are
ascertained to him that fights and conquers? If the man that is in some degree
mortified, did often contemplate the felicity that God has provided for him,
both present and to come, he would not, he could not faint. These meditations
would so disgrace the pleasures of sin, and so commend unto him the reward of
piety, that he would even scorn to serve so base a thing as sin, which
gives no wages, but chafe and dirt; when he might be entertained in the
scruice of Christ, who (besides his being so infinitely excellent) gives the
joy of his salvation to his soldiers for their stipend. Put your selves in
mind often, O ye servants of God, of the consolations of the Word and Spirit,
of the Joy unspeakable and glorious, of the Peace that passes all
understanding, and of the hidden treasures, which neither eye has seen, nor
ear has heard, nor man's heart conceived, but God has provided for you, by
his Grace, and revealed to you by his Spirit, and will reach unto you with his
hand. If you will reject the pleasures of sin which are but for a season, and
endure the pains of fighting the good fight of fiath: you cannot faint in this
battle, if you lend your thoughts to these encouragements, you cannot but
account all your labor easy, if you consider the reward and end of your
labor.

4. Last of all, we must much and often ponder upon the death of Christ: who he
was, Of Christ's sufferings.
what he suffered, why, and for whom, with the matter, cause, effect, and end
of his sufferings, that so we may work in our selves a love and fear of God,
a base esteem of our selves, with an holy sorrow and indignation against
sin. The death of Christ, must be the death of our sin, and upon his Cross
must we crucify these lusts of our flesh, that they may wax faint and feeble,
and be quite and clean abolished in us. Here we shall see the exceeding
hatefulness, and mischieuousnesse of sin; here we shall see how odious it is
to God, and how harmefull to our selves. Here we shall fee the infinite love of
God unto us, and his most gracious readiness to forgive and help us. This
thought will be most available, to overthrow the power of all ungodliness in
us. The Son of God, the King of Heaven and earth, was abased and humbled, and
smitten, and wounded for our transgressions. They lay heavy upon his soul,
they pressed him down to the dust of death: he died for us, that he might
redeem us to himself, and make us a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
O shall we not abhor and detest that, which was so unspeakably grievous to
our Savior? Shall we not show our love to him, in casting from us those
things, that caused him to be a man of forrowes, and to have experience of
infirmities? How bitter and tedious was sin unto him, and shall it be
delightful unto us! How did it make him sigh, and cry, and groan, and bleed,
and shall we take pleasure in it? Shall we not show our selves thankful to
him, that was so pitiful to us, that he had rather himself endure the curse,
then that we should be ouer-whelmed with it? Let us often look to him whom
we have pierced; often consider of his torment and agony, and often renew in
our selves, the remembrance of his cursed and reprochful death, and weane our
hearts from the love of unrighteousness, and make us conformable unto his
death. We cannot be hold to do evil, if we consider well, how much evil he
suffered for our evil doings. Now these thoughts (if we accustom our selves
unto them, and do many times sequester our selves from all worldly
cogitations, to enlarge our hearts in them) will be as a sword in the throat of
our lusts, and prevail mightily to wound them to the death, and as it were, to
let out the heart-blood of them.

CHAP. IX. Showing two more spiritual means of Mortificetion: Fear, and
Watchfulness.
Fear of our selves, a means to mortisie sin.
suspecting our own weakness, and even trembling to think, that we may be
grossly overtaken. Blessed is he that fears always, for this fear will
be the cause of safety to him. Whiles a soulier fears his enemy, he keeps
his harness upon him, and will not disarme himself, so long as he mistrusteth
the approach of an enemy: But security makes a man lay his weapons aside, and
give himself to pleasure, ease, and sleep, and then if an enemy assault him,
he is soon slain, or put to flight. he that is afraid of falling into some
deadly sickness, will easily be persuaded to look to his diet, and to take
some necessary physic. Say therefore in thy self, O if I grow careless,
sin will quickly grow strong in my weakness, and quickly raise up it self
against me, and do my soul more mischief then tongue can express! how have
many of Gods Saints been foiled, that were far and far better then my
self? shall not their misery be my warning? If such Worthies were overthrown
and wounded, what will become of me? If I grow foolishly bold, and make too
fair promises to my self: fear lest one shall fall, will keep him upright,
even in a very slippery way: but soon are his feet caught from him, that
looks about, and never suspecteth a fall. A moderate doubting of our own
strength, will quicken us to prayer and meditation. This virtuous jealousy and
suspicion of our weakness, will make us shun the occasions of sin, and so
preserve us in safety, when others that are more ventrous, shall be sooner
foiled, though they be more strong: when we fear our selves most, we pray
most to God, and most trust in him; and prayer and confidence will keep us in
safety. Indeed, we never cast off this wariness, and cautelousnesse, till we
be first beguiled with the deceitfulness of sin; and when it has deceived
us, it will easily do us a mischief. Look about, therefore, see how thou
stand environed with enemies, see what an ill nature thou have within thee,
what a violent adversary without thee. Thou art like a besieged City, full of
traitors, the wise men in such a City, will quickly mistrust and doubt the
worst; they will ever suspect, that mischief is plotting against them, and by
fearing, they become careful to prevent it. There is an excessuie fear that
infeebles the knees, and weakens the hands, when a man casts off hope, through
fear, and will not persuade himself that he can be safe by all his
endeavors. Courage is gone, when such fear enters; and what soldier can do
any thing, when his heart fails? But a moderate fear, that still causes a
man to cast the worst with in himself, but alone conditionally, (unless he be
very diligent to prevent it:) this awakens courage, and by telling of the
danger before, does call up the care of the soul, to prevent it. Fear was
placed by God in the soul, as a Watchman or Sentinel, to discover
neere-approching dangers: and if we wake this Sentinel, to keep his standing
place, and to hold his eyes from sleeping, we shall be safe from the danger
that will ouerwhelme the careless. Fear of man breeds a snare, fear of
poverty, fear of death, fear of disgrace in the world, puts us further into
the danger; but fear of sin, fear lest we should provoke God, wound our
consciences, and rush upon such courses in our folly, which we shall have
cause to rue ever after: this breeds safety, and by this fear, we shall
happily fulfill our salvation.

2. Last of all, we must be watchful, Watchfulness necessary to
mortification.
which will surely follow from our being fearful; for fear will hold the
eyes open a great while together. The more waking eyes in an army, the more
safety; but if all be asleep, all may be surprised and killed, before they be
aware. When Saul, 1. Sam. 26 7, 8, 9, 10.
and all his host were seyzed upon with sleep, David and Abishai came into the
midst of the Camp, to the Pauillion of the King, and then it was easy, with
one blow, to have dispatched the King, and discomfited the army. Spiritual
watchfulness is as necessary against spiritual enemies, as natural
wakefulnesse against natural. When Samson slept, then the wicked flattering
harlot Dalilah, did rob him of his locks, and of his strength, because,
against his vow of Nazariteship, a Razor had passed on his head. The Saints of
God be Nazarites, sin cannot put a Razor to their heads, till they fall
asleep on its knees, till their mind slumber, and the eye of the mind wink,
they can hardly be drawn to taste of forbidden delights or profit: but when
they are heedlesse and careless, then is their vow broken, and they think not
of it; then their strength becomes weakness, and then the Spirit is driven
from them. O let Samson warn us, and let us take heed that our minds be not
rocked asleep in the lap of the world! Prou. 4.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
This watchfulness is an attentiveness of mind to all our actions and our
ways; a looking to our hearts, eyes, ears, tngues, hands, feet, and whole
man. A due considering what corruptions we are troubled with, what things hurt
us, what do help us, whether we grow stronger or weaker, whether corruptions
decay or increase, and how our foul fares. A looking to the motions that
arise within, to the words and deeds that come forth. A marking, what we
think, say, do, whither we go, to what end, upon what warrant, upon what
calling, that we be not found loose and wandering, and going, we cannot tell
why, nor whither, our selves. The soul is said to be awaken, when the eye of
the mind is thus obseruatiue of it self; and so long as it is thus with us,
the least striving of lusts is noted, and resisted, and so the greater
disorders are prevented; but when this observation of our selves is absent,
sin gets head by little and little, and we find our selves in the hands of
it, all of a sudden, and know not how to get out. Wherefore, to all the parts
of Christian armor, watchfulness must be joined: for what good can weapons do
to a sleeping man? and how can a sleeping body fight, though he be never so
well armed? When we forget that godliness is the maine business, and that our
chief work is, to keep our felues unspotted of the world, and walk worthy
of the calling whereto we are called, and so suffer our minds to be drawn
away with other things, and never take care whether the things we do be good
or evil for our souls, nor whether they please God or no, but let the
thoughts and words run at random, as it were; O how soon shall we be drawn
into sin, and how quickly will the members that are on earth grow big within
us! Wherefore, as an eye must be had still to mutinous and treacherous subjects,
and they must be observed what meetings they have, to what places they go,
and what countenance they bear; so must we do with our sins. The eye of the
mind must bend it self to these things, and not suffer any less needful
matter to divert it. A man in a sleep is little different from a dead man; and
a Christian and sanctified soul, if it fall asleep in a careless neglecting,
and reckelesse disregarding of its own ways, will behave it self for the
time but a very little better, then one that is dead in sins and trespasses.
Now let your eyes be always open, and bent upon your own ways, and then you
shall walk like living men indeed. Thus now have I showed you the best means
I can gather out of Gods Word, to make you prosperous in your spiritual
battles. Be moderate in the use of bodily contents: Fly far from the
occasions of sin: Power forth your hearts often before God in confessions,
requests and Praises. Busy your minds continually, in thinking of Gods holy
nature, fearful threats against sin, and gracious promises to the upright,
and of the bitter Passion of your blessed Savior. Be always fearful of your
selves, be always watchful over your selves. These things do, and your
souls shall thrive, and your lusts shall die, and you shall happily mortify
your members which are on earth, if alone you take another direction with you,
concerning the manner of using these helps.

CHAP. X. Showing, in what manner we must use all the helps to mortification.
FIrst then, We must use all helps to mortification in a good manner.
these things must be done seasonably; we must oppose our corruptions by prayer
and meditation, when they begin to arise, and use all the other means against
sin, before sin have gotten too much head, Seasonably.
when corrupt inclinations do even begin to stir, and be troublesome, then
must we resist them, then must we fly from the occasions of increasing them,
then must we revive holy fears, and stir up our selves to watchfulness,
then must we call forth holy thoughts, and stir up holy requests; we must
not feed on such thoughts, wee-must not let them lie quietly in the soul, we
must not give them a little rest, as it were, a time of truce; for if we do,
they will slily steal away the delight of our imaginations, and so the consent
of our wills, and then shall we be faint in resistance, and like enough be
foiled. Every harmefull beast is easiliest killed, when it is youngest. The
Whelps of a Lion or a Bear, are soon and safely dispatched; let them grow
longer, they will wax stronger, and cannot be slain without more trouble, and
more peril. The first motions to sin, are like Lions Whelps, let them
continue a while, they will be as young Lions, let them have liberty to get
out at the tongue, they will prove ramping and roaring Lions. Instance in
fleshly lust: When a motion that way first arises, oppose it by prayer and
meditation, it is soon quelled, and dies. Let a man content and please his
fancy in that motion, and nourish the desire, by being satisfied in it, and at
last give way to some wanton words, and some degrees of dalliance, his prayers
will not be available, unless they be very fervent, and then he shall hardly
be able to pray fervently. We must be wise therefore, and quench the fire,
before it have taken the beams and rafters, and be flaming forth out of the
roof of the house.

2. Constantly.
Secondly, we must be constant in fighting against sin, even day by day, and
hour by hour without intermission. If we give it truce for a day or two (as
it were, a putting of the Canaanites to tribute only) it will recover so much
strength, as after, we shall far more hardly keep it under, yea, it will go
near to make us tributaries. A grievous sore must be dressed every day, and
every day have new tents and plasters applied to it; if it be neglected one or
two days, it will be the worse for it, perhaps a week or a month after. We
must make it our chief work to be warring against sin; we must not only
skirmish against it occasionally, but fight against it purposely. There is no
business so much concerns us, as this of mortification; it should be set
before our trades, and our studies, and food, and our sleep, and all the
things of this life: we must follow it, as the Day-labourer does his labor,
day by day; and we must give our selves no leave to make a loytering day: yea,
we must be constant in holding out to oppose sin, though we may find but
small success at first. The Israelites fought against Benjamin the third day
also, though they had lost two battles before. We must not suffer our little
prevailing to dis-harten us, but pray again, and agine meditate, and set the
battle in array again, for all our losses. What says David to Ioab? 2. Sam.
11.25.
The sword deuoureth on both sides; let not this thing trouble thee, but make
the battle more strong against the City, and overthrow it. So must we
encourage our selves against sin: Great Captains have continued the siege of
a City for many years together, though they have lost many men, and spent
much money, and seemed little to prevail. We must resolve to continue this
siege so long as we live, and to make hot assaults upon our corruptions daily,
though sometimes we seem to our selves but to lose our labor; and he that
holds out the combat, shall conquer.

3. Thirdly, Orderly.
we must use order in our spiritual warfare. It is discretion in a Captain,
to begin his conquest in the fittest place, and to know which enemy to deal
against first. We must in the first place, and with the chief care, oppose our
chief sin. In inuading the Country of an enemy, it is wisdom to begin first
with the weakest; but in inuading sin, we must begin with the strongest lust
first. That corruption to which, in regard of bodily temper, or custom, or
place, or state of life, a man is most subject to, that he must first, and most
resist and weaken: for if the greater sin be suffered, the less will shelter
themselves under it. Take the General of the Army, and the whole host will be
discomfited: if he escape away, he will wage more soldiers, and make more
work. 2. Sam. 17.2, 14.
Achitophel counseled to kill David, and then should all the people return in
safety. It is good counsel the holy Ghost says, that is, commodious.
Hushai's words were set out with more flourishing shows; but Achitophel gave
the sounder advice for Absaloms profit. Lo, the King of our lusts must be
smitten, then shall the victory be easy against the rest. He that sets not
himself against his most beloved sin first and most, does but preuaricate
(as they term it) that is, object in jest against other sins, he seems to
fight with sin, but he is not in good earnest. Til the Lord did smite the
firstborn, Pharaoh would never yield to let Israel go. We must kill the
firstborn, else shall we never pull our necks from under the yoke of
spiritual bondage. Know therefore, what is the chief corruption of thine
heart, whether it be pride, sullenness, carnal sorrow, anger, revenge, lust,
worldlines, deceit, or whatsoever else. Consider what sin is most common in
men of thy calling, rank, age, condition temperature. Consider what sin thou
have most delight in, and most profit from, and are in thy carnal inclination,
most willing to follow, and most loath to leave. Now having found this, here
begin thy warfare, here continue it with most heat and earnestness, make all
expedition, without all delays, to cut off this member on earth, and use all
diligence, and all constancy, to pull out this eye of the flesh. What ever
conquest thou seem to get in other matters, Satan will soon draw thee
captive again, if this sin remain unmortified. An enemy that ouer-runnes a
Country, and leaves some principal Forts untaken, vndemolished, is as soon
beaten out, as he got in: so he that on a sudden begins to turn godly, and
seems to make a conquest of many disorders, but leaves the chief Fort
vnpulled down, shall soon lose more then he has gooten, and cause his latter
end to be worse then his beginning, because he had not truth in the inwards,
nor was taught wisdom in the secret of his heart. Begin therefore at the right
end.

4. And last of all, Spiritually.
use all the means thou use against sin spiritually, and in faith, not
depending upon the things done, nor upon our own worth or strength in doing,
but upon the Spirit of God, and his blessing for success. We must look up
unto God for the fruit of all his ordinances, and of our labors, promising our
selves good speed, but from God, not from our selves. In his strength we must
be strong, performing all the things that he commands in obedience, but
still acknowledging, that without him we can do nothing. The Lords soldiers
must make mention of the name of the Lord their God, and say, Through him we
shall do valiantiy, and he will tread down our enemies under our feet. Our
feet must tread them down, but God must tread them down with, and under our
feet. Therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.10.
before he sets down any part of the Christian Armor, begins his directions,
and makes entrance thus: Finally my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might. We must be strong, but not in our own strength; we must be
powerful, but not in the power of our own might. Romans 8.11.
He that raised up Christ from the dead, must quicken our mortal bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in us, says the Apostle. This is the most important
consideration of all the rest in the point of our spiritual war, to know
whence our success, and strength to get success, and all, must come; that so
we may be full of assurance to prevail, not through the sufficiency that is
in us, or the excellency and prayse-ablenesse of our endeavors, but through
him that inableth us. It must be a power by mere and free Grace, created in
us, continued in us, renewed in us, by which we must oppose our selves to
these deadly enemies of our salvation. Let the Christian be as full of hope,
yea, assurance, as is possible, but let him build his hope and assurance
without himself, even upon the mere favor and goodness of God, that has
promised to fight for us. The use of spiritual means thus spiritually, is the
mortifying of the deeds of the body by the Spirit. And thus we may say to our
selves assuredly, as David to that Philistian Champion, 1 Samuel 17.45, 46, 47.
I come against thee in the name of the Lord God of Israel, and we shall
prevail against you; for God will give you into our hands. Thus I have
informed you of the most pertinent things that you ought to know, for your
better help in the work of mortification; the degrees of it, the means of
it; and the manner of doing it. Now I will make some use of all, and so
conclude.

CHAP. XI. Containing the first use of the point, for examination of our selves
in regard of the time past, how we have performed this duty.
To examine our selves whether we have moritified sin, yea or no.
I must make bold to require every one of you to examine himself, whether he
has thus fought against the lusts of his flesh to crucify them, yea or no?
The Lord has sounded the Trumpet to battle, and as a General, has given
the signal; have you prepared your selves, and been forward to fight like good
and valiant soldiers, or have you not? When such a point as this, concerning
our duty, is taught, we can never apply it with fruit unto our selves, unless
we begin thus to search and inquire into our selves, how we have performed our
duty. No sound humiliation, no true comfort, will arise to the soul from
hearing the Word of God, unless we consider our own ways, and rightly
inform our selves of our carriage, in what sort we have practiced that, that
God has enjoined us. This duty, you see, is plainly enjoined, many soun
reasons do confirm it, many evident texts do bind our consciences unto it.
Gods will is manifest, we should therefore demand of our own souls, Have I
been obedient to these commandments, or have I not? Have I been careful of
doing Gods will, or have I not?

2. Many men remain ignorant of their own estates, and live in the continual
neglect of good duties, and yet perceive not their own faultiness, because
they never take pains to look unto their ways, and to do that, that David
says, would cleanse their ways, even to take heed unto them, according to the
Word of God. There be a number, which please themselves in a good opinion of
themselves, and take it for granted, that they be good Christians; when indeed
they are nothing less then that, for which they do account themselves; and
the cause of this mistaking, is ignorance and heedlesnesse, either they know
not what is the duty of a good Christian, or they never ask of themselves,
how they have discharged that duty. We have done our best, to help you
against ignorance in this matter, and to make you see plainly what you should
do. We are now to persuade you to help your selves against carelessness, by
trying your selves at the true touchstone, that you may rightly discern of
your own estates, and not be guilty of negligent omission, without knowing
it. I pray you Brethren, what shall it profit your selves, to call your selves
after the name of Christ, if you have no good assurance, that that honorable
Name does of right appertain unto you? It is easy to clothe ones self with
the outward habit of true religion, and to put on the garments of external
profession of piery: but all these must be pulled from us at last, we must be
stripped of forms and show, and found to be such as we are indeed, and not
such as we have barely appeared. If thou have carried the name and face of a
soldier of Chrit Jesus, and yet have not fought for him according to the
military oath and Sacrament, wherein thou have tied thy self unto him, he
will give thee no praise, nor no wages, for having abused his name and his
colors, and made a fair show to no purpose.

3. Well then, Brethren, it is altogether needful as to do, so to know whether
we have done the part of good soldiers; and this we cannot know aright,
unless we do well consider of our selves. The soul of man if far in love
with it self, and will soon justify it self without cause, and beguile it
self with vain words, saying, I have not sinned, when he has sinned; and, I
have done my duty, when I have not. Saul boasted, 1 Samuel 15.
that he had gone the way which God had sent him to, and done the work which
God had set him about, and would not be convinced by the bleating of those
Sheep, and lowing of those Oxen, that should have been past bleating, and past
lowing, if he had done according to his sayings: yet he did but coozen
himself with a very false conceit. Many a man spares his lusts and
corruptions, and they bleate and low in the ears of all men, and yet
themselves will not hear them so, as to be driven from a fond conceit of
themselves, that they be mortified men indeed. We see how easy it is for a
mortal and corrupt man, to entertain a good opinion of himself without
ground. But now let me be bold to use the words of the Apostle in another
case, let no man deceive his own self, and be not deceived; for God is not
mocked. How is it then, my Brethren? Be you mortified men, or be you not? Know
well what this thing is, before you say, you are mortified, or the contrary. A
wanne countenance, a look cast down, niceness in some external forms of
divine Service, a rough censuring of others, a busy finding fault with every
man, austeritie of carriage, and sour censoriousnesse, these are not points of
mortification; it is the killing of our own sins, by the power of the Word
of God and Prayer. It is to sear our selves, and watch over our selves with
such vigilance, till we have been able at least to forbear the practice of
gross faults usually, and the allowance of all, it is this, I say, that is
meant by mortification.

4. Now let me examine each of your souls in Gods stead. What pains have thou
taken, and do thou take, against thy secret and most beloved Lusts? What
Prayers? What Meditations? What fear? What care? What watching? What abridging
of thy self? What circumspection have thou used to make sin dye? What cost
and toil, as it were (for without cost and toil, war can never be
maintained) have thou been at, in warring against the enemies of God, and of
thine own soul? Where be thy victories against pride and vaineglorie, against
envy and revenge, against wrath and bitterness, against lust and wantonness,
against worldliness and covetousness, against guile and deceit, and the
other troop of lusts that do swarm in the lives of men? Show me some of
these sins lying dead at thy feet, or bleeding, and ready to die, much
mangled, and much wounded. Where are thy heaps upon heaps, as once Samson
said, seeing thy weapons are far sharper, then the Iaw-bone of an Ass, that
he was driven to make a weapon of? Thou professest to be a Christian, that is
to say, a fouldier of Jesus Christ our Lord: Go to then, if thou would be
counted a valiant and a good soldier, can thou say of thy self, as they
sang of David once; Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten
thousand? At least, Can thou bring me to one Sisera, whose head thou have
pierced, and made to lie groueling upon the ground before thee? Brethren,
consider whether you have done any such spiritual exploit, or no, and think
not well of your selves without cause. It is not using big words, and making
frayes, that makes a good soldier, but killing the enemies of the Prince. What
one or more of these mortal foes of God, and of thy soul, have lost their
lives by thine hands? A man may, if he will, know whether he have killed his
sins, yea or not. It is not so ouer-hard to find, whether sin have received
its deaths wound, by our skillful and valiant using of the spiritual weapons,
wherewith Christ has furnished us; or whether it yet do walk healthily,
lively, and at liberty within us. I say, this is not so hard a thing to find,
but that we may find it, if we will not wittingly beguile our own selves.

CHAP. XII. Containing the second use of the point for humiliation of them,
that have not performed this duty at all, or not in due measure.
The careless reproved, and humbled.
so many as have been negligent in this warfare, must suffer themselves to be
reproved, and to be humbled by reproof: for which purpose you must know,
that there are two degrees of offending in this matter. There are some that
have no care at all to kill sin, but rather strive to save it from death.
There are others that have too little care.

2. Among those that go for good Christians in their own esteem, there are
many that count it enough to keep themselves from the blame and shame of such
crimes, as the world condemns, though they never war against the lusts of
their heart, and the inward corrupt affections of their evil souls, and the
inordinate motions of their own minds. Alas, this is to take sin prisoner
a little, and to keep it alive for a ransom; this is not to kill it, this is
far from mortification. There are some that content themselves in a few things
to walk orderly, but for other faults, they excuse them, and defend them, and
sooth them, and keep them warm, and so fight for sin, and do not fight
against it. There be some, that if to civil righteousness, they add a form
of piety, coming to Church at times appointed, receiving the Sacrament, when
others do, saying their prayers morning and evening, and now and then reading
a Chapter in the Bible; if, I say, they do thus much, they count themselves
excellent Christians, though they never did know what it meant, to be in fight
against their own distempered lusts and affections, nor ever took any pains
in that kind, wherein mortification consists. There are some, that if they
can outstrip the common sort a little, and keep a course of religious
exercises in the families, and flock to hear good Sermons, and then be hot
and sharp against Bishops and Ceremonies, and cry out against the faults of
the times, and blame Magistrates and Ministers, and every man's faults, with a
great storm of words, that then do count themselves Standerd-Bearers in the
Camp of Christians, whereas they are not able to show any sinful lust and
affection mortified in them, whereas they neither see nore care to see nor
resist the wrath, pride, envy, bitterness, worldliness, unmercifulness,
contempt of their brethren, and other foul vices, wherewith their lives are
made to stink in the nostrils of all that can smell any thing.

3. All these, my Brethren, all these, whateuer they may say and dream of
themselves, be unmortified, and void of sanctity. And whosoever amongst you
is such an one, we assure him, that Christ will never acknowledge him for a
good servant, nor crown him as a good soldier. Whatsoever man he be, of what
wit and learning soever, of what tongue and speech soever, of whatsoever
forwardness in religion otherwise, and of whatsoever strictness in outward
matters, if the corrupt lusts of his heart lie quiet within him, if the foul
vices which original sin have planted in him, do live at peace within his
soul, and he neither observes nor bewaileth, nor subdueth them; I dare
boldly say, that man is but a whited tomb, and a painted sepulcher. Many men
please themselves much, because they have a quarrel to other men's faults: but
deal blows as freely that way as thou will, if thou do not strike as
fiercely at thine own members, thou art no better then Iehu, though in thy
wrath against others, thou show as much fury, as did Iehu in his marching
against Ahab, and as much (as thou countest it) zeal, as he did against Ahabs
Family, and Baals Priests.

4. But there are some of Gods Saints that fight in this battle, but with a
very faint hand, pursuing their lusts, as Israel did the Philistims, 1. Sam.
14.24.
when Saul's rash oath had made them almost to starve themselves for hunger, as
it were, with a languishing foot and hand. They set against finnes, sometimes,
but not often, not continually; they do not count it the maine matter, as
soldiers do, and let all other things give place to that: they are more eager
against the faults of others, then against their own faults, though some
pains they take this way too. They see some corruptions, and resist; but they
are not diligent enough, in striving to find out all their evil inclinations,
and to set against them. I know not how you may better find it, then words can
express it, but they fight against many sins, but by the haules. Hence it
comes to pass, that they do catch many wounds, and break out diverse times,
into many such words and deeds, that do both blemish them, and vex them much,
and yet they cannot take warning, but because other things do divert them from
the study of mortification, they grow slack and remiss again. Doubtless,
my Brethren, he that behaues himself coldly in this fight, is but a weak
Christian, whateuer knowledge he have gotten, and whateuer name of forwardness
he has attained. And sure, many that are of great note, because they can
speak well, are yet hereby proved not to be strong men, but even babes in
Christ at best: for alas, how far are they from having put to death pride,
passion, envy, lust, worldinesse, and other corruptions; yea, how much and
often do these sins prevail against them? O, let us see our weakness in
this: for not as we know and can speak, so is our goodness, but as we can
mortify the members that are upon the earth. It is not bravery of speech that
makes a good soldier, but the blood of his enemies falling before him.

5. Now therefore to both these neglecters of mortification, to him that
neglects, it altogether, and to him that neglects it very much, let me turn my
speech as sharply as I can, but differently according to their different
offenses. To thee that satisfiest thy self, in keeping sin a little close,
or at best, a little under, and to thee, that make a formalitie in Religion
thine utmost mortification, and to thee that make a little flash of heat
against those, that thou call the corruptions of the times, the highest
degree of thy striving against finne, giving not truce alone, but peace, to
pride, vanity, earthlines, idleness, bitterness, revenge, and other like
sins; thou art but an errand dissembler, I pray thee know it, and I pray thee
be ashamed of it. If thou come to the Word, and it do not show thee the
foul sins of thine heart, and make thee strive against them; If thou prayest
with others, or by thy self, and thy prayers do not procure light to see, and
strength to overcome thine own inward corruptions; believe it, what-euer thine
own self-love, or the false opinion of others may tell thee, thou art but an
hypocrite. O, now take it to heart, and be grieved and ashamed, that thou have
all this while lived in show a Christian, indeed a Gentile; in show a child of
God, indeed a child of the devil; in a show an heir of Heaven, indeed an
heir of perdition.

6. And all you that have been somewhat careful of mortification, but that
somewhat has been far too little, and therefore you find your lusts yet
very strong within you, because your pains has not been very earnest and
constant to subdue them, I pray hear, and receive reproof. What mean you to
deal so foolishly for your selves, so unthankfully with God? What mean you
to live lives so uncomfortable and distracted, so vnheauenly, so dishonorable,
when you might gain comfort, settlednes, honor, and a little heaven to your
selves by mortification? For the most part, your sharpnes unduly against other
men (sometimes for these things that be faults, and sometimes also for those
that be not) is the chief cause of your remaining so much unmortified, because
you fight too much abroad, therefore you fight too little at home, and lose so
much at home. What, mean you to be many masters? What mean you to be
teaching every body, more then you selves? What mean you to be prying into
your Governors, and your neighbors, and every body but your selves? and by
being busybodies in other men's matters (as it most times falls out) to hinder
the thrift of your own souls? Fault-finding abroad is one of the greatest
enemies to mending of faults at home. Now, I say, what mean you to deal so
foolishly for your selves, as to keep so much ado about that, that less (if
at all) concerns you; and to be so remiss in your own bosoms, that your
own sins be as strong as other men's, and perhaps, stronger, though you see
them not? What, to bring water to quench another man's house, when thine own
does burn as fast as his? And now why do thou deal so evil with the Lord
they God, as not to pursue these enemies to death, which he has given thee to
pursue? Thy chief work is, to mortify thine own sins. Has God promised
thee comfort here, and glory hereafter, if thou will crucify thine own
lusts? Has he called thee to be his child, inroled thee into his book, given
thee the earnest of his Spirit, and the pay of some present Joy in hope, and
all this to hearten thee, in cutting off the members upon earth, and will thou
be still so careless in it? O, now humble thy self before the Lord, and be
greatly sorry, Joel 2.1, 2.
that thy lusts be yet so strong within thee. God sent a Prophet to Israel to
chide them, for that they had not destroyed the Canaanites, according to his
Commandment, by the hand of Moses, and they finding themselves guilty, lift
up their voices, and wept, and the place from thence was called Bochim, that
is, The place of weepers. I come in Gods name to reprove thee, for that thou
have not with due care rooted out the evil brood, the natural inhabitants, as
it were, of thine own evil heart; now therefore at leastwise be humbled, and
mourn for this thy carelessness.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the third use of the point, an exhortation to reform
the former negligence hereafter.
Exhortation to more diligence.
make your humiliation so through and sound, that it may bring forth
reformation. All you that baue hitherto gone along in your sins without any
care at all to mortify them, now be entreated to buckle on your harness, and
to learn to fight. It will not serve the turn for your souls health, that
you repress your sins from breaking out scandalously to the eye of the
World. It will not serve the turn, that you cast out such faults from your
lives, as would scarce be tolerated in Heathens; you must fight against all
sins, inward sins, secret lusts, hidden corruptions, and those that most
men count nothing; you must fight against the sins that are most dear to
you, and that you have loved best, and followed most, and that Nature makes you
most unwilling and unable to resist; you must fight against the sins of your
own age, and your own constitution, and your own estate, and your own
condition.

2. Now, I pray you, set to the works, learn of God to know your right
enemies, and to fight against them. Be not afraid, because we talk of
fighting the fight shall be without danger, for in this case the only peril
is, not to fight. In other battles, he that runs away, does often escape
better, then he that stands to it: but in this battle, whosoever flies, dies,
and he alone escapes with life, that fights it out to the last. It is a noble
quarrel, to fight for life and liberty against a mere usurper, that has no
manner of title, and yet would make you slaves. Sin has none interest to you;
the Devil is not your Creator, that he should make himself your your Prince
and your God. These lusts against which we exhort you to fight, they are the
devils armies or garrisons, by which he holds you down under his most unjust
and tyrannical government. O, rebel, rebel against the devil, kill his
Garrisons, set your selves at liberty. Fight against worldliness, envy,
malice, pride, hypocrisy, wantonness, wrath; fight against them; resolve,
that thou will never be made a drudge by them, as thou have been; that they
shall not have the command of thine heart, and thy tongue, and thine hand, as
they have had, but that now through the Grace of God, thou will cast away all
these things. How thou should fight, I have showed thee before: remember
those directions, and use them, and be happy. O that any reasonable man, much
more any Christian, should be so base-minded, and of such a servile
disposition, as to be content to make himself a slave to any wicked passion,
to any sinful lust, to any filthy vice, to any of the deputies of the Devil,
that rule for him, and under him. What say you, men and brethren, will you now
set in to fight in good earnest, against all your sins? If you will, the Lord
be with you, the Lord assist you, the Lord beat down your foes before you,
and we bless you in his Name, in whose Name we have exhorted you. If you will
not, then hardly live and die in thraldom for ever: for without this fight,
there can be no liberty.

3. But now to those that have been slack and careless in this duty, let me
sound an alarm, Numb. 10.9.
as the Priests with the silver Trumpets in the Law, to revive their spirits,
and put new heart into them, that they may with more zeal, and better courage,
address themselves to this most honorable war. Now, my Brethren, give more
diligence to the mortifying of your earthly members, and let nothing daunt you,
or withdraw you from this battle. Remember the words that Ioab spoke to
Abishai his brother, 2. Sam. 10.12.
and make use of them for this purpose: Let us play the men for our People, and
the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that, this is good in his sight. It
is not for your Country, and for your Contrymen that you fight, but for
your own immortal souls that you must play the men; and here the battle is
not yours, but Gods; and the success is not doubtful, but most certain.
Nothing can afford thee more comfort, then a constant resolution in this fight;
nay, without such resolution, nothing can afford thee true comfort. By this
thou shall show and know thy self to be a true Christian, and procure to thy
self an eternal Crown of glory. Remember the equity of the cause, the
necessity of the war, the fruit that shall redound from it, and the certain
assistance, acceptance, and reward, that God himself will afford thee from
Heaven. That prosperity that thou have already met with in this war, has
done thee more good, then all the world besides can do. Would thou for a
World be in the same servitude, which once thou wast, before thou tookest in
hand the mortifying of these earthly members? More diligence shall bring thee a
fuller victory; and a fuller victory shall bring thee larger consolation.

4. All that hot breath which men do spend, rather in blasting the names, then
healing the faults of their Brethren (when they are bitter and tart in judging
and condemning them) will be no whit at all beneficial to themselves; nay,
neither themselves, nor others, are the better for this warring. Turn your
edge another way, and enter freshly into the fight against your own sins,
and let other men alone. Indeed in this war, as in the natural, every one
must be ready to lend aid, by seasonable admonitions, unto his
fellow soldiers also, but the maine work is, no make good each his own
standing, and to repel the enemies which himself is most assailed by. What
words shall I use to persuade you to this duty? Your Captain is Christ Jesus;
your fellow soldiers are all the Saints on earth, and the Saints in Heaven
have all given you an honorable example of fortitude and constancy; and your
enemies be base Rebels, and vile Run-awayes. March on then valiantly, and under
such a Captain, with such fellow soldiers; against such adversaries, be ready
to spend your utmost endeauours. You have but three enemies, that seek to
keep you out of Heaven, and the other two may do you some trouble, but hurt
they can do you none at all, if you keep the flesh down, and put to death
these members upon earth. All the wicked men on earth, and all the wicked
Feinds in Hell, cannot make us guilty of one evil word, or one evil thought,
further then the corrupt flesh within does take their part, and join with
their temptations and sollicitaion. These be the traitors that betray us unto
Satan and the World. O, therefore use them as traitors, pursue them, apprehend
them, execute them. And so much for those, that in trying themselves, shall be
found either wholly, or in great part careless of this work.

CHAP. XIV. Containing a consolation and encouragement to those that have been,
and are painful in the duty of Mortification.
Comfort and encouragement to all truly mortified men.
I make no question, which have done the office of valiant men, and can look
upon the carcasses of sins, as Samson did once of the dead Philistims. This
work, I know well, has proved painful to them. It is a tedious business
to fight against the things that corrupt nature loves so well. But as any
duty that God requires, does stand us in more labor, so shall it afford us
more comfort here, and more bliss hereafter. He that has begun the work of
mortification so far (as I told you before, in speaking of the first degree
of it) that now those sins which once reigned in him, are put down from
their regencie; and those corruptions that once have was a slave unto, are now
deposed from their throne, as it were, and do cease to command in his members,
as once they did, has much cause to rejoice in the salvation of GOD, although
he find these lusts still striving, and laboring to recover their ancient
sovereignty.

2. It is certain, that the Spirit of GOD does rule in him, in whom sin has
ceased to rule. Every man is under the command of the flesh, or of the Spirit:
every man is subject to the Lord, ruling in him by Grace, or to the Devil
ruling in him by lust. Satan is a very strong man, and our own lusts are his
weapons, none can bind this man, and cast him out: but the Spirit of strength,
of which Saint John says, Stronger is he that is in us, 1. John 4.4.
then he that is in the world. Wherefore if any man that was once under the
yoke of wrath, lust, revenge, covetousness, or any other vile affection, do
find now, that by fervent prayers to God, by the power of the Word in holy
meditations applied to him, and by virtue of the death of Christ, and other
like spiritual means by him used, the Lord has pleased to pull this yoke
from off his neck, so as now, in stead of taking delight in the evil motions
of sin, he is grieved in his soul, when such thoughts do stir in his
soul, and cease not to cry to Heaven, till he find them beaten back
again, and does not now yield up himself to follow these things with
greediness, but is usually able to forbear the palpable practice of sin;
and if he be overtaken in any gross manner, he is greatly humbled and
abased, and recouers himself with speedy confession, and lamentation, and
renewing of his resolutions: If any man, I say, do find the case to stand thus
with him, he has in some measure fought and prevailed; and now blessed be
he of the Lord, let him look upon the dead bodies of his lusts with much
comfort, and let him triumph in God, that has conquered for him; and let him
encourage himself still to continue fighting, that still his soul may
increase in strength, as the House of David is said to have done, and his
sins may grow weaker and weaker, as it was said of the House of Saul.

3. My Brethren, this war whereinto you are entered, must last for term of
life. The flesh and Spirit can never be reconciled, there is no thinking of
any peace, but that which will be worse then dishonorable, even damnable; and
a sure war, is much rather to be chosen, then an unsure peace, much more then
a peace, which will be surely mischievous. Now by how much the war will
prove of longer continuance, by so much had you need to put on more strength,
that you may endure; and a great part of your strength must grow from your
comforts in your good beginnings. Wherefore now, let every true mortified man
(according to the riddle that Samson once propounded to his companions) fetch
sweetness out of the strong, and meat out of the eater; let them find an
Honie-combe in the carcass of the Lion which they have slain, and go eating;
let them, I mean, take great consolation in the sight of their happy
proceedings in this heavenly work.

4. There be some Worthies of Israel, that have lifted up their spears
against many hundreds (as it were) and left them all dead in the place: the
hearts of such do nto much need to be wished to take comfort. The content
they find, in perceiving the strength of sin so much abated in them, is
unspeakable. David was no more full of joy, when he saw Goliath come tumbling
to the ground, then are their souls, when they look upon this slaughter, that
God has enabled them to make among their lusts. No man is able to set forth in
words, the joy that grows to a man, who is hard set to by a cruel enemy, (of
whom he looks for nothing but death, unless he prevent it by giving death)
when he sees him fall down wounded, and gasping for breath. O, with what a
countenance and cheer, did Iael run to meet Barak, and to bring him to the
sight of dead Sisera? Surely the content of a spiritual man, in his spiritual
victories, when now his sins are even breathing their last (as I may so
speak) is no whit less; yea, it is much more solid, then that of such a
conqueror. Those that have happily passed the brunt of this battle, and have
their enemies in the flight, rather then the conflict, are (and have cause to
be) the chearefullest of all men, they be like soldiers pursuing their foes
with that joyful shoute of victory, victory in their mouths, and they enjoy
the comfort of their former labor with much thankfulness.

5. But there are other some, that have not yet attained so much strength, nor
gotten so much ground against their foes. They are now, as it were, in the
very hottest of the skirmish, the bullets fly about their ears, as I may so
speak, and their corruptions are violent within them, and do often with great
strength hale them, and draw them captive to the law of sin, which is in
their members. They do sometimes get the better, and beat back evil desires,
and find themselves mightily resolved to sin no more: at other times, evil
desires do mightily afflict them, and they are wellneere ready to faint and
fall, scarce able to retain their purpose of goodness, scarcely able to hold
out in their resolution of not sinning; yea, it may be contrary to their
resolutions, pulled by the flesh to do the evil that they hate; but then
feeling themselves wounded, they smart, and bleed, and struggle with their foe,
and get up again, and again betake themselves to their weapons of prayer and
meditation, which were almost wrested out of their hands for a time, and come
crying and mourning before the Throne of Grace, begging pardon, begging help,
and so again confirm their Faith, and renew their repentance, and make up the
breaches of their new obedience. These poor Saints (like soldiers, whose
enemies do yet hold their own, and make strong resistance) are often full of
fear, and care, and doubt, their hearts often droope, and they mistrust
sometimes, lest they shall be vanquished, rather then overcome. Let me
therefore apply my speech to he encouragement of those that need encouragement.
I say unto thee whosoever; that art in this case, that thy case is good and
happy, and that thou have much cause of rejoicing in God, notwithstanding all
the trouble and cumber that thou find with thy sins. It is a blessed
thing, and a great and unspeakable favor of God, that to what lusts thou
did once do service with all thy might, those thou now opposest with all thy
might; what corruptions thou did follow with greediness, thou do as it
were with greediness resist; what thou did once place thine happiness in
doing, now it is thy greatest unhappiness, that thou art inclined to do.
This, I say, is an estate that should give thee much comfort. Once thou did
serve sin; now thou fightest against sin: once thou wast a willing slave to
it; now thou art a resolute soldier against it. Thou fallest into sin very
seldom, which thou did run into very usually. Thou fallest into far
less evils of that kind, wherein thou did once commit far more grievous;
and now the least degrees of sin do more disquiet thee, then once the
highest did; and now thou let not so much as the thought of that go
unconfessed and unlamented before God, the grossest act of which thou wast wont
to hide, and cover, and excuse, and not to confess. Take courage to thy self
therefore, and enjoy the beginnings of victory, and be assured of the
conclusion. Thou art now in killing sin, and thou shall kill it; thou art now
busy in the conflict, and thou shall divide the spoil.

6. Now, all ye suldiers of Christ Jesus, that find in your selves the
beginnings of mortification, and a firm purpose of soul to continue,
resisting, striving, fighting, bless God, that has given you his Spirit of
liberty in some measure, and apply your selves now with all your might, to
consummate the work begun: Let not your hands wax feeble, nor your hearts
faint. Remember the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 16.13.
Watch ye, stand fast, quit you like men, be strong. He that continues to
fight, shall surely overcome. Let no doubt seize upon you, to weaken your
hands: the Lord your God he fights for you: believe his promises, give credit
to his Word, and you shall prosper. Take comfort in your estate that have
entered into the battle. The young men and the babes in Christ, which have not
yet so mightily prevailed in this war, are happy, as well, though they do
not so fully feel their happiness, as the old beaten soldiers, and ancient
Captains, to whom a larger measure of success has given a larger sense of
comfort. The weakest and feeblest of all Christ's soldiers, that lays at sin
with as much strength as his weak arms can, that bears a spite to it in his
soul, that resolves never to yield to it, whateuer come of him, and that will
never make peace with it, though he may take foyles by it, nor never yield up
himself into its hands, thought he may be wounded, he does mortify the
members that are upon earth, and he is, and let him know himself to be happy,
that comfort may make him more courageous, and courage may make him more
comfortable.

(...).
FINIS.
Charitable Tears: OR A SERMON SHE WING HOW NEEDFVLL A THING IT IS FOR EVERY
GODLY man to lament the common sins of our Country.

Preached in Banburie.

Isaiah 22.12, 13, 14. In that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping,
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:

And behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh,
and drinking wine. Let us eat and drink: for tomorrow we shall die.

And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts; Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you, till ye die, says the Lord God of hosts.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man. 1623.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe relics of good nature remaining in man since the fall, (by the work of
a common Grace preserving them) have taught Heathen men to know, and enabled
them to practice many worthy duties. Among the rest, some of them have abounded
in a most affectionate love to their Country, the welfare of which, they have
preferred before their own lives; and the ruin whereof, they have been
careful to prevent, even with their own ruin. Many worthy sayings have they
writ to this purpose, but scarce any more divine, and more deserving
admiration have I met withal, then that one of Tully, in his book of Scipioes
Dream, where he brings in a dead father (now in Heaven, as he supposed)
encouraging his son to do service to his Country, (wherein himself had
given him a most noble and notable example) with this most worthy sentence:
There is a most sure and certain place in Heaven for every man, that shall
procure the weal of his Country, either by freeing it from peril, or
increasing the happiness of it any way. To hear a Gentile tell of Heaven, as
of a thing certain; to hear him tell of certain places provided there for
those, that should do virtuously; to have the service of ones Country pressed
on his soul with so celestial an argument; sure it proves, that sometimes
the light of Nature does reach further, then many which live in the bosom of
the Church, do attain. But the purpose for which I thought of this sentence,
is, to let it appear, how great a reckoning reason does tell every man, that
he ought to make of his Countries welfaere, how careful he should be to
preserve it from dangers, to adorene it with all benefits, and to continue, and
augment the flourishing estate thereof. It must needs be an happy pains, from
which a multitude do reap commodity; and that one man deserves very well of
all men, for whose cares or labors, all do fare the better. Now if Nature and
Philosophy can give so good instructions to those that will attend them, how
much more perfectly should we be able both to learn, and follow the same
lessons? It is a great reproach to him that goes by daylight, if another
traveling alone with a candle, or a torch, shall see the way better then
himself: and without doubt, that eye is very dim, which discerns less by
the help of the Sunbeams, then another may do by the help of a Lamp or
Taper. O, then how just both blame and shame must be cast upon us, that are
nothing so regardfull of our Countries welfare (the most of us) as were some
Inhabitants of Heathen Rome and Athens! I would to God therefore, that I could
inflame the souls of those, that shall read these few lines, with a far
more feruents zeal to the prosperity of this our Church and Nation, then that
they had before. If the fire of love did burn warmer and lighter in our
hearts; it would not dry up the fountain of tears, to which the book
following persuades, but would even melt and dissolve our now-frozen hearts
into tears. Those that stand in places of eminency, may perform many good
services for their Country: we shrubs that sit in the shade below, can do
nothing worth the naming, but earnestly to pray for the bark, in which we
sail, and to lament the things that we see, to threaten a miserable shipwreck
thereof. He that will judge of things by appearance (and make carnal wisdom
his only Loadestarre in judging) can hardly mistrust so much evil, as those,
that make faith in Gods threatenings a counselor to their forecast, must needs
most evidently foresee now ready to come against us. The huge increase of vices
amongst us, the noisome swarms of wicked men, and wicked deeds, do assure
every one that believes, there is a righteous Judge in Heaven (who thence
beholds all the sons of men) that he will not long forbear to scourge us
soundly, for our unthankfulness to him, and rebellion against him. Lay all
things together, and I think, there neither is, nor ever was a Nation more
beholding to the Divine Majesty. What peace? What plenty? What deliverances?
What brightness of heavenly light have we enjoyed now for the space of more
then threescore yceres? Again, lay all things together, and, I think, there
neither is, nor ever was a Nation more wicked and ungrateful, and that did
worse requite the loving kindness of God. What profanenes? What blasphemy?
What contempt of God and his Word? What sins of all sorts do abound and
reign amongst us? We seem to have entered into a contention with the
Almighty, whether he shall be more merciful, or we more sinful; whether he
shall be more constant in doing us good, or we more obstineate in sinning
against him. I doubt not but that the same faults are found in other Nations,
that are in ours, and in places further off from the light, perhaps also
grosser faults: but a people so long and happily enjoying the Gospel, and so
poorly answering the seed that has been sown amongst us, I cannot think
there is any. What shall we do then? and what will be the issue of our not
bringing forth fruit worthy the pains and cost that God has bestowed upon
us? We may flatter our selves, as it is usual for men to do, and promise to
our selves as much good, as our hearts can wish: but it is sure, Gods
threatenings shall be fulfilled, and public sins shall bring in judgments
after them, answerable to themselves in greatness, and inpublikenesse. Mine
intention therefore, in setting abroad this Sermon, is, to do the best good
that I can to my poor Country, in stirring up those that are not stark dead
in sins, to set their endeauours on work, for the preventing of her woes.
There is no way left for us to defend our selves against Gods hand, but prayers
and tears. Man's wisdom is folly with God: It hurts it self often, in seeking
to help it self, and lies snared in its own subtlety, as in a grin. Man's
power is weakness with God, and often casts it self down, by seeking to
establish it self, falling with its own weight. No, my brethren, no: Not our
wisdom, not our power, but our prayers and tears; I say, our prayers and
tears; these are the best fences against the calamities, to which our Country
stands exposed. These will pacify God, these will make him say, as once he did
to the Prophet; Amos 7.3, 6.
It shall not be, says the Lord. To the end that I might provoke some to apply
themselves to this so needful a service for their Country, I have held up the
example of a most worthy man of God, whose example, if we would imitate, no
doubt but we should procure as much prosperity to our Nation, as Israel
inioyed in his time. Set about it therefore, O ye Christian souls: You
Country has interest into you: It callengeth at your hands, all the good you
can afford it: It justly claims the vtumost impreouement of all your
abilities. It stands in danger of Gods hand, by reason of the sins wherewith
it is defiled. Not your blood (which would you deny?) but your tears are now
called for, to wash away those stains. Heathen men have fought for their
Country, shall not we sight for it? They have given their whole bodies, shall
not we give our tears? They have laid down their lives, shall not we lay
down our mirth? They have encountered all perils, shall not we endure the
labor of mourning and lamentation? I call upon you in Ieremies words: Lam.
3.18, 19.
Let your tears run down like a River day and night: give your selves no
rest, let not the apple of your eyes cease. Arise, cry out in the night, in
the beginning of the night watches, power out your hearts like water before the
face of the Lord, lift your hands toward him. If misery come, you will surely
cry, when crying will avail but little; cry before it come with such a
crying, as may prevent it. O, defer not to afford this Island another sea of
tears for its safe-gard, and that a better too, then this wherewith it stands
surrounded. The multitude are so metamorphosed into stones, that all words are
cast away, which may be spent in calling them to sorrow, But if there be (as
sure there is) in our Nation, any small remnant left, of those that have hearts
of flesh, now let them witness their loves to their Country, in taking up a
bitter lamentation against those crimes, that make a clamor in heaven against
it. Cry aloude (I pray you) and out-crie the crying sins of England. God
from Heaven has spoken aloud by diverse corrections; He, as a Father loath to
strike, has given us many a fair warning. Let us not show our selves to be
wanton children, that will take no warning, that will not believe their parents
threats, that will needs continue their untowardness, till the rod be held up
over them, yea, till their skin begin to smart with stripes. There are many
that mourn for crosses, penury draws tears from the eyes of many. We weep
to no purpose, in weeping for such things. Let our hearts be filled with ruth,
for the faults that fill this Kingdom: Let the Lord see, that some are fit to
be spared, if for their sakes, perhaps, he may spare all. I pray thee, Reader,
be a true friend unto thy native soil. Help her with thy humble requests and
earnest lamentations. Intercede to God for her with a beneded knee, and a
broken heart, and moystned eyes. Not thy money, not thy toil, not thy
fighting, not thine hazard, but thy sorrows are called for. These vouchsafe to
thy self, and to thy Country, and we shall all be safe. All enemies here or
elsewhere, all Papists at home or abroad cannot hurt us, if our sins hurt us
not; they shall not hurt us, so long as they be pursued with cries and
lamentations. God is our King, sin is treason against him: if many commit it,
and none bewail it, he must and will avenge it: but if we spare not to grieve
for sin, he will surely spare to punish it. Happy grief, blessed tears,
joyful sorrow. The heart of fools is in the house of laughter, the heart of
wise men in the house of mourning. Follow the worthy Prophet into this house,
imitate him in it, do as he has done, and thy Country shall enjoy thy
tears, more then it could do thy labor, thine hazard, thy substance. But I
must not forestall the following Discourse. I hope it will cause the good
amongstvs, to pity their Mother, and to mourn for her, that they themselves
may rejoice with her in the fruit of their mourning. Now I commit thee to the
following leaves, and them to thee. I would thou would read them; I would
thou would consider them; I would thou would practice them: and so
wishing thee a much good sorrow, as in other cases thou could wish thy self
joy, I leave thee to his blessing, who will accept thy sorrow, and remain

A desirer of thy tears, William Whately.
Feb. 19. 1622.
CHARITABLE TEARS, etc.
Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because they keep not
thy Testimonies.


CHAP. I. Opening the Text, and showing, and proving the doctrine, viz. that we
ought to lay to heat the sins of others.
THE Prophet of God, the Author of this most heavenly Psalem, inthis part of
it, proceeds in his meditations after this order. First, he makes way to his
petitions, by professing his diligent care of Gods Law, Verse. 129, 130, 131.
Secondly, he propounds his petitions; for mercy, Verse. 132. direction, 133,
deliverance, 134. feeling of Gods favor, 135. Lastly, he concludes his
petitions, with professing his sorrow for other men's sins in these words. And
this he puts also for a confirmation of his faith, to assure himself, and (as
one may say) to persuade the Lord, that he should speed inhis suites: For it
is great reason, that God should mercifully guide, deliver, and comfort him,
that does take so hainously the dishonor done to God by other people. We have
here then to make the grief of David, set out by the quantity and cause of
it. The quantity is expressed in that hyperbolicall phrase, Rivers of waters
run down mine eyes. Whereby is meant, that his sorrow was very great, and
withal comstant, in that it did show it self by continual and abundant
streams of tears. The cause is in these words; Because they keep not thy
Law. Not wrongs and persecutions against himself, but sin and wickedness
against God, did procure his great sorrow: or if he wept for the molestations
and injuries offered unto himself, yet not so much considered in the nature of
injuries, as of sins. Let me therefore at this time be bold to press upon
you a most needful and excellent duty, from the example of this holy man, we
ought to lay to heart the sins of other men.
viz. and know the dishonor that is done unto our Maker, by the offenses of
our neighbors. Every good subject is troubled, to see his fellow subjects
prove Rebels; neither can any good and dutiful son or daughter, behold
without sorrow, the rudeness or undutifulness of their brethren or sisters:
nay, a servant that is loving and obedient to his Master, is also sorry at the
heart, if his fellow-seruants show themselves stubburne, careless, and
disobedient: so should it be with the faithful subjects, dutiful children,
and obedient servants of the living God, their very souls should be filled
with anguish, and their countenances with sadness, for the rebellion,
disobedience, wickedness of those amongst whom they live. Not alone our own
offenses, but those of our brethren also, should be as a load and burden upon
our souls. Thus it is reported of Lot, 2. Pet. 2.8.
that he vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with seeing and hearing
their unlawful deeds; speaking of his behavior, when he dwelt in Sodom. The
impurities and uncleannesses of those brutish creatures, were even as a rack
unto his soul, and he could not look upon their foul and lathsome, and yet
common and usual abominations, but that it did even torture and torment his
heart, no less then a rack would hjaue done his body. So when Ezra was
informed of the sin of them, Ezra 9.2, 3, 5, 6, etc.
that had returned out of captivity; he sits down confounded, and fasts, and
weeps, and mournes, and in the agony of his soul, pulls off the hair of his
own beard for grief, and at last breaks forth into a most lamentable and
mournful confession of that sin. This Prophet also had professed before in
the 53. verse of this Psalm, saying; Horror has taken hold upon me, because
of the wicked which forsake thy Law. And Jeremiah professes to the people,
that if they would not hearken unto him (to amend their lives according to the
Word of God, which he should speak, and had spoken) then his soul should
weep in secret places for their pride; Ier. 13.17.
yea, his eye should weep sore, and run down with tears. The Apostle Paul
likewise hearing of the incestuous Corinths abominable crime, and the great
conniuency of the Church of Corinth toward him, did write a letter unto them
about this matter, as himself says, 2. Cor. 2.4.
out of much affliction and angish of heart, and with many tears. Lo, how
bitter to the soul of the holy Apostle, the tidings of the Corinthian
disorders were. He that for scourging, stocking, imprisonment, stoneing, and
all heau persecutions, was scarce ever filled with anguish (but rather rejoiced
in the same, and seemed to gather new life by the coming on of new miseries)
is now exceedingly cast down, and put into bitter weeping, and lamentation,
for the wickedness committed by one of that Church, and by the rest tolerated.
Yea, our Savior Christ himself (the best pattern of all holiness and
obedience) did look upon the Pharisees (as the Gospel tells us) angerly indeed,
Mark. 3.5.
as their peruersenes and wilfulness did well deserve, but withal, mourning
for the hardness of their hearts. And it is also observed of him, that coming
to Jerusalem, he did even weep over it in great compassion, Luke 19.41.
because they had carelestly neglected the day of their visitation. You see
proof enough of the point: let us further make it good unto your souls, by
clear and evident reasons to be taken from four heads: First, from the graces
that ought to be in every Christian heart, which cannot but procure this
sorrow. Secondly, from the nature of sin, which is to be sorrowed for.
Thirdly, from the good effects that will grow from this sorrow. And lastly,
from the evil effects, that will follow upon the want of this sorrow.

CHAP. II. Containing one reason of the point, from the graces which ought to
be found in every godly man, and being found, cannot but work this sorrow:
these are three; Love to God, Love to men, Hatred of sin.
IT is agreed upon by all, Reasons: first, from our love to God.
that the hearts of Gods Saints, ought to abound in fernent love to the divine
Majesty, in regard both of those infinite excellencies which are in his holy
nature, and the innumerable demonstrations thereof, as also of those great and
many benefits, which they themselves do receive from him. This love cannot be
separated from an earnest desire, that he may be honored, served, obeyed, and
in word and deed acknowledged and respected, according to his own worth and
greatness, and the multitude and greatness of his mercies. Now there is such
a natural sympathy betwixt the affections of man's heart, and they are so
mutually subordinated each to other in their workings, as it is not possible,
but that love to any person, and desire that he should be well dealt withal,
must needs raise up grief and sorrow upon the beholding of the quite
contrary: For love must needs beget hatred, and abhorring of those things,
that tend to thy hurt, and dishonor of the party loved, because he that
loves, cannot choose but esteem and account them evil, yea, and very evil,
and if that thing be present with any man which he hates, and reputeth evil,
it must of necessity stir up in him a measure of sorrow proportionable to
his hatred. Wherefore this grief must bear witness to the truth of that
love, which, we say, we bear unto the living God, and must justify all those
protestations, which we are ready to make, of having abundant good will unto
him. For it is in vain to say, we love, if we bring not forth the effects of
love. It is but painted and imaginary fire, which yields forth neither heat
nor light: so it is but tongue-loue, and lip-affection (which is good for
nothing but to beguile our selves, and make us better conceited of our selves,
then there is cause) that produces not the true and proper fruits of love.

Furthermore, we do know and confess, Love to men.
that our love to God, must always be joined with the love of our brethren,
even of all that are made of the same flesh with our selves. I mean, our
hearts must be settled in a liking of them, and desire of their welfare, as of
Gods creatures, to whom he has pleased to unite us in many bonds. For though
the Lord do allow, yea, and command us, to hate the workers of iniquity (as
they well deserve, because they commit hate-worthy actions,) yet this hatred
must not be any habitual inclination, or motion of the will to their hurt, but
alone a stirring up of the affection of dislike against them, or not brooking
them, in regard of the evil which they commit; which may well stand, and must
ever be joined with the virtue of Christian charity, whereby out of a liking
of them, as Gods creatures, we are always prompt, and ready to wish and seek
their good. Now if we do thus love them, must it not needs grieve us to see
that, which we know to be harmefull and mischievous to them? Love cannot choose
but breed a fellow-feeling compassion, a sympathizing commiseration, and
sensiblenesse of the loss, evil, damage, misery, of the party loved.
Wherefore sin being (as in the next reason we are to show) a most dangerous
and hurtful thing to the souls of them that commit it, it cannot but call for
our sorrow, yea, much sorrow, and many tears, whenever we behold it.

Again, Loathing of sin.
every Christian man should have his heart possessed with a loathing,
detestation, and hatred of sin, that being indeed the first and principal,
and most immediate object of hatred, we may call it the chief odious thing, in
regard of which alone, it is lawful to hate other things, neither is any thing
further hateful, then as it does some way or other participate of sin:
misery being alone hateful so far, as it is an effect and concomitant of
sin, from which if it be separated (as in the case of suffering for weldoing)
it is even lovely and desirable; but whatsoever does savor of sin, in as
much as it is sinful, is hateful also; and therefore the Word of God commands
us, to be haters of evil. And if a man do never so much forbear sin out of
other considerations of the inconveniences that ensue it, not out of a loathing
of it, in as much as it is a contrariety to the will and glory of God, the
chief good: (for indeed sin alone is properly contrary to God, as having no
manner of dependence upon him, nor similitude of him, nor any other relation to
him, but alone as contraries be relatiues, and as crimes have reference to the
Judge that is to punish them,) I say, if in this respect of loathing sin as
sin, we forbear it not, our forbearance of it, is not a thing formally
good, it is not truly nor sincerely good, but alone good inshew, a practice of
hypocrisy, a carcass or painting of goodness. It being then a thing so
absolutely needful to hate sin, as that we cannot say, we have Gods Image,
unless we resemble him in this (for he hates sin with a perfect hatred,)
it is therefore also necessary, that we grieve for sin: for the presence of a
thing loathsome and detested, cannot be separated from grief; grief being
nothing else but a contraction and paining of the heart at an evil thing
present, and that must needs be confessed evil, which is accounted hateful.
So then we shall falsely affirm, that we hate evil, if we sorrow not to see
it committed. There are some things, which in nature a man abhors, and
cannot away withal (as some cannot endure a Cat, some a Mouse, some a Frog, or
the like;) now when such a loathed thing, does of force, and whether he will or
no, draw near to any person; experience will tell us, how grievous it is unto
him; he cries, and shreekes, and starts, and shows an extremity of the
passion of sorrow; and if he cannot fly from it, his whole body will weep, as
it were, in a kind of cold sweat, as if the weeping of the eye were too little.
So if sin be amongst the number of things, that we cannot away withal, that
we do loath, detest, and have in abomination, we shall surely testify our
abhorring it, by a sadness, heaviness, deiectednesse, contraction, contrition,
troublednesse, falling, melting and mourning of our spirits, when we cannot
choose but see it committed; for betwixt grace and sin, there is as true an
antypathy, as betwixt a man's nature and a toade. And therefore so much grace (I
mean, sanctifying Grace) as we have in us; so much sorrow must we needs have
for sin. So have you the first reason of the point, consider the second,
which we fetch from the nature of sin.

CHAP. III. Containing another reason of the doctrine, gathered from the nature
of sin.
From the nature of sin, which
separating the person in whom it rules, from the Sea and Fountain of
goodness. We may call it, after a sort, the first and chief evil, by
participation with which, all that is evil, does become evil; as God himself
is the first and chief good, by participation with whom, all things that are
good, do become so. For first, sin does most of al things (yea, solely and
alone) cross, thwart, contradict, dishonours God.
and so wrong and dishonor, and so offend, provoke and anger; yea, and after a
sort, grieve, trouble, and vex the Lord God of Heaven: for God himself is not
afraid to tell us, that he is grieved with men's wickedness; that he is laden
with them, as a Cart with Sheaues; yea, that men do weary him with their
iniquities; yea, that it grieved him at his heart that he had made man, when
he saw his wickedness. It is certain, that the Lords excellency is such, and
so infinite, that no perturbation cna befall him, to the diminishing of his
happiness and bliss, let all the sinners in the World both do and say,
whateuer wickedness they can. But yet still sin is a thing of that nature,
as does directly tend to the disquieting, troubling, and hurting of him, by
casting him out of his throne, by wresting his authority out of his hands, by
setting his creature in his room, and preferring the will and pleasure of the
creature (which is less then nothing) before his will and pleasure, that is
more then all things. All this the sinner does, as it were, proffer and assay
to do, though he cannot effect it: For sin is nothing but an opposition of
the reasonable creature, to the authority and commanding will of the Creator.
And therefore if it were not, because the Lord out of his endless and
unmatchable power, is able to ease, content, honor, and glorify himself on
the sinner, by a just and deserved punishment of the sin, and by causing the
way of the wicked to perish, as the Psalmist speaks, it would certainly
prove, even a very vexation, misery, and hurt unto him. So sin is the
foulest thing in all the World, offering and attempting to do the greatest
mischief in the World, even to put the Lord besides his Kingdom, and to rob
him of his Sovereign authority and power; and should not a Child of God be
grieved to see such a thing as this committed? If we see a man offering to
wound, cut, stab, kill a child, a friend, a neighbor, a stranger; grief does
amaze us, we cry out, and our heart bleeds with grief. The sinner (especially
by gross and presumptuous sinning) does, as it were, strike at God, endeavors
to pierce, wound, and (let it be spoken with reverence, to show the horrible
evil of sin) after a sort, to kill him: for his Being and Sovereignty must
needs both stand and fall together, and sin does directly set against his
Sovereignty: so that if a sinner could have his will, the Lord should be King
of all the earth no longer. O hateful and horrible thing! And shall this
horrible wrong be offered to the Divine Majesty, in the sight and hearing of
one of his children and subjects, and he not cry out againstit, and be
pained at the very soul for it?

Furthermore, sin is the most banefull and mischievous thing to the creature,
that can be imagined, both to the persons self that does commit it, and also
to the place and Nation, in which it is committed. Hurts the sinner.
Upon the committers soul (not to name inferior punishments) it brings
unavoidably (unless grief and sorrow come betwixt) the intolerable torment of
Gods infinite and inconceivable wrath, and indignation; causing, that so sure
as there is a God, so sure shall the soul of every man that aduentureth upon
it, be for ever tortured and fried in the fiery and unquenchable flames of
Hell, unless repentance (that is, an hearty sorrow for it, and a careful
amendment of it) do prevent to danger. Christ has said it long ago; These
shall go into everlasting fire, and in Hell their worm dies not, nor their
fire goes out. David affirmed as much before in substance, saying; Upon the
wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this
shall be the portion of their cup. Paul has confirmed as much, saying;
Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish shall be upon every man that
does evil. And again: For these things sake, the wrath of God comes upon
the children of disobedience. Shall we see a man offer to tear out his own
bowels, to cast himself into the midst of the Sea, to leap into an hot
fiery furnace, and not be heartily sorrowful at it? Now what does every
sinner, but prepare an huge fire, by piling on huge heaps of wood, wherein his
soul and body must afterward be burnt for ever; the anger and justice of God,
turning all into a flame, that never shall be quenched? Can any man know,
believe, and consider all this evil to follow from sin, and not bewail
bitterly, to see his brother rush into it?

Moreover, Hurts the land where sin is committed.
for the whole Land where sin is committed, it is thereby made obnoxious to
all the miseries, that this world can bring forth; Sword, Famine, Pestilence,
all these come after to purge away sin, if tears do not first wash away the
stains thereof. This is that, that sets open the floodgates of Gods
vengeance, and causes it to empty it self upon a Nation, and makes it to
break in upon them, like the breaches of the Sea, which cannot be stopped.
This causes the Lord in wrath to turn men over to civil and open discord,
whereby they fall a killing each other, till the streets do swim with gore
blood, and the earth be hidden, and as it were, buried with carcasses. Hence it
comes, that the Sword has commission to destroy, and devour; that the
ancient man is pierced through, the young child tossed upon a spear, and his
brains dashed out against the stones; and the virgin first ravished, and after
has her guts ripped out. War, with all the bloody mischiefs and insufferable
insolences thereof, do follow upon sin, till a City be turned into a
ruinous heap, and a populous Country changed into a Wilderness, and put over
to Owls and Hedgehogs, and unclean birds and beasts to inhabit: and never
was there Town, City, or Country, where sin was boldly and impenitently
committed, but sooner or later, Gods glittering Sword was sheathed in the
bowels of it. Hence are all the stirs and tumults that al Nations have groaned
under. This has made the earth to stagger like a drunken man, and the
inhabitants thereof to reele up and down, like men overcome of wine. This is
that which casts the World into a very frenzy, and puts the sons of men upon
the mad humor of quarrelling and killing each other by thousands, and ten
thousands at a time. This also causes the Lord to send the destroying Angel
against a Country, and give him charge to lay about him fiercely, smiting and
killing (as it has befalne, even in our own times and sight) diverse thousands
in one week, within the compass of one City? How many more then in the whole
Nation? The sweeping Pestilence, and other infectious diseases, do come in
pursuit after sinful men, and sinful deeds; and flying in at the windows,
do empty the houses of men, and Towns of inhabitants, till none be left to
walk in the streets, and travail in the highwayes thereof. And never yet was
there, never shall there be a sinful and wicked Nation, but (one time or
other, in the fittest season, when their sins are grown ripe) the Lord has,
or will dispatch his Messenger, riding upon the pale Horse of Plague, together
with him that rides on the red Horse of War, to avenge the quarrel of his
Covenant upon it: yea, for this also, the black Horse of Famine is appointed
to join himself with the other two, to make yet a more full riddance, and
take a more full vengeance. Dearth, famine, and scantnesse, want of bread,
cleanenesse of teeth and emptiness, and the lingering consumption and pining
away of the body, for want of victual: these tormenting evils do come on the
World, to punish the wickedness of the World. The bellies and backs, and all
the limbs and joints of men's bodies, must wring, and be pinched for it,
because all did join together, and abuse themselves in committing it. Sin
does sometimes shut up the bottles of Heaven, and make the Sun (as it were in
an anger) to burn up Corn and Grass, and the necessary provision for man's
sustenance. Sometimes again, it does open the same bottles ouer-long, and
causes the clouds as in a rage, to drown up the fruits of the earth, that men
and beasts should feed upon. This also makes the earth it self, as it were,
hardhearted to mankind, and (even quite and clean against her proper
disposition) to refuse to yield her increase for their use. Neither was there
ever a Nation under Heaven, of what profession soever, Christian or Heathen,
but that the Lord has taken his fit times, to discover his anger against their
sins, by withholding from them the fruits of Nature, and pinching them with
scarcity, in stead of abundance. And that is often fulfilled, which the
Psalmist sings; A fruitful Land is made barren for the transgressions of
them that dwell in it. Sin has slaughtred, poisoned, starued millions of
millions of men, and sent to violent and untimely ends, innumerable thousands
of reasonable creatures and beasts. Sin turns loose Fire, and Water, and
Heaven, and Earth, Sun and Moon, and Beasts, and all Creatures, and makes
them all to fight against Man to destroy him; and (which is more mischievous)
it turns them loose one upon another, to employ their reason and strength to
their mutual ruin and overthrow. What was that, that drowned the old World?
burnt up Sodom, and the Cities adjoining? consumed the Canaanites out of their
good Land? laid waste Babel, Edom, Moab, Ammon, and all the other Countries,
yea, of Iewrie and Jerusalem too? and often (to come nearer to our selves) the
Cities and Countries of this our own Nation? Was it not sin? What, I say,
has burnt up so many houses and towns, spoiled so much goods and treasure,
murdered so many men and women, and done such unspeakable mischief in the
World? But even this foul, loathsome, odious, and abominable thing, which we
call sin, the very proper parent and grand-dame of all that evil, that all
creatures lie under. For lying, and swearing, and whoring, and murder, and
fraud, and oppression; for ignorance and profaneness; for idolatry and
superstition; for swearing, and cursing, and other abominations, the God of
Heaven has a quarrel with the men on earth, and empties his quiver of
arrows, and sends out all his Hosts and Armies, to cut them in pieces,
fighting against their bodies, goods, lives, souls, and all, till he have
spoiled them of al comforts here, and sent them to yell, and roar, and cry,
and weep, and gnash their teeth in Hell hereafter, where their sins shall be
no longer a grief unto him, because he has avenged, and, as it were,
comforted himself in the execution of his infinite and perfect Justice upon
them. O my Brethren! have we not said enough, to make you perceive, that it was
not without cause, that David made his eyes to gush out rivers (and that you
should make your eyes do the like) for such a thing as this?

CHAP. IV. Containing a third reason of the doctrine, from the good effects of
this mourning.
From the good effects of mourning.
to this holy and hearty mourning. These Rivers of tears do give so good
content to God, and so refresh his soul, wearied with sin (to speak after
the manner of men,) that so long as there be but even a few of them running,
his anger cannot wax hot to burn against a Nation. Amongst what people there
are found a competent number of men that do wayle, Preserues the Land.
mourn, and lament for the common sins, this holy exercise of theirs does
(as we may speak) tie the hands of Gods Justice for the time, that he will not
strike that people with great severity. He is so abundantly pitiful and large
in compassion, that he cannot but defer the execution of his wrath (so long
as it may possibly stand with righteousness to defer it) upon the fervent
and humble petition of his poor servants, that with sad hearts, and bended
knees, do cry unto him, saying; O Lord, spare thy people whom thou have
redeemed; and, O Lord God, forgive and cease, we beseech thee; for who shall
raise up Jacob, for he is small? Let sin be as open and great, and crying, and
clamorous as it will, yet if there be a convenient number, fifty, forty,
thirty, twenty, or perhaps but ten in a City, that cry, and weep, and make
bitter lamentation for it; none extremity of public judgments likely shall
come: Seldom does God break in upon a people, till there be none, or in a
manner none left to stand in the gap; and when the time approaches, that he
has a full purpose to do a fearful execution on a Land, then does he take
away the mourners, and deliver the suruiuours up to hardness of heart, and
carnal mirth and iollity, that so he may have a full blow at it, when there is
none to hinder, and without let power forth all the vials of his wrath, when
there is none stands up to deprecate. O excellent fruit of lamentation for
public sins! it gets a repriuall of an whole Town or Country, and causes,
that the Lord will not suffer his furious indignation to ouerflow. So a man is
a great benefactor to his Country, by pouring forth his tears in this wise;
and should not Christians, as well as (yea, more then) Heathens, show
themselves true lovers of their Country? But, Keeps the soul from infection.
it does likewise preserve the mourners self from infection of sin, causing
that it cannot seize upon his soul, to poison it, as else the nature of it is
to do, so long as he continues to weep and groan for it. In common plagues,
there is great enquiring after preservatives. One commends Rue; another,
Wormwood; a third, Holy-thistle; some this, some that, as their judgment
leads them. But beloved, the worst of all diseases, the most catching, the
most contagious, the most apt to lay hold upon all, that come within the breath
of them that are overrun with it, is sin. The plague it self, and the
most desperate of all plagues, is nothing so apt to leap from man to man, and
house to house, as sin is. The scabs among sheep, the murraine among cattle,
do not more speedily ouerrunne the whole flock and Herd, then wickedness
will do an whole house, town, and Country. Only there is one most notable
preservative, which every man carries about with him, which he need not take
pains to seek elsewhere, but in himself, nor be at cost to buy of any but
himself, and that is sorrow, grief, tears, the same that the Psalmist here
speaks of. And whosoever he be, that can take but a reasonable draught of his
own tears, morning and evening, or but twice or thrice a week, yea, or
seldomer, for the sins of the men, with whom he lives, shall never be
infected with them, nor drawn by imitation, to like and practice them: for the
soul will never agree to do that it self, which it is pained in it self to
see another do. Will you not now make for your selves, and take this
sovereign medicine against this pestilent sickness? Oaths, lying, cursing,
bribery, simony, coozenage, oppression, usury, idleness, voluptuousness,
pride, revenge and filthiness, shall never catch you by the example of other
men, if you mourn for them, and behold them committed of others, with grief
and anguish of spirit. Will you not therefore stir up your sorrows, and save
your selves from the peril of an evil generation? Especially, seeing this
sorrow will do yet more good, by making them, Makes one careful to redress
sin.
in whom it is, careful of seeking the reformation of others, so far as lies
in them, and their duty and power extends. As godly sorrow for a man's own
sins, will bring forth repentance not to be repented of, and cause him to
amend his own evil ways: so godly sorrow for other men's sins, will also
make him seek to draw them to repentance and amendment. This will cause him to
contend and contest against sin and sinners, and with all his might
(according to his place and calling) to oppose and resist both it and them. If
he be a Minister, this sorrow will set open his mouth to cry out against it,
and cause him to lift up his voice like a Trumpet, to pronounce defiance, and
sound war against it, on Gods behalf. If he be a Magistrate, it will arm his
heart with courage and constancy, and all due severity, so that he shall
vnsheath the Sword of authority, and lift up his arm, and smite the wicked
doers soundly, with an heart virtuously hardened against the vices of foolish
pity, and of fearful cowardice. If he be but a private person, it will
make him admonish, reprove, complain, and solicit Magistrate and Minister,
and all he can, to procure a redress. Sorrow is a thing so much against the
good liking of Nature, and a burden of which, every one that stands under it,
is so truly and earnestly desirous to be eased, that it will stir up his
care to shake off the burden, and remove away that, that does procure his
sorrow. So shall a godly man not alone save himself from sin, but be made
an instrument also (so far as is possible for him, if it may be) to save
others from sin, he shall preserve himself from the contagion, and be
enabled, if the disease be not past cure, to heal them that are diseased.
Thus when Paul had heard with bitter grief the disorders of Corinth, he could
not be well, till he had sent a letter unto them, and dispatched Titus thither
also, to see things better ordered. And when Ezra had fasted and wept for the
sin of Israel, how careful was he (with the help of the Princes) to redress
that abuse?

And from this good effect, Saues one from the common punishment.
will follow another no less desirable, as a fruit of this; namely, that the
mourner shall save himself from partaking in the common punishment, if it must
needs come. Lots righteous soul was vexed, as you heard, with the impure
conversation of the Sodomites; wherefore the Lord sent his Angel, and
delivered him from those flames of brimstone that consumed the Sodomites. And
the Apostle concludes hence, that God knows how to deliver his: and so it must
needs hold, chiefly in the like case, the Lord will rather even miraculously
deliver those of his people, that set themselves against the sins of the
times with bitter lamentation, then that they shall not be safe, even then
when others are smitten. Jeremiah wept for the pride of the people: and did not
the Lord perform his promise, and make the enemy to entreat him well in the
evil day? Baruch and Ebedmelech also were among the few mourners for
Jerusalem: and had they not their lives given them for a prey, whither ever
they went, though the Sword of the enemy raged in the house, and in the
streets? Yea, do we not read that excellent vision of the Prophet Ezekiel,
how that before the City was given up to destruction, Ezekiel. 9.1, 2. etc.
he saw the Lords Angel appointed to go forth with a pen and inkhorne by his
side, and passing through Jerusalem, to set a plain mark upon the foreheads
of all those, that had lamented and mourned for the sins of the City, and
that no plague was permitted to break forth upon the rest, till these were
marked to escape? Lo, how those that sigh, and cry for the abominations
committed in a City, shall surely escape the miseries that must come upon that
City. Tears are able to procure safety to a man, even in a general and
common overthrow, where wealth, friends, wit, strength, and all other helps
will fail him: for either the Lord will graciously, and in mercy take them
away from the evil to come, and gather them to their fathers, that they may
not see the misery which is to ouerwhelme the people, or else he will hide them
under the shadow of his wings, and by his Fatherly providence for them, take
some order, that they may go safe in the common desolation. Behold hold a way
of safe-guarding your selves in the hardest times, and of procuring that
blessing to your selves, which ungodly men do falsely promise to themselves
from the vanity, and lies, under which the Prophet says, they think to lie
hid, namely, that when a scourge does ouerflow, it shall not come near you;
and that is nothing else but to do, as our Prophet has done before, send up
sighs and groans unto the Lord, for the public sins; and whosoever
bewayleth the general wickedness, shall also be delivered from the general
punishment. Therefore if any man desire to be pulled, as a brand out of the fire,
and to be one of the two or three berries in the utmost boughs, that must
hang upon the tree, when all the rest are beaten off, let him provide for his
own peace and welfare betime, by making his heart to ache, and his eyes to
weep for the common abominations. And so you see what good this mourning will
do, in regard of the public State, by proroging the punishment so long as is
possible, and in regard of his own self that mourns, by keeping him from
the infection of sin, making him careful to seek the amendment of others,
and so saving him from participating in the public plagues.

CHAP. V. Containing the fourth reason of the point from the evil that will
ensue for want of mourning.
From the ill effects of not mourning. The soul will be infected.
and let them consider of the evils, that will necessarily follow from the
absence of these tears. It is certain, that no man can shun the infection of
other men's sins, unless he mourn for them; as no mourner is infected, so
none but mourners can be free from infection. He that grieves not for a sin
that others commit, will easily be induced to commit it himself, if occasion
serve, at least he will soon be drawn to like it, and think well enough of
it, and then the infection has taken the heart, and has possessed the spirits
and vital parts, as it were, of his soul, and that is enough to kill a man,
though it should be kept from breaking forth in outward action. Some men, by
virtue of a good constitution, escape the Plague in the hottest and forest of
all plagues, and that also, though they use few or none antidotes or remedies.
It is not so with our inward man, in regard of sin: For of so ill a complexion,
as it were, and so unsound and healthlesse a constitution are all our souls,
since the defiling of our nature by the first sin of Adam, that any sin
almost does easily, speedily, unavoidably, cleave unto the same. The driest
Touchwood or Tinder that is, does not more readily take fire by any little
spark, then our souls will catch a sin by bad example. And sin it self
is so strong and vehement in the working of it, and withal so deceitefull,
close, and insinuating, that it does almost insensibly conueigh it self into
our inward bowels, even almost before we are aware: so that unless we do
moysten our selves often, by the tears of godly sorrow for sin; we cannot live
amongst others, that do even glow with the fire of it, but we shall also burn
and glow for company; neither is there a man under Heaven so sanctified, but
he shall become wicked with wicked men, if his soul mourn not for their
wickedness. Lot would sure have been unclean in Sodom, if their uncleanness
had not vexed his righteous soul. Therefore to prevent a mischief otherwise
vnpreuentable to our selves, namely, the being polluted with other men's faults,
let us see it a duty (and follow it) to wash our selves with tears from that
pollution.

Otherwise, A men shall be careless of seeking of redress of evils.
we shall also pull another evil upon our selves, even make our selves
slack, careless and remiss, in the endeavor of reforming the sins of our
brethren. Hardheartednesse, in not feeling the burdensomenesse of sin, will
cause, that a man shall sit still, and let it take its course, and bestow no
pains to redress it: for that that one does not feel to be evil, why should
he bestirre himself to amend? And surely he feels it not evil, that does
not mourn for it. What was the cause that the Corinthians did so carelessly
tolerate the incestuous person among them? Has not the Apostle taxed it in one
word, saying; And you have not rather grieved, that such an one might be taken
from amongst you. Lo, they mourned not for the sin, and therefore they
chastized not the sinner in good manner, as they ought to have done, for his
amendment. And so will it ever be in all places and times. In what measure
sorrow for sin is wanting, care of amending it will be wanting also: little
of this, if little of that; and if none of that, none of this will be seen in
men's lives. This insensibleness of sin, is joined with too much
sensiblenesse of other things; it makes one so timorous, that he dares not
speak against wickedness, for fear of offending such and such: it makes a
man foolishly pitiful, and cruelly compassionate, that he cannot find in his
heart to hurt the offender, even by due executions of justice. He, whose heart
and eyes cannot perform their office, in grieuing for, and lamenting sin,
neither will his hand and tongue do their offices, in speaking and striving
against it. The same corruptions that make the heart short in grief, and the
eyes in tears, will also make the tongue short in reproouing, and hand in
punishing. Neither will any man lay a plaster to that sore, which he thinks
not worth grieuing for; for if it were dangerous, why is not he sorry? If it be
not dangerous, what need a plaster? And so it will follow, that sin having
none enemy to resist it, none to oppose and fight against it, will mightily
prevail (as a fire which no man seeks to quench,) and so get the upper hand,
till at last it grow so high, crying, and insufferable, Public plagues will
come.
that the Justice of God can no longer forbear it, but he himself must take
the matter into his own hand. Then follow sore and heavy calamities upon the
Church and Commonwealth, and the whole Nation groans under Gods blows,
because few or none did groan for the sins that provoked him. When many
commit evil, and none lament it, then the wrath of God will surely arise, then
is sin gotten to his full ripeness, and then the evils aboue-named,
sometimes singly, sometimes altogether at once, are appointed to destroy a
Nation. All the policy of Governors, all the valor and courage of soldiers,
all the wealth of Citizens, and the love and friendship of neighbors, shall
not keep a Nation in welfare, nor mound it from grievous and fearful
plagues, if once the voice of sadness and mourning, and of those that cry and
weep for the abominations of it, be put to silence. Then will God change their
wisdom into folly, and catch them in the snares of their own craft; and if
other means should fail, will make them, even to undo themselves. Then shall
power be turned into weakness, and courage into cowardice; for God will
fight from Heaven against them, as the Prophet tells the Jews; and if their
enemies were but dead carcases, yet should they rise and overcome. When all
cease mourning, then shall all begin suffering, for that is a sure proof, that
sin is come to his full growth, and that the measure of man's wickedness, is
replenished even to the brim. Indeed, what is there then remaining, that can in
any reason be thought able to move the mercy of God to longer forbearance? When
none bewayleth, or as good as none; when none supplicateth, when none plead
the causeat the bar of his mercy, how can Justice but raise it self up, and
smite the abusers of former mercies, with so much greater severity, by how
much they have been longer borne withal?

And further, They shall perish in the common destruction.
it will come to pass from this letting sins slip away by them without
sorrow, that the children of God (if any few grains of Wheat be found hidden
in the huge heap of chafe) shall perish in the common destruction, and be
smitten with the rest, because they mourned not for the rest, but did rather
partake of their sins, by not opposing them: for none is in mercy marked for
the day of deliverance, but a mourner. Though a man be for the general,
upright and godly, yet if in that particular, he do so far degenerate from
the rules of godliness, that he remain sorrowlesse, for the dishonor done to
God by others, this vngrieuing disposition has so deeply engaged him into the
guilt of those sins, that it will very hardly stand with the truth and
wisdom of God, to let him go free; but he must cause him (for the good of his
own soul) by the smart of crosses, to grieve for such evils, as else he would
not grieve for. So mischief upon mischief breaks in, when tears and
mourning stand not up to prevent the same. A man's self is infected, he becomes
careless of reforming evil, God smites the whole society, for the sins now
committed by all, and lamented by none; and then he that mourned not, must
himself also smart for company. Shall we not seek to stop the way against
all, and each of these evils, by intrenching our selves, as it were, within
these Rivers of waters?

And so, Brethren, you have reasons great store, to prove the duty, and
persuade unto it. If you love God, whom sin grieueth; if you love your
neighbor, whom sin hurts; and if you hate sin it self, which all ought
to hate that love God and their neighbor; if you consider, how loathsome and
grievous a thing sin is, how offensive to God, yea, and injurious, how
harmefull also to mankind, both to him that dares practice it (whose soul it
tumbleth to the bottom of hell, besides other crosses of all sorts, which
attend it for the present,) and also to the Country, where it is suffered,
causing the Lord to send out Sword, Pestilence, Famine, and all manner of
doleful miseries against it: If you consider, that this mourning will surely
cause the Lord to reprieue the whole Country, and that it will keep the soul
of the mourner free from infection, and stir him up to al due means of
redressing sin, and so save his own soul, at least, from the common calamity,
when it can now be longer no deferred. And lastly, if you remember, that where
this mourning is absent, a man's soul will surely be infected, he will grow
careless of doing that which he ought to do, for redress of evil, and so sin
growing mighty, will infallibly and ineuitably procure a common judgment, in
which himself shall also, as a man not signed for deliverance, be taken away
among the rest. If, I say, you do acknowledge and confess all these things,
as they are all manifest, and do seriously lay them to heart, you cannot choose
but yield in your very consciences, that you all ought to do, as the Prophet
here professes to the Lord, that himself was wont to do, even cause Rivers
of waters gush out of your eyes, because men keep not the Law of God.

CHAP. VI. Containing the first use of the point, a reproof of them that do
neglect this duty.
Reproof of those that mourn not for common sins.
how slow and backward have we all been, to this so plain and needful a
duty? Ah, it is most evident, that we deserve most sharp reprehension for
being so scant in tears for that, for which this man of God did weep so
abundantly. For where is there, my brethren, alack, where is there to be found
one man amongst us, that has imitated so precious, and withal so manifest
example? Where is his dwelling, whose face is covered with these tears, and
cheeks made wet with this weeping? In what corner may we meet with him, or
her, that is able to profess in truth before the Lord, and his own soul: O
Lord, Rivers of water have run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law?
O, no, no; we are sold over to mirth and iollitie. Behold, slaying of Oxen, and
killing of sheep, eating and drinking, and calling to hang sorrow, as once
among the Jews. Behold; piping and dancing, and minstrelsey; behold, making
out hearts fat and iouiall, as in a day of slaughter. But alas; Ah, alas; the
sins of the Land are not laid to to heart by (almost) any of those that
inhabit the Land, and for a thousand sinners, hardly have we one weeper. As
for the common multitude, why, they would think him even quite out of his
wits, whose face they should see blubberd with weeping in a corner: And why
forsooth? Because his neighbors be wicked and ill living men, and keep not
Gods precepts. Why (would they think and say) what is that to him? Shall he
bear other men's burdens, or answer for other men's sins? Or can he mend
their faults by sighing and weeping for them? Why then should he vex himself
for that, which will bear never a whit the better, if he should vexed his heart
out, at it? This would be the censure of the common and ordinary man, of such a
mourner, as the Text speaks of, they would count his tears ill spent, and
himself a fool for his labor. And as is their judgment, such is (and such
needs must be) their practice. They never in all their lives wept one tenth
part of a tear, for all the sins and abominable deeds that ever they heard
of, or saw committed: unless it have fallen out, that the same thing have been
an hurt unto themselves, or some other man, whose case they have tendered, and
so bemoned the person, not bewailed the sin; been sorry for it as an injury
against man, not as a transgression of Gods precepts. But this neglect is not
found alone with the vulgar sort of men. Nay, those that have gotten some good
measure of knowledge and of virtue, and do exercise themselves with some due
care to keep themselves vnsported of the wicked world, even these also, for the
most part, have eyes altogether dry and tearelesse, in regard of other men's
offenses. Who of those that seem to know and fear God, and to delight in his
ways, is careful to wipe away the stains of his neighbors sins with his
own tears? Brethren, I demand of each of you; Can you say, and affirm, and
that truly and sincerely in the presence of God, that your eyes do yield forth
streams of water for the public sins?

Again, I propound this question to every of your consciences: Art thou able
to take up David's words here, and with the good leave of thine own conscience
to affirm, as he affirmed, Rivers of waters, etc. Doubtless there are but
very few, if at all there be any of us, that may affirm thus much of
himself, without a manifest accusation of falsehood in his own soul. If we
lament our own sins, we think it abundantly sufficient, though we lend no
tears at all to bewail our neighbors faults. Indeed it must not be denied,
that the greater number of tears, and those the most earnest and bitter, must
be bestowed by every man, in lamenting the sins of his own heart and life:
but yet seeing God is dishonored also by the faults of others, and the souls
of our brethren, as well as our own souls, ought to be dear unto us; neither
can it be denied, that it is a sin, and a fruit of our not sufficiently
hating sin, and loving God and our brethren, that we are so exceeding
defective in sorrowful tears for their misdeeds, and cause enough there is,
that each of us should take up a grievous complaint against himself, and say,
O Lord, how unlike have I been to thy servant David? No floods, no drops of
tears, scarce half a score tears, scarce five, scarce two, scarce one,
scarce half an one, does proceed from mine eyes for the many and heinous
transgressions, that I do daily see with mine eyes. Where was my love to thee,
Lord? Where mine hatred of sin? Where my charity to my brethren? O how
justly might thou sweep me away with the Besome of the common destruction,
and bring thy fearful plagues upon all of us, even my self amongst the rest,
because they sinned, and I wept not for their sins? We are bound, brethren,
even to be angry, and to fall out with our selves, when we find in our selves
a manifest neglect of a plain duty, so evidently enjoined by God, by others
so plentifully practiced, and grounded also upon so good, and undeniable
reasons as this is: and therefore now charge thy soul before the Lord, with a
great sin of omission, in that thou have forgotten, or nor regarded to weep
in secret for the public sins. There want not men amongst us, that can
eagerly inueigh against the Words naughtiness, and aggrauate the offenses of
others in words, and with a satyricall bitterness, set out the greatness of
their folly. Yea, there are some, that can make matters worse then they be, and
set a deeper and dirtier color upon the sins of others, then they ought to
do: but among these witty and sharp reproouers, of these vehement and
clamorous accusers, is there any one, trow you, that may be called a weeper, a
mourner, a lamenter? It is easy to exercise ones wit upon the sins of
others, by making them ridiculous, to move the spleen with laughter. It is
easy to exercise ones stomach upon the sins of others, by violent
inuectiues, to make the offenders odious; but it is hard, yea, hard indeed, to
exercise ones sorrow upon the sins of others, to make our selves careful of
not offending in the like kind, and of seeking to stop them also from
offending. Diverse may say, I beheld the transgressors, and laughed at them:
diverse also, I beheld the transgressors, and chafed at them: but few (alas,
how few?) can use another sentence of David in this Psalm, and say; I beheld
the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy Word. Let us
therefore earnestly condemn our selves in our hearts, that have eyes so dry,
and void of tears, when we have a Land so naught, and full of sin. For
Brethren, how stands the case with us? Can we justly excuse our selves, and
say, The cause of our not weeping, is the want of cause to weep, for that
amongst us, the commandments of God are diligently kept, so as there is no
just reason of digging up Fountains of tears, to bewail the contrary? Are
we able in truth to defend our selves with this Apology, which were the only
due Apology, that would defend us from blame for not weeping? I would to God,
even heartily I would, that it were so, and that it were nothing but our, either
too much zeal, or too much aptness to find fault, that made us in this manner
to accuse and condemn our selves, and you. But alas, the contrary is most
manifest and undeniable. Sin abounds with us as much, as ever it did (I
think) in the streets of Jerusalem; and (as it is fore-prophecyed, that
knowledge should, so it is fulfilled, that) wickedness does even ouerflow,
like the waves of the Sea. Oaths, and blasphemies, and cursed speakings,
breaking of the Lords day, and unhallowed profanation of Gods hallowed Time,
contempt of Gods Word and Ordinances, and a shameful turning of Religion into
a mere form and fashion, disobedience against Governors, murder, whoredom,
theft, fraud, usury, briberie, simonie, all sins, almost, of all sorts, in
all estates, all places, all ages, all conditions, all sexes, do swarm round
about, and fill the World, like the Frogs of Egypt, or the Flies. The face of
our Nation is covered over with a Leprosy and Tetter, of most odious and
loathsome wickedness. Who can walk the streets in a Market, or a Faire-day,
and not hear a thousand oaths, and a thousand curses, a thousand lies, and a
thousand periuries, even wilful and gross false swearing, even for a very
trifle? With us they despise Father and Mother; with us they oppress the poor
and fatherless; with us, they defile every man his neighbors wife; and with
us, they take usury, and lend for increase. Amongst us, there is lying,
swearing, whoring, stealing, killing, and in a manner, no mercy, nor truth, nor
knowledge, nor fear of God in the Land: so that it is nothing else but very
blindness, that makes us not to see, if we see not, our Country to be even
buried almost, in a Sea of wickedness, and yet lo, we weep not, nor mourn;
our dead hearts and dry eyes drop down no tears for all this. O blockish and
senseless souls of ours! O consciences hardened and deaded, and little less
then seared with an hot Iron! O that we could be greatly discontented with
our selves, for having been so exceeding hard-harted this way, and for having
bestowed so little time and pains in laboring, to make our selves softer. We
have not only not wept, but not striuen to weep, not alone have we omitted
sorrow, but even the endeavoring after sorrow has been far from us, and that
of the two is the much more faulty; for he that labors to perform a
Christian duty, and yet failkes of it, for all his labor, is a far less
offender, then he that does utterly forbear all pains to perform it. Now so
it is with most of us (I think, I may say with most of us) we have bestowed
no pains, nor time, to dig up these fountains of tears, we have not set
our thoughts that way, nor labored the matter with our own hearts, to make
them grieved and sorrowful in this behalf. Again, and again therefore, let
us compare our selves with this Prophet, and wonder at the difference, that he
had floods of tears, and we have scarce at all one tear, to shed for the
breach of Gods Law, which is so notoriously broken amongst us. There is, I
acknowledge, a generation of faultfinding men, that make us far worse then
we be, their sharpe-sighted eyes can see no lawful Ministry, no true Word,
Church, Sacraments, nor prayer amongst us, and yet of these captious People,
and carping Nation, that ouerlash so much in accusing, there is scarce any that
mourns for the things he carpeth at: for they so spend themselves in false
accusing, that they have no leisure to bestow in true bewailing of our sins.
But tho we may not, nor must not acknowledge our selves so bad as they would
make us (for a body may live, tho he be sick and diseased; and Job was a true
and living man, tho covered over from head to foot with boyles and Ulcers,
that his friends knew him not,) yet neither can we deny our selves to be a
people very wicked and disordered, to whom the Prophets words may fitly be
applied; Ah sinful Nation! Ah people laden with wickedness, a corrupt Seed.
And again; We have deeply revolted from the Lord, and our sins are gone
over our heads, and they reach up to Heaven. And in another sense we may say as
he; The whole head is sick, the whole heart is heavy, from the crown of the
head, to the soles of the feet, there is little to be seen but wounds, and
swellings; and yet, ah yet, we lament not; those that fear God, lament not;
those that come to Church, and love the Word, lament not; those that desire
otherwise to walk uprightly and conscionably, lament not; so that it may well
be a question, whether most of us ever read this sentence, or heard it read
with any consideration and aduisement. If the eyes of sinners were only found
dry, if tears were absent alone from the cheeks of those that work
wickedness, it were not much: who could expect any thing but stony hardness,
from stony-hearted men? But even the people of God, his own children, that
should have hearts of flesh within them, these also have continued hard, in
regard of other men's faults, and even forgotten that it is a duty, to make
Rivers of waters descend from their eyes, because men keep not Gods statutes.
Now Brethren, if this were a fruit of a kind of natural unfitness to mourn,
because we were made of a firmer mettle, then that sorrow could melt us: we
might then lay the blame upon the body, rather then the mind. And yet if nature
had denied us tears, it has not denied us sighs, and groans, it has not
denied us the power of sitting in heaviness, and of making our selves sad and
pensive. Though we could not weep so plentifully as this Prophet, yet we
might end our hearts, and earne in our bowels, and ache within, and sigh, and
grind our very souls to powder, which yet alas we neither do, nor strive to
do. As the outward demonstrations of sorrow, I mean, wet eyes, are absent
from us, so is also the substance thereof, I mean, the inward tumbling of the
soul up and down disquietly, the hearts beating it self, as it were, against
it self, and causing it self to be pained. So then we neither mourn
outwardly, nor yet inwardly; we neither weep with our eyes, nor grieve with
our hearts; and what can we say in our own defense? For certainly, brethren,
it is not the want of aptness to weep, that makes us not to weep, for our
eyes are ready enough in other cases, and for other matters, to yield forth
even Rivers of waters. Let but an husband, or wife, or child, or friend lie
sick, and be ready to die; let but fire come and consume some part of our
goods; let any man but coozen and deceive us of some sums of money; yea, let
any friend show himself unkind, and disrespectfull of us; yea, let any enemy
reproach us with froward and bitter speeches; yea, let a Governor chide and
shent us, as we think, without our fault; or but an equal take us up
ouer-cuttedly in terms, or any, almost, the least thing befall, that wrongs us,
in body, goods, or name: O then how we melt like wax before the fire? What
floodgates be our eyes? How do tears push themselves forward (like a breach
of the sea) and will not be stopped? Then we cannot speak, but we weep, and
sob, and hardly can speak for weeping. O foolish man and unwise! Can thou
have while and heart to weep so much for the evuill words spoken against thee,
for the discourtesies offered unto thee, for the losses and crosses that do
befall thee, and can thou not weep at all for the sins committed against
God, for the thousands and ten thousands of oaths, and blasphemies that are
darted at his Name, for the woeful sacrilege committed against his Church, for
the ignorance, blindness, hypocrisy, profanenes of the multitude, and in a
word, for all the numberless abominations, that are daily, hourly, minutely
committed amongst us? O heart possessed with self-love, and prizing its own
ease and welfare above Gods honor and glory, and making more account of its
self, then of its Maker! Here now if in any thing we should enlarge our selves,
in speaking against our selves, and in reproouing, shaming, condemning our
selves; and this, if any thing, we should most vehemently press upon our
selves, as an extreme and vnansweerable aggrauation of our hardness, which by
this we know, not to be natural, but sinful. Say to thy self, I came to such
a place, such a time, and found the countenance of my parent, brother, sister,
or friend, estranged from me; and his words and carriages unloving toward me:
It put me in my dumps for a day or two after, and made me water my plants, and
moysten mine hands and handkerchiefe with tears. I went, not long after, into
another place, and heard forty foul oaths, and a number of horrible
execrations and raylings, and one or two dry sighs served the turn at this
wickedness, or scarce so much was done by me, to show my sorrow. O Lord, O
Lord, how abounds mine heart with ouer-high conceits of my self? How do I
ouer-value my self, and undervalue thee? What, to be more troubled at a cross
word or two against my self, at the denying of some small request, at any
discourtesie, any injury, then at so many oaths, lies, curses, raylings, as I
have heard without trouble? I know not whether I should be more ashamed of mine
excessiuenes of tears in the one case, or my defectiuenesse in the other; but
both laid together, do make up the measure of mine hardheartednesse to the
full. If I could sigh, mourn, weep for nothing, it were not so much, that I
did it not for the sins of others; but when I have such store of tears for
other things, now to be so scant of them for that that deserves the far
greater quantity, what shall I say of my self? Sure this deserves a degree of
sorrow, beyond tears, and so fall upon thine own heart, and crush it too
pieces with dislike of thy self, that have been so extremely isensible in Gods
behalf, so ouer-tender in thine own. O that these words of mine might so
far prevail with my self and you, brethren, that we may at leastwise
acknowledge our selves to be greatly faulty, for not having discovered our
detestation of sin, our good will to God and Man, our religious care of the
public welfare and our own, by taking out the lesson of David, and of Jeremy,
and by following the worthy pattern of holy Ezra, and blessed Paul and our
most blessed and worthy Savior himself. Doubtless it will do some good, to
know our sins, and to confess against our selves, saying, I am in truth
exceedingly oo blame, for my lavish and prodigal casting away such a multitude
of tears for nothing, and bestowing so very few or none in that case, wherein
they would have been (as precious seed in a good ground) exceeding profitable
to my self and others, I mean, in bewailing the sins both of my self and
of the times.

CHAP. VII. Containing the second use, viz. an exhortation and direction to
this duty, of mourning for the faults of others.
Exhortation to mourn.
this omission of tears to be sinful, I must turn my speech unto your hearts
for another purpose, requiring you in Gods name to reform this fault, by
turning your laughter into tears, and your joy into sorrow, as Saint James
advises. Ignorance of a duty required, though it cannot wholly excuse the
neglect of it, is yet some mitigation of the fault: but when a man is plainly
told of a duty, convinced that it is a duty, reproved for omitting it, and
yet is careless to perform it, now his carelessness is notorious and
inexcusable. Perhaps, my Brethren, some of you that have now been taught the
needfulnesse of these tears, did never consider the matter so well before, but
now that the thing is made plain unto you; and your souls must needs
confess, that you also, as well as David, ought to be moved with the faults
of others: continue not to omit a known duty, lest your consciences accuse
you of wilful disobedience. Not alone to do what God forbids me, when I know
his will to the contrary, is a fruit of wilfulness; but also to neglect what
he enioynes, when his good pleasure is made manifest unto me.

We have taken from you the excuse of ignorance; we have made your hearts to
confess, that you ought to have wept some of David's tears: we have, I hope,
made you sorrowful for not weeping them; now, we pray you, let us make you
careful, to shed these tears more plentifully hereafter. I know, that the
same David that here tells of rivers of tears, does also tell of his songs in
the night, and great rejoicing. But there is no such opposition or fewd betwixt
such songs, and such tears, that both may not well be done in their seasons.
The day is long enough for both, at least, our life is long enough, and every
Christian must find while to mourn for his own and others faults, that he may
be comforted: he must sometimes make his tears his drink, that he may be
fitted for the cup of consolation; and put himself in ashes, that he may be
ready to receive the garments of gladness. Wherefore, brethren, frame your
selves to mourning and lamentation, lift up your voices, and weep, and draw
forth water, and power it out here before the Lord, for an acceptable
drinke-offering, as once it is reported of the people in the days of Samuel: A
fitter season to mourn, we need not seek for. The Text fits well with the
time. Oh that our hearts would fit with both! God has mourned, will not ye
mourn? Be not among the generation of men, that mourn not when they are wept
unto; we come now to tell you, that God would have you weep. He calls for your
tears, and he looks for them: and let him not look in vain. Take up the
words of the Prophet, and say; O that our heads were Fountains, and our eyes
Well-springs of tears, that we might weep day and night, for the sins of
the Daughters of our People! Yea, let every man say with him; My belly, my
belly, depart from me, comfort me not, look away from me, for I will weep
bitterly, because (not of the slain, but) of the sins of the Daughter of my
People: for it is a day of wickedness and abomination, and a time of extreme
dissoluteness. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the heart; I cannot hold
my peace, mine heart makes a noise within me; for I have heard the voice of
swearing and cursing, sin upon sin, iniquity upon iniquity; the people is
a foolish people, they have not known God, they are sottish children, and will
receive no instruction; they are wise to do eiull, but to do good they have
no knowledge. Imitate the good Prophet in these words of his, and labor to put
on his affections, and then proceed more particularly, and say: Oh the oaths
and blasphemies in our Nation! O, the contempt of Gods Word and Gospel in our
Nation! O, the pride and idleness in our Nation! O, the drunkenness,
whoredom, and filthiness in our Nation! If Rome, or Constantinople abounded
with swearing and cursing, who could look for better there? If France and
Italy were full of whoredoms, who could expect other in those corners of
Popish darkness? But England, Ah England! Gods Signet, Gods Jewel, which he
has fostered as tenderly, and adorned as graciously, as ever he did Judea.
England, the one only Nation, almost, that does openly and solely profess the
true Religion of God: I say, England abounds in all these sins. What shall
we say or do? Whither shall we turn our selves? And how shall we comfort our
selves for this, when even England is full of all wickedness? What? Swearing
in England? Cursing in England? Lascivious dancing, dallying, and wantonness
on the Lords day in England? Contempt of Gods Word, drunkenness, pride,
idleness in England? Even in England, where there is so much preaching, and so
much hearing? Where the Gospel has banished Popery for so many years? Where
the Scriptures have so long time been read and published, and where God has
used so many means for so great space of time to recall us? O, break our
hearts within us, and let our eyes drop down tears to think of it! But what
mean I thus to strive with you for tears, and to wrest and extort them out of
your heads by force? To weep a little at a Sermon, is nothing to speak of:
there is a further matter required of you. In secret, I say, in secret, when
you be all alone, and may more freely do it, then do it more abundantly; or
else to do it here a little by compulsion of earnest words and persuasions, is
little worth, and will do little good. I confess, that in meditating these
things with my self, I found mine eyes great with tears, and mine heart within
me swollen with sighs, and I hope that the uttering of them, may have also
power to fill some of your hearts, and of your eyes also. But, ah, there is yet
a greater and secreter mourning which I call you to. He weeps in truth, that
weeps without witness. Trepare to the work.
Take thou some time this day, or some other day, to get alone by thy self,
and press these things upon thy self, that have bin so earnestly beaten upon
thee in the preaching of the Word; and there bowing the knees of thy soul
before God, begin with an acknowledgment unto him, that now thou confessest
this mourning: for the public sins is a duty, which he does justly require at
thine hands, and which thou have sinfully neglected heretofore, but now art
sorrowful for that neglect, and desirous to perform hereafter; and then
humbly beseech him to thaw, by the sweet and warm beams of his Grace, this
frozen heart of thine, and so to smite this rockie soul, that it may yield
forth, as once the natural Rock did, even Rivers of water. Pray him,
according to his most free and gracious promise, to power upon thee the Spirit
of Grace and supplication, and removing the heart of stone, to put within thee,
in stead of it, an heart of flesh, that thou may now do, what David did, and
what thy self by his example art called upon by the Ministry (and art
accordingly desirous) to do.

Having thus prepared thy self, Begin to weep for thine own sins first.
then set about the work it self, and first, begin to weep for thine own
sins; for assure thy soul, it shall be all in vain, for any man to labor
to bewail the faults of others, that does not in the first place bewail his
own faults. Think and say thus then to thy self in thy meditations: Ah, what
a vile and wretched sinner am I? What a Childhood have I spent? What an Youth?
What a Middle-age? And (if thou be come so far) what an Old Age? What
thoughts have I harbored in mine heart? What words have I uttered with my
tongue? What deeds have I done with mine hand? This tongue of mine has sworn
many a vain, passionate, and outrageous oath: This tongue has cursed, and
rayled, and spoken profanely: It has spoken wantonly and filthily, and told
many a lie and false tale. This hand has used cruelty, revenge and dalliance.
This heart has swollen against Governors, and boiled away in envy and malice.
This heart has been fearelesse and careless of God, and has forgotten him
and his Word, and even doubted of his Being. O wretched tongue, wretched hand,
and wretched heart! O, would that I could mourn for all these abominations of
my life! O, that all the tears which ever I wept in all my life, for crosses,
losses, wrongs, injuries, unkindness, and the like, were now all vnwept, and
gathered together at once in mine eyes, that I might power them forth in godly
sorrow before the Lord for my sins! Be thou humbled and cast down, O my
soul, and be thou troubled within me! wallow thy self in the dust, and tumble
thy self in ashes. Thou have offended against thy Maker, and sinned against thy
Redeemer, the holy Son of God! Thou have wronged thy neighbors, and hurt thy
self, and deserved damnation; and, Ah wretch, thou have showed thy self
ungracious and ungrateful, against that heavenly, careful, and tenderhearted
Father, that gave his only Son to death to ransom thee. What Father ever so
loving? What child ever so rebellious? Why are you dry, O mine eyes? And why
art thou stony, O mine heart? Why does sorrow fly from me? And why are tears
departed hence? O that I could weep! O that I could weep! O that I could even
be melted and dissolved into kindly tears, and with blessed Peter, weep
bitterly; and with godly Marie, wash the feet of my Savior with my tears!
Thus strive and take pains with thy self, to make thy soul sad for thine own
sins first; and having softened thy self somewhat by such endeavors, then
begin for thy Country also, and think in this sort: Ah Lord, if I had sinned
alone, I alone would weep mine own tears. But I am a man of polluted lips
and life, and I dwell amongst a people of polluted lips and life. We have all
gone astray, we all have done an abominable deed, there is none that does
good, no not one. This Nation, this Christian and baptized Nation, wherein thy
Gospel of truth has so long shined brightly, is yet still for all that, a
wicked and a sinful Nation. O, that thou would please to help me mourn for
these common sins! Is not thy Spirit as able to soften a man's heart now, as
in former times? Proy to God to soften the heart.
Is not an heart of the posterity of Abraham naturally as hard, as one of
another offspring? O thou that gave David store of tears, stir up in me
also the spirit of grief, for the public sins. Consider the grievous sianes
of our Land.
And now begin to represent unto thy soul, the many monstrous crying sins
that are daily (and with impunitie many) committed in our Country. Loose thy
thoughts a while, in this great Thicket and wilderness of abominations, that
has ouer-growne us, and say; What could God do more for a people, then he
has done for us? and he looked for Grapes, and behold, wild Grapes; and for
Figs, and behold, rotten Figs; for judgment and righteousness, and behold, sin
and wickedness? What monstrous ignorance and profanenes and hellish Atheism
does cover the multitude? What monstrous pride, and idleness, and fulness of
bread, and abominable uncleanness, do cover the Gentry? How full of oaths
and blasphemies are the Court, the City, the Towns, the Country with us?
Great men swear, and mean men swear; Ministers swear, and people swear;
men swear, and women swear; boys swear, and girls swear; and almost babes
and sucklings swear; and if every oath were but a drop of water, it were
enough to make a flood to drown the whole Land withal. The Lords Day is every
where violated and profaned. The Word and Sacraments are made a very jest, and
all Gods services are turned into a mere customary piece of work. The
children are every where stubburne and rebellious against their parents. Much
murder and bloodshed is committed; and for envy and malice, the Land abounds
with them, whoredom and filthiness stinkes in every corner; theft,
oppression, usury, simony, sacrilege: where shall a man stir, but he shall
meet with them? Lying, deceit, fraud and guile are become amongst the
necessary ornaments of a good chapman, and one cannot live without them
now-a-dayes. Presumption, stoninesse of heart, and turning Gods Grace into
wantonness, are every days faults. O Lord God, we are a most wicked and sinful
Nation and people, and should not my soul mourn for this? O, how art thou
dishonored, and thy Laws broken, and thy Spirit grieved! and should not my
soul weep bitterly for this? Consider the grievous punishments that must
come, if mourning prevent not.
And when thou have thus called to mind the sins of the Land, represent also
to thy self the judgments that must come upon us for them, and say; Lord,
what shall we do in the end thereof! Thy patience will not always last, thy
grace will not ever strive with us, Justice will not suffer thee to bind thine
hands for ever with the cords of long suffering; yea, the Lord must needs arise
at length in fury and indignation, and stir up himself in wrath, to come
and comfort himself, and ease his soul, by taking vengeance on such a Nation
as this. He must give our Cities to the spoil; our houses and Churches to the
fire; and all our goods to the deuourer. He must hiss for his Fly against us,
and bring upon us, as he threatened and brought upon Judah, his four great
Armies to destroy, Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and the teeth of evil beasts to
devour. He must lay us waste and desolate, and cause us to dye of grievous
deaths, and cast our carcasses into the open streets, as dung on the face of
the earth, that there should be none to bury, or to lament. He must fill us
full of wailing and howling, and bitter lamentation. Did not Judah escape, that
had less light, and fewer means? and can England escape, that has the light
of the Gospel, as much exceeding that of the Law, as the Sunshine does the
Moone-light? And now think with thy self, that thou beholdest God, sending
scarceness amongst us, and every body feeble and languishing. Think that thou
saw the Pestilence leaping in at our houses, and sweeping away whole
Families and Towns, till there be no buyer. Think that thou see the
insolent foe breaking in upon us, and with drawn Sword, filling every place
with fear, slaughter, death, and desolation, and then say; O the slain of the
Daughter of my People! the Waster wastes; without, the Sword; within, Famine
and Pestilence: for all these things must as assuredly come upon England, as
ever they came upon Jerusalem. If enough do take up the task of mourning, we
may escape them in our days: but if we do not preconceiue them by the power
of faith in Gods threats, we shall surely feel them in the execution; and when
the generation of mourners for sin is gone, then will the time of howling for
the punishment of sin be here. Think it not therefore a needless thing to
anticipate a cross, and to make it present in imagination beforehand. For
particular afflictions, we must not drown our selves in cares, before they
come: but because we know, that God has denounced this vengeance, and executed
it on others, and that his Justice is the same still, therefore we are sure it
will come on this Nation also, and that speedily, if rivers of tears prevent
it not. Wherefore our best way is, in the foresight of it, to lament the sins
that would procure it, that so we may not be forced to feel it, when all
lamentations will be bootelesse. This was preached upon a Tuesday in
Whitson-weeke.
Brethren, will you spend some hour or two this day, this idle day, when
others pipe, and howte, and drink, and dally, and dance, and add to the heap
of sins (as you know the season bears,) will you I say, thus meditate, and
pray, and mourn, and sigh, and strive to send forth rivers of tears? If you
will, blessed be those tears! they shall do good to your souls, and good to
your Countries, good to the King, and good to the Commons, good to the
Commonweal, and good to the Church, and good to the whole Land, and all that
dwell in it. But alack, I fear you will not, I fear we loose our labor.
Business, business, sports, pastime, company, some one or other such thing,
will steal your hearts away, I fear: for so it is usually seen, out of the
Church, into your houses and shops, you go some to your works, and some to
your sports, and never so much as think of what you have heard, never set upon
the practice of what you are exhorted to; and so we preach in vain, and you
hear in vain, and we get nothing but our labor for our pains. Now for the
Lord Jesus sake, do not so this day, but covenant with thy self, that before
thou sleep, thou will forcibly break through all occasions, and find some
one hour to take pains with thine heart, and to frame it to some tenderness
of remorse, that thou may be able once to say with David; Rivers of waters
have run down mine eyes, because they kept not thy Law. Say, thou should
hear of the death of wife, husband, child, friend: would it not affect thine
heart with some sorrow? Let the tidings, yea, the hearing and beholding of so
many sins committed (which do more dishonor God, then any cross can hurt
thee) have some power over thy griefs, and show, that thine affections are not
altogether carnal. One or two tears, shed for sin voluntarily, in the day
of prosperity, out of a ture desire to show our hatred of it, and love to God;
and out of a serious consideration of its spiritual filthiness, and
heinousness, is more worth, then twenty tears shed in the day of affliction,
when a man cannot tell, whether it be the sin or the cross that procures
his tears. Now therefore address your selves to that unwelcome task of
mourning (to Nature, I say, unwelcome, but to Grace most welcome,) and if you
cannot at first onset, get floods of tears, yet if you can get but two or
three tears, or a few hearty sighs (till another time that you may get more)
know, that it is worth your labor; good duties are done likely with much
weakness and difficulty at first: custom and continuance of doing, must
bring us to more perfection; be not discouraged, because thine heart will be
hard, and full, unapt to mourn, when thou addressest thy self first unto it;
but know, that a good beginning is requisite in all businesses, and he shall
never finish any thing, that will sit still and do nothing, because he finds
not all things answerable to his desires at first: yea, that man that labors
to set his will upon a pitch of sadness, by offering to his mind fit thoughts
for that purpose, and so makes his soul heavy with the apprehension of that
that is evil and naught, shall be well accepted with God, though he attain
not that melting, that dropping, that teare-flowing, and sensible sorrow, that
David here speaks of. And he that accustometh himself to that habitual
grief of the will (taking displeasure against an evil thing, making it self
auerse from it, and wishing that it had never been) shall in due season be
blessed by God, with the spirit of tenderness, which shall most kindly and
gently soften his heart, and cause his soul to be so mellow, and easy to be
wrought upon, that he shall even sweetly and freely power forth this his
Drinke-offering before the Lord, and most sweetly water his soul with these
April showers of tears, which shall make it fertile, not alone in he flowers
of presently ensuing comforts, but also in the rich harvest of virtue and
godliness, and the plentiful rewards thereof. Wherefore carry this short
sentence home in your minds, and give not over striving by times and turns,
till you have made your selves in case, to join David's request with David's
reason, and to say; Lord, make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me
thy Statutes: Rivers of tears do drop down mine eyes, because they keep not
thy Law.

CHAP. VIII. Containing the third and last use of comfort to them that have
done, or shall begin and continue to do this service.
Comfort to them that do mourn.
and continue to perform, or shall now begin, and proceed to perform this
excellent duty, we must also speak peace to their souls, and preach unto
them the glad tidings of good things, to comfort them withal. O, it is a great
happiness, to tread in the steps of those, concerning whom we are perfectly
assured, that they are now in Heaven: well may we assure our selves, that we
shall be where they are after our death, if we have walked in the ways,
wherein they walked, during their lives. Thou know, David was a child of
God, a true regenerate man, a man after Gods own heart; thou know, he had
all his sins pardoned, dyed an happy death, now reigns in Heaven, and has
attained eternal salvation. It would do thine heart good, to have an
infallible token, that thou also art such an one as David, that thou have
interest into the same good things which he enjoys, and shall have possession
of them at last, as sure as he has. Then compare thy behavior and carriage
with David's; when he saw men wickedly to break the Statutes of God, when he
saw wickedness committed in every place, and knew not how to help it, what
did he do? He wept, and sighed, and lamented, and cried, and took on very
pitifully, even as if some great cross had befalne himself, and as if his
own person had received harm. Can thou likewise affirm before the Lord,
that the same cause has produced in thee the same effects? Does the breach of
Gods Law break thine heart? Does the sinfulness of others make thy soul
sorrowful? Do thou sigh and groan, and bewail, and mourn for those
things, which it is not in thy power to redress? Lo then, thou art a David, a
man after Gods heart also, a sound and sincere Christian, an Israelite within,
before God, a lover of God, a lover of thy Brethren, an hater of sin, and thou
also shall be saved with David, and rejoice with the same heavenly Joy,
wherewith he now rejoices. Those that are like the Saints of God in duty,
shall be also like them in glory; those that have followed them in holiness,
shall follow them in happiness. The same Spirit works in them, the same
Christ dwells in them, and the same Crown shall be set upon them. Blessed
therefore are these mourners, for they shall be comforted. Whatsoever thing
David did ask in the former verses (and now in this verse does lay, as it
were, the foundation of his hopes to attain the same, upon the remembrance of
these his tears before God) that are we bold in Gods name to promise assuredly
to every one that can speak the same thing of himself. Do thou mourn for
the sins of other men? Then will God look upon thee, and be merciful unto
thee, as he uses to do to them, that love his name; for thou also love his
name. Does thine eye drop down tears, because men keep not Gods Law? Then
will he order thy steps in his Word, neither shall any iniquity have dominion
over thee. Does thy soul lament bitterly the common sins? Then will he
deliver thee from the oppression of men, that thou may keep his precepts?
Does thine heart mourn for the public offenses of those, with whom thou
live? Then will God make his face to shine upon thee his servant, and will
teach thee his Statutes. In a word; Striuest thou to perform this service, of
which, David makes profession in this verse? Then shall thou certainly
obtain al those benefits, for which he made his humble petition in the former
verses. Wherefore let these Rivers of tears become streams of comfort, wherein
thy soul may bathe it self, with much content. Godly sorrow is the mother of
sound Joy; these tears are the proper seeds of heavenly comfort, whereas
carnal joy does end in sorrow, and that crackling mirth of sinners being
extinguished, shall leave them frozen in horror and amazement. Wherefore reap
you the comfort of the seed you have sown, and as the seed was precious, so
let the crop be; and as the seed was abundant, so let the harvest. From this
duty may thou infallibly collect, that thy charity was sound and
plentiful. This duty will prove certainly, that thine hatred of sin was
hearty and earnest, and, I suppose, it may go in the reckoning of one of the
most infallible notes of Gods child.

To mourn for the general calamities of the Church, Two sure signs of
sanctity.
when ones self is at peace; and to mourn for the general sins of the
Church, though himself be free; these are two most happy signs of true
holiness, and this latter I think to be the surer of the twain, as more
sensibly and manifestly testifying true zeal of Gods glory. Yea, whosoever
sorrows heartily for the common sins, may, in some respect, take more sure
hold of that mourning to confirm his faith, and assure himself of his
uprightness, then of his sorrowing for his own particular faults. We have
examples of damned hypocrites, that have been sad and heavy, for their own
sins, in some cases, as Ahab, Judas, Saul, and he rest: but we have never any
example of any, that lamented the public and common wickedness of the Church
or Nation, where he lived, and of the persons amongst whom he conuersed
(unless accidentally, wen the sins have fallen out to be injurious and
troublesome to themselves, or to their friends,) but of those which we are
well assured, to have been truly sanctified, and now to be eternally glorified.
Is not Lot in Heaven? Is not David in Heaven? Is not Ezra in Heaven? Ae not
Jeremiah, Baruch, Ebedmelech, and the rest of these mourners all in eternal
glory in Heaven? Name me a man that is noted to have bewailed the sins of
others, and I will bring you a ground out of Scripture without doubt or
question, that he is saved: so can it not be said of those that have mourned
for their own sins. For in truth, the fierceness of an evil conscience,
terrifying the soul with the fear of hell fire, may stir up such grief,
and make an unsanctified man complain bitterly, that he has sinned in such
or such a thing, as Judas in betraying innocent blood. That natural affection
which we bear unto our selves, may also make us sorrowful fort that, which we
cannot but see, will be harmefull to our selves, even where no grace at all
does dwell: But to sorrow for public offenses, and for the sins of those,
that are no way near unto us (but as the common bands of Humanity and
Christianity have united them) there can be no motive at all imagined, except
the true hatred of sin, and the true love of God and man, which no man can
have, but from the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ dwelling in him. Desperation
and horror without Grace, may procure tears for ones own faults, nothing but
holiness can procure them for others. A man may lament his own sins, and
not hate them; he cannot lament the common sins, but out of an hatred of
them. Wherefore let the people of God make much of these tears, and preserve
them (as it were some hot and comfortable licour) for their use, against the
day of temptation; that when the weak faith shall be assaulted with manifold
objections, it may have this token of truth to allege for it self, against
which, there can be none exception; and let the people of God endeavor to be
frequent in this exercise o mourning for the common sins, that they may
abound in comfort afterward, and be filled with joy, in stead of sorrow; for
always holy sorrow ends in joy. We may not make our selves so careless of
our spiritual estate, as to lose a good duty, but must put all the Graces that
God has given us, and the effects of them to the best use, improouing them all
to the increase of our faith in God, and our spiritual rejoicing in the
assurance of his love. It will make us constant in good duties, if we shall
find them to do us much good. Let these sorrows be much profitable and
comfortable unto them (O Christian soul,) as indeed they ought, and out of
these weeping promises, gather these gladsome conclusions. I am sure I am Gods
child: I am sure I am a member of the same body, that David was a member of: I
am sure, I partake of that Spirit that dwelt in him: I am sure, that sin
shall not mortally infect me; that I shall not be drowned in the public
Judgments; that God will either spare the Land for the sake of my self, and
other like mourners; or at least, that himself will make provision for my
welfare in the common woes. I shall laugh, when others are punished for sin,
because I wept, when they committed sin. God will be my shelter and refuge
in the time of trouble, and he will not give me over to the destroyer; for
often have I caused, and often do I purpose hereafter to cause, that streams
of tears shall descend from mine eyes, because the sons of men do tread his
Statutes underfoot. I have not only wept for mine own sins (which fear of
shame in the World, or damnation in Hell, has made many a dissembler do:) I
have not alone wept for the faults of my children, and near friends (which
also carnal affection has made many a carnal man to do in some cases:) I
have not only wept for the faults of others, that were harmefull to my self
and my friends, (as self-love will make any man to do,) but I have wept for
the general sins of the whole Land, for the sins of the high and low, for
the sins of strangers that knew me not, and enemies that love me not; for
the sins of any of Adams sons, that I knew to have sinned, because they
kept not Gods Precepts. Blessed be the Lord, that has made maine heart, in
such a measure, soft and tender: I am in his Covenant, seeing he has created
an heart of flesh within my body; and I am sure, that none but a fleshy heart
will make the eyes to shed tears, for the violation of Gods testimonies by
other men.

(...).
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. line 20. for, fretting, read fettering. p. 17. l. 13. f. 1. Corinthians
r. 1. Chron. p. 23. l. 30. f. be, r. because p. 28. l. 5. f. disorder, r.
disorders. ead. f. does. r. do. p. 38. l. 22. f. know, r. knowing. p. 40. l.
1. f. First, r. that is. p. 51. l. 2. f. less. r. loss. p. 52. l. 15. f.
kyes, r. trees. p. 55. l. 6. f. break. r. brook. p. 56. l. 3. f. common of
those, r. common. Of those. l. 8. f. desires? Very, r. desires: very. p. 68. l.
18. f. God alone; r. God; alone, p. 70. l. 16. f. Hamar, r. Hamor. p. 72. l. 9.
f. cumber, and attend, r. cumber attend. p. 78. l. 2. f. thou, r. you. p. 80.
l. 5. f. shame, r. shun. p. 112. l. 19. f. lend, r. bend. p. 119. l. 22. f.
persecute, r. prosecute. p. 121. l. 2. f. of God, r. with God. p. 134. l. 13.
f. them. The one, r. them. The natural means are two, the one. p. 164. l. 28.
f. selves, r. souls. p. 170. l. 19. f. have. r. has. p. 176. l. 4. f. works,
r. work. p. 204. l. 15 f. thy, r the. p. 229. l. 3. f. longer no, r. no
longer. p. ^44. l. 6. f. him, r. himself. p. 251. l. 17. f. us, and every, r.
making all faces black, all knees weak, and every body. l. 19. f. houses, r.
windows. l. 20. f. buyer, r. buryer. p. 252. l. 24. f. souls, r. selves. l.
25. f. countries, r. Country.


