A TRVE AND AMPLE RELATION OF ALL SVCH OCCVRRENCES AS HAVE happened in the
Palatinate since the first of June. 1622. Stilo Antiquo.

Truly Related in a Letter, received from Doctor Welles the tenth of June.
1622.

And now Printed the 14 of June. 1622.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the gilt Cup in Cheap Side, in the Goldsmiths Row. 1622.



A TRVE COPPIE OF A LETTER Sent from Doctor Wells, Relating all such
Occurrences, as have happened in the PALATINATE of Late.
Received this 10. of June. 1622.
I Do not write this Letter with any desire of publication, because the best
Compositers are subject to the worst censures, or willingness to traduce, and
countermand such Pamphlets, as are rather framed out of coniecturall brains
then honest intelligence, but merely to satisfy my Friends, especially such
as are friends of the cause of the Pallatinate, and find their hearts affected
to the true understanding of the business. For if in supplying the Press
there is a kind of commenditory zeal and honest wellwishing manifested; much
more shall the truth it self receive grace and favor, and be well come to all
Religious hearts; as for such as are otherwise addicted, it matters not to
satisfy them, for Charms will not move Adders out of their holes. And
Pharoahs heart was hardened, till he saw the judgments of God. To conclude this
Preface, if you mean to divulge any thing I write, I pray you give the world
notice, that it is against my will; and Letters written in have are not fit for
curious over-looking, or judicious examination. As for extractions, and culling
out (as I may say) the principal points, it will be the better, if there be
way given, whereby the Work may be justifiable, and the world made acquainted
with information of the Truth; and so to the purpose.

Since the Kings coming into the Pallatinate, and joining with Count
Mansfeild, there has been many skirmishes, I will not call them all
Battles, in all which it has pleased God to give him happy success, yea,
in that unfortunate Disaster of the Powder, in the Marquis of Badens Camp, the
issue tended to the glory of God, and the Kings eternal Honor, for he
recovered more then he lost, and gave them all a worthy testimony of his valor
and Horoick Demeanor, so that if you will give me leave by way of Transcision,
to exemplify some particulars, and I will by Gods grace speak nothing but the
Truth, and so dull and abate all the sharp and keen edges against Him, which
desire to cut the life of Reputation, did not Virtue in despite, like a Sun
dispelling the vapors, quite dissolve and vanish the morning dew of
calumniation.

Know then, that in these Conflicts, his Majesty has still been in person,
and so forward, that he has many times showed sufficient testimony of his
own particular valor, discharging his Pistol at the very first Encounter, in
the face of the Enemy; and many times Adventuring with the foremost, when there
was great reason and cause that he should have been more charie of his person.
Besides, He is a comely and handsome Gentleman, and so complete, that I know
not whither I should prefer the workmanship of God, in his composure of
body, or well qualifying his mind, for he is and ever has been, for any
thing I can hear or see, of extraordinary good Demeanor in all his affairs,
as both his speeches and actions do manifest, neither dejected with
Adversity, nor lifted up with Prosperity. Fair and temperate, neither given
to the common vice of the Dutch Nation, which is drunkenness, nor yet the
English, although he have well learned the English Tongue, wherewith the most
do learn the English Oaths: He is so moderately conditioned, that there is a
pleasure to behold Him, and a delight to converse with Him; the truth is, I
never heard his worth sufficiently spoken of before his coming to us, so can I
not sufficiently demonstrate the same, now he is amongst us. I have incisted
the longer upon this my poor Discovery, because Malice heretofore has imputed
the loss of Prague to his negligence, or ignorance; and wickedness, even at
this present, does dare to lay some aspersions upon Him: But to go forward.

After the recovery of the Marquess of Baden, and the taking of Laden-burge,
therewas a work to take out the provision therein, and bring it to the Kings
store at Mainhem. For it was great and much more then was expected, so that the
whole Army was the better refreshed: after which another buy sinesse of great
importance proposed it self, and the Kings Army in as great speediness
marched over the Rheine at Mantem bridge toward Haggenaw in Alsatia, before
which Leopoldus the Emperors brother had lain some ten days, as resolved to
surprise and besiege the same by way of recovery of some of his losses: but
hearing of the Kings approach, and fearing the sally of the town, which was
extraordinary manned with 5000 of Mansfields soldiers, he prepared to draw a
way about the 8 of May by your account, and took an order with his army to
shift for themselves, as he very fortunately made his own escape: but the
Kings army followed him so close, and pursued him so far, that they cut off
most of his baggage, and seized on his carriages, where contrary to expectation
was found above 26000. l. weight of powder, all his plate and much good
furniture besides, ere they ended the business, both Colonel and Captain,
with a regiment of foot and six troops of horse, were most of them taken, and
reduced to his Majesty's service, for very few were slain at this time: this
was done when they were passing a bridge, which as some say was broken, and
others say was ouerthronged with numbers; but the former is likeliest, because
two pieces of ordnance was drowned, and the King took two or three more; but
how ever it was, or that men may vary in some petty circumstances, we repute
it a greater defeat then that which they speak of, that the Marquis of
Durlach had, for though he lost more ordnance, yet not half so many men:
besides, that loss is doubled by so many troops as are gone over to our side,
and God be praised are most willing to serve his Majesty. This, as we hear,
is already printed amongst you, but in a rouing manner, and far from
sufficient intelligence; and therefore I thought it good, as in the rest, to
certify you in the very truth, which howsoever many men may suppose
superfluous, and that still they hear but one and the same thing, yet sure
there is great contentment in honest confirmation of such businesses, or true
relating the matter. So I go forward.

The said Marquis of Durlach named in your copies the Marquis of Baden, is
again on foot, and has altered the manner of his sequestring himself in a
camp alone, so that now being seven thousand foot and 1200 horse, as we may
say, he is joined with the King and Count Mansfield, being all together, to
abate a little the lauishes of rumor 20000 in a running army, which is
continually on foot, as the cause requires, and business imports; for of
late they have been seven days together in the Country of Dermstrat, hard by
Frankford, the Prince whereof Lantgraue Lodowick has always bin a straight
enemy to our affairs, and a public professed friend to his Imperial Majesty:
for it was he that the last year labored the accord between the Princes of
the Union and Marquis Spinola, it was he that gave way and assistance to all
the Spanish marches, it was he that has so much extolled and magnified the
house of Austria, it was he that has taken great pains all this Winter to
dissuade the Marquis of Durlach and other Princes from taking up arms in our
assistance, under pretense of desire of peace, and avoiding effusion of
Christian blood: it was he that gave ear to the Jesuits and Priests in their
blasphemous railings and filthy calumniations against God, his Church, and the
King of Bohemiaes business. To conclude, it was he (Gods holy name be praised)
that the King took prisoner in his own country, and keeps him still in his
custody. His country has neither strong towns nor fortifications, but is soon
subject to a violent enforcement, and so was as soon overcome by our armies
affoording a great supply of provision, the hungry soldier was well cheered,
and our distressed garrisons wonderfully relieved with good muttons and beeues,
that all this Winter have bin afflicted with great scarcity and wants, hunger
and cold: but now there is a new face of comfort and contentment appears on
every side. For my Lord Chichester is safely and opportunely arrived at Manheim,
to our hearts rejoicing and the Kings satisfaction. For although Monsieur Tilly
our grand enemy be again strengthened from Bohemia, Bauaria, and Leopoldus,
yet whether war or peace, the King is able to en^ounter with him, and prepares
with resolution to oppose all his enemies, let them increase never so fast, as
I must confess they are many; Tilly of himself is esteemed 14000 strong, and
as our intelligence is, has 6000 more from the Duke of Bauaria in his passages
and Gone saloes as he ca^ spare from his garrisons, so that in the end of May he
marched full 20000. toward the King, whose transcendent name with me is
predominant.

After my Lord of Belfast or Chichester was welcomed and entertained of all
sides, the King and Count Mansfield departed to the army, and as we had
certain intelligence upon Monday the 27 of May he marched to a town of the
Bishop of Ments above Frankford, called Ausburge, to meet with the Duke of
Brunswick there, who was now marching into Franconia; but before he could get
to the Maine, a river over which he must be transported, General Tilly with
his great strength and whole army was got before him, so that he must of
necessity fight or retire, for Brunswick was not yet come up to the river,
nor had any notice of the Kings being so near, more then that he would come
to meet him.

In breife, to fight upon so great disadvantages, was not thought convenient.
For the Country being spoiled, and vittailes scarce could afford them no
releife: the enemy being strong and provided of purpose, might hazard the Army.
For you must consider, besides Tillyes own forces, he had Gensalers horse
which came to him from Openham, from the Archduches horse, so extraordinarily
armed; that they exceeded the Dutch far and may well be compared to those
strong Cataphracts of the Romans, which were armed from head to foot;
therefore it was thought convenient to make a Retreat, which was done in so
good order, that to his everlasting praise, the King must be remembered: for not
with standing, all they could do, the enemy followed so hard that he over
took them, and the horse gort such way through and about the woods that
skirmish they must, and skirmish they did, so that the King returned from the
Van, to be an actor in the same.

This fight lasted in a manner two days, May 30. 31. and was at last ended so
well, that while the Horse encountered on both sides: the foot retreated
toward Manheym, wherein was lost not above on 100. of either side, but the
Horse had a sorer conflict and a sorer continuance, wherein the King as he had
done in his first battle with General Tilly, demeaned himself so
courageously well, that his example drew on others to noble performances and
remarkable encounters: for amongst many Gent. whose names did not at this time
fall to my proportion of knowledge, among those that were noted to fight most
bravely were Colonel Ouertront Commander of the Palsgraues horse, one Sir John
Maynard of Kent Captain of a troop of Count Mansfields horse, were worthy and
remarkable. Count Mansfield had one of his kinsmen, called Count Philip, of
Mansfield taken prisoner, as ouercharged with numbers; diverse others might be
remembered to their perpetual fame. Many were slain, wounded, and taken
prisoners on both sides. The report goes, ye loss was 200 on both sides, the
loss being equal keeps rumor from too lavish boasting of peuailing, only the
King returning to Manheim that might be said he was glad it was no worse,
considering the accident or chance of war. God had dealt mercifully with him
in affoording him so good an escape and deliverance from such eminent peril.

On our side was Colonel Galstein General of the Marquis of Durlacks horse
slain, a worthy brave soldier, and a Rinegraue taken prisoner.

On the Emperors part a Collonell in complete armor, was shot into the face,
as he lifted up his beauer to take the air: and sundry other officers were
subject to the ouer-mastering forces of their Adversaries; some killed, some
wounded, some suppressed, and they were glad at the last to part upon equal
terms; and (as we hear) Monsieur Tilly had no great cause too much to
rejoice: for the horse that escaped left much Armor, and the men were bruised
exceedingly. But concerning our selves we esteemed it a blessing, exceeding
Report, that in a retreite of thirty or forty miles we have lost no baggage at
all, nor more men than the enemy, although their joy exceeded, and Report had
made the matter amongst the Bishops so famous; yet there is but one truth,
and as near as ever I can, you have it: and therefore spare not to tell to
both your friends and foes, that our business does thrive well, and by Gods
gracious assistance, we shall make a happy progression, though I must confess,
the enemy is very strong, and looks for great supplies from out of diverse
Countries.

The same night his Majesty returned to Maynheim, and supped chearefully with
General Vere; assuring that the Duke of Brunswicke is twenty thousand strong,
and increases his Army daily in his marches. Now if any ask where were the
skouts on al sides, where was the mistaking, either of the Rendezuous, or the
day of Brunswickes approaches? where was the ouer-sight that Monsieur Tilly did
lodge himself without any fear (as it were) between the Armies? for if
Brunswicke had come forward, how could a dangerous battle have been prevented?
I answer for all as well as my poor understanding will serve me, these things
might be without impeachment of martial Policies, or true Discipline. For,
concerning the King of Bohemia, he was resolved to fight, and careless of any
forces his enemy could have, so far forth as he might join with Brunswicke,
who had formerly sent him Letters of assurance, he would come to the river of
Main such a day. Besides, it was a probable conjecture, that Tilly could not
so suddenly be so strong, considering his former defeature, and Leopoldus
raising his Camp; but the truth is, most of the Archduke Leopoldus forces
meant directly to join with Tilly: and he took advice with Gonsales de
Cordua with what expedition to go forward: Concerning Tilly himself, he had
reason to prevent the mischiefs, apprehending an irrecouerable danger, if the
King of Bohemia and Brunswicke did meet: besides, he took notice that
Brunswicke and more Carriages and ordnance mounted which must be the cause of
slow marches, and bring along with him some impedime^ts: last of all, that he
must pass over the River, and whether by boat or bridge, if he could get
thither before him, he was sure to hinder his landing, and procrastinate his
iourny. Concerning Brunswicke, he could not be so confident to limit his time
to a certain day, because an army in long marches are many times pulled back
from speed and celerity by circumstances, accidents and casual events, as has
formerly been apparent in memorable Expeditions, where the breaking of a
carriage, or the dismounting of a Cannon has hindered an Army from a whole
days march. To conclude, let there be no impeachment of a Soldiers credit in
the business of the war, except apparent cowardice, folly and treason
step in; but let every man endeavor to do his best, and when disasters
happen, be ready rather absolutely to say, It was the will and pleasure of God;
or with modesty to conclude as the common Proverb is, It was the fortune of
war.

Thus far have my Letters extended in the business of the Pallatinate, and
if you long now to hear of the King and Brunswickes meeting, or of Mansfields
forward marching, I assure you I long as much to give you notice of the same
and make no question, but my next Letters shall not only advertise you how my
Lord of Belsaft or Chichester proceeds in his Commission, but send you the
happy tidings of some worthy exployt or other, either tending to the
discharging the Pallatinate of her intolerable burdens and grievous enemies
or the thriving of the cause in a far better manner than many hollow-hearted
would have it, but because things are dubitable, and the secrets which belong
to God unsearchable, I leave it to his direction and preservation that knows
what is best for his own glory, and the propagation of true Religion. Just now
as I am ready to seal up my Letter, comes a Letter from Collonell Golsteme his
own hand, whom we took to have been slain, that he is yet living a
prisoner, which made much joy.

FINIS.

