The declaracyon of the procedynge of a conference, begone at Westminster the
last of March. 1559. concerning certain articles of religion and the
breaking up of the said conference by default and contempt of certain
Bishops, parties of the said conference.

()

Imprynted at London by Richard lugge and John Cawood prynters to the Queen's
Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis*

THE Queen's most excellent Majesty, having hard of diversity of opinions
in certain matters of religion amongst sundry of her loving subjects, and
being very desirous to have the same reduced to some godly and chrystian
concord, thought it best by thaduise of the lords and others of her priuye
counsel, as well for the satisfaction of persons doubtful, as also for the
knowledge of the very truth in certain matter of difference: to have a
conueniente chosen number of the best learned of either part, and to confer
together their opinions and reasons, and thereby to come to some good and
charytable agreement.

And hervppon by her maiestyes commandment, certain of her priuye counsel,
declared this purpose to tharchbishop of york (being also one of the same
priuye counsel) and required him that he would imparte the same to some of the
bishops, and to make choice of. viii. ix. or. x. of them, and that there should
be the like number named of the other part: and further also declared to him (as
than was supposed) what the matters should be: And as for the time, it was
thought mete to be as soon as possible might be agreed upon. And than after
certain days past, it was signified by the said archebyshop, that there was
appointed by such of the bishops to whom he had imparted this matter. viii.
persons, that is to say. iiii. bishops and. iiii. doctors, who were content
at the Queen's majesty's commandment to she we their opinions, and as he
termed it, render account of their faith in those matters which were
me^cioned, and that specially in writynge, although he said they thought the
same so determined, as there was no cause to dyspute upon them. It was hervpon
fully resolved by the queen's majesty with thaduise aforesaid, that according to
their desire, it should be in writing on both parts, for auoydyng of much
altercation in words, and that the said bishops should because they were in
aucthorytie, of degree superiors: first declare their minds and opinyons to
the matter, with their reasons in writynge, and the other number being also.
viii. men of good degree in scooles, and some having ben in dygnitye in the
church of England, if they had any thing to say to the contrary, should the
same day declare their opynions in like manner. And so each of them should
deliver their writings to the other, to be considered what were to be improued
therein, and the same to declare again in writing at some other convenient
day, and the like order to be kept in all the rest of the matters: all this was
fully agreed upon with tharchbishop of york and so also signified to both
parties. And immediatlye hereupon, diverse of the nobility and states of the
realm, understanding that such a metynge and conference should be, and that
in certain matters whereupon the court of parliament consequentlye following
some laws might be grounded: they made ernest means to her majesty, that the
parties of this conference, might put and read their assertions in thenglyshe
tongue, and that in the presence of them of the nobility and others of her
parlyament house, for the better satisfaction and inhabling of their own
Judgments to treat and conclude of such laws as might depend hereupon. This
also being thought very reasonable, was signified to both parties, and so
fully agreed upon, and the day appointed for the first meting to be the Friday
in the forenone being the last of March at Westminster church, where both
for good order and for honor of the conference by the Queen's majesty's
commandment the lords and others of the privy counsel were present, and a
great part of the nobility also, and notwithstanding the former order appointed
and consented unto by both parts, yet the bishop of Winchester and his
collegees alleging they had mistaken, that their assertions and reasons should
be written, and so only recited out of the book, said their book was not
ready then written, but they were ready to argue and dispute, and therefore they
would for that time repeat in speech that which they had to say to the first
proposicion. This varyacion from the former order and specially from that which
them selfs had by the said archebyshop in writing before required, addinge
thereto the reason of the apostle, that to contend with words is profitable
to nothing, but to subuersio^ of the hearer: seemed to the Queen's majesty's
counsel some what strange, and yet was it permitted without any great
reprehension, because they excused the^ selfs with mistakinge the order, and
agreed that they would not fail but put it in writynge, and according to the
former order, deliver it to the other part, and so the said bishop of
Winchester and his collegees appointed Doctor Cole Deane of Poules, to be the
vtterer of their minds, who partly by speech only, and partly by readyng of
authorytyes written, and at certain times being informed of his collegees what
to say: made a declaracyon of their meaninges and their reasons to their first
proposicion, which being ended, they were asked by the privy counsel if any of
them had any more to be said: and they said no. So as the^ the other part was
lycenced to show their minds, which they did according to the first order,
exhybitynge all that which they meant to be propound, in a book written, which
after a prayer and inuocacion made most humbly to almighty god for the enduyng
of them with his holy sprite, and a protestacion also to stand to the
Doctrine of the catholyke Church builded upon the scripturs, and the doctrine
of the prophets and thapostles: was distynctlye read by one Roberte Horn
bachelour in Diuinitye, late Deane of Duresme. And the same being ended with
some likelyhod, as it seamed that the same was much allowable to the audience:
certain of ye Bishops began to say contrary to their former answer, that
they had now much more to say to this matter, wherein although they might have been well reprehended for such manner of cauillacyon: yet for auoydinge of any
more mistakinge of orders in this colloquy, or conference, and for that they
should utter all that which they had to say: It was both ordered and thus
openly agreed upon of both parts in the full audience, that upon the Mondaye
following, the Bishops should bring their minds and reasons in writing to the
second assertion, and the last also if they could, and first read the same,
and that done, the other part should bring likewise theirs to the same. And
being read, each of them should deliver to other the same wrytings. And in
the mean time the bishops should put in writing, not only all that which
Doctor Cole had that day uttered: but all such other matters as they any
otherwise could think of for the same, and as soon as they might possible, to
send the same book touching that first assertion to the other part, and they
should receive of them that wrytinge which Master Horn had there read that
day, and upon Mo^day it should be agreed what day they should exhibyte their
aunswers touching the first proposition. Thus both parts assented thereto, and
the assemblye quietly dismissed. And therefore upon Mondaye, the like assemblye
began again at the place and hour appointed, and there upon what sinister or
dysordered meaning is not yet fullye known (though in some part it be
understood) the bishop of Winchester and his Collegees, and especially
Lyncolne, refused to exhibit or read, according to the former notorious
order on friday that which they had prepared for the second assertion. And
thereupon by the Lord keeper of the great leale, they being first gently and
favorable required to keep thor der appointed, and that taking no place,
being secondly as it behooved, pressed with more earnest request: they neither
regardyng the aucthoritye of that place, nor their own reputacyon, nor the
credit of the cause, utterly refused that to do. And finallye being again
perticulerly every of them a part distinctlye by name required, to understand
their opinions therein: they all saving one (which was the Abbot of Westminster,
having some more consideration of order and his duty of obedience then
the other) utterly and plainly denied to have their book read, some of them as
more ernestly then other, some so also, some other more indiscreetly, and
vnreuere^tlye then others. When upon giving such example of dysorder,
stubbernes and self will, as has not ben seen and suffered in such an
honorable assembly, being of the two estates of this Realm the nobility and
the commons, beside the presence of t^^ Queen's majesty's most honor^ble privy
counsel, y^e same assemblye was dismissed, and the godly and most christian
purpose of ye Queen's majesty made frustrate. And afterward for ye contempt so
notoriously made, ye Bishops of Wynchester and Lincoln, having most obstinatly
both disobeied common auctority and varied manifestly from their own order,
and specially Lincoln, who showed more folly then the other: were condingely
committed to the Tower of London, and the rest (saving ye abbot of Westminster)
stand bound to make daily their personal apparaunce before the counsel, and
not to depart the City of London and Westminster, until further order be
taken with them for their disobedience and contempt.

The three proposityons where upon conference was determined to have been at
westminster.
1 It is against the word of god, and the custum of the ancient church, to
use a tongue unknown to the people, in common prayer, and the admynistration of
the sacraments.

2 Every church has authority to appoint take away and change ceremonies and
ecclesiastycall rites, so ye same be to edificacio^.

3 It cannot be proved by ye word of god, that there is in the Mass offered up a
Sacrifyce for the quick and the dead.

The names of such as had conference in the propositions aforesaid.
The B. of winch. The B. of Lych. The B. of Chest. The B. of Carlis. The B. of
Linco. Doctor Cole. D. Harpesfolde. Doct. Langdall. Doctor Chedsey. D. Sco. B.
of Chyc. Doctor Coxe Master Whithed Master Grindall Master Horn. Master
D. Sands. Master Gest. Master Aylmer. Master Iuell.
God save the Queen.

