A most fruitful / piththye and learned treatise, how a Christen man ought to
behave himself in the danger of death: and how they are to be releued and
comforted, whose dear friends ar departed out of this world, most
necessary for this our unfortunate age and sorrowful days.

John. 6. Verily verily, I say unto you, he, that believes in me, has
everlasting life.

Unto all those / that unfeignedly desyer to live under the fear of god, and
with patience abide the coming of our lord and savior Jesus Christ, through
the workynge of the holy ghost, grace and peace be multiplied.

THough al ki^des of bestes have some things commen one with another, as in
that they see, hear, feel desire, move from one place to another: yet has
every beast also his own special property, as the bird has another nature
then the fish, the lion another disposicion then the wolf. Eue^ so in other
my books, heretofore by me publyshed, I have set forth a general comfort
concerning trouble, sickness, poverty, displeasure, derth, war,
imprisonment and death, under ye which I have comprehended al ye cross and
afflyccyon of man. Nevertheless, every mischaunce or adversity has also his
own special consideracio^. And forasmuch as among terrible things upon
earth, death is esteemed the most cruel of al, and it can yet with no wisdom of
man be ryghtfullye judged, how it goes with a Christian in and after death:
Therefore the greatest necessitye requires, that we Christians be diligently
instructed, by the infallyble word of god, in especial touching the end and
conclusion of our life. For wha^ the last hour draws nigh, which we every
day (yea every twincklyng of an eye) look for: whether the soul, after it be
departed, do live: whether the corrupted body shall rise again: whether eternal
joy and salvation be at hand, and which way conducteth and leads to
salvation, thereof has the most subtyle worldly wise man, by his own natural
reason, no knoweledge at all,

Plato, Aristotel, Cicero ye gretest learned and wysest, write of these high
weighty matters, very childishly and folyshli: and as for consolacion that they
give, it is in no sort nor wise to be compared unto the holy divine scripture
which only ministers the true Christian comfort in life and death. And
though every manne ought daily to consider his end, and at all times to make
himself ready for death, seying tha^ he knows not how, where, and when god
shall lay his hand upon him: Yet nevertheless at this present time we have more
occasions to talk and treat thereof, now that almighty god does with diverse
and sundry plages, more grievously then here to fore visit our unrepentant
life, for that he all this while has perceived in us but little ame^dment:
neither need we to think, that these, ye reign, and other plages shall
ouerleape us. Considering now yt I (though unworthy and unmeet) was called by
authority, but specially of god, to teach, to exhort and to comfort: I have,
with great labor out of ye holy Scripture, and out of old and new authors
collected, how a man should prepare himself unto death, how he is to be used
that lies a dying, and how they ought to be comforted, whose dear fredes ar
departed. Which things, as they be orderly set in this book (right dearly
beloved and loving reader) I do present, dedicate and offer unto the. And
though I can consider, that this little book is to small and slender a gift,
because of my person: yet is it neither little nor to be despised, for the
fountaynes sake that it flows out of, and by reason of the^ matter, whereof it
is written. For herein, out of the unchangeable word of god, are noted the
head articles of our last conflyct and battayll, whereupon depends either
eternal victory, honor and joy, or else everlasting loss and endless pain,
of the which things we can never think, talk nor treat sufficiently.
Wherefore, whereas this little book goes forth unto thy use, that art an
unfeigned Christian, and to the comfort of al such as are afraid of death: I
pray the (for Christ's sake) not only to accept it as the testymonie of a
wyllyng and loving mind toward the, but also to have still an earnest desire
to that, that it has pleased god by me at this time to communicate unto the:
that with thy thankfulness thou may move other to the life that can do
better, and by thy profet stir the harvest lord to send more harvest men
into his harvest. Which he cannot but do, outcept he could deny himself, that
came into the world, another to put out ye flax that smoketh, nor to break the
read that is but broosed, but to open to the^ that knock to him.

Love god. leave vanitye. and live in Christ.

Vale et ^i^e^^ cum fortuna.

The contents of the first book
The first Chapter co^teineth: What death is. folio. 1 The.2. Chapter. That the
time of death is uncertain. folio. 6 The.3. Chapter. That it is god, which
has laid the burden of death upon us. folio. 7 The 4. Chapter. That god
sends death because of sin. folio. 9 The.5. Chapter. That god turns
death unto good. folio. 12 The.6. Chapter. That death in it self is grievous to
the bodi and soul. fo. 13 The.7. Chapter. That we all commenly are afraid of
death. folio. 22 The.8. Chapter. A commodity of death, wha^ it delyuereth us
from this short transitorye time. folio. 26 The.9. Chapter. Another
commodity, when death delivers us from this miserable time. folio. 29
The.10. Chapter. Witness, that this life is miserable. folio. 37 The.11.
Chapter. That the co^sideracio^ of death before hand, is profitable to all
virtues. folio. 40 The.12. Chapter. In death we learn the right knowledge of
our selves and of god also, and are occasyoned to give over our selves unto
god. folio. 43 The.13. Chapter. That the dead ceasseth from sin. folio. 45
The.14. Chapter. That the dead is delivered from this vicious world: having
not only this advantage, that be sins no more, but also is discharged from
others sins. folio. 48 The.15. Chapter. That the dead obteyneth salvation.
folio. 50 The.16. Chapter. Similitudes, that death is wholesome. folio. 52
The.17. Chapter. Witness, that death is wholesome. folio. 59 The.18. Chapter.
That death can not be avoided. Item of companions of the^ that dye. folio. 62
The.19. Chapter. Of natural help, in danger of death. folio. 66 The.20.
Chapter. That God is able and will help for Christ's sake. foli. 68 The.21.
Chapter. That god has promised his help and comfort. folio. 79. The.22.
Chapter. God sets to his own helpyng hand, in such wise, and at such time,
as is best of all. fo. 84 The.23. Chapter. Examples of gods help. folio. 88
The.24. Chapter. That it is necessari to prepare for this journey. folio. 90
The.25. Chapter. Provision concerning temporal goods, children and fre^des,
which must be left behind. folio. 92 The.26. Chapter. Preparacion
concerning gostly matters: with what cogitacio^^ the mind ought most to be
exercysed. folio. 97 The.27. Chapter. Of repentance and sorrow for sin.
folio. 102 The.28. Chapter. Of true faith. folio. 103 The: 29. Chapter. Of
hope. folio. 116 The.30. Chapter. Of the sacraments. fol. 117 The.31. Chapter.
Of prayer. folio. 120 The.32. Chapter. The form of prayer. fo. 124 The.33.
Chapter. A form of praise and tha^kesgeuyng. folio. 130 The.34. Chapter. That
the prayer is hard. fol. 133 The.35. Chapter. That the word of god is to be
practiced and used. fol. 134. The.36. Chapter. Amendment of life necessary.
foli. 136 The.37. Chapter. Exhortacion unto pacyence. folio. 139 The.38.
Chapter. *The original and fruit of pacyence. folio. 145 *The.39. Chapter.
*That a man, while he is yet in health, ought to prepare himself before hand.
folio. 147 *The.40. Chapter. *That the foresaid things ought by time, and in
due season to be taken in hand. fol. 155
The contents of the second book.
*The.1. Chapter. *How the sick ought to be spoken unto, if need shall
require. folio. 164 *The.2. Chapter. *Of the burial, and what is to be done
toward those, that are departed hence. folio. 180
The contents of the third book.
*The.1. Chapter. *How they ought to be comforted, whose dear friends are
dead. foli. 186. *The.2. Chapter. *That unto such, as dye, it is profitable to
depart out of this life. foli. 195 *The.3. Chapter. *What profit the death of
friends brings to such, as are left behind alive. foli. 204 *The.4. Chapter.
*Companions that suffer like heuines of heart. folio. 212 *The.5. Chapter.
*Through gods help, all heart sorrows are eased. fol. 214 *The.6. Chapter.
*We must furnyshe our selves with prayer and patience. folio. 217 *The.7.
Chapter. *Ensamples of patience in like case. folio. 222. The.8. Chapter. *The
commodity of patience. folio. 228 The.9. Chapter. We ought so to love our
children and friends, that we may forsake them. folio. 231 The.10. Chapter.
*Of the death of young persons in especial. folio. 234 *The.11. Chapter. *Of
ye death of the aged. fo. 24^ *The.12. Chapter. *Of strange death. fo. 244
The first book of death. declarynge what death is.
The.i. Chapter
HOly scripture makethe mention of four manner of deaths and lives.

1. The first is called a natural life, so long as the soul remains with
the body upon earth. The natural death is it that separateth the soul from
the body.

2. The second is a spiritual unhappy death here in time of life, when the
grace of God, for our wickedness sake, is departed from us: by means whereof,
we were deed from the Lord our God, and from all goodness, allthoughe as yet we
have the life natural. Contrary unto this, there is a gostly, blessed life,
wha^ we through the grace of the Lord our God, live unto him, and to all
goodness. Ephe. 2.
Hereof writes Paull, after this manner: God which is rich in mercy, through
his great love wherewyth he loved us, even when we were ded in sins, has
quickened us together in Christ.

3. The third is a gostly, blessed death here in time, when the flesh, being
ever the longer the more separated from the spirit, dies away from his own
wicked nature. Contrari hereunto, is there a gostli, unhappy life, wha^ the
flesh with his wicked disposicion, continuallye breakethe forth and lives in all wilfulnes. Against this, does Paul exhort us, saying: Collossia^s:
Mortyfye therefore your members which are upon earth: fornicacion,
uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupisce^ce covetousness: etc.

4. The fourth, that the scripture makes mencyon of, is an everlasting life
and an everlasting death: Not that the bodi and soul of man, shall after this
time lose their substance, and be utterly no more. For we believe undoubtedly,
that our soul is immortal, and that even this present body shall arise again.
But forasmuch as we our selves grant, that life is sweet, and death a bitter
herb, this word (life) by a figurative speech is used for mirth and joy. This
word (death) for heuines and sorrow. Therefore eternal life, is called
eternal joy: and eternal death eternal damnacio^.

Of these manyfolde deaths, have we commenlye a perverse judgment. We abhor
ye death of the body and have on a pace to the unhappy gostli death, which yet
in it self, is a thousand times more terrible then any death corporal. For
when a man delyteth in his own wyckednes, though as yet he live upon the
earth, he is nevertheless dead before god, and the soul must continue still
damned for evermore.

In this book, my handelynge is of natural death, which before our eyes,
seems to be an utter destruction, and that there is no remedy with the dead
(even as when a dog or horse dies) and that god has nomor respect unto
them: Yea the world swimmeth full of such ungodly people as have none other
meaning. Else doubtless would they beehaue themselves otherwise toward god.
Death vereli is not a destruction of man, but a delyueraunce of bodi and soul.
Where as the soul being of it self immortal, does either out of the mouth
ascend up into heaven, or else from the mouth desce^deth into the pit of hell:
The body, losyng his substance till domes day, shall than, by the power of
god, be raised from death, and joined again to the soul: that afterward the
whole man with body and soul, may eternallye inherit either salvation, or
else damnacyon.

That the time of death is uncertain. The.2. Chapter.
THe body of man is a very frail thing. Sickness may consume it: wild
beasts may devour it: the fire may burn it: the water may drown it: the
air may infect it: a snare may choke it: the prickyng of a pynne may
destroy it. Therefore when his temporal life shall end, he can not tell.

The principal cause, why we know not the time of death, is even the grace of
god: to the intent that we by no occasion, should linger the amendment of
our lives until age: but always fear god, Luke. 12.
as though we should dye to morrow.

But as soon as the hour comes, no man shall ouerleape it. Hereof speaks
Job, Job. 14.
when he says, that god has appointed unto man his bonds, which he cannot
go beyond.

That it is God which has laid the burden of death upon us. The.3. Chapter.
IT becomes all Christians not only to suffer, but also to commend and
praise, the will of the heavenly Lord and king. Now is it his will, that we dye.
For if the sparowes, whereof two are bought for a farthing fall not on the
ground without god the father, much less, we men (whom God himself estemeth
to be of more value the^ many sparowes, yea for whose sakes other things were
created) do fall to the ground through death, without ye will of god. Like as the
soldier tarieth in ye place, wherein he is appointed of ye chef captain to
fight against the enemies, and if he call him from thence, he willingly obeys:
Eue^ so has ye heavenly captain set us upon earth, Ephesi. 6.
where we have to fight, not with flesh and blood, but with wicked spretes.
Therefore if he give us leave, and call us from hence, we ought by reason to
obey him. Like as one should not withdraw himself from payeng what he owes
but gentle to restore the money: So has God lent us this life, and not promised
that we may always enjoy it. Therefore is death descrybed (...) be, ye payment
of natural debt.

That God sends death because of sin. The.4. Chapter.
According hereunto, ponder thou the just judgment of god: For out of ye
third Chapter of the first book of Moses, it is euydently perceived, that death
is a penaltye deserved, laid upon us al for the punishment of sin. As the
little worm that grows out of the tree, gnaweth and consumes the tree, of
whom it has his beginning: So death grows, waxes out of sin, and sin
with the body it co^sumeth And specially yt venymous sickness which they call
the pestilence is sent of God as a scourge for the punishment of our
naughtynes. Hereof speaks the word of god in the fifth book of Moises, after
this manner: Deuteronomy. 28.
If thou will not harken unto the voice of the Lord thy god, to keep and to
do all his commandments and ordinances, which I command thee this day:
then shall al these curses come upon thee and overtake thee: The Lord shall
make the pestilence to cleue unto thee, until he have consumed thee from the
land, whether thou go to enjoy it. The lord shall smite the with swelling,
with fevers, heat, burning, wetheryng, with smyting and blastyng. And they shall
follow thee, till thou peryshe.

Yet among the most gracious chasteninges, is the pestilence rekened of the
holy Prophet and king David; ^. Reg. 14. c.
who (after that he of a pride, 1. Par. 22.^.
had caused the people to be numbered) when the eleccio^ was given him, whether
he would rather have seven years dearth, three months overthrow in war, or
three days pestylence in the land, made this answer, I am in a marvelous
strayt. But let me fall I pray thee, into the hands of the lord, for much is
his mercy: and let me not fall in to the hands of men. 2. reg. 24. 1. Para. 22.
Then sent the lord a pestylence into Israel that there died of the^.70000 me^.
Wherefore if god overtake thee with this horrible disease, be not thou angry
with Saturnus and Mars, nor with the corrupt aier and other means, appointed
of god: but be displeased with thine own synnefull life. And when any fearful
image of death comes before thee, remember that thou with thy sins, haste
deserved much more horrible things, which god nevertheless has not sent unto
thee.

That God turns death unto good. The.5. Chapter.
Although thou haste deserved an hundredth thousand greater plages, yet shalt
thou comfort thy self before hand, after this manner: A father does his
children good, and not evil. Now is my believe in god, as in mi gracious father
through Jesus christ and sure I am, that Christ upon the Cross, has made a
perfect payment for all my sins, and with his death has taken away the
strength of my death: Yea for me has he deserved and brought to pas,
eternal life. Wherefore though death, in the sight of mine eyes, and of
natural reason be bitter and heavy: Yet by means of the passion and death of
Jesus Christ, it is not evil, or hurtful: but a benefyte, a profitable and
wholesome thing: even an intraunce to ever lastyng joy.

That death in it self is grievous to the body and soul. The.6. Chapter.
WHat grefe and hurt, death does bring with it, I will now declare: To the
inte^te that when we have considered the same before trouble come, we may in
our distress, be the less a frayed, holdyng against it, the great
commodities of death, that Christ has obtained for all faithful. It greueth
a man at his death to leave the pleasant beholdynge of heaven and earth, his
own young bodi and chereful stomach his wife and children, house and land,
feldes and meadows, silver and gold, honor and authority, good friends and
old companions, his mynstrelsy, pastyme, joy and pleasure, that he has had
upon earth.

Afterward, when death knocks at the door, then begins the greateste
trouble to work. When the diseases be fallen upon the body of man in greater
number, they are against all the members in the whole bodi, breaking in by
heaps with notable grefes so that the power of the body is weakened, the mind
combred, the remembrance astonished, reason blinded, sleep hindered, the senses
all to broken. By means whereof, the eyes are darkened, the face is pale, the
fete are cold the hands black, the members out of course, the brow hardened
the chynne falls down, ye breath minisheth, the deadlye sweat breaks out:
Yea the whole man is taken in, and disturbed, in such sort, that he is now
past mi^ding of any other thing. Death also is so much the more bitter and
terrible, because that the feeble discomforted nature, does print the horrible
image of death, to deep in it self, and fears it to sore. And hereunto is
the devil likewise busi, to set before us a more terrible evil death, then
ever we saw, heard or read of: To the intent that we being oppressed with such
imaginacions or thoughts should fly and hat^ death, and be driven to the love
and carefulnes of this life, forgettyng the goodness of god, and to be found
disobedient at our last end. Moreover, whosoever of himself is not thoroughly
assured, and knows yet sin by himself, he is not astonished for naught, for
as much as sin caryeth with it the wrath of god and eternal damnacyon. Now,
not only the evil, but also the good, have grievous and manifold sins (yea
moo the^ they themselves can think upon) with the which, in dangers of body
and life, their mind is oppressed, as it were with a violente water that fearcely
rages and gusheth out: yea even the same praise worthy and commendable thing
which the godly have practiced alreadi, that do they yet perceive, not to be
perfect, but myxte with uncleanness. Hereof speaks Esaye in this wise: Esa. 64.
we offend and have been ever in sin, and there is not one whole. We are al
as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses, are as a cloth stained with
the flouers of a woman.

Dauyd prayed: Psalm. 143.
Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified.

Gregory writes: woe unto the commendable life of men, if it be led without
mercy.

Item the Apostell Peter gives warnyng: your aduersarye the devil goes
about, as aroring lain, seking who^ he may devour.

If one that is about to shote a gonne, be unsteady at the letting of it go,
he mysseth all together, and all that he prepared for it before, is in vain:
Even so at the end of this life, are the deuyls most busy, to turn us from
the right mark, that our former travail and labor may be lost, forasmuch
as they know that there remains but a very small time of life. So that if
the soul escape them now, they shall afterward go without it for evermore.

Even as myghtie enemies do besege and lay assault to a city: So the deuels
compace the soul of man with violence and subtlety, to take possession of the
pore soul, to apprehende it and bring it to hell. When we are yet in
prosperity, the devils would have us to make but a small matter of it, as
though we were in no danger to godwarde, albeit we blaspheme, be dronken and
commit whordome, break wedlock etc. But in the danger of death they bring
forth those wicked sins in most terrible wise, putting us in mind of the
wrath of God, how he in times paste here and there did punish and destroy
wicked doers: to the intent that our souls might be hindered, snared, shut up,
bound and kept in prison, from repentance and faith, and never to perceive
any way how to escape, and to be delivered: And by reason thereof wholye to
despair, and to beecome the devils portion.

Furthermore, good friends and companyons are loath to depart a sunder,
specially such as are new knit and bound together one to another, as two
married persons. Now is the bodi and soul nerest of all bound and coupled one
to the other: but in ye distress of death, the pain is so great, that it
breaks this unity, and parts the soul from the body: for the which cause
a man at his death does naturally sygh in him self. Good companyons upon
earth, though they depart one from another, have an hope to come together
again: But wha^ the soul ones departs from the bodi, it has no power to
return again to the body here in this time. Job. 14.
Whereof Job gives two similitudes: A tree if it be cut down, there is some
hope yet, yt it will budde and shute forth the branches again. Likewise the
floudes when they be dried up, and the rivers when they be emptye, are filled
again through the flowynge waters of the sea. But when man slepeth, he risethe
not again until the heaven perysh. This understand, that after the commen
course, one comes not again in this present life: one cannot die twice, and
after death cannot a man accomplish any more, yt he neglected before time.

How goes it now both with the body and soul after death? As Soon as the soul
from the body is departed, the body is spoiled of all his powers, bewtye and
senses, and beecome a miserable thing to look upon. Augustyne says: a man
that in his life time was exceadyng bewtiful and pleasant to embrace, is in
death, a terrible thing to behold. How nobly and preciouslye so ever a man
has lived upon earth, his body yet begins to corrupt and stynke, and
becomes worms meat: by means whereof, the world is of this opinion, that
ye body comes utterly to naught for ever. The world also knows nothing
concerning the immortality of the soul: and they which already beeleue, that
the soul is immortal, doubt yet whether it shall be saved. Yea they say
plainly: it were good to die, if one wist what chere he should have in yonder
world. To them is death like unto a misty and dark hole, where one woteth not
what will become upon him.

That we al commonly are afraid of death. The.7. Chapter.
BY means of the occasions aforesaid, certain heathen men, have given
uncomfortable and desperate judgment, concerning the passage of death. In the
Poet Euripides in oreste, one says: It is better to live il, then to dye well.
Which words are very vnchristenli spoken. Yet are there found ensamples even
of holy men, that they had a natural fear of death. The holy Patriarch
Abraham, thinkyng that he stood in danger of death by reason of his wifes
beutie, would rather suffer, all that else was exceadyng heavy and bitter. He
judged it a smaler matter, to call his wife his sister, then to be destroyed
himself.

Ezechias an upright valeaunt king, Esaias. ^.
when the Prophet told him he should not live, was afraid of death, and
prayed earnestly yt his life might be prolo^ged. In the new testament, when
the Lord Jesus drew nere to his passion and death, he swet blood for very
anguishe, and said: My soul is heavy eue^ unto the death. And thus he prayed:
Father, if it be possible, Math. 26.
take this cup fro me.

The Lord says unto Peter: Verily verily I say unto thee: When thou wast
young, John. 21
thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would: but wha^ thou art
old, thou shall stretche forth thy hands and another shall girde thee, and
lead thee whither thou would not. Lo, Peter being excellentlye endewed
with the spirit of God, and steadfast in faith, had yet in his age, a natural
fear of death, for the Lord said unto him before, that another should lead
him whether he would not. Therefore writes gregory not unright wha^ he says
If the pilours treble, what shall the bordes do? Or if the heavens shake for
such fear, how will that be unmoved which is under That is if famous
saynctes did fear to dye, it is much less to be maruayled at, when we poor
Christians are afraid.

Experience witnesses, how febly we set our selves against death. Many an
old (or otherwise vexed) man, can neither live nor dye: for in his aduersytie,
he often times wysheth death: Note.
And wha^ death approaches, he would rather suffer what soever else upon earth,
if he might therebi escape death. Many of us have heard the gospel a long
season, and studied it thoroughly (so to say): yet are we so afraid of the
death of our selves and of our friends, as though there were none other life
more to look for: even like as they that be of Sardanapalus sort, do imagyn,
or else mistrust the promise, comfort and help of god* as though he were not
able, or would not succor and deliver us. Yea some there be, that if death be
but spoken of, they are afraid at it.

The commodity of death, when it delyuereth us from this short transitorye
time. The.8. Chapter.
AL ye aforesaid disprofites and grefes, do iustlye vanyshe, and are nothing
esteemed, in comparyson of these commodities, when death delivers us from this
ruinous miserable life, from all enormities and vicious people, and conducteth
us to eternal joy and salvation: which thing shall hereafter be plainly
declared.

First, a short transitorye and shiftyng life, ought not to make us sorye.
Though this life had nothing else but pleasure, what is yet shorter and more in
decay, then the life of man? Half the time do we sleep out: Childhode is not
perceived: youth flies away so, that a man does little consider it: Age crepeth
on unawares before it is looked for. We can recke^ well, that when children grow,
they increase in years and days but properlye to speak, in their growyng are
their days mynyshed. For let a man live three score or four score years,
look now how much he has lived of the same days or years, so much is
abated of the time appointed.

Is it not now a foli, that a man can consider when his wine a minisheth in the
vessel, A lyuelye similitude.
and yet regards not how his life does daily vanyshe away?

Among all things, most vndurable and most frail is man's life, which
innumerable ways may be destroyed. Psalm. 103.
It is compared unto a candle light, that of the wind, is soon and easily
blown out. A man in his time is as the grass, and florysheth as a flouer of
the field. For as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone.

The heathen Poet Euripides called the life of mortal men, Dieculam, that
is a little day. But the opinion of Phalerius Demetrius is, yt it ought rather
to be called one point of this time. This similitude sounds not evil among
Christians, For what is the whole sum of our life, but even one point, in
comparyson of the eternity, that undoubtedly follows hereafter? Psalm. 90.
David himself says that our years pass away sodenli. Man is like unto a
thing of naught: his time goes away as does a shadow.

Another commodity, when death delyuereth us from this miserable time. The.9.
Chapter.
Our desyer is to be free from all werynes and miserye: Yea ye more we
consider this present wretched life, the less fear shall we have of death
which delyuereth us from all mischau^ces and grefes of this time. Heaps of
troubles happen unto us and unto other men (yea to special persons and whole
nacyons) in body, soul, estymacyon, goods, wives, children, friends and
native countries.

Bodily health is sone lost, but hard to obtain again: And when it is
already gotten, the doubt is, how long it will continewe. There be more
kinds of diseases, then the best learned Phisicians do know: among the
same, some are so horrible and paynfull, that if one do but hear the^ named,
it makes him afraid. As the falling sickness, ye gowte, fransy, the sudden
stroke and such like. Besides sickness, a man, through out his whole life,
comes into danger by a thousand means and ways. Consider with how great
carefulnes the child is carried in the mothers womb: Man's (...) life.
how daungerously it is brought forth into the world. The whole chyldehode,
what is it else, but a contynual weping and wailyng? After seven years, the
child has his tutours and scholmasters to rule him, and beat him with rods:
when he is come to man's stature, all that he suffered in his youth, does he
count but a small travail, in comparison of it, that he now from henceforth
must endure. The old man thinks, that he caryeth an heavy burden or
mountain upon his neck. Therefore weye well the miserable body, and the
myerie sack of thy flesh toward thy helper: and be not so sore afraid of
death, that eases thee of this wretched carcass. According hereunto is the
mind combered and vexed, through sickness and grefes of ye body, by reason
that the body and soul are joined together. And how precious a thing (I pray
you) is our natural reason? Childhode knows nothing concerning it self.
Young folks take vayn and unprofitable things in hand, supposyng all shall be
gold, and consider, neither age to come, neither yet death: and (even as the
commen saying is) thus will the world be begiled. Whereas a man, the longer he
lives, should ever be the more and more wise, it comes often to pass, that ye
more he grows in years the mor he doteth, and afterward becomes even a
very child, yea twyse a child.

The disquietnes of man's life.
The mind is tempted, ye lust rages, the hope disceaueth, heaviness vexes,
carefulnes is full of distress, fear disquieteth: yea the terror of death is
more grievous, then death it self. It can not be expressed, how a man is
sometime plaged with worldly favor: afterward vexes he himself with care of
temporal things. Many one marreth himself with vice and wickedness, gets him
an evil conscience and a gnawing heart.

The virtuous also, have their blemyshes and temptacions, which unto them are
heuier and more hurtful, then the blemyshe of the body. Wherefore in ye misery
of this time, this must not be esteemed the least portion, that we and other
folks do daily commytte grievous sins against God. Which thing thoroughly to
consider, makes a good hearted parso^ ye more desirous of death, which
delyuereth us from this sinful life. Moreover, all conditions and estates of
me^ have their grefes. The grefes of all estates
Riches, that with great care and travail are gathered together and possessed,
be sometime lost by storm, fire, water, robberye or theft. He that is in
honor and prosperity, has enemies and evil wyllers. Whosoever has the
governance and rule of mani, must also stand in fear of many things. And
what occupacyon or handy craft can a man use, but he has in it, whereof to
complain?

Not only has a man trouble on his own behalf, but a very stony stomach
and an iron heart must it be, that is not sorry, when hurt does happen to his
father and mother, to his own wife, children, friends or kynsfolkes.

Furthermore, the universal troubles is manyfolde and pyteous, specially now
at this present, with noisome diseases, diuisio^s wars, sedicions, vprours.
Like as one water wave follows upon another, and one can scace avoid another:
Eue^ so often times comes one mischaunce in another neck. And in this short
life upon one only day to have no trouble, it is a great advantage:
therefore ought we to be the less sorry, when the time of our deliverance
approaches.

Now might one object against this and say, that this present life has many
pleasures and pastymes wythall. Our troubles more the^ joys.
Nevertheless a man must open the other eye also and behold, that in this life
there is ever more sorrow then joy behynd. Worldly joy is myxte, defiled,
spotted and perverted with sorrow and bitterness. It may well begin in a
soroweful matter, to bring a short fugytiue pleasure, but suddenly it ends,
to a man's greater heaviness. Not in vain does the wise manne say: The heart
is sorowefull even in laughter, Prouer. 14.
and the end of myrthe is heaviness.

Philip the king of the Macedonians, when he upon one day had received three
glad messages (one, that the victory was his in the stage play of Olympus: the
second, that his captain parmenio, had with one battle over come the
Dardanes: the third, that the Queen his wife was delivered of a son:) he
held up his hands toward heaven, and said: O ye gods, I beeseche you,
that for so great and manyfolde prosperity, ye will point me a competent
misfortune. The wise prudent king, feared the in constancye of fortune, which
(as the heathen talk thereof) enuyeth great prosperity. And therefore his
desyer was, that his exceadyng well fare might be sauced with a little trouble.

Experience it self teaches us. Where did ever one live ye space of a month,
or one whole day in pleasure and ease so thorowelye, but some what has
offended or hyndred him? Therefore earthlye joy is not so great, so durable,
nor so pure, but that ye whole life of man, may well be called a vale of misery.

VVytnesse / that this life is miserable. The.10. Chapter.
TEstimony of ye scripture, Job. 9.
man is borne to miseri, as the bird is to fly. Job. 7.
The days of man are like ye days of an hired servant, even a breath, and
nothing but vain. Look through the whole book, called Ecclesiastes, the
preacher. Augustyne writes: If a man were put to the choysse, that either he
must die, or else live again afreshe, and suffer like things as he had suffered
already before: he would rather dye, specially if he thoroughly consider, how many
dangers and mischaunces he scace yet has escaped.

Whosoever now knows likewise, that God through death, does make an end of
miseri upon earth: It brings him great comfort and ease. Yea he shall rather
desire death, then fear it. For eue^ holy Job himself also, wha^ he was
robbed of his health, riches and children, and rebuked of his wife and friends,
wished rather to die then to live.

(...). 19.
Helyas, being sure in no place, desired to dye. Tobias, being stryken with
blyndenes and misintreated of his wife, praid thus: O lord, deal with me
according to thy will, and command my sprete to be received in peace, for
more expedient were it for me to dye, then to live. If holy me^ now by reason
of their great troubles desired death: It is no marvel if we, that are weaker
and of more imperfeccion, be werye of this life. Yea an unspeakable folly is
it, a man to wish for to continue still in the life of misery, and not to
prepare himself to another and better life.

That the consideracion of death before hand, is profitable to al virtues.
The.11. Chapter.
A Very mad and unhappy man must he needs be, which thorowelye considers,
that undoubtedly he must depart hence, he knows not how nor when: (and
whether he shall than have his right mind, directyng him self to God and
desiring grace, he cannot tell) and will not even now out of hand begin to
fear God, and serve him more dilygently.

As the pecoke, when he looks upon his own feathers, is proud: but when he
beholdethe his fete, lets ye feathers down: even so does manne cease from
pride, when he considers his end. For in the end he shall be spoiled of al
temporal bewtye, strength, power, Job. ^
honor and goods. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
turn thither again.

Through the consyderacion of death, may a man despise all fleshelye lust and
worldly joy.

For even the same flesh, that thou so pampereste with costly daintyes and
vain ornaments, must shortelye be a portion for worms: neither is there a
more horrible caryon, then of man.

Mani one through fear of death gives alms, exercises charity, does his
business circumspectly. To be short: the consideracyon of death, is even as a
scourge, or spur that provoke forward, and gives a man suffycient
occasyon to avoid eternal death, whereof, the death of the body is a
shadow. Therefore the Ninevites, Jonas. 3.
fearing their own over throw and destruction, repented and fell to a
perfect amendment.

In death we learn the right knoweledge of our selves and of God, and are
occasyoned to give over our selves unto God. The.12. Chapter.
MAny a man in his life time, can dissemble and show a fayer countenance: but
at the point of death no ipocrisie, or dissimulacion has place. There verily
shall we be proved and tried, what manner of faith, love, conscience and comfort
we have, and how much we have comprehended out of the doctrine of Christ. Then
does god let us se our own strength, how that all worldly strength is a
thousand times less, the^ we ever would have thought all the days of our life.
Then perceive we seingly and felingly (so to say) that we stand in the only
hand and power of god, and that he alone endures still lord and master over
death and life. Then learn we right to feel the worthiness of the passion and
death of Christ, and in our selves to have experyence of the things, whereof
we never took so dilige^te head before in our life time.

Then come the fittes of repentance for sins committed, that we think: O If
I had known that god would have been so earneste, I would have left many
things undone, which I (alas therefore) have committed. Then were we forced to
receive and love the gospel, which else here to fore might not come to such
stout and ioly yonkers. Then begin we to run to god, to call upon him, to
magnify and praise him, faithfully to cleue unto him, and vpryghtly to serve
him.

That the dead ceasseth from sin. The.13. Chapter.
ALl Christians desyer to be free from sin: for sin and vice does far
far vex the faithful, more then al misfortunes of the body. Now though one
do keep himself from sin: Yet stands he in a slipperye place: the flesh
is weak, strong is the devil, of whom it is easelye overcome: whosoever stands,
let him look that he fall not. 1. Corin. 10.


While the captain yet fyghteth, it is uncertain whether he shall have ye
victory and tryumphe: even so though a man do valeauntly defend himself
against the lusts of the flesh and temptacyons of the devil, he may yet
fall, and lose the victory. Yea if we always lived, we should do more evil:
sin ceasseth not, till we come to be bleste with a shuffell. Death cutteth
away sin from us, and delyuereth us from unclean se^ses, thoughts, words
and deeds. For though death in paradise was enioined unto man* for a penalty
of sin: Yet through the grace of God in the merits of Christ, it is become
vnhurtefull: Yea a medicine to pourge out sin, and a very workehouse,
wherein we are made ready to everlasting ryghtuou^nesse.

Like as terrible Goliath with his own sword was destroyed of David: even so,
with death, ^ came by the means of sin, i^ sin overcome and vanquished of
Christ. If it grieved us from our hearts, that we daily se and find, how we
continuallye use our selves against the most swet^ will of our most dear
father: and were assured withal, that in death we cease from sin, and begin
to be perfect and ryghteous, how were it possible, that we should not set
litel by death, and patiently take it upon us? Out of such a feruente
gelousye and godly displeasure, Paul, after he had earnestlye complained, that
he found another law, which strove against the law of God, syghed and
cried: romans. 7.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Again, so long as death has so evil a taste in us, and we will perforce
continue still in the life of the flesh: we bewray our selves, that we do not
well, nor sufficiently understand our own defaultes, neither feel them deep
enough, nor abhor the^ so much as we should: Yea that we be not earnest
desyrers of innocence, nor fervent lovers of our heavenly father.

That the dead is delivered from his vicious world, having not only this
advantage, that he synneth no more, but also is discharged from other sins.
The.14. Chapter
Whosoever leaves nothing else worthy behind him, but that he is quyte from
vicious people, may well be the gladder to depart hence: partly for that he can
be no more tempted of them, nor enticed by their evil ensample: partly for
that, though he could not be deceived by others, yet it greueth him at the
heart, to see other fo^kes practyse their wilfulnes. Now has vice and sin
eueri where gotten the upper hand: the truth is despised, god himself
dishonored, ye pore oppressed, the good persecuted, the ungodly promoted to
auctorite, Antichrist tryumphing. Great complaining there is, that ye world is
ever the longer ye worse. Forasmuch the^ as through death we be discharged of
so vicious a world, who^ should it delight to live hear any more? This meaning
does ye preacher set forth in ye.4. chapter of Ecclesiastes, saying: So I
turned me and considered all the violent wrong yt is done under ye son. And
behold ye tears of such as were oppressed: and there was no man to comfort
them, or that would deliver and defend them, from the violence of their
oppressors. There is at this day, by the grace of God, many a worthy
Chrystian, that desires rather to dye, then to be a loker upon such deuelyshe
wylfulnes, as commonly goes forward.

That the dead obtayneth salvation. The.15. Chapter.
AS for vicious unrepentant people, when they dye, I know no comfort for the^.
Their bodies in deed shall rise at the last day, but foul and marked to
eternal pain. Their souls shall be delivered unto the devil, to whom they
have done service. An ensample hereof stands of the rich man: Luke. 1^^
again there is thensample of good Lazarus that al Christians are taken up of
the angels into eternal joy and salvation. We must not first be purged in
purgatory, but through death we escape the devil, the world and all
misfortunes, that this time is oppreste wythall. If we now should lose our
bodies, and not have them again, then were death in deed a terryble thing,
neither precious nor much worth. But our body is not so little regarded before
god, for even unto the body also has he already prepared salvation. Yea even
for this intent, has he laid upon our necks, the burden of natural death,
that he might afterward clothe us with a pure renewed and clear body, and to
make us glorious in eternal life. Therefore death also, which is a beginning
of the joyful resurreccyon, ought to be esteemed dear and precious in our
eyes. After death verily is the soul in it self cleansed from all sins, and
endewed with perfect holiness, wisdom, joy, honor and glory for evermore.

Similitudes that death is whole some. The.16. Chapter.
IF an old silver goblet be melted, and new fashioned after a bewtiful manner,
then is it better then before, and neither spilte nor destroyed. Even so have we
no just cause to complain of death, whereby the body, being delivered from
all fylthynesse, shall in his due time be perfectly renewed.

The egg shell, though it be goodly and fair fashioned, must be opened and
broken, that the young chicken may slip out of it. None otherwise does death
dissolve and break up our bodi, but to the intent that we may attain unto the
life of heaven.

The mothers womb caryeth the child seven or nine months, and prepares it,
not for it self, but for the world wherein we are borne: Even so this present
time over al upon earth serves not to this end, that we must ever be here,
but yt we should be brought forth and borne out of the body of the world, into
another and ever lasting life. Hereunto behold the words of Christ: Ion. 17.
a woman wha^ she trauayleth, has sorrow, because her hour is come. But
as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguishe,
for joy that a man is borne into the world.

Namely, like as a child, out of the small habitacion of his mothers womb,
with danger and anguishe is borne into this wide world: Even so goes a man,
through the narowe gate of death with distress and trouble, out of the earth
into the heavenly life.

For this cause, did the old Christians call the death of the saints, a new
birth. Therefore ought we to note well this comfort, that to dye, is not to
perish but to be first of all borne a right.

The death of the faithful, forms in deed, to be life unto the death of the
unbelievers: but verily this is as great a difference as between heaven and
earth. Our death is even as a death Image, made of wood: which gyrneth with
the teeth and fears, but cannot devour. Our death should be esteemed, even as
Moses brazen serpente: which having the form and proporcyon of a serpent,
was yet without bytynge, without moving, without poyso^yng. Even so, though
death be not utterly take nawaye. Yet through ye grace of god, it is so
weakened and made void, that the only bare proporcio^ remains. Wha^ the
master of the ship thinks, he is not wide from the place, where he must land
and discharge, he sayleth on forth ye more cherefully and gladly: even so the
nearer we draw unto death, where we must land, the more stowtly ought we to
fight, against the gostlye parels. Like as he that goes a far journey,
has uncertain lodgyng, trauayll and labor, and desires to return home to
his own country, to his father and mother, wife, children and friends, among
whom he is sureste, and at most quiet: by means whereof he forces ye less
for any roughe careful pathe or way homewarde: even so all we are strangers
and pilgremes upon earth. Par. 30. c. ^sa. 39.119. c Peter. 2. b. Cor. 5. a.
^hilip. 3. c. ^c. 11. c. 13. b Cor. 15.
Our home is paradise in heaven: our heavenly father is god, the earthy father
of al men, is Adam: our spiritual fathers are the patriarchs, prophets and
apostles, which altogether wait and long for us. Seeing now yt death is the
path and way unto them, we ought the less to fly it, to the intent that we
may come to our right home, salute our fathers and friends, embrace the^,
Hebre. 13.
end dwell with them forever. We have hear no remayninge city, but we seek one
to come. Psalm. 3.
Our conuersacio^ and burgership is in heaven.

But if any man be afraid of death, and force not for the country of heaven,
only because of temporal pleasures, the same deals vnhonestlye: even as do
they, that whereas they ought to go the next way home, set them down in a
pleasant place, or among companions at the tavern: Where they lying still
forget their own country, and pass not upon their friends and kynsfolkes.
How evil this becomes the^, every man may well consider by himself.

The lord Jesus gives this similitude: except the wheat corn fall into the
ground and dye, it ^ydeth alone, but if it dye, it brings forth much
fruit. Likewise, Paull compares us men unto graynes of corn, the
churcheyarde, ^ Corin. 15
to a field. To dye he says, is to be sown upon Gods field. The
resurreccyon, with the life that follows after, resembles he to the
pleasant grene corn in Summer.

If a man lay in a dark miserable prison with this condition, that he should
not come forth, till the walls of the tower were fallen down, undoubtedly he
would be right glad to see the walls begin to fall: our soul is kept in
within the body upon earth, as in captivity and bonds. Now as soon as the
body is at a point, that it must needs fall, why would we be sorry? For by
this approaches the deliuerau^ce, who^ we, out of the prison of miserye, shall be
brought before the most amiable countenance of god, into the ioyefull fredome
of heaven. According to this did Dauyd pray: Psalm. 14^
Bring my soul out of prison (O Lord) that I may give thanks unto thy name.
Item in many places of scripture, to dye is called to sleep, death it self
aslepe. Like as it is no grefe for a man to go sleep, 1. Cor. 15. Thessa. 4*
nor wha^ he seith his parents and friends lay them down to rest (for he
knows, that, such as are aslepe, do soon awake and rise again) so wha^ we
or our friends depart away by death, we ought to erecte and coumforte our
selves with the resurreccion.

VVytnesse that death is wholesome. The.17. Chapter
FOr the strengthnyng of ou^ faith, I will allege euydente testimonye of Gods
word. Ecclesia. 7.
The preacher says* The day of death is better, the^ ye day of birth. As if he
would say: in the day of thy birth, the^ art sent into the cold, into the
heat, into hunger and thirst, whe^in is sin and wretchedness in the day of
thy death thou shall be delivered from all evil. Again we read: Sapien. 4.
though the righteous be overtaken with death, yet shall he be in rest.

John. 5.
Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my words, an^ believes on him
that sent me, ha^^ everlasting life, and shall no^ come into damnacyon, but is
sca^^ed from death unto life. Romans 14. a. 2. Cor. 4. b
If w^ live we live unto the Lord: (...) we dye, we dye unto the Lord*
Therefore whether we live or dy^ we are the Lords. Behold, how comfortably this
is spoken of all Christians.

That death can not be avoided. Item of companyons of them that dye. The.18.
Chapter.
Upon this condition are we borne into the world, into this light, not to
continewe always therein, but (wha^ god will) through temporal death, to lay
aside and put of, the travail of this miserable life. Wyttie men have found
out, how hard stones may be broken and mollified, and how wild beasts may be
tamed: but nothing could they invent, whereby death might be avoided. It is not
vnwyselye said: Gods hand, may a man escape, but not death.

Metrodorus writes, that against bodeli enemies, there may be made fortresses,
castles and bulworkes: but so far as concerns death, all men have an
vnfensed city. In other dangers, power, money, flight counsayll and policy
may help: But as for death, it can neither be banyshed with power, nor boughte
with money, nor avoided with flying away, nor prevented with counsel, nor
turned back with polycye. And though thou be now delivered from syckenes, yet
within ^ little while, thou must, whether thou will or no, depart hence to
deaths home: for the higheste law geuer of all, told our fyrs^ father so
before.

In what day soever thou eatest thereof, thou shalt dye the death: Gene. ^
understand, that ye death of the soul brings with it the death of the body.

Whosoever now grudgeth and is not content to dye, what is that else, but that he
forgettyng himself and his own nature, complayneth of God in heaven, that he
suffered him to be borne, and made him not an angel?

Why should we refuse ye thing that we have commen with other men? Now does
death touch, not only us, but high and low estate, young and old, man and
woman, master and servant. As many as came of the first man, must lay down
their necks. Death is an indifferent judge, regards no person, has no pity
on the fatherles, cares not for ye poor, dispe^seth not with ye rich, fears
not the myghtie, passes not for the noble, honors not the aged, spares not
the wise, pardons not the folyshe.

For like as a river is poisoned in the well spryng or fountain, so was the
nature of man altogether in our first pare^tes. And forasmuch as they
themselves were maimed through sin, they have begotten unright and mortal
children. roman. 5.
Touching this says Paul, by one man came death upon all men.

Now let us consider, what excellent companions and holy feloshyp they also
have that are dead. Paul writes, that we must be like shapen unto the image
of ye son of god. If he now, that of nature was immortal and innocent,
became mortal for our sakes, even Jesus Christ our savior: why would we then,
that many and sundry ways have deserved death, continewe here still and not
dye? Abraham the faithful, Sampson the strong, Solomon the wise, Absalom the
fayer one, yea all the Prophets and Apostles, kings and Emperors, through
death departed out of this life. A very deintie and tender body must that be,
which co^sydering so great multytudes of coarses, does yet out of measure vex
himself, because the like shall happen unto him. That were even like, as if
one would take upon himself, to be better, then all ryghtuous and holy men,
that ever were since the beginning of the world.

Of natural help in danger of death. The.19. Chapter.
Whosoever will help himself from the pestyle^ce with flying away, leauyng his
own wife, friends and neighbors: he declares imperfectness of faith, and
stands not with Chrystian charity, where we owe unto others, the same, that
we in like case would gladly have at their hands.

Grant that the pestylence is such an infectuous sickness, as one takes of
another. What tha^? If one stand in battle raye to fight for his country,
must not he also look for a gonne stonne, to be sent him into his bosom, to
carye home? does it therefore beseme him to break the array, and to fly? Like
as there the enemies of the body are at hand: So here do the gostlye
adversaries besege the soul of him that is a dying, where one Chrystyan
should help another, with worthy talk. Therefore is that a folish unadvised
counsayll, when we, with neglecting of our own members, will fly from the
wrath of god, thynkyng through sin, to escape the punyshme^t of sin.
Experyence also does show, that such folks do often perysh as well as other: yea
sooner then they that fled not at al. But physic is permytted of god: as in
the time of pestylence, with fyers and perfumes to make ye air more wholesome
from poyso^, and to receive somewhat into the body, for the consumyng of evil
humors, and to hinder the infeccion. Ite^ when one is taken with a disease, to
be let blood, to sweat, to follow the phisicians instruccio^: such things are
in no wise to be reprehe^ded. So yt, whether it turn to death or life, the
heart only and hope hang upon God. The physicion should neither be
despised nor worshypped. For to think scorn to use medecyne in syckenesse,
what were that else, but even to tempt god?

That god is able and will help for Christ's sake. The.20. Chapter.
SPecially wha^ death is at hand a man fyndeth no help in any creature of
heaven and earth, whereby he might fortunatly suppress ye exceading great
fear of death, but only in god ye father, in Christ his son, and in the
holy sprete of them both.

It is god that knows the parels of thy death, and can meddle wythall. Through
his power shall thou get through, and drink the bitter draught. Though we dyyet
lives god before us, with us after us, and is able to preserve us for ever.
Christ says: weep not, the damosel is not dead, but slepeth. Faythles reason
understands not the mystery of God and laugheth. But Christ, ye true god,
has both ye word and work together, and says no more but, arise, and the
soul came again to ye body, and she arose. Out of this and such like
ensamples, ought thou (faynte hearted man) to understand the infinite power
of god, who can receive thy soul also, and preserve it.

Not only is god able, but will also help graciousli. Whi should not he lay
upon thee some great thing, (as death is) seeing he adds so great
advantage, help and strength thereto, Math. 10. d. Luke. 12. a. Psalm. 34.
Psalm. 55. c. 1. Pet. 5. a
to prove what his grace and power may do? For he has nombred all ye hears
of our head: that is, he alwai has his eyes upon us and cares ever for us.

Yea that he loves us more the^ we love our selves, and makes better
provision for us then we can wysh, he has openly and evidently testified in
his own dear son: Mark. 16. c. Luke. 22. c.
who^ he caused to take our miserable nature upon him, and therein, for the
sins of all the world to suffer, to dye, to rise again, to ascend up to
heaven, Acre. 7. ^ roma. 8. ^ Ephesians. 1* c. 4. Philip. 2. a Col. 3. a 1. Pet. 3. c
Heb. 1. a, 2, ^ 10, b, 12, a Psalm. 110, a
where he sytteth at the right hand of god the father almyghtye. Among the
which articles, every one does help and comfort such as are a dying.

The natural son of god him self from heaven, became a mortal man, The
human^^tie of Chry^^
to the intent that man's mortal nature, through the vnityng thereof with the
immortal nature of the Godheade, in his own only person, might be exalted to
an immortal life.

He, The passion of Christ
having a natural fear of death, said: my soul is heavy eue^ unto the death.
He prayed also: father, if it be possible, take this cup from me. But this
fear and terror did he overcome, Math, 26, ^ Mark, 14, ^ Io, 12, c Luke, 22,
^
for he adds thereto and says: father not my will, but thine be fulfilled.
Through this victory of Christ, may al Chrystyans also overcome such terror
and fear as they be in.

Item though the Jews blaspheme never so much, and say: let him come down
from the cross: Math, 27 Mark, 14, d Luke, 22, c
he has helped other, let him now help himself: as though they would
say: There there seyft ye death, like a wretch must thou dye, and no man is
able to help thee: Yet did ye lord Jesus hold his peace thereto, as if he
heard and saw them not. He made no answer again, but only regarded the good
will and pleasure of his father. Therefore though we have an horrible temptacion
of death, as though there were neither comfort nor help for us any more, yet
in Christ and with Christ we may endure all, and wait still upon the gracious
good will of god.

He did not only suffer the horror and temptacyon of death, but death it
self, yea the most horrible death: whereby he took from us the death
eternal, and some deal mollified and swaged our temporal death: yea besides
this, he made it profitable and wholesome. So that death, 2, Cor, 5, ^ Phil, 1,
c roma, 7, c Hebru, 2,
which of it self should else be a beginning of everlasting sorrow, is become
an intraunce into eternal saluacyo^. According to this meaning are ye words
of Paul: wha^ he says, that Christ, by ye grace of god, tasted death for all
men. Item, he became partaker offlessh and blood, to put down through death
him, that had the lordshyp over death, that is to say, the devil: and that he
might deliver them, which through fear of death, were al their life time in
danger of bondage.

Christ's resurreccyon,
Moreover that Christ is the living and immortal image against death, yea the
very power of our resurreccyon and of life everlasting, he himself has
testified with his own ioyefull and victoryous resurreccion: and also with
that, that in his resurreccyon, many other saints that were dead, rose from
death again. Math, 27,


Again how full is it of comfort and pure treasure, that S. Paul joins our
resurrection unseparably, 1, Cor, 15,
to the resurreccyon of Jesus Christ. Likewise does S. Paul comfort his
disciple Timothy with the resurreccion, and says. 2, Tim, 2 ^om, 6, b, 8, b
If we dye with Christ, we shall live with him: if we be pacyent, we shall also
reign with him.

Christ's ascensyon
No less must the fruit of the ascension of Christ be considered. For the son
of god has promised and said: Father, I will, that where I am, they also be,
whom thou have given me. Seeing that Christ now with body and soul is go te up
to heaven, what can be thought more comfortable for a man at his death, then
that we Chrystyans shall also after death be taken up into the joy of heaven?

In heaven sytteth Christ at the right hand of god, Christ sy^teth at the
right hand of god,
Lord and king over sin, devil, death and hell. Him we have, in that heavenly
life with god, an assured faithful mediator and helper. Though we must fight
in extremity of death, yet are we not alone in this conflyct or battayl: even
the valeaunt heavenly captain himself, who upon ye cross over came death and
all misfortune for our sakes, has respect unto us from time to time, goes
before us in our battle, and fyghteth for us, Deuteronomy, 1, c, 20 Exo, 14, c
Iosu, 23. a 1, Pat, 6, a 2, Pat, 20, 32, 4, reg, ^, d Zach, 10, a
keeps us from all mischaunces in the way to salvation: so that we need not
care nor fear, that we shall sink or fall down to the bottom.

He shall cause us, with our own bodily eyes, to see the glorious victory and
triumph in the resurrection of the dead, and to have experyence thereof in our
own body and soul. Death is even as a dark cave in the ground: but who so
takes Christ's light candell, puttyng his trust in him, and goes into the
dymme dark hole, the mysre flies before him and the darkness vanysheth
away.

In Christ have we a mighty effectuous image of grace, of life and of
salvation: in such sort, that we Chrystyans should fear neither death, nor
other misfortune. Summa, he is our hope, our safegarde, our triumph, our
crown.

Wrinesse of scripture: John, 1^
I am the resurreccion and the life: he that believes one me, yea though he
were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and believes on me, shall
never die. Forth with after he had spoken these words, raised he up Lazarus:
who had lain fouer days in the grave, and beeganne to corrupt and stynke.

As by Ada^ al die, so by Christ shall all be made alive, 1, Cor, 13,
every one in his order. Item our burgershyppe is in heaven: from whens we
look for a savior, Philip, 3,
eue^ Jesus Christ: which shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
fashyoned like unto his glorious body, according to ye working whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto himself. Also: Ye are dead, Colossia^s, 3,
and your life is hid with Christ in god. But when Christ, your life, shall
show him self, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Here does Paul
declare, that our life is not in this world, but hyd with Christ in god, and
shall through Christ in his time, be gloryously opened. After this manner should
Christ be prynted into ye feeble, troubled and doubtful consciences of the
sick. And withal diligence ought the office of Christ to be considered, how
that he, according unto the scripture, coming into this world for our wealth,
did also, for our wealth, preach, wrought miracles, suffered and died, to
deliver us out of this false unhappy world, to open unto us ye ryght^ door
into eternal life, and to bring us, with body and soul, into heaven. Wherein
neither sin, death nor devil, shall be able to hinder us, for evermore.

Who shall ever be able, sufficiently to praise and magnify, the infinite glory
of the grace of god? What would we have the Lord our God to do more for us,
to make us lustely step forth before the face of death, manfullye to fight
in all trouble, and wyllynglye to wait for the delyueraunce?

That god has promised his help and comfort. The.21. Chapter.
OVte of this exceadynge grace of god for the blessed seeds sake, proceade gods
comfortable promises in the old and new testament. Psalm, 32 Psalm, 91,
Mine eyes shall still be upon thee, that thou peryshe not. The Lord shall
deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the most noisome death.
With his own wings shall he cover thee: so that under his feathers thou shall
be safe. His truth and faythfulnes shall be thy shylde and buckler: so that
thou shall neither need to fear any inconuenyence by night, neither swyfte
arowe in the day season: neither the pestilence that crepeth in darkness, nor
yet any hurt that destroys by day time. Though a thousand fall on thy left
hand, and ten thousand on thy right, yet shall it not touch the.

Hear does god euydently promise, that he will gracyously preserve his own
children. First, from such temptacion, phantasy and disceaueablenes, as come
up on a man by night in the dark. Secondly, from the violence of wicked
unthrifts, and all myschaunces that overtake men openly in the day season,
yea sometime suddenly and unawares.

Thirdly, from the pestylence, yt we need not to fear it, though there dye of
it a thousand on the left hand, and ten thousand on the right. The
pestilence shall either not take us, or not wound us unto death, or else serve
to our everlasting welfare.

Fourthlye, from hot feuerous syckenesses, such as commenlye grow in hot
countries, when the son shyneth most strongly. Under these four plages, are
all mischaunces comprehended. In the end of this Psalm stand these words: I
am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and bring him to honor. When god
says: I am with him, consider not thou thine own powers, for they help
nothing at al. Behold much more the power of him that is with the in trouble.
When thou hear: I will deliver him, thou must not be faint hearted, though
the trouble do seem long to continewe. when thou hear: I will bring him
unto honor, be thou sure, that as thou art partaker of the death of Christ,
so shall thou be also of his glory.

Math, 11,
Christ calls thee to him, and cries yet still: come to me all ye that
labor and are laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke on you, and learn of
me, that I am meke and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. Again: verily vereli, I say unto you: John, 8,
If any man keep mi sayings he shall never see death. Understand that the
light of life does shine clearer, then the darkness of death can blind. For
the faithful, through his belefe, is after such sort incorporated and joined
unto the lord Christ, yt true life, that he shall not be separated from him.
Though body and soul depart a sunder now for a season: yet is that done in
an assured, undoubted hope of the blessed resurreccion, that very shortly both
body and soul shall come together again to eternal joy. And thus the
Christian beleuer neither seeith, feleth nor tastes the everlasting death of
his body and soul, that is to say, eternal damnacyon.

God sets to his own helpyng hand, in such wise, and at such time as is
best of all. The.22. Chapter.
GOd now through Christ does not only promise most graciously his comfort and
help, but faithfully perfourmeth he the same in due season, so far, and after
such sort, as is expediente. The very right time undoubtedly does not he
omit. Death in deed is a narowe way, but god shorteneth it. The bitterness
of death passes all the pains that we have felt upon earth, but it endures
not long. Death must make quy^^^ speed with us, as Ezechyas the king of Judah
says: Esaye, 38
he shall cut of my life, as a weeber does his web. And when the pain is
greatest of all, then is it nere the end. Hereunto may be applied that Christ
said, it is but a modicum, a very little while. John, 11
Though it were so, yt the troubles of death did long endure: Yet toward the
eternity that follows after, is the same scace as one point or prycke, in
comparison of a whole Circle. In the mean season, God can more comfort and
help, the^ the most horrible death of all, is able to disturb or grieve.
Sometime takes he from us ye grievous enemy or mortal sickness, and so
delivers us out of the parelles of death. Else gives he some ease or
refreshyng outwardely: or if the trouble gooe on still, he sends his sweet
gracious comfort inwardely, so as the pacye^t (through then or king of the
holy ghost) does feel a taste, a proof and beginning of the heavenly joy: by
means whereof, he is able, wyllyngly to forsake all that earthy is, and to
endure al manner of pain and smerte, until the end.

^^m^, 8,
The sprete of god certifieth our sprete, that we are the children of god. If we
be children, we are al so heirs (the heirs I mean of God) and heirs annexed
with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be gloryfyed
with him. God commands his Angels, that they with him do look unto thee (O
man) when thou dyest, and to take heed unto thy soul, to keep it, and to
receive it when it shall depart out of the body. Wytnes this is* the angel of
the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, Psalm, 34,
and delyuereth the^. And: Psalm, 9^*
he has given his angels charge concerning thee, that they keep thee in all
thy ways, and bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot
against a stone.

The Angels, Hebru, ^
which are many without number, be ministering spretes, sent to do service
for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation. Therefore, a Christian, at
his last end, must be throughlye assured, that in his death he is not
alone, but that very many eyes look unto him. First the eyes of god the father
himself and of his son Jesus Christ: then the worthy angels, and all
Chrystyans upon earth.

Then according to ye co^tentes of the sacrament of baptyme and of the supper
of the lord, al Christians, as a whole body to a member thereof, resort unto
him, that is a dying: by having compassion and prayer to help him by, that at
his death, he may over come death, sin and hell.

Examples of Gods help. The.23. Chapter.
IN the time of the Prophets and apostles, God raised certain from death: to
the inte^te that our weak feable nature might have the more help, to believe
the resurreccion and eternal life. For the dead could not have been raised, if
death did bring man utterly to naught. Abraham fell sick, Gene, 25,
and died in a good age, when he was old and had lived inoughe and was put
unto his people: that is, his soul came to the souls of the other saynctes,
which died before, So is it also of Isaac. Gene, 3^
Word was brought to king Ezechias, that he should live no longer. But after he
had made his earneste prayer unto God, there were added fiftene years unto
life. When Lazarus dyed, Luke, 16
his soul was carried of the angels into Abraham's bosom. The murderer upon
the cross, heard in his extreme trouble, that Christ said unto him: this
day shalt thou be with me in paradyse. Luke, 23,
Daily experyence testifies, that god forsakes not his own. Therefore
undoubtedly, he that has begone his kingdom in us, shall graciously
perform and finishe it.

That it is necessary to prepare for this iourneye. The.24. Chapter
IF we could find in our hert^ gladlye for to hear, how vnhurtefull, yea
wholesome and vincible death is become through Christ: we would not be idell, and
linger still till ye time came, that we must needs dye.

A good householder makes provision for himself and his familye, and bieth
before hand, fuel and victualles, and such things as he has need of, for a
whole year or for a month etc. according as he is able. Much more ought a
Christian to provide yt, which concerns not only one month or one year,
but an eternitye that has no end. Like as faithful servants wait for
their master, so ought we to look for the coming of Christ, wha^ he shall call
us out of this time. Luke, ^^
If the householder knew, what hour the thief would come, he would watch,
and not suffer his house to be broken up. math. 24.
Therefore be ye also ready: for in the hour that ye think not, will the son
of man come.

Whosoever has perfect knoweledge of death, as it is hitherto descrybed and set
forth: he, in making provision before hand, has first this advantage, that
it is good fighting with a known enemy. Contrary wise on the other side:
what shall an unmeet warryour do, that knows not the nature, subtlety,
weapons and polycy of the enemy?

Prouisyon concerning temporal goods, children and friends, which must be
left behind. The.25. Chapter.
Again, concerning temporal goods: Let the rich who has wife and children,
or other heirs, make provision for them in good ord^^ under writing, according
as i^ every place the custom is. But i^ honor and authority, substau^c^ or
goods go to nere thy stomach, then consider, that they be no^ true, but
uncertain, transitory^ and vain goods: which bryn^ more unquietness then
rest. Consider also, that many more rych^ mighty Princes, kings an^ Lords,
must be spoiled of (...) their glory, and be feign to content themselves
with a short, narrow place of the grave.

Though we here lose all, yet do we scace lose one farthynge. And in the
other life, we have not kyngedomes, nor empires, but GOD himself and
everlasting goods. In comparison whereof, all minstrelsye, pastyme, pomp,
myrthe and chere upon earth, is scace to be esteemed, as casting counters,
toward the fyneste coins of gold. Therefore ought we to learn, specyallye
in syckenes, to give all temporal goods their leave, and to bid them fare
well. And if any manne will further more disquyete and trouble us, in telling
us still of them, then must we requyer him to depart and let us alone.

Whosoever has a train hanging upon him, as father, mother, sisters, brothers,
wife, children and friends: the same is the sorer laid at. For naturally we all
are loathe to depart from them. Math, 10
Here must we remember ye words of Christ: He that loves father or mother mor
the^ me, is not worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more then
me, is not mete for me. And whosoever takes not up his cross and follows me, is
unapt for me. Therefore must thou break thine own will, take up thy cross and
give over thy self unto the will of god. Specialli forasmuch as even they,
whom thou art loath to leave behind thee upon earth, shall shortelye come to
thee. And in the mean season, when thou departeste from thy friends, thou
go the next way and spedest thee, unto better and more loving friends. And
therefore the holy patriarch Jacob said, Gene. 49.
when he should dye: I shall be gathered to my people. Item unto Moses and
Aaron, said god: Thou shall go to thy people and unto thy fathers. Hereby is
it declared, that death is a passage to many mooe folks and better friends,
the^ we leave here. There is God our father, his son our brother, his heaven
our enherytaunce, and al angels and saints our brethren, systers and
kinsfolks, with who^ we shall enioie eternal goods for ever.

Again, whosoever leaves behind him, a poor wife, children not brought up, and
friends that are in necessity: must also do his best, commyttyng them to ye
protection, help and comfort of god, with an earnest prayer, yt he will
graciously take the governance of them. For our wives, children and
posterity, does the second commandment set in gods tuicion, when it
says: mercy and kindness show I unto thousands of the^, that love me and keep
my commandments.

Exodus 22. Psalm: 145.
Item god writes himself a father of the wedowes and fatherles, and takes
them into his own proteccyon.

Now if thou receive not this godly consolacio^ and comfort, then (to thine
own great notable hurt) thou disquietst thy self so grievously, that thou
canste consider nothing that is right and just, eternal or heavenly.

Preparacion concerning gostly matters: with what cogitacions ye mind ought most
to be exercysed. The.26. Chapter.
Moreover, the sick must give all other worldly matters their leave, that the
soul be not tangled with any earthye busynes, but directed upward into
heaven, where it desires everlastingly to live.

Hear shall it be nedeful, that our mind have an assured vnderstandi^g of ye
holy gospel. In this co^sideracion endure thou still: hang thou thereupon with
steadfast faith, where out grow these fruits: prayer, ryghteousnes,
pacyence and all goodness.

After the doctrine of the true gospel, without thine own and religious men's
works, without the merits of saynctes, art thou justified, made ryghteous
and saved, only through Christ: who alone is thy mediator, aduocat, helper,
satisfaccion, hope, comfort and life. It is Christ's will to conueye thee
away from sin, from the world, from the devil, and from hell, and to take
thee to his grace into the eternal paradyse, though all creatures were
against thee. Probacyon out of the scripture.

John. 17.
This is the life eternal, that they know thee to be the only true God, and
whom thou haste sent Jesus Christ. With this eua^gelicall doctrine, and with
nothing else, must our heart be occupied, what temptacions soever happen, which
undoubtedly will not tarry behind.

While we go about yet merry and in health, it bryngethe exceeding great profit,
if we exercise our selves with the cogitacyons of death. But in sickness, and
when we must dye (that is) when ye horrible image of death would make us
afraid, we must not unquiet our selves, with heavy remembrance of death. We
should not behold or consider death in it self, nor in our own nature,
neither in them that are slain through ye wrath of god: But principallye in
Christ Jesus, and then in his saynctes, which through him overcame death, and
dyed in the grace of god. From this sight, may not we suffer our selves to be
dryue^, though all angels and all creatures (yea though god himself, in our
opinion, would lay other things before our eyes) which they do not. Howbeit
the evil sprete makes such an appeara^ce. For Christ Jesus is nothing else but
life and salvation. Yea ye more depely and steadfastly we do set, prynt, and
behold Christ before us, the more shall death be despised and devoured in
life: ye heart also has the more rest, and may quietly dye in Christ.
Therefore says Christ: Ion: 16.
In the world (that is also in your selves) ye shall have trouble, but in me
peace. Be ye of good comfort, I have overcome the world.

Apoc. 14. Nu: 21: Ion. 3.
Blessed are they, that die in the Lord. This aforetyme, was figured and
signified: When the children of Israel, betyng bitten of fyerye serpents,
might not struggle with the^, but behold ye brazen serpente: namely Christ. So
the quick serpents fell away of themselves, and vanyshed.

When we now behold death and the panges of death in it self with our own
feeble reason, with out Christ, without gods word (specially out of season,
that is to say, in the danger of death) then has death his whole power and
strength in our feeble nature, and kylleth us with the greater pain: so that we
forgette God, and are lost for ever.

Of repentance and sorrow for sin. The.27. Chapter
TO the intent that our will heart and mind, may right and truly receive,
and apprehende the lord Christ: We must first be thoroughly sorrowful for
our synnefull life, and confess, that there was no remedy, but of our selves
we should have been damned for ever. This shryft or confession of sins, must
not forth with be done to the priest, but unto god, with hearty sorrow and
repentance, after the ensample of the poor sinner. And of the Publycane.
Luke. 7. ^. 18.
Therefore must we also acknoweledge, that with all our own power and works,
we are able to prevail neither against death, nor other mischaunce. For how
were it possible, yt we pooresely worms, feeble and weak in body and soul,
should be able to endure the stormy waves and intolerable burden of death, if
the right hand of god himself, were not present, to help our infirmity?
Full truli spoke a certain king in France, when he lay on his death bed: I have
been very rich, I have had exceeding much honor, my power was passing great:
and yet for all my riches, power and fre^des, I am not able to obtain of
death, so much as one hours respyte.

Of true faith The.28. Chapter.
TO such a confession, be longs the Chrystian belefe, that we turn our
selves away from al comfort of man, yea from all creatures to the only
creator, through Jesus Christ, and to give our selves over wholly unto him.
With all our natural reason and wisdom, shall we never be able to
comprehend, how it comes to pass, that the soul must depart out, and yet
be preserved: ye worms consume the body, and that the same yet shall rise
again and live for ever. Therefore is there required faith, in Christ and in
his word. The sum her of have we, in the twelve articles of the old
aunciente undoubted Christian belefe.

And though it be our duty always, specially at the time of death,
earnestly to consider all the articles: yet pryncipally wha^ we dye we ought to
exercise ye four last articles: The communyon of saints, The Fruits of faith
the forgeuenes of sins the resurreccion of the body, and the life
everlasting. For these four in themselves comprehe^de all the power,
commodity and fruit of faith. Namelye, whosoever does steadfastly look for all
grace and help at gods hand, through the concepcion and birth, death, and
passion, resurreccyon and ascensyo^, intercessyon and merytes of Jesus Christ,
and stands, lives and dies in ye same faith: though all sins, devils,
death and hell would fall upon him and oppress him, yet can they not hurt
him. To be short, it is not other wise possible, he must needs have
feloshyppe with God and the elect, and be quite discharged from all sins, and
joyfully rise again to eternal life. Yea what soever the son of god himself
has, can do and is able, that same has this beeleuer also obtained: neither
can it go other wise with him but prosperously in life and death, here and in
the world to come, te^porally and eternally.

Witness. Whosoever has Christ, has already the true life and all blessing: for
Christ is the life, the resurreccion, and a plentefull sufficiency of all good
things. Through faith, Ephesi. 3.
does Christ dwell in our hearts. Therefore through faith we obtain all
consolacion and blessyng.

That faith is the true absolucyon, it may be perceived by the words of
Christ, wha^ he says so often in the gospel: be it unto the according to thy
belefe.

Item God will constauntlye stand to his word and promise: he is of nature the
truth it self. Heaven and earth shall pass, but his words shall not pass.
Luke. 21.


What are now the promyses of god? John. 3.
So god loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes on him, should not peryshe, but have everlasting life. O how
blessed a promys is this, that if we believe in Christ the son of god, we
shall through him inheryte eternal life?

Item: John. 5.
vereli verily I say unto you: he that hears my words and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into damnacyon, but is
escaped from death unto life. Lord how comfortable a thing is this, that a
faithful beleuer, by temporal death, escapes through (yea is already escaped)
into everlasting life?

Again, John. ^*
this is the will of my father, which has sent me, that every one, which
sees the son and believes on him, have eternal life: and I shall raise him
up at ye last day. As though he said: This is the most gentle good will of god
ye father and of god ye son, that such a man, as still endures in steadfast
confidence upon the grace and word of God, shall be preserved and saved for
ever. And even as little shall sin, hell and the devil, be able to hurt him,
as they could hurt Christ himself. A pithie similitude
When ye darkness of ye night falls down, it covers ye whole world, dymmeth
the color and fashion of all creatures, fears and discomforteth them: yet
is it not of such power, as to darken, suppress and quench ye least light of
all that is found in the world. For the darker ye night is, ye clearer does
stars shine: yea ye lest light of a candell, wtstandeth ye whole night, and
gives light round about in the mids of darkness. A little spark also of a
coal can not the darkness cover, much les is it able to quench it. 1. Ihon ^
Now is god the true, everlasting and heavenly light. And al they, yt put their
trust in him, are as a burni^g candle. For through faith does god dwell in our
hearts, and we are ye living temple of god, and Christ's disciples ar called ye
lights of ye world. Hereout follows it, ye though ye prince of spiritual
darkness thrust in, with his noisome poiso^ and plages: Yet shall we behold in
faith yt he with his poiso^ and plages, can neither apprehe^d nor destroy any
true faithful man or woman, but shall be sinitten back and driven away perforce.

A little vain of water, An apt similitude
breaks forth out of the ground sometime scace a finger bygge: and when the
water is gathered into a dyche or ponde, it spryngeth nevertheless. And though
ye water become heavy of certain hundredth wayght, and move about the fo^^tayne,
yet can it not drive back (...) fountain, but it drives ye whol^ waighte of
the water backward^ and forward, and spryngeth st^^ continually, till the
dyche be s^ full, that it go over. And if the other water be foul and
trouble^ it can not myngle it self among the fresh clear water of the
fo^^tayne: but ye same remains pu^^ and fayer, till in time it com^ far
from the head spryng.

Iere. 2. Psalm. 36.
Now is god, the only plentiful fountain of all life. An^ the faithful are
very flowyng wels. For Christ says: Whos^ believes on me, John. 7.
out of his body (as says the scripture) shall flow streams of the water of
life. Which words he spoke of the sprete, that they, which believe o^ him,
should receive. Thus no m^^chaunce of this world can spoil^ any faithful man of
his comfort and life, forasmuch as god the eternal well spryng of life,
dwells and flows in his heart, and dryueth all noisome things (...) away
from it.

To the intent now, The exercise of faith.
that thou may be partaker of al ye fruits of faith, thou must ma^fulli
strive and exercise thy belefe after this manner. If any imaginacion or
thought, concerning sin or death, will fear the, though flesh and blood
tell thee otherwise, and though thine own natural reason would make thee to
beeleue none other, and thou thy self felest not the contrari, but ye god of
very wrath will kill thee and da^ne thee for ever: yet let no dispayer pluck
the noble comfort of the savior out of thine heart: let not thy heart waver
in the loving and fatherly promise of god: Let the terrible cogitacions pass,
as much as is possible. Remember ye comfortable gracious word of ye lord Jesus.
Blessed of godis he that ^ath this ^ynde.
Comprehend and keep it sure in a steadfast belefe, confydence and hope. Pluck
up thi^e heart and say: O death, thy false fear would feign disceaue me, and
with lying cogitacions, pull me away from Christ, the worthy. I may not harke^
to thy fear, neither accept it: I know of a dear valeaunt, worthi and
victorious man, that said: be of good comfort, I have overcome the world.
That is to say, sine, death, devil hell, and whatsoever cleaves to the world.
And verily verily, John. 6.
he that believes and puts his trust in me, has eternal life. With the
which words, the same dear valeaunt, worthy and victorious man does apply
also unto me his victory and power. With him will I continue, and keep me to
his word and comfort, whether I live longer, or must die. Here ought we
perfectly to be sure, that ye greater the battayll of death is, the nerer is
Jesus Christ, to crown us with mercy and loving kindness.

Evident ensamples out of the new and old testament. Paul reioyseth and
bosteth against the terror of death. Death is swalowed up in victory. Death,
1. Cor. 15.
where is thy victory? Hell, where is thy styng? As though he would say: To the
fayt^^full death is a comfort.
O death, thou may well make one afraid, as a death image of wood may do:
but to devour, thou have no might.

For thy victory, stynge and power, is swalowed up in the victory of Christ.
And through Jesus Christ our lord has god given us, ye victory against thee, so
that all true faithful Christians, are become lords over death and hell. Out
of such a faith, is Paul not afraid to say: Whether we live or dye, Roma. 14.
we are the lords. And again thus he speaks exceadyng comfortably: Christ
is to me life, Philip. 1. Oh that these words were printed in our hearts
and death is to me advantage. For hereby go we from labor to rest, from
shame to honor, from heaviness to joy, from death to life. 1. John. 5.
We know, that we are translated from death unto life Though I walk in the
valey of ye shadow of death, Psalm. 23.
yet fear I no evil, for thou lord god art with me.

Unbelief.
Therefore let them fear death that know not Christ, neither believe in him, even
such as from temporal death, pass unto death everlasting. For God geuethe
charge and commandment, that we should receive coumforte in the lord Jesus,
as the words sound be of good comfort, How god (...) blasphemed by our fear of
death.
I have overcome the world. Whosoever now will not be comforted with the lord Jesus,
does unto god the father and the son the greatest dishonor: as though it
were false yt he byddeth us, be of a good comfort: and as though it were not
true, that he has overcome the world. The fearer o^ death arme^^ the devil
against himself.
And by this, whereas the devil, sin and death is overcome already, we
strengthen them, to be our own tirannes against the faithful true savior.
Trust in ou^ own stre^gt^ is the way to desperacyon
Hereof proceed such words as these: I wot not how to endure and abide it:
alas what shall be come of me: What is that else, but to have respect unto our
own strength, as though Christ were not at hand to take our part, and to
fynish ye matter? Item, through unbelief, a man desires to remain here
longer, whether god be content with all, or no. In the sight of the world, he
is taken to be no honest man that vily forsakes his bodily master: does not
be then procure unto himself everlasting shame that in trouble of death pyketh
himself away from Christ, the heavenly master: Witness: he that believes not,
Mark. 16. John. 3.
shall be damned. He that believes not on the son of god, shall not see life,
but ye wrath of god abides on him.

Of hope. The.29. Chapter.
The work and strength of the lively faith.
Faith, though it be no greater then a little spark, gendreth hope, which looks
and wayteth for the deliverance to come, and shall undoubtedly not come to
confusion. Commit thy cause unto the lord, hope upon him, Psalm. 37.
and he full well shall bring it to pass. Ipse faciet, he himself will be the
doer.

The good Patriarck Abraham is set forth unto us, for an ensample of faith and
hope. Like as he hoped against hope, that is to say there as nothing was to
hope: even so must our hope stand fast and sure, against all that our own
natural reason or the wicked enemy can object or cast in our way.

Of the Sacraments. The.30. Chapter.
TO ye confirmacio^ of faith and hope, serve the holy sacraments of baptism
and of the supper of the Lord. The use or fruit of Baptime.
Baptime is an undoubted true token and evidence of ye grace of god, fastened
eue^ upon ye bodi: with the which god promyseth and byndeth himself, that he
will be thy god and father for his sons sake, and will also preserve the with his
own sprete in thy greateste parels, for evermore.

The sacrament of the body and blood of Christ must be exercysed and
practiced, The place of the supper and persons.
only in ye coming together of the whole congregation and church, according
to the ensample of the Apostles. Therefore let the sick satisfy him self with
the general breakinge of bread, whereof he was partaker with the whole
congregation. But let him diligently consider the fruit thereof, after this
manner: The fruit of the supper.
god has promised me his grace in Christ, and given me an assured token from
heaven in this sacrament that Christ's life, has in his death overcome my
death, and that his obedyence in his passion has destroyed my sins. This
godly promise, token and evidence of my saluacyo^, shall not disceaue me. I will
not suffer this to be taken fro me, to die for it. I will rather deny all the
world and my self also, then to doubt in gods token and promise. Here the devil
te^pteth a man to say: yea but through my unworthiness, I may spil the gifts of
god, that are offered me by the word and token, and so be spoiled of the same
for ever. Our worthynes to communicate.
Answer: God gives thee nothing for thine own worthynes sake: yea he
buyldeth thee unworthy, upon the worthynes of his own son. If thou believe on
the son of god, thou art and continueste worthy before the face of god.

Item, forasmuch as thou have gone heretofore unto the supper of the lord,
thou art through the same sacrament, incorporated and conjoined with al them
that are sanctified in god: and art already come in to the feloweshyp of the
saints, so that they with thee in Christ dye and overcome.

Of prayer. The.31. Chapter.
NO man should presume, to exercise faith and hope or other spiritual gifts,
out of his own power: but humbly to prai unto god for all such things, Our
sufficiency is from god.
as are nedeful. And seeing we have need of one mediator and advocate, god has
given us his son Jesus Christ. Neither is any of our prayers acceptable unto
god, Hebru. 1^.
but such as we offer through Jesus Christ. Therefore must we with draw our
selves from al creatures, praying and desyryng all things at gods hand, only
through the name of Jesus.

How ought a man to call upon god through Christ? What is to call upon god in
Christ.
With belefe, that we doubt not but our prayer is heard already. To such a
faith and confydence are we occasioned, in that God has commanded us to pray,
and promised that he will graciouslye hear us: knock and it shall be opened
unto you* etc.

For what thing ought we to make our prayer unto god? For ye vnderstandi^g of
his word, for remission of sins, for increace of faith, for love even
toward our enemies, for help, patience, comfort, and all spiritual gifts.
To pray for health and long life, The moderacion of prayer for temporal things.
is not vnryghte, so far as we commit and refer it unto the holy will of
god. For we can not make it better, then the faithful father, that knows best
of all. And to pray for a long life, is often times nothing else, then to desyer,
to be kept long in miserye. Esai. 38.
Good Ezechyas yet prayed with tears, yt he might live for a season.

Christ, the most perfect ensample of al, did pray: Father, if it be possible,
take this bitter draught fro me: nevertheless, not my will but thine be done.
Like as he now prayed thus, ye second and third time, most earnestlye: So
ought we also without ceassynge to call unto god. Some appoynte god before hand,
what death he must suffer them to dye. But they do best of all, that prescrybe
unto the lord their god neither fashyon of death, nor time, neither other
circumstaunce: but refer al unto him, who knows what is profitable and
good, better then we ourselves.

Moreover we must pray for wife and child, for friend and enemy, and for the
whole congregation of the Chrystians, yt god may graciouslye take the^ all into
his own proteccion. Unto prayer belongs it also, cherfulli to give god
thanks, for all bodily and gostly benefits.

The form of prayer. The.32. Chapter.
Prayer to god the father.
O Almighty everlasting god, mercyful father of heaven, thou have created me
after thine own image, and endewed me with exceadyng plentiful gifts.
Confession.
Yet not wythstandyng all thy benefits, I have many and sundry ways contemned
and transgressed thy commandments. All my days are passed forth with
grievous sins. I fear and fly from thee, as from a righteous judge. Althys,
what soever it be, I freelye knowledge and confess and am sorry for it, from the
ground of my heart. Desire of grace.
But, O heavenly father, I cry and call for thy large and great mercy: O enter
not with me into judgment, remember not the sins of my youth. O think upon
me according to thy mercy, for thy names sake, and for thy goodness, which has been from everlasting. Vouchesafe to grant me thy mercy, which thou according
to the contents of the gospel, have promised and opened through thy beloved
son: in such sort, that whosoever believes on him, shall have everlasting life.
Now is my belefe in Jesus Christ, even in the only redemer of the whole world.
I utterly refuse all other comfort, help and assistaunce, and my hope is,
only through Christ, to have pardon of my sins and eternal life. Thy words
are true, be it unto me according to thy words: O let me enjoy y^ passion
and death of thine only begotten son. Take for my si^nes the satysfaccion
and paymente of our lord, Jesus Christ: according to the tenor of my belefe.
Of this my faith, thou shall thy self O Lord be witness, and al thine elect.
My last will also shall it be, upon thy mercy to die in this faith. Though I now,
by occasion of pain, lack of reason, or through te^ptacio^ should happen or
would fall away: suffer me not yet, O lord, to stick fast in unbelief and
blasphemy, but help mine unbelief, strength and increace my faith, that sin,
death, the devil and hell do me no harm. Thou art stronger and mightier the^
they: that is only my trust and confydence.

O lord, the flesh is feeble, and impatient: lay not thou my weakness to mi
charge, but burn, smit, prycke and plage as thou will thy self: Patience and
lowlynes is the sign of a Chrystyan.
only Ibesech the grant me patience and lowelynesse of mind. Be thou ye
strength of my soul in this far iournei, which I have now to go in an
unknown land. Now show thy self unto my poor soul so, as it may feel that
thou art my refuge, my help, proteccyon, defense, comfort, castle, my sure
stony rock, my safegarde, my treasure, prosperyte, health and welfare. I
yield my self wholly unto thee with soul and body, let me never be
confounded. Help also, Prayer for the enemy.
o heavenly father, that according unto thy commandment, I may love mine
enemies, and pray for them that have hurt me. Math, 5. c roma, 12, b. c.
And bring to pas through thy holy sprete, that all they, who^ I have done
harm unto, may also forgive me, to the commodity and health of their own
souls. For it reweth me, and sorry I am, that at any time I have broken
Christian love and charytie, and begiled desceaued, or offended any man with
evil ensample, or with to few benefits. I beseech the O lord, through Jesus
Christ, forgive thou all them, that ever have hurt me, in thought, word or
deed.

Prayer for eueri man
To thy faythfulnes and proteccion, O dearest father, I commit all that
concerns me, specially wife, children, friends and all such as thou have put
under my governance. Comfort and help thou all those, that ly in bands and
ar persecuted for thy words sake. Have mercy upon al such, as are in prison,
poverty, sickness and heuines. O bring thou the whole world to the knowledge
of thy holy word, that they may live according to thy godly will, and (through
out all troubles) to endure and continue still in ye Christian faith. O Lord
Jesus Christ, Prayer to god the son.
I beseech the through thine own merits, have mercy upon me. Saying I my
self can not make satisfaccion or sufficient ame^des toward the father for my
sins, I lay the^ upon the, in hope that you haste already taken them away.
For you have paid that we ought, and our wounds have thou healed. O increace
thou, in me and other men, faith, pacyence and consolacion, what adversity or
trouble soever we be in.

Thou, lord Jesus, in thy passion did pray: Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass fro me: nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done: and that is
my prayer also. Upon ye cross yt dydst pray: Father, forgive the^. Eue^ so
lord, forgive I al those, yt ever have done any thing against me. Thou did
cry: my god, my god, why have you forsaken me. O lord forsake not you me then,
in my deadlye trouble. Upon the cross, you said: into thi^ hands I commend
my sprete. Even so now lord, commend I my poor soul into thy hands. O thou
holy sprete. Prayer to god the holy ghost
Great is the anguish and distress of my heart: have mercy upon me for Jesus
Christ's sake. I am afflicted, and so are many more: O vouchsafe thou to
illuminate, comfort and stre^gthe^ me and them unto al goodness: co^uey thou and
bring us out of all trouble, and fail us not, neither forsake us for evermore.
Amen.

A form of praise and thanks geuyng. The.33. Chapter.
Thanks geuyng to god the father.
O Almighty, eternal, merciful god and father, I laud and praise the, that
thou have created me a reasonable man, and as a father haste preserved me to
this hour: keeping me from great dangers ever since I was borne, and doing
me more good, then ever I was or am worthy. Specially, I give thee thanks for
thy endless grace, which thou show unto me and all faithful, through thy
most dear beloved son: In yt he for my sins, would be tempted so many
ways, and suffer so vile a death: to the intent that I from hence forth,
might be assured of faithful assistaunce.

Magnified and blessed be thy name, that thou suffer me not to dye, without
knoweledge of ye holy gospel. I thank thee also dearest father, that thou
visiting me with this syckenes and danger, do not forgette me. For in the
mean season also, thou comfortest fortest and helpest, and full graciously
shall thou bring the matter to an end.

Thankesgeuing to the son.
Honor, praise and thanks be unto thee, my most dear lord Jesus Christ, for
thy holy incarnacion, for thy martirdom and bitter passion: whereby I am
perfectly assured, that thou art my redemer and Savior. Upon yt only set I my
building: thither ward stands my hope: there will I be found. Romans 6. b.
romans 8. b. 2. Timo. 2. b
Cherefully and gladli with thy help, will I depart hence: trustyng, that as I am
partaker of thy troubles so shall I also have my part in thy everlasting
glory. Namely, that at ye last day, thou shall raise up this my poor mortal
body, taking my soul unto thee immediately at my departing hence. Thankesgeuing
to the holy ghost.
O ye holy sprete, I render un to the praise and thanks, for the true
understanding, belefe, comfort, patience, and al gifts, which thou graciously
do minister and give, by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

That the prayer is hard. The.34. Chapter.
HEre unto serve al psalms of prayer and thankesgeuing. Howbeit, whatsoever
concerns prayer, it is all comprehended with few words in the holy pater
noster, if it be diligently and earnestly considered. Notwithstanding no
Christian prayer can be done in vain, yt it should not be faithfully heard.
God says: Psalm. 91.
He has a desire unto me, and I will deliver him. When he calls upon me I
shall hear him: yea I am with him in his trouble, whereoute I will deliver him,
and bring him to honor. He knows my name therefore will I defend him. With
long life will I satisfye him, and show him my salvation Yea ye whole psalter
is full of such comfortable promyses. Luke. 23. d.
Ensample: if you pray with the murderer upon the cross, that Christ will
remember thee in his kingdom, thou shalt also in thy heart, he are the
gracyous comfort: this day shall thou be with me in paradyse. Nevertheless,
whosoever is in trouble, heuines or adversity, ought earnestly to desyer, the
intercessions and prayers of faithful beleuers.

That the word of God ought to be practysed and used. The.35. Chapter.
FArthermore, he ought always to have gods word before his eyes, and ferue^tly
to exercise him self therein. For whereas he faithfully calls unto god, he
does it upon his word: and in ye word of god he is taught how to behave
himself toward al, what soever comes in his way. If a man now can not
give himself true informacion out of the holy scripture, whether it be
co^cerni^g sins committed, or other te^ptacyons: then ought he to ask
counsayll of his learned soul shepeheard, or of some other me^ of godly
understanding. The lord says not for naught: My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, John, 10.
and they follow me, and I give the^ eternal life, and they shall never peryshe.

Amendment of life necessary. The.36. Chapter.
THe true faith brings with it naturally, a steadfast purpose, to live from
hence forth, according unto all the co^maundeme^ts of god.

Christ likewise exhorts every man, rightly to exercise, and well to use the
gifts of god. Hereof brings he in a parable. A certain man, taking a journey
into a strange country, Math. 25.
called his servants, and delivered unto the^, his goods. And unto on he
gave five tale^tes: to another, two: and to the third, one etc. Upon ye same
does the lord appointe the faithful servant his reward: and punysheth the
slougish and evil servant. The righteousness of faith co^prehe^deth the fear
of god, love of thy neighbor, patience, and all virtue. Of this fear, Prou.
14.
it is written: The fear of god is a fou^tain of life, to avoid the snares of
death. Neyghbourly love does first and principalli require, that we frendlye
and vnfeynedlye for gods sake forgive all them, that ever have offended us: and
again to undertake (as much as lies in us) to reconcyle al our enemies. Then
does charity require, to give alms, to comfort the heavy hearted, and to
practyse al works of mercy: and look who has done the good in thy sickness, it
is requisite that thou give them thanks. Among benefits, this is not the
lest, when one moves and exhorts another, to keep himself from al
filthiness. As for bodeli things, the sick should dyspatche the^ with few
words: but such as concern nourtour honesty, ye fear of god, safeguard in
him, and the homage, which is due unto him, that ought to be done with more
deliberacyon. For look what one speaks at the point of death, ye same goes
deper to the heart of such as hear it: partly because it cannot be thought
that a man on his death bed, being in greatest trouble, will use ipocrisye, or
dissemble: partly, for that, when the soul begins to be discharged of the
bodi, it often times shows some token of the fredome and joy, with the which it
shall (eue^ now forthwith) be perfectly endewed. Ensample: the dear worthy
patriarchs in the old testament, before their departing out of this life, sent
and called for their children and other folks, instructi^g and exhortyng them,
to submit themselves unto the law of god, and diligently to walk therein.
How faithfully did Mathathias at his death, 1, Match. ^
speak to his noble sons, comfortyng them out of gods word against all
their enemies?

Exhortacyon unto pacyence. The.37. Chapter.
FInally, we can not do better, than with gods help being pacient in all
adversity, and steadfast in all temptacions, most gently and mekely to give over
our wills into the will of god. I spoke not of such a patience and valeau^tnes,
as utterly to feel no more terror of death. For that is a very blockishe
vnsensiblenes of wild mad barbarous people: but al such feebleness as is
felt, must a Christian man overcome, and with faithful confidence upon ye grace
of god, cherefully step forth before the eyes of death. In ye passion and
death of Christ we have a perfect ensample, not only of patience, but also of
eueri other thing, that hitherto is written concerning preparacion unto death.

1. Cor. 1. Colossi. 2.
For he is given unto us of god, not only to be our redempcyon, but also to be
unto us wysedom, whereby we must learn all that is necessary for our health.

The seven words, that the lord spoke upon the cross, are specially to be
pondered, weied and considered.

The first: father, forgive the^, for they wot not what they do.

The second: woman, lo there is thy son.

The third: this day shalt thou be with me in paradyse.

The fourth: my god, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

The fifth: I am a thirst.

The sixth: It is fynished.

The seventh: Father, into thy hands I commend my sprete.

Through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, Ensamples of saynctes.
did all holy fathers and servants of god in the old and new testament give
over themselves wyllyngly unto death, the way of al flesh. Luke. 2.
Holy Simeon says: lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou haste
prepared before the face of al people etc.

Seeyinge than that every faithful Christian, A lesson to learn to dye.
does no less see Christ with the eyes of his heart: he ought, with praise
and thanks to say: forasmuch as I am assured, and do consta^tly believe,
that I am redeemed and delivered by Jesus Christ, and not destroyed, but only
changed through the death of the body: I am right wyllyng and well content to
depart hence and to dye, when soever now it shall please the lord my god.

The murderer, upon ye cross, did wyllingly suffer the death yt he had
deserved: and so he obtained the everlasting tryumphe of a Martyr.

Acts. 7.
Holy Steven was content to suffer the fearce crueltye of ye enemies: for in his
last trouble he kneled down, and cried with a loud voice: Lord Jesus, receive
my sprete, lord lay not this sin to their charge.

Philip. 1,
Paul, the chosen vessel of god, speaks thus very comfortably: My desyer is to
be loosed, to depart hence out of misery, and to be with Christ, which
thing is best of all: for Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage.

These, and such noble ensamples of other holy martirs, should (by reason)
provoke us feeble sluggishe Christians, to be the more hardy and stout, and to
think thus: well go to. Thou haste as yet, suffered no great thing for ye
lord Christ's sake: therefore now, eue^ as a lamb, give over thy self
cherefullye unto death for his names sake.

Thou haste daily made thy prayer, Prayer requires patience.
as Christ has taught thee, that god will take thee out of this wicked
world into his kyngedome, Mathe. 6.
and that his will be done. Now if he will gracyously convey thee into his
kingdom, thou ought from the botome of thy heart to rejoice, and, as his
own child, willinglye to obey them.

Forasmuch as the famous heathen man Socrates, being before the seat of
judgment, where ye matter touched his body and life, desired no advocate,
neither submitted himself to the Judges, but valeauntly disputed before them,
and proved that there is no evil in death: It should sound very evil, If we
(which out of the infallible word of God are instructed concerning a better
lif) should forsake this life of misery, with les patience, and with more
unquietness of mind, the^ did the heathen man.

The original and fruit of pacyence. The.38. Chapter.
TO the intent that the feebleness of our nature (which quaketh at death, as at a
thing terrible) may show Christian patience, we must cleave unto Jesus Christ
with true faith, which shall warm our hearts, to have a love and desire after
the heavenly glory and everlasting salvation: Yea rather to lose an hundredth
bodies (if it were possible) then to be destitute of the holy gospel, whereby
we are assured of deliuerau^ce from si^ne, devil and hell, by means of ye blood
shedding of Jesus Christ. Vnpacie^t folks, grudge against god, pouryng out al
unthankfulness, for that they were not created immortal, and so imagen they in
themselves a terrible cruel god: Gene. 13. b, roman. 4. Galathi. 3. a. Gene.
12. c 10. a. and.26. a. b
Yea al manner of vices grow out of impaciency. Abraham who other wise is set
forth for an ensample of faith and righteousness, fearyng death to sore,
sinned grievously, denying Sara to be his wife.

Note this well What Christian heart can read this without ^eares.
In these later days (ye more pity, god be mercyful unto us) it is become a
commen thing, for fear of death, to carry the true belefe, only in heart
secret. outwardely to deny the holy gospel and with mouth, behauour and gesture,
to serve Antichrist.

That a man / while he is yet in health, ought to prepare himself before
hand. The.39. Chapter.
THis preparacion ought no man to linger or dyffer till another time (though
he bee^ never so whole and sound) but every one forthwyth and daily, to
begin to make himself for death, to the intent that at all hours he may be
found ready. Like as a stout and valeaunte soldier, when he must be up and
fight with the enemies, ouerslepeth not him self, but keeps his standing, and
has his weapons and harnes already upon him: so much more ought we
Christians, at al times to wait upon our heavenly captain, wha^ he blows the
trompe, that we may be readi to pas forth with him. Let your loins be girded
about and your lyghtes brennyng, Luke. 12.
and ye your selves like unto me, that wait for their master, when he will
return from the weddyng: that as soon as he comes and knocks, they may open
unto him immediately. Happy are those servants, whom the lord, wha^ he
comes, shall find wakinge.

With this similitude doethe Christ exhort every man, that at all times we
prepare our selves against his coming, when he knocks through sycknes and
other dangers, when he calls us out of this life, and when he shall come
again out of his heavenly palace, to judge the lyui^g and the dead. The right
preparacyon is true faith, fervent love and charity, the clear shine of al
virtues, and specially, a gentle willing mind to open unto the lord, to let
him in, and with him to pass forth into his royal and matrimonial palace of
the everlasting ioifull kingdom.

The preacher says: remember thy maker in thy youth, Eccle. 11.
or ever ye days of adversity come, and before the years draw nigh, when thou
shall say: I am weary of my life. Again we read: examine and correct thy
self, Sirac. 1^.
before the judgment come: so shalt thou find grace in the sight of god.
Humble thy self before thou be sick, and declare in season that thou will
cease from sin. Be not hindered to pray in due time, and differ not thy
amendment until death. No man knows the time, place or manner, how he shall
end this life. Many one hops yet long to live, and thinks: I am yet yo^g,
I will follow ye world. Wha^ I am old, or have a wife and keep house, then will I
begin to frame my self. But o thou fooll, who has promised thee, that thou
shall be an old man, yea yt thou shall live to morrow? As nothing is more
certain then death, so is nothing more uncertain then the hour of death,
which the Lord has not opened to his best friends. Therefore every day
think thou none other in thy mind, but that thy glass is run out: A friendly
warnyng.
let every day be unto thee the last day, seeing thou wotest not whether yt
shall live till to morrow. Learn to beware by ye example of other men, upon
whom stretche leg came suddenly, and slew them, even when they thought
nothing less then to dye.

Yea of death ought we to think, as of that, which is present: for we have
death by the foot, and carye him about with us in our whole body.

Like as one in a ship, whether he sit, stand, awake or slep, is ever still
borne and carried forward, although he mark it not greatly, neither feel it:
so our life in a continual mocyon, does every twynklyng of an eye steal
forth, and privily crepe to ye end, though we mark not how the time passes.
David says our time goes forth swiftlye, Psalm. 90.
as though we did fly As if he would say: there can nothing run or fly
away more swiftlye. And Sirac says: Sirac. 14.
remember ye death taryeth not.

Paul says: I dye daily. 1. Cor. 15.
For even in the midst of life ar we in death: yea death, daily as soon as we
are borne, takes away some what of our life. After this meani^g writes
Augustine: The time of this life, is nothing else, but arounyng unto death.

Moreover death is daily set before our eyes: we hear ye sighing and
lamentable voices of the^ that dye: we see the coarses carried to the burial:
we gooe by the graves of the dead: we be still talkyng of those that are dead
and buried.

If the ensample of others, touch us but a little, then let us consider our
selfs. Where is there one of us, that has not sometime ben in danger of life,
either through tempest, sickness, pestylence, murthur, war or other misfortune?
Therefore seeing death waits for us on every side: we do wisely, when we
also on every side wait for him, that he take us not unprepared, or catch us
suddenly. Though a man perfectly know (as no man does in deed) that it should
belong before he dyed: yet were it exceadyng dangerous to differ the
preparacio^ til tha^. And more profitably could not one ha^ble the matter, then
by time and in due season to direct himself unto that place, where he
desires euerlastynglye to remain. For uncertain he is, (when the last hour
comes,) whether he shall convert himself to God, and whether he shall have
his ryhgte mind or not.

Though he be not robbed of his right mind: yet in deadlye sickness he has
so much to do with the trouble, that it is heard than for him to learn, that
he has not comprehended and learned before. The unspeakable pain of the
body, the horrible sight of thine own sins, the terrible fear of gods
judgment and the cruel temptacyon of the devil, come altogether upon one
heap in the perturbaunce and co^braunce of death, and hinder exceadyng much in
every thing, that one ought to think, speak or do. If thou now have
lightly regarded al warning, and so die in thy sins, thou shall not be
able after death to amend any more. Al repentance and sorowing from that time
forth, shall be in vain. Prou. 11.
When the ungodly dies, his hope is gone. Forasmuch the^ as it is so, that in
death we must abide the sorest and most dangerous conflict and battayl: every
reasonable man may well perceue that we ought by time and in season (yea all our
life time) to prepare before hand against the said battayll.

That the foresayed things ought by time and in due season to be taken in
hand. The.40. Chapter
THy last will and testament, The fruit of making thy testamente in time of
health.
being made while thy body is whole and sound, causes not thee to dye the
sooner (as our feeble understanding ymagineth) but is an occasion that thou
die the more quietly, and that you then goeste not first about such
thorns, wha^ thou lie upon thy death bed. Well don is it, when one yt dies,
does restore evil gotten goods. But unto god it is an hundredth times more
acceptable, if you restore it thy self, while thou art whole and sound in body.
It is well don, to bestow one porcio^ of goods for the relief of the poor. But
yet is it a much more acceptable offering unto God, when one himself in his
lyfetyme gives unto ye poor. For yt, which you upon thy death bead apoyntest
for them, is not always distributed: and though it be, yet is it no more thine.
Some do eue^ as ye wife, yt would give none of her potage to any body, till her
pot was ouerthrown: then called she yt pore unto it.

It is well done, in the end to forgive all men and to pray unto god, that he
also will forgive all thine enemies* but much more commendable is it to forgive
them before, while thou have thy health: and not do it for fear of death, but
for the very love of Christ. As for other wayghtye makers, wherewyth thou art
wrapped, concerning wife, children, neighbors, debtes, friends or enemies:
those likewise oughteste not thou to differ, till the last day: wherein
thou haste enough to do with the world, which thou art loathe to forsake:
with death, whom naturallye thou hateste: with the devil, who practyseth all
his crafty falshod and subtyltie: with the fear of hell, the terroure whereof
is horrible. By means of such things, an unprepared manne does often forgette
the grace of GOD, and the souls health. For if thou, having always a loving
friend in estymacyon, dooeste contrary wise little regard a poor neighbor: It
were no wonder, if thou should forget the same neighbor in the mean
season, when thy dear friend is departed. Even so when one now has always cast
what may do the body good (howsoever it goes with the soul) no meruayll,
that the souls health is neglected, when the body fails.

After this meaning, does holy Augustine earnestly threate^ saying: with
this penaltye is a sinner punished, that when he dies, he forgets himself,
who in his life time thought not upon God. Therefore while a man is in his
flowers of health, he ought in such sort to learn the comfortable sayings of
the gospel, that in his trouble, they may of themselves fall into his mind: or
if other men advertise him of the^, he may be the better aquaynted with them,
and have them on his fyngers ends, as them that he has known, exercised, and
used before.

Moreover, faith, whereby we overcome death and hell, has her beginning,
increace and strength, and is direct, not only above, but also against all the
natural reason of man, that the infinite eternal god, should freely of a very
gracious favor through his dear son take our part yt are most grievous
sinners. Therefore by times and in due season, through ye preachi^g of the word,
through the prayer and sacrament, should faith in us be planted, increaced,
practysed and made perfect.

In the mean time as long as we live, ought we to pray and beseech god, of a
gracious hour and blessed end. And when the end draws nigh, to put God in
remembrance of the same prayer as well, as of his commandment and promise: in
yt he has not only charged us to pray, but promised also that he will
graciously hear us.

Oh, most gracious god give us grace to do this and with unfeigned hearts to
put it in practice.
Daily ought we to have remorce of conscience, where as we have failed, to
repent and be sorye, to crave of God forgeuenes, and to take upon us
immediatlye, to amend al such things as are amiss. For in the sight of god,
it is a thousand times more acceptable, to cease from evil by time in due
season, before trouble come, the^ that present danger and fear should force
us to amendmente. He that is fallen into a deep foggy well, and sticks fast in
it, will he not straight way call unto every man, to help him out, one way or
other? Will he not make a soremone, howsoever men have to deliver him: Out of
doubt, he that goes above with sin and vice, hangs by a bare weak threade
(so to say) above the pit of hell: yea he is now in hell alreadi, forasmuch as
he turns not from si^ne to the grace of god.

Then must it needs be an horrible, deuelysh and obstinate blindness, when
one sticks fast in such a state of life, as is altogether cursed, and yet
will appoint a day, a great while hence for to come, and therein think to
begin to give the devil his leave: when he knows not himself, whether he
shall live till that day, and whether he shall then have a mind to convert.
For to have a will unto true repentance, is a free gift of god, which ought
of him daily to be desired: that the commen proverb be not verified in us:
vicious life, unhappy death: he that will lie well and soft, must make his bed
thereafter. Yet for all this, it is not my mind to shut up the grace of god into
a narow strayte, or to bid any manne despair. Wha^ an evil disposed man, that
fears not god, lies upon his death bed, being afraid of hell and damnacyon,
he may happen to desyer of god longer life, for this intent, that he may
afterward amend, beecome a better man, and more directed to dye. But let not
such vayn thoughts trouble thee. For though you should live yet an hundredth
years longer, thou mighteste, through thine own perfectness, deserve nothing
toward god: But be thou of this assured without all doubt, that there can no
true repentaunt come to late. Turn thee yet, even this present day, unto god:
be heartily and unfeignedly sorry for thy sins: be of a good mind and whole
purpose, that if god help thee up again, you wyle amend al things. Nevertheless
comfort thy self by that only mean, which God has prescrybed: namely the
Lord Jesus. So shalt thou be sure, with the murthurer upon ye cross, to
have gracyous favor for ever.

The second book of death.
How the sick ought to be spoken unto, if need shall require. The.1. Chapter.
Hitherto have we declared, how one ought to use himself in the dangers of
body and life. Now follows, how we should behave our selfs toward them that
be in like case. Hereof has david sung these words in the.40. Psalm: blessed
is he that considers or thinks upon the poor, for in the time of trouble,
the Lord shall deliver him. The Lord shall preserve him and save his life: he
shall make him prosper upon earth, and shall not deliver him into the will of
his enemies. When he himself lies sick upon his bed, the Lord shall
refreshe him. Yea thou lord make his bed in all his sickness. Item, he that is
judge of us all, shall at the latter day pronounce this sentence: come ye
blessed of my father, possess the kingdom, that has been prepared for you,
from the beginning of the world. For I was sick, and ye visited me. O what a
wicked vnbelef is this, yt we are more afraid at a little aduersite and
uncertain danger, then encouraged by such a Godly, sure and faithful promise?

Therefore among the greateste works of mercy, this is rekened to visit the
sick, to have compassion on them, to give them good counsayll, and to comfort
them. Which thing must be done with reason and discrecyon, to the intent that
neither to little, nor to much, be meddled withal. To little were it, to cause
the sick still to believe, yt he shall shortly come up again and recover. For
such fond hope have men already of their own nature, and thereby sometime
they over see themselves.

Again, it were to much, to deal roughly with one, that is weak of faith,
and suddenly to fear him with death: that were even as much, as to break ye
bruised read, Esaias. 42. Math. 12.
and utterly to quench the smokyng flax, contrary to the ensample of Christ
our Lord.

A whole instruccyon ought to be given unto such sick persons, as have need
thereof, to make the^ strong and wiling unto the cross and death. And so should
they also be put in mind, what death is, whence it came and wherefore, what it
does through the grace of god for Christ's sake: by whose sprete and power the
most horrible death of all is overcome. Her of is spoken suffici^entlye in the
Chapters going before.

Out of the which foundacio^, it may thus be spoken unto the sick: thou have
the almighty god thy dear father, and Jesus Christ thine intercessour and
savior, who has taken all thy cause in hand: let him alone wythall, he will
not suffer the to perysh, but give thee his holy sprete, which shall conducte
thee, into eternal joy and salvation. Only direct thou thy self even now
at this present, and prepare thee to depart, geuyng all temporal things there
leave, having a right understanding of the holy gospel, and exercising the
true belef thereof by feruente prayer, charitable love and pacyence.

Turn thee for gods sake, from all creatures, to the creator and maker, turn
thee from wife and child, turn thee from temporal goods and honor,
consyderyng that none of them can help the, neither from si^ne, nor from
death. All that thou leauest behynd the, the lord, according to his almighty
providence, shall well and fatherli take care for the^. He yt has created thy
wife and children, shall also provide them a living, as he has sent unto thee
al things necessary, eue^ unto this hour. Afterward ought not the mind of
the sick to be disturbed or pointed hither and thither, up and down (as, the
more pity, they use to do in the Papistry) but only unto God the father
through Jesus Christ, according to the co^te^tes of the whole gospel, after
this meaning: The spiritual comfort^^
Do thou believe and confess from the ground of thy heart, that there is but
one only god, who has given thee body and soul, meat and drink, lodgyng
and clothyng, with all other necessaryes, and graciously helped thee out of many
grievous mischa^ces and miseryes? The sick.
Then let the syck say: yea, that I knoweledge and confess.

Do thou also confess, The co^forte^
that thou ought above al things, to have feared and worshypped this thy
gracyousse maker and father, and to have loved him with al thy heart, with al thy
soul, with al thy strength, and, for his sake, thy neighbor also as thy
self? Has not god deserved yt at thy hand? The sick.
Then let him say: O Lord god, I should in deed have done so.

The comforter.
Knowledge thou likewise, yt thou often and many a time, haste wyttyngly and
willingli, of very ungraciousness, done against god and thy neighbor: by
means whereof, thou have iustli deserved the everlasting wrath, plage and
indignacion of god in body and soul? Then let him say: Oh sir, it is al to
true, The sick.
I yield my self guilty, and confess it before God. Well, The co^forter
greater and more horrible sins then these, couldeste not thou do, if thou
wouldeste still not regard the wrath and rigorous judgment of god, as thou
haste done heretofore. How art thou minded? Do thou desire and pray from
the ground of thy heart, that God will preserve the from such slender
regarding of thine own sins, and of his just wrath and judgment? Desireste
thou also, with thy whole heart, that God will not deal with thee after his
divine judgment and justice, but according to his fatherly mercy, and that he
will remitte and forgive thy sins and trespaces? Then let him say: Yea that
is my desyer, The sick.
from the botome of my heart.

God from heaven did send unto thee his dear and only begotten son, The
co^forter
who took upon him the nature of man, and in his death upon the cross he
bare, not only our trespace, but ye pain also and punishment due for the same,
making full payment and satisfaction for us. John the Baptist with his finger
poynteth unto Christ and says: lo, this is gods la^be, that takes away the
sin of the world. And John the Evangelist says: 1. John. 1.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

Do thou now confess, that Jesus Christ the son of God dyed and rose
again for thee also: And wylt thou as one parcel of the world, one broken
read, one piece of smoking flax, and one lost sheep, cast al thy si^nes upon
him: embracyng this comfort of the gospel in thy heart, and comprehendyng it
with a strong steadfast belefe? Then let him say: O lord Jesus, The sick
my hearts desyer is, of the to be healed, comforted and refreshed. And
thanks be unto God for evermore, yt I may have him my mediator and redemer. I
will wholly commit and yield my self unto him.

Then upon this, The co^fo^^*
the Lord Jesus Christ by his godly word and gospel, sends thee this
message: Thy sins are forgiven the, and in his sight all are taken away: not
only the sin, but the pain also due for the same: namely everlasting death,
hell and da^nacyon. So that thou shalt be received again as a dear acceptable
child, and heir of eternal life. Beleuest thou this comfortable promise of
Jesus Christ? Then let him say: yea, The sick
but O merciful god, strength thou my weak belefe. The co^fort^^
The sum of all this, is contained in the articles of the Christian belefe,
which with the aforesayed interpretacion, may be rehearced unto the sick.

And to the intent that thy heart may be set at rest, and ye assured in
thy faith, therefore has Christ instituted his holy supper and sacrament of
his body and blood: wherein he does signify, witness and put to his seal,
that even thou also art one of those many, for whom he gave his body, and shed
his blood. Now when sin, death, hell, devil and gods wrath te^pteth and
turmoileth thy conscience, you must with the same sacrament, as with the word of
god, comfort thy conscience: that Christ Jesus with his body and life, is thy
suertye: and that his soul and blood, and all that he is, stands for thee
and on thy side, against al bodily and gostly enemies.

Moreover, thou must bid the sick call upon god for faith, patience, and other
spiritual gifts,

Some time recite before him the Lords prayer, with a short exposicion, that
he may direct his prayer the better.

Exhort also al such as stand about the sick, to pray for him, considering
that our lord has made a rich and faithful promise: Where two or three are
assembled in his name, he himself will be in the mids among them, and grant
them their desyer.

And for as much as al instructions must be taken of the word of god, therefore
before the sick these parcels following may be read. The.6. Psalm which
begineth: Lord rebuke me not in thine anger. etc.

The.22. Psalm: Mi god my god etc.

The.25. Psalm: Unto thee O Lord. etc.

The.27. Psalm. The lord is my light. etc.

The.42. Like as the heart longs. etc.

The.51. Have mercy upon me etc.

The.91. Whosoever dwells. etc.

The.116. I am well pleased etc.

The.139. O lord thou searchest me. etc.

The.143. Hear my prayer, O Lord. etc.

The prayer of king Ezechias. Esaias. 38.

The Psalm of Simeon: Nu^c dimittis. Luke. 2.

The.11. Chapter of John: Of Lazarus.

The.14. and.17. of S. John's gospel.

The passion of Christ, and specially concerning the one of the two murderers.

The.8. Chapter to ye Romans The.1. Corinthians. 15. Al which places serve to
make the prayer feruente, and to strengthen true belefe.

Furthermore, the sick ought to be told of the fruits of faith, because of
prouokyng thankefulnes for the unspeakable grace of god: with exhortacyo^ to
forgive his enemies, to do every man good according to his power, and in every
point to amend his own life and conuersacyon: but specially with a pacyente,
gentle, quiet and good wyllyng mind, to wait for delyueraunce.

Namly, thou may say thus: Take up thy cross upon thy neck pacyentlye and
follow Christ, thy Lord. Remember and behold Christ, hanging in great
Martyrdom upon the cross. He suffered pacyently, until his fathers will was
fulfilled in him. Even so thou also, hold still unto the Lord thy god, that
he may perform his will in the: if it be his good pleasure, now to take the
stinki^g transitory flesh from thee, to purify it, and to make an eternal
gloryfyed body of it, thou haste great cause to reioyes.

At the point of death.
When the sick is drawing a way, and specheles, having yet understanding, thou
may speak unto him these words: fight valiauntly as a worthy Christian, and
dispayer not: be not afraid of ye rigorous judgment of god: hold thee fast
to the comfortable promise of Christ, there as he says: I am the resurreccion
and ye life. He that believes on me, shall live though he were dead: and whosoever
lives and believes on me, shall never dye. In him is thy belefe* therefore,
shall thou live with him for ever. Christ thy savior shall never forsake thee.
There can no man pluck thee out of his hand. John. 10.
Heaven an earth shall pass, but gods word endures for ever. Have thou
therefore no doubt, Luke. 21.
thou shall, after this battle, receive the crown of everlasting life.

Ask now the man, whether he understand and believe: desyer a token of him,
and cry unto him fayer and softly: good brother, upon thy souls health depart
not, shrencke not away from Jesus Christ, commit thy soul unto thy
faithful god and loving father. Speak from thy heart rote with Christ thy
brother upon the cross: Father, into thy hands, into thy proteccyon and
defense, I commit my sprete.

When his understanding is paste, commit him unto god. Make thy prayer alone,
or with others, that god will take this sick man into eternal life, and
grant him a joyful resurreccion at the last day, only for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

Of the buryall and what is to be done toward those, that are departed hence.
The.2. Chapter.
THe soul of the dead, as soon as it is departed from hence, comes into a
state there as prayers (if one would make the^ for him afterward) have no
place, and ar either unprofitable or else vayn: yea, offe^syue also and
hindera^ce, to our Chrystyan belefe.

The body of him, that is departed, ought reverently and soberly to be
conducted unto the earth and buried. For that is the last service, that we can
do for such as are departed, and therbi may we declare our charitable love
toward them. In ye mean season, when we reverently commit the body (as the
wheat corn) unto the earth, we testify our belefe of ye resurrection for to
come. The scripture also commends those, that faithfully will have to do
with burying of the dead after the ensample of Tobias. Of misordring the bodies
of the dead, writes Plato, the heithen Philosopher. Lib. 7. De repub.

Is it not a bond, gredye and voluptuous thing, to spoil the dead coarse,
and to rage against the body as an enemy, when the enemy that fought in the
body, is departed away? What differ they from dogs, which bite the stone
that is cast at them, and let him go fre that cast it: There is no
dyffere^ce. Of such points ought we to be ware, for they bring hurt unto
victory. Of gorgeous graves and sepulcres, it is written in the Poet
Euripides: men's minds are mad, when they beestowe vain cost upon dead
bodies. For if we consider ye matter right, we must needs greatly meruaill,
that ever a man should fall into such a fre^sy, as to use pride after death.

Touching the place of Burial it is to be noted, that by such ordinary means,
as be permitted us, we are bound to avoid sickness and all hurt. Now out of
graves there come naturalli evil savors or vapors, which alter and chaung the
air, and increase the disease of the pestilence, wha^ the church yard or
place of burial stands in ye mids of Cities or towns. Therefore both the
Jews heathen and Christians, were wont to have their Burials without the
Cities. For what time as Christ raised the wedowes son from death, ye
Evangelist says: Wha^ he came nigh unto the gate of the City, behold, there
was carried out one dead, who was the only son of his mother, Luke. 7.
she being a wedowe, and much people of ye City with her. Moreover the
sepulcre of our Lord Jesus Christ was without the City. But the Pope and his
adherentes, with their money market, found here a treasure bag, otherwise
perswadyng the people: as though to lie here or there, did further or hinder
salvation.

Afterward, let the dead rest quietly, no evil being spoken of them of malice
but good, Good counsayll.
though they were our enmyes (of malice I say) for otherwise must vice and
sin, as well of the dead as of the living, be declared and rebuked, that others
may beware. The old Poet Mimnermus writes: we al are enclyned to envy an
excellent famous man, but after death to praise him. Therefore do they not
only against Christian charity, but also against man's nature, that disdain
to give unto the dead, their due praise and commendacyon.

Specially wha^ one, that has showed us frendshype and kindness, is departed,
we ought never to forget his benefytes, but to declare our thankfulness to his
kynsfolkes or friends. But if we carry the remembrance of them to the grave,
and bury it with the coarse, thynki^g no more upon their gentleness: Then are we
like unto wild beasts, that are hot and burning in desyer, but as soon as the
thing desired is out of sight, the love is quenched. Hereof co^playneth the
Poet Euripides: seldom are there found faithful constaunte friends after
death, though before time they were joined never so nere together. The
thankfulness, that is showed to him yt is present, passes away and vanishes,
when one is carried out of the house.

The third book of death
How they ought to be comforted, whose dear friends are dead. The.1. Chapter
NAturallye we mourn, weep and lament, when our kynsfolkes and fre^des
depart. When father and mother dies, the son and ye daughter reme^breth,
how many a foot step the elders went faithfully and worthily to provide them
their living: yea if it had been possible, they would have showed the child
their own soul, and given them the heart in their body.

Again, the parents consider, how good obediente children they have had of
their sons or daughters: and what honor and ioyefulnesse more they might
have had of their children, if they should have lived longer.

The sisters and brothers remember, that they came of one father, being borne
under one motherly heart, brought up in one house, eating and drinking at one
table. If it were else a man's companion, he thinks: he was my faithful dear
friend, he did no man hurt nor harm, but desired to do every man service, and
that so honestlye, that a man might have trusted him with his own soul.

If he were a good ruler, we think: he was to his own natyue country, true
and faithful, and excellently well enclyned to the welfare thereof who has not
then good cause to be sorry for his departing: This is the cause, yt the blood
naturally gathers together, so that we are sorier for ye death of such one,
then of another private man.

Such heaviness, pity and compassion, does GOD allow. For he has not
created us to be stones and blocks, but has given us five senses, and made
us an heart of flesh, that we might have feling, and love our friends,
being sorye wha^ they suffer trouble and dye: Yea GOD hates vnfrendlye and
unmercifully people: and whose hearts are not moved, when their friends are
vexed or taken away from them. Therefore the holy Patryarck Abraham, Gene. 23.
lamented and mourned for Sara his wife when she was dead.

Good Joseph made great lamentacyon for Jacob his father. Gene. 50.


Paull likewise, Philip. ^.
writes thus: My helper and fellow souldyar Epaphroditus was deadly sick: but
GOD had mercy upon him, and not only upon him, but also upon me, that I
should not have one heaviness upon another.

But as in all things, so in this there ought a measure to be kept, that we
continue not in fleshly vnordynate heaviness, but still resyste the sorrow, and
comfort our selves with this accou^pt following: what do we mean thus to
mourn and lament? What will we do? The Lord is great, and does no man
wrong. And the same is an honest good will, that conformeth it self to the
will of god.

A notable saying.
For the good heathen man Seneca, wrote unto his scholar Lucillus after this
manner: a man ought to be content with every thing that god is pleased
wythall, only because it pleased god.

Now is every thing ordered by the providence of god, as holy Augustyne de
ciuitate dei says: Lib. 5. cap. 11
without an orderly division and conueniente joining together of the parts,
has not God left so much as the bowels of any best, how vile or small so ever
the same be, nor the feathers of a bird, nor the flower of the herb, neither
ye leaf of the tree: so that there can nothing be found, that is not
subject to the providence of god, neither can there any little bird dye,
without his device, charge and commandment.

If god now have so diligent respect to such small things, how then could thy
friend (who^ thou mournest for) depart away by death, without the providence
of god? Therefore if we speak against the lords works, and cry against his
will, what is yt else, but even as though we therefore lived upon earth, yt we
as lords and rulers, should prescrybe laws for the almighty? Which thing to
think (I will not say to speak) were yet horrible.

When thou geuest forth thy child to a nource, and she has kept it long
enough, you take it home again: the nourse having no reasonable cause to
complain upon the, for taking again thine own. Yet much les cause have we to
grudge against god our creditor, wha^ he by death takes his own again. For as
for father and mother, brother and sister, wife and child, friend and lover,
yea and all other things that we have, what are they else but lent goods and
free gifts of god, which he has committed unto us, and which we, as long as
he lends us the^, ought to esteem as aduau^tage.

When a Lord has lent us a fayer costelye table, whether should we gladly
with thanks restore it him again, when he requires it, or braull with him
after this manner? O thou terryble lord, how happens it, that thou have robbed
us of so costly a table? How comes it, yt thou have taken it from us again so
suddenly? Upon such a complaynte might not he with good right, answer: Is that
now mi reward for lending you so costly a table, which I did of love
(undeserved on your part) yt ye might have commodity and pleasure there of a
while? Yea the more worthi the gift was yt I lent you to use, the more tha^kful
should ye be unto me. Yea with rougher words might god justly rebuke us, that
be so vnpaciente. When ye house fell upon Jobs x. living children, vii. sons
and.iii. daughters, and when his.vii.M. sheep were bre^t with fire from heaven,
and his enemies carried away his five hundredth yoke of oxen, and five hundredth
asses, as the other enemies drove away three hundredth Camels, and slew also his
servants in all this misery and hurt, Job comfort h^imself and thanketh God,
who had lent him such things, and taken them away again. The lord (says he)
has given the^, the lord has taken the^: eue^ as it has pleased ye lord, so
is it com to pas: blessed be the name of the lord. Let us therefore also say
with Job: the Lord gave us this father, that child, such a friend: the Lord
has taken him again: blessed be his name,

But wha^ thou should laud and praise god, it hyndereth the exceadyngly, if
thou fear, that god of a wrath and enemitie against thee, has taken away from
thee thy son or thy wife. etc. Such an opinion comes not of god, but is
even a practyse of the devil. And herewyth agrees our feeble nature: what
soever is song or said, we think in trouble, that god is angrye, and that our
will is good and profitable and not gods will.

Contrary hereunto, are we instructed by holy scripture, that though we know
not perfectly, for what cause God sends us this or that punishmente, yet
ought we to be satisfied in this, that god is gracious and favorable unto us,
for his beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Nevertheless to the intent
that we may both the better understand, and be the more glad to receive the
good will of God. I will declare what profit such a death brings to him, that
departs, and to those that remain.

That unto such as dye, it is profitable to depart out of this life. The.2.
Chapter.
IF they that be dead from hence, had not suffered trouble in this world when
they were alive, it were no maruaill, to se us mourn out of measure for their
departing. As for all their joy and pastyme upon earth, they are scace to be
accounted drea^es, in comparyson of the true joys and treasures above. Again:
who will undertake to number the adversities, that al men, of what estate so
ever they be, must be possessours of: We may well say with Job: man that is
borne of a woman, lives but a short time, and is replenished with many
miseries. Against the which there helps nether gold nor silver, nether power
nor nobility, nether policy nor natural wit. To day we are whole and sound,
tomorowe sick: to day merry, to morrow sorry: to day rich, to morrow poor: to day
honored* to morrow despised: to day alive, tomorow dead.

Moreover vice commonly has so the upper hand, that none can live upon earth,
but he must displease either god or man, or else them both. Therefore seeing thy
loving friend is gotten out of the mire, and gone out of the sweat bath that
thou yet sit in: art thou sorry now, yt he is releaced and unburdened of so
much misery? Thou should rather give thanks and praise unto god for it:
specially forasmuch as death does utterly destroy nether bodi nor soul,
nether honesty nor virtue, wherein, he that is now departed did here exercise
himself in time. For look what good thing on has done, it shall not be
quenched out through death: but the praise and commendacio^ thereof, among al
such as are good, does rather increase then minish after death. The soul
departing in true faith passes strayghte to the joy of heaven.

The lest parcel of the body does not utterly peryshe, but the whole body
shall at the last day, be called to immortality, where our friends shall be a
thousand times better, richer, more pleasant and more blessed, then ever they
were upon earth: when we all shall come to them again, see them, know them,
and have perpetual company with them and all saynctes. After this sort, did
Adam and Eve trust, that Abel, who was slain, should be restored again unto
them, because of the sede that was promised.

A similitude: if a great Lord had called the and thy son, and promised you
much wealth and good should thou weep when thy son goes to him, and thou
thy self will shortly follow after? No verily, but thou would order thy
matter so, that thou might be there out of hand. Why vnquietest thou thy
self then so sore, for the death of thy son or friend? The almighty Lord
has called him and thee to his eternal kingdom, to place thee and him among
the princes of heaven. Thy son passes hence through the gates of death, he
shall rise again to honor. Why vexest thou then thy self? Why ordrest not
thou thy self, joyfully to follow him? For thou haste not lost him, but only
sent him before.

If it were possible, that thy son knew of thy unmeasurable waylyng and
howlyng, and could speak unto thee, without all doubt he himself would rebuke
it and say: why will ye vex your age with unprofitable, yea with unreasonable
mournyng? Wherefore will ye blame god, his ordinance and prouyde^ce? Will ye
envy me the great honor and joy, that I am promoted unto? Think ye, it is a
thing to be bewailed and lamented, that I am brought out of danger into
safgarde, out of misery into welfare and out of the wicked world into the
company of angels? I will go some what nerer unto you: I pray you, if it lay in
your strength and power, to send for me into ye temporal life again, would ye
calm down again into ye misery of yours? With what great fault have I
deserved such unfaithfulness at your hands? And if ye should not call me
again, why mourn ye then so and lamente? Upon such words, we must needs be
ashamed of our unmeasurable sorrow and heaviness. That we ought thus to judge of
faithful Christen men that are departed, we may learn by ye words of Christ,
who testifies unto Martha: I am the resurreccion and the life. John. 1^.
He that believes on me, shall live although he dye. And he that lives and
believes on me, shall never dye. How dear and precious, Psalm. 11^.
in the sight of the lord, is ye death of his saints? Understand that god does
faythfulli take them in to his proteccyon, and has respect unto their souls,
to receive them into eternal life.

Now say thou: Alas, if I knew, that my wife, child or friend were saved,
I could the better away with his death. As for a thief, he need not to be
glad when he is carried from prison to the galows. This manne has been all his
life a child of the world: he never feared God, but dyed in sin happly
without repentance, and peradventure from the carte of this miserye, he is
yoked in the charet of eternal fire.

Answer: no man can tell, how he behaved himself at his last end: happly he
repented, and is pardoned. We ought ever to hop the best, till we have
suffycyent evidences, that the man is lost.

Secondly: though his damnacyon were open and manyfeste, yet ought a faithful
man to rejoice in the righteousness of god. The ravens must have dogs
garbage, partriches must be set upon the board before lords: a murthurer
must be laid upon a whele. It is as mete for Judas to sit in hell, as for
S. Peter to be in heaven.

Thirdly thou say: if he had lived longer, he would peradventure have
amended. Whereupon take this answer: he might have happened as soon to ben
worse. A prudente man looks for no better, but fears the worse in this
blasphemous world.

S. John. Chrysostom testyfieth plainly, that as soon as God takes away a man
through death, the same man from thence forth, should never have been better.

Verily God is to be praised and thanked, when he takes away the ungodly.
For the more a man heapeth up sin upon sin, the greater punyshmente must
he suffer afterward, for good rightuous justice sake. The ungodly synneth ever
the longer the more upon earth: but by death does god pluck him down from his
synnefull life: though not spiritually and inwardly, yet with exterior members,
the same must cease from sin. Therefore to such as are hard hearted and
disordered, there is nothing better, then to dye the sooner.

What profit the death of friends, brings to such as are left beehynde
alive. The.3. Chapter.
THat the death of the ungodly does profyt other men, it is easy to perceive:
for thereby are the wicked upon earth some what minished and swepte out, and
other poor wretches faer the better.

But that the death of the righteous should bring any commoditye to such as
remain alive, it sounds straung in our ears: therefore shall it be declared.

When a man, endewed with excellent gifts, is made an idol: Almighty God
cannot suffer it. For God himself will be he, of whom all good things
undoubtedly must be hoped and looked for: and unto his dishonor it serves, if
the heart clean not only unto him. And blessed is ye man, that sets his
love, comfort and hope upon the Lord. Again, cursed be the manne (as the
Prophet says) that upon man does put his trust. Now comes it lightly to
pa^, that we set to much by rich parents, by fayer children, honorable
friends, and men of good propertyes. Therefore god plucketh them away from us,
to draw us away from creatures, and yt we might perceive his feruente love
toward us, in that he is gelous over us, that he takes out of our sight,
whatsoever we gape upon besides himself. And also, to the intent we might
perceive, that whatsoever is in the world, it is but temporal, and lasts
but the twynklyng of an eye: and that only the father of heaven will, can and
may help in all troubles.

Moreover, what a number is there of the^, that of an inordinate love toward
their children, parents and friends (to make provision for them, and to bring
the^ aloft) iopard their souls for the^, fall into great unquietness, and fret
within themselves, being unmercifully, covetous, brybers, usurers, liars,
disceauers. Franciscus petrarcha writes: Thou have lost thy son, yea but
thou haste lost with him also much fear, and an infinite matter of careful
sorrows: by reason of the which cares, that thou might be delivered from
the^, it behooved either thee or thy son to die.

Therefore give god thanks for his grace, when he discharges thee of those
things that hinder thee in his free service: and wha^ he takes from the thy
wife, child, friend or others, upon who^ thou haste hanged to much, and for
whose sakes thou have done wrong many a time.

That thou may understand this thing the better, take for ensample mercy
toward the poor. We see that they, whose children and friends are departed,
give alms richlye, which, while their wives, children and friends were alive,
would not have given one penye, for fear that their friends, after their
death should have had need, and ben destitute of money themselves. Yea rich
folks, which (as God sometime appoynteth) have no children nor heyers of their
own bodies, become fathers and vpholders of many poor men. Which thing unto
them, and unto al Christe^dom, is more profitable and more worthy of
comme^dacio^, the^.x. sons of a naughty life, such as commonly there be many:
among whom scace one of x. spedeth well, I mean of those that inherit their
fathers riches and goods: for shamefullye they waste and consume them, to the
hurt of themselves and of others

Item, though one know, that he ought to love no man in such sort, as to
displease god for his sake: yet many a time is one moved, through his friends,
to do against his own conscience, if he will not displease them. Therefore
graciously does God pluck away those friends, whose presence serves unto thy
destruccyon.

Moreover thou say: how should not I mourn, seeing I am now robbed of
such help and sucour, as I should still have if he were yet alive. Answer:
such complaining comes not of a free love toward ye dead, but of a seruyle
and bond stomach, ye looks and has respect to it self, and desires to
work his own profit with another ma^s hurt. Now if thy son or friend, that
might have been thy comfort in thine age, be departed, god may send thee
others in their place: Yea there be some at hand already, yt offer their help
and cou^sayll to the and thine, and will not fail thee at thy need. And though
it were so, that thou hadest none other child nor friend in their stead, but
werst destitute of all bodily help, yet have thou a gracyous god through Jesus
Christ, with the spiritual gifts, which shall continue with thee for ever.

But some say (and specially great yonkers) mi mourning and sorrow is, because
my ki^red, name and stock, mine arms and badge perysheth, now that I leave no
heirs of my body behind me. O thou great ydiote, thou lame^test, that thy
name and honor perysheth in this transytorye world, and forcest little, how
thy name and honor may continue for ever more in the kingdom of heaven.

What is become of the mighty kings and emperors, which fought for the
greatest honor and magnificence, yt they might never be forgotten upon earth?
The memorial of them is paste long ago, they have their reward already, as our
lord says. Contrary wise: the dear worthy saynctes, which despised al
glory of this mortal life, have at this day greater honor, praise and
commendacyon, then they yt trauayled to obtain the glory of this world. Now
therefore will god help thee, not to pass upon temporal honor and pomp:
but most of all to care, how thy name may remain in remembrance before god,
with those, that unto him have done faithful service.

Companyons that suffer life heaviness of heart. The.4. Chapter.
IF any thing were practysed against thy child or friend, that necessaryly must
not com to pas, so that he might well have escaped it, then had thou just
cause to howl and lamente. But now behooved it him, as a mortal man, to end
this life, even according to the first ordinance of God. Thou have thousands
and thousands of companyons, whose dear friends departed hence by death. Why
will thou then disquiete thy self? What time as Abraham was commanded of god
to sacrifice his own only beloved son, what mind had he (thi^kest thou) wha^
he now drew ye swerd, and thought to slay his son? greater sorrow had he for
his son yt yet was alive, the^ you for thy son yt is dead. In what case was
the holy patriarck Jacobs heart, when tidings came to him, that his dear son
Joseph was torn of wild bests? Where was there ever father in greater heuines,
then even David, when by his own son Absalom (whom he yet exceadingly loved)
he was expelled from his kingdom? Doubtless he was in none other case, then as
though ye heart in his body shronck and melted like wax. These and such like
ensamples, oughteste thou to set before thine eyes: whereby thou shall perceive
that thy sorrow is to be esteemed but small toward these: and therefore through
the contemplacyo^ thereof undoubtedly it shall be assuaged.

Through gods help, all heart sorrow is eased. The.5. Chapter.
Unhandsome phisicians are they, that well can se the greatness of the sickness,
and braule with the pacyent for his excess, but can not show a remedy, whereby
the blemyshe may be healed. Therefore now that I have hitherto reproved
unmeasurable sorrow and heaviness, I will not leave the matter so bare, but
declare now also a medicine, whereby unreasonable mournyng (if it be not clean
taken away) may yet be eased and minished.

The time of it self, makes al combraunce lyghter. For there be many men and
women which in times past have set finger in the eye, knocked upon there breasts,
pulled the here out of their own heads, ran against the wall, disfigured
their whole bodies, and horribly howled for ye dead. But now they have their
pastim in all kind of minstrelsye, as though they never had ayled any thing.
Not wythstandynge to wait still till heuines forget it self, is a wynishe
thing: and again, to bridle it by times, be seems the natural reason and
sobernes of a man.

What is the^ to be done? It lies not in thy power, without ye special help
of god, to expel sorrowful mourning. First and principalli ponder thou the power
and grace of god. The power: in that the almighty is able many hundredth ways,
faithfully to ease thee of thy sorrow. The grace: in that he is willing and
ready (for the worthynes of his son) to make the joyful again, here and in
the world to come, so as is most for thy profit and wealth. Ada^ and Eve had
unspeakable sorrow, when their obedient and rightuous son Abel was murthured.
God than did well put them in remembrance of their sin. But they, being also
myndfull of the promise of ye blessed sede, were thereby erected and comforted
again: howbeit in such an exceadyng heaviness, it was very hard to withstand
desperacion, and to overcome al mischaunce. Therefore let us consider, that
though we Chrystians be not altogether called to the pleasures of this time,
but stoutli to strive and valeauntly to fight against them: yet shall not
Christ leave us comfortless, but according to his promise, he shall faithfully
be with us until the end of the world.

We must furnishe our selves with prayer and patience. The.6. Chapter.
TO ye intent yt god may assiste us with his might and grace, we must ernestly
pray unto him that with his holy sprete, through his godly word, he will
comfort us, yt we may render thanks unto him, when he has delivered our
friends from the daily battayll of the soul, against the flesh, the devil
and the world, and from all discommodities of this veil of miserye.

For like as one, that has fared well at a dynner, does thank his host,
though the host let him depart again, yea yt geste reioyseth afterward to
remember it: even so, forasmuch as god for a season, has lent us wife, child
and friends (which is more then he ought us) though he suffer them to
depart, we ought nevertheless to give him most high thanks.

Specially there is required a willing and stout mind: whereof holy S. Paul
has written this very comfortably. I would not brethren, 2 Thessa. 4.
that ye should be ignorant concerning them which ar fallen a sleep, that ye
sorrow not as other do which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also, which sleep by Jesus, will god bring again
with him.

By these words may we perceive, that there be two manner of mourners for the
dead. The heathen and unbelievers mourn without hope of the resurrection:
their opinion is, that seeing their nere friends are dead, there is no more of
them, but that they have utterly lost them for ever. This heathnyshe sorrow,
will not S. Paul have of Christians.

The Christians mourn also, but with a living hope of the joyful
resurreccyon. For like as god the father left not Christ the lord in death,
but raised him up again, and placed him in eternal life: Eue^ so us that
believe shall not he leave in death, but bring us out, into everlasting life.
For this cause does the Apostle speak of the dead, as of those that sleep,
which rest from all trauayll and labor, that they may rise again in better
case.

Like as the flowers with all their virtue, smell and bewty, lies all the
winter in the root, slepyng and resting, till they be awaked with the
pleasant time of may, when they come forth with al their bewty, smell and
virtue: Even so ought not we to think, that our friends which be departed,
are in any combra^ce or sorrow, but there strength and virtue, being drawn in,
lives in god and with god. They lie and rest till the last day, when they
shall awake again, fair, bewtiful and glorious in soul and bodi. who will
not now rejoice at this comfort of Paul, and set aside all unprofitable
sorrow, for this exceadyng joys sake. Faith, that is confessed with the mouth,
must not be destroyed with a contrary deed. Now is our belefe set thus: I
believe forgeuenes of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Therefore remains there nothing behind, for the which ye soul
of the faithful should be tormented in the world to come, or shut out from
everlasting joy. In the law.13.9.2. vbicu^que, it is noted: unseemly heaviness
for the dead, spryngeth out of despair of the resurreccyon for to come: and
rather of fayntnes of mind, then of mercy or godliness.

Ensamples of patience in like case. The.7. Chapter.
IF the wise famous heathen could be numbered, which took the death of their
friends and children in good part, and with a stout stomach, should it not be
compted a shame unto us Christen men, that declare less constancye in that
behalf?

Pericles, the captain of the Athenians (who for his wisdom and virtue, was
called Olympius, one of heaven) wha^ he had lost his two sons Paralius and
Zantippus wtin the space of four days, was no more sorye nor unquieted in the
same sudden chance, but that on yt day following, he came clothed in white
before the whole multitude, and consulted of the present wars: so discretely
and manfully, that every man wo^dred at him and honored him.

Xenopho^ a disciple of Socrates, when he understood that his only son
Grillus had foughte^ valiauntlye, and upon the same was slain of the enemies,
he said unto those that brought him the message: I made my prayer unto the
gods, not yt they should give me an immortal son, or yt he might be a long
liver (for I knew not whether that were profitable for him) but that of my
son they would make a good man, and a lover of his own natyue country:
which prayer (as I perceive) they have granted, and therefore I thank them.
If thou had rather hear ensamples of the romans, the^ consider Paulus
Emilius (who overcame the Macedonians and triumphed gloriously over the^. When
he within seven days, had lost both his sons, he was not therefore broken
minded, but as he went forth to the multitud without both his sons (which
before time always led him, and stayed him, the one on the right hand, the
other on the left) the people of Rome, having pity on the old honorable
man, began to lament and weep. But he, being nothing moved, stood there and
said: I besought ye gods, if our comme^wealth, for ye great prosperity
thereof, have any evil will among those which be in heaven, that I my self,
and not ye whole multitude, might recompense and bear it. And seeing it is so,
I give god great thanks. M. Fabius Maximus also, not without just cause,
belongs unto the number of dear worthy men. When he upon a time had to do
with the office of ye master of works, there came unto him a message: first,
yt his house was fallen down, and had alto bruised his wife a virtuous
honorable woman: secondly slain his mother, who in weighty affairs had often
given him good counsayll, which he followed to ye great commodity of the
commen wealth: Thirdly, it was told him the same day, yt his young son, of who^
he had an expectacyon and hope of al goodness, was dead in Vmbria. The fre^des
and lovers of this Fabius, yt stood about him, when they heard this, wept very
sore. But he alone being unmoved, went forward stoutly in ye business yt
concerned ye co^me^ wealth.

Here because of shortness, I leave out a multitude of ensamples, of sundry
me^, named Galli, Piso^es, Sceuole, Metelli, Scauri, Marcelli, who^ in such
points to follow, it is laudable, and worthy of commendacyon.

I will yet show one ensample of the virtuous woman Cornelia, which was
daughter unto Scipio Aphricanus. When she understood, that her two sons,
Tiberius Gracchus and C. Gracchus (who being Magistrates, had honorably and
well behaved themselves) were slain, and she of her friends was called
miserable, she said: I will never think my self a miserable woman, forasmuch
as I have brought forth such men.

This woman now overcame her own natural feebleness and motherly heart: should
not the^ a man (which word notes the stronger kind and more valea^t
stomach) declare himself even as stout? That an heithnish unbelieving woman
could despise, should that make a faithful Christen man so utterly faint
herted? That she wyllyngly gave again unto nature, wilt not thou suffer god to
have it, wha^ he requires it of thee? She took upon her, with an unbroken mind,
the death of many children: and wilt not thou, that forgoest but one child, be
comforted again? The heathny she woman knew none other, but that after death
there remains nothing behind: yet made not she an unmeasurable howli^ge.
Thou know, that after this time, there remains an everlasting life: so
much the worse then besemeth it a Christen man, to unquiet himself with excess
of heaviness.

The commodity of pacyence. The.8. Chapter.
Unseemly sorrow, for thee sakes that are dead, is unprofitable and hurtful.
Unprofitable: for as soon as ye soul is once departed out of the body, it
comes either into heaven, or into hell, and with no crying shall it be called
back again, or altered. Neither canste thou serve the dead with any thing
more, then, that his remembrance be dear and had in honor with thee. The
heithnishe Poet Sophocles writes: if ye dead might with tears be called
again, the^ should wepi^g be co^pted more worth the^ gold. But O my good old
man, it may not be, yt he which once is buried should come again to ye light.
For if weping might help, mi father had been alive again. Hurtful: hereof has
the heithnish poet Philemon written right wisely: many of them, through there
own fault, increace misfortune to themselves, and make the same more grievous,
then it is of nature. Example: when one has his mother, child or fre^d dead,
if he thought thus: he was a man, and therefore he dyed: this adversity should
be no greater, then nature brings with it. But if he cry: I am undone, I
shall see him no more, he is gone and lost for ever: such one heapeth up yet
more sorrow, to that he has already. But who so consydereth every thing with
discrecion, makes the adversity to be less unto himself, and obteyneth the
more quietness.

It were a very scornful thing, if, when a man has hurt on foot, he would
therefore mar ye other also: or if, when one part of his goods is stolen
away, he would cast the rest into the sea, and say, that he so bewayleth his
adversity. No les folyshly do they that enjoy not such goods as ar
present, and regard not their friends that be alive, but spyl and mar
themselves, because their wives, children or friends be departed.

Though one of the husband man's trees does wyther away, he heweth not down
therefore all the other trees, but regards ye other so much the more, that they
may win the thing again, which the other lost. Even so learn thou in
adversity, with such goods as are left thee, to comfort and refresh thy
self again.

We ought so to love our children and friends, that we may forsake them.
The.9. Chapter.
AL such things ought of us to be considered, taken in hand, and exercysed,
while our wives and friends are yet alive. Namely, if thou have father or
mother, husband or wife, child or fre^des, lay not thine heart, love and
affection to much upon the^, how good, profitable and honest so ever they be:
Love thy friends because god has commanded the to love them and not for
affection to them, and the^ wylt thou be contented with gods good will and
pleasure

Note the saying of an heathen man greatly to our shame.


but remember always, that they are transitorye things, which thou may lose
and forgoo, wha^ time requires. Love him most of all, who^ thou can not
lose, even thy redemer, who (to draw the unto his love and to deliver the from
the love of the world) stretched out his arms, and suffered the most vile
death for thee upon the cross. Seneca says not unwisely: I lend my self
unto the things of the world, but I do not give my self unto the^. He says
more over that nothing is possessed as it ought to be, except one be ready at
all times to lose it.

But if we fasten our hearts (so to say) upon our children and friends: that
is, if we love them to much, and not god above all things, then has our
sorrow no measure, as ought as they are altered or taken away. Therefore if
thou have not prepared thy self to adversity by times, and art once overtaken
with indiscreet heaviness, then let it be unto the a warnyng from hence forth, to
keep thee from the greater love of tra^sitorye things, which has brought
thee into such heart sorrow: to the intent that at other times thou may take
ye death of thy wife and children, in good part and with more constanci of mind.

Of the death of young persons in especial. The.10. Chapter.
AFter the general instruccyon concerning death, must certain obieccio^s be
answered, that hitherto are not resolved. If a young man, or if a young daughter
dye, Lord, what a great mournyng begins there to be: alas he is taken
away in his young days before his time, he should first have been married,
and had a good wife upon earth, and in his last age have dyed in peace, and
rest. Hereof comes it, that we think the death of children to be unnatural,
eue^ as wha^ the flame of fire through water is violently quenched. The death of
the aged we think to be natural, as when the fire quenches of it self,
according to the saying of Cicero.

Item the death of young persons, is compared to unripe apples, that with
violence ar plucked of from the tree: the death of the aged, is thought to be,
as wha^ ripe apples fall down of themselves.

Item, As it is hard to undo two bordes newly glewed together, but old
ioininges ar lightly broken a sunder: so we co^plain that young folks dye with
greater pain then the old: Yea it greueth the fathers and mothers heart, when
(as they count it) ye matter is turned vpse down, that children depart out of
this world before old folks. The answer is taken out of the fore rehearced
ground. The will of God.
If god (who has al in his own power) had promised every one a long life,
then might thou complain, at the shortnyng of the life of thy self or of
thy friends against gods promise. Now has god compared and clothed the soul
with the body, that what day, or what twinkli^g of an eye soever, he
commands it to depart, it keeps ye same time, wherein one finisheth his
course. Therefore has no man cause to complayn of an untimely death, but look
whatsoever one has lived over and beside the first day of his birth, it is an
increace.

Moreover, god knows much better then thou and we al, when it is best for
every one to dye. And so faithful is he for the lord Jesus Chrysts sake, that
he in no wise will be to hasty upon us.

Secondli, The shortne^ of this time*
though we remain a long season, in this fickle transitory life, yet is al our
time but short, specially toward the endless eternity. Therefore it has but
a slender difference, to depart hence in youth or in age.

Thyrdly, Misery.
through death is a young person wythdrawen away fro many troubles, which else
were at his door. For commenly the longer a man lives, the more miserable is
he.

Take ensamples out of old stories. If Themistocles after the most glorious
victory against Xerxes (when all the Greeks aknowledged and commended him for
their redemer and delyuerer) had dyed, should it not have served him to a
perpetual praise and honor?

Then should not he afterward have been rated, as a betrayer of Grekelande:
then neded not he to have been in bondage, not to have fallen down at the
foot of the king of Barbarye (as before a god) whom he before had dryue^ out
of grekelande. How thrall and vile a thing was it to be esteemed before the
world, that The misrocles must needs come before king Xerxes?

What is to be said of Marcus Cicero? who confesses himself that if he had
died sooner, he had escaped exceadi^g great troubles. And forasmuch as he so
said while the matter was yet tolerable, how would he first have thought and
lamented in his age, to see with his eyes the drawn swords over the senators
and Citizens heads, and when the most principal men's goods were parted
among murderers, Catilina was a sedicious man.
yea wha^ whereas before time there was one catilina, the city was now become
full of such sedicious persons?

The ensamples of daily experience declare sufficiently before our eyes,
whereby we may evidently perceive, yt death (though they call it vntimeli)
delivers yet from great misfortune and adversity.

Fourthlye, the innocence and clennes of youth, is of their own nature and
through evil ensamples, defiled and stained with the life and co^uersacion
that follows after. Augustine says: the older the worse.

Therefore when a young man falls on sleep, know thou that God shows great
grace unto him, in that he suffers him not (as many other) to remain long in
this blasphemous world, to the intent he should no more be hyndered and
defiled with it, but has called him from hence to a right good state, He
speaks of Henoch.
that with himself and al ye elect, he might possess the kingdom of heaven.
Witness of the scripture: Sapience. 4.
suddenly was he taken away, to ye inte^te that wickedness should not alterhys
understanding. His soul pleased god, therefore hasted he to take him away
from among the wicked.

Similitudes. He that is upon the sea, and with a good strong wind, is carried
soon to ye haue^ or land, where he would be, is happier then he, that for
lack of wind, is feign to sayll still many years and days upon ye sea, with
much trouble and werines. Eue^ so, ye more happy is he, who^ death takes away
from ye stormy and raging sea of this world. Seeing there is set before us, an
universal native country, and he that is long in going thither, obteyneth
no more, then he that is spedely gone thither before hand, should not one wish,
that he had soon overcome the foul dangerous way, that leads to ye heavenly
harborow?

The sooner one pays his debt, ye better it is. If there were none other
remedi, but you with an hundredth moo must needs be beheaded, and thou art the
first that is put to execucion: art thou not then the first that is
dispatched of the pain?

Finally, if thou consider the mischaunces of other folks thou have the less
cause to complain. One dies in the mothers womb before he be borne. Another
dies in the very birth.

The third in his florishynge youth, when he first delyteth to live, falls
away as a bewtiful rose. Among a thousand is there not one, that comes to the
perfect age.

Of the death of the aged. The.11. Chapter.
VvHa^ old aged folks are gredye of this wretched life, they do even as
those, ye when the wine is all spent, will needs drink out the wine lies also.
Whosoever dwells in an old rotten house that synketh down, needs not long to
seek proppes to under set it, but should rather be glad to get him out of it:
even so, old aged folks, by reason of their decayed body, should rather be
co^te^t to depart from it. And this advantage they have, that their death is
not so fearce and paynful, as ye death of young folks.

This is chefely to be considered, that the lord our god will not have us
careful (which thing belongs unto him alone) but to be faithful and true,
and diligently to labor. Old fathers and mothers, are not able to trauayll
any more: and yet with erneste carfulness, they think to bring all things
to pas. This special fault they have, that they think, they shall ever lack.
Therefore unto them verily it is best, that god take them away from al care,
sorrow and trouble, and place them in quiet rest, with other faithful
Christen folks.

Of strange death. The.12. Chapter.
Whoso is taken with the pestilence, or dies else of sycknes in his bed, ought
gladly to suffer the hand of god, for every bodi has deserved a far worse
death. And a very small rod is this, toward it that god sends over the
ungodly, yea often times over his own dear children, when one is beheaded,
Psalm. 44.1. Roma. 8. c. ^. Cor. 4. b.
another burnt, ye third drowned etc. where they altogether may sing with David:
for thy sake are we killed every day and co^pted as sheep, appointed to be
slain. But if one dye an unwont death (as one is destroyed by the hangma^,
another dies a sudden death, ye third, as happly a man's child, falls down
dead from an high place) this take we for aterrible death, and cannot tell else
what to say of it, as though eueri kind of death in it self were not terrible
unto the nature of man. Though one dies upon ye whele for murder, there is
some time more hope of him, that he has found grace at gods hand, then of
many one yt dies at home in his bed. Ensa^ples also are to be considered: for
a great sort of gods elect died not a right death, as we use to term it. Abel
was murthured of his own natural brother. The prophet being sent to
Hieroboam, was destroyed of a Lion. Esaye was sawne a sonder through the
mids. Hieremy (like as Steven also) was stoned to death. James, being thrown
down from the pulpet, was slain of a fuller. Peter at rome was fastened to a
cross. Upon Paul was execucion done with the sword: such like ensamples have
thou. Heb. 11.


Item, the most excellent heithe^ men came miserably out of this world. The
good Socrates was poisoned: Euripides was all to torn of dogs: Sophocles was
choked with a little stone of a grape bury: very sorrowful combraunce did fret
out the heart of Homerus. Innumerable ensamples declare, that there happens
no new thing unto us, what death soever we or our friends dye.

Specially let us observe this rule: death is terrible to the^ that have no
god: but of us which are gods children, ought not the horible image of death to
be feared but to be welcome unto us. For god himself comfort us with these
words following: I live, John. 14.
and ye also shall live. Of this ar we assured in Christ Jesus, who upon the
cross, dyed ye most horrible death for our sakes, to who^ with the father and
the holy ghost be all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Only unto God give the praise.

An exhortacion written by the Lady Jane, the night before she suffered, in the
end of the new testamente in Greek, which she sent to her sister Lady
Katherine.
I Have here sent you, good sister Katherin, a book: which although it be not
outwardly trymmed with gold, yet inwardlye it is more worth then precious
stones. It is the book, dear sister, of ye law of the lord: it is his
testament and last will, which he bequethed unto us wretches, which shall
lead you to the path of eternal joy. And if you with a good mind read it, and
with an earnest desire follow it, it shall bring you to an immortal and
everlasting life. It will teach you to live, and learn you to dye: it shall
win you more, then you should have gained by the possessions of your woeful
fathers lands. For as if god had prospered him, you should have inherited
his lands, so if you apply diligently this book, sekyng to direct your life
after it: you shall be an inheritour of such riches, as neither ye covetous shall
wythdrawe from you, neither the thief shall steal, nether yet the mothes
corrupt.

Desyer with David, good sister, to understand the law of the Lord your God.
Live still to dye, that you by death may purchase eternal life: or after your
death enioie the life purchaced you by Christ's death. And trust not, that the
tenderness of your age shall lengthen your life. For as soon, if god call, goes
the young, as the old: and labor always to learn to dye, deny the world,
defye the devil and despise the flesh, and delight your self only in the
Lord. Be penitent for your sins, and yet despair not. Be strong in faith,
and yet presume not. And desyer with S. Paul, to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, with whom even in death there is life. Be like the good servant, and
even at midnight be waking: lest wha^ death comes and steals upon you like
a thief in the night, you be with the evil servant found slepinge, and least
for lack of oil ye be found like to the fine folysh women, and like him that
had not on ye weddyng garment, and then be cast out from the marriage. Rejoice
in Christ as I trust ye do. And seeing ye have the name of a Chrystian, as
nere as ye can follow the steps of your master Christ, and take up your
cross, lay your sins on his back, and always embrace him. And as touching
my death, rejoice as I do (good sister) yt I shall be delivered of this
corrupcyon, and put on vncorrupcyon. For I am assured, that I shall for losyng
of a mortal life, win an immortal life. The which I pray god grant you,
send you of his grace to live in his fear, and to dye in the true Chrystyan
faith: From the which, in gods name I exhort you, that ye never swerve,
neither for hope of life, nor fear of death. For if ye will deny his truth to
lengthen your life, god will deny you, and yet shorten your days. And if ye
will cleave to him, he will prolonge your days to your comfort and his (...)
ye which glory god bring me now, and y^ hereafter, when it shall please God to
call you. Fare well, good sister, and put your only trust in god, who only
must help you. Your loving sister, Jane Dudley.


