TWO SERMONS OF ASSISE: The one entitled; A prohibition of Revenge: The other,
A Sword of Maintenance.

Preached at two several times, before the Right worshipful Judges of Assise,
and Gentlemen assembled in Hertford, for the execution of justice: and now
published.

By W. Westerman, Minister of the word, in Sandridge.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Gregory Seaton, and are to be sold at his shop
under Aldersgate, 1600.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG. BR ^^ET HIB. ^^^ FD.

J. Pin^ sculp
bookplate

To the Right worshipful and worthy Gentlemen, master Rafe Coningsbye, and
master Pope Blunt, Esquiers, and in Commission of the Peace for the County of
Hertf. and liberty of S. Albans, W. W. wishes all increase of heavenly
wisdom, to the glory of God, the profit of their Country, and the salvation
of their own souls.
AT your requests, in your several Sheriualties (Right worshipful) I preached
these two sermons: where I trust the Lord gave a blessing, to the fruit of my
barren and unworthy lips. But because the most part of Auditors hear
sermons, as Trauailers, by the law, might use Grapes: that is: eat some Deuteronomy.
23. 25
for the present time, but carry none away with them: and for that our Lord and
Savior teaches such frugalitie in feasts of small preparation, that the
fragments should be gathered ^ohn. 6. 12.
up, and nothing lost: I have thought it not amiss, to press out the liquour
of these my grapes, and present the reuersion of them, as it were after the
feast, in this basket of leaves: for a more general use, and longer
continuance. If the remaynes seem greater then the former provision, impute
it to Gods blessing, that suffers no decrements, nor want at his feasts: and
to the short allowance of time, wherewith my words (but not my sense) were
assysed, and stinted at the first delivery. In such earnest business, when
there is no surplus of time to be borrowed, we hold it lawful to temporize:
not quenching the spirit, but co^ueying the streams of our words within narrow
banks: after which sort, they may be more fruitful (the Lord assisting) then
if they ouerflowed, all without bounds or measure. But howsoever then, these
exercises were abridged by the hour, yet now in the writing, I have given them
more free vent, and liberty, where every man may be the caruer of his own
time, in hearing and reading. And in this manner now published, I send them
abroad, under your names and tytles (Right worshipful) that they may be, not
only a pledge of my good will to you both, united in one Epistle, as ye are
in love; and in love like David 1. Sa^. 20. 17. 2. Sam. ^. 2^
and Jonathan: but also give testimony of that commendable order in your grave
assemblies, where I perceived both Judges and Gentlemen, beginning their
affairs, with the first fruits of their knees, ears, hearts, and tongues
consecrated to God, and directing the rest of their proceedings accordingly, in
wisdom, and justice. In this loose and profane age, wherein too many make an
Idol of their private fancy, and bless themselves in their mother wit (the
most base Idolatry of all others, ^ib* de vera elig. ca. 38.
says Austen) It is a comfort yet, that the Cedars, and men of greatest note,
will beautify Gods service with their worthy examples, as they strengthen
judgment with their Authority. The deligent execution of judgment in civil
causes, is without doubt an acceptable service to God. For which purpose, both
Judges, and Rulers are commanded to be wise, and learned, that in the same they
may serve the Lord* yet not only as civil Politicians, but as holy Christians
with fear and trembling. And therefore they Psalm. 2.
must kiss the son, least he be angry, and bend the knees of their
wisdom, power, and authority, to the name of him first, that is president
over the congregation of the gods on earth. The heathens never durst attempt
any matter of great importance, without invocation on their gods, and some
solemn inauguration, or sacrifice, performed by their priests, and wizards; to
get a forehand blessing to their actions. Even amongst them it seemed absurd,
and arrogant, to commence grave enterpryses, without calling a greater power to
their assistaunce: although some did attribute so much to their own wisdom,
prowess, and fortune, that they thought prayers were for simple wretches, and
fools, as Ajax (like an Atheist) vaunted: Aliorum est vincere Mela^cthon ^rat.
de precat.
D^o iuuante, etc. Other cowardly fellows may obtain victory by the help
of God, but such as he could do well enough without him. Yet such were
accounted most miserable, even of those that had only a general glimse of an
unknown God: and therefore Homer at all hard assaies, shows how great, and
small, did enterprise nothing without some supplication to the gods. As for the
ancient Israelites, they had their Levites Numb. 10.
with trumpets to go before them; Priests and Prophets assistant in all 1.
Sam. 13. 13
difficult occasions. When Saul left Samuel, he proved himself a fool, though
he offered a self-will sacrifice to the Lord. And what became of the pen of
the Scribes, or the wisdom of the wise, when they leaned to their own
fancies? The pen (says Jeremy became vain, Ierem. 8. 9.
the wise me^ are ashamed, afraid, and taken, for lo: they have rejected the
word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in the^? But the practice in those your
assemblies, declare your reverence to holy exercises, which to your
co^mendations and gods glory are continued: the Charter of heaven being first
unfolded, and the Commission from the next supreme Governor, afterward being
read, that both your authority from heaven, and earth, may give the Judges
confidence in their proceedings, and good success in their determinations. In
that place at two several times I was a witness of the general consent of many
worthy gentlemen, for the furthera^ce of peace, justice, and good order: but I
have had daily experience in your selves, and some others about us, with what
singular care and dexterity, you have managed the weighty affairs, both of
your Prince and country, whenever you have been employed, by commission from
the one, or petition from the other. Neither have your public employments
withdrawn you from the exercise of private virtues: your delight in holy
exercises is manifest, by your diligent repair unto them, your affability,
and kindness appears in the courteous carriage of your selves toward all
men that deserve not the contrary. Which personal qualities are also graced
with a diligent reformation of your followers: a matter of greater In
Pa^^gy^ic. dicto Traiano.
magnificence (says Pliny) then for a man to reform himself. Whence it was
that the Queen of Saba was not only in admiration of Salomons wisdom, ^.
King. 10. 5.
and answers; but also of the sitting of his servants, and the order and
apparel of his attendants. To confirm and encourage you in this course of
virtue, ye have had both domestical, and neighbor examples, whereof some have
ended their race, others remain still, not forgetful of their Country by
private occasions, or greater preferments. Amongst whom I may register these
two worthy and ancient standards, sir Henry Cock, and sir Philip Butler,
knights of especial mark, and account, such as since my remembrance have
flourished in the Courts of the Lords house, and yielded much excellent service
to their Prince, succor to their country, and shadow to the Preachers, and
ministers of the truth. Neither is the last of these qualities to be the least
regarded, especially amongst us, where the ministers are provided of
maintenance, but as younger brethren, having livings for the most part like the
Amazonites, giving suck but of one breast, the other being diseased with a
Wolf, or quite cut off with an Impropriation. For who sees not how every
Bramble is ready to scratch them that creep low? every cowarde hartned to
strike him that may not strike again? I speak not this for impatiencie of
want, or injuries, or to plead an irregularitie to privilege any corruption in
us: for we have learned both to be abased, and to abound, to turn our cheeks
to the smiter: and give for a Philip. 4. 10. Math. 5.
need the coat of a poor vicaridge, to him that by law can take away the
cloak of of our parsonage. But so long as the Lord maintains the crown upon
the head of his anointed handmaid, and continues our gracious Prince nurse
royal of the Gospel, and mother of peace: we are to expect safely under such
as you (Right worshipful) being her hands, and wings of defense, as she is the
Angel of God upon the earth for the preservation of his prophets and people.
And I must confess, that as the Lord has planted this barren jurisdiction
with many fruitful vines: so have they received from time to time much comfort
and assistance in their ministry, by you the religious gentlemen of dignity,
and countenance, wherein you give testimony thai you fear the Lord, whose
lowly ambassadors you kindly entertain. And his true fear is the only grain,
that sets a perfect glass, and a lively tincture upon all other wordly
respects and colors: which shall flourish, when Nimrods Babel, Absolons
pillar, and all gorgeous buildings, with the names of their founders shall lie
in the dust. Neither amongst these comforts received, toward the encouragement
of the Ministers here abouts, may I forget the tender regard of that reverend
father, placed over us, now L. B. of Land. whose entrance was in much fatherly
kindness toward us: not in any hard exactions, colored with benevolence, but
rather in forbearance of ancient duties; since when he has declared his
continual care, by diverse cautions given for our gentle and courteous usage:
beside the prevention of some late expenses, and payments, that elsewhere, the
meanest livings tasted deeply of* All which temporal encouragements, being
supplies of some co^tentation to a mean estate, we thankefully a^cept, as at
the hands of God, thereby acknowledging our selves deeply bound to distill
our spirits, and studies into such wine of comfort, as may again cheer both
God and men. In the depth of which desire, I the most untimely slip in the
vineyard, have tendered these two Sermons, as an after gleaning of grapes, unto
the press of learning: the licor whereof if it has any waterish, or earthly
went, impute it to the caske: if it have any celestial rellishe, or sweet
savor, yield the praise and glory to God, who is able to turn our weak
water, into wine of strong consolation; whereof I wish the perpetual fruition,
to your selves as to mine own soul. And further desiring the Lord of his
abundance, to multiply his graces spiritual and temporal, upon you and your
posterity for ever: I humbly take my leave.

Yours in the Lord, William Westerman.

Avenge not your selves (dearly beloved) Text Romans 12. 19.
but give place unto wrath: for it is written: vengeance is mine, and I will
repaye, says the Lord.
THe most wise and holy Lord and Lawgiver of Israel (Right Worshipful and
right Christian Audience) ordained that the sons of Aaron with their silver
Trumpets, should sound out, as well the sommons unto the civil assemblies
Numb. 10. 2. 3.
of peace, and religious exercises: as the Alarm to battle, and warlike
enterprises. The same Lord being our God still, requires the substance of
those ceremonious shadows in our solemnities. For ye are his people; we are
the Levites: his two Testaments are the two silver Trumpets* the distinction of
sounds is pricked down before us in his book of truth, whose direct we are
to sing after, sou^ding out sometime doctrine of instruction, sometime of
reproof, sometime of comfort, setting it sometimes to the heads and rulers,
sometimes to the meaner sort, sometimes to peace, sometimes to war, as the
Lord shows occasion, and the spirit gives utterance. Now because I am at
this present, though of my self an earthen pitcher, yet called to utter some
certain voice out of these silver trumpets, that all sorts of Auditors here
assembled may reverently, and in the fear of God, prepare themselves to be
Actors in this intended service: I have made choice of this Text to be the keye
whereunto I may set my tune: wherein the holy Ghost by saint Paul sounds a
retreat unto all quarrellers, and plaintiffes, intending private revenge, or
hammering mischief in their hearts. For as in the former part of this Chapter,
he used all sweet inducements unto love, and peace, and all good arguments to
dissuade from haughtiness of mind, ambition, selfe-conceipt, being the only
sparks that fire men's affections, and hinder that peace which we should keep
with all men, if it be possible, and lie in us: so now as though he perceived
men's hearts burning, their desires swelling, their mouths raging, their
hands threatening, their daggers drawn, and the peace in danger to be broken,
he steppeth forth in the midst, as a blessed peacemaker, and draws out
the sword of the spirit to take up all quarrels, and prevent all mischiefs,
after this manner: Avenge not your selves (dearly beloved) but give place to
wrath: for it is written etc.

This seems to be a Writ from above: and it is to be served by us the
Messengers of the Lord, upon you his people, that by means of your Christian
profession do owe especial obedience to the high court of heaven. If we
break open this writ, we shall perceive the contents thereof to be first A
Prohibition 1. Prohibition
of Revenge: Avenge not your selves (dearly beloved) but give place to wrath:
secondly a Confirmacio^ by the Authority of scripture. For 2. Confirmati^
it is written: vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

Revenge is the punishment of injuries, and The Prohibition.
the redress of wrongs; the question is to whom this punishment and vengeance
belongs: it is mine says the Lord, I will repay, by my self or my
substitutes; therefore Avenge not yourselues, intrude not into my throne,
forestall not my right; but rather give place to mine ordinance, let man's anger
yield to Gods wrath; man's impotencie to gods power: man's partiality to Gods
Justice; man's secret conspiracy to the public Judgment established by God
himself.

The Revenge therefore that is by this Prohibition removed, is private: such as
receiving injuries offered without right, repayeth them again without Law. The
revenge, and redress of wrongs warranted unto us, is the wrath and vengeance
of the Lord: either mediatly to be executed by his Ministers ordained to take
vengeance of evil doers: or else immediately by the Lord himself, where the
sword of the Magistrate is too short, or the hand too slack, to smite the
malefactor.

The chiefest doubt remains in this word Wrath, to the which we are to give
place: for some have interpreted it of man's Wrath, not Gods: some of our own
wrath wherein we Imbros. de ^^^. lib. 1. C. 12
are agents and feel our anger boiling, and beginning to kindle in the bosom:
these counsel us to resist anger at the first, or at the least, to retire our
selves and give back from the extremity, and continuance of it: to let
Aretius.
slip all occasions of quarrel, and so to forget and forgive, that we
eschew all prouocations, all motions or speeches, that may renew the memory of
wrongs, or nourish the conceit of injuries and indignities: some again
expound it of man's wrath as it is in another, and wherein he is the Patient: as
though this were a Caveat to stay us from laying sticks upon another man's fire:
that we blow not the coals, of another man's choler: that we answer not a
fool according to his foolishness, nor an hasty man according to his
hastiness: Lactant. lib. 6. Instit. Cap. 18.
by that means adding oil to his flame, or oyning our impatiencie with his
injustice.

But we follow those interpreters which with best warrant do understand this
wrath of Gods wrath, and the revenge of iniquity, Alhanas. irae diuinae.
August in Ps^ 78. vindictai^ quitatis. Thom. Iudicio diuino.
or his divine Judgment, and not of the anger either of the wrong dooer, or
sufferer? For notwithstanding the sense of the former be godly and somewhat to
our purpose: yet this phrase of giving place, is not used in that signification
affirmatively, but rather negatiuely: as ( Saint Paul says to the Ephesians)
Give no place to the devil: and so in that sense would he have said here,
give no place to wrath, if he had understood it of the unlawful and wicked
wrath of man, and not of the most lawful and holy wrath of God. But I need
not make many words, let the Holy Ghost interpret it self, which by the
Confirmation brought from the Authority of Moses, and the mouth of the Lord
himself, does manifestly declare, that such wrath is here to be yielded unto,
as the Lord claims to himself by the terms of vengeance and recompense:
the later whereof, Saint Paul for the Deuteronomy. 31. 35,
more certainty, and clearer application expounds in the person of God, and
action of his vengeance, I will repay.

Now we have notice of the Authority wherewith this writ is confirmed, let us
search the contents and meaning of the Prohibition, being directed from so great
a Lord, under peril of our souls if we obey not his command.

In this behold first the title wherewith S. Paul The title. The re^aint.
Reasons ^orcingeery one of ^em.
greeteth us: which is most kind and loving; Dearly beloved: secondly the
restraint, Avenge not your selves: thirdly a direction; give place to wrath.
Fourthly: note how every wotd of the prohibition is backed and seco^ded with
some reason implied, to dissuade from private revenge, and to draw to a patient
abiding of the Lords leisure, and an expectation of his judgments to be
executed.

Let us first examine this amiable title, which The title.
serves as a sweet ingredience to qualify a bitter medicine: Dearly beloved
says he, as though he would protest before hand, that although he resisted
their affections, and crossed their stubborn wills, by withholding from
revenge, yet he did it for love to their souls, and cure to the soars of
their minds. If we consider the estate of Gods beloved people in this life, we
shall find that they have need of many admonitions and precepts of patience,
and forbearance, first because of their infirmities, secondly because of the
continual reproaches and wrongs which shall be offered unto them. Gods best
beloved are not so perfect and exact, but they are subject to passions, and
often resolutions 1, Sam. 25. 2^.
of Revenge against their enemies: as, David was marching to the destruction of
Naball, for his churlish answer, till Abigail meereth him, and with gracious
words asswageth his displeasure. And who sees not; but the life of the best
Christians is a mark for all wicked men, and the devil himself to be
continually darting at, and therefore even to them, being Gods beloved is it
necessary to give this Item: Dearly beloved avenge not your selves. Beloved
they were to whom Paul uttered this, as those are that he are this first
beloved of the Lord: secondly for the Lords sake beloved of the ministers of
God. Will you then see what reasons may be drawn from this title, to keep
all Christians Reasons from the title against revenge.
from revenge? Say you are disquieted, reproched, oppressed: Let this be your
comfort, you are beloved of God, whosoever hates you: you are his dearlings,
he tendreth your case, he numbreth your hairs, he puts your tears in his
bottell.

We are content to endure great dangers, for those that we know love us: to
put up many injuries at the entreaty of our friends: and who is a lover like
the Lord, or a friend like him, which entreats us, and charge us, not to
Avenge our selves, not to resist evil, but to commit our causes, and souls in
well doing to 1. Pet. 4. 19.
the Lord our faithful Creator, and Revenger.

Again: those whom we love we imitate, and express in manners and
behavior: As God is our Father in Creation and Adoption: so must we prove our
selves to be his children in Imitation: but in nothing may we better declare
who is our father, then as we were beloved when we were enemies: so to love
again, and pray for our enemies when they have wronged us. Did our Savior
Christ revenge when he was hurt? No: says the Apostle, being reviled he
reviled not again, Pet. 2. 23.
being iniuried he sought no revenge, when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed it to him that judges righteously. Thus doing he left an
example, that we should follow his footesteppes.

The devil when he gets audience, tells a man how much he is hated, and
iniuried: but the spirit of God being pure is also peaceable and tells him
how much he is Iam. 3. 17.
beloved, endeavoring to drown all conceit of men's spite and malice, in the
depth of Gods love set as a seal to his conscience. And from this ground of
Gods favor and love, he rayseth an argument of charity and kindness to
other: wherefore Coloss. 3. says Saint Coloss. 3. 12.
Paul; As the elect of God, holy and beloved put on the bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another: as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. For
it is an Article of Covenant beetweene God and our selves, rehearsed in our
prayers, and parle with the Lord, that as we are forgiven our offe^ses, so
should we forgive.

If we break covenant, and forgive not others: how can we demand
performance at his hands, and not rather look for such measure as we mete to
others? When our Master remitteth ten thousand talents, if we be straight
laced, and will not forgive a trifle Math. 18.
of some hundred pence, it is a token that our final quietus est, is not
signed by the Lord, but that he will call us back to an after reconing, to
pay the utmost farthing, or indeed lie by it for ever.

Dearly beloved, says Paul, as of God, so beloved for his sake of my self: I
love you and yet may not flatter you. What will many of our painted Christians
say to this? Surely, he is not my friend, he loves me not, that would advise
me to suffer this disgrace, or put up this injury: It is against my honor,
my worship, say the greatest, against my profit and credit, say the meaner
sort: nay it is against my conscience, (say many) to endure these wrongs: when
alas it is lust and concupiscence, Iam* 4. 1
not conscience that fights in their members, and breeds this disquiet.

Are we then beloved of the Lord, and of those that are his dear children,
though we be maligned and hated, and oppressed of others? O let us keep this
haven of refuge, and succor open, that when the world is a sea of troubles
raging against us, we may shoot our selves into the same: and give back into
the comfortable arms of his love. Let us rather loose our longing desire of
revenge, then the favor of that Lord, by whom we are so dearly beloved.

Thus does the Apostle sweeten his Prou. 27. 6.
sharp message, like a lover, giving a faithful wound for health, and not for
hurt: in a tender regard to preserve his clients (like a good counsaylour) in
the everlasting possession of their souls by patience. As Paul, so I would all
Ambassadors of heavenly peace would keep this note of love, that one string
sou^ding right, might serve to set all the other in tune. And thus much for
this sweet title: Dearly beloved: which I desire of the Lord may make such
melody in your hearts, at this present time, that all desire of revenge, and
bitter passions of the mind assuaged, you may be transformed into such sincere
keepers, counsaylours, and seekers of peace, that this title may remain for
ever verified in your souls, Dearly beloved*

Now follows the restraint, Avenge not your ^. The restraint.
selves. Revenge is a rash proceeding to the punishment of injuries received,
without law, without order, without authority. In every private Of revenge by
heart, tongue, and hand.
man there be three instruments ready to further this revenge, the heart, the
tongue, the hand.

First is the heart prohibited from all purpose, and devise, or desire of
vengeance. 1. The heart.
For in the heart is the bottom and coare of this disease. There lurkes a
root of bitterness, which if it be not stocked up, will spring up, and defile
both mouth, and manners. Concupiscence is the mother of many wicked impes,
fathered by the devil, and conceived in the womb of the heart, which must be
strangled in the birth: or else like the vipers brood, they destroy the womb,
and mischief many others. From the heart come Math. 15. 19.
evil thoughts, murders, false testimonies, slanders, said he that knew the
heart. But me thinks I hear some whisper; that thought is free: It is free
indeed, but how? free from the detection or punishment of man: but the Lord
which made the frame of the heart and searches the thoughts, is a Judge
standing before the door thereof, to condemn those that do but Iam. 5. 9.
grudge against their brethren, says saint James. Hell and destruction are
before the Lord: how Prou. 15. 11.
much more the hearts of the sons of men.

The sin of the devil was but an exaltation of the heart. A wicked heart is
an abomination to the Lord: although it want means, either of strength to
give correspondencie to the will, or audacitie to utter the poison and spite
in terms: for intention is action, and hating is 1. John. 3. 15.
killing, before almighty God, the Judge of all secrets*

The situation of Jericho was pleasant, but the water was naught, and the
ground venomous and barren, till Elisha the Prophet, by an ^ King. 2. 19.
infusion of Salt cast into the spring of the waters, cured those infectious
qualities: and so beloved, is the estate of a professed Christian, pleasant to
behold with many seeming commodities, which (if the waters of the heart be
bitter and infectious with the inueterate leaven of malice) are all dashed, and
made matters of danger and death, rather then means of comfort and life.

The word of God is the salt which must be cast into the Fountain head of the
heart, which being healed redresseth all dangers and inconveniences, and this
is that word, and that salt wherewith we desire to season and suck out all
corrupt humors from the bottom of your hearts.

Avenge not your selves dearly beloved Diverse be the reasons that back this
prohibition, Reasons against a Revenging heart.
and may make it of force to withdraw us from this private and privy rancour
of the mind, though commonly the affections incensed have no ears. But see,
(beloved) before the Cocatrice eggs be hatched, and they break Isai. 59. 5.
out into a serpent, what travail, and pain, there is in the conception, and
breeding of mischief, and nourishing of a revenging thought. What disease can
so disfigure the body and consume it? what loss can so take away the Revenge
o^ heart co^sumes body, goods, and soul.
benefit of Riches or honor? or what canker can so infect and poison the
soul, as an envious thirst of vengeance, and a desire to cry quittance with
our enemies? He that carries 1. The body.
the fire of malice in his bosom, first burns himself, pyneth and scorcheth
his brains, dries the marrow of his boanes, drinks up his own blood,
bewrays his worme-eaten conscience with the malicious sparkles of an evil
eye. For as Wisdom makes the face to shine, Prou. 15. 13. Prou. 14. 30.
and a joyful heart makes a cheerful countenance, as a sound mind is the life
of the flesh and restoratiue to the boanes: so does malice put the face Genes.
4. 5.
out of favor, makes Caine walk with hanging looks, consumes the eyes in
the holes, hasteneth Zechar. 14.
death to the body, and filles the boanes with corruption.

The spirit of a man (says Solomon) sustayneth Prou. 18. 14.
his infirmity: but a wounded spirit, who can bear^ it? Anger rests in the
bosom of fools, and yet Eccles. 7. 11*
like a restless beast it teareth the soul of him that keeps it. It
swells like poison, and makes Job. 18* 4.
grin, and gnash the teeth like a dog, for so it is said of Stephens enemies,
Their hearts burst for spite, and they gnashed at him with Acts 7. 54.
their teeth, they show the tricks of hell, and the property of the devil in
this life, for Diaboli propria est inuidia, says Basil: Envy of all other
Basil* de Inui*
sins is the devils peculiar brand, wherewith he is marked. Do but take a
view of the envious creature, mark his joy and laughter, it is but to see
others weep and wring: by this, hastening vengeance upon himself, from the
Lord which causes malicious men to be caught in their own snares. Therefore
(says Solomon) be not glad, when thine enemy falls, Prou. 24.
let not thine heart rejoice when he stumbleth, least the Lord see it, and he
be displeased, and turn his wrath from him to thee. So great an enemy is the
envious man to himself, that he deriues the plagues of others upon his own
body and soul. Whereof Job desires to clear himself, Job. 31. 29.
protesting that he rejoiced not at the destruction of him that hated him, nor
was moved to joy, when evil came upon him. As for the sorrow and deadly
vexation of the mind, which this desire of revenge, and hatred effects, 2.
The use of goods and honor abridged by revenge of heart. Esth^r. 5. 11.
as it tormenteth the body, so it depriueth the rich of his ease, and the most
honorable of his contentment: his own abundance cannot pleasure him, nor his
purple garments heal him. When Haman has reconed up all the glory of his
riches, the multitude of his children, all his promotions, wherewith the king
had honored him, the favor and banquet, wherewith the Queen had graced him,
what is all this to cheer him up that has a clog in his heart, which drives
him to confess, that all this is nothing, so long as he sees Mordechat the
Jew sitting at the Kings gate: so that Haman cannot go joyfully to the
banquet, except he be the hangman of his enemy, for default of a little
courtesy toward him. But if this venime were but only dangerous to the body,
or only such as wrought a coffeehouse toward 3. Revenge i^ heart an enemy
to the soul.
riches, honor, and things external, it might seem tolerable: but it
poisoneth also the soul, infecteth religion, intercepteth prayers, depriueth
us of the sight and presence of the Lord. 1. Pet, 2. 11.


All fleshly lusts (says Peter) first fight against the soul of our selves,
and that before they harm the body of others; for he that bears fire in his
bosom first burns himself, before he endaunger his neighbors. Admit thou
know the truth, can teach others, frequent sermons, profess well, speak
favorably, and Godly, yet if thou concealest a spightfull heart under this
mask of religion, thou art but as a potsheard ouerlaide with silver Prou. 26.
23.
dross, a gilded scpulchre, and all thy profession is but a lie, not able to
affourd any comfort of conscience to thine own soul: and therefore from such
hipocrites S. James pulls of the vizard, and shows them their own estate.

If you have bitter envying and strife in your Iam. 3. 14.
hearts rejoice not, neither be liars against the truth. How can that mind
which is stuffed with superfluity of malice, hear with profit that word,
which is sincere milk to be received with meekness as of newborn babes?

Again, what prayers can issue from a bitter fountain? What desire or delyght
can the malicious heart have to present it self before the Majesty of him
that esteems of hatred as manslaughter? How dare thou offer those sighs
and groans to the Lord that break from a forge of revenge? With what
confidence can thou lift up those hands to God for mercy, that are ready to
be lifted up against thy brother in cruelty? seeing the Lord will have pure
hands lifted up without wrath or doubting? Timoth. 2. 8. Math. 5.


Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: says our savior: their
soul is a glass of Gods cheerful face: but he that hates his 1. John. 2.
11.
brother is in darkness. A turbulent spirit, and a spightfull heart is like a
troubled water, where there appears no reflection of any comfortable
countenance, but dregs, terror, darkness, the shadow of death and cruelty,
being the Image of the devil himself. For there is no such harbor for him to
lurk and fortify himself in, as that heart which is swept with anger, Luke.
11. 21. 25.
and garnished with wrath: upon whose rage the sun has often set: therefore
says S. Paul to the Ephesians: Let not the sun go down upon Ephse. 4. ^6.
your wrath, give no place to the dwell: Who if he get in league with the
corrupted will, he imployeth not only the heart, but the tongue, not only the
tongue, but the eyes also in witchcraft, Basil.
and vilanie, being his work commonly upon a profound malice, and an
inueterate desire of revenge. Seeing then the very thoughts of revenge, are
judged and condemned of the Lord, seeing they are the root of all mischiefs,
the tormenters of the body, the disfigurers of the face, the depriuers of rest
in the midst of riches and honor; the slaughterers of the soul; the
empeachment of religion; prejudicial to the hearing, and hinderers of prayers,
the eclipse of the eye of our soul, that it cannot see God, nor be seen in
peace of him; and the very harbengers of the devil, let us that have thought
wickedly, (as who can say his heart is clean?) Prou. 20. 9.
lay our hands upon our hearts, and yield our selves to the virtue of this
prohibition, Avenge not your selves.

As upon the heart, so the holy ghost commands us to lay our hands upon the
mouth, to stay the tongue, and surcease all practice of 2. The tong^ stayed
from revenge
revenge, by any outward means: that if we cannot rule our affections for
love of him that seeks to bridle them, yet we may tame our our tongue, and
repress our actions for fear of the magistrate, that is the minister of God
to take Romans 13.
vengeance of all cursed speakers, and wicked dooers. Two sorts of people are
concluded, and shut up, within this restraint. One sort are like Lions, either
roaring in high thundering words, or ramping in cruel manner upon their pray. The
other, like Foxes, close, and subtle, but greedy notwithstanding. One
trusts to his force: the other to his fraud: one takes his lust and
liberty, scorning Gods ordinance, as a refuge for cowardes, and not a fit
redress for them that have nimble tongues of their own, and hands swift to
shed blood. The other gives back for advantage, and will crouch and bow,
till he see his occasion, and then he is merciless.

First, we are by virtue of this warrant to charm those great barkers, which
using that womanish kind of revenge, do bend their tongues like bows, and
shoot their words like arrows. If to call our brother Racha, as much to say,
as paltrie fellow, deserves the punishment Matthew. 5.
of a council, if the nicke-name of fool in unadvised anger be worthy of
hell fire; then what shall be given unto thee thou false tongue, which Psalm.
52. 4.
love and use to speak all words, that may destroy? which cuttest like a
rasor, not only those that are present, but woundest, like a venomous Psalm.
120. Barnard. de tripli^i custod.
arrow, the absent and unseen? Leuiter volat grauiter vulnerat, says Bernard,
of the speech of a wicked tongue: it flies lightly, but pearceth deeply: it
enters easily, but goes out hardly: and that more is, Vnoictu multos
interficit, with one blow it spoils a multitude How great is the wound, that
so small a weapon makes? Saint James terms it to be James 3.
a world of mischief, a fire that enflameth the whole course of Nature, an
unruly evil, full of deadly poison, a beast that no man can tame. And yet the
Lords bel^ued are not to suffer this member run riot in themselves: for if
James 1. 26.
any man seem religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceyueth his own
heart, this man's Religion is vain. The beloned of the Lord that strive to be
perfect, and to bridle the whole body, must not let the tongue loose. Blessing
and cursing, bitter water and sweet, must not issue out of the fountain of a
sanctified mouth. Nay, if a man respect but the benefits of a temporal
estate, he is to set a watch before his mouth. For if any man long after
life, and 1. Pet. 3. 10. Psalm. 34.
to see good days, he must refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips from
guile, says the holy Ghost.

In the rank of those, that practice this kind of Revenge, there are some that
would seem to surcease from their bitter and unlawful course, but it is when
they have rather tired then tamed their tongues, and spurged out their deadly
poison to the full, then they cry out, in the bitterness of their heart, upon
God and the Magistrate for further vengeance against him, whom they have most
cruelly torn and depraved already.

But they ask and receive not, for the spirit of ^m. 3.
them lusts after envy: and their curse being causeless, flies like a
byrd, and settleth no where, ^rou. 26. ^.
unless it return to their own bosom. S. Jerome, likeneth it unto an arrow
shot against a stone, which sticks not in the mark, but oftentimes, ^eronym:
de ^ta cleric.
Resiliens percutit dirigentem: flying backward, it strikes the Archer. As he
loved cursing (says David) so shall it come unto him, it shall ^sal. 109. 17.
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bosom, it shall be as
a garment to cover him, and a gyrdell to his loins.

Are all words of rebuke, and curses the fruits of hatred, and actions of
private revenge, and therefore unlawful? will some say: To which I answer,
that there be reproves of the righteous* proceeding from love, and curses of
the ungodly, issuing from zeal: and warranted by the spirit of God, and
therefore are consequent sentences of his appointed wrath and vengeance upon
sinners. Let the righteous reprove me says Psalm. 141. 5.
David, for that shall be as precious balm upon my head. O fools and slow of
heart, said our Savior Luke 24. 25.
to his disciples: and, go behind me Satan, to Math. 16. 23.
Peter, that a little before made a blessed confession of the truth. O foolish
Galathians, who has Galat. 3. 1.
bewitched you? writes Paul to those for whom he trauayled twyce, that Christ
might be formed in Gal. 4. 19.
the^. In these reprehensions, and taunting words was no malice but a zeal to
gods truth, hatred to ignorance, and love to the souls of the parties rebuked,
and thence brake out these sharp and charitable terms of reproof. Habet vera
Amicitia Barnard. 24^ Epis.
obiurgationem interdum, adulationem nunqua^. True friendship chideth
sometimes, flattereth never. But the case seems harder in flat curses, and
prayers of execration, and vengeance, which notwithstanding by warrant from
the spirit of God, have proceeded lawfully from the mouths of holy men, in
especial commission for the same. What woes, and judgments Math. 11.
does the Lord thunder out against Chorazim, and Bethsaida, against Pharisees,
Scribes, and Math. 24. Ierem. 17. 18. Ierom. 18. 22
hypocrites? Jeremy, and David pray most fervently against certain enemies to
God and them selves. Saint Paul in particular against Alexander 2. Timoth. 4.
14*
the Coppersmith, prays the Lord, to reward him according to his deeds,
which were evil and cruel. Noah changed his fatherly Genes. 9. 25.
words of blessing into a heavy curse upon his son Cham, and his posterity.

What shall we say of all these, but that they were warranted by the spirit of
God, and their place assigned to reprove, and pronounce the sharp sentence of
the Lord against his d^sperate enemies revealed unto them. For the prayers
A^gust. in Psa. 108.
and imprecations of those that were in^^wed with a spirit of prophecy, came
not from any desire or delight they had to see Gods vengeance upon others for
any private respect: no not that calling of fire from heaven, by Elias, King*
1. 2.
nor that deadly curse of Elisha upon the ill nurtured children: but Elias was
fired with a peculiar spirit, against the enemies of God, which being doubled
on his servant, procured him in the Lords name to curse those malepart boys,
that reproched the ministry of God, in the wanton mockery of Elishaes
defect. So that those curses, whereupon present execution followed, were but
modus praedicendi August. in Psalm. 108.
futura, says Austin, the manner of foretelling things to come: wherein the
spirit giving notice of Gods pleasure, the Prophet pronounced the just
vengeance of God to ensue. If any one now undertake to curse, or call fire from
heaven upon any particular persons, as the Pope banneth and curses the Lords
anointed many times: his prayers are turned into sin, he Luke. 9. 55.
knows not what spirit he is of, and therefore where he curses, the Lord
blesses.

But I hear (me thinks) some one that has caught a lewd custom of
swearing, cursing, and wishing vengeance at every word, yet makes this
foolish excuse for his filthy language: Although I speak all manner of
mischief, curse damnablie, swear horribly, yet I protest (with a monstrous
oath) that I mean no harm, it is not for revenge, or anger, but custom: I am
friends with God, and all the world; And thus he would justify the tree when
the fruits be wicked. He swears his yea and his nay backward and forward, he
salutes his friends, and seasons his ieasts with cursing and banning: and shall
we believe that he fears God, when he tears God on this manner? Shall we
think him so good a fellow, as he makes himself? Solomon says, the favors
of the wicked be cruelty, Prou. 12. 10* 14. 9.
his courtesies be cursings, his salutations vengeance, and mischief. Are not
these such fools as make but a sport of sin? Are not these such deceitful
men, as feign themselves mad, and cast firebrands at their friends* and then
say: Am Prou. 26. 18*
I not in sport? It is the property of some dogs to bark not so much for
curstness, as for custom, Petrarch.
says one: and yet it is but a currish quality at the best: and surely he
that has such a continual issue, and canker in his mouth of rotten words, and
bitter streams, must needs have a sink of corruption in the heart: and
whatsoever small reconing he makes of cursing and blasphemy, yet he that
swears often, must needs be like a servant often beaten and Ecclus. 23. 10.
11.
bunched, which can not be without some scarre, says the wise man: and if he
knowledge not his sin, he makes a double offense: for the righteous Lord,
that will demand an account of every Matthew. 12. 36.
idle word, will not hold him guiltless undoubtedly, that with monstrous
oaths takes his name in vain, howsoever the judgments of the Lord are not
regarded by the wicked.

It is a question moved, and answered by that learned father Basil, whether he
that uses audacious speech, and rash terms, and yet upon admonition for the
same, makes answer, Nihil habeo mali in cord, I have no evil in my heart,
Quest. 28. ^iffus. expl.
be to be credited in this case or no; His answer is that it fares with a
sick soul, as with a sick body. The diseases of the body appear not to
every one; no not to the Patient himself, when he is in his sharpest fittes:
yet when he rages and speaks absurdly and idly, though he says he is not
sick, no man of mean experience will believe him, but rather pity his case,
being the more near danger, by how much he seems the farther from feeling
and sense of his grief.

In which case an expert physicion acquainted with the rules and signs of his
art, is able to discern the secret disease, and the danger thereof, and
better inform the Patient of his estate, the^ the standers by, or the patie^t
afflicted himself. So is it with a soule-sicke wretch, that nether feels his
corruption, nor knows the depth of his deadly wou^d. For if he rage and belch
out unsavory and rotten words, cursings and blasphemies, though he say his
heart is sound and clean, shall we believe him? Nay rather let us give credit
to the Lord, which as a most approved Physicion has set down this Aphorism
as an infallible rule: Malus homo etc. An evil man out of the evil treasure
of his heart brings forth evil. Luke. 6. 45.
For of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And howsoever man's
conscience think it self clear, or his mouth protests of his innocence;
yet God is greater then his conscience, and will waken his sleepie soul at the
last, by the scourge of the same conscience: but in the mean while we are to
know the tree by the fruict, and the fountain by the water, assuring our
selves, that where smoke and vapoures are there is some fire, and where
maleuolent speeches break forth, there is a malignant humor that sets them a
float.

The offense of an evil tongue increases by circumstances of the person, that
is assaulted by the riot of the same. The highest degree is to set the mouth
against heaven, as Rabsache, Isa. 36.
and Julian the Apostate did: the next is to curse Eccles. 10. 20. Exodus 22. 28.
the King, or speak evil of the ruler of the people, to rail at Authority:
and then follow such as unnaturally curse father or mother, or curse Leuit. 20.
9.
their children as Michahs mother cursed her son; Judges. 17. 2. Leuit. 19. 14.
and such as uncharitably curse the deaf, which cannot hear, or foolishly
curse themselves, and swear as Peter did, to get credit amongst a Mark. 14. 71.
cursed company that used belike that fashion in their affirmations.

As in all these the impatiencie or corruption of a wicked heart is discovered,
so also does it show it self in the rage and cruelty of a man against the
very dumb cattle, the power of whose life and death is in his hands. Balaam
^um. 22. 29.
may discover his wicked heart, when he exceeds in wrath against his ass,
and smites him with a staff, and wishes a sword in his hand like a ruffian
to kill him: for a good man is merciful to his Prou. 12. 10.
cattle, says Solomon: and the beast that he may kill upon an occasion, he
will not curse in his anger, for polluting his mouth, or inuring his tongue to
a wicked custom, for evil speech corrupts good manners. Nay Michael gives
us an example, that we are not to blame no not the devil himself with cursed
speech, but to Jude. 1. 9.
give place to the Lord that shall rebuke him. And therefore they that defy
him, and curse him with outrageous terms, rather serve him and please him,
then offend him: for says the wise man, When the ungodly man curses Satan,
Ecclus. 21. 27.
be curses his own soul.

But of all other, no cursed speakers are so dangerous in our estate, and
need so much to be curbed, as those monsters which Saint Peter 2. Pet. 2.
shadoweth out in their colors, that walk after the flesh, in the lust of
uncleanness, despising government, being presumptuous, and standing in their
own conceit, and not fearing to speak evil of those that are in dignity.
Be there not many of that vipers brood, cockered under the Popes wings, that
hiss like serpe^ts, at their dearest mother, and curse like Shimei, casting
out railing books, like stones to hitte the Anoyncted of the Lord? But they
fall, like stones tossed into the air, upon their own heads. Amongst our
selves at home: who is he almost that dares not revile those that are of
greatest virtue, best desert, highest authority? if they perceive not such to
favor their dissolute behavior. But when the Devil and drink meet
together, as they do in many of our licentious people now a days, then is
every sober man a noted enemy, every Magistrate that keeps peace or good
order, a professed foe. The Drunkardes will Psalm. 69. 12.
not stick to make songs of David, nor speak evil of the Governors; and it
is like that if the wine failed not, that is, their livings melted not, and
beggerie came not upon them like an armed man, they would Prou. 6. 11.
not blush to brave Authority in open place, and disturb the whole course of
justice. As for our selves that speak of peace, we are sure to be assailed
with war: when we play upon David's Harp to ease their grief, they cast
their spears to wound us: and charm we never so sweetly, yet this Serpent of
revenge and malice, either is deaf and will not hear: or fierce and ready to
sting us: but it is our portion: we must bear it, you redress it. And thus
have we discovered not only the humor, but the vapors and smoke of Revenge
kindled in the heart, and venting out at the mouth, that you the Lords beloved
may see the deformity, and reform the fault, according to this prohibition of
saint Paul's, Avenge not your selves: which he expounds to the Ephesians. after
this sort: Let all buternesse, crying, Ephesians. 4. 31.
evil speaking, be put away with all maliciousness.

Next after the tongue we arrest by this Prohibition 3. Revenging hands arrested
the wilful hands, and violent proceedings of those that will be their own
caruers, and therefore without deliberation with themselves, without expectation
of Gods vengeance, against right, reason, and al good order, revenge their
injuries received in deed, or imagined in conceit.

The Apostle here speaks in terms of love to all: but how shall we
speak? or what style shall we use to the rufflers, and hacksters of our age?
Shall we call them beloved? That were out of fashion with such affectate
malcontents, that take a pride to be partakers of the curse of Ismael: that
had his hand up against every Genes. 16. 12.
man, and every man's hand against him. Shall we call them christians, and so
teach them their duty? That name fitteth not the tragical humor, and
stage-like behavior of our days: wherein every Nouice, like a fury, learnes
to cry Revenge, to offer the stabbe, to threaten the pistol, and in their
advantage not to spare: no not a brother, but to strike him, as Primus diabo.
li discipulus. Bas. Genes. 4.
Caine, the first disciple of the devil, did Abel: not a reconciled friend,
but to wound him traitorously as Ioab did 2. Sam. 3. 27.
Abner. Alas how is that precious account forgotten which the Lord makes and
demands of man and beast, for shedding of man's blood, Genesis 9. 5.
with an vnpriuiledged sword, and a private anger! What small reconing is made
to deface the Image of God, or tear the flesh of our selves, as though men
were become wolves and dragons, to their own kind! Is that valor and
fortitude so to fear another man's life, that thou can not live in quiet,
till thou have seen his death? Is it manhood, to be monstrous, and cruel,
like the old Giants; or savage, like beasts of the pray?

If you provoke beasts, they lay about them presently Lactant. lib. 6 Instit.
Cap. 18.
with horn and hoof, says a father: and so do fools receiving hurt, being
led with a reasonlesse fury, to revenge; they cannot respite their rage, nor
mitigate their passions. A fool rages and is careless, and in the have of
his anger he commits folly, says that wise king: but Prou. 14. 16.
shall the heat of his blood excuse his assaults of violence and murder before
the Lord? Shall his anger, being a short madness acquire him? Or shall the
wounds that are given without Prou. 23. 29.
cause, by such as tarry long at the wine, till they are enraged with heat,
and dispossessed of wit, plead a pardon for him, that kills his companion in
drink? Ask but the Philosopher, and he will tell us, that drunken offenses
deserve double punishment, for such madness is voluntary, Arist. eth. 3.
and such ignorance is wilful: therefore our common speech sufficiently
concludes this point, which awardeth him that kills a man when he is drunk,
to be hanged when he is sober.

But of all other, that same violence and murder which is effected by
presumption, and premeditated circumstances, is prohibited by the Lord, and to
be resisted by the sword of his vengeance. O that this sin might not be
found in the house of Jacob; But what age is this? Or what people do we live
amongst? Bluntly to kill, and simply to murder, is but for plain fellows:
our gallants that study to be mad with reason, have an art of killing,
rules, traditions, and precepts to teach them murder by the book: in which
they grow more expert then captain Ioab, which 2. Sam. 3. 27. 2. Sam. 20. 10.
could take the first ribbe in his stabbes, where he was sure to speed. Such
cunning there was in Jerusalem, not long before the ruin and desolation
thereof: for common stabbers, with Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 12.
their cloaked poyniards, and short daggers, in the midst of assemblies
dispatched those against whom they made any quarrel, with ^icarii.
great art and secrecy. And it can be no good presagement in any Country,
when bloudthirstie men grow expert, and boast like tyrants, men of power and
strength to do mischief, and take away life: when alas it is more August. in
Psalm. 52.
grace and prowess to give life, or preserve it: for every vermin, and base
viper can wound and kill: and is this a property for strong men to glory in?

But we hear daily the reply of some in their impatient mood: What? shall we
suffer all? be made fools? accounted cowards? and be so disarmed, and bound to
the peace, that every one shall ouer-crow us and oppress us? He that puts up
an old injury, prepares a new for himself. These are to understand, that the
same God which forbids private revenge, has ordained a public redress for
all injuries, either by them that carry the weapons of his wrath, or by
himself, if judgment slumber with them. And therefore as we have a restraint to
keep us from revenging 3. Direction.
our selves: so we have a direction whither to go, and speed of a remedy in
all our grieuances: Give place unto wrath. He that will right his own cause,
and be his own stickler and champion, takes the place of Gods wrath, and
intrudes himself; but the beloved of the Lord must give place: if thou can
not forbear injuries, yet forbear, and expect a day of hearing of the
righteous Judge, or his lawful delegats. Neither when private men see notorious
sins unpunished, is it lawful for them upon an ouershot zeal, to take up
the sword, and play the Reformers.

Such a one (will thou allege) is a forsworn wretch, Gods enemy: and
therefore I may do the Lord good service to kill him.

Who art thou that so iudgest, and presumest to have power of life and death,
without a commission? Keep thou thy bounds, wait upon the Lord, tarry his
leisure. Private me^ have no further plea, but complaints to their superiors,
or tears and prayers to the Lord, in such a case. Peter must put up his sword,
or else Peter must perish Math. 26. 52.
with the sword. Although Symeon and Leui, seem to have a just cause of their
violent course, against Shechem, and ask if he should Genes. 34. 31.
abuse their sister, as an whore; yet their father lays a brand of Gods wrath
upon them, for being Genes. 49. 5.
brethren in evil, and slaying the man (though an offender) in their cruel
rage.

Judas and Theudas started up in a time of tyranny and oppression, when the
people were mightily racked with the Roman exactions, and pretended Acts. 5.
a deliverance: but their enterprise, being not of God, came to naught, with
all the partakers. The like success had the Anabaptists in Munster, who made a
religious show, of repressing Sleidan. lib. 5.
the tyranny, and ungodliness of the governors of their times. And what
other end had our Ket of Northfolke, or such like vpstarts? who swelling to a
head by the confluence of many poor wretches, crying out reformation, at
length burst themselves like a botch, and declared their corruption. But we are
otherwise Prou. 24. 21.
taught, to fear God and the king, and not to meddle with the^ that are
seditious: to remove our matters from our own affection, to the Lords
judgment, not to avenge our selves, but give place unto his wrath: not that
we should make the law (being his ordinance) an engayne to serve our lusts,
as the foxes and troublesome suitors do, of whom we shall speak hear after*
but that it may be a refuge to keep us in peace, to defend our innocence,
which if it does not perform: yet patiently we are to expect the wrath of our
God, that can still the enemy and the Auenger in his good time. Now as many
reasons were raised from the loving title to keep us from revenge, so is this
restraint Four reasons against selfereuenge. 1. Reason from the action of
aue^ging.
full of matter to dissuade from that sinister course.

If we consider first this action of auenging, what is it but to repay evil
with evil, to punish vice with sin, and to imitate the wicked in his works
and ways of mischief? Qui malum Lactant. Improbitati opposita impatia en^ia
magna^ concitat tempestates.
imitatur bonus esse non potest: he that imitateth the bad, cannot be good
himself. He shall have as good as he brings, say thou: he brings the fruit
of injustice, and thou payest him with the thorns of impatiencie. Because
thine enemy is unjust, will thou be ungodly? because he is an oppressor, or a
slaunderer, will thou be froward, and a murderer? Ne vtaris inimico
praeceptore, says Basil: let not thine enemy be thy scholemaster, to tech thee
that which thou detestest in him. Should thou be a glass to resemble the
fury and madness of the wicked in his angry mood? or should thy voice be the
Echo of his ungracious speech? or thy hand the iustrument to bandy back again
his balls of fire and mischief? No, rather overcome theeuill with good: fire
quenches not fire, but rather settes all on a flame: neither can evil
repress evil, but increase it rather: and one injury linked to another (as
Samsons foxes, fastened with firebrands at their tails) disturb the quiet, and
destroy the fruit of whole societies. But he that renders good for bad,
heapeth hot coals upon his enemies head, not to consume him by his will, but
to kindle and stir him to charity again, or at the least to a confession
against himself, such as Saul made to David; Thou art more righteous than I.
This is the victory that ^, Sam. 24. 18.
Christians, which are the heirs of blessing, should content themselves
withal. Contrariwise, Barnard admi^lites templi.
Infelix victoriaest, in qua hominem supera^s, vitio succu^bis: It is an
vnglorious victory, when conquering a man, thou art foiled by a beastly vice.

Secondly if we note the person here discharged 2. Reasons from the person
revenging.
from revenge: it is our selves. How absurd it is that one man should be
plaintiff, witness, Judge, and executioner, al himself in his own cause,
the laws of God, of men, of nature, and common sense can teach us. He that is
first in his Proverb. 18. 17.
own cause is just: that is: tells a sound tale for himself, till his
neighbor come and control it. If the plaintiff go no further then the court
of his own affections, he shall have all the favor that may be, for he is
Amicus curiae, and the defendant shall have neither audience, nor advocate
there, but all extremity: for what other thing can be expected, when a man is
plaintiff, witness, Judge, and executioner all himself; but that the action
should be rashly co^menced, the witness corrupt, the judgment partial, and
the execution both sudden and violent.

In regard whereof our private matters are dismissed from our own partial
hearing, and we are inhibited as Judges in competent to deal for our selves.
And although Christians should carry a court of conscience about them, wherein
there is no corruption, nor partiality, no hard measure intended to others, but
such as they desire to be returned to themselves, yet to avoid the slander and
suspicion of injustice, they are to abide the public trial, and to submit
themselves, to the ce^sure of the Lords appointed ministers, and in no case to
defile their hands with the base execution of their own revenge. 3. From the
direction, a* reason against revenge.
A third reason is drawn from the direction made, to send us where we should
seek, and may find remedy of al enormities: Give place unto wrath. Wherein is
thus much employed, that although, thou had the sword and the law in thine
own hand, and might be thine own caruer, ^and Cha^pion, yet thy hands might
fail thy heart; though thy private anger be cursed, yet has it but short
horns: the strongest revenger meets with his match. Therefore that ancient
trial by combat, is grown out of practice with Christians, because therein
the innocent party is as far endaungered as the offender, the weak truth is
made a prey to strong falsehood, rather then a punishment: And the Lord has
ordained diligent inquisition to sift out offenses, and an oath to be the end
of controversies, and girded his magistrates with power and majesty to
suppress the mighty, and has not left the defense of the innocent, or the
revenge of the wicked, to one man's valor, or to the hazard of a thing
uncertain, or the exercise of a private man's wrath, which has no warrant from
the Lord, but is rather a tempting of God, then a due course of trial in
matters punishable by the sword. It is not for the weakness of man's anger to
prevent the power of gods ordinance. Fret not thy self against sinners to do
evil, but trust in the Lord and he will care for thee: be silent, and he will
speak for thee: stand thou still, and he will fight in thy cause. If thou
drawest out thy wodden and hasty dagger, he puts his sword into his
scabberd, and leaves thee to thy self. A child that is hurt, does not turn
again, but runs and complains to his father: Christians must as children,
declare their wrongs to God their father, and let him alone, give place to his
wrath: we are but underlings, he is our Champion: it is policy for the weak
to give over his defense to the strong: it is duty to give place to our
betters, and danger to preoccupate and take the Lords vengeance out of his
strong hand. Therefore let our hearts be still, our tongues quiet, our hands
peaceable, least in private revenge we imitate the wicked, show our selves
corrupt Judges, base executioners, prevent the Lords assistance, and perish in
our own weak and froward ways.

But I need not stand longer to press the words of the prohibition, for
arguments against this private revenge: seeing we may show a transcript and
copy, out of gods sacred charter and holy Oracles to take down the hearts,
silence the mouths, and restrain the hands 2. Confirmation.
of all slesh, from their sinister proceedings. What art thou that dare
intrude into gods right and title? Vengeance is mine; what art thou that
threatnest, and say thou will do to thy foe, as he has done to thee? I will
repay, says the Lord. As in the prohibition the sword of vengeance is wrested
out of every private man's hand, and they brought to attend the Lords power and
pleasure for the righting of their wrongs: so in this confirmation, the Lord as
it were clothed in his royal apparel, his crown of majesty upon his head,
the earth trembling at Psalm. 93. 1*
his looks, devouring fire going from his throne, makes known his title by
this claim, vengeance is mine: and taking his sword, seems to shake and
brandish it in threatening manner, against all usurpers, and evil doers: with
this prohibition: vengeance is mine, I will repay: says the Lord. Behold
(Right worshipful) the Patent and charter from whence your authority is
derived, and whereby the reverence and submission that every soul must yield,
is procured and enforced. All creatures and ordinances be the Lords, but this
ordinance of judgment he entitleth himself unto, by precise, and special
terms, as being a thing wherein he will mightily declare his power and
majesty, and therefore 1 The challenge bp the exe^ution. 3. The subs^^ption.
first is recorded his challenge: vengeance is mine: secondly his execution of
the same, I will repay it: thirdly the subscription of his great name is
affixed, as thus: says the Lord. That this is the Lords true act and deed,
and a faithful copy out of the Original, Saint Paul the Register of Gods
holy spirit gives witness, with scriptum est: it is written. The devil
began with the like flourish of scriptum est, twice when he tempted Christ,
to make stones of bread, and to cast himself from a pinnacle: yet he brought
but a shadow no substance, he urged the letter but not the true meaning: but
when he came to the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof, he Luke. 4. 6.
fled from his scripture, and has not so much as one letter or tittle to
plead, but only his bare word, All these are mine; If you ask how he came by
them, he answers as the thief at the bar, they were delivered unto him, by
whom he cannot tell, the time he remembers not, the place he has forgot: which
is as much to say, they are none of his indeed, he holds them by usurpation,
not by any right, he forgeth a donation, but can make no delivery nor good
warrantize of his gifts. But the Lord, which is witnessed to be the same which
reigned of old, which made all nations, and therefore corrects all, did
Psalm. 55. 19. 94. 10. Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
thunder out his glorious challenge by Moses, and confirmed by wonders and
miracles, that vengeance and recompense was his; insomuch that David gives
testimony, of the Lords title again and again repeated in Psalm. 62. 11.
his hearing: GOD spoke once and twice, I have heard it, that power belongs
unto GOD. And the Apostle in this place, shows the Lords former title, and
pleads the continuance of possession without interruption: For it is wtitten,
says he, and the scripture is not in vain which speaks after this manner,
vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

This vengeance so claimed by the Lord, is Vengeance spiritual^.
either spiritual, or civil and corporal. The spiritual vengeance is not
assigned to the ministers of God, in pomp, and external violence; For the
weapons of our warrefare be not carnal 2. Cor. 10 4.
(says S. Paul) but mighty through God; the beauty is not outward, but
within: the power is not to tyrannize upon the body by a secular arm, nor yet
to sley the soul, as the man of sin would seem with his brutish
thunderbolts, but to threaten from God, to declare and pronounce the vengeance
of the Lord, but leave the execution to himself, because we know he will
repay, and to this effect, the Author to the Heb. 10 30.
Hebrews produces this same charter, as one that speaks by knowledge: we
know him that has said: vengeance is mine I will recompense, says the Lord.
Vengeance temporal.


That vengeance which is corporal and reaches but the body, is partly
reserved to the lords own hand, immediately to inflict particularly in this
life, and generally, at the last great day of his vengeance: partly it is
committed to substitutes, and his ministers of wrath to cherishe the well
doers, and cut down the evil. So that though it please him to call his
Judgments vengeance, and to claim it; by this most terrible denomination to
strike fear and reverence into all men's hearts: yet by the same speech he
understands also that mercy and favor belongs to him: as it does indeed
more properly and naturally. For says Barnard, Inserm. de ^at. Domi.
he is called not only the God of vengeance, but pater m^s^ricordiarum, the
father of mercies: because out of himself, and the bowels of his own native
goodness, he takes matter of compassion, and mercy: sed quod Iudicat and
condemnit, nos eum quodammodo cogimus: but in that he judges In vengeance
there must be mercy.
and condemns, the matter and occasion is in our selves, and we after a sort
compel him unto it. We have therefore the example and precept of the Lord
himself, to keep us that are private, from intrusion, disobedience, or a hard
conceit of the magistrate, such as the Anabaptists are possessed with,
affirming the politic govern our to be a necessary evil, and Danaeus. de
ho^. lib. 4. cap. 24.
rather a plague, then a benefit to Christians, because he does punish. And the
same example from the Lord we may show as a president, against those rulers
that be all for vengeance, and extremity; nothing for mercy nor compassion.
For the Lord has appointed the rulers to be shepherds and watchmen, to feed
and preserve: not roaring lions and hungry bears Pro 28. 15. Micha. 3.
to prey upon the people, to trample upon them as mire, and grind them in
pieces with extortion and polling. Our Savior Christ therefore calls
governors (...), benefactors and gracious, not malefactors and mischievous,
because by their title he would teach them their duty. And if the Lord had
ordained his magistrates only to kill, to rack, and to poll his people, he
might have put in the devil for a sole Commissioner, for he can practice
nothing else, but mischief and vengeance: but because the magistrate must use
mercy and a favorable defense of the good, a correction of evil, and not a
confusion of all together: therefore has the Lord committed his sword unto
men, and gave them this title, I have said you are Gods, intending they should
Psalm. 82. 6.
be just as God, holy as God, merciful upon occasion as God, without
partiality as God, without iniquity as God, and so doing, they may be
fearelesse of the faces of men, as God himself. Thus may all men in authority
behold their faces and duties in the glass which shows the Lords
properties, and tells them how near they come to his perfection. The Lord
does not only exercise punishment, but pity, and compassion. How far be
those Judges and officers from the Lords example, that pinch all in the purse,
let none go free, what person soever in what cause soever, if he light in
their claws, whose courts resemble the Popes Purgatory; if he say the word, or
any of his proctors, that the souls of men are in, though they be out, yet pay
they must by themselves or their friends, before they be at rest, though they
were at quiet before. And how like are such to the ignorant physicians, that
prescribe to all persons, in all causes, phlebotomie and letting of blood, as
though every disease were of excess and superfluity, none of defect and
penury: for they draw blood of all, and lighten the purse of every Patient,
and this makes the world to decrease in wealth, but increase in sins. What
warrant such officers have for their dealings, I know not, except it be this
vulgar proved true: he that buys dear, must seldeare, and he that farms at
a hard rent, must take up all with the angle, and drag all with the net.

Nevertheless it is a more desperate case, when in a Commonwealth a man may do
any thing without punishment, then when he can do nothing, but he smarts for
it. A licentious liberty is more dangerous then servitude it self: and
therefore better have a sharp governor, the^ In execution mercy, but not
remissness.
an Idol and a block, that suffers the people to be devoured one of
another, and consumed of themselves. Wherefore as the Lord conueyeth over his
authority to men, and confirms the^ in their place, with these titles, that
Judgment is his; power is his; the throne his; the sword his; and vengeance is
his: so he teaches them the diligent use, and careful execution, adding this
clause, I will repay. When Iehos hap hat had ordained Judges under him, he
gives them the same charge, that he had received from God and the same
encouragement. Take beede what ye do: for ye execute not the Judgments of
man, but of the Lord, 2. Chron. 19. 6
and he will be with you in the cause of iudgement^ wherefore now let the
fear of the Lord be upon you: take heed, and do it: for there is no
iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of person, nor receiving of
reward. So that the place of a Judge is not a place of private revenge, nor a
dumb show of honor and pomp: nor a pillowe of ease and security whereon
men are to sleep, or tell the clock: but there must be circumspection,
diligence and wisdom: they must take heed, and do it, hoc agite, attend upon
this office: do this, and yet take heed what ye do. When the Lord has said
to rulers, ye are gods, he means not that they should be like the Epicures
idle god, which sat in his throne, and Psalm. 82.
let all inferior matters alone, as to base for his eyes: nay rather the Lord
would have them like himself, which does not only Isai. 40. 12.
weigh mountains and hills in his balance, but the very dust of the earth,
and sands of the sea. And therefore he sets down judgment Exodus 18. 22.
for small matters: and as he says vengeance is mine, so by Solomon he
descends lower, and Prou. 16. 11.
lays claim to the balance, and tells us that all the weightes in the
bag, be the work of the Lord. And who are weaker or lower, then the
fatherless, the widow, the poor? and yet al Judges have the Lords Letter
commendatory, or mandatory rather, in their behalf: the tenor whereof is this;
do right to the poor and fatherless, Psalm. 82.
do Justice to the poor and needy: and how they should do this right, he
tells them: deliver the poor and needy: save them from the hand of the
wicked. And further to keep the Judges themselves in awe, he stands over
them, and tells them of his presence, in the very entrance of the Psalm,
saying: God stands in the assembly of gods, he Judges amongst gods: he
makes one, in all courts, all assizes, and Psalm. 82. 1.
sessions, and that which men pass over, he finds out: that which they wink
at, he punishes. The Judges ignorance will not excuse him, if for carelesnes,
he suffer the calamity of the innocent: for if thou say, Behold we knew not of
it; the holy Ghost will reply as in the Proverbs, he that po^dereth the
heart, does not he understand it? Prou. 24. 12.
and he that keeps thy soul, knows he it not? and will not he also
recompense every man according to his work? And the righteous man Job will
teach thee in dignity, what thou ought to have done, in his Apology,
touching Job. 29. 16.
intricate matters, for when he knew not the cause, he sought it out
diligently, as he says of himself. At leastwise the Lord himself that upon
the clamorous outcry of Sodomes sins in his ears, comes down G^^. 18. 21.
on the earth, to examine if their sins were so grievous or no: does rather
intend an instruction to those whom he honors with the title of Gods: then
further intelligence to his own wisdom, from the which nothing was hid.

According to the power assigned from God, must be the purpose, and practice of
every governor. For what is a sword, if it be always like a childs dagger,
riuetted in the sheath, and put to no use? what are good laws without
execution, but as belles without clappers? And what are magistrates, that
having neither the life nor soul of justice in themselves, and therefore
cannot quicken the dead letter of the laws, nor make them effectual in sound
or motion? Are not they rather Idols tha^ Gods? rather Images that must be
kept by a sexten and keeper Lodouic. Viues in. 1. lib. cap. 3. de ciuit. Dei.
(for so Plato speaks of voluptuous and doting governors) then guardians and
keepers of cuntryes, cities and people themselves?

It is a true saying experimented daily, that Magistratus indicat virum: the
honor and authority Aristot. lib. 5.
of an office, makes trial what is in the man that bears it. A private man
like an empty vessel may have many flawes and crackes, many faults and
defectes that appear not: but as when vessels are filled, the chinkes are
descryed, by the leakeage of the wine: so when men are graced with authority,
their unsoundness is discovered through some chinke of folly, or fear, or
carelessness, or else they prove staunche, and show their sufficiency, for
wisdom and conscience.

The best course in those that have a pre-eminence to ordain officers, is to
try them by degrees, first if they will be faithful in little things, that so
they may be credited at last with the great: or as men prove their vessels,
with water, before they trust them with wine. Absolon 2. Sam. 15.
will be lowly and popular to al suitors, and promise fair to do Justice,
till he get aloft, and then he shows himself neither to fear God nor the
king, neither to care for Justice nor honesty. Men can spread the nets of
humility, and weaue them with the knots of subtlety, till they have caught
their desire, and then they show their hypocrisy. It seems that Pope
Boniface followed this course in his clyming: of whom it is spoken* Intrauit
vt vulpes, Fascic* temp. Boniface. 8.
regnauit vt leo, mortuus vt canis* he entered like a fox, he ruled like a
lion, he dyed like a dog. And so commonly it comes to pass, a badde
beginning has a wicked proceeding, and a miserable end. Wherefore it is
expedient for men of honor, worship, and authority to carry this title of
the Lord, and this promise of execution in their memory, that by it they may
be comforted in their good proceedings, repressed from cruelty, and the
exercise of private revenge in their public actions; and yet stirred up to be
diligent and careful, because the Lord himself is not only a looker on, but a
chief Actor. For vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord.

Now shall it be requisite again to return to private men, and the people of
God for whose sake the Lord has vouchsafed his power and majesty, his justice
and equity, to be established* and executed by worthy men ordained for that
end. They are inhibited from that revenge, which they could not execute without
sin: and sent unto the courts of gods Judgment, where they may have a
defense of innocence without repulse. If any shall object the faults, delays,
and circumuentions of courts and laws, thereby coloring their disobedience to
superior powers, they must understand that gods holy ordinance must not be
resisted for the personal crimes and defects of those that supply the places,
but rather be obeyed, because the sparks of gods majesty and justice remain
in some measure in every magistrate. The image and superscription of a Prince,
stamped in basemetall, is current amongst his subjects, as well as that which
is made in the finest silver, though in deed it be not so precious. S. Peter
admonishes servants, and under that title, subjects, to be obedient in all
fear, not only to the good and 1. P^t. 2. 18.
courteous, but also to the froward. There be two sorts of people that abuse
themselves toward the sacred ordinance of laws, magistrates, and governors;
appointed notwithstanding for the punishment of evil, and the decision of
controversies, that Gods people might live in honesty and peace.

The one sort are flat Recusants, as Libertines, 1. Recusants* civil
ordinances,
and Anabaptists: and such tumultuous fellows as would have al subject to
their lusts, but they will be subject to no laws.

The other are Foxes that make account of 2. Foxes and* abusers of the laws.
the Judges and laws, and use them to the satisfaction of their private
revenge, and malicious humors.

Somewhat are we to speak, God willing, of both: and first, of those former
Recusants? not because any such are in this place: but because unquiet, and
troublesome s^^ters, that follow the law to serve their lusts: when they fail
of their hope, for the most part turn from one extreme to another, and set
themselves clean at defiance, with Justice and Authority.

Touching Libertines, which promise others liberty, Recusants Libertimes* 2.
Pe^* 2. 19.
themselves being the servants of corruption, which walk after their lusts,
and despise government, it is no marvel if they scorn and contemn order and
magistracy, seeing they dare open their mouths against heaven, and say, There
is no God. But as they blush not to be called the Damned crew: thereby
sentencing themselves, to confusion; So Saint Peter accompteth ^. Pet. 2. 12.
them as bruit beasts, led with sensuality, and made to be taken and
destroyed. If you ask how they shall perish? Saint Peter answers, through
their own corruption, the cords of their own sin shall stop their
breath: and though they escape long, and shift often; yet the Lord knows how
to reserve ^. Pet. 2. 9.
them to the day of vengeance.

The Anabaptists, and such as lean to their Recusant Anabaptists.
stubborn conceit, are also within the compass of such Recusants. They would
have all things common to their own lusts, and nothing reserved or kept for
any man's need. Because some rulers are wicked, therefore they will have no rule
nor government at al to be over them: a grateful principle to them that desire
to be lawless. I know the good father Tertullian may be produced as a patron
for these: for he Dan^* in August. de here is. cap. 86.
was overtaken by this error, that he thought the use of the sword in
battle, or punishments could not be lawful, and therefore degraded all
capital and criminal Judges from their places.

But fathers as men might be deceived, and so was Tertullian: the Lord himself
can neither deceive, nor be deceived, and he has said, Vengeance is mine.
He has said, Give Matthew. 22. 21.
unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's. He by his word has created the
Magistrate, called him his Minister, put the sword in his hand, charged Romans 13.
him to strike: and commanded every soul to be subject, not so much for
fear, as the wicked are, but even for conscience, as the godly. He commanded
the captives by Jeremy, to seek the prosperity Ierem. 29. 7*
of Babylon, and pray unto the Lord for it: He exhorted by Paul, that
intecessions and 1. Tim. 2* ^.
supplications should be made for Kings and princes, and all that were in
authority: the King of Babylon knew not God, the rulers in Saint Paul's time
were no Christians, but heathens and tyrants: yet such governors are to be
obeyed, and prayed for: that under them Christians may live in peace, godliness,
and honesty: how much more the faithful governors, that seek themselves the
peace of Jerusalem, and the righteousness of Gods kingdom? though many
blemishes may be noted, and imperfections of men, in the administration of
judgment under them.

Here may we not forget the Papistical Clergy, Recusant Papists.
that acknowledge the power of the Magistrate, when they would have their
pestilen thatred executed against the saints of God, which they call heretics:
but when justice should worthilye be turned upon themselves, then they plead
exemptions, and privileges, they are spiritual and may not be touched;
forgetting that which the Lord has set down for a perpetual Canon: Let every
soul be subject. Which Chrysostom expounds of Churchmen, as well as of lay
people: Sieve Apostolus, sieve Euangelista, sieve Propheta fueris, Magistratui
subesse debes. Be thou Apostle, Evangelist, or Prophet, or whatsoever, thou
must yield subjection to the temporal Magistrate.

As these would exempt themselves from their due obedience to Rulers; and yet
shroud themselves under their wings, for revenge, or defense: so Julian the
Apostate, did exact obedience and tribute, belonging to governors: but
persuaded all Christians, that his tyranny and cruelty, was good for them,
they might not resist but suffer: If he stroke them upon one cheek, they
should turn the other: thus, in an irreligious jest, sending in deed his
subjects to heaven, and himself merrily into hell. It seems, the common
translation, which the Romanists follow, speaks contrary to their own
practice and meaning: Non defendentes, has the translation in this place; not
defending your selves: but their practice is contrary: for they trouble heaven
and earth, for the auenging of their quarrelles: and doubt not by any violent
proceedings to supplant Kings and Princes, and depose them from their thrones,
being animated and warranted by that hellish resolution of Gregory the
seventh, and his successors: that treason against unbelieving Princes is
lawful.

But touching the words of our Savior Christ, where he prepares Christians
to bear injuries without resistance: they take not away public and lawful
defense, such as is sought by a due course of complaint, or reply, at the hand
of the Magistrate, without rancour and heart-burning. For when he teaches
Christians, that being smitten upon one cheek, they Math. 5.
should turn, to him that smites, the other: he intends they should be so
far from rendering one blow for another, that rather they should suffer two,
then revenge one: and yet not to fail in the lawful defense of themselves.
For in the same Chapter immediately, our Savior says: Agree with thine
adversary quickly, least he deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the
Sergeant; without doubt ratifying the course of civil proceedings in
judgment. Moreover, he gives example of this himself, who being smitten, did
not strike again, but yet he expostulateth de facto, touching the deed,
whether it were lawful or no, in him that struck him. If I have evil spoken,
bear witness of the evil: but if I have well spoken, why smitest John. 18.
23. August. ad Marcellin.
thou me? Vbi ostendit (says Austen) praeparationem maxillae faciendam esse in
cord: where he shows that the preparation of the other cheek must be made
in the heart. For so Christ Isai. 56.
Jesus gave his cheeks to the nippers, and was not only content to suffer
blows, but death for his enemies. The like example gives Paul before the
high priest, reproving the injustice of the Acts. 23. 3. Acts. 21. 13. ^om. 9.
3. Acts. 23. 17.
Judge, and yet prepared to suffer bonds and death, and to be separate from
Christ for his countrymen. Moreover, did not the same Paul obtain a safe
conduct for his safeguard, against certain wretched fellows that had sworn
his death? Did he not appeal to Caesar, and Acts. 25. 12.
take the honest aduauntages of the law to help himself? If this were the
practice of the best men, who doubts but our Saviors precept respects the
heart, and private court of man's conscience, providing against all impatiencie,
and immoderate desire of revenge, but leaving open the law for a lawful
defense, and open preservation of life, goods, body, and name. So then the law
is good, if it be not abused, as it is said in another sense: for it serves
to redress all wrongs, to repress all tumults, and therefore was it a wise
speech of the town Clerk of Ephesus, to the raging Idolaters: If Demetrius,
or the crafts me^ have a matter against any man, the law is open, and Acts. 19.
38.
there are deputies, let them accuse one another.

And here come in the foxes and followers of Such as abuse the law by ouerusing
the same.
the law, such as will not revenge in words, nor blows, but rather desire to
be slaundered, and to take blows, yet not for any meekness, but to get an
advantage in law, wherein they may show all extremity of lingering revenge.
And here they spend their wit, their wealth, their friends, their time, their
souls, and all: as the Spider that woorketh out her own bowels, to compass
her prey. Will you examine what be their actions and suits commonly? Surely
words of unkindness, actions of some deserved slander, some trespass pedibus
ambulando: de lanacaprina, and asini vmbra. Of goats wool, and the shadow of
an ass. How do these Sycophants abuse the ordinance of God, with their
contention for trifles? They are not unlike those nice people, that continually
lie in the hands of physicians and surgeons for pimples and warts, when both
the physician and the lawyer was appointed for necessity, and not for
wantonness. Am I deceived? or do I not see these suitors pestered with boxes
and papers (the books of their profession) to course about from place to
place, more busy to cast away their money then then the lawyer to catch it:
They have a running sore of selfwill, and malice, but their word is only
Currat lex, Let the law have his course: a course they mean without end,
except they can saciate their wilful minds with a full triumph over their
impouerished adversary. Their courage is invincible: for neither the
admonition of friends, threats of authority, no nor badde success in their
suytes, can make them give over, and sit down by it: for it fares with them as
with the drunkard in the Proverbs, that boasts after this manner: They have
stricken me, but I was not sick: they Prou. 23. 35.
have beaten me, but I knew not of it, when I awoke: therefore will I seek it
yet still. As such seek the wine when it has bitten them, so these being
drunken in the pursuit of their malice, though they smarted a while, and
caught an overthrow, yet will rouse themselves and to it again: for hot
gamsters will take no check, nor repulse: losing is no warning; but the more
they lose, the more they seek to venture.

I know what this generation will reply, if they hear me: We have stood
before the best in good presence, in the highest Courts of greatest honor,
and justice. Surely I grant it, for the Spider works her webbes, and takes
hold with Prou. 30. 28.
her hands, often in Kings palaces; and Satan, the father of all false
accusers, liers, and busy bodies, Job. 1. Zachar. 3.
stands before the Lord amongst his servants; but it is to accuse, slander,
and pick aduauntages against Gods people.

I persuade my self that the wisdom of you (grave fathers) can mark out
such, better then I describe them. And ye the learned cou^sellors that are
interpreters of the law, of credit and conscience, will be loath to open
their mouths in the gates, for such turbule^t suitors. Yet (give me leave) no
cause is so desperate, no client so perverse, that finds not a solicitor, at
the least, to help envy forward, and pull justice backward, if there be
wilfulness, and abililtie in the follower. Notwithstanding I am assured, that
the best for counsel, and conscience, amongst you, detest both the
contencious quarrellers, and all those brokers of ill causes that by shifts and
quillets disturb the honorable Courts of Justice, and turn wholesome
Judgment into bitter wormwood. And indeed as the law is a comfortable
baulme, to plaster up the wounds and sores of every private disquiet, with
convenient expedition: so (with all due reverence to Gods ordinance be it
spoken) are the delays, quirkes, and demurres, like the corrosiue plasters of
an unconscionable leach, which turn a small green wound into an incurable
Fistula, by poisoning and exulcerating the same, for their further practice and
lucre. But I speak in vain, if I direct my speech to these kind of people,
who are not present in this place now, for the church is as the shadow of death
unto them, and they have earnest business, which they love above their souls.
To you therefore prudent Counselors, and all that fear God, be it spoken.
Remember Psalm. 5. 8.
that as vengeance is Gods, so the laws are Gods, Judgment is Gods, Counsel
is Gods, verdict and sentence are Gods. He that has said, Judge righteouslie,
has said also; Speak the things that are right. The tongue of the just is
^rou. 10. 20.
as refined silver says Solomon. There is no untruth, no shift, no dross in
it. The presence of Gods Majesty in judgment, engraven in the brows of his
Commissioners, calls for reverent speech: it admits no railing nor girding
to obscure the truth: nor those answers ad hominem, non ad rem: that are to
the person, somewhat: but nothing to the purpose; though such pleading in
disgrace of parties get a popular applause for the time. A captain Plut.
apotheg.
of Darius hearing a mercenarie soldier to rail against Alexander, in high
words, struck him with his spear, saying, Ego te vt pugnes etc. I pressed thee
to fight with Alexander, and not to rail against him. And so do wise and
honest clients retain advocates, and see them to plead their cause, not to
revile their adversary. O how sweet are those riches that are gotten with a
good conscience, and a tongue of sound counsel, and pure wisdom: But the
gathering Prou. 21. 6.
of treasure by a deceiptfull tongue, is as vanity tossed to and fro, of them
that seek death. He that coueteth that evil covetousness to build his house,
consulteth shame to his house, says Abacuk, for the stone shall cry out of
the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it with a woe, ringing
aloude in the conscience Haba^. 2^.
of the founder himself, laying the foundation in blood and iniquity.

I would those busy bodies, that abuse the law, and your patience (right
worshipful) with trifles, and slanderous actions, as also those cruel
tyrants, that crouch before authority to make the poor fall into their
snares, and to rack the^ of Psalm. 10. 10.
spite, by extremities of law, were as well acquainted with their duty, as I
know the better sort here present is. But it is your parts (grave fathers) to
quiet these stirring heads, and quench these fiery spirits. All laws both of
God and men, have provided against the slanderous caueller, and cruel
oppressor. Thou shall not walk about with tales among the people: Thou shall
not stand against the blood of thy neighbor, I am the Leuit. 19.
Lord: that is the divine law. Men's laws were diverse, but the Athenians and
Romans, provided against them, some by banishment: some by penalties, some by
an oath taken of the plaintiff, Wolsius in Deuteronomy. 22.
that he did follow no suit, animo calumniandi, with a purpose of cavil and
slander.

And for those cruel tygres, that are all armed with prickles like the
Hedgehogge, that Totus Ec^inus asper.
seem to give place to Gods holy wrath, and yet have seven abominations in
their hearts, and a thirst to torment and impouerish their adversary; these, I
say, it becomes your wisdoms to discern and discomfit. They are such indeed
as tarry the leisure of the law, and seek the face of the Court: but they
wring the nose to force out blood, they houer after extremities, forfeytures,
and aduauntages,: which being obtained; they themselves catch their debtour
Matthew. 18. 28.
by the throat, help to serve their own executions, enter into the gates of
him that is Obadiah. 1. 13.
fallen, delighting in his adversity, and taking pleasure in his misery, or
else feeding themselves with a wicked triumph over the bones of a poor captive
starued in prison. Is this agreeable to Gods holy will? who charged his people,
that they should not rule cruelly over Leuit. 25. 43.
their brethren sold unto them: who in the 24. of Deuteronomium, commanded
them, when Deuteronomy. 24. 10.
they asked again of their neighbor the thing that was lent, that they should
not go into his house to fetch a pledge, nor keep the pledge till the Sun
went down, of the party that was poor; who also in the 58. of Isaie, mocketh
at the fastes and prayers of such, as would seem to be deisout, Isai. 58. 3.
and serve God, and ask after the ordinances of the Lord, and yet they would
seek their own will, and require all their debts, and smite with the fist of
wickedness; when the Lord required a fast from strife, debate, and extremity;
a loosing of the bands of wickedness, a taking away of heavy burdens, a
manumission of the oppressed, and a breach of the yoke of bondage.

As the usurer, may be called a legal thief, Barnard. de cura rei fa.
because he covers his cruel extortion by law: so may these unmerciful
creditors be termed legal murderers, such as the law in some things does
assist: so that by law they may both go to the devil together, for their
uncharitable minds, as well as other thieves, and murderers without law, for
their unlawful actions.

Amongst other faults that the Corinthians are reproved for, by saint Paul,
this was no small one; that there were many quarrelles, suites, and complaints,
commenced amongst them, for small matters, and that before heathenish Judges,
where they made themselves ridiculous, and the Christian profession scandalous,
to them that were without. He tenteth their wound, and shows what root those
corruptions did spring from. For there wanted first wisdom amongst them, to
compound and decide controversies. Is there not a wise man amongst 1. Cor. 6. 5.
you? says he; none that can find where the fault is, and set down the right
of the cause of so small a moment? Secondly, there wanted love; for brother
with brother went to law, and 1. Cor. 6. 6.
that under Infidels. Thirdly, they wanted patience: Why rather suffer ye not
wrong, and forbear 1. Cor. 6. 7.
one another, forgive one another? let many faults pass, forget many
injuries, and commit them to God? Fourthly, there wanted Justice: Nay, ye your
selves (says he) will do wrong, and harm, and that to your brethren. These
four wants must needs be amongst us (beloved) who are so litigious, and
ready to go to the law. For want of justice in foro conscientiae, in the Court
of our conscience, we do injuries: for lack of patience, we will suffer
none: for want of love, we spare neither father, nor brother: for lack of
wisdom we come to no speedy agreement our selves, but the law must try all.
Out of Saint Paul's reproof, may it not well be thus spoken to you that are
such sookers in law suits? Though ye have not a conscience to do right, nor
patience to suffer wrong: nor love to forbear your brethren; yet if you were
wise your selves, or had wise neighbors about you, your matters might be
determined at home. And doubtless, if me^ would do as they would be done to:
or if the offender would agree with his adversary quickly, in the way: and the
party Math. 5.
offended accept of reconciliation, and debate the matter with his neighbor
himself: what quiet of heart, and safegarde of monye, and godly love might
be procured? whereas now men dwell in suites, tossing themselves as in a sea
of troubles, enriching the lawyers, abusing the law, and empouerishing
themselves. It is a token of an unwholesome air, Si valeans ho^ mines, ars tua
(Phoebe) iaces.
where the country is full of thriuing Physicians. And Plato that divine
heathen says, Signum est profligatae, turpisque educationis in ciuitate,
Danoeus ex Platone.
cum multis Iudicibus, iurisconsultis, and foris egeat. Respub. It is a sign
of badde and wicked education, and ill manners in any country, when the
Commonwealth has need of many Judges, many Lawyers, many Courts. The
multitude of these Physicians of our estate, so increasing, and flourishing,
tells us with shame that we are a sight of wrangling Christians, for the
most part, without justice, without patience, without love, and wisdom: and
therefore it is more then high time, that this were amended in those that fear
God, and respect the peace of a good conscience. One great means of
Reformation herein, rests in you (Right worshipful) if you carefullye put in
practice that prudent example of Gallio deputy in Achaia, who being
importuned by the clamourous outcryes of Paul's adversaries; drove them all
from the Judgment Acts. 18. 16.
seat, as men having more malice then matter. A commendable action in him that
was but a heathen, but better will it become the place and profession of a
Christian Magistrate.

And thus, dearly beloved, have we opened, and served this writ of
prohibition against private revenge, we have considered the loving title, used
by Saint Paul, to allure our hearts to a like proportion of love aagaine. We
have heard how dangerous to our bodies, and souls, how prejudicial to
religion, in both the exercise of hearing and praying, and what an enemy to
God, and a friend and follower of the devil, is a heart full of malice. And
yet when iniquity has conceived, and brought forth revenge, either in words
or deeds, then is it more dangerous: for as it hurts it self first, so it
mischieueth others, being come to that pass. We have gaged the poison of a
wicked tongue, and found it unmeasurable; we have applied means of cure if the
patients will endure it: we have arrested all those, and bound them to the
peace, that dare undertake their private revenge, or proceed to the raising of
a public mutiny. If they will not obey our writ from heaven, we leave them to
you (right worshipful) the ministers of Gods vengeance, to be bent or broken.
We have directed all plaintiffes from their weak anger, to the mighty wrath
of God: for the confirmation royal of our prohibition from heaven, we have
brought a true copy, warranted by Saint Paul a faithful Register, of that
sacred Patent and Charter, wherein the Lord makes known his challenge, and
threatens not only revenge to all usurpers, and evil doers, but promises
also a recompense to those that abide his leisure, and commit their cause to
him; or his ministers ordained for revenge and recompense. We have showed what
Magistrates are, and should be: Gods they are for God, and therefore should not
be rigorous, nor flouthfull, but just, merciful and diligent. We have declared
that subjects cannot be well governed with oppression of the greater: nor
magistrates amended by rebellion of the less. We have examined the absurd
opinions of the^ that would have no superiors, but all equalles; nothing
private, but all things common; no laws, but all lust and liberty. We have
merte with those foxes that use the public ordinance of God, to rack their
private spite, and work their extremities. To conclude, we have used motives
to dissuade men both from private courses of revenge; and also from the abuse
of that public vengeance, those laws, and that ordinance which the Lord has
planted to preserve the good, to maintain peace, truth and right amongst men.
Now therefore (Grave fathers) remember your public callings, that your sword,
and your sentence, your judgment and vengeance is the Lords: Remember that by
title you are Gods: but forget not your private condition; you shall dye like
men: remember that you are masters and Judges here, but forget not that you
have a master and a Judge in heaven Look upon the people, and think, though
they be many as the blades of the field, yet are they but grass: all flesh is
grass, surely Isaie. 40. 7.
the people are grass: but yet look again, and behold that as the grass
is, so is the flower also: as the people are, so are the Rulers: there is some
difference in beauty and dignity, as there is in the flower and the grass:
but the grass withers, and the flower fades: men dye, and mortal Gods,
like men perish, but the word of God endures for ever.

To be short, let all that fear God, obey this precept of his; renounce the
pursuit of their own malice, purge their hearts, and cleanse their hands,
give place to his ordinance, reverence his Ministers, seek lawful remedies
upon necessity: but seek not so revenge in this world, as though thou
would leave nothing to be revenged of God, in another. Despise not Gods
vengeance here on earth: neither faint, nor be astonished though thy cause can
not be heard, though thy right cannot be cleared: appeal in prayers to the
witness and Judge of heaven: he is higher than the highest, even that king of
kings, that God of Gods, that Lord of lords, whose great name is here
subscribed to the claim and promise of truth: vengeance is mine, I will repay
says the Lord: to whom being one in substance, three in person, the only
wise, invisible, and eternal God, be all honor, power and dominion for ever
and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
THE SWORD OF MAINTENANCE.

A Sermon preached before the Right Worshipful the Judges of Assise, and
gentlemen, assembled at Hertford, the 13. of July 1599 for the execution of
Justice.

*

PERIIT ET INVENTA EST printer's device of Robert Barker

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Gregory Seaton. 1600.

The text. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgment in the
gate: it may be Amos. 5. 15.
that the Lord God of hosts will be merciful unto the remnant of Joseph.
INeede not use many circumstances (Right worshipful Fathers and brethren
beloved in the Lord) to move this grave assembly to attention, whose religious
minds are readily prepared (I trust) to receive with meekenes the word of
God: and therefore cannot but affourd me beneuolent audience in the handling
of the matter of this text, being so consonant to your godly dispositions,
pertinent to the present occasion, and set down in compendious precepts, so
fit for your sharp understanding and short allowance of time.

For what else is my text, but a brief issue of a long Process between the
Lord of hosts and his people? Who like a plaintiff much agrieued, Amos. 3.
had often protested against the rebellions of Israel, and made many
proclamations (as with sound of trumpet) against their injuries offered:
reproved their corruptions of Amos. 4.
religion, and their defaults of Justice, cut down their mighty sins with
mighty judgments and executions of famine, sword and pestilence, thereby
having wasted their multitude from thousands to hundreds, from hundreds Am. 5.
to tennes: and yet now as a kind father intending the correction and not the
confusion of his children, he offers a capitulation of peace, with these
conditions. If you will seek the Lord, and live, if you will seek good and
not evil, choose life and not death: hate his enemies, love his friends,
establish his approved ordinance of judgment: abandon all places of idolatry,
surcease those lofty sins of oppression and injustice, so commonly practiced
in the gate, then go to, the Lord will reason with you, and come to a friendly
parle for further reconciliation. But before any peace can be concluded, mercy
expected, punishment released, or execution stayed: you must condescend to
these Articles: Hate the evil and love the good, and establish judgment in
the gate.

In these words we may generally note these is drawn and confined wholly to
the good. The action is mixed, including many virtues, excluding many vi^es,
being an accomplishment of justice and mercy, and the establishment of
judgment, whose fountain is in the heart, and private affections of men
reformed: but the streams do flow, and run down in public to the comfort
of the good, and terror of the badde. These are the Articles which the Lord
does propounde to the Israelites by his Prophet Amos, and daily by us his
Ambassadors does offer unto you his people, 2. Cor. 5
with desire that you would be reconciled unto him, and subscribe with heart
and hand to the contents thereof. Which being promised, and performed, behold
a gracious truce and covenant on Gods behalf: It may be the Lord of hosts
will be merciful to the remnant of Joseph. Let no man be discouraged at this
phrase of speech, as though Gods promises were like the doubtful Oracles of
heathenish Idols, yea and nay: it may be, and it may not be: for with the Lord
there is assurance of mercy, his words be yea, and Amen. Has he said it,
and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?
The possibilities Numb. 23.
of men are full of hazard, but the Lord is not a man that he should lie or
double, or be prevented of his purpose. Is there no doubt then in this speech?
None, touching the absolute performance of the Lord: but much difficulty in
respect of flesh and blood, if men look upon their own unworthiness,
unconstant perseverance, and the low ebb that the house of Joseph, and Gods
people are sometimes driven unto. Yet again, all is courage, when we cast our
eyes upon the Lord of hosts who is strong to save, inclyning to mercy, whose
readiness to help in extremity appeared to Joseph; and was often showed to
his seed, when they were but a remnant and reuersion: and therefore may
assuredly comfort all faithful hearts that without all doubt, he will be
merciful unto them, if they keep this covenant with the Lord, and consent to
hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate.

Thus much have I spoken to declare upon what ground our doctrine and
exhortations (by Gods assistance) shall be planted: in what terms the estate
of the Israelites ^hen stood: and what Articles were propounded for the
redress of their calamities: in the urging and unfolding whereof, our greatest
time shall be spent; because we desire to apply the same approved remedy to our
own decays, and wa^ts, assuring our selves the Lord will not fail to be
merciful, if we keep touch and promise with him, in such conditions as he
requires.

In one word therefore to wind up the su^me of all these conditions: it is
that which we Knowledge. 1
call sometimes conscience, sometimes zeal; not the common conscience of the
world: but that same which is first cu^scientia, joined with knowledge, that it
may have an eye to discern Courag^. 2.
good from evil. Secondly that which is rooted and planted in the will and
affections, that it may have an edge of hatred to threaten the evil: and a
back of love to defend the good. Practice. 3.
Thirdly such a conscience here is required, as has not only skill to
discern or will to desire, but also a ready hand to practice: not resting in
contemplation, but proceeding to such action as the place and vocation of every
man exhorts him unto for the maintenance of judgment in the gate. These
three properties of a good conscience, called by the Lord, in this text, and
aspired unto by all that fear God, or love the good estate of their country,
amongst this grave assembly, occasion me to speak somewhat of either, and
first of knowledge.

Knowledge is the guide and light of a good 1. Knowledge
conscience. A fit Intelligencer for the will and affections, for it advises
what is evil and to be eschewed, what is good and to be embraced. Without this
direction, hatred like a blind archer shootes beside the mark* and may kill a
man in stead of a beast: And love cherishes often a snake in the bosom, in
stead of a friend. As the eye discernes between light and darkness, so the
understanding tries out the difference between good and evil. Therefore
seek good, and not evil said the Prophet in the former verse. No man can
seek well without light, nor find the good except he can distinguish it from
the badde, and trying all hold that which is the best.

Many are the difficulties that hinder us from the discovery of evil, and the
recovery of the good: and yet great is the danger, if we mistake the one for
the other.

The difficulties appear if we consider first Difficult.
the blindness of our own heart, except it compassing us about, pressing us
down, Satan as a prince in the air tempting us, a world of sin about us, a
body of sin within us. Besides this, the custom of sin has flying
upward, and therefore not followed with half so many scholars as iniquity,
that pulles down the hill to the broad gates of hell and destruction. Lastly
evil Danger.
and body.

The fruit of the forbidden tree was pleasant to behold, and good to eat,
but it was bitterness and death at the last. For evil is of two sorts, the
seed and the fruit; the seed is sin, and the fruit is punishment: the one
is a sweet bait, the other a deadely hook: it goes down pleasantly like
wine, but it stingeth in the end like a Scorpion. Prou. 23. 31.
And yet there is a league between iniquity and our affections, as there was
between Iezabel and her chamberlaines: As Iesabel pearching aloft, painted her
face, and commanded 2 King. 9. 30.
her Eunuchs attending upon her, til Iehu, sent with revenge from God, began
to cry, who is on my side? who? So does iniquity possess the highest chamber
of our heart, and paints herself in fresh colors, reigning over our
affections as slaves, till vengeance hunt after her steps, and the messengers
of God give warning to the affections, to cast down their cursed mistress,
and renounce that sin, which they have served, least the fall of her, dr^we
all her Eunuchs and partakers to confusion.

The heathens themselves always taught obedience of the will to the wit, of
the affections to reason: which had been well, if the light of reason had not
been extinguished in heavenly things: and so fowly blemished in natural. But
the natural man's reason perceiving not the things of God (his wisdom being
folishnesse, 1. Cor. 3.
his light darkness) made the conscience corrupt and vain in the true and
particular discourse of good and evil. Many say: who will show us any good?
said David of the common Psalm. 4. 6.
sort: but he must have a new spirit and a perfect understanding, that with
David can lift his eyes to heaven, and cry: Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance; acknowledging al our felicity to depend upon the favor of the
Lord. In matters of common honesty, humanity, civility of manners, the
heathens were a law to themselves, and shall be a shame and condemnation Romans
2.
to us: in that with so small a glimse of natural light, they practiced many
things commendable, made many wholesome laws, excelled in many outward
censures, and actions of indgement. But we having the word Psalm. 19.
of the Lord, converting the soul, giving wisdom to the simple, and light to
the eyes: having the law of God (I say) to examine what is good, and what
evil, being the only touchstone of truth and falsehoode, the rule that
shows as well the crooked as the straight: If we love darkness rather than
light, if we fail in seeking and setting up the kingdom of God, or the
righteousness thereof in our life and practice: there remains unto us no
color of excuse, nor cloak of defense. For unto every one of us in our
several charge, may that protestation of Micah be urged: He has showed thee
(O man) what is good, and what the Lord requires Micah. 6. 8.
of thee: surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, and
to walk with thy God. And this is that knowledge of good and evil, derived
out of Gods holy and acceptable will and word, which like a cunning rider
turns, and directs our affections being of themselves like horse and mule
that have no understanding. But as the Lord instructs Psalm. 2.
all Rulers to be wise and learned, so in another place he will have them in
the fear of God, to Exodus 18. 21.
be men of courage also. For courage is the feruencie Courage.
and concitation of the mind placed here in these two affections, hatred and
love: which are profitable to the furtherance of virtue, and taking down of
vice, so as they stand in awe of reason, as a soldier of his captain, by
whose command he takes up and lays down both his courage and Basi, co^^.
Jrasc.
weapons. Wherefore these affections are not only to be allayed and cooled in
man (as some Philosophers affirm) but sometimes Peripatet.
also to be kindled and stirred up: that as the iron is steeled and hardened
with the fire, Bas.
so man's heart with concitation of the spirits against the right object may
have a tincture of greater courage and fortitude against GODS enemies. Neither
is this agreeable to the opinion of the Stoickes, Lactant. Just. lib. 6. cap.
14.
who utterly extinguished all sparks of affection, in their virtuous and
perfect man, pulling out both gall and bowels as though there could be no
good use of them, for the exercise of virtue. For indeed it is an extremity
of sin, to have a seared conscience, that feels no pricks of humanity: and
a token of a reprobate sense to be senseless, and without natural affection.
Romans 1. 30.
Neither again has our first creation planted any malignant nature in the
mind of man (as the Manicheis dreamed:) nor yet by August. confess. lib. 8.
cap. 10. Illyricus.
the fall of Adam is there a devilish substance of mischief possessing the
soul of man: but the same principles that were created pure and good, and
corrupted in quality only, by that afterclappe of our forefather: being
refined and altered by the spirit of GOD, are to be employed in Gods holy
service: hatred in the pursuit of evil, love in the defense of virtue and
goodness. By these therefore, as by the two supporters. Justice is advanced,
the scepter of Princes governed, the sword of magistrates kept upright,
kingdoms established, Gods Church and commonwealth preserved.

Seeing the Lord reaches the affections, and sets the inward parts first on
work, in the detestation of evil, and favor of the good: it appears, that
he condemns all hypocrisy, that glistereth in some eye-seruice, but acts
nothing heartily: and that he excludes all those dissembling Politicians,
which Machiauel painteth out in some outward colors and shadows of Justice,
but inwardly full of all devilish subtlety. Neither are those qualified
according to this rule, that separate the Serpents wisdom from the doves
innocencye. Achitophels counsel, though it be like the Oracles of 1. Sam. 16.
23.
GOD for worldly wit, and the great request it was in: yet being like
mysteries of the devil for dishonesty, and mischievous co^seque^ce is rather
cursed then blessed by the Lord: for his condition is to have wisdom matched
with holiness, a just conversation with a good conscience: an upright heart,
fearing God, eschewing evil, approving the thing that is good, with a constant
purpose in himself and others to destroy the power of Satan branch and root,
and advance the kingdom of God with the righteousness thereof.

It is strange to behold what a spirit of giddiness, confusion and slumber
sometimes possesses the mind and consciences of many that have had some
knowledge discerning between good and evil, but have wanted this sanctified
hatred of the one, and fervent love to the other. What made that neutralitie of
religion in Israel, and Samaria, that men feared God, and 2. King. 1^. 1.
King. 18. Zephan. 1.
yet worshipped their idols? halted between God and Baall? used to swear by
the Lord and Malcham? It was not simple ignorance of the true religion, but
want of zealous and hearty detestation of Idolatry, selfe-wil-worshippe, and
hypocrisy. And how is it come to pass, that amongst us, after so much
preaching, and so great light, so many stand at a gaze in religion; wavering
between Egypt and Canaan, between Christ and Antichrist, light and
darkness? Or what is the cause that in the womb of our mother the Church of
England, there are bredde such corrupt children, as account all religion either
a public policy; or term all hatred of sin, love of truth; reformation of
the life, study of piety, and practice of modesty but an humor? and a
fancy following the complexion? Doubtless these men have had knowledge of the
good and bad: but some of them have made no careful separation of the poison
from the wholesome 2. King. 4. 40.
fruit, and therefore death is in the pot: some perceiving iniquity to
abound, and the love of Math. 24. 12. Revel. 2. 4.
many waxing cold, became lukewarm and lost their first love for company.
Others having had never any love indeed to the truth, or hatred of
ungodliness, are given over to 2. These. 2. 11.
believe lies in the blindness and lusts of their own sense, and perverse
imagination. Who although they have been shuffled with Christians, as Saul
amongst the Prophets, by reason of laws and orders, for a season, 1. Sam. 19.
24.
yet are they such as never have made any covenant in heart with the Lord, to
hate Psalm. 50. 5.
the evil, and love the good.

As in matters of religion, so in civil behavior and outward justice, behold
(Right worshipful) the like effects of the like Ierem. 9. 3.
negligence; when men have no courage for the truth, they proceed from evil
to worse; as though they had no knowledge, neither of right or wrong, good or
evil.

Such was the sottishness of Nabal in the 1. Sam. 25. 10.
midst of his plenty, that he knew not his friend from his foe, made no
difference between David, that had been as a well to his servants, and some
common fugitive, 1. Sam* 25. 17.
that had run away from his master* He grows so wicked at last that a man
may 37.
not speak to him, and as he lived like a block, so he dies like a stone in
the end. Many, in the Preachers time, were come to that pass, that they made
no distinction between the conditions of the Just and the Eccles. 9. 12.
wicked, the pure and polluted, the swearer and him that feared an oath. And
what say the obstinate and wilful people in Malachie? We count the proud
blessed, and them Malach. 3. 15.
that work wickedness. Nay, in our age what difference do many make of the
truth and a lie, of deceipte and upright dealing, of whordome, and undefiled
marriage, of usury and honest trade, of stolen bread and the bread of
labor? the taste is the same, all gain is godliness; all money sauoureth
alike. O fearful shipwreck of faith and a good conscience; GOD and Mammon,
hell and heaven, light and darkness are equal matches in their lumpishe
understanding.

In all estates and degrees where there is a defect of courage and zeal, such
fruits spring up by little and little; as indeed Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus: no man at the Iuuenal.
first step came to the height of iniquity* Barnard^ servidi dom. Ecclus.
27. 11.
The minister that shines without heat, as he gives no great light, so he is
not of any great certainty, but is changed like the Moon: And Luke. 14. 35.
he that has no salt to powder his words, waxes altogether unsavory at
the last, and scarce good for the dunghill.

The Magistrate whose conscience affects not the due administration of
justice, grows by degrees to be a sleepie watchman, whose drowzie lethargy
depriueth him of all sense, and distinction of good and evil, right or wrong:
the extremity of which incurable disease, is noted in two properties by our
Savior Christ, of a Judge that feared not God, nor reverenced Luke. 18. 2^
men. Experience teaches us, that a Be which has lost his sting becomes an
unprofitable drone, neither fit to keep, or gather honey* and a governor that
has neither courage nor zeal against sin, is unmeet to preserve virtue in
her right, or maintain judgments A^^^de is more fit for him then a rod; and
a ab^^^t foil to play withal, then a sword of Justice to punish with.

The want of this zeal made that the faithful Isai 1. 21. 22.
city of the Lord became a harlot, their silver became dross, and the in wine
was mixed with water, their Princes were rebellious, and companions of thieves.
A lamentable estate is it when the affections are misplaced, and judgment so
turned up side down, that men will speak good of evil, and put darkness for
light, light for darkness, (...). 5. 20.
bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour. A woe is pronounced to those
preposterous dealers, that shuffle up matters with such confusion of judgment.
And I take it a part of the woe, that they grow from evil to worse, til they be
so infatuated ^erem. 93.
that as they, like Idols regarded in conscience neither right nor wrong: so
like Epicures at last they measure the righteous Lord, and his just judgments,
by the leaden rule of their corrupted senses. Such will the Lord search for,
with a candle being frozen in their dregs, and saying in Zephan. 1. 1^. Ezech.
9. 9.
their hearts; The Lord will do neither good nor evil. They sleep, and dream
also that the Lord slumbreth: who notwithstanding every morning brings his
judgment to light, and fails Zephan. 3. 5.
not: but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed, says the Prophet Zephanie.

It is no marvel therefore, that the Lord will have the observation of these
conditions to be grounded in the affections; and from thence to break out into
public action, and the execution of judgment in the gate: seeing that if the
fountain head be intoxicate, the streams will be (...).
infectious; or if the conscience be seared up, all other absurdities and
confusions of religion, common humanity, and justice break in amongst me^.

Behold therefore how these affections must work to the establishment of
judgment in our gates, or else what inconveniences follow: First by
negligence, where no gain appears; secondly, by partiality, when lucre is
expected. Some that hear this precept urged, hate the evil, love the good,
will approve of the love, but repeal his hatred. It is pity (say some) that
fair weather should do any harm; and yet for all this pity, there must be
foul as well as fair. Love, and fair means, gentle dealing (which they call
only love) are good, but to whom? Meliores sunt, quos dirigit amor (says
Austen) they are the better sort which will be directed by love: sed plures
sunt quos corrigit timor, but the greater part are not to be amended but by
fear.

An old festered sore must not have a le^itiue plaster. And it is true that
an unruly Patient makes a cruel Physician. As the wine that is too hard is
unpleasant: so that which is too flat is unwholesome. The Lord teaches us by his
example, how to use these affections, although he be subject to no passion
himself. Anger is not in me (says he) when he speaks to Isai. 27. 4.
his people. But if the briars and thorns were set against me in battle, I
would burn them, says the same Lord, speaking of his enemies. With the pure
he is pure, with the froward he will show Psalm. 18.
frowardnes, says David, attributing to the Lord mercy and judgment seeming
contrary by reason of the object he works upon, yet issuing from the father
of lights, in whom is no shadow ^mes. ^ ^7.
of change of contrariety.

The same David being a kind shepherd to Israel himself, yet takes
witness of the Psalm. 139.
Lord, that his thoughts hate evil: Do not I hate them that hate thee (O
Lord) do not I contend with them that rise up against thee? Moses was a very
meek man; and yet with the Idolatry of his people he is so incensed, that he
breaks the tables of the Covenant, and then he cries to execution. Every man
slay his brother, his companion, his neighbor: the fact performed Exodus 32.
(says he) You have consecrated your hands this day to the Lord. So
acceptable a sacrifice is the punishment of Gods enemies, and evil doers.

Job was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the Job. 29. 15.
lame: and yet the same Job makes this triumph of his earnest pursuit of the
wicked: I brake the chawes of the ungodly, and plucked the prey out of their
teeth.

The Lords champion David intended a rough c^re of intractable malefactors:
when he threatened them, and armed himself after this manner: The wicked shall be
every one as thorns 2. Sam. 23. 6. 7.
thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands: but the man that shall
touch them, must be defens^d with iron. Though the wicked be unruly, sharp,
and dangerous to deal withal; yet the Lord has armed your hands (grave
fathers) with iron gantlets, with authority from heaven, Commission from the
Prince, to gripe the proudest offender, to strike the Lion and the Bear, the
oppressor, extortioner, the robber and bloud-shedder, that the sheep and and
harmless people may be rescued from the ungodly, that are mightier then they.
It was 1. Sam. 15.
unseasonable pity that Saul showed in sparing Agag the enemy of God, and
Israel. And Achab did not wisely, in yielding such favor to Benhadad,
appointed by the Lord to die: although his servants presented themselves with
great humility in sackcloth and halters, glosing upon the rehearsal of his
words; thy brother Benhadad. Saul had a sharp rebuke for his untimely pity,
and Achab threatened that because he had let him go that was appointed to die,
therefore thy life for his life, thy people for his people, said the Lord. Is
it not needful to show a deep displeasure against all notorious offenders,
if the Magistrate becomes not only answerable in his own person, for the
wilful escape of Gods known enemy; but also the innocent people stand
indicted, and are to be punished before the Lord, and to pay their lives a
ransom for the wicked escaped with impunity? and that but by one man's
default. S. Augustine showing why the good and bad, were both enwrapped together
within the compass of the self same scourge by the furious Goths, yields
this reason: Iure amaram vitam sentiunt; ^ ciuitat. Dei. ^. 1. cap. 9.
worthily they feel the bitterness of this life with the wicked, quia
peccantibus amari esse noluerunt; because they were not bitter to them in their
sins, but over gentle, having rather fellowship with the works of darkness,
then reproving them. And this was the cause that father Eli was plagued as well
as his Sam. 2.
sons, for his indulgence, and remiss correction of that whoredom and
sacrilege, which to the dishonor of God, and scandal of the people they
committed. For when sin grows stout and lofty, and punishments weak,
when the rod of Scorpions is turned into feathers, when private men reprove
not the ungodly, ministers rebuke not, Judges and rulers (having them offered)
punish not, at the last all become guilty, all actors and consenters in sin,
and all be punished with a grand execution of some famine, pestilence, sword,
or such like calamity.

I would to God in our peaceable estate, there were no want of this holy
indignation, and religious fortitude, in the pursuit of those manifold sins
which are the spots of our peace, and shadows in the sunshine of the
Gospel. But set before your eyes (religious audience) our whole estate: and
consider (as I doubt not but you do often) the sores of our body politic, and
the breaches of our land, from the top of the head, to the soale of the foot,
and you shall behold many wounds, and many sovereign plasters, and yet very
slow healing, because there wants courage in the heart of the Physicians, to
apply the one to the other. Look down to the legs of our Commonwealth, and
remember that lately they were ready to rot with idleness and misery. Those idle
vagarants (I mean) who swarming like Caterpillars not long since, and treading
down Prou. 13. 23.
the field of the poor (wherein is much fruit if it be well ordered) walking
without check or shame, in theft, drunkenness, and whoredom, in
profaneness of life, and all ungodliness, swearing and cursing, lying and
murdering, begetting a monstrous offspring, (the parents without wedlock, the
children without baptism) are they not mightilye repressed by an easy
medicine, wisely provided by the superior powers? and yet but coldly applied
by the inferior officers? Who amongst us, remembering the gross
inconveniences of those idle backs and slow bellyes so tolerated to wnader
and increase, but will detest that course of life? And yet there must be a
respective look of love to Gods c^eatures, and a commiseration of them: for
though they be lazy legs, and yet are they our limbs, and members: and
therefore to be supplied with work, and relief, with direction and
correction, by those parts that carry the eyes, and wisdom to govern and
teach, As hatred of their sin is ready to whippe them: so love and
compassion must be ready to help feed them. They must eat (so nature
teaches us) not the bread of idleness, but their own bread, purchased by
their labor, so the Scripture informs 2. These. 3. 12.
us.

A wife and ancient Counselor sometime of this Realm, wittily rebuked the
manners and orders of a strange Country, not much differing Sir Th. More Vtop.
from his own but in the title; for that they first made thieves, and taught
them to steal, and after hanged them up. They made thieves (says he) in that
they suffered such a multitude of seruingmen, to be trained up in idleness
and pride: which after being thrust out of service, must needs be driven to
theeuerie, for begging they scorned, and to labor they had not learned in any
honest vocation. I will not say but men made service able are very necessary,
and stand before great men in good place: But idleness, permitted to a
multitude, must needs be the nurserie of beggars, and where many lusty open
beggars remain, there, says Plato, be many privy thieves, and pickers. As
all other Plato de. rep. dial. 8. Zepper.
countries are noted for some peculiar vice, which the people thereof are most
addicted unto: so English men though they be ingeniosi, yet are they desidiosi,
though ingenious, Ascham.
yet idle; it is our fault, and therefore asks great industry of the
governors, before it can be thoroughly expulsed. Neither is it to be forgotten,
that a renowned King of this nation Edward, the third of that name, procured
strangers from beyond the seas, with great rewards Camden in Kent.
and privileges, to come into this country; and teach our people that trade
of clothing, which to the great benefit of this land, and employment of the
poorer sort, is yet in practice: whence al our women are presupposed spinsters:
as the men of mean degree are intended laborers. And sure a kingly practice is
it to provide work for the lusty and strong, as relief and hospitality for
the sick, and the lame. From the head there descend sinews to the hands, and
inferior members: and from the highest in place, must issue such good
directions, as may govern the whole body, and keep it in frame. The legs
must not be cut off, or Heb, 12. 12,
turned clean out of the way, but rather straight steps are to be made to
our feet, and the halting legs to be healed, and the feeble knees to be
lifted up.

If we ascend from the legs to the hands: shall we not see a multitude of
them defiled with bloodshed, beside the manifold iniquities wherewith they are
exercised? Count the wounds, the murders, and the blood that is shed in
every part of our land: note how it is covered under the wings of men that
have countenance: how it is pleaded for, with this allegation, that life is to
be favored (even in favor of him that had no mercy in his rage) and we may
with good cause be afraid least the Lord arraigne the whole land for blood
unrevenged, crying in his ears. The life and blood of the murderer is owing
to the Lord, who puts the sword into the Gene. 9. 6.
Magistrates hand to make payment and satisfaction for blood wrongfully shed:
there is no way to purge the land from blood, but to strike the offender, that
the righteous may rejoice: Psalm. 58. 10.
and wash his foot in the blood of the wicked: and make it a Caveat to keep
him from the like.

Look up toward the heads, and greater men of our Commonwealth: If the want
of discipline, suffered the Grasshoppers to catch a head which skip upon the
ground: what will not the Caterpillars dare that sit aloft in the highest
trees, amongst much fruit, clothed in gay colors, despising the Magistrate,
and scorning the Minister? There is indeed a common disease very dangerous in
many of them, that carry something high sails, and think themselves to be
mighty: which is called, Noli me tangere, Touch me if thou dare. As in
physic, so in divinity, it is thought to be incurable: because the more it
is handled and dealt withal, the more it swells and rages with anger and
fretfulnesse.

This disease reigns amongst the usurers and extortioners of our time, that
hate the good, Micha. 3. 23
and love the evil, and pluck off the skins from the people, and the flesh
from their bones: that join house to house, and field to field, till there
Isai. 5. 8.
be no place, but for themselves: that depopulate whole towns, and swallow up
the poor that Amos. 8. 4.
the needy of the land may fail: and yet break through the statutes and
laws as through cobwebbes, which hamper the Flies, but yield place of evasion
to the Bees.

And are not many of the greater sort far gone with this disease, that will
be blasphemers in their speech as with authority? Their tongues be their own,
and who shall control? Are Psalm. 12.
not Laws, and Church, and service of God, holiness and observation of the
Sabbath, accounted exercises for mean men? Great men may do what they lust.
Hard is the fire to be quenched that has taken the top of the house: and how
hard a thing is it, for wealthy men to reform a vice? Who dare rebuke or
reprove Herod, though he live in incest and horrible Mark. 6.
adultery? If John Baptist shall discharge his duty, by one means or other, at
one time or another it will hazard his life, Judgments of the Magistrate, and
reproves of the Prophet, are not to come near Bethel, and the Courts of the
Amos. 7. 13.
mighty, as many suppose: yet must not we cease to warn and exhort, and
threaten sometimes: but you (right worshipful) who represent the Majesty of
almighty God, and carry the authority of a godly Prince: must especially
declare by the courageous execution of good laws, how little you regard the
high looks of the proud, and how much you hate iniquity, and love judgment,
mercy and fidelity.

You have a Sword of maintenance put into your hands, long enough to reach
the most offenses, both of high and low: although in those sins of blasphemy
and adultery, it seems to be too short. But though the swearer and adulterer
stand not in your Calendar condemned to die: yet the Lord says of the one, He
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain: the other he
seems to reserve to his sharper judgment, because he is here ouerslipt: for
whoremongers and adulterers God will Heb. 13. 4.
judge, says the Apostle. And yet as a prince sitting in judgment chaseth
away all evil with his eyes: so with your looks, and words of detestation
comptroll, check these faults at least, that your zeal and hatred against al
such evils may appear.

Thus have we sharpened this holy hatred, and brought it to the establishment of
justice in the gate: which notwithstanding is not contrary to love, but rather
a branch of that root. For as the Lords chasticements are the tokens of his
love: so are men's punishments the fruits of mercy and compassion. The good
shepherd is cruel to the woolfe for the lambs safety: and a good
magistrate rigorous to the wicked for safeguard of the meek. There is
Miscricordia puniens, and Crudelit as parcens; Pity punishing, and cruelty
sparing: say^h that pitiful father Austen, that yet overmuch contendeth
August. ad Macedon.
with the Magistrates of his time for the pardon of malefactors penitent.

But as the corrupt time and manners, require a concitation of anger, against
iniquity: so always be it provided, that hatred and love, judgment and
mercy, be knit together in one link: and sit both together as Judges joined
in one commission. All laws are not to be written in blood: nor every
offender punished alike, when necessary circumstances alter the case. They are
cruel Surgeons that have no other means of cure, but incision, burning, and
launcing, for every sore. There shall be judgment merciless to him that
shows no mercy, James. 2. 13.
says James, and the wise man gives this caveat: Eccles. 7. 18.
Be not just overmuch. Equity and not extremity is to be practiced, Be angry
(says the Ephe. 4. 26.
Apostle) and sin not: giving the spur to the affections: and yet adding a
bridle withal, to keep moderation.

And even when sin, detected and discovered, does enforce the Judge to
execution; then must he remember, that as he is a Judge for God: so is he a man
against man. Te habes ante te (says Austen) Thou have a pattern of thy self
before thy self. I can bring no better example of Judges charitablie affected
in this point, then your selves (Right worshipful) amongst whom we may
hear the Judge himself giving sentence of death to the body, with such
exhortations and comforts that may give hope of life to the soul: not unlike
the skillful Physicians Plutarch.
herein, which apply gentle and pleasant fomentations to the member, that by
their cutting and launcing is in pain.

There are two names (says Austen) Homo: peccator: The man: and the offender:
quod peccator est, corripe: correct the offender: quod homo est, miserere: but
pity the man. In this respect the mariners that were appointed to proceed to
the execution of Jonas, found Jonas. 1.
guilty by lotte, were much to be commended, for their obedience to GOD, and
compassion to the party condemned. For when they are about to cast him into
the sea, they break out into this affectionate prayer: O Lord, lay not upon
us innocent blood: for thou have done as pleased thee: which prayer, so well
tempered with justice, and mercy, may well beseem all men in authority, when
they sit upon life and death, and the search or punishment of transgressions.

If we shall enter into a more strict examination of these three words,
Establish judgment in the gate, we shall find three things in them. First,
that there be a settled habit in the distributers of judgment: it must be
established: Secondly, that it be generallye administered, without respect of
persons: Judgment is a common good. Thirdly, that the course of the same be
practiced in a public place of free resort, In the gate. It is not only some
single action which the Lord urges, but a continual exercise and practice of
judgment. It is not enough to do some things justly, at some times, and upon
some occasions: but the streams of justice must continually flow, as from
the fountain head of a sound conscience. It is reported of Cambyses, a most
wicked King, that he performed one point of justice upon a corrupt Judge: but
one swallow makes no summer.

That ungodly Judge in the Gospel did once right for a widow, that overcame his
accustomed delays, with her importunate outcries: Luke. 18.
the devil himself (they say) is good to some body: although it be against
his will and disposition. And did not Pilate extend some points of justice
toward our Savior* Christ, Matthew. 27. 24.
arraigned before him? Did he not pronounce him to be a just man? did he not
protest for his innocence, that he found no fault in him? And John. 19. 4.
yet behold against his speech, and conscience, he delivers him to be put to
death* and shows himself to have had some shadows, but no stabilitie of
truth or justice in him.

A Magistrate that has neither knowledge, nor conscience (and accordingly,
does not practice himself in the course of judgment) seems to be naked in
the gate, although he be clothed in scarlet: therefore he must suite himself,
and adorn his place and person with equity, and diligence: as Job speaks of
himself. I put on justice, and it covered me; judgment Job. 29. 14.
was as a robe, and a crown. So was he attired in justice, as in a comely
garment, covering all his parts. The cloak that hangs upon one shoulder is
quickly blown away, and some shreds and pieces of judgment only, are not
sufficient to show the* true properties of a just and upright governor.
Righteousness is to be put on as a girdle about the loins, to gird all other
virtues, to keep them round and close, and even on all parts: yet must it not
be like the girdle, that saggeth and be^deth it self to that side, where the
purse and the money hangs, not inclining to the right hand or to the left, to
the rich or to the poor, but equally and indifferently 2*
bent to all alike. And this is the second note of importance, whereby the
nature of that which here is called judgment, is declared. For judgment must
generally be distributed: it is not to give the offender punishment only: but
to yield defense to the innocent and helpless. And therefore in the holy
scriptures when Isai. 1. 17.
we read that the fatherles are to be judged, and the poor, then we
understand they are to be defended and relieved against their aduersasaries.
When the wicked are to be judged: that Romans 13. 2. 4.
judgment is vengeance and punishment to be inflicted upon them according to
their deserts. And lastly this refuge for the poor, and resista^ce of the
ungodly must be in the gate publicly: bitter like wormwood Amos. 5. 7.
to the meek and innocent. And further that wholesome laws being carefully
enacted, may be as faithfully executed to the confirmation of Gods true
service, the maintenance of the Princes dignity under God, and the
preservation of Gods people in peace, godliness and all honesty.

This mention of the gate is not in vain: for it teaches us that the Judges
and Rulers sat openly in a common place to hear and determine all matters
that were brought. The causes are manifest* namely, that justice might
gloriously shine, and show it self in public to the cheating up of all
faithful hearts, and open shame and ignominy of evil works. And that not
only citizens, but cou^trymen, forreiners, and strangers, might have free
access without danger Pet. Mart* co^. Jud. 5.
or disturbance by any local privileges. Besides, the exercise of judgment
in the gate and open place, might terrify those that had mischief in their
hearts, prese^ting commonly vengeance to their eyes, and terror to their guilty
consciences.

The consideration of this place must needs put us in mind of the Lords great
benefit to us continued: in that he has so graciously provided, that our
gates, and public Courts of Justice have neither bin shut up for fear of
enemies, nor pestered with wars and violence; that Zechar. 2. 7.
our Country is inhabited as Jerusalem without walls: that our Castles bearing
only the ancient titles of war, are become for the most part ruinous by long
peace, and courts where peaceable judgments are executed: that our halberds
are rather ensigns of honor and ornament, then weapons of necessity.
Deborah, that mother in Israel, triumphed that Judge. 5. 1^.
in her time the towns were inhabited, the people might go to the gates for
judgment: and such peace under the government of a woman had the Land for
forty years. Of the like or greater Verse. 31.
benefits of peace, people, and judgments may our victorious Mother rejoice,
and set her heart (as Deborah did) upon the governors of Israel and Verse. 9.
on them that are willing amongst the people; to stir them up to praise the
Lord, for victories, deliverance, and continuance of peace, above the space of
forty years already: By thy good pleasure (O Lord) and to thy glory be these
years doubled; of life to our Deborah, and of peace to our Israel. But let us
return to the gates of Israel, and the execution of judgment there practiced
in the time of Amos. All was not in frame belike, because the Lord so earnestly
deals to have justice established, as though it were decayed, and ruinated.
Isai. 5 7*
It was even so: when the Lord looked for judgment, behold oppression: for
righteousness, behold a crying. Judgment was turned backward, justice stood a
far off* truth was fallen in the streets, Isai. 59. 14.
^quity could not enter, he that refrained from evil, made himself a prey. The
Lord knew their manifold, and mighty sins: they afflicte the just, they take
rewards, and they oppress the poor in the gate. A^. ^.12.
Therefore amend your ways (says the Lord) establish judgment: let not
ungodliness sit in the place of justice, any longer.

Shall we take a view of that which most corrupted their state, and
overthrows judgment in all places whereit takes foot? There was respect of
persons, a gainefull cause was sooner heard, and had more favor, then truth
in form a pauperis. The righteous were sold for Amos. 2. 6. cap. 4. 1.
silver, the poor for shoes. The great men were as kyne of Bashan, full
fed, oppressing the poor, destroying the needy, and saying to their
masters; Bring and let us drink. As though covetous Lawyers, should serve the
turns of unmerciful Landlords, in oppressing their poor tenants: and then
call for the price of iniquity, to drink and make themselves merry with the
tears of the widow, the sweat and the blood of the poor and oppressed. Then
is the estate most desperate, when the laws are stretched to serve men's lusts,
when private injuries obtain the countenance of the Court, and privileges of
the gate. When (as in Micahs time) To make good for the the evil of their
hands: the Micah. 7, 3.
Prince asks, and the Judge judges for a reward: therefore the great man
speaks out the corruption of his soul: and so they wrappe it up says Micah:
as a filthy thing in a fair clout.

The Lord knowing that no wine was so dangerous to Princes, as the swallowing
of gifts to make the magistrate drunk, and forget the equity of causes: and
that no train was so dangerous to undermine, and blow up the seat of
judgment, as those trains of secret briberies, has set down this precept
grounded upon true experience; Thou shall take no gifts: for gifts do blind
the wise: and pervert the words Exodus 23. 8.
of the righteous. Let no man reply, as though a man might purse the rewards of
the suitors: and his eyes see never the worse, to do Justice: for the Lord
says, it is impossible but gifts will blind the eyes of the wise: how much more
of the foolish? they will pervert the words of the righteous: how much more of
the covetous? and of him that will do wrong for a morsel of bread? his
conscience being gulled with custom of sin and injustice?

It is not enough then to wash our hands from taking rewards against the
innocent: but he must not sell right, nor make merchandise of equity. He
that plays a merchant of justice, executes justice, but unjustly, says
Philo de magi^strat, delig.
Philo: he sells that for a reward, that he should afford grati^* rem natura
pulchram, deformem efficit: he blemisheth a thing that is naturally beautiful:
he hurts the party, whom he should help: takes from him that has the
wrong already, and gets a bad custom, that his hands and heart will linger
after gifts more then attend to do right. For gifts be Augustine.
as birdlime, they entangle the wings, and make that the receiver is not his
own man, but stands in awe of the giver.

The Lord knows what metal a man is made of, and therefore to keep his
conscience sound, and vncrackt, and to keep the balance of justice upright,
without leaning and tilting to the heauiest end, he will have no such tentatio^s
of iniusrice admitted. Solomon knew the force of a reward? when he likeneth it
to a pleasant stone, that Prou. 17. 8.
prospers which way soever it is turned: as though he meant it to be the
Philosophers stone, so much in request, and so strange in effects, And indeed
it makes court for a man in this world, and brings Proverb. 18. 16. Proverb.
29. 4.
him beforegreat me^: but yet, by judgment is a country maintained, and a man
receiving gifts, destroys it.

The Thebans were heathens, and yet perceiving Plutar. in Isid.
the inconveniences of receiving rewards: painted their Judges without hands;
to signify that they should be no receivers: an easy matter if Judges were
but images: but the Lord preferres Exodus 18. 21.
to his seats of Judgment, such as hate covetousness, because they should
neither have greedy hands, nor ravenous hearts after the prey; though for the
pursuit of evil, and cherishing the good, they should be well provided of the^
both.

But gifts do not only consist in taking with the hands, of the rich: for he
that respects persons, Prou. 28. 21.
will do wrong for a morsel of bread, for handfuls of barlie, and sell the
righteous for shoes: nay for less than this, for some popular praise, for the
breath of men's mouths, to get some favor of the poor, as well as of the rich.

Felix a corrupt Judge fisheth after money to be given him by Paul, for his
deliverance, and therefore sends for him and co^muneth with him often: when he
sees no money come, though he perceives his innocence, yet he leaves him
Act. 24. 27.
bound, to make some advantage by him, if not by money, yet to get a poor
favor at the Jews hand at the least. The desire of praise does much: but the
hope of gain, and a gift in the bosom blinds the eyes, charmeth the tongue,
rauisheth the affections, seareth up the conscience, turns all things up side
down, alters the case, and makes that which is right to day, wrong to
morrow. Many in this asse^bly hauered of that famous Orator Demost hones, and
of that trip he was taken in, to his perpetual shame: for the first day he
dealt most vehemently against the Milesian Ambassadors, the second day he
appears again but in another likeness; his neck is wrapped and Plutarch.
his cheeks muffled, as one that would show an excuse before hand of his
silence, by reason of his disease, which he would have supposed to be Angina:
the quinzie, or the mumps: the people perceiving his swelling and silence, to
be but the blows of a secret bribe, termed his grief to be Arge^tangina, as a
man should say not the quinzy but the coyn-sec, and silver mu^ps. I trust this
disease be not amongst our Orators (amongst the better sort, I know it is
detested) yet some we hear suspected of some such sudden crampe in their
tongues, by reason that they have failed their clyent at his greatest need in
presence or speech, under some pretense or other: take heed: for there is no
greater wou^d to public justice, private conscience or credit, then to play
upon both hands, and betray the trust of him that depends upon your patronage.

But is it not lawful for Lawiers, or learned Counsailors to receive fees? I
come not to mar the market, nor to take away the hire of the labourer: they
may receive their fees, if they give their counsel, although not on both
sides. Saint Austen does rule this case, and teaches who should be receivers
in the courts of justice, and who not. A Judge must not sell, no not Iustum
iudicium: just judgment: nor a Ad Mac^don.
witness verum testimonium, no not true witness: much less falsehood. For the
Judge is to hold the balance equally between both parties, and therefore must
not be swayed with gifts: the witness must speak the truth indifferently.
But for the honorable Judges, there must be pensions of honor, estate and
authority, assigned by the Prince, or else in common not depending on the
suitors. Nehemiah had prepared for him, daily an ox, and six chosen Nehemiah.
5. 18.
sheep, birds and wine in abundance: although in the distress of the people,
he required not the bread of the governor: nor such large allowance. But for
an advocate it is lawful (says Austen) to prise his pains, and for a
counselor to take reward for his learned counsel of the suitor which
retains him: the weight of whose cause he must urge to the uttermost of his
knowledge, as being an eye to his clyent that can not well discern his own
right, and a mouth for the dumb, that cannot open his mouth in the gate. And
yet such counsel must he give, as tends not to the stopping of the course of
Justice, with crooked shifts and delays: but his counsel and pleading (as you
can tell best your selves) must be, rather to give light out of darkness, then
to cast smoke, and cloud over the light, rather to unfold then obscure the
matter, entering rather a conference the^ a conflict; that as two stones
struck together the fire flies out: so the wise and learned Counselors
arguing the case, the truth may appear, the Jury may understand, the Judge
proceed to sentence; and Judgment may be exalted in the gate.

As all good ordinances and benefits of the Lord may be abused by the
corruption of men: so may our peace, and place of judgment be defaced, either
by officers or suitors.

By officers from the highest to the lowest, if there be not a hatred of sin,
and love of virtue fixed in the conscience: when officers will suffer
corruption, and suitors offer corruption, what wickedness is not then bredde
between them? When David began to sing mercy and judgment, he first cleansed
his house, ^sal. 101.
vowed to walk uprightly himself, and to cashire out of his family, the
slanderer, the proud, the deceiptfull person, the liar, and all that rank: and
then he proceeds and threatens to destroy all the wicked of the Land. If
great men's houses were so purged, the city of God would the sooner be
cleansed, and the execution the better be furthered. It is dangerous for the
head when the eyes be deceiptfull: when the inferior officers and agents be as
false spectacles, to miss inform the conceit, and make that which is
straight, seem crooked. What a disgrace of Justice, and judgment is it, when
attendants and officers be like the horse-leeches daughters, crying ever Pro^.
30.
give, give, never satisfied? or when they show themselves light or uncomely,
in gesture or action? The throne of Solomon had lions carved ^. King. 7.
about it, to declare a kind of majesty and gravity in the very steps: not
apes, nor foxes, nor wolves; beasts that were either toyish, deceiptful, or
ravenous after their prey: so should great men's servants, and officers of
Justice be lions in show for gravity, yet harmless as those Images about
the seat of Solomon: rather terrible to them that stand aloufe, then hurtful
to those that have occasion to come near.

That zealous and upright Ruler Nehemiah, amongst other the abuses of his
predecessors the governors of Jerusalem, taxes this to have* been none of
the smallest, that they themselves were not only ouerchargeable, but their
servants bare rule over the people also. Nehemi. 5. 15.
As who doubts but inferior creatures will be most imperious, when they have
but the cloth or countenance of men in authority: if ^. Sam. 2. 13.
they may be suffered to make their own game and games. Elies boys were more
saw^y with their flesh-hookes, than became the sons or servants of a holy man:
they smarted for it themselves: 1. Sam* 3. 13.
but their father also, and his house for ever was judged beca^se his sons ran
into a slander, and he stayed the^ not. Too many not only of the priests
boys, but temporal men's officers, being but hungry flies at the first, bite
sore, and pinch near, making that complaint of the Lord in Isay to be true:
Children are extortioners of my people. I know that many godly fathers may have
wicked sons, and good masters bad servants. Our savior Christ had a thief to
his purs-bearer: the John 12. 6. 2* King. 5.
man of ^od Eliseus, had Gehezi, a liar: but he followed him at an inch, till
he found out his privy brokeage and cast him off for an hypocrite. It is a
worthy answer made by the heathenish prince Tiberius, to a polling customer of
his* that thought to have highly pleasured his Prince with racking his
subjects, and exacting great sums: Meum tonderi pecus ^im in Tib.
volo, non deglubi: I will have my sheep shorn and not fleyed. It is the
property of these underhand dealers, to pretend great husbandry for their
masters, and double diligence in their service: under which color they
practice their iniquity without check or controlment. But because it is not
for me to speak against these, except I have a sound warrant, I refer the^
to that threatening of the Lord in the Prophet Zephanie (where the Lord says) I
will visit ^ophan. 1. 8.
all such as are clothed with strange apparel, and those that dance upon
the threshold so proudly, which fill their masters houses by cruelty and
deceit. Wherein we behold their apparel to be strange for fashion, their
gate more like dancing then going, their place to be at the entrance, and
threshold of their masters door; no man may approach but by their admission:
their gesture to be full of pride, their gettings to be great, for they store
themselves, and their masters houses: the means to be wicked, by deceit and
cruelty: and the redress of these inconveniences to be referred to the
visitation of the Lord himself. I will visit.

As officers, so suitors do many times undermine the frame of sacred judgment
in the gate. Suitors are either such as seek for Law or Justice: or such as
owe suite or service for trial of right, as Jurors and witnesses. As for men
of our profession, I take them rather to be beholders, then actors, except it
be in this place: And (under reformation be it spoken) extraordinary men
rather the^ fit Ordinaries to hold the book and the candle to an old trewant,
that all his life time has lived without book.

Touching the suitors therefore that seek for relief, and righting of wrongs;
even they by their crooked and sinister dealings, by their malicious actions,
and bad handling their matters with additions of subtlety, and private
corruptions may poison and trouble the wholesome streams of Justice, which
should refresh themselves and others. Of these I have spoken largely not long
since out of this place, in the audience of the most, here now assembled: for
this time let them remember Salomons caveat: Go not forth hastily to strife,
least thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbor Prou.
25. 8. 9.
has put thee to shame, debate thy matters with thy neighbor. As though he
counseled to foresee the end before a man begin: and to compound all
controversies at home, if it be possible, and use the law as men use Physic
for necessity, not wantonness. Against these busy and rash suitors, that
seek rather for law then right: no such approved remedy, as the countenance
of a Judge like a Northern wind Pro. 25. 23.
blowing them away from the seat of judgment.

Next unto these suitors, are such as owe suite and appearance, by reason of
some good sufficiency of wealth, above the common sort. Our law intends
these to be as petty Judges, and therefore it behooves them to learn wisdom,
and the knowledge of equity above the vulgar people. It is true that (as the
wise man speaks) such as only hold the plough, or meddle with their cattle,
or follow their handicrafts, Ecclus. 38. 25.
are not asked their judgment in the counsel of the people: but you are they
that can labor, and yet need not, at all turns: and therefore your
sufficiency of liuelihoode and employment by the laws of the Realm do call
for some good education of your children, ability in your selves to understand,
and conceive the order and course of Justice. If the law make you Judges, the
Lord tells you that amongst the rest, you must be wise: that you Psalm. 2.
may see, not with other men's eyes, but your own. Now it is pitiful to
behold how irreverently many take their oaths, how slightly they regard them:
for the most part it is made but a matter of form and custom. As they take
the same oath with their foreman, so commonly they believe as he believes,
think as he speaks, without further examining the circumstances: or else they
regard the privy suggestie^s of a forsworn bailif^ and follow him as a false
guide: or in the prejudice, and stubborn partiality of their own affections,
without reason or common sense, dwell in an opinion: that though they be braied
as oatmeale in a mortar with a Proverb. 17. 2^
pestell, yet will not their folishnes leave them. And even by these means, is
the course of judgment hindered in the gate.

After these, follow the witnesses, which speak indeed before them: for
witness must go before verdict. These of all other must be upright and
indifferent, and speak the truth sincerely. Therefore the Lord, by prohibiting
men from bearing false witness, set down that very phrase in his speech, as
being the highest offense that by the tongue might be committed against our
neighbor. These must know that they speak before God: for they inform, and
assist with their evidence, ne quid Iudex (quia inspector cordis non Augustine.
est) Iudica^do erret: least the Judge (being no sercher of the heart) should
err in Judgment. These being guides to others, in the finding out of the
truth, if they shall fail, may misselead Judges, Jury, counsel, right and al.
Of all that resort to the place of Justice, none does so profane, and
co^temptuously abuse the ordinance of God, as a false witness: Solomon says, he
mocketh at judgment, Prou. 1^. ^8.
and swalloweth iniquity. He laugheth in his sleeue, to see that he can delude
so many grave wise and learned men assembled.

I greatly fear that judgment after this sort, by such kind of people is
made but a mockery in our days. For what say some being defenda^ts amongst us?
If it stand upon the proof of mine adversary, I am gone: entending that a man
of a large conscience may have proof and witness for any thing. There were a
kind of heretics, called Priscillianistes: which gave these precepts, Iura,
periura, etc. swear, and forswear: but it was to avoid persecution, and to
cover their own filthy absurdities. Certain heathens used to swear (as they
said) with their tongue, but not with their heart: but others that knew not
God, yet condemned this profane excuse and cloak of perjury.

What shall I call our false swearers, that for a friend, or a master, or a
piece of money (prevailing more then friend and master, or GOD himself with
them) will not refuse to justify any thing upon their oath? These Libertines
of our age, worse than heretics, more wicked than the reffuse of the heathens,
dare in the presence of God, before the seat of judgment (having their
devilish falsehood co^tradicted by a contrary oath many times, their
co^scie^ces gal led with evidence of the truth it self, terrified by the
warnings of the zealous Judge) yet set abroach a false and forged testimony to
the overthrowing of al just proceeding in the course of judgment. I know these
fellows are of great antiquity, though never grown so shameless as now.
Moses provided legem talionis, for them that should bear false witness. The
Judges, says he, shall make diligent inquisition, Deuteronomy. 19.
and if a false witness be found, it shall be done to him, as he thought to
do to his brother: an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. As that decree by
Moses, against false witnesses, argues that in his time, such ungodliness was
feared. so the plot of Iesabell (that, writing to the Judges, comanded them to
set up two wicked men, sons of Belial, or unthrifts, as some translation
has, suborned witnesses against the life of innocent Naboth) manifestly
shows, that this abuse was both known and practiced by the higher powers,
who should rather have sought out and punished such desperate unthrifts, and
children of Belial, then made use of their falsehood. But the like customers
were employed against Christ, against Steven: and the like treachery possesses
our common knights of the Post, such as being banquerupt of their goods,
having lost both credit and honesty where they are known, now set to sale
their conscience to the world, and their souls to the devil. Iuuenal, a
heathenish Satyrist, in his time derided such Sa^ ^.
loose companions, for betaking themselves to such professed villainy; and
wishes them rather to be brokers of old stuff: Hoc satius quam si dicas sub
iudice, vidi, quod non vidisti. Any base trade were better then to say before a
Judge, I saw, that which thou never saw. Faciant Equites Asiani Qua^quam and
Cappadoces faciant equitesque Britanni.
: Let the Asian knights, renowned for perjury, and false evidence, exercise
that professed treachery. He thought it a disgrace for Romans. And we may
think such damned practices unworthy to be named amongst Christians, except
it be with reproof and detestation.

If any such ungodly wretches flatter themselves in their sin, supposing by
their secret carriage to escape, let them remember that the Lord threatens to
be a swift witness against Malach. 1. 5.
false swearers: and to send a flying book, whose contents shall be a curse,
to enter into the house of Zacha. 5. ^.
him that swears falsely, and there remain till it consume house, timber,
stones and all.

And thus have we unfolded those conditions at large, which the prophet from
the Lord does urge to the people, in this brief abridgement; Hate the evil,
love the good, establish judgment in the g^^e. You have heard that the Lord
requires holy* affections, just actions; a good conscience led by knowledge,
to the hatred of evil, and love of the good: an upright conversation exercised
in the works of justice, and mercy, holiness and judgment, by every man
from the highest to the lowest, in their degree.

We have seen the defectes and decays of judgment, and how they are to be
repaired and amended, that Gods people may have a sure refuge from all injuries
and oppressions. And to this end is every man to meditate upon his vocation
and place, first in the Church and state of Christianity, secondly in the
Common wealth; and to study how his conscience, and actions thereupon
grounded, may turn to the maintenance of religion, virtue, and peace, and to
the wrack and confusion of sin and transgressions. Singulus quisque homo,
est vt vna litera De ciuit. Dei lib. 4. cap. 3.
in sermon, and quasi elementum in ciuitate, says saint Austen: Every man is
as one letter in the speech, and Alphabet; one element and member of the City
or Country. The highest in dignity, and deepest in skill, as reverend Judges,
worthy Gentlemen, learned Counselors, are as vowels: ^urors and witnesses, as
half vowels, to speak when they are spoken to, and to sound something with
others, nothing with themselves. Mutes there be that cannot speak in their
own cause: whose silence is to be assisted by the sound of others, that are
charged to open Prou. 31.
their mouth for the dumb. Dipthongs there be too many; double tongues, which
breath out hot and cold; these marr^ the consort of judgment, and harmony of
truth, and therefore are to be razed out of the row of a Christan Alphabet. To
conclude, if all hearts be zealous for the advancement of Gods kingdom, and
all hands strong and courageous to establish the righteousness thereof (both
in the true service of the Lord, as also in the preservation of his people)
then does the Lord of hosts promise for his part a truce, and peace to be
extended to us, as to his entirely beloved subjects.

Having thus declared what conditions the Lord expects: now remains to show
the Content of his promise, and mercy propounded for his part. It may be the
Lord will be merciful to the remnant of Joseph. Seeing that if there be any
default it will be on our part: therefore have we beat most upon this point,
that we first perform these articles required: for (as the Lord says in
Malachie) Bring all your tithes into my storehouse, that there may be meat in
my house, and prove me now herewith, if I will not power upon you a blessing
without measure. So, if we would bring the first fruits of our wisdom, zeal
and courage, that there might be judgment provided as meat in due season for
the relief of Gods people: prove him, if he will not be merciful unto us,
above all that we are able to ask or think.

This phrase of speech, It may be; implies no uncertainty, on Gods behalf:
neither does it teach to doubt in the Lords goodness: but rather it refers
all to his own good pleasure, which never fails them that turn to him
unfeignedly. But as the Israelites, in regard of their manifold transgressions,
and many evident tokens of Gods anger burning toward them: in regard of the
small remnant of people left, being but as some two legs, and a piece of an
Amos. 3. 1^.
ear, rescued by the shepherd, out of the mouth of the Lion: might conceive
some unlikelihood of their restoration: so we (beloved in the Lord) casting
our eyes upon the infinite number of our sins, beholding them as red as
skarlet, and hearing them clamorous in the Isai. 1.
ears of God and men: beholding his sword Ezech. 21. 10.
ready furbished to smite: remembering the loss of many sound Churchmen,
religious Fathers, grave Counselors, deep statesmen, upright Judges, valiant
warriors, worthy lusticiaries, which in short time we have sustained: may
perhaps in a sudden passion break out, and cry with the Prophet Amos, in a
vision: Spare (O Lord God) I beseech thee: who shall raise up Jacob? Amos. 7. 2*
for it is small. And yet again, as the Israelites beholding an outstretched
arm of a merciful father, an almighty power of him that is the Lord of
Hosts: remembering his deliverance to Joseph their father, contrary to
expectation: and seeing yet a Remnant still reserved, of such as may be
instruments of their recovery, might lift up their heads in hope of their
prosperity to be restored. So we considering the Lords mercy, sealed to us
by many favors: the Gospel yet continued: the bars of our gates made strong:
the light of our Israel unquenched by ^al. 147. 13. Sam. 21. 17.
preservation of the Lords anointed: beholding a supply of faithful
Counselors; a tithe of grave and learned fathers, godly and painful
Ministers: the seats of judgment furnished with men as renowned for wisdom
and courage, as in any age; the Country replenished with many zealous
gentlemen, prepared both to keep the peace, and build the wall of Jerusalem,
^ehemiah. 4.
with Nehemiah, and armed also against the sudden enemies of God, and the
realm, at all assayes: perceiving an holy seed, being as the substance of a
tree that has cast her leaves, a sprinkling of true O lives remaining amongst
us ^sai. 6. 13.
ungathered: a fresh care springing up in the nurseries of our land, for
religion and all good arts; some houses of learning erected; libraries of mute
masters restored from their ruins; ^ Sam. 19. 22. ^amen. 4. 7.
many good Samuels governing Naioth, and the schools of the Prophets, many
precious Nazarites, as the polished Saphires shining. If they Amos. ^. 12.
Revel. 17. 4.
may be kept from the wine of that golden cup in the Revelation: and not forbad
by their parents to qroqhecie, and serve God in his ministry. Seeing, I say,
such means rescrued, and sparks of comfort showing themselves in this dark
generation, and knowing the Lords mercy in appointing means of safety, to
those whom he intends to deliver: knowing his power in effecting his will by
feeble means: we may yet have some confidence that the Lord will take some
longer truce, and grant a larger time of repentance toward us, suffering us
still to eat the good things of our land, and enjoy peace with godliness and
honesty. But who are we that we should prescribe unto the Lord any conditions?
or stand upon terms with him? It is best for us to imitate those valiant
captains of David, who having set their men in array, and readiness for
battle, break out into this courageous 2. Sam* 10. 12.
exhortation. Be strong, and let us be valiant for our people, and for the
cities of our God: and let the Lord do that, which is good in his eyes. So now
having placed every man in his rank and order, in the Church and Commonwealth,
there remains only this, that we (fastening our eyes upon the Lord our
strength) be strong and valiant in the hatred of evil, love of the good, and
in the advancement of judgment, and righteousness in our gates: that the
Lord may subscribe to the continuance of our peace and felicity, in such
particulars as it shall seem good to his wisdom, and Majesty* to whom being
the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, and God only wise, be honor and
glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

