FAVNVS and Melliflora. OR, THE ORIGINAL of our English Satyrs.

John Weeuer.

Sit voluisse, Sat valuisse.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Valorous and excellent accomplished Gentleman, Master Edward
Stanley of Winwicke Esquire, all fortunes, suitable to the ancient worth of
the Stanleyes.
Howsoever (most bounteous Sir) this subject which I present, may be either
disagreeing to your disposition, or being but a Shepherds lowly pastoral,
far unworthy so worthy a Patron: yet the willingness of my soul, to show
some sign of good will to my countrymen, enforces me to consecrate my
cheifest studies to the setting forth of their admired virtues: which
considered, I doubt not but your Worship with courtesy, will accept my rusticke
inciuilitie, and with favorable Patronage, pardon my wood-borne imperfections.

Yours in all John Weeuer.

Of the Author.
THe Greek Comadian fitly does compare
Poets to Swannes, for both delitious,
Both in request, both white, both precious are,
Both sing alike, and both melodious:
I but the swanne remains dumb so long,
(As though her Music were too good to spend)
That so at last her soule-enchanting song,
Is but a funeral dirge to her end.
Weeuer, herein above the Swanne I praise,
Which freely spends his sweet melodious dittie,
Now in the budding of his youthful days,
Delightsome, pleasant, full of Art, and witty,
Yet heavens forbid he should be near his death,
Though like the dving Swanne he sweetly breath.
M. D.
In Laudem Authoris.
TExuit eximio Weuerus carmina cult^,
Texui^ and magni grande stuporis opus^
Si peterem meritis, meritas expromere lauds,
Vox raucisset iners, arida penna foret:
Te decorat Pallas, te lauro cinxit Apollo,
^e gaudent Charites, ^^eridum^ue chorus:
Dum cupimus musis vestras mulcere camaenas,
F^ndimus in pelagi flumina flumen inops.
R. H.
MEthinks I hear some foul-mouthed Memus say,
What have we here? a shepherds roundelay?
More loue-truks yet? will this gear never end,
But slight lascivious toys must still be pend?
Content thee M^mus, thou have lost thy sight,
For this is neither vain, obsceane, nor slight.
If for to write of Love and Loves delights,
Be not fit objects for the grauer sights,
Then still admired Chaucer, thou may rue
And write thy ancient stories all anew:
And that same Fayry Muse may rise a^aine,
To blot those works that with us do remain.
Then fear not Weeuer let thy Muse go on,
Thy ma^den Muse, thy chaste Endimeon:
To blazon forth the love of shepherd swains,
As well in Cottage as in Court Love raines.
And whosoever shall chance thy book to see,
In it shall read ripe wit, sweet Poetry.
I. F.
FAunus a siluan god, and Mellislora
A sacred Nymph, that used among the woods,
Rose every morning with the bright Aurora,
To gather garlands made of musk-rose buds:
In love they liude long, and in love they did,
(O wonder not, that gods, and Nymphs can perish)
Oblivion buried them in their chief pride:
So all men die whom no sweet Muse does cherish:
This Aesculapius by his cunning pen,
Reuines the dead from their obscured grave,
Such sacred skill has Art unspir'd in men,
And such a sweet reviving may I have:
All Poets with green Luirell crown his head,
Whose pen makes live, such as have long bin dead.
T. H.
To the true favorite of Heroical Poetry M. Thomas Bromley of Deeresolde,
Esquire.
Since that the Author, and the Authors pen,
At thy command are both as much as mine,
Thou may demand, and justly wonder then,
Above all other, why this book is thine?
Or why this Poem, to a Poet send J,
Whose quick invention, judgment, learning, wit,
Will soon perceive, and see wherein offend I:
And where I might more scholler-like have writ.
The Sun guides altogether, yet alone
And singular the seat is of the Sun:
To celebrate, and praise, all is not one,
I strive to stir, before I stir to run:
And Mellifl^ra (for the name) is meet
For thee, whose pen is slower and honnie sweet.
I. W.
FAVNVS and Melliflora
When Jove ambitious by his former sins,
(From him al Muses, so my Muse begins)
Deposde his Sire Saturnus from the throne,
And so usurped the Diadem alone:
Some higher power for aged Saturn strove,
Gave him a gift, which angered lust-stung love:
A lovely boy, whose beauty at his birth,
Made poor the heavens to enrich the earth.
(When Jove no beauty in the heavens found,
Was he not angry? yea, and to the ground
Sent Mercury, to woo a shepherds swain,
Whilst he himself came in a shower of rain:
Whose drizling drops fell into Danaes lap,
Which to receive, (maids will receive such hap)
She held her skirt, Jove such abundance powered,
Twenty to one but Dance was deflowred.)
His name was Pycus, yet surnamed the Fair,
Whom Circe chaunted in her scorne-gold hair,
Whom Ladies loved, and loved of so many,
The wood-Nymphes wooed him, yet not won of any,
Till Canens came, (who when she began to sing,
The ayrie Bird would hoouer with her wing,
To hear her notes, for Canens she was called,
Of singing sweet) and Pycus heart enthralled:
Not married long, but Canens did enjoy
Of fairest father, far more fair a boy,
(That heaven, and earth, in bringing forth these two,
Made a great brag that so much they could do:)
Faunus a boy whose amber-stragling hairs,
So strangely trammeld all about his ears,
The crispe disheuel'd playing with the wind,
Among the thickest, never way could find,
But sweetest flowers would leap from Floraes lap,
And so themselves within his tresses wrap.
That glad he was those locks (those locks alone,
Those locks that locked in bondage many one:)
With careless art, or artlesse care infolde,
And draw them in a coronet of gold.
If bashfulnesse enveloped his face,
A pretty palenesse damask't such sweet grace,
Like Daisie with the Gilliflower distilled,
Or Roses on a bed of Lillies spilled:
Or rather when the wood-Nimphs gazing stood,
Love like a tyrant therein threatened blood:
His eyes were such, my Muse yet hardly can
Emblazon forth the beutie of a man:
My dullard muse to sing it may suffize,
Of his rich coat he wore in wondrous guize:
The ground whereof was velvet, white as snow,
Reaching unto the ankles down below,
With buttons made of Diamonds upon,
Such as our knights of the order first put on:
Upon the left side it no fastening had,
But on the right side with a pearl staide,
Upon th one shoulder where the two ends met,
Were both together, with a jewel set,
On top whereof in lively form did stand,
Great Hercules with distaffe in his hand:
To every seame were fastened ribonings,
With stories wrought of Emperors and Kings:
And at each ribbon hung a precious stone,
(Loves chief disport consists in these alone)
Which were fair Ladies costly Amatists,
Tide to the tender small leau'de ozear twists,
That so they might his ribbons enterlace,
When he pursude the nimble Heart in chase:
And she grew proud, and held the rest in scorn,
That knew her favor by young Faunus worn.
Poudred upon so strange, that many thought
With purple colored silk it had been wrought:
But (ah alas) it was the crimson stain,
Of goddesses, which Faunus looks had slain:
About his neck he wore a falling band,
Which took it pride from his fair mothers hand:
His ivory feet, appearing unto sight,
In murrey velvet, buskins rich were dight,
The middle slits with tyrian Bisse were laced,
Whose pretty knots his man-like leg embraced.
In many places bare as use has bin,
To show the clearenesse of the naked skin.
The wanton boy attired in this sort,
Unto the Latian mountains did resort,
Whose proud height garnisht with such stately trees,
Seemde to contemn the valley at his knees,
The humble valley in as good a state:
(But lofty Gallants lower minds do hate)
Was still replenisht with a pleasant river,
(Proud of the gift, and yet more proud the giver,)
Whose wanton streams the ban^ so often do kiss,
That in her lap (at length) he falling is:
Her bubbling water with slow gliding pace,
Shows her great grief to leave that pleasant place:
And with a murmr when she goes away,
Greatly laments she can no longer stay,
Cause th'vpper streams by violence would come,
To take possession of that joyful room,
With swift pursuit, and as they gin to chase it,
The banks like arms do lovingly embrace it:
Whose purling noise upon the pibble stones,
For such departure are the doleful groans:
Her tears exhalde such norishment does give,
As on the tree-fringd banks made Pleasure live,
Among these trees a goodly Cypress grew,
That all the lofty pines did ouer-view,
Who bowed her fair head (in the sunnie gleames,)
To tres^e her green locks by those glassie streams.
Her top, her shade, upon the River showed,
For the kind mois^ure on her root bestowed,
Running upon so delicate a ground,
As that the truth could never yet be found:
Whether it made the gravel precious look,
Or else the gravel purifide the brook:
Whose meddowes green enameled with roses,
(It Was Paradise some Poet yet supposes)
Added a show so ruddie, that most deemed
The field to blush at his own beauty seemed.
Near to this valley Shepherds often met,
And by this valley sheepish squadrons set,
Within this valley past the time away,
With leapes and gamboles, and with other play:
Here the Nymphs played such summer games as Base,
For it was summer always in this place,
And Bar^breake, the which when Faunus saw,
So many wood-Nymphes standing on a row:
The boy, though young, (yet who so young that loves not,
Or who so old that women's beauty moves not?)
Spide Mell^flora: Melliflora was
Among the number sitting on the grass:
Sweet Melliflora I can tell ye true,
The grass grew proud that under her it grew.
Fair Melliflora, amorous, and young,
Whose name, nor story, never Poet sung:
She wore a garland wrought with Amorets,
With orphrates ouerlaid and violets,
Whose lacinth loue-lockes hanged out so fair,
As dressed the garland, garland dressed the hair,
And enterlaced with a purle band.
(Like cristall Tagus through his golden sand)
Which hiding now, then hidden by the hair,
At fast and loose to play it did appear,
Fair was her face yet fairer might have been,
If that the Sun so often had not seen
Her lovely face, for half the day he spent
In kissing her, yet never was content:
(For God or man thinks he the Cushion misses,
That wooes all day, and winnes naught else but kisses)
Until the sun with overmuch desire
Of love (for love is hotter then the fire)
Consumde the wreathe of Diamonds in his throne:
( Ouid's beguilde, it was not Phaeton)
For Melliflora was the cause he burned,
His chariot, and the world to cinders turned.
Strange were her weeds to Faunus, yet not strange,
For in such weeds the wood-Nymphes use to range,
A petticote tuckte even with the knees,
Garnisht about with leaves of sundry trees:
And sometimes like a net drawn up, and wrought,
(Which net the eagle- Jove might well have cought)
And all her garments made so light and thin,
(Who could restrain but think what was within)
And black silk laces whereon silver bells
Did hang above her elbowes, and of shells
Her slippers were, her legs, her arms, her breast,
In many places naked, yet so dressed,
As nakedness another raiment scorned,
For she her clothes, her clothes not her adorned.
Faunus a far off stood stone-still and gazed,
The more he looked, the more Love inly blazed,
He would have quenched it with his tears, but then
(A spark of beauty burns a world of men)
It burnt the more, yet who can well refrain
From drinking water, when he feels the pain
Of burning fever, though that water drenches,
And turns to fire, which like Love never quenches:
But youth may love, and yongmen may admire,
If old age cannot, yet it will desire.
For since that time old men of sixty years.
( Bear^ng a beard, or rather, beard them bears)
Will heat their bloods with love and young wives choose,
(At such sweet weddings yongmen nothing loose)
Faunus kneeled down and unto Venus prayde,
Before his prayers were the one half said,
He thought it best unto the Nymph to write
And show his love, but ginning to indite,
He tried the Muses with his often changes,
(Love never loves to rest, but always ranges.)
If once on Melliflora he did think,
He wet his paper both with tears and ink:
Fearing to end before he had begun,
Mistrusting each word which his wit had done:
One was too dark, another was too plain,
This word too lostie, and the other vain.
That set not down the sorrow of his heart,
This showed his passion, but it showed no Art:
He tore his papers, cast away his pen,
Sore was he grieude, and yet not angry (men
In true love are not angry) for he knew,
The more he studied, still the worse it grew:
Then he resolude to take the rose-strowne way,
Into the valley where he saw them play,
Accosted all with Venus and the Graces:
With white hair hiding their enticing faces,
Which hand in hand would make a circle round,
With often turning, then themselves confound,
In Pyrrhus dance like soldiers armed twine them,
And wedge-wise yoked in array combine them.
And when he came, that wood-Nymph was most feign,
That to their play might Faunus entertain.
And if he spoke, the Nymphs drew somewhat near him,
To taste the sirrop of sweet words, and hear him.
And gray-eyd Dorys she would always eye him,
Till she was struck purblinde she could not see him:
Some wished him sooner (though he came too soon)
Before the pleasure of the day was done:
Some said, the night for Lovers was the day,
And Love delighted in the night to play,
For now the day his office gave to night,
To lend our adverse hemisphere his light.
The Nymphs requested Melliflora than,
To move this suit to Faunus, she began:
I would we had such eloquence as might
Entreat your Highness lodge with us all night,
We and our arbor evermore would rest
Content, and honored with so great a ghest:
You shall but lie upon a bed of roses,
Your sheets white lillies, pillowes fragrant poses,
Your blankets flowerdeluces shall be drawn
With pretty pinkes, your curtains leasie lawne,
And in my bed, My, unawares out slipped,
Her face bewraide how that her tongue had tript,
Which Faunus seeing, would have kissed her then,
To hide those blushes (oh how kind are men!)
Fresh she begins, thinking that word to alter,
The more she speaks, the more her tongue does falter,
And against her will that My she spoke again,
(Love will not let such words be spoke in vain.)
This past as unregarded: Faunus said,
I were inhumane if this were denaid,
Overcome with joy, they in the mid rank set him,
He thought their arbor in the midway met him,
Such force of Music conquered length of way,
With torches making artificial day.
Above all trees in th odoriferous meades,
(With green vine branches, curling their proud heads,
And honni-suckles) at their lodging door,
Does grow the pleasing broad leau'de Sycamore:
Her entrances adornd with precious stone,
Built in the form of a pauillion^
Ridings cut out, so that the eye might judge,
What Angels did inhabit in the lodge,
And like a comet (yet more precious far)
Stretching her tale unto a lesser star,
He pointed at a pleasant summer hall,
Wherein the Nymphs did use to banquet all,
The colored marble beautified the top,
Whose pillars seru'de the house to underprop,
And underneath whereas a river rode,
Was mineral, her streams an handful broad,
Her shaking Crystal was a perfect mirror,
To all the beauties in the garden near her,
Whose water washed them rather they did wash it.
For when their snow-white ^uorie hands would plash it,
(Like honie-bubbling Ladon, or P^re^e,
Clear Castalie, or lukewarm Hippocrene)
Upon her face she makes ten thousand lines,
Ten thousand Saphir colored bubbles shines,
As not content in large to have their pinctures,
In each of them sets forth their lively tinctures:
And comes again to play, embrace, and threaten,
And laughes, and smiles, and leapes to be so beaten
Behind this brook or thicket was a green,
Whereas five hundred grasie rounds had been
Made one in one, like to these water rings,
Thence to a gallerie Melliflora him brings,
There was D^ana: when Acteou saw her,
Bathing her self (alas he did not know her)
(A goldsmiths wife once nakt without her pearl,
Hard to be known is from a country gerle)
A foolish Nymph sat weeping (for love can
Make goddesses like women love a man)
The posture of whose limbs so lively seated,
As Art and Nature Love and Anger ^reated:
Within this gallerie when as Faunus comes,
The grapes with child, and diverse colored plums,
Gave to the eye a pleasant taste, before
Unto the mouth they came, and evermore
The coo^^ wine sild into the goblet skips,
And laughes for joy to come unto such lips:
As Faunus drunk, still would he steal a look,
(Thus Faunus swallowed Cupids golden hook)
Then laid his eyes wide open his love to view,
(Thus he received the darts which Cupid threw)
Then closde his eie-lids from that glorious light,
(Thus he preserved the riches of his sight)
And thus fair words and power attractiue beuty,
Bring men to women in subiectiue duty.
But supper ends, and all the Nymphs expected
Some amorous talk of Faunus: he neglected
Vntiil a Nymph (this order yet we use)
Said, let us husbands in the ashes choose,
In lovers rites, Faunus though rude and raw,
It was no dallying, yet with Nimphs he saw,
Then smiling said: Fair Nymphs, the shepherds lasses,
Thus choose them husbands, turning crabs in ashes;
If in these woods good husbands be so scant,
Will you sweet Nymphs with me supply some want.
But some said nothing, these gave full consent,
And some said twice No, which affirms content,
And some said once No, these would grant and give,
In women's mouths, No is no negative:
Whereat he blushed, and fearing to offend,
The fondling thus abruptly made an end.
Sorry (God knows) the Nymphs were he had done,
Then Deiopeia among them all begun
To speak, whose words to Beril straight distilld,
As from her lips the orient peade trilld,
Looking at Faunus smilingly then said:
A cumbersome companion to a maid
Is modesty, our elders all contemned it.
For cowardice most valiant men condemned it,
Blushing and sighing Thesens never strove,
To woe and win A^tiope his love.
Nor would he have his time so spent and lauisht,
But laid her down, and some say she was ravished,
And so she was, but ravished with content,
And got with child, belike both did consent:
Stout Hercules young loles father slew,
And then by force his force fair Iole knew.
Yet this vnfathered Lady would begin,
Most sportfully put on the Lions skin,
And took his clubbe betwixt her hands and viewd it,
Though she was ravished, yet she never rewd it.
Soft Menela^s Helen could not brook,
Yet what enforcing Paris gave, she took:
Women are servants, servants unto men,
But praise your servants, what will follow then?
A ready horse straight yeeldes when he has found,
One that will have him yield, else falls to bound:
And thus she parl'de, thus she plainly wood,
Yet childish Faunus hardly understood.
Until to bedward all the Nymphs them dressed
To take their rest, yet took no ease in rest:
The night begins be angry, when she sees
She can distill no sleep in lovers eyes,
Tossing her self among the clouds now has
Sent the red morn as Herald of her wrath,
Whose lover Phoebus rising from his bed,
With his dewie mantle has the world ouer-spread,
Shaking his tresses over Neptunes ebb:
And giving tincture to the Spiders web:
These fair Nymphs rose, seeing the light did call them,
And fairest Faunus equipaged all them.
A fairer beuie of fair virgins never,
The worlds fair eye, the Sun could yet disseuer:
Their pretty pastimes, and their plates begun,
At Barlibreake young Faunus needs must run,
In couples, three, the mid place, called Hell,
But since that time the play is known too well:
With Deiopeia it was Faunus lot,
First to be Hell: they ran, and Syrinx got:
Syrinx and Spio so pursude the chase,
That Melliflora had the middle place.
Her partner At at Deiopeia ran,
But first for Faunus she her course began:
He ran, but ran with eye cast over his shoulder,
Not caring how, so that he might behold her:
She took him straight, about his neck she clang,
And on the grassie carpet Faunus flang.
Willing he was, yet wrastled, strove, and fought,
And fell to feel, and said he was not cought
By law of Barlibreake, because he fell,
It was his heaven, though thus to be in Hell:
(For many one for Hell, not Heaven would pray,
If such she devils were in Hell to play.)
Longer he strove, that longer he might stay,
But Deiopeia bade her come away:
(For she poor soul was huer-sicke of love,
And ^ear'd such strife another strife would move.)
And yield to Faunus, then she parts him froe,
(Though she from him, nor he from her could go)
Let us (she feared again they would contend)
Of Barhbreake for this time make an end,
Some other play, some other sport begin,
That standers by, and lookers on be in:
It ended, thus the other play began,
Some fifty maids, (too many for one man)
Took hand in hand, which made a spherie round,
Or globe the perfect st figure to be found,
Then one (whose lot is first among them all)
Must go about and let a napkin fall:
And whom foe re it heth next behind,
So soon as ever she the cloth does find,
Must with swift-running foot the other chase,
Until she come unto her rank and place:
If catch before, the fliers forfeit is,
To gratify the follower with a kiss.
The sport begins and Arethusa first,
Would have drop-napkin'd Faunus if she durst,
But she took Dor^s; Doris at next bout,
Kissed Melliflora, she fetched Faunus out:
She fled (yet took) he followed (not forsaken)
She ran (yet caught) he followed (and was taken)
Upon the back part, fixed she he her eyes
So firmly, that before she nothing sees.
Put down she falls (the ^ymphes began to wonder)
(...) above (^^t women will he under:)
^^e her the kiss, she (willingly though took it,)
Gave it again, the nouice then forsook it:
White Nisae^ next for Deiopeia pressed,
And she at Faunus, he could never rest,
But either caught, or else was to be cought,
Until the freshman faunt and breathless brought
With tracing was, (the Nymphs much swifter were)
(For love is hea^enly light, compact of air)
So that the slow'st among them never misses,
But casts him down, and smothers him with kisses.
These gamesome Nimphs, welnere seven days had spent
In such like plays, and sportfull merritment,
Faunus thought often Loves fire for to display,
Desire was bold, but Shamefastness said nay.
If he began to come but somewhat near her,
His body quak't as though his heart did fear her,
All that he said was, Nymph when you are at leisure,
Feign would I speak, he might have spoke his pleasure,
She found this means, only that he might woo her,
To loose her Necklace let her Caul forgo her,
Within the woods, that well she could not wear,
Until she found them, her loose dangling hair,
And as she sought them, softly thus would say,
I prithee Faunus help me, come away,
If thou should go into these woods alone,
Thy Melliflore would follow thee anon:
Will thou not come? believe me I must chide,
Yet he in love for all this would abide,
When for his love, Love fram'de the time most fit,
(^oyes love is foolish, Love to youth brings wit.)
Then to the hedges walk they on a row,
To pluck the sweetes (how sharply sweetes will grow:)
From sharpest stinging hawthorne as they go,
Fortune to turn their mirth to sudden woe:
From out the woods did send a fierce wild boar,
Which seen (such beasts they never saw before)
A care, or fear, or both, did make them trudge,
Some to the woods, and some toward the lodge:
Some under hedges, some to holes would run,
This way, and that, the best, the beast to shun:
But Melliflore (whose beauty by that pass,
Like a rubd rubie much augmented was:
Like musk, or ciuit kept in bosom hot,
Her breath most sweet by running sweetness got,)
Kept on her course, yet never looked behind,
Whom Faunus followed, whilst a wanton wind,
Like to some pleasant ciuit smelling breath,
Would gently play him with her veil beneath,
And come, and go, heave up, throw down, to show
Twise-wounded Faunus, what he did not know:
Something he staid his swift pursuit with leisure,
Fearing to be deprived of such pleasure,
But what he saw, it is needless for to say,
Here shall your thoughts, and not my pen bewray:
But as he began his swifter running slack,
The anger-froathing boar was at his back,
Which made him turn, and at the boar to thrust,
Into whose heart his hand he guided just:
He was but armed with a little knife,
Some des^iny belike preserved his life:
Yet by this fight he Melliflora lost,
So Faunus thought him worse then ever crossed.
In th'unknowne woods, then up and down he rangeth,
This way for that, that for another changes:
Losing himself, within a grove he found
Loue-sicke Adonis lying on the ground.
For hating Love, and saying Venus nay,
Yet meeting Melliflora in his way:
Love made (Love weep to see thy tyranny,)
Adonis frustrate his vowed chastity:
Whilst narrowly upon her looks he spide,
Struck with loves arrow, he fell down and did.
For by the Bore (as all our Poets feign,)
He was not kilde, Faunus the Bore had slain.
But tracing further, who but Venus met him,
Thinking he had been Adon, thus she great him:
Welcome Adonis, in thy lovely breast
Now do I see remorse and pity rest,
Which to return my dear Adonis moved,
Venus persuades her self she is beloved:
Hoping to have some water from the rock,
Which she had pierst, she stripped her to the sinocke:
Wrought all in flames of Chrisolite and gold,
And bout his neck her arms she did enfold:
So (at the least) she meaning to have kissed him
He turn'de aside: then sorry cause she mist him,
To Faunus said, fair Saint, shun not such kindness,
Can these bright eyes be blemished with such blindness?
If thou were blind, and Venus could not see,
Yet in the dark best sighted lovers be:
Or give, or take, or both, relent, be kind,
Lock not Love in the paradize of thy mind:
Is Venus lovely? then Adonis love her.
Is she the Queen of love? then what should move her
To sue and not command? Is she loves mother?
Shall she be loathed, which brings love to all other?
With that she do all to the Iuorie skin,
Thinking her naked glory would him win.
The shamefac't Faunus thereat something smiled,
Venus looked on him, knew she was beguiled:
Yet would have loved him for Adonis sake,
(Thus women will one for another take.)
Faunus resisted, Venus would no more
Solicit him, but mounted as before
In her light Chariot drawn with milke-white Doves,
Away she flies: Faunus left in the groves
No sooner had the wood him passage lent,
But home to see his father Faunus went.
Picus much wondered where his son had been,
Whom of seven days and more he had not seen:
But sleeplesse nights, his being soon revealed,
With sighs and tears (Love cannot be concealed.)
His father by his countenance espide him
To be in love, and mildely thus began chide him:
Fond Boy, quoth he, and foolish cradle witted,
To let base love with thy young years be fitted:
This vpstart love, bewitcher of the wit,
The scorn of virtue, vices parasite:
The slave to weakness, friendships false bewrayer,
Reasons rebel, Fortitudes betraier:
The Church-mens scoff, court, camp, and countrie's guiler,
Arts infection, chaste thoughts and youth's defiler.
And what are women? painted weathercocks,
Natures oversight, wayward glittring blocks:
True, true-bred, cowards, proud if they by coide,
A servile sex, of wit and reason void:
Shall women move thee, whom so many loathes,
In gaudie plumes trickte, and newfangled clothes?
Thus in our find-fault age, many a man
Will fondly rail with foul-mouthed Mantuan.
Some sharp witted, only in speaking evil,
Would prove a woman worse then any devil
With prating Picus: though that women be,
Fram d with the same parts of the mind as we.
Nay, Nature triumphed in their beauteous birth,
And women made the glory of the earth:
The life of Beauty, in whose supple breasts,
As in her fairest lodging virtue rests.
Whose towering thoughts attended with remorce,
Do make their fairness be of greater force.
But of this subject every day who reads not,
Which is so praised, as it praises needs not?
And my conceit not able for to reach them,
Might bring forth words for praise, which might impeach them:
And so with love it is easy to find fault,
Yet not so easy when it gives assault:
Then to resist his force, whose excellence*
Is to transform the very soul and essence
Of the lover, into the thing beloved:
This heavenly love (no doubt) young Faunus moved:
But (all this while being dumb) Faunus replide
Unto his father, and withal denide
He lou^d a woman: then his father knew
From whence his grief and melancholy grew,
And that he was by some wood-Nymph accosted,
Because the pleasure of the woods he boasted,
And Latian mountes. Then Picus thus again
Sharply rebukte his son, but all in vain,
Thou art no soldier for Dianaes garrison,
Nor twixt her Nymphs and Faunus is comparison:
Nymphs are like Poets, full of wit, but poor,
Unto thy kingdom, add a kingdom more
By marriage: let Pycus counsel thee,
Look not (my boy) at wit, and Poetry.
Faunus no reckning of such counsel makes,
(Light is that love which any counsel takes)
Then like Hermocrates the Physician,
Seeing his patient with an incision
Sore vexed, in steed of ministering to the sore,
Began to chide, bade him be ficke no more.
Or like a friend, that visiting his friend
Laden with fetters in dark prison pend,
With unkind words, and bitter terms does move him,
To leave those fetters, or he would not love him:
This other way from love would Pycus reaue him,
And bade him leave to love, or love to leave him:
Or if such love made Love not to regard him,
His love would love, with hatred to reward him.
Remember love, and Pycus would the rather,
Forget his son, he should forgo his father.
Love all this while on Faunus ey-balls stood,
Whose Envy, palenesse, Anger, caused blood
In Faunus cheeks, to hear such blasphemy
Pronounc^d by Pycus against his deity.
With that he leapes from Faunus face and flies
Unto the self-preuented Destinies.
He found them busy at a Parliament,
Under their feet relentlesse Adamant,
Above their heads the marble was for teele,
The ribs of iron, and the raftrie steel,
The walls of flint, and brazen was the gate,
And every one upon a wooll-packe ^ate.
Whose stern austere looks never mou'de to ruth,
By gold, nor favor, beauty, age nor youth:
Yet when love came (what hearts though made of stone,
In which Love cannot make impression?)
Welcome he was, Love then his speech began,
To show th'vnmanlike cruelty of man,
How Nature first ordaining one for one,
Made woman chief for procreation:
But men like drudges, not content to use them,
In blows (sometimes) and speeches will abuse them,
Love's will was this, that maids should have their will,
Not overmuch, but to restrain from ill.
Ill kept-in-thoughts, with virtuous company,
Restraining not from well-rulde liberty.
For maids were made to make such harmless plays,
Such honest sports, as dance upon the lays:
The hey-de-guise, and run the wild-goose chase,
And try the keeles the ^arlibreake, and base,
But with a barley when the pastimes end,
And maids must needs for milking homewards wend:
As some depart, some are constraind to stay,
For when they end, then Love begins to play,
His play is pain, but yet a pain with ease,
His keeles are coals, whose fire does grieve and please,
From play (for pray) Love takes two loving freeres,
Traind up alike, perhaps of equal years,
Yet such is love of parents such begot,
That wealth, nor worth, true love considers not.
Sometime a King dotes on a country swain,
Sometime a Lady loves a lad again:
Sometime the meaner will the greatst reject,
No not a person Loue'will once respect.
And having pearc'd the soul's seuen-doubled shield,
Love makes the one unto the other yield.
They yield (kind souls) but parents will not grant,
With tedious brawlings still they find a want,
One is too rich, the other is too poor,
(So then twixt Faunus and fair Melliflore,
Love told the Love,) and fearing fathers ire,
Love is defeated of his chief desire.
This kind unkindness children yet must take,
Until their parents price of them do make,
As in a market* then what man will crave them,
And give the most, he shall be sure to have them.
Thus from Loves mouth the honnie as he spoke
(...), as from the brode-leau'd builder oak,
And opall pearl from his lips did fall,
The Destinies began to gather all.
Such precious jewels, if they fell but near them,
And proud of such loue-tokens yet do wear them,
His sugared tale thus sweetened by his mouth,
The Destinies did somewhat pity youth:
With one consent and voice they all agreed,
These statutes should for ever be decreed:
That man for his vnmanlike treachery
Should be tormented with vile jealousy,
That maids from honest liberty restrained,
Should always think from what they thus refrained:
That it was some treasure from the which they are tide,
Some Indian jewel which men use to hide,
Some strange conserve, sweet, dear, and precious,
And women are by nature licorous.
These thoughts awaked, women grow manwood,
Nor can these thoughts from actions be withstood.
What bird is pleased, though in a silver cage?
A dog tide up in golden chains will rage.
That market marriages evermore should be
Content the best, the worst to disagree,
That shrewdness should possess the woman's heart,
In stubbornness the husband act his part:
Thus drawing opposite in one yoke, alive
Long might they live, but they should never thriue^
And since that time, all marriages enforced,
Never agree until they be deuorced.
This sentence given, Love then back returned,
To lovely Faunus, who in Loves fire burned,
But ere he came, Faunus had turned to hate,
His fathers speeches, and grew passionate,
Who in the night (the best means for desire)
Got up, and darklings, only his attire,
And naked beauty with a tresse of Amber,
Gave a resplendance to the purle-hung Chamber:
Sought for a suite, yet could not well devise,
What garment best might please his fair Nimphs eyes:
If costly, then for woddy Nimphs too curious,
If gay or gawdie, that was but penurious:
This was too old, the other was not new,
This the Tailer (Tailers will not be true)
Had cut too short, that he might have a sharing,
A garment then he took more rich then glaring,
Of gold beat Samite to his heels which rought,
With knoppes and broches, birds, and beasts, ywrought.
In tuffes of Cypress hung the Topaze stone,
Which through the Cypress (yet obscurely) shone:
As when we see a thin black cloudie clustre,
Through which the stars do yield a darksome luster:
A gorgeous choler of dear cheua^all,
Set with a white embrodered Pyronall,
And Margarites, with workmans rare devise,
It seemed like unto a shining Ice,
That night (adorned in this princely sort)
Faunus departed from his fathers Court,
And went, until for wearines he was
Constrainde to lie down on the yielding grass,
And recommended his fair bodies breath,
To Morpheus the elder borne of death.
There Faunus lie, and cease my pen to tell,
What pain those Nymphs abode for thy farewell:
How sops of sorrow drencht in cups of care,
In steed of Nectar and Ambrosia were:
Grief great in all, yet great'st in Melliflore,
Who thought her Faunus murdered by the Bore:
She cut the trees, and caru'de the tender graffes,
With doleful Sestines, mourning Epitaphes.
And stopped with sighs, and drowned in kisse-cheeke tears.
Her halfe-spoke words. A garment now she wears
Right Rauen-blacke, like sorrows liuerie,
Cut all in rags, yet ioynde so cunningly,
As by her clothes poor raggedness was bra^ed.
And poverty no greater riches craved.
The Sun this morn before he did appear,
Got two hours journey in his Hemisphere.
And Melliflora at the Suns first peeping,
With loves sharpe-sighted eye the thickets creeping.
Under the broad head of a Pine Tree spies
Faunus asleep, whose face to heaun-ward lies.
She shrunk aside, aside again she started,
Thinking he had been Adon, she departed:
But comes again, (for love lept from his eyes
And pulled her back) it was Faunus then she sees:
She knew and feared, fear she knew before,
Fearing he had been murdered by the Bore,
She laid her eie-liddes to his eyes and wept,
Then she perceiude her dearest Faunus slept.
With that she joined her corrall lips to his,
Sucking his breath, and stealing many a kiss:
Wishing the life of a Camelion,
That she might only live his breath upon:
Which all unwilling his fair body left,
And would not from that paradise be rest,
Or heavenly mansion, which he did retain,
But there in hope to be enclosde again:
This soft sound sleep to Melliflore gane leisure,
To see, to feel, to smell, to taste such pleasure,
As none but only she could ever know,
And none but Faunus on the earth could show.
Oh for how often (whilst love her marrow warmes)
Would she embrace twixt* Alablaster arms,
And hug, and cull the snow-white fronted Boy,
Call him her love, her life, her soul, her joy?
Then pry more nearely on his neck, with often
Quick moving looks, and with her fingers soft
Dimple his breast, and hanging ore his shoulder,
Hold Faunus down (thrice blessed with such an holder.)
And then again, though yet he sleeping is,
Thus she began to woe him for a kiss.
More gracious far then-dawning of the day,
Then Venus star, or purple colored May:
Let not my begging dearest Faunus grieve thee,
Upon a note ten thousand kisses give me:
And then as many busses overplus,
As Cinth^^ gave her love Propentius.
How many Cupids with the Graces trippe
Upon thy left cheek, and thine upper lip?
How many life's, deaths, jove's, hopes, cares, and fears,
Thy quicker moving eie-balles Faunus bears:
So many collings, with kind clippings give me,
As Cupids golden headed arrows grieve me:
And add enticements twixt thine amorous kisses,
And pleasant murmures with sweet sounding hisses.
As Doves by turns be either other nibbing,
And lovingly in blither words be snibbing:
And bloudlesse in my bosom when thou lies,
And I turn up my watrie swimming eyes:
Then will I glue thee in my limber arm,
If cold as lead, my breast shall make thee warm*
And Melliflora with her kisses breath,
Shall give her Faunus life in lookt-for death:
Until my spirit in dewie kisses altring,
Within my body faint and fall a faultring.
Then take me Faunus twixt thy naked arms,
And use thy hugging and thy kissing charms:
And in thy hearts spoone coll me least I perish,
As twixt thy breasts my frozen blood i will cherish:
And then, like mine, thy moistie kisses dew,
At po ynt of death life will again renew:
Thus shall we enjoy the heaven of our age,
And both together both our lives will swage.
This said, she gathered fragrant smelling posies,
And strewed him over with violets and roses:
Then with a kiss feign would she him have raised,
Yet stood stone still, and wishly on him gazed:
And forth his sleep, as though she feared to fear him,
She fixed her kisses to the roses near him.
The roses warm by Mellifloraes mouth,
A whispering gale of wind came West by South,
How many roses then before she kissed,
(If she had known this, none she would have mist:)
Her former kisses kisses gainde such plenty,
That she receiu de for one kiss more then twenty.
Such store of kisses on the sudden found,
Some (slipping from her) fell upon the ground,
That such an harvest came upon the earth,
As since, we had of kisses never dearth.
But stirring once, his pillow made of grass,
Faunus awakt, and Venus thought she was:
With that he rose, and like the blushing morn,
Having all night the loathsome burden borne
Of aged Tython (old men do no good,
Yet will be fumbling) angry then and wood:
Among the clouds herself she headlong throws,
To meet with Phoebus, what they do, all knows:
Headlong he ran, such gamesome love he scorned,
As Venus loved, to have his love suborned.
But Melliflora ran and ouertooke him,
And held him hard, and never once forsook him,
Until his name was honored by her tongue:
As one that finds great treasure stands long,
Doubting he sleeps, so stood the lovely boy,
Loue-sicke, amazed, and surfeited with joy.
But when he knew her, O what amorous greeting:
Faunus deuisde to entertain his sweeting*
Like to the elm enclaspt with wanton vine,
Or as the ivy does the oak combine,
About her neck his ivorie arms did twine,
Faint, feeble, weak, and languishing: in fine,
A moystie kiss sealed up their lips, as never,
Injurious death should their embracements sever,
But with their kisses make two bodies one,
And so their hearts with kisses live alone:
Some tears betwixt them (tears of joy again)
Did fall like silver drops in sunshine rain:
Then Faunus told her how he escaped the bore,
And both related th accidents before:
His ey-browes touch her roundie speaking eyne,
Kissing her neck and lips like Corraline:
Then busseth she his cheek, his chin, and brow,
Red, comely-short, and like to Cupids bow:
Yet in this union thus displeasde they be,
Because themselves they kissing cannot see:
Then like two culuers once again they cleave,
Hug, cull, and clippe, and sorry for to leave.
She carries kisses on her doubtful eyes,
In those two Diamonds pretty babes he spies:
Until they smile, which as the sun does chase,
The mist-hung clouds then shows his cheerful face,
From eyes, and cheeks, did drive away the tears,
The sighs, the sobs, the cares and doubtful fears.
Faunus resolved now had intention,
To woo (how love refines invention)
And thus he courted: Faunus thus begun
To woo a Nymph, who was already won.
Sweet namelesse Saint, (no name can set thee forth,
All titles are but stains to such thy worth:)
Whose ornaments and beauty pure divine,
Do make the city at these woods repine,
If that great highness can descend so low,
Vouchsafe those eyes to see their overthrow,
Disdain him not whose wit, whose life, whose days,
Does study, live, and serve, to show thy praise.
Think not my suit of small weight in thine ears,
Nor less regarded for my boyish years.
With that in his he took her moisty hand,
(How white God knows) and gently did demand.
Shall these white hands (quoth he) (and then he kissed them.
And turnde and lookte as though his kisses m^st them)
Become as withered grass, dry, lean and yellow,
And these ripe years be fruitless rotten mellow?
Shall such a field lie leyes and not be tilled?
Shall such rare sweetes be spent and never spilled?
Shall beauty fade, and earth enjoy this cover,
And not remain and flourish in your lover?
The heavens prevent from womankind that fall,
Women were borne to bear and borne withal,
That burdens borne that they might bear another,
A mothers child must be a childs fair mother.
Dear Nymph, enjoy the springtide of your age,
These April flowers in winter will assuage:
Spend that you cannot keep, it is not best
That death should take his aim from beauties rest.
Beauty (fair Nymph) is woman's golden crown,
Man's conqueresse, and feminine, renown.
Not ioynde with love, who dear yet ever sold it?
For Beautie's cheap, except Loves eye behold it.
You have the beauty Faunus heart to move,
You have the body to reward his love.
Impart them both unto the longest liver,
It (...) a gift which will enrich the (...):
(...), it sues, it offers to be taken:
High, I sue, and would not be forsaken.
If Beauty smile, then Faunus thinks him blessed.
Then Melliflora with a smile expressed
How hard it is true love not to discover,
With that (not coy, nor lavish to her lover)
She said, who taught thee eloquence, and wit,
(Conceit was quickened, and his words made fit,
She knew by love) whose force might well persuade,
And make thee brag the conquest of a maid,
Small were that boast, and smaller is my beauty,
The smallest praise deserving, and less duty:
You talk of beauty (if the truth were known,)
Because so well acquainted with your own:
For mine or any other excellence,
Were all imparted to me by your presence,
Which if I were, sole mistress of my mind,
I would repay, and be to you as kind:
But such a vow devoutly have I made
To die a virgin: scarce the half word said,
His wit and senses by desire set open.
Sweet Saint (quoth he) that vow must needs be broken,
It is not lawful you should make a vow,
The which Religion cannot well allow:
Our pure Precisians think themselves most wife,
Yet in this one point are they not precise:
No doubt, they marry when they feel the motion,
Untimely timely subject to devotion
Are then your years, to what end were you borne?
Remember but, and you will be forsworn.
A cloister woman mewd up in a cell,
To die a maid, and then lead apes in hell.
A Votaresse, a Secluse, and a Nun,
Nay you must be forsworn when all is done:
For, can you study, fast, and pray among?
No no, (fair nymph) your stomach is too young.
Your beauty will dispense with this decree,
You must be periurde of necessity.
If you but come your Orizons to say,
Dianaes Hunts-men will forget to pray,
Or rather leave before they do begin.
Are you not then the Autresse of this sin?
Or if her priests such fairness do epsy,
They will be conquered by your looks, and die,
Committing murder, what will follow then?
This odious name, The Murdresse of men,
Which is flat treason against all Deity:
For murder is much worse than perjury.
Save then my soul, and thousands more from spilling*
You get no praise (my Melliflore) by killing.
Such coy account, such niceness of an oath.
But they espide (not fully ended) both
Clear Deiopeia coming from her sport:
Love saw his journey long, and time but short,
In fewer words he sealed up the match,
And that though Argoes hundred eyes did watch,
They should depart those Nymphs, and fly away.
Faunus kind entertainment spent the day:
So Melliflora in the tonguelesse night,
With snowie skinned Faunus took her flight.
Which when heau^n saw (what does not heaven see?)
With rain of tears she shows her dwellers be
Rapt with that sight, nor trees from mourning keep,
But every twig with dropping tears do weep.
Such beauties past them, then the clouds gave place,
That heaven might freely smile upon her face:
The Moon at full was full proud of that duty,
That she might bear the torch to such rare beauty,
But to deprive the Moon of this her sight,
The Sunset loue-sicke, ^ose within the night:
With his approach, they both lay down oppressed,
Whose length the earth in beauties liuorie dressed:
Under an hill whose lifted bittle brow,
Would ouerlooke his prospect then below,
Whose proud high Pines, unto this day are prowder,
They had the hap from summers sun to shroud her:
Now mong the Nymphs is Melliflora mist,
And also Faunus, whither they went none wist:
They seek the hills, the valleys, and plain ground,
And this they find, they were not to be found.
With eyes, with tears, and tongue, their errand shown:
And this they knew, they were not to be known,
The more they thought, they knew not what to think,
But Deiopeia from the rest began shrink,
Thought she was gone with Faunus, was most likely,
(Riualls in love will be suspicious quickly.)
She offered incense to Dianaes shrine,
Even as sweet () I offer unto thine.
But three dares rites and ceremonies ended,
Unto Diana she her journey tended,
With low obeisance to her deity,
She told her Mellifloraes perjury,
That she and Faunus prince of Italic,
Were stolen away: at such impiety,
(Though Melliflore she loved dearly) wroth
And angry was Diana with them both:
She swear her priests and huntsmen would not tarry,
If thus her chastest Nymphs began to marry.
No more they would, but then incontinent,
Her purest priests and all a wooing went:
But Deiopeia her self banished
Dianaes court, and in love languished.
Faunus alone, with her alone required,
Alone with him, which she alone desired.
Yet now she fears to be with him alone,
Because no further in loves office gone:
He would have sealed with the cheifest arms
Of his desire, the wax that Venus warmes.
But as she did the contrary command,
He was afraid, durst not her words withstand.
Did not the boy therein a coward prove?
Nay rather valiant, to withstand such love.
The marriage was by one of Vestaes Nuns
Solemnized, She Faunus never shuns:
He gives, she takes, and nothing is denide,
She his, he her love's force and valor tried.
And still they strive, but who obtainde the day,
Let him be judge that er'e fought such a fray:
But faint and breathless here the quarrel ends,
Loves cause being righted, both again are friends.
And Venus, to increase their amity,
Considering words against her deity
Were spoke by Pycus: she incontinent,
In heat of rage her indignation spent:
Transforming him into a bird of the air,
And where before, of al he was most fair,
She makes him blackest, keeping nothing white,
But breast and belly (for there dwelt delight)
And by her power divine she so has framed,
That by his own name he is ever named.
And seeming yet al women-kind to hate,
Over their houses always he will prate:
And near their poultrie build his nest and watch,
How he their chickens and their ducks may catch.
Faunus and Melliflora now are gone,
To take possession of his fathers throne:
And being come, they find his mother dead,
For grief her dearest son from court was fled.
Almost a year with mirth the time was spent,
When chaste Diana on fell mischief bent
Entered the Court. (At that time Melliflore,
Grieud with the burden which her fair womb bore.)
And put upon stern Hecates attire
By magic, meaning to explain her ire:
And so (to ease her hate which inly burned)
The fair child to a monster she has turned:
His head was guarded with two little homes,
A beard he had, whose hairs were sharp as thorns,
Crooked his nose: his neck, his arms, and breast
Were like a man, but like a goat the rest.
No sooner was the fair Nymphs womb cut open,
To give the monster largest room and scope,
^ut out he flies, and to the wood does run,
(For there Diana pointed he should come)
And tripping long time ore the leauie launes,
Joined issue with the Satyrs and the Faunes:
But Faunus changing Melliflores complexion,
(Thus man to woman gives all perfection:
And as our chief Philosophers will say,
Woman by man is perfect made each way.
These virgins then of sound and upright carriage,
Are monsters plain without the stay of marriage)
At length begot Latinus, he Lauinia:
Aeneas her from Turnus took away,
Succeeding him, his son Ascanius,
And after him Aeneas Sil^i^s,
Him Brutus killed, and at our English Dover
Landed, and brought some Satyrs with him over,
And nimble Faeries. As most writers grant,
London by Brute was named Troynovaunt.
The Faeries offspring yet a long time went,
Among the woods within the wild of Kent,
Until transformed both in shape and essence,
By some great power or heavenly influence,
The Faeries proved full stout hardy knights,
In iusts, in tilts in tournaments, and fights,
As Spencer shows. But Spencer now is gone,
You Faery Knights, your greatest loss bemone,
This boon Diana then did ask of Jove,
(More to be venged on the Queen of Love,
That (...) late transformed sons Satyrs,
(So called because they satisfide her ires)
Should evermore be utter enemies,
To lovers pastimes, sportfull veneries.
Jove granted her this lawful just demand,
As we may see within our Faerie land:
The Satyrs ierking sharp fang'd poesy,
Lashing and biting Venus luxury,
Gauling the sides of foul impiety,
Scourging the lewdness of damnd villainy,
Shooting out sharp quills in each angry line,
Through heapt-vp vices like the porcupine.
If this praiseworthy be, then first of all
Place I the Satyr Academicall,
His Satyrs worthy are (if any one)
To be ingrau'd in brass, and marble stone:
Detracting nothing from the excellency,
Of the Rhamnusian Scourge of Villainy,
Put I was borne to hate your censuring vain,
Your enuions biting in your crabbed strain.
Now let us show the Satyrs enmity,
Which Brutus left behind in Italy.
The first Satyr of Horace.
To his Patron Mecoenas.
Bounteous Mecoenas, s'daining to peruse,
And patronage the weakness of my Muse.
WHat is the cause that none content will live,
In that estate which choice or chance does give,
But evermore a novel life pursues,
And praises that another man does use?
Th'vnwildie war^ior brusde with toil, and spent
With groueling ^ld, says, most of all content
O blisfull life, O merchants fortunate:
The Merchant says misliking this estate,
When Southern winds with rain bedagled wings
Swell up the seas, and him near shipwreck brings:
Warre's better, why? they fight, and presently,
Or quick death comes, or joyful victory:
The Counselor when as the clyent waits,
And fore the cocks crow knocks at his gates,
Cries, happy husbandman, his bed which keeps,
And lullabies his thoughts with careless sleeps:
The countryman, i^ for a surety sent,
Unto the city he is ever bent,
To gape, and pore, and staring wide he pries
On every mocke-Ape toy which he espies,
Iogging his mate upon the elbow, he
Swears citizens the blessed people be.
The residue of these new fangles would,
(They are so many which I have enrould)
Tyre-prating Fabius, lest I thee delay,
Hear in a word. Suppose some god would say,
Your likings all I wondrous well allow,
I will effect your will: and soldier, thou
Shall be a Merchant, Counselor I give
To thee thy wish, a farmer thou shall live:
Your trades are turned, depart here from my sight,
Why stand you still? they will not though they might
Accept this blisfull and their chiefest boon,
Then what is the cause but Jove of right may soon,
In wrathful mood engorge his swelling cheek
Against all this sort, and hear not them which seek,
And sue to change their present state hereafter?
But lest some say, too much I mingle laughter,
Though what forbids but that the iester may
Speak truth in toys, and make the Reader stay,
As fair spoke Pedants, teaching country schools,
With butterd bread will lure the little fools,
To learn their Crosse-row: but I Will make an end
Of trifles now, and serious things unbend:
The country swain which shares the yielding leas,
The Mariner that furrows up the seas,
The Tauerner which reakes not much to lie,
And Soldier, say, the cause they travail why,
Is this, that when vnnimble three-legg'd age,
There stronger years, or moyling toil does swage,
That then they might of all sufficient have,
Least easelesse need their body bring to grave.
Not much unlike the little Ant that moiles,
(A little beast, but one of greatest toil)
And draws her dainties thwart the hilly soil
By might of mouth: and placed in her cell,
In all she may, she huswiues it so well:
Lays it in piles, and shroudes it under roof,
As one which were not for to learn the proof
Of winters wrath, when sleeting Ianiuere,
With sullen shoures saddes the beginning year:
Within her cave she keeps her festival,
And feels the fruit of her provision all
In Summer time. ^ut thee, nor scorching heat,
Nor shuddering cold,
Nor stormy seas, nor winter, fire, nor sword,
Nor ought can keep from heaping up thy hord.
Thy glutton mind with moath-consuming pelf,
Whilst one thou see be richer then thy self:
What vailes it thee to grubbe this weight of molde,
So fearfully this Idol god thy gold,
In hugger mugger evermore to hide,
Which if thou spend, no farthing will abide,
And if thou snudge, and coffer't from the sun,
What show makes it, what good is thereby won?
Of corn (...) admit thou have in store,
An hundredth thousand (...) on thy barn flore,
What comes thereby? thy belly holds no more
Then mine, as if to hirelings thou were sent,
Thy shoulders fraught with bags of bread, thou went,
And they receiving what thou thither brought,
Thou gains no more then him which carried naught.
Or answer this: to him which does propound
Nature his guide, what booteth him of ground,
Whether that he an hundredth acres tilles,
Or else a thousand? But to him which filles,
From a huge heap, thou say, It feeds the eye,
And in the same we condescend to thee,
Whilst our repaste contents the mind always,
Shunning all not: wherefore do thou praise,
Thy corn-(...) gardners, boue our sacks? we feed
On them as well as you they serve our need.
As if thou must thy pot with water ^ill,
And by thy side a fountain does distill:
Yet for affection, and to please thine eye,
Unto a river fu^ther off thoul thie:
At which, whilst some have (...),
The (...), and they have fallen in.
But he that takes ^o serve his use, no more,
The troubled water near the slimie shore,
Needs not to drink, his fl^ming thirst to cool,
Nor drowning fear within the muddie poole:
But greatest part of men with poison d bait
Of wealth bewitched, abundance in each state
Is all their bliss, their God, and earthly store,
A man is but his money, and no more.
What punishment shall we devise or find,
For him that has this vnder-eating mind?
Lets suffer him in sin to wallow still,
And wretched be so long as er'e he will.
Such one we read of dwelt in Athens town,
In substance rich, but yet a niggard clown:
Whose couetize the world would ever hiss,
Of infamy he still regardlesse is.
Let people hiss and mock me as they list,
Whilst with my gold (quoth he) locked in my chest,
I please my self, mine eye still viewing is
My gold, my goods, my God and heavenly bliss.
Dry Tantalus does often aspire to taste
The gliding water, but his labor's waste.
Why do thou laugh? what pleasure do thou take
To love this gold, which endless grief does make?
For thou endur'st his fate, take but his name,
This fable's told of thee, thou art the same.
What though amidst thy heaped bags thou sleep,
When fearful dreams thy mind awaking keep,
And that (which thy confusion will bring,)
Thou sparest it like to some holy thing:
And Tymon-like thou do but please thine eye,
With that which should thine honor raise on hie.
As though it were in pictures to delight,
Thou do not know the use of money right,
Disburse it so for to supply thy want:
Let bread be bought, herbs, wine, or what is scant,
By which abating Nature waxes faint.
To wake days, nights to stand in awe and fear
Of thieves, least of thy riches they should hear.
Of fire, of servants, least they pilfer thee,
Be these thy gains? Jove then this boon to me
Grant, that deuoyd of wealth I ever be.
But if the cough chance trouble sore thy head,
Or some disease do cause thee keep thy bed,
Thou have thy friends still at thy elbow pressed,
Which will provide confections of the best:
Cunning Physicians for thy help procure,
And to thy sons and kinsfolk thee restore,
With potions will in perfect health again.
Thou art deceived, thy wife she works thy baine,
Thy son, thy neighbors maids, acquaintance all
Weep, but lest death should linger in thy fall:
What marvel is it when silver was thy Lord,
None love thee? thou deseru^st no loving word,
For if thy kinsmen and thy friends thou will
With slight regard thus bind in friendship still,
Thy labor's vain, perseverance in love,
Discordeth much. Thou may as well above,
The sluggish Ass a golden saddle set,
And teach him chew the bit, play, and curuet:
This be the end: when much thou have in store,
Then fear not want, and travail for no more:
Thy will accomplished, live then at thine ease,
Let not Ouidius greedy mind thee please,
It is too long to tell how he wo^ld turn
His coomed coin which shoules nor would adorn,
His corpse with clothes, but like the poorest wight,
No better then his servant ever dight,
Fearing his riches would in time assuage,
And he sustain great penury in his age:
But lo his wife (of Greekish dames most bold)
Did cut his throat, so ended he and's gold*
What, is it best like (...) to live?
Or all my goods like (...) gi^e
To whores and bawdes? why do thou thus compare
Extremities, all spend, or else all spare?
I would not thee a greedy (...) have,
Will thou then be a drunkard and a knave?
There is a difference twixt the Eunuch Taine,
And Herm^s^s that most luxurious swain.
A mean there is in all things, bonds be pight
On this side or beyond which naught stands right.
But now at length to come to my request,
How happens it that no man likes best
His own estate? His neighbors goat does bear
A bigger bag, her mil^e is far more clear.
Comparing him not to the great^r sort,
Whose state is base, who lives in mean apport:
But shoots at high^st, with him he does contend
To pass in coin, and so there is no end:
For he that all men means to leave behind,
In running (...) some richer eue^find:
As when to win some laurel crowned fame,
The Charrioter (as in th^olympick game)
Lashing his thundering Coursers makes the ground,
(Whose rising face their fiery hoofes does wound.)
To shake, and dandle, never looks behind
At those he coats, but swifter then the wind.
Scoures forward still, to ouergo the rest,
And here it comes that he has lived blessed
Not one will say: A man we seldom find,
So cloyd with the world, as one which has new dind^
Is with his meat: none in^s extremest days.
Will part from life, as from a feast his ways.
But drad Mecoenas, now this shall suffize,
Least thou suppose my volume would arize
Greater then that which bleare-^ide Crispine made.
Not one word more at this time shall be said.
The first Satyr of Persius.
O Slight regard of sots, or brainlesse men!
How great their blindfold vanities are, when
Naught they applaud but tingling Poesy,
Lulling the sense with itchfull ribaudry.
What means my tragic clamor, to what end,
My ayrie breath to water do I spend?
What man takes pleasure? who will loose his time
In reading of my testy waiward rhyme?
To me did speak, no flat-cap low prizde swain,
(Much less my self) to read my crabbed grain,
Will leave a pleasing Poets sugared vain.
Then to respect me, shall I find not one?
Yea, two perhaps thou shall, or rather none.
This retchlesse care is much to be lamented,
Wherefore? not that my soul is discontented,
Fore me they should Polydemias prefer,
Or blockish Labeo, these but trifles are,
No: for what thing it please tempestuous Rome,
To raise, or throw down by her bribed doom:
Thereto assent, correct, nor make denial,
Or in the balance poise that wicked trial.
Know thou thy self, but not by others words,
What man so vile but lustful Rome affords!
Oh if my tongue might run at liberty,
And now it may, I Am come to gravity:
With sad rough-wrinkled age, and what I say,
Is casting toys and childishness away:
And also now stern uncles I resemble,
Whose sharp correction make their neuews tremble:
Now then forgive me. But I will not tho,
How can I but a Satyrs forehead show?
And be a scorner in a saucy splen,
We write shut up, within our studies, when
He for to write in ordered sillables chose,
Another at his liberty in prose,
Some great great work the Romans have assigned,
Which to procure (I fear me) of the mind
The avrie lunges will troubled be for wind,
This doubtless to the people he shall reed,
Com'd, in his new gown* and his richest weed:
With his Sardonix birth-dayes jewel graced,
In some high seat, or chair, imperial placed,
When with some limber unguent he has noynted,
His moving throat, at all as^aies appointed,
Faint, with a swimming, turned up Venus eye,
He of his speech will make delivery:
Here may thou see in most lascivious guize,
The greatest Romans play, and wantonize,
When as their lungs his lust-stung words do perse,
And itching entralles, scracht are with his verse.
Old-ore-worne truncke, and do thou lay the bait,
For tickling ears, for ears which itching wait,
When in thy past recovery pocke-eate-skinn^,
Thou know thine own, and do excuse their sin.
O stay, what profit does thy learning show?
Unless that foolish doctrine thou do know,
And barren fig tree so deep rooted in thee,
Thy liver burst, come forth and honor win thee?
I ^hold thy manners, and thy withered eld,
O foolish manners now for virtue held,
And is it nothing for to know thine own,
Less what thou know, to all the world be known?
O but it is a jolly thing to see,
Men with their fingers point thee forth, it is he
Which pend that learnd egregious Poesy:
Deemes thou it nothing openly t^haue bin read,
Of an hundred schoole-boyes yellow curled heads?
Behold the Romans mid these gluttony,
Inquire the most be praised Poetme,
Some noble man t'whome bout his shoulders hings,
A diverse colored garment screaming sings,
Or through the nose speaks some foul tragedy,
Of Phillis and (...), or (...) hat po^sie,
Is lamentable in (...) surquedry,
He melts and breaks it in delivery:
They rise up all to him, they give the palm,
And with these speeches they his words embalme.
Are not the ashes of this Poet blessed,
The gentle coffin will not's bones have pressed*
From's Manes, his happy c^dars, and his toome,
Will not the Violets, an^ the Roses come?
And do thou scoff us? thy sharp hooked nose
Most craftily thy sharp derision-showes:
Will there be any will^ng to refuse
The peoples praise, when as his skillful Muse
Does leave works worth the juice of Cedars tree,
To after age, and all posterity?
And verse, not fearing Salters quick consume,
Nor Pothecaries wrapping in perfume.
Whosoe re thou art moud with my reprehension,
Which at this time against me does make objection,
I do not always when I write refuse
The peoples praise if so my dullard Muse
(Which happens seldom) bring some legend forth,
Witty conceited, sweet, and praises worth:
Nor are my heart strings of obdurate horn,
That such esteem and honor I should scorn.
But the maine point, and the extremest end,
To which thy study and thy actions tend
I do refuse. Thy well done, wondrous rare,
Good, ex^ellent examine with me here:
This whole great praise, what has it inwardly?
Here is not Labeoe^ sottish Poetry:
His Iliads drunk, with neesing Hellebore,
No Elegies for fair mouth d Romans more,
Raw stomackt at their banquets to rehearse,
For to be writ in Cittron beds no verse.
Thou know^st what dainties are most meet to place
Before thy flatterers, which thee always grace:
Thou know how to reward the need^e poor,
With some cast garment, threed-bare, raggd, and tore.
And then thou say, the truth feign would I know,
I love the truth, the truth unto me show:
Both of my self, and of my poesy,
What high regard wee're in. Fool how cannot be
That they corrupted with thy bribery,
Should speak the truth? Put without flattery
Would have me speak? Thy Poetry is vain,
Thee and thy works the wisest do disdain:
When such a hogge-trough, such a panch thou have,
Reaching a foot and half above thy wast,
And gurmondizing still in gluttony,
How can thou write (fool) witty Poesy?
O Ianus, first made prince of Italy,
Who can express thy great felicity,
Whom never Stork-bild ^eerer yet did flout,
Nor medlers hand did asses ears point out,
Behind thy back, nor put forth such a tongue,
So far extended forth, drawn out so long?
How far some dog of scorcht Apulia
Hangs out his tongue, upon the hottest day.
But you O Roman peers, whom nature gave,
As to other men, behind no eyes to have,
Look warily unto these glauerers,
These writhen-mouth'd frumpers gullish flatterers,
Do thou but ask the vulgars true opinion,
Of thy writ lines, thy scoffer in derision
Will answer thee: Why who can but commend,
Such a sweet flowing Poem rarely pend,
Whose pollisht numbers do so smoothly end,
He knows the best his verses to extend:
As one that having shut one of his ^ine,
With green vermilian draws out a line,
If need require to write a Comedy,
A sharp fang'd Satyr or a Tragedy.
Some fatal banquet of swart Atreus,
Orestes, Progne, and of Tereus,
Then does his Muse give witfull poesy,
Unto our Poet most abundantly.
Behold we see one to the hearing brings,
Some lofty style of Emperors or Kings,
Or some great Poem for to take in hand,
When as the freshman does not understand
His rudiments, nor has the salt of wit,
For to describe a grove as does befit,
Nor praise the fruitful country how the waines,
Carry the liquor which the grape distraines,
Nor fire, nor herds of swine fed fat with grains:
Nor yet the feasts of P^les celebrate,
The goddesses of shepherds consecrate,
From whence the Emperor Remus did derive,
His pedigree. How Quintus thou did riue,
And break thy plow-share, with the furrow torn,
Whenas thy stonisht wife stood thee beforne,
With a Dictators vesture thee t'adorne.
The sergeant who this sudden news did know,
Upon his shoulders carried home thy plow.
Well done ingenious Poet, to express
A lofty style, and graueld in the less,
But some there be who more obscurely write,
Whom th^venemous book of Labeo does delight,
Some with Pacu^^us harsh A^tiopa,
In reading over a winters night will stay,
Whose mournful heart in sorrows ecstasy,
Is underpropped, he says, with care and misery.
When pur-blind fathers every day thou sees,
Unto their children teach such words as these:
Do thou demand how this unpolished speech,
Into the tougues of all men made a breach,
From whence this ruin of the Roman tongue
Did first arise, in which the Romans long
Have took delight? fore all this they prefer,
And act it on the Amphitheater,
And does this language nothing thee ashame?
Will not gray hairs thy green affections tame,
And will thou ever be so covetous,
To hear this latin mingled barbarous,
Call Pedius Thief, then what will Pedius say,
He in smooth opposites will his trespass way:
And for his sugared flowing eloquence,
He Is greatly praisde and held in reverence,
O eloquent Apol^o robbing wit!
And is it so? lascivious Romans, yet
Like fauning dogs this flattering do ye love?
What? shall a shipwrackt man to pity move,
My liberal mind some money to bestow,
Whenas before me singing he does go
Thy shipwreck on thy shoulders thou do bring,
Upon a table painted, and do sing.
But such a whining speech premeditate,
Cannot make me thy chance commiserate,
Yea but in verse there is a comely grace,
A secret couching of each word in place,
The Poet did the Poem finish thus:
Of Atis borne in Berecinthius,
And not unlike the Poesy of him.
The Dolphin took Nerea for to swim,
Thus have I taken a part privily,
Of Apenines mount dividing Italy:
But like to these affecting evermore,
To speak by some odd foolish Metaphore.
Arma, Virum, what difference twixt them both,
Virgills beginning, it is a barmie froth,
A grosse-puft style, like to some bough pulled down
From the green corke-tree dried in the sun:
Then in thy judgment what worth reading is?
What Poem is most pleasing then? Why this
Of some wise Roman in his Nioblis.
Now they have filled their writhen unpleasing horns,
With the hoarse sound of hissing Mimallones,
Taking away the painted head by this,
From the proud heiter of priest Bassaris,
And Moenas wreathing th^ivie which, alone
Makes Linceus still redouble Euion,
And the new Echo answers there evpon.
Could these be writ, in us (Oh how I Am grieved)
If any virtue from our fathers lived.
This nice effeminate moving with our hippes,
This slime is ever swimming in our lips,
Moenas and Atis ever in our mouth,
Whose wanton speech corrupts both age and youth,
Nor has it yet a Poems trial biden,
Nor know what means a Poets nails off bitten,
What need have we? or what will it auaile's,
To pull our tender ears, or bite our nails:
Take heed, be not so malapert and bold,
Least that thy Patrons entrance waxen cold,
Denying thee to come within their gates.
Some churlish Porter thy approachment waits,
To beat thee back, and ever as thou goes,
This dogged letter R^ounds through his nose.
I pass not for it, for my part I praise
Your amorous Poem^* and your wanton lays:
O! all is good, all excellent you write,
These, these my words thou say again delight:
I do forbid now that there should be one,
Twixt thee and me to make dissension.
Paint here two Saints, say, children piss without,
This place is holy sanctifide about.
I straight depart. But Lucils liberty
Did lash and scourge the best of Italy.
Blunting his teeth against thee Rutilius,
VVhetting them sharp for wilful Mutius,
Sly subtle Horace taxed every sin,
Unto Mecoenas, once admitted in,
Twixtiest and earnest witt^ly would forbid,
More secret vices in the heart strings hid.
And craftily keep the longing Audience,
With a gracious gesture ever in suspense.
And was it lawful they their minds should utter,
And such a heinous thing for me to mutter
My half spoke word? nor spoke them privily,
Nor in a reed like Midaes family:
Yet in my book i will whisper secretly,
O little book, I have seen openly,
My self has seen: which of the Roman peers,
But now adorned is with long asses ears?
This in my book I insert covertly,
Yet would not change my smiling Poesy
For Labeos Illiads. Who delighted is,
To read bold Cratine, or crabd Eupoli^:
Until with old age he wax bleakish wan,
Read over my Satyrs, if by chance he can,
Some hidden knowledge find, the rea^er than,
With fervent zeal my Satyrs all will hear,
And read me over with a prepared ear.
But such a reader, such a tinckring slave,
For to peruse my lines I do not crave,
Whose dunghill Muse delights to look so low,
As cauell at a Grecians crooked shoe,
Or that can say unto the blind: you are blind,
One which all faults in outward parts does find.
Thinking himself one of authority,
Raisde to renown perhaps and dignity,
By bearing office late in Italy.
Because the false measures he has broken,
Of Aretus.
Nor crave I him who takes his chief delight,
Numbers and figures in a board to write,
Or in the dust, as our Astromoners,
Rejoicing much if from Philosophers,
Some shameless whore do pull away the beard.
But unto these, (when th'officers they have heard,
And Dinner ends, in lustful sort to live)
The Curtizan Callirrhoe I give.
The first Satyr of Iuuenall.
STill shall I then an hearer only be,
And never put forth my hidden poesy?
With the big Theseods so often cumbred
Of whuling Codrus, and unpunished:
Shall one recite alow^d his histories
To me, another his sad Elegi^^?
Huge Telep^us, ought he to have spent the day
Scotfree, or on a ful-writ Margent ^stay?
Of all the book with audience ever tended,
Orestes, not as yet behind him ended.
Venus (to whom it is dangerous denying any reasonable request) hearing
glowming Inuenall threaten so great a punishment, entreates my Muse, that for a
while she would leave him in his English tongue imperfect yet to Venus she
makes a vow, that Iuuenal, Horace, and Persius shall hereafter all be
transl^ted.

Loves Queen fair Venus all this while attended,
Wishing they would their critic style have ended:
Hearing them thus malign, snarle, rail, and bite,
Spewing the rancor of their envious spite:
Her Godhead being most of all abused,
All possible means she for reuengement used:
Abhorring more their spightfull action,
That they exposde her to detraction:
Because she saved from Iunoes tyranny,
Eneas sometimes prince of Italy:
Preserving then Ascanius his bratte,
By sea and land from her malignant hate:
Thus much by much entreatie she obtainde:
Or by her own power she thus much then gainde,
I know not whether, that (for Satyrs spite)
Italians should in fond loves take delight.
In stranger sins, sins which she was ashamed,
Among the Italians rightly should be named.
Sins, scarlet sins, sins who delights to use,
In other regions, thus we him abuse
(For through the world her wrath's inueterate)
In odious terms, Yon's one Italionate:
And (to be brief) that lustful venerie,
Should be the downfall of all Italy:
This is the cause Italians to this day,
Are ever ready, apt, and prone that way.
Not having fully quenched the flaming fire
Of vengeance, with th'Italians. Now in ire
She mounts her Chariot swifter then the wind,
Or subtle comprehension of the mind.
Which by two nimble Cocksparrowes was drawn,
Caparisond but lightly, with the lawne
Took from the Flowerdeluces inner skin,
Trapt and embost with marigolds: within
Sits Venus naked, holding in her hand,
A tumbling shel-fish, with a myrtle wand,
Wearing a garland on her wimpled head,
Compacted of the white rose and the red*
None but the blind boy Cupid durst approach,
For to be whurried with her in the coach.
The snow-white Graces running by their sides,
Were through the heavens their waggoners and guides,
Lashing the sparrowes under quiuering wings,
With whips of twisted gold, and silver strings:
A Beuie of white Doves still flickering over,
From the Suns sight such beauty seemde to cover.
And thus she rode in triumph in her throne,
Whose radiant luster like the Sun beams shone.
Darting her rays into the heavens above,
As half dismaide the majesty of Jove:
All heavens beauty seemed far the less,
Her naked beauty striving to suppress:
And shrunk aside, not daring once come nie her,
Iealouse of Jove, least he by chance should spy her:
Knowing he would their glorious beauty scorn,
When one more fair appeared him beforne.
The presence always of the greater light,
Does make the lesser shine not half so bright.
Take heed fair Ladies, standing in the place
With one more f^re, you lose your former gra^e.
Her journey tended to our English clime.
And here she houered, and remaind a time.
Hearing before the Satyrs enmity,
Against her proceedings and her deity,
Using all mischief against her enemies,
Thrusting her self in baudy elegies,
Polluting with her damned luxury,
All ears which vowed were unto chastity,
And evermore thus on fell mischief bent,
Until she found (she never was content:)
Some of her Saints (belike) who every day,
Unto her shrine their orizons did say:
Which fore she asked, this boon to her was giving.
That all the Satyrs then in England living
Should sacrifisde be in the burning fire,
To pacify so great a goddess ire,
And from their Cyndars should a Satyr rise,
Which their Satyricke snarling should despise.
All which performed, she left our English shore,
Never I hope to trouble us any more.
If trauailers this year of Jubilee,
Bring her not over again from Italy:
Which if they do, no sooner see her floate,
But Satyrs pinch her spangled Petticoate:
You know her malice plainly, as you see
Your true descent, and lineall Pedigree.
FINIS.
A Prophecy of this present year, 1600.
-- Who lives past ninety nine,
Shall afterward speak of a blessed time.
THen cease fond Satyrs quipping Epigrammatists,
S^e scoffing Critickes, ^earing Lucianists,
Stern censuring Catoes, full gorg^d Lucilians,
Enuie-swolne Cynickes al-eyde Epidaurians,
Vnringed routing hogs otter-toothd Rhamnusians,
Cease cease to bawle, thou wasp-stung Satyrist,
Let none so testy petulant insist:
Hold, stay thy lashing hand, and ierking rimes,
There is no lewdness in these Halcyon times.
By heavens poudred robe, and fiery element,
There is no sin in Albion permament,
Vice lies deep smothered in his darksome toome,
And Virtue takes possession of his room,
All spotless pure, this first of Ianivere,
Propitiously began great Platoes year:
Defer your rigorous envy-kindled rage,
Until some other stranger sinning age,
Let hell-borne sin with your untimely spite
Lie buried both in womb of silent night.
Prophet (whosoever thou were) heavens give thee meede,
For this thy old-said saw, and truest reed,
If I but knew where lay thy senseless vrne,
Upon the same sweet odours I would burn,
And solemnize thy dated exequies,
Hoping to be inspired with prophesies,
That so I might the verriment unfold,
What happen us the next seven hundred should:
In every nooke and angle now I burst,
To all assemblies boldly do I thrust,
To Paul's, to plays, to prizes, reuelings,
To dicing houses, Tavern beuerings,
To bowling alleys, night-set merriments,
To Mile-end traynings, Tyburne dreriments,
To beare-baitings, and every wonderment,
Each conduit-fray, and little blunderment.
Ennaunter some odd toyish fopperies,
Should he obscured from my searching eyes.
But mong this rout I hear no foolish word,
In serious ernest, or in jesting bourd:
No scripture jests, no heaven profaning oaths,
No sudden stabs, no French newfangled clothes.
Gallus has left his new-stampt blasphemies,
Rubrine disclaimes his damned heresies,
Writhled Sylene his gotish bitchery,
And Valodid his iugling witchery.
Baudy Melino needs not lust relieve,
With cordial compounds, and preservative,
Reine-running botches, pockes, are voided clean,
Then Pod^lingus go and scrape again,
In Florence stews with lustful Aretine:
Seal up your Seringe, case up your implements,
Trusse up your trinckets, Leuca's instruments,
None use in ioulting coaches hurried.
Now Lucia looks like one twice buried:
Expecting hourly passage to her Grave,
No muddy mind no slimie dunghill slave,
But hates with Pickt-hatch t^haue his name defaced,
Vices are loathd, and virtue is embraced,
Give me akingdome Cynicke, now I can
Show thee a complete rightly perfect man.
O wakefull prophet that so far away,
Could spy the dawning of this New years day!
And in thy true authentic prophecy,
Foretell that brutish sensuality,
Leopard-skind, soule-polluting Sodomy,
Dogs appetite, and damned impiety,
Should be transported into Italy
From England, this same year of Iubile:
But tell me Satyrs now in seriousness,
Why ripped ye forth the guts of vitiousnesse,
Or dipped your pens in puddle beastliness?
It is dishonor, and indignity,
Unto a Poets great supremacy.
For by the worlds pure and immaculate
Selfe-yeelding-all Saturnus maidens state,
Not for a world of Indian treasury,
Would I the world in terms so villifie,
Or prove it in my wrangling poesy,
A Brokers shop of vile iniquity:
Nor should my lavish and malignant tongue,
Tear out the bowels of sins hidden long,
Hook out abhorring-nature strange delights,
Drowned in the red sea with the Sodomites,
For whilst such covered sins you do vnvaile,
Crabbde reprehension sets them but to sale.
Not long ago^ (by chance) these ears of mine,
Ore-heard young Tusco read a Satyrs line,
And grauel'd (as it seemed) stood censuring,
His eyes fixed on a weather-cocke, misconstruing
The gloomie sense, and sembled thereupon,
Of fryes and puisnes a convocation:
Slubbering the margent with their greafie thumbs,
They found no meant, till court-boy Brisco comes.
This agent patient in a moment spide
Light in this dark line. Tusco then replide:
I Am glad of this, I thought there had not bin
Such novel pastimes, such a new found sin:
And since in Paul's (I walking) Tusco met,
And at his heels I saw young Brisco iet.
But by the sprightly essence of my soul,
My retchlesse lines shall Brisco not control:
Nor rub the botch sore on his ridden side,
Nor gird the galled blisters on his hide:
That would but more his grief exasperate,
And all the world by him exulcerate.
Sinne's like a puddle or a mattery sincke,
The more we stir them, still the more they stincke.
O could the circuit of my pulsiue brain,
Harbor but in it such a cinicke strain,
I would have scourgde selfe-blind Brauortian,
Keeping in Newgate his lewd curtezan,
So lushiously with sack, and marrow pies,
Whilst in the Fleet his Uncle staruing lies,
There fleet, or sincke, or drown, his care is more,
To snort in the arms of his shape-altring whore.
When (for a coach) Malberia in a cart,
Was ioulted, then I crossed the streets athwart,
With rapiers pendant Minke and Mario ran,
After this fat luxurious Curtezan:
With draffie pispots still as she was crowned,
Minks wept for Love, for Anger Mario frowned.
This would have fazd a Satyrs pisse-stept whip,
They escape my ierking rhyme or iocund quip.
Though (...) not for kingdoms would I name him,
That were enough for evermore to shame him)
Maintain his servant, sister, and his whore,
And yet maintain his sister and no more,
Should I vnvaile incestuous luxury?
Nay rather Curtaine-or^e such brothelrie.
Though Vicro bezzle on the alehouse bench,
Till^s lacket's bawdie with the barmie drench:
And thereupon unto his audience preach,
At every full point ysking forth a belch:
Slupping the Challice like a drunken Scale,
Where frothie lambs-woll swimmes in nappie ale:
And thence return and guzzle off the Boule,
Tills eyes began startle in his iobber noule,
Though Dario brag, that for reward or fee,
He never made his Muse a mercenarie:
Yet written, gives her unto Noble men,
And in exchange receives their Angels then.
Though Lacrion in a bravery disburse,
For jingling spurs, the jingling of his purse,
He spurs not me, nor do his rowels prick:
And wherefore then against Lacre^n should I kick?
Why should I Darios brag reitterate,
Or damned Vicroes vice exaggerate.
Burno exclaimde, as Cicero wont to cry,
When Cateline did work conspiracy:
O Times, O Manners lewd and impious,
When his own Manners made the Time so vicious.
What beastliness by others you have shown,
Such by your selves it is thought that you have known:
But Vice this year of Virtue makes an end,
^ll at the worst, does always gin to mend.
FINIS.

