Those. Iolley Esqr. F. S. A.



THE Court of Conscience Or Dick VVhippers Sessions.

With the order of his arraigning and punishing of many notorious,
dissembling, wicked, and vicious livers in this age.

By RICHARD WEST.

Math. 25. verse. 34. 41. Venite beati, abite Maledicti in ignem aeternum.

Imprinted at London by G. Eld, for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop
adjoining to Christ Church gate. 1607.

To his very loving friend and Master, Mr. William Durdant, and his very
friend Master Francis Moore: RICHARD WEST, wishes all health and happiness.
MAny and sundry are the gifts and presents which are sent between friend and
friend, of value according to the ability of the sender. Some present gifts
of great worth, as Plate, Jewels, and such like, others meaner things. My self
finding my own estate but of a weak kind, am bold instead of such gifts,
only to bestow part of my brains fruit upon you both, presuming that it will
be kindly received, though it be but of a small moment or value. By the one of
you I assure my self (at least am in good hope) it will be kindly received as
a simple present from the Servant to the Master. The other (in lue of many
good turns at your hands already received, and not any way requited) I make
the rather bold to connex in the partaking of the same: humbly requiring you
to be a kind of Sidemen in the assisting of Dick Whipper and his Iewrie in
this session to aid them with your judgments in the pronouncing the sentence
of condemnation against the malefactors at the arraignement, having and being
of that opinion, that you will not only judge without partiality at this
time, but also be ready in your foynes to attend the judge, at the next Court
day, when I believe a greater malefaector will be brought in, then the worst of
these: In the mean time I Will bespeake a new whip which shall stick close to his
sides as ever his shirt did.

Yours in any service: R. W.

THE PREFACE.
IN the beginning when the Lord of hosts,
After his image lively face and feature;
Created man in all the lands and coasts,
And for their succors every living creature.
He did ordain in lue thereof each day,
That they should praise his blessed name for ay.
All lands and people then he did divide,
And parted them with watrie surging seas,
Asundry language over and beside,
He did appoint to men for better ease.
With understanding of each others mind,
That so they might be to his laws enclinde.
Which laws or statutes were by him erected:
Declaring them to man on Sinay mount,
Through Adams sins from Paradise abiected,
He vowed aday of Judgment for account,
Of every sin or vain offense Committed,
Which Cannot be without his mercy quitted.
And knowing well that man of his own nature,
Was most unapt to observe his holy word:
He did erect his plagues for every Creature,
Ordayning for them hunger, fire and sword,
And finding weighty sins of man abound,
The whole world men and all he deeply drowned.
Saving his servants whom he did apoint,
Noah and his family to be in arc:
God of his mercy only did anoint,
Those eight to live within the self same bark.
Having of every creature with them two,
For worlds increase which after should ensew.
This is most credible the time is past,
Approved of truth before we lived in age:
The sins of man yet being apt to last,
Procure the Lord to anger, wrath, and rage,
But what should I of these things mean to write,
The holy Scriptures plainly them recite.
But as concerning this our latter time,
Considering by the abundance of our days:
To greater sin man's nature's apt to clime,
Which is a mean that Satan sprenges lays,
To catch the sons of men by subtle guile,
Into his Nets, and so their souls to foil.
GOD (as before time) for the better peace,
And keeping under of each wicked wight:
In every land true duty to increase,
Has placed a Prince to rule the people right.
Whose swords and Scepters bear so great a sway,
That they expel disorders quite away.
But oftentimes the kindest man in sight,
He that will handle tongue in smoothest sort:
To simple meaning man does seem a light,
Yet slilie creepes and bites him to the heart.
Which glauering people being least suspected:
Live in that order long time vndetected.
But God creator of the world and man,
Finding the hearts of such to be corrupt:
Reueales to world and people now and than,
The sliest plots and treasons most abrupt.
Which in the hearts of such are closely hid,
At length from world such members he does rid.
Dicke Whipper now (man's conscience it is I mean,)
Knowing the guilty hearts of every sort,
Has summoned a meeting, where all men,
Are to repair in person at that Court.
As Well the rich as poor, the good, as bad,
The wise, as foolish, reprobate and mad.
A Iewrie of the best he has appointed,
To be impanneld on the worser sort:
And sit in Judgment with him as anointed,
To be the pillars of Celestial Port.
For whom he has elect a Princely coast.
For the other, whipstock, whip, and whipping poast.
The deeds of good he does pronounce in Court,
To the endless praise and comfort of their souls:
The others misdeeds to their endless hurt,
He has engrossed fair in his Court roules.
The good shall wear and have the heavenly Crown,
The other feel the whip to pull him down.
The names of the Iewrie.
Good Counsel. Upright Judge. Zealous patron. Faithful Minister. Godly
Magistrate. Loyal Subject. Charitable Benefactor. Careful parent. Obedient
Child. Sure Friend. Peacemaker. Lowly minded.
Good Counsel.
Star of the Senate, light of all the land,
Truths cheese supporter, pillar of advice,
Mishaps preuenter, leader of the band,
Out of Captivity Jewel of great price.
Guard to thy King, country and peoples health,
Wisdoms way-maker root of commonwealth.
Vigilant waker when that others sleep,
The King and Countries good, that seekst to find:
To hear the woeful plaints of such as weep,
Oppressed by their superiors most unkind.
Helping with thy advice that to redress,
That otherwise would countries bane increase.
To framing of good laws thou lend'st thine ear,
With purse and help in service of thy Prince;
Country and neighbors with a tender care,
Of being forward people to incense.
To the right service of Almighty God,
And breaking superstitious heavy clod.
Be thou as foreman in this Iewrie grave,
Receive a robe befitting such a wight:
Let give thy sentence, against deceiptfull knave,
Be to his hid deceit an open light.
Receive of people thanks and worthy praise,
In heaven of God, the crown which never decaies.
Upright Judge.
With gravity and with indifference,
Thou equally do Judge all things in right
With Just sealed waightes, and with an even balance,
Thou waiyest causes in the public sight,
Of all the world not tendering bribe or fee,
Which shows the fear of God to stand in thee.
The Heavens maker and the earthly Kings,
Having respect to that thy Godly care:
For trewly waying all unequal things,
Have placed thee in a princely seat full rare.
Which place of their own persons destitute,
They have appointed thee to execute.
Allowing thee not only worldly substance,
For thy advancement fore the face of men,
But honorable title and pre-eminence,
Over all other people where and when
Different Causes are to be decided,
That by thy wisdom all may well be giuded.
As Well in Controversies and debates,
As in disorders toward King and land,
Committed by outrageous runagates,
Rebellious Traitors or any other man,
Thy golden wisdom is with grace enamelld,
Wherefore we crave thee here to be inpannel'd.
Zealous Patron.
Pattern of Pitey which with trembling fear,
Most willingly to house of God repairest:
Attentively his holy word to hear,
Spreading abroad thy branches with the fairest.
And having taken talent from the Lord,
Do not the same within the ground vphord.
But make use of every part thereof,
Not putting Candle underneath a cover:
As does the Careless servant with a scoff,
Concealing heavenly secrets from his brother.
All thy delight is in the house of prayer
Thy contemplations sound into the air.
Thou sit not in an vn-Godly seat,
Nor yet thou stand in the sinners way,
Thou art elect of God the Lord so great,
As Chosen vessel him thou do obey,
Studying each time, each hour, each day, and night,
How to find out the heavenly paths aright.
Thou standst in field under the Cross of Christ,
In his defense and service every hour:
Immovable and firm there does consist,
Thy faith in God acknowledging his Power.
Grace light upon thee stand in Gods defense,
Against sinful wight to hear the evidence.
Faithful Minister.
Heavenly Physician for the feeble soul,
Ministering Physic of a pleasant taste:
Of comfortable herbs spiritual,
Excerped from the Godly gardens wast,
Clothing that naked soul in Godly raiment,
Thou shall receive an heavenly seat for payment.
Thy silly flocks in pleasant pastures green,
Go feeding, fat, and full of Choysed flowers:
Not penned nor pounded in a pinfold keen,
Yet still defended from the ravening powers,
In spite of Romish sheppard and his train,
Thou grazest with them on the pleasant plain.
Thou leadst them not among the thorns and briers
Tearing their fleeces, neither do permit:
Their carcases to stick in clammy myers,
They walk secure from deep and dangerous pit,
Then guide we pray thee with thy sheppards hook,
Those of this Jury from a partial Crook.
Take place among them, pass thy Judgment freely,
According as thou find'st the guilty mate:
Sift out and search their crafty dealings nearly,
That being opened men may see the state.
Wherein these foul and exercrable Crew,
Have lived in spite of other men and you.
Godly Magistrate.
LIkewall to City in a Godly care,
Thou do encompasse those the which thou guidest
Upholding them in truth and virtue rare,
And from that form and order never slidest,
Whip to disordred, riotous and rude,
Crown, to the Godly, virtuous and good.
Within thy liberty thou do forecast,
To benefit the place wherein thou dwell:
And all with plenty still thou surely have
Vicious and wicked members thou expellest.
Weeding out clean the Couchy stinking weed,
That feign within the ground would shed her seed.
To the sicke-man most apt the art to extend
Thy Physic, therewithal to raise him up:
To lame thou art a Crouch, an eye to blind,
The feeble Creatures Comfortable cup.
The orphans poor thou houerest with thy wings,
From the extortioners accursed stinges.
Now in this Jury we most surely mean,
That thou support and aid us with thy help.
As the fifth ballaster whereon we lean,
For punishment of want on foolish whelpe.
Unruly Creatures are so sprung and grown,
That of necessity they must be mowen.
Loyal Subject.
IN true obedience and loyalty,
With tendrest care of Princes will performing:
To peoples good and Princes royallty,
Pretended mischeifes still thou art reforming.
Most ready the art to show and eke to do,
Thy best endeavor to give Caesar's due.
With might and maine continual vigilancie,
Still pressed to arms and ready in pursewing
The traiterous heart full stuffed with arrogancy,
To that corrupt hearts downfall and undoing.
Ready to boult and prudently to sift,
Their secret treason and their Crafty shift,
To patefie the Erroneous sects and schimes,
Which are so blazd and sown in many places:
Heretecall unfaithful Atheismes,
And treasons toward Kings imperial graces,
Upholding state of land and Justice seat,
Thou do abandon each difloyall feate.
In this high court or session for reproof,
Of domyneering ill disordred mate:
Thou art elected one in the behoof,
Of heavenly throne and high celestial state,
To give thy Censure with unfeigned heart,
Against malefactious knave for his desert.
Charitable Benefactor.
THou which with pity in thy heart art moved,
Toward the needy soul with care oppressed,
Thou blessed of God, of earthly men beloved,
For helping of the Orphan so distressed.
Comforting widows, saluing sick-mans sore,
Aiding the simple, with fall of thy store.
Not as a greedy mizer which does hoord,
All in his cofers till his day of dying.
And at the last like cormorant absurd,
Is forced to distribute bedridden lying.
But art with willing heart in readiness,
Apt to redress the poor man's needinesse.
We want thy helping hand to aid us here,
Being in place appointed for redress
Of impious wrongs against the country dear:
Heaven grant us favor, fortune, and success
To prime away the foggie mowldring moss,
Ore-growing fruitful tree with filthy dross.
Spend now some time to honor of thy Lord,
The countries wealth, and subjects peaceful living.
In heaven thou shall be paid, thy whole reward,
Thou shall have peoples praises and thanksgiving.
With worldly wealth the Lord has thee endued,
When by himself the wicked were pursued.
Careful Parent.
TO heavens glory, and terrestrial joy,
The heavenly father, father to us all,
Created man, and Satan to annoy,
Has by his son releast him from his thrall.
Only to work salvation for that creature,
Which is of his proportion face and feature.
Thou vndersianding wherefore thou were framed,
Have sown the godly seed of purpose culled,
To breaking of the wanton child untamed,
When by persuasion he would not be ruled,
And have in godly nurture traind him up,
From tasting of the Romish damned cup.
Instructing him in a religious kind,
In knowledge of the heavenly fathers will:
Provoking him, and putting in his mind,
The holy Scriptures that he may fulfill,
The duty that he owes to God above,
To live with neighbors in unfeigned love.
It is most fitting thou should take a place,
To hear and to determine every fault
Which is committed by the brazen face,
Of shameless rascal which is good for naught.
Their cheats and cousenages are abroad so plenty,
Of grace and goodness world's even almost empty.
Obedient Child.
IN honor, love, and true obedience,
Toward thy Parents dutiful and kind:
Thou have endeavored with diligence,
To be submissiue and of lowly mind.
All to enlarge, increase, and to prolong,
Thy happy days, (as heavenly Fathers tongue.
Has openly upon the Mount declared,
In the pronouncing of his holy laws:)
The path to heavens kingdom is prepared,
For thee to walk, suppressing hellish claws.
Which have been raking at the heavens anointed,
To walk the paths forbidden and vnappointed.
Meek in behavior, courteous in speech,
Lowly and reverent to all thy betters:
Orderly given, loath for to impeach
Thy nurture, being trained in godly letters.
Heavens dew be-water that young tender plant,
A sweet increase God grant it never want.
That as a second Daniell it foresee,
And prye into deceitful false devises:
Of false accusing Elders, and to be
A Judge to punish such bad enterprises,
As are committed by a damned sect,
Of rogues and vagabounds the Hels elect.
Sure Friend.
NOt like Thirsites envious and repining,
In maledictious order thou have lived:
But prone and ready still to be adjoining,
In friendly amity and never grieved.
To be a loyal and true hearted friend,
In case of charge assured to the end.
Damon by right and title thou art called,
For to the last to Pithias thou did stand:
Before the tyrant proffering to be haled,
For him to death, and gave that tyrant band
For his forth-comming, which had he but slackt,
Thy self for him had been most surely rackt.
Thou have not with blanditious flatteries,
Soothd up thy friend in hope of any gain:
Giving fair words, and turning them to mockeries
Tainting thy conscience then to work him pain.
But rather then to make thy friend a pray,
Thy self thou have endangered many away.
Caring for conscience how thou may uphold,
It guiltless of revealing secret things:
Most willing thou have been still to unfold,
The mischief which to friend a mischief brings.
Then in this friendly knot come take a place,
To heavens glory, and to hells disgrace.
Peacemaker.
TRoubled in mind at each dissentious sound,
Or motion of thy neighbors disagreeing:
Thy chiefest care has been to find the ground,
Of all their discord, studying and foreseeing
The way to make an universal peace,
To bring the factious hearts to quietness.
Who from the roots of enuies hateful branches,
Have practiced the most accursed devises:
Each against other plotting of mischances,
To breed contentions and detested vices.
Causing not only worldly expense and charges,
But secret malice, which souls pain inlarges.
Most worthy thou in the superior place,
Bearing the title of the Child of God
Should have been set disposing of that grace,
Committed to thee for reproof, of odd
Disordred creatures, foul and naughty doings,
Delighting falsehood, theft, and blood imbrewings.
In heavens service to the Fathers peace,
For executing Justice, and upholding
Of truth: and for the punishment of vice,
In justice seat we place thee at unfolding
Of those disorderly accursed slights,
As have been used by untamed wights.
Lowly minded.
NOt surly Pompous, scornful foolish proud,
Though not of base house, stock or parents sprung,
But lowly minded, meek, and of a good
And kind behavior, with a gentle tongue.
Ready to bow to mighty Potentates,
And humble to the poor and meaner states.
A worthy brother not to be abiected,
From the society and godly knot,
(In heavens behalf) of Iewrie here elected,
And now impannelled, hardly to be got.
Seek all the world for twelve such other more,
Youl' never find them in the earthly store.
Therefore to Court and council let us hie us,
Their guilty persons shall be all brought in:
Like Justice sword my whip shall here stand by us,
To take sir Rogue and Rascal by the skin,
Come knaves and wretched whores with all your train
I Will lead you trench-more to another strain.
Down with your Triggens, ho me thinks you leap
Already round and capring on the toe:
How fine youl' iumpe when you behold my whip,
I Will cleach you soundly all before you go.
I Will teach you th'capers and the antic iumpes,
Put off your gaskins, quick, put on your pumpes.
To all and singullar Backbyters, Slothful teachers, Graceles Truants, Cokring
Parents, Cheating thieves and Cutpurses, Drunken Scoundrells, Highway haunters,
Shifting Gaimsters, Whoremongers, Gluttenous Epicures, Tiraunts, and merceles
Villains, Coueteous Parsons, Proud Knaves, Extortioners, Idle Caterpillars,
Profaine SWearers, Atheists, and Unbelievers, Punkes, Baudes, Makebates and
Tatling Gospips, Liers, and Applesquiers, Witches, Coniurers, and Enchaunters,
Beggars, Idle Roges, and Counterfeit Madmen, Fools, Flattring Maplefaces,
Cruel Masters and Dames, and Vn-Godly Servants.
KICHARD WEST wishes dew punishment soundly paid them for their deserts and at
the end of the Whippers Court true repentance of sins.

per Christum dominum nostrum. Amen.

CEase you sad Nymphs your Delia to bemoane,
For she a joyful life since death has gained:
And you pale Dimenes daughters cease to groan,
For Phaeton was for his folly pained.
The one by nature, but the other died,
Cast Down by Jove, from Heaven for his great pride
It greeues me sore to see your sad laments,
In the bewayling of so great your friends:
Look but about who is this that parchment rents,
Sure he brings news that to lamenting tendes.
It Is not for one alone to lend his ear,
For all are naught and so twill prove I fear.
Sure it is foam Lawyer or some worthy man,
So by his habit he does seem to be:
By his black gown, his pen and ink in hand,
Paper and Dust box, frowning face and eye,
He has a scrowle all full of written names,
He calls in order Masters Men and Dames.
What should it mean why it is no brewers clarke,
Clarke of no kitchen nor of any Church:
Steward of hell no no no who then? hark,
I Will stand a loofe and keep out of his lurch.
He has a great long launching whip behind him.
I cannot stealt I know not how to blind him.
Take heed my masters you with whom he reckons,
It seems heel pay you all your wages soundly:
Ha, let me se whose that to whom be beckens,
He Is very brief, he begins to call him roundly,
What fellows that, that to him does trudge,
There sits a Jury by him, he is a Judge.
Backbiter.
YOu May. Silke-strings, baudy emblem maker,
Rimer and Ridler Come into the court:
Maker of songs by every channel raker,
You are indicted here what all a-mort,
Hold up your hand hear your inditment read,
Twill cost, y' a whipping else I Will loose my head.
And wherefore is it? because you spend your time,
All the whole day among your baudy queanes:
In ribauld talk and loathsome silthy rymes,
Stperfluously it flows out in streams.
Backbiting all men in a hidden sort,
Come, come, untruss, O here is gallaunt sport
And more then that for still you do invent,
Sedicious like against all men to exclame:
In baudie ballads being wholly bent,
In sort indecent men unknown to blame.
Thinking to excuse your self by giving quipps,
Against those that never deserved your railing nips,
What should I stand to tell you all your tricks?
I should backbite men then as well as you,
Nor yet your rabbles altogether mix,
It were an endless work I tell you true.
A Iayle deliuyry further I must make,
Of other knaves with you that share a stake.
Slothful teacher.
YOu that in gown befurrd with rod in hand,
Like Dominator over silly boys:
Bear such abreadth among that silly band,
And make them with their babbling keep an noise,
Only to blind those that pass by the schole,
You ere endited here: Come in you fool.
Why you forsooth ant please you have a slight,
To make a Monitor among those apes:
Yar' there in the morn and come no more till night
Next day you whip them all, there is none that scaps
Whose fault is it that they loyter sport and play,
Who should be there he that's not there all day?
Thus by your negligence not only you,
Spend time in vain (the more shame for you sir)
(Not like a Careful man as others do,)
But make poor silly Children to incur,
There parents anger, and to ere in wit,
And practice ill, against whom soever it hit.
Come, Come, untruss, indeed you are in great fault,
I cannot spare you'faith I pray dispatch:
Are you a master now you shall be taught,
How think you now sir have you met your match,
Heeres no commanding rod your chair or stool,
you had sped far better if you had staid at school.
Graceless Trewant.
YOu that can take your breake-fast in your hand,
Your Pen and Ink, your Satchell at your back:
And blind your parents, you that must be mand,
To the schoole-doore like an ungodly crack.
For fear of running out among cut-pursse boys,
To play at Trap, at nine-holes and such toys.
Neglecting that which for your sake your friends,
To their great cost would willingly bestow:
All for your good, yet you to make amends,
Practice your own pernicious ouer-throw.
Cashe ring all the duty that is due
By Gods laws to your parents all from you.
What is the means (but want of sound correcting)
That in you fall beginning with a little:
Pilfring and stealing, all good course obiecting,
Til master grau^d-theefe makes you venture mickle
Then from Bride-well, New gate, or other Iayle,
Either you are hanged or whipped at a Carts tail.
By which good silly Fathers heavy heart,
With careful mothers sorrow toot' annexed:
Makes them repent each of them for their part,
Thy coming to the world they are so perplexed.
Untruss thou villain, never be in hope,
I Will whip thee from the hangman and the rope.
Cockring Parents.
YOu wanton parents (that your properest term)
The roots of wantonness in every child:
Supporting Childrens pleasures so infirm,
By cocking of your lobkin louts so wild,
Still yielding to them at each fond request,
The fames the way that makes a iayle their neast.
Here is the court there is a suit Comenced,
Against you jointly by a declaration:
Being found guilty you shall be recompensed,
As is your child before the self same fashion.
More guilty you are found then witles child,
For flattering him in glauering wise so mild.
When child to pilfering any way is bent,
Purloyning, lying, slaundring or debate:
Carrying of factious tales found evident,
Or gilty of assisting theeuish mate,
Where Is his receiver sooner then your selves,
Who lends more listening ears to make bate-elues,
Because it is fit to keep your children down,
Which paraduenture youl' forget to do:
Untruss sir knave, and I Will put of your gown,
Breech, Smock and Petticote I tell you true.
I Will lace your querkes full soundly that procures.
Dericke to hang himself and none of youres.
Cheating thieves and Cutpurses.
Ungodly seignior, you that walk in shape,
Of a good gentleman with glorious tongue:
Though for a prey you altogether gape,
Traversing the City all the streets along.
Besiedging every crowd in every place,
And will undo a man before his face.
Having your isntrumental tools and knives,
To show your cunning over laboring people:
Undoing them, their children and their wives,
You show no pity on the poorest cripple,
Come how it will, so you lay hold upon it,
You care not if men's lives should lie upon it.
In fields and highways, with purloined things,
As Buttens, Cambrick, Rapiers, and such like:
Old Hats, or Cloakes, or counterfeited rings,
And such like merchandise you daily seek.
To ouer-reach poor simple minded wretches,
In cheating wife by such your Tiburne fetches.
Now forasmuch as you play least in sight,
That Master Derrick cannot seize upon you,
I have a deputation to indite,
All your whole sect my blessing will come on you.
And with my whip I Will lead you such a course,
Shall save you riding on the three legd horse.
Drunken Scoundrell.
THou that to Tippling and to quaffing still,
Appliest thy mind, and hate a virtuous race:
Carowsing every hour with every lill,
Gunpowder bellied with a bag-pipe face.
Till that with drink thou art so ouer-blowne,
That all thy shameless life is seen and shown.
Reeling, and staggering, and blaspheming God,
With bitter oaths, and loathsome bawdie songs:
Think thou or not, have thou deserved the rod,
By thy transgressing in these odious wrongs,
The holy Psalms on every drunken seat,
Thou ha^merest out when thou can scarsly speak.
And with a thousand cursings thou disdainest,
Those blessed creatures which the Lord has sent,
Thou make no spare, for why? as king thou raignest,
The head of sinners: ready for to rent
God in two pieces. Ah thou odious wretch,
I want a cord for thee to make thee stretch.
But since I have no cord, I have a whip,
Look here you knave, here is whip-cord stru^g with wire,
Down with your gaskins, now I Will make you skip
Out of your drunken skin, and for your hyer,
Dance A charanto, though you like not that,
It Is better sport, then whipping of the Cat.
VVay-walker.
GEntlemen your charities for the love of God,
We are poor Soldiers newly come from France:
In hard adventures for you we have trod,
In sturdie service, though it be our chance
In our own countries now to crave relief,
We have been Captains, our exploits the chief.
When came you over? Friday seuen-night last,
God is our judge, and to our great expenses:
We had of foreign coin, well, that is past,
Ye'a spent it all among your pretty wenches,
No God renounce us, by a storm at Sea,
We were compeld to throw much goods away.
I you say well, but as I chaunst to ride
To Higate ward, some sixteen weeks ago:
Where you were standing by the highway side,
With every one his trull, what is it not so?
'Twas but to crave an alms, it was no worse:
You spoke me fair, but took away my purse.
You shameless rascals, thus you do abuse,
The worthy name of soldiers by your roging:
You never were in service, you refuse
To leave this shameless course and kind of progging.
Come Countus mountus, down with all your hose,
Your bums shall feel my whip, your sconce the blows:
Gamester.
WHat Mozus Auus, with a pair of Dice?
Ready to open a pair of holy Tables:
Fine nimble fingerd knave, that in a trice,
Will cog a Die, and twenty other Fables,
Within this hour he scarcely had a penny,
Now for a hundred pound heel play with any.
Your tricks are sir, first to fetch men in,
Under a simple color that you use:
As ignorantly playing, first they win,
You ouer-see your game, or so to loose.
At last poor Butter-making John begins,
Instead of money to go count his pinnes.
And further sir, you except no time,
For Carding, bowling, or any other play:
Sundays or holy, when the Bells do chime,
Instead of Church you driely march away.
Into a Cooks shop, Alehouse, it is your guise,
To meditate on pots and Mutton pies.
And in that service you remember God,
But how? by swearing by his heavenly name:
To dearest friend you have, youl' wink and nod,
But cut his throat for two pence if you can.
Untruss your trunkes, your tail and I must play,
A game at tick tack ere you pass away.
VVhoremonger.
NOw Caualiero you have been at Paul's,
At forenoones sermon? whether walk you now
To Lincolnes Inn, the Temple, or the Rowles,
And so to Moore gate to the Golden plowgh?
In the after no one you will walk a turn or two,
About Moore-field the grounds all leueld new.
The winds too high, the dust flies in your eyes,
It Is paultrie walking there till th'elmes be grown:
A better place then that you can devise,
Toward the Curtain then you must be gone,
The garden alleyes paled on either side,
Ift be too narrow, walking there you slide.
Into a house among a bawdy crew,
Of damned whores; I there is your whole delight:
Let purse and time go which way twill for you,
Busse me sweet roge till moneys all gone quite.
Then curse and swear how shall we do for more,
At baudy house they go not on the score.
Then to high way or other pillfring course,
You do be-take your self to be maintaind:
Picking of locks or else to stealing horse,
After you are taken ^hen you must be hanged,
Untruss you rascal, quick, dispatch and strip you,
For these your baudy tricks I Will soundly whip you.
Epicure.
BEane-bellied Churl thou filthy clenchpoop clown
Shaped like a butterfirkin o greacy face,
Thy fame for eating ringeth through the town,
To thy discredyt and most foul disgrace,
If all day long thou do not eat and glut,
Thy belly thinks that thy throat is cut.
Twenty poor men with that thou deuourest,
Would thoroughly be every day content:
To see another eat or drink thou lowrest,
As all the victuals in the world were spent.
When thou have filld thy neuer-contented crop,
Down like a dog thou fallst to catch a nap.
Being awake thou vtterst out the old,
And on a fresh begin to feed again:
In Plutos regester thou art enrold,
As a chief spoile-good, and a earthly bane.
To be the mean so many people famish,
Thou stinkst before the face of God most rammish,
Untruss thou barrel; o my sweet child chopper,
Welcome to school to me see thou my whip:
When thou have tasted some of my school butter,
Thy limbs will be so liethy thou will leap.
Hay, how he daunces, Pen and ink and paper,
To cronicle up how nimbly he can caper.
Merciles Tyrants and Villains.
FLint-harted our most deuelish and despitefull,
Making a sport of envious crewell deeds:
Tending to blood to whom it is delightful,
To hear of any murder that exceeds.
Be it on aged man or tender child,
Thou think it cannot be to strange or vild.
Thy chiefest care is still for new devises,
How to torment poor silly minded creatures:
Craving thy mercy for such enterprises,
As be offensive by their silly meatures.
Talk not to thee of mercy nor forgiving,
For thou will pardon never a creature living.
Now Master Suck-blood I have found a trick,
How to requite your kindness to the poor:
Three yards of wire and whip-cord in a whip,
I have erected here and all to scour.
Your carcass from the shoulders to the heels,
I Will whip your skin till all your carcass dreeles.
Untruss your Pipdianos never quake,
I swear I Will never remit your bloody deeds
Dispatch I Will make your pagatron to shake,
And give you ierry lickum till it bleeds.
If this my penannce have no power on you,
Next time the Devil he will sease upon you.
Coueteous Person.
YOu that are troubled with a golden care,
I mean your care of hoording wordly wealth,
Not caring by what means or way to rear,
Your substance be it well got or by stealth,
But so you have it hoorded in your bags,
You care not if your father go in rags.
What do you pass in flattrie by alurements,
To induce poor servants by a cunning means:
To rob their frinds or masters, your procurements
Are the supporters of oll thieves and queanes.
Rascals and runagates you with lickorish things,
Are all the way that youth to folly brings.
When pilfring Tom has been abroad at work,
Cheating or picking poketts if he escape:
Your are his landlord at your house heel lurk,
Let cunstable and officers go scrape.
You Are of such wealth by such most damned defects,
That never a man or neighbor you suspect.
Who Master Monymonger a good old man?
And why his money couers all his crimes:
He walks demurely with his cap in hand,
More knave then all the rest a thousand times,
But with my whip for all your money baggs,
I mean to ierre-lick your old knaves rags.
Proud Knave.
OAt-meale mouthd gentleman, get up your surly Ass
John Suck-egges picture proud, and yet a noddy:
You Are stout in heart, behold but in a glass,
Your Coxcombks picture, and fantastic body*
You Are so befashion'd I know not where to find you,
Ere long I trow youl' wear your nose behind you.
All that thou have in money and in lands,
Tom Tailor seizes on to please a goose:
Poules alley Meg, then she comes in for bands
And cuffes new fashioned, turn but Margaret loose,
For French and Dutch, for Spanish and Polony,
Sheel' set you forth in coxcombes shape for money
Then for a Fether to Blackfriars gate,
A sword and dagger, boots and ringling spurs,
Within a week the fashion alters, straight
Off goes that gallant suite among the curres,
Why what carest thou, thy father has good lands
The rent but yestet-night came to thy hands.
Yet thou art borne but meanly in degree,
Silly poor Webb, thy fathers goes to plow,
All he can get he is feign to lay on thee;
Another gallant suite a making now:
Work master Tailor, pray you work a pace,
And with my whip the whilst I Will set on lace.
Extortioner.
THou miserable caitiffe, which with usury,
Extortionably without conscience do encroch
The poor man's living, driven by necessity
To borrow money: let him not approach
Without a band, a gage, a pawn, or some amends,
Exceeding ten times that this varlet lends.
If he foreslack, or break but one poor hour,
Neglecting of the payment of that sum
Little or much, then he is in thy power,
Thou suest his bond, poor wretch he is undone.
His gage or pawn, thou take by bill of sale,
It Is fully thine, if nere so little he fail.
Ten in the hundred, not twice ten to that,
Cannot content thee for thy moneys lone:
If less he proffer then thou telst him flat,
Thou can not lend: the money's not thine own:
Either thou wilt gall his heart and make it bleed,
Or disapoint him in his greatest need.
Impious and cancred Cur, if I should spare,
And suffer thee to live in such a kind:
The devil of hell himself would come and tear
Thee all to pieces: no i will whip thee blind.
For thy extortion which poor man does nip,
I Will pay the hire, and use for it with my whip.
Idle Caterpiller.
AH good man snekesby, tender fingerd roge,
Idle companion, you that will not work:
But round about the fields and streets go proge,
And all day in the bowling alley lurk,
Spinning of streat-webs, hunting after plays,
Dice, Cards, and whores, and all accursed ways.
Not being able for thy life to set,
Thy hand to any exercise or pains:
Toward thy living any thing to get,
To goodness never thou appliest thy brains.
Either in Powles all day, thout' sit and sleep,
Else to some bawdie miching Ale house creep.
How can thou shift to pass away the day,
Either thou must have money or a dew:
Pilfring and stealing needs must be the way,
Thou art ringleader of the filthy crew.
Thou fearst not Marshall, Newgate, nor Bridewell,
Their punishment, thou can already tell.
But good man Rascal you did never see,
So fine a clacking whip as I have made,
To teach your idle skin actiuitie,
Come hoist arise, come up you lasie Jade.
Come hayt a-ree, i will ierke your idle sides,
The slothful grief upon your shoulders rides.
Profane Swearers.
NAay here come they that I have long expected
Shakebag of Kent, and Ruffianly Dick Coomes:
Swearing Black-Will, the devils chief elected,
The seeds and flowers that Pluto sheds and bloomes.
Hels chief supporters and her royal states,
The very hooks and hinges of her gates.
The name of God, and all his blessed substance,
They spare not to blaspheme and take in vain:
The seed of Caine, they are of his alliance,
Bloud-suckers, murderers, and all for gain.
In swearing, and in blood's their chiefest bost,
Another sect there are, Knights of the post.
Which without conscience will swear and stare,
Against a man they never saw before:
And petty swearers, such as will not spare,
To set themselves upon the devils score.
Cursing their bodies, facing down the things,
Which truth apparently to light often brings.
You Scoundrels, swear, and do the best you can,
Swagger, and quarrel, fight, and chafe your sills:
At all your sundry weapons curse and ba^,
I Will beat you down, with all your forest bills.
I have a whip will make your hides to smart,
'Twi^l break no bones, but sting you to the heart.
Atheist, Anabaptist, and Unbelievers.
THou unbelieving villain which do think*
That heaven and earth and all was made by nature,
Not framd of God: That even at hell mouths brink
Thou infidel and most for-saken creature,
Recant thy Error for there is a God,
One that can make thee feel his heavy rod.
But thoult not stick most openly to say,
There is no God, the scriptures are but fables:
Made and devised only to gainsay,
And to prevent and disapoint the trobles.
Which one man against the other still does plot,
For wealth and substance sake were not for that.
Thou live in pomp and pride, thou have not felt,
The hand of God, he has not tought thy state:
Nor laid his finger to decrease thy wealth,
He never sought thy substance to abate,
But still has suffered thee to abuse his name,
Looking at length thou should thy self reclaim.
Yet thou in wickedness do wander still,
And would continue in thy blasphemy:
I Will see thee hanged ere thou shallt have thy will,
To Gods dishonor Satan's chiefest enemy.
For I Will so whip you that you shall believe,
The Devils horns do hold you by the sleeue.
Punks, and Shameless Whores.
TAllow faced whores, diseased with the Pox,
Through most inordinat and filthy lust:
Trickt up and trimmed in your harlots locks,
All to conceal your filthy Cancred rust.
And to bring youth by your alluring words,
To all the mischeife that the world affords.
To rob and steal to pillfer and purloyne,
Their masters goods, and all that they can get:
To trick and trime and make your bodies fine,
How they come by it you do not respect.
When they have got what they can rap and run,
You Will be the first shall hand them if you can.
Your dainty mouths long after sweetest fare,
You must have wine the best that can be gotten:
Faith Mistres Susan, a caudle is very rare,
I but alas long time it cannot cotton.
Though for a while you rub it out in pride,
Yet at the length your whordome will be spied.
Where are you then, faith clean out of request,
Detested loathed, utterly forsaken,
Noted and flouted like a shameless beast,
With my whip therefore you must now be beaten,
Of with your Mask and all your whores attire,
I Will lace your skirts with whipcord strung with wier
Bawdes.
NOw Mother Beeton where dwell you? you Jade
For sooth in the lane that leads to spittlefeild:
What occupation are you what is your trade?
My house a pretty wench forsooth will yield.
A pot of good ale good wine or a fire,
You shall have any thing you can desire.
Your trades to luske (you Jade) about the Innes,
To see what country wenches come to town.
To seek for service then this witch begins,
To speak them fair: I pray sweet heart sit down,
You Are weary I woosse what do ye want a service,
I Will help you to a very gallaint mistres.
She Will give great wages if so be she like you,
Pray go with me I Will bring you to her speech:
What can you wash or starch well (I beseeke you)
She bids her drink then with a Crafty fetch,
The gallant mistress which she does provide,
It Is Meg was carted at Alhallantide.
Where she continewes not a month or more,
But she is mad as bold as any other:
A shame-lesse strumpet and an arraunt whore,
One that will cut the throat of her own brother,
Old Jade I Will whip thee soundly thou art th'vndoing,
Of many maids and Comely proper women.
Make bates and tatling Gossips.
YOu that at Conduicts, and such other places,
The alehouse, bake-house, or the washing block
Meet daily, talking with your brazen faces,
Of peoples matters which concern you not.
You sow such discord twixt the man and wife,
You set a thousand at debate and strife.
With truly Gossip, such a one does this,
And Williams wife went forth with John the Cooper:
Simon called Susan whore: why truly Sisse:
Frauncis and Marie's gone abroad to supper.
Were it my case, as it is mother Jones,
I Would tear the flesh from off the villains bones.
What Is this concerning you or your affairs,
Your mind should only be about your work:
To earne your living should be all your care,
And not by th'ale-house fire still to lurk.
Gaging your husbands goods for Ale and Beer,
Youl' sell your smocks and kerchers for good cheer.
Get home you Mawkes from off your gossips seat,
Take heed of meddling any more of others:
I Will make your back, your sides and shoulders sweat,
And ierke you till you shed your Gossips feathers.
Turn up your tippet, I Will teach you to prate,
Your shoulders and my whip are fallen at bate.
Liars.
HEre comes a proper child, a well faced youth,
With very neat apparel, comely making:
Where have you been my child? forsooth in truth
I was but where my mothers maide's a baking,
O lying villain, all this liue-long day,
He has been with the cutpurse boys at play.
What this is one of these that cannot speak
Three words, but two of them shall be a lie:
Is grace gone from you? is your faith so weak,
To stand in falsehood? what is the cause or why?
Or who should move thee thus to speak the word,
Which can no truth nor certainty afford.
Thy credit's cracked, there is no man that will trust thee
If thou should tell a thousand certain tales:
All honest men abandon and detest thee,
Each true man cries out, and upon thee railes.
They do eschew, abandon and detest
A lier, worse then any savage beast.
Nimble tongued Nicholas (as the Proverb says)
He that will lie will steal: but as for you,
I have a whip will remedy in faith,
The tripping of your tongues not speaking true.
Untruss you Rascal, nay a knave so young,
Must learn to rule his false and lying tongue.
Panders and Apple-squires.
GEntelemen Seruiters, and the chief reteiners,
To old Meg Curtis, and her bawdie tennants,
Mall Cleuelyes pages, though but little gainers,
For in a conscience you become their servants*
Only to have your bawdrie of free-cost,
You Are good man of the house, you are called mine host.
You color whordome in an antique show,
Youl' walk before a whore in a blew coat,
Or livery cloak, your sword and dagger to,
Your boots all durty in a spotted Hatte,
She like a country-Gentlewoman wanders,
After your heels to bawdie rascals chambers.
And thus you live upon a whores reuersion,
Upholding them in all their whorish doings:
It Is good you should, why'tis your occupation,
To entertain their clients in their woings.
When you have made them drunk, youl' rob them quite
Of all they have, and turn them out at night.
O you are a notable and a cheting rogue,
Who'ld think your maple-face should have it in you,
To rob a man and after like a Dog,
To lay him down well near a furlong from you,
Come you base slave, and hold your tippet up,
For you shall drink though but of a dry cup.
Witches, Sorcerers, Coniurers, and Enchanters:
YOu Canckred old whore, you whose nose and chinne
Touch one another you are so old and crooked
when you should mind your souls health, you begin
To wax unlucky, who is it that provoked,
Your beldams skin to witchcraft and such evil,
But even your father Lucifer the devil:
You Nigro muzell in the devils liknes,
Clothed in black with white rod in your hand:
You that can conjure all the clouds to thicknes,
Blustering and rayning, troubling all the land.
Which are invested so with hellish skill,
You blow down trees and houses when you will,
Troubling and perplexing every creature,
With fiery lightnings thunderclapps and showers,
The heaven yet keeps them from your fiery meature,
And utterly euerts your hellish powers,
When al your witchcrafts past and earth be shaken
Dericke will trusse you up when your are taken.
But ere you go for all your last offenses,
Vnluckines and troubling of the land:
Behold my whip; here is one that recompenses,
All the whole rogry you have took in hand.
For all your witchcrafts showers of rain and thunder
I think my whip will make your sholders wonder.
Beggars, Idle Roges, and Counterfeit madmen.
YOu sturdy roges and harlots that do lie,
Begging and craving still at every door:
Some upon stiltes and crouches, some there be,
That never show your selves but always poor,
Under the color of those tattred rags,
You hord great sums of money in your baggs.
Another sort there is among you: They,
Do rage with fury as if they were so frantique,
They knew not what they did but every day,
Make sport with stick and flowers, like an antique.
Stowt roge and harlot counterfeted gomme,
One calls her self poor Besse the other Tom.
Yar able all to serve and do good work,
Were not the roots of rogry so enrooted:
Within your lazy bodies: that you lurk,
In fields or hedges dawbed and bebooted.
Up to the very eyes in dirt and mire,
Bridewell has often paid you for your hire.
But that's a thing of nothing for y'haue fellt,
All the whole punishment Bridewell can yield:
I tell you jolly yongsters I have smelt,
A whip out for you which you cannot shild,
Nor yet defend your selves by all your shifts,
From tasting of his frank and liberal gifts.
Fools and Flattering Maple-faces
YOu whom the Lord with wit has so endued,
With knowledge and perfection of skill:
Yet for the want of grace it is eschewed,
Folly embraced, having wit at will,
Amongst the wise thou art holden as a scoff,
To make thy self a fool and others laugh.
Thou Art feign like Gnato, as a fawning Curre,
To flatter and to sooth men for thy living:
Up holding them in each Contrary word,
Be it true or false thy sentence thou art giving.
A flatring and deceitful tongue, and lying,
Despise their own good, others they are envying.
Thou like a fool with coxcome, motley coat,
Ladle and pudding and a thousand toys:
Go like a cokes an noddy and a sot,
Derided by a hundred little boys.
O it is a proper sight to see your person,
In all your foolish robes and flattring fashion,
Come let me see how finely you can flatter,
To save your Pakes and shoulder from the whip:
Your sides will quake, your butocks they will clatter
When you shall feel the smart, I know you will skip
Out of coxecomes coat, and leave your ladell,
The whipp for such a fools afitter babble.
Crewell Masters and dames.
YOu crewell masters that be put in trust,
For bringing up of youth in Godly fear:
To learn their trades, in godly kind Just,
The keeping of their portions all your care.
Whether they have their trades or have them not,
Why what care you, when money you have got.
You do deteyne that is sufficient from them,
In meat and drink and other needful things:
If they purloyne or steal who can condemn them
It Is your own selus, that youth to folly brings.
Yet not withstanding if they do offend,
Be sure to bownce them; never seek to mend.
Or find redress in Justice that they leave,
Their naughty kind of negligence vncarefullnes,
But mistress minkes your wife for sooth must have,
Her pennyworth from their pates, in hatefullnes,
Ready to beat out silly chilldrens brains,
(If they offend but little) for their pains.
Because misusing servants is so good,
And want of needfall things that they should have:
You dogged queen put of your crewell hood,
Your coat and smock, down with your hose sir knave
You shall receive the thing the which you need,
My whip shall make your sides and shoulders bleed.
Unconscionable and ungodly Servants.
ANd you in who^ bad conscience has such root,
That you respect not, so you have your fills
Of necessary things: it makes no boot
What work you do: you Iacks and saucy Iills.
In masters absence pass the time away,
In loytring or in sleeping all the day.
Your eyelids must be opened, you be taught
To leave your filching, and such other vice,
Look here is my whip, it serves not for naught,
Make ready quick, I Will cleach you in a trice,
A sounder set of slaves cannot be found,
Twere good to whip about, another round.
But as you like the cheer which you have had,
Fall to your knaueries again once more:
This gentle warning is not half so bad,
As next will be, if you be on my score.
If you offend, the next time I will have,
A Tree and halter for a saucy knave.
But my desire is that we may be friends,
And all the world leave their disorder quite,
If you do so, i will make you all amends,
I Will break my cord, and fling away my whip.
Into my Iewrie you shall all be taken,
When you have all your knaueries off shaken.
FINIS.

