THE TRIAL OF CHRISTIAN TRVHT, BY THE RVLES OF THE VERTVES, NAMELY THESE
PRINCIPAL, FAITH, HOPE, CHARITY, AND RELIGION: SERVING FOR THE DISCOVERY OF
HERESY, AND ANTICHRIST, IN HIS FORERVNNERS AND MYSTERIES OF INIQVITIE.

The Second Part, Entreating of Hope.

Wherein is made manifest, that the pretended Hope of the Protestant,
empeaching the merits of Christ, his holy grace, and man his virtuous life,
destroys all true confidence in Almighty God, either exceeding in
presumption, or wanting in Desperation.

By EDWARD WESTON Doctor and Professor of Divinity.

Probate Spiritus si ex Deo sint. Prove the Spirits, if they be of God. 1.
Johan. 4. Printed at Doway, By the Widow of LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the sign of
the Holy Lamb. 1615.

Permissu Superiorum.

THE EPISTLE TO THE COVRTEOVSE READER.
THERE is nothing so sacred, which is not in some sort infested by impiety,
or so pure and undefiled, that man his malice endeuoreth not upon occasion to
pollute and corrupt. But for that such practices are in their oune proper
shapes and natures passing ugly and detestable, thereupon wily wit in them
plays conning pranckes, and laboreth earnestly to make that seem holy,
which is plotted against all sanctity, that to appear shining bright, which
is ordained to oppress and extinguish the very beams of the sun with an
infernal vampe of error and foul transgression. Which manner of crafty
maliciouse intendeme^t is in no one kind, as more ruefull to feel, so nether
more veuable to behold, then in the progress of heresy and heretics
againest faith and children of the Gospel: whose endeavors either are so
covert lie couched in the treanche of deep dissimulation, or so gorgiouslie
set out upon the stage in the fained coulors of hypocrisy, that none shall
be able to discrie the treacherouse conceilement of the one, and the false
varnished splendor of the other, unless his watchefull Prudence be balased
beloe with humility, and his humble obedience be reared up oboue to the height
and light of discreet vigilancie.

When Abraham's servants had by digging found out sundry fountains G^n. 26.
for the commodity of clear water in the soil of Palestina, the inhabitans
of the Country envying his success as it seemed, with violence dammed them up
by quantity of earth cast into their discovered Springes: the which
notwithstanding after by the industry of his son Isaac were cleansed, and in
them the liquor was brought again to wholesome use, and native perfection.
Whereupon did then arise a new manner of opposition betwixt the homebred
shepheardes of Gerara, and those of his own retineue: whenas his profane
enemies did not now as before in Abraham's dayse, by strength of arm glutt and
stopp them up, but maintained claim under a false title unto them: and so by
sclaunder and emnitie sought to impatronise themselves with propriety of such
preciouse treasures, which before God his people held in lawful possession.
Orig* Homil 13. in c. 26. Ge.
In like sort what aunci^nt fou^taines of divine doctrine we have bequeathed
us from the labors of the P^t^^arckes, and Prophets; or of later invention
discovered unto us by our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, some bend their
force^ with the Jew and Gentill by earthly and carnal interpretations, or
else by might of perseq^ution, vtt^^lie to abolish, and so to dry up the water
of them even to the darkness of oblivion. Others not professing their total
extermination, to wit h^ret^ kes, co^mence suict. againest their true owners
by clamorouse comba^ments, ir^full inst^um^ntes of fury, to entitle themselves
Lords ou^r ^uch endowments, to which equity affords not them an^e allowable
interest, or i^stifi^^le pr^tenc^. Notwithstanding in ishue of effect,
heretics as they st^^^e ag^inest us Catholics to be commanders of the
fountains, so not content with the lordeshipp of them, moreover seek by
their vs^^ p^tion to defile them: with the Pagan and Jew accord in this
fi^all pro^ect^, that they, as monumentes and headspringes of faith, be (...)
up with clods and rubbish of infidelity and idolatry.

It h^^he been auerred in the precedent Treatise, that our assured assent
Au^ust in (...)
of ^ill and understanding s^^rendred to says, as upon rock and ancher does
depend upon some outeward authority, through poyes of remar^keable gravity
pr^u^l^^t with such, who prudentlie are to judge what is to be b^leued, and
what to be ^schewed fals^ly recommended unto Romans ^^.
them as matter of that heavenly quality. In regard whereof the Apostle S.
Paul pronounced, faith to be engendered by hearing, and hearing employed
about the same, to be directed to the word of God. Wherefore that faith may
be attained by hearing, not on^lie is to be attended a soun^ing Voice of the
Preacher, but all so the property of him as catechist is to be considered: in
that from him only are we dutifullie to hear in this important affair, who
according to a iudiciouse calculatio^ is found to be a divine messenger of the
holy Ghost: for otherwise among many Doctors and masters in contrariety,
our attentive hearing should be uncertain, distractiue, and so liable to the
decciptes of forging dissemblers and false Relligionars. Wherefore when we have
by a prudent examine once found out the weight and moment of authority,
then in virtue of the same may we maturelie esteem the Preachers words as
the very words of almighty God, delivered unto us from the mouth of man,
as from his oracle of approved service and designed ministry. For by the
word of God the Apostle in that place did not mean the whritten word, but
rather the word of the church in her preaching tradition: in that the word
of the Gospel was not then registered by letters when he uttered that
doctrine: and also for that, many I^en lib. 1. c. 5.
barbarouse Nations converted to the faith of Christ, not knouing any record
of scripture, nevertheless in their first conuersions, and original
matriculations in the society of God his people, as they conceived faith b^
hearing, so also d^ubtlesse did they ^hen hear the word of God believing.
Therefore the most assured, breife and substantial method how to stick to
tr^uth when the ear^, instrument of faith and discipline, is assailed by
fals^^ie, is exactlie to discuss, which contradictorie party is avouched by
gre^ter and better authority, as through more ample number of beleuers, elder
profession, orderly mission, more eminent sanctity, more famous explo^tes in
the process of verity and virtue: then herupon respectively it will be
approuable by reason, relying on the one, to censure as light, weak, not
worthy our admirtance such pretended authority, which in bala^ce of trial
shall appear^ deuoide of all those prerogatives of divine gravity and
majesty. According to which manner of proceeding S. Augustine by way of
ponderou^e authority does not only excellently well prescribe in general
against all heresy banded in arms to infest the Catholic faith, but moreover
still disputing in particular against the Manichies, the Donatistes, the
Pelagians, applies this capital Prescription from outward authority to the
present controuerlie: and thereby not only Theologicallie, but also
prudently, as each intelligent person may in like Case, concludes for the
Catholic faith againest their heresies. And upon this ground, comperatiuely
valeuing the presumptuouse authority of Protestants with that of Catholics,
it has been by me demonstrated, that natural prudence does give sentence for
us againest them: and most evidently have we made it good, that Protestants
for w^nte of this outeward competent authority, consequently have no means
to setle and ancher themselves in substance, in constancy, in unity of
belief, to convert Pagans, to reclaim heretics, or to condemn their
errors as justly reproueable.

Bu^ what seems in this poincte to me most considerable, is this: that Cir. in
exposit Symb. Nicen.
wereas the Protestante clearelie perceives, that outewarde authority of
grace and worth stanneth not for him, but rather for us, and in front of
hostility against his faction, thereupon turns he his battery to demolish
and beat down this grande outeward authority diuersely empeaching the same:
and so in effect manifests himself an auoued soldier of Antichrist. For if
once his impiouse and rebelliouse pride should prevail against authority in
the affair of faith: if he shall dismantle faith of the safeguard and state of
authority, forthwith must faith perish, as a tree despoiled of the barcke, as
a plant deprived of heavens influence, as the conducte wanting the pipe: then
must there be no pregnant arguments left to r^concile the infidel or
misbeleuer, no supporte remnante to a certain wavering Christians, no
preservative extant againest the infection of heresies and seduction: and then
herupon must all Christian piety and belief, as the Protestant formindeth,
breath out their vital spirit into atheism and paganrie. In this respect
deservedly Aetius, as whriteth Socrates, was suruamed the Atheist, for that
disdainefully he misprised the authority of commentaries endighted by the
learned Fathers, relying wholly in resolution upon his own private
expositions Socrat l 2. Hist. c. 28.
devising this or that pretenddely, as sense deducted from the sacred Text.
Also for this self same consideration S. Athanasius calls Arius an
Athanasius. orat 2. cont. A^ian.
Atheist, all though in counterfeict resemblance he urged scriptures to
fortify his heresy, in the mean season contemning authority, and boasting
of himself as peculiarly illuminated by almighty God. And as concerning the
Protestant, if we once think with him, that the church, from which in
perplexity we are to receive assurance, in strife to gaigne repose, to be
invisible, shrouded and buried in the bouells of darcknes, what purpose is it
for us in search to make repair to her mansion place or tribunal of
judgment? If we conceipte, as Protestants do, that the teaching authority
of the church may err, and has often times made lapse into falsitie, why
should we now for the present creditt her definitions, peremptorely auouching,
these whriringes to be the very word of God Ghostly from him inspired:
almighty God to be one in substance, and triple in personalitie: the second
person in the B. Trinity to be incarnated for the worlds redemption, seeing
that in these, as well as in others matters by her indifferently recommended
unto us, she may decline from verity, and all conformite with the prime and
eternal truth? Whereupon abandoning churchlie authority, we must remain
left to our own tiring devises, and so flitt and wander, as shall please
poor reason from her weak vigor changeably to give us information. Then at
the the first brandeling step into a labarinth, shall we entertain opinion
with the Arians, that it smallie imports our salvation of what sect be our
faith in sundry particular poinctes, so after own devised fashion we believe
in God and Christ: who as records Athanasius, thought to be an Athana. orat.
2 con Arian. Epist ad. stud v^^. sol^^.
indifferent thing the asse^tio^ of Arins, and thereupo^ equally styled them
good Christians, who followed the same. In like manner shall we consorte with
Donatistes, who as witnesses S. Augustine accounted it a matter merely
disputable the practice of rebaptising. Also shall we join ^shue with
Pelagians Aug ^^* cont. Cr^^con. c. 4. D^ ^ecc^to o^^g c 2^.
denying the necessity of grace to good life: In which thing, said they, as
aduertiseth us the same S. Augustine, if we be conninced to have erred, yet our
error will not appear otherwise a fault, then against civility. After
being possessed with this caruing conceipte in matter and obiecte of divine
faith, crying out with the strumpet Diuidatur, lert variances in beelefe have
free pasportes 3. Reg. ^.
to travail without loss through damnation, our private devises in mutiny
phantasying this or that, not giving us full co^tentment, doubting of all shall
we rushe upon atheism, and losing sense and spirit of heaven, finally die in
the hidiouse gulf thereof. And h^re^s staked the dismal and black period of
Protestancie auiling and neglecting the regardeable Aug. epi. ^^^
authority of the Catholic church. Que est enim peior mors animae, quam
libertas erroris? what death ^f the soul worse, then fredome to err? For as
has been declared againest the Protestante, his misprisall of outewarde
authority concerning i^^efragable judicature in questions controuersed,
importing assured delivery of the cathechisme to all desirouse of instruction,
opens the gappe to distrus^e, to dissentions, to all heresies, and at lenght
to rennegacie of faith and infidelity purposed by Antichrist, and his
vnuersall band of enroled accomplices. Then Christian Reader, I doubt not, but
that thou haste understood by the precedenr part, first, that by virtue of
natural prudence, if for thy direction in the affair of faith thou resoluest
to folloue any teaching authority, thou at absolutely to follow that, which
stanneth for the Catholic Roman belief: that of the protestant, in veue and
verdicte thereof, not being equal, or in any sort comparable. Secondly haste
thou learned, how that the Protesta^^ by diverse his positions, purposely
applied to disgrace all outewarde authority of the church, as denouncing, or
rather renouncing it as invisible, as pl^able to error, as subject to the
examine and censure of every private spirit, as for many hundreds of years in
service of Antichrist to have displaied his banner of cruelty, of falsitie, of
impiety: in defiance of Christ and Christian verity to have enacted sundry
Canons and decrees, laboreth hereby to destroy the ordinary instrument of the
Holy Ghost for the persuading of faith, and nurrishing the same; and so
makes entrance for rude, blouddie, cruel, savage atheism, with barbarouse
neglecte of all divinity.

Moreover for that the total office of a Christian is not abridged in the
Lactant lib. 1. I^st^* Chri^o. Homil. quod Nemo laeditur.
sole work of faith, but also is enlarged to a virtuous life: and in this
respected most eminently, for that our savior Christ, guider thereunto, in
regard of the deity of his person, purity of his doctrine, and price of his
deserte, is most high, souerane, and efficaciouse, therefore suruay is now to
be made, to what p^tche of excellency in this kind is leuelled this Catholic
belief; then upon what border burteth the d^siguised credulity of the
protestant. In discussion of which matters are to be employed the ensuing
controversies apertaining to Hope, Charity, and Relligion.

There is no heresy, the which does not, as affirms of Arianisme S. Athan.
ora* 2. (...) A^ian (...). (...) 6^. (...). c 4 ^pist 166. (...). ^^ in Job ^n.
ca ^^ C. ^. Ep Dedica^ ^d Th^od^s^^^ Ho. 3. (...) Th^^aur* Greg N^ss ^. l de
Character Ho^. Christian.
Athanasius play the part of the subtle serpent, inuesting it self in the
sac^^d s^ow^ o^ holy Scriptures, thereby in secrecy to make entry into the
paradise of Christ his Catholic church, and in that place in agencie for
Antichrist to ^^^ade Christ, intending to diminish his excellency, either in
his person, in his meritt, or in his graciouse benevolence imparted to man
kind. And for that this high degree of imparted goodness is espetially aimed at
by our savior Christ, as ^ruicte and end of all, to wit that his faithful
children be in work and action of life excellently innocent, ritchely
abundant, and so, as in a prime sort conformable to right reason, so also
most agreeable to almighty God, aucthor and giver of the same: herupo^
Heretics under a pretended title of holy writ, and of magnifying Christ,
have s^ily endeavored to empare in man this perfection of virtue through
Christ, yea contrariewise, to entice him to impure and dissolute liberty by a
privilege of a fained Gospel: at last to force him to the thralldome of
Antichristian seruility through sin and wickedness. Wherefore the Fathers
wrighting againest Pagans, among (...) li. ^ cent. Iul^an. Aug Epist. 3. 5.
other arguments to prove unto them our Christian belief to be prudently
credible, and to be entertained iudiciously by all, have urged this as most
pregnant and forcible, that our holy faith above whatsomeuer other institutions
of humane Philosophy, or coulorable inventions of painted Poetry, is most
persuasiue and vigorouse for virtue: namely to to combine man with God in
piety, man with man in charity, and in all integrity of conversation. Marcke
I pray the, writes S. Augustine to his Aug. ^p^. 202. l. ^. quest. v^^. and
N^^. Test. c. 7.
Freinde Nectarius, with what praises in the Catholic Church are recommended
frugalitie, continency, and in regard of wedlock fidelity, and to conclude,
all other honest and good manners. In which when any City does excel, it
may be truly said, that it florisheth. And when as some made argument against
the Catholic faith, as prejudicial to the estates of Princes, and common
wealths, the same Doctor thus discovers their humor, and preposterous
intended policy: Therefore they thinck, or seem so to do, that the Christian
doctrine is contrary to the common utility, because they will not, that the
common Augu. Epist. 3.
waalth do stand by the power of virtue, but rather by the impuritie of vice.
Le^t then such as auouche the Christian doctrine to be repugnant to the
commonwealth, give me such an army of men, accordingly as the Christian
doctrine enformeth soldiers, let them give me such gouerners, such husbands,
such wives, such parents, such children, such Lords, such servants,
such kings, such Judges: to conclude such payers of debtes, and exacters of
princes rentes, as are appoincted by the Christian doctrine, and then let them
dare affirm the same to be hurtefull to commonwealthes, or doubt to confess,
the same, ^f it b^ followed, to be most commod^o^se unto commonwealthes.

And allthough virtue, in regard that it is a quality agreeable unto a
reasonable soul, is in a degree most eminently pleasant thereunto, and as it
were the liquor of hunnie flowing about the sense of taste, yet notwithstanding
for that the intellectual invention of that medioc^it^e, which is the mark
aimed at by man's will, in the obiecte thereof, is not all Waise easiely discried
by every mind, and much more hard is it, to hold on that action bente by
resolution toward the same, when sensual perturbations are a floote, and
stand furiously in a^mes for the opposite vice, therefore it seems, that it is
accompanied with contrarieties, as being light and darcke to the intelligence,
deliciouse and harshe, facill and troublesome unto the affection. Every man as
speaks the Prince A^^st (...). ^a Moral. ca. ^^
of the Philosophers, can draw forth a circle, but to po^ncte out the center
thereof, is a thing very difficulte. Wherefore allthough it be an easy matter
to discern in judgment what is the mediocritie of every perturbation, yet to
keep in action this mediocritie, whereby we are made praysworthy, i^ a
busin^sse passing d^^fi^^ll. And therefore it is a rear thing to be an honest
man. It falls ou^e often times, that the amiable hew of virtue is shadowed
with such outeward representations, as do not only hide the true luster
thereof ^^om the vulgar eye, but also unto the same make it contemptible and
dispriseable. What sp^ctacle Aug* ^^^. 3 ^n ^^. ^^.
more loathsome, says S. Augustine, then martyrdom, ^f a man ask the
question of his carnal eyse? yet what thing more ^aire, if he enquire of the
eyse of the haerte? Who can easelie perceive the splendour of patience shining
in holy Job sitting upon the dunghill, the carbuncle of zeal in Daniell buried
in the lions den, in S. Peter, and S. Paul emprisoned, tied in chains,
banished, in want and indigence, dying violent deaths* or who can with
Abraham in expedition of a decreed purpose hold up an arm made cruel with a
sword, to kill his best and only dear Isaac among all his wo^dlie delights
and contentements! wherefore in that Philosophy and Heathenish Poeterie were
insufficient to give us this direction Ci^^l lib. 10. T^esaur. ca 3.
of mind to find out virtue, to entertai^e this courage of will to pursue
the same, the son of God became man, intelligible by his doctrine, and
imitable by his ensample, to the end we might know virtue, and consequently
be enamoured with the beauty thereof. The Pagans as writes Joseph. in Pr^^at.
A^^iqui^.
Josephus, imputed to their Gods shameful factes, and hereupon increased the
malice of evil disposed persons for the accomplishment of all wickedness. And
as upon reuew of histories we may easily prove, that the ciuil^st and sue^est
sort of people, living ever upon the earth, to have be^e Christians, so may we
know, that our profession before all other has arrived thereunto, in reconing
that it has been addicted to virtue in all excellency, which intelligenceth
the mind, and ridding the will of all harshenes, sweteneth it in amity,
piety, charity; and so draws the whole man from the leese of sensuality,
That, as speaks S. Augustine, As the beauty of the body Augu T^^. 32. i^ 7.
c. Johan. 2. P^t. 1.
is the soul, so the beauty of the s^ule be almighty God. Happy and
desired lucifer, expected by the sacred Apostle S. Peter, to arise in the
haertes of all true believers! No glittering mass of goulde or silver, no
rich Iuellrie of pearl^s and precio^se stones yea as speaks Aristotle, no
princely empire, by which mortal men do much r^semble almighty God,
brings Arist. l. 1. Mag Mor. c. 4. and 6.
man to that top and tipe of dignity, to that degree of honor and civil
respect, to which virtue causes him to mount and aspire. Upon which
consideration, Courteouse Read, in regard of Civility, thou a^^e diligentli^
to mark and ponder, which faith stanneth more effectually for documentes to
inform the understanding, for restraincte, and incicitements also of the
will, to inure the same in all virtuous actions: for hereupon depends thy
coll^ctiue conclusion, to censure which faith and relligion are truly civil
and politic, and which balefull thereunto. And without all doubt, the end
and drifte of nature drauing men to unity and combination of City, and
common wealth, was not only by reciprocal commerce to enriche the inhabitants,
to make them abound in pleasure, but espetially that they should be hereby
virtuous, and that in a better manner, then they could be living sauadgely in
distraction and vagrancie: for otherwise virtue set a side, greater calamity,
and sharp^^ misery, will accompany Citizens, Rulers, and subjects, then if
they lived in sequestration upon mountains, in wodes or dens: for that the
malice and lust of man are then most potent, when they be armed with
dissimulation, with craft, where the party assailing may contriue what he
list: which tricks of unnatural policy have commonly for school the
cour^e where virtue is wanting, for feelde and theater the common wealth, for
vpsho^ barbaritie, and hateful disunion. Farthermore if in this affair, not
relying on reasons discourse, we will solely behold the pole st^r of heaven
the providence of almighty God, we shall even by experience know, that only
virtue is civil and politic; in that virtue only is mother of love, of honor
of prosperity, with out which no tricking descant, or odiouse coosenage of a
barbarouse politician, can make any common wealth truly civil, or for wisdom
commendable. What brave and great exploites, I pray you, are brought to pass
by this new gloss, by this forged coin, by his ^ascar^e altering nature in
false viso^s, by these clokes, which strike no thing but that which is not?
where are at home their abundance, their contented and united minds, their
trustefull repo^^s in each others ^^^iance? where are abroad their trophies of
arms, and letters, of redoubted puisance and renoume, of faithful leauge and
amity? where is their same, which maugre death, and the whole heap of its
funerals, glo^^fi^th the name against lenghte of time, or envy of the wicked?
what is then the sum? A litel time to be dissolute, by litel and litel in
time to dissolve all: and after time to be eternally and miserably tormented.
Hear the judgment of Josephus, a sage Historiographer among tha leaves. We may
understand, Joseph. Prae^at An^iq.
tha^ such commun^ties as are obedient to the will of almighty God, and are
afraied to violate laws well decreed, to be prosperouse in all suc^esse above
humane c^nc^ipte: to whom almighty God for reward proposes ^elicitie. But
contrariewise if the depart from the observance of them, their deuis^s finally
come to no good end: moreover their endeavors, which unto them seem good,
expire in most remediless calamities.

Whereupon in dew consequence does it follow, that as the Christian Pla^o li^*
de Repub A^ist. ^ (...). ca. 1. ^ Po^t C^c^^o ^^ de leg^bu^ X^ophon ^^ C^^o
Arist. in Magnis Mo^al ^. 1. c. ^.
belief is wonderfully auayleable unto virtue, as to justice, to charity,
relligion, continency, fo^^i^ude, and temperance, so is it most effectually
profitable to civility, and humane commercement in society. No famous
Philosopher endoued only with the light of reason, as commendable to
posterity, has hitherto written of civil institution, who has no^ laid
dou^n as ground of such discipline virtue, and that good abearance betwixt man
and man, which is conform^ble to right reason, and by means thereof available
to the community: also supposing fell barbaritie, opposite to civility, to
be no thing else but a frouard distraction of man from man through vice and
wickedness, ^ther ou^ewarely breaking into fury, or closely conceiled under the
resemblance of probiti^, infestingst artifically all honest decency of life
and comportement: for as well (to give an example) stanneth in oppositio^
against justice the ingenering Burglar, attempting his enterprice in the
dearckenes of the night, Dissimilite^ nocent sed non dissimilit^r ^^piunt Aug
P^aef. in Psalm. 9^.
as the open thief attending his booty on the high way side. Most apparent is
it then, the new found kinde^ of policy, attributed by some to these our
dayese, as to a sager age, vaunted and vented forth from the pen of Nicholas
Ma^^^^uill, to be naught else but an artificall introduction of barbarism, the
nourcery in deed of all vice, the torment of of men's souls and bodies, the
impeachement of the community, because it bears strong head against virtue,
the pillar and ho^^combe of civil life and conversation. If the Rulers
security must be founded upon the deboshementes of the bodies and souls of
his subjects, as upon their luxury, their incontinencie, their roietousnes,
their prodigality: If his assured stay must arise from their disagremente,
their ^uspitions, treacherise, riualitise, hostilitise, in recknoning of
diversity in relligions or otherwise among them: if his wealth is to be
purchased from their penuries, their bondage, from their base couardely and
ignorant dispositions: as that Florentine Scribe aduer^^seth Princes, just
according to the^enor of Barbarism, excellently described and politickly
rejected by Aristotle, Ari l 5. Po^it. cap 1^.
then suppose we, that freinde and freinde, master and servant, lauwer and
client, P^^sition and patient, souldior and ^ustick, merchant and gentleman,
husband and wise, be thus likewise aff^cted correspondently to the Idaea of a
Prince toward his subjects, and these toward him, (as one will certainly
ensue of the other) and then tell me in this mutiny of vice, in this
^nisprision of virtue, in this anxietie of fear and dread, in this egar
pu^^uicte ofter private lust o^ lukar, what ci^^litie will remain in a common
wealth, what bond in^olablye combining citizens* or rather (...) be confessed,
that sauagenes will make her trophey, as upon the spo^les of virtue, so upon
the ou^rthroe of ^rew sound and solid (...). In which respect, cour^eouse
Reader, thou shall understand, of what importe is it, to entertain and
embrace the Catholic Roman faith, even civil state of humane society merely
considered, it recommeding unto the so eff^ctually virtue, the sole instrument
of good policy, and repressing so pouerably iniquity, the proper engine of
cruel and disorderly (...).

Without all doubt if we shall in several by ioincte and member anato^^se he
belefe of Protestants, we shall behold it according to the whole (...) thereof,
to have progeny, as mightily biased with carnalitie and (...), from these
three Heads: to wit for the understanding, that it be freed from commanding
authority of menn: that the will be licenced in liberty from conscionable
subjection to Princes: and that sensual concupiscence bear sway as not
controble by remorse of conscience, or opinion of spiritual hurt from any
sinful transgression: all which are so many elements and letters, which spell
barbaritie. Of the former has been made a su^^icient remonstrance in the
precedent part: the other to we are easily strained from the pregnancie of
their doctrine. In general it is the humor of an Heretic, to be barbarouse in
furiouse and ^bidinouse outerage, resembled by those horses in the Apocalips,
whose hurtful might was In their mo^thes, and in their tails: whereupon very
elegantly thus S. Gregory: These horses, that is naughty Preachers, Apoc 9.
Greg l 33 in ^ob. cap 29.
running every where by the instincte of carnalitie, have power in there
mouths, and in their tails: for that preaching perverse things, and being
borne out by the temporal magistrate, they exalte them selves by ba^kward and
wordly means. Were not Luther and Calmn in this respect barbed horses of
Antichrist, to induce barbarism, whose rebelliouse mouths breathed out a
relligion contrary to the whole church then being regnante? whas not their
tails also pouerable, when promising men security in all lustefull liberty,
drew many to the carrion of their dunghill? wicklefth, that disgraciouse monster
of o^ur nation, did he not poison the air, bane the bodies and souls of
millions with incitementes to turpitude of life, auouching that God is aucthor
and ordainer of sin? and yet to Calvin, and Luther, to Luther lib de l. arb.
Calum. l. 1. Inst cap. 3.
all Protestants he seems in this an Euangelister! Do not these infernal
harpies teach no sin in vilany, in barbaritie, to endamage an apprehending
Protestanter, no good work of virtue to be puetly good, or good in purity,
no observance of the law to be possible or needful? and why? but that men
loyter, flying from labor in virtuous endeavors, and lull themselves a sleep
in security, where all sins abound, where the worms of wicked factes
break out of the living bowelles of pampered panches? where is among them the
crystal fountain of profounde speculation? where is any curbing restrainte
to withdraw the will from sensual disportes? where is any forcible inuitement
to live a virtue onse life, which be the three principal instruments of
civility? Suerly that eye, which can not clearly take a veue of these wantes
among Protestants, lives in Egypt, and knows no darckenes: he needs the
Chelidonian stoone to restore dec^ied nature, being far from any accidental
endoument, or excellency in this respect: he that perceives not these
de^ectes to be occasioned througe the very genius and drifte of Protestancie,
well may he be proud, but not for excess in science, but rather for extremity
of folly and ignorance.

We are then for the present, to prove to we things against the Prostant:
first that the whole purpose of his doctrine tends to the disgrace of Christ
his metitt, empareth such means of his bounty, as has been by the same
purchased for us to attain unto perfection of life, and divine beatitude: as
it were damming up the flude of God his mercies through our Savior Christ, by
which is conuayed to the paradise of his church the liquor of heavenly dew,
the force of Christian grace, to fertilise our souls, to cleanse us from
impuritie, to carry us along in good action contrary to the maine current and
stream of our decayed and depraved natures: so that his steps forewarde of his
pretended hope appear nothing else, but so many proud presumptuouse passages
ishuing from his folly, and determining in his oune ruin, his most miserable
and lamentable destruction. Secondly shall we make a most clear remonstrance,
that his doctrine in the affair of Christian hope does so* blemish and defile
with the excrements of hell, disgorged from the mouths of old infamouse
heretics, of Antichrist that man of sin, the beauty of virtue, that men
crediting him, shall have no just cause to be inamoured therewith, to make any
espetiall regard thereof, no^ trouble them selves much as atcheue the same: and
that contrariewise endeavoring by sundry Positions to mask and excuse the
deformity of vice, to lessen the greuouse and hateful harm encurred thereby,
does consequently encourage mortal menn to accomplish their f^ll course in all
iniquity, and barbaritie, the daughter of loose disportefull carriage. Let
them gloss or the will, guilde as the like, the ordu^e of defiled consciences,
whilst they seem to repose on Christ alone for recovery and recure: let them
flatter them selves in the mean season with the inheritance of a devised
liberty, of a refined Gospel, and of a spatiouse place to dance the current
of their recom^o^ts: let them glory, that in their garden they gather nothing
but roses without thorns, the course there about the allies and mazes
without restraincte: the rest and sleep on the verdure of their late invented
pleasant Phancies: yett this is, and shall be the vpshott, and I hope
Epitaphte read by the world of their doctrine, and endeavors, That men cont^mne
virtue, and d^eade no vice.

Contrariewise as our Catholic hope is passing strong, so is it also
excedinglie pure and virtuous: the former is caused by this, that we hope
through divine grace, the which is most potent and firm: the other proceeds
from sych means as Christian hope uses to attain her end and purpose. Let
man his hope says S. Augustine, so be settled on God, that he Aug Ena^* a in
Psalm. 90.
nether be allured from him by pleasure, nor broken through fear. There be
towe principal affections, against which virtue is to strive: that is wanton
and vain love, and also drouping dread. By love we trespass against virtue,
preferring before it the opposite and forbidden delight: by fear of loss we
leave our station, and perform not that, which is apoincted Arist. in mag.
Mor. ca 8. Apoc. 16.
by virtue. Whereupon thus concludes Aristotle: wherefore virtue is employed
about pleasures, and dolors. Therefore that is a preposterous hope, yea an
inhumane and deformed expectation, which looks for beatitude without all
dependence of virtue and true civility: as if one might through Christ ariue
to eternal bliss, and yet permit his love to yield to concupiscence, suffer
his fear to work the omission of that good office, which is prescribed by
virtue: and in deed such a hope as this is, found in the Protestant, is no
thing else, butt the witch Circes her cupp to transform me^ into beasts, and
in deed that goble^, which the Babilonian strumpet, daughter to Antichrist,
and mothermistresse of all Protestants, tendreth to all, whose liquor droncke
by the^ turns their estates to that condition, which is proper to the bratts
and slaves of the beast, that man of sin Antichrist. Our Christian hope then
ought to be puisant and resolute; yet pure and honest; and in that respect
more pure and honest, because it is not Philosophical, but Christian, not
humane, but divine. Consider th^n, I beseech the G^ntle Reader, first, what
reliance has the Catholic hope on virtue, whose ancher takes hold on the
goodness of allmighty God, and also upon the goodness of life and action,
allthough in a diverse quality: not presuming with an unclean repose, as
sinful touch, to lay hold on purity it self. On the other side seriously
way with thy self, how a Protestant by eficacie of his pretended hope is not
only defiled, but likewise emboldened by sacrilegiouse conceit, as if from
heaven he were assured that his hope divorced from virtue were sufficiently
available to a^cheue his final end of happiness. whereupon must thou nedest
conclude, that faith to be accepted of the, which brings forth a virtuous
Hope: and such avouched faith to be rejected, which boldly lanceth in to the
debth of all iniquity: which acertaineth men of their salvation, when suarming
with vices they look in presumption for that croune, which is end and period
of all man's endeavors.

In what pitiful plight must then be plunged that common wealth, in which,
with Machiauilian policy concurreth and accords Protestantish Theology?
The Machiauilian will advertise the Prince, that his assurance of estate
depends on the sins and baseness of his subjects, as upon their
disagrementes, upon their voluptuouse riott and effeminacie, upon their
si^plicitie, slavery and ignorance: then the Protestantish minister will
preach* both to Prince, and subject, that no wickedness is to be ^mputed unto
a beleuer, that the law of God and nature is impossible, that virtue is nether
commendable, nor priseable, that civil l^wes oblige not the conscience, that
sins by abolishment are never assoiled, that the Rule of faith is each man's
private spirit enterpreting the word, that almost no heresy is damnable:
That the splendour and substance of outeward Relligion is superstition or
idolatry: and so when all are possessed with these principles of court, and
Pulpit, the hearers and crediters as they will be lavish for vice, and
disdainefull toward verue and heaven, so finally their manners, besides
offense against God, and trespass against Nature, besides mi^prisall of the
cross of Christ, will be resolved into barbarism: for as nothing is truly
civil but learning, and virtue, so nothing balefully barbarouse but ignorance,
and iniqui^ie. Alas, what la^dable maiestry is it in way of policy, to
induce the rude popularitie into a relligion, and to confirm them in the same,
which is grateful to sense, proportionable to the inclination of flesh and
blood in their distempe^atures. The Turchishe discipline of government
depends principally upon these three apoinct^ments: first that the
understanding be not troubled with any difficulty in matter of faith: then
that sensuality be gratified by free acce^se, with all indemnitie, of carnal
pleasures: lastely, that presentement of horrible penalties ^nforce bodies and
souls into slavery and utter dastardie: all which serve as instruments to
retain in office and duty that base generation. Contrariewise a thing
prayesable is it, and worthy a civil governor so to dispose the haertes of
subjects, that willingly they submitt their minds to obiectes of belief,
which exceed natural reach, and as it were trauerse the course thereof: then
to incline their affections to such obseruances, as be austere, ircksome, and
afflicti^e to concupiscence: finally to make virtue so powerable with them,
that terror do not so much move them to good abearance, as a cordial love of
virtue, and espe^ially, an inflamed charity toward God and man. This, This
was the course of policy, which our ancient and renoumed fore fathers have
held, so gloriouse unto them, and auailelable to us, enjoying now the fruictes
of their ra^e wisdom and constitutions.

It shall suffice then, gentle Reader, that I a far of cry thee aim, and
give thee intelligence by the duty of a faithful Sentinel, and a loving
Patriott, in that prefession most assuredly pleadged, and strongly obliged
ever to remain thine for thy chefest good and abletterance in what he may

EDWARD WESTON.

THE TRIAL OF CHRISTIAN TRVTH AGAINST HERESY, By the rules of virtue, serving
for discovery of Antichrist in his foorerunners, and mysteries of iniquity.
THE SECOND PART.
The Catholic Roman faith related to hope in regard of principality, and
subjection in a civil commonwealth, as also of all virtue in general, is
maruelously commendable and convenient: implying likewise in it self hereby
such arguments of probable credibilitie, as humane prudence may either vvishe
or desire.

CHAPTER. I.
THE inward ability of man his soul, as well by Divines as Philosophers,
Division of man his power in his soul*
is divided into two kinds: that is into one part thereof Reasonable, and the
other Sensitive. That of reason comprehends the understanding, and the will:
and that of sense is two fould, to wit Concupiscente, and vvrathfull.
Concupicence makes force to attain conceived pleasure: wrath and ire, as of
her guard, endeavor to give repulse unto such obnoxious euentes, and opposite
things, as may deprive concupiscence of her desired delight. Which doctrine
S. Macharius thinks Ambr li. 3. de virgin Match. hom. 1. Ezech. cap. 1.
to have been illustrated by the obiectes of the Prophet Ezechiel his great
vision, thereby behoulding the face of a Man, of an Ox, and of a Lion,
environed with a great light, and combined all together in one fashion and
order of proportion: as if the visage and feature of a man signified his
faculty Reasonable, that of an Ox, his Concup^^cence, and that of the Lion,
his Ire or Wrath: all which, as they be parts of man his soul, so likewise
are they necessary instruments of his good carriage and function* Moreover the
will and affection of man according to S. Augustine and S. Thomas Aug 83. quest.
q. 51.
is said sometimes to be divided within it self, yea fighting by severed
members of it self against it self, the face of a man, as it were, that of an
Ox, and that of a Lion striving in it for victory: so that the will is then
Concupiscence, when it gathers up forces to S. The. 1. part. q 92. ^^. 3. in
3. Sent* Did. 26. q 2* a^^. ^.
the purchase of pleasure: VVrathfull, when by courageous fortitude it breaks
and ouercometh adversity. For the present we are only now to discuss such
perfection of man, as belongs to the Reasonable ability of the
understanding, hereafter being to enquire of the due institution of
Concupiscence and Wrath in the ensuing chapters ape^taining to Hope, Charity,
and Religion. Seeing therefore we are now to search for the best direct on of
man his mind, as prime cause of his whole carriage, I recomend unto the
discreet Reader for his directorie this one consideration: that whereas the
gifts of Almighty God his grace accrue by the meritte of his Son CHRIST
unto man his nature, in that professed faith and belief is undoubtedly to be
found the efficacy and worth of grace, the which in regard of virtue, does
mo^e f^ll^e and completlie perfect nature: and contrariwise that pretended
credulitie^s to be esteemed as most false and deuilish, the which d^presseth
nature, causes it to faulter and fail in that course of behavior, which
reason shall judge to be most convenient for the same, and so consequently by
it also ^o be most desired.

2. The verity of two things are especially by a certain and well grounded
knowledge The ^^^ ^^ise o^ (...) life.
in man his understanding to be agnised: the first imports ^he persuasion,
that his soul is immortal: the other that Almighty God is existent, and
prouiden^ over all things By the one we may deem, that we are not allot^ed to
ter^e^e and transitory Aug. 8^. quest. q. 53.
pleasures as to ou^ final end, but rather ordained f^^ exercise of virtue, in
like sort as the soul is of a constitution spiritual and eternal. By the
other we resolu^ to be a maine pa^te of our office and duty to surrender
supreme homage unto divine majesty, to live in fear and reverence of the
same, and to reckon our selves as accoumptable at his judgment sea^e for
every action of ou^s here in this life, either performed, or omitted. For
without these two circumstances, general k^i^s, and pole-stars of a politic
estate, no civil ^^uention can ^ufficientlie ^en^e man his dem^anure from
barbarism of vice, from distemperature of affection: the judgments of which
once being extinguished, when the ^^a^^ing and fie^ie eye of outward justice by
secrecy and security from pain is avoided, th^n our concupiscence will
break and rushe forth into bad designs, and our irefull faculty by violence
and outrage, or else sly conue^ance, will make free passage for the same, to
the ruin and disordering of all humane society. Contrariw^se, what manner of
affection, correspondent to civility, works in man the recognisance of
Almighty God, and of his sacred providence, Cicero thus declares: ^ic in (...)
Who can do otherwise, when he considers, that God has a care of him,
th^n day and night, even with horror adore the Divinity, and if any
adversity fall out, from which who is free* fear that it has (...)
happ^ned! VVhereupon passing prudent was the fiction of Homer, according to
which Venus meeting with the Goddess Sleep, and requesting Him. (...) 14.
her to con^^^l by her art from Jupiter his eyes what she intended, received
this answer:

What God som^uer el^ with bond of sleep I could
Bind fast, even Ocean father of the Gods, if that you would.
But of Jupiter, Saturnes ^h^ld, the restles eye to press,
Is not my power, nor da^^^ venture on such fact I do confess.
To the same purpose of ciu^litie does it belong, that C^tizens re^aine an
acertained persuasion, that the proper office of man is virtue, as designed
industry of his body and soul, squared out, and commanded by reason: and
that by the same virtue he imitateth Almighty God, as thereby fashioned and
mannered out with an amiable, and prise^ble shape even unto the divine
affection. Of which consideration th^s speaks Aristotle: He who performs
his duty agreeable unto the mind, cultiuateth the same, and is Arist libr. 10.
Ethic. c. 8.
well therein disposed. And it is very probable, that such a one is most dear
unto Almighty God. For if the immortal Gods have any care of men's affairs,
as it is most likely they have, also it is probable, they be delighted with
them, as with things most near resembling themselves, such as are their
minds: and al^o that they revvard such with gifts and savors, who love
m^st t^eir minds, and make chiefest reconing of them, as o^ things especially
respected by the Gods, having a great care of them performing right and good
^nd^^ours. To the same effect of ^ertue and civility, thus deuiseth Seneca: Of
what quality will s^eme to be unto thee that Senec ep 10^.
diui^e light, when thou ^halt behold it? Assuredly this one cogitation vv^^^
not permit any uncleanness to he in the bottom of a soul, no vilitie, no
cruelty: for it avouches the Gods to be vv^tn^sses of all things. In force of
this cogitation men have pursued by a natural instinct purity of a virtuous
life, and have sought by all means possible for expiation and purgation from
sinful filth of action once contracted, abhorring to present before the divine
aspect the ugly purtractures of a defiled heart and spirit.

3. Contrariwise, when the reasonable faculty of the soul is without all
guidance S Th. 22. q 81. a^. 4. Homer. Odiss^x. ^li. n. pap. l 5* silua^.
Bo^er. in descrip. Peru. Senec. epist. 102. l 4* de Benef. c. 4. 18. Pl. in
Marcello. The orig^ of Barba^isme. Rom ^. Ps. 1^.
from touch and belief of Almighty God, necessarily, as virtue then will be
soon vanquished by Concupiscence, and Ire, so civility will be thereby
excluded, and fell barba^isme of violence and craft will every where bear
rule and commaundrie. For indeed barbaritie, although it have the absolute
accomplishment in faculty of man ^ras^^bl^, notwithstanding it remarketh
origin and beginning in the mind, especially when it is void of all heavenly
intelligence, concerning the certain knowledge of Almighty God. In regard
whereof the Apostle S* Paul recounting the humor and disposition of the
Gentiles, before they were enlightened with the Gospel, thus speaks: There
^^ not among them an intelligent person: there ^^ not any enquiring after good.
Here as beginning of barba^isme, and head of the pe^egrie thereof, is placed
ignorance and infidelity in respect of Almighty God. Then from hence ishueth
in the Concupiscible faculty a bruti^^ declination from honesty to unlawful
pleasure: All have declined, and become unprofitable. There ^s not any which
does good, no not one. Lastly from these precedent causes* raceth out in
furi^ the barbarous distemperature of emnitie, of hostility, usurping empire in
the Iras^^ble part: Their thro^^ ^^ an open s^pulcher, with their tongues they
dealt ^ra^t^li^, the po^so^ of (...) lies under their tongues; whose mouth is
full of malediction, and (...) contrition and ins^licitie are in their ways,
and the way of peace they have not known. When heaven is not held in price
with men, when they neither bend nor stoup^ by homage to the majesty of
Alm^ghtie God, when they respect no judge above, what may de^^ine them from
possible delights here below, from expected honors, puisance and riches, liable
to their abilities? It is not the penal law, which can command the hearts
affection, or dread from thence, which may always rebut the rush of burning
lust, the fiery fiercenes of revenge and purchase, the blustering blast of
raging ambition. Rather when once Almighty God is contemned, or not considered
by mortal men, this will be their barbarous resolution: A^r^l. pr^^* i^
Psy^o^.


Quis m^h^ regnator (...) quis conditor orb^^?
Quis Deus, quae iam merito metuenda potest^^?
Ib^ per impuros feruent^ libidine luxus,
Ins^^^a^or habens aliquid sine test propinq^i
Depositum, tenac^s auidus spoliabo client^^:
Long^^^am perimam magico cantamine matrem.
Who heavens Lord to me, who worlds Creator does appear:
What God, whose powerful hand with reason ought I fear?
I Will run to foul delights, vvhilest furious lust does burn:
I Will beds with incest soil, and sacred shame i will spurn^.
What neighbor lays with me, if witness be not known,
I Will openly deny my charge, and take it for my own.
Let hand of auar^ce the client spoil, although he hold full fast,
Let magic charm end mothers life, if life yet longer were to last.
4. VVhereupon all the Sages of the world have conspired in this one opinion,
that S^ndery means chose^ by me^ to know Almighty God, as by the Gen^^.
for support of c^uilitie, and dischardge of man his natural duty, is
necessarily required some certain knowledge of Almighty God. Only in this
has appeared the differencie among them, that by sonderie means they have
sought to derive unto their minds this heavenly intelligence. To this effect
some have depended upon the relation of spirits, called Geni^, by oracle, or
otherwise, expecting from them all Theological Plin lib. Not. Histor. cap 7.
P^utarch ^. de Socr. Demon. Prudent. perysteph, Claud. paneg. Hono. lib. 1.
od. 29. Hierem. 32. Aug. de Doct. Christ. c. 17. 18. 19 20. 21 22 ^^. de
Diuina^. Demon. ^ 83. quest. q. 79. Senec. Suasor 4. Pluta^ ^^. de defect.
orac. Clem. Alex. ^. 1. Strom. ^ul Firmic. lib. de origin. Errotis. Ser^nus ^.
de ^ato. Hermias Tom 4. B^^ Sanctae. Philo^ophie in some sort is a persectio^
to be desired. Sap 16. Romans 1.
information. But proof and experience have declared to man the infirmity, or
rather iniquity of these geniall gods and intelligencers to this our purpose
of instruction. For besides that, they withdraw our cogitations from Almighty
God, making them to border and end in themselves: also as Pliny and Plutarch
witness (although otherwise much addicted to their service) they appoint such
actions, such rites and customs unto their followers, as they manifest
thereby, that they are in deed rather deadly enemies unto mankind, then
no^ishers and pedagoges thereof: as when they prescribe slaughter of young
children in Sacrifice, foul ceremonies at their altars, sorce^ie, and all
manner of hor^ible crimes and wickedness. Moreover it has been observed, with
what falsitie and injury against Almighty God, as notes S. Augustine, they
have often times deluded men's expectations by their vocal oracles or
southsaiers, fra^ming al their devises not by rule of any science, but
according to hap of event: as witnesses Seneca the elder, Plutarch, Clement
Alexandrin, Julius Firmicus, Julius Serenus, Hermias, and others. Besi^es these
inconveniences, for that one certain and common rule cannot be expected from
these Genij to serve for all, men would vary and disagree among themselves in
matters of greatest consequence, to the perturbation of the commonwealth, to
the bane and overthrow of virtuous civility, by such ambiguouse and opposite
sentences ordering their endeavors.

5. Others have labored to attain unto the knowledge of Almighty God only by
the faculty of Philosophy, and speculation of these natural things, which
beheld of us represent in some sort both the being of one God, and also his
infinite, and admirable perfections. Truly of this there is no doubt, but that
Philosophy is necessary in regard of civil science, much serving also unto
divine Theology, and in general conducent to all virtue. As concerning
Almighty God, seeing that all his creatures by contemplation beheld by us, do
represent him as their God, their Lord and maker, it follows that according
to degree, in which students more severally, and profoundly discern and
penetrate the natures and qualities of them, they do likewise behold in a more
shining and distinct contemplation that sovereign perfection in Almighty God
the centar of all, as is very well remarked by the Angelical Doctor S.
Thomas. VVhereupon does likewise ensue that great love in us toward his Divine
Majesty: 5. Thom. 1. part. q^. a^t. 1.
which affection is the very foun^aine of all probitie and decency in all our
occupations. Moreover Philosophy, even whilst it contemplateth the fabric
of universal nature, as not then considering the proper principles of
morality, avails even then passing much to Religion, to justice, to
temperance, to a magnanimouse contempt of earthly affairs or accidents.
Seneca discoursing by letter with his friend about mere speculations of
nature, as of the heavens and elements, imputing unto him this demand,
Seneca epist. ^^1.
But what appartaine these disputes to good manners? returns accordenglie
this answer: Not every document, which is moral, does forthwith make a man
good. One thing serves to norish man, an other to exercise him, an other thing
to apparel him, an other to teach him, an other to delight him:
Notvvithstanding all concern man, although every one of them make him not the
better: other things in an other sort appartaine to manners. Some correct men,
and order them, others search out their nature, and origin. Wherefore when it
is dem^^nded, why nature produced man, why she has preferred him before
other creatures, do thou think, Cic in Lucul. Hieron. l^ ad Magnu^ o^at.
Aug. de Doct. Christ. c. 16. 40 Aliud est enim scire tantummodo quid homo
credere debeat propter adi^^scendam vitam beata^, quae non nisi aeterna est:
aliud autem scire quemad modum hoc ips^m and pijs opitulctur, and co^tra impios
defendatur, qua^ proptio appellare vocabulo scientiam videtur Apostolus.
August. 14. de Trin. c. 1. Hanc enim, quam Dialecticam voca^t quae nihil aliud
docet, quam consequentiam demonstrare, seu vera veris, seu falsa falsis,
nunqua^ doctr. na Christiana formidat. Aug. l 1. cont. Crascon. c. 20.
Philosophy not sufficient for man his instruction. Senec in praefat l. de
quest. Natural. Cic in Lucul. Senec l^. not. quest q 32.
I depart far from precept of good life and manners? It is not true. For
when vvilt thou know, what manners are to be entertained by us, but when
thou understand, what is best for man, after thou have looked into his
nature? Then at length shall thou perceive, what is to be done of thee, and
what is to be eschued, when thou have learned what thou ovvest unto thy
own nature. In like manner Cicero entreating of the morality, which flows
unto our lives from natural Philo^ophie, says: The consideratien and
contemplation of nature are as it were the natural food of minds and
vvitts. Hereby we are reared up on high, we seem to be enlarged, humane
things we despise, and thin^ing on supernall and heavenly things, our
commodities here belovve we contemn as small, and of little importance
Hereupon does the Catholic faith allow and much esteem the studies of
liberal^ sciences, thereby partly to ciuilize and supple the harshsenes of our
rude natures, to withdraw our employme^tes from brutish pleasures; and also by
furniture of them, as by the Egyptians spoils, as speak S. Hierom and S.
Augustine, better to explicate the mysteries of our belief, and likewise to
defend them against the pride and error of any false pretended Philosophy and
literature. And from hence natural prudence may deduce a maine forcible
argument for the proof of truth in our Christian Faith and Religion: for
whereas the Turk, and other barbarous people, conceille their mysteries in a
couerture of silence, and dreadful stupiditie, we contrariwise,
notwithstanding we credit such high veriti^s above reason, and so repugnant to
our sensuality, as of the Blessed Trinity, Incarnation and Passion of God,
Yet we in open school discourse of them, dispute and discuss them curiously
and exactlie, as being resolutlie by a supernatural light enforced against the
strength of all falsitie: nothing being to us more precious and dear, then the
empire and preualence of truth.

6. Nevertheless in that our Philosophy is infirm, variable, and diverse, yea
even about such obiectes as are most familiarly conversant with our senses,
from thence is no security, for repose of a settled judgment in matters of
Divinity, or means competent therein so tendered of agreement with
perpetuity in a multitude, as law of humane civility and society seems to
require. Wherefore Seneca considering the general ignorance, which had
ouergrowen man his mind, and also the manifold differences among Philosophe^s
in their search after Almighty God, thus discourses. So great error holds
our mortality, that we deem this vvordels fabric, then the which there is
nothing fairer, nothing better disposed, or in purpose more constant, to be a
thing of casualtie and v^lubilitie: and so tumultuous, and situated betwixt
floods, clouds, tempests, and other things, which beat the earth, and things
near unto it. Neither this madness does reign only among the common people,
but also is found in such as profess vvisdome. For amongst them there are,
who think they have a soul, and that prouidently disposing all affairs of
themselves, and of others, and yet they d^m^ this vniuersoll machin, in which
we are, to want counseille, to be carried about by temerity: so that nature
knovveth not what she does. Upon the same consideration thus Cicero: VVerefore
by reason of dissentions among the Philosophers, we are constrained to be
ignorant of our Lord God. From whence it did ensue, that the world grew even
weary in Seneca his time of Philosophers, and left of to frequent their
schools, as he himself reports. Who regards now Philosophy; or any
liberal study, unless plays be omitted, or a rainie day fall out which is
good to lose? VVhereupon so many families of Philosophers are extinguished for
want of succession. The Accademickes, as well the elder, as younger, have left
behind them no famous professor. Who now declares the doctrine of Pirrho?
That Pithagoricall school of an envious troop, wants a master. The new
sect of the Sextians, as the strength of Rome, vvhilest with great seruencie^t
did begin, even then expired on a sudden And who is he that will suffer
loss of goods, life or liberty, merely in asseueration of an opinion
invented by Philosophy, when power and argument shall stand against it?

7. Wherefore the defect of other instruments proved and experienced, in due
The necessity of faith.
consequence, there are no remanant means for us to discover the eternal
truth of Almighty God in himself, and in his benefits respecting mankind,
then by divine faith speaking unto us by some audible authority, graced with
the poising ornaments of gravity, constancy, sanctity, and veracitie,
serving fitly thereby for our information and direction to that end, for which
we are created. And as faith bordering upon supreme authority, does limit the
understanding of man; that it once reposed and determined with the non plus
vltra of the first commanding truth in God Almighty, his affection may after
hold a more assured and grounded course of good life, so it seems by this
principle of faith, that man is reduced to the very headspring and beginning
of all natural and civil endeavors; as do excellently well consider S.
Hierom, and S. John Damascenne. Upon faith says S John Damascenne, do depend
all humane and Hie in expos symb. Damas. lib. 4. cap. 12. Aug. de vtil. Cred.
cap. 14.
spiritual affairs. For we see, that the husbandman without faith tilleth
not his ground. Neither deuo^de of faith does the merchant, carried upon a fevv
bo^des commit himself to the fury of the waters Matrimony is not contracted
without beleef^ or finally any thing is undertaken belonging to humanelife,
without the same. Only then it remains, that according to verdict of
prudence we now recount, what conditions in such faith are to be remarked.

8. First therefore this faith, in regard of things to be believed, and weight
of credit The qualities of a Civil faith.
in the proponent of them, ought to be an assent of man his understanding
judicial, reasonable: not slight, or lightly upon occasion of a glance of the
mind entertained. For if this quality be wanting, the best wits in a
commonwealth will d^sd^ine to embrace it: So that customarie fashion do not
otherwise externallie prevail with them: and they will verily thinck, the
prince to serve his own private to have hailed in such a belief into the
commonwealth, as they say, by the head and sholders, in inward opinion and
affection not making any reckoning thereof. To whose president and example they
will after accordingly also esteem of the same, and have their consciences as
free, and not restrained by scruple or commaundrie of such an erraticall
invented planet of Policy. Whereby licenced in this sort to all liberty,
with scorn of that faith they outwardly profess, they will break out into
all insolence and barbarism of demeanure, when occasions with indemnitie shall
be presented For in deed it is all one, to have no belief, and to retain
such a one, as is not probable, or agreeable to common judgment. Wherefore
this raineboe faith may well be a help unto a prince, governing by barbarous
tirannie, to scatter his people into troops of faction and dislike, to deboshe
them with vice, to perplex them with fears and suspicions, to ouerrunne them
with ignorance and brutish conversation, but never shall it serve for a civil
institution, or abetterance of the community. In this respect Aristotle laying
down particular precepts, Atist. l. 7. pol.
the which may avail a Prince, resolving to govern even by barbarous
tyranny, wills him to be careful and studious in profession of Religion;
and that in such sort, as that he seem so to do, s^ue simulatione stultitia,
without fainting in a religion by art forced and forged, or in such a one,
which the best spirits may justly censure as folly and weakness of brain.
For as the foundation of a house is to be sure, upon firmitie of it the whole
edifice subsisting, so faith in Almighty God, the substantial support of
civility, is to be both in prince and subjects souls deeply entrenched, and
soundly grounded.

9. Moreover in faith, as rule of man his civil and moral life, is to be
regarded force The unity of faith.
of unity and conspiracy in one accord of belief. Which being wanting,
forthwith will arise in swarm and mutiny sondrie heresies, as the steely
brood of Cadmus, which will disturb by variety of arms and clamors all
peace in a commonwealth. Neither is any commotion so tempestuous, hot and
barbarous, as that which breaks out of the Sanctuary: heaven as it were
patronising the auctores of garboiles on earth, as shall herea^ter more amply
be declared.

10. Also this faith ought to be holy, that is an inducement strong and
forcible unto (...) of faith.
virtue, and integrity of life. For seeing that the end, and also means of
true policy and authority, is moral goodness in the sub^ectes, therefore to
this purpose is only suitable Dio^o^ (...) Xe^^ Cito rebukes lavve^s ^at^^r
(...) how to Pu(...) offenses, then to procure that offenses be ^ not Conc.
T^d ^ess. 6. Can. 28. Joan 7. Joan 5. Alph de Au. l. super aud^ filia cap ^4 1.
ad Timo. 1. Aug Tract 30. in Ioa. cap. 7. Tract. 54 c 12. Plat. l de Rono
status Rel. c. 26. Isa. 11. Ex quo eni^ fremuerunt gentes, and popul^ meditati
sunt inania aduersus Dominum, and aduersus Christum eius, qua^de ab eis
fundabatur sanguis Sanctorum, and vastabatur eccle sia, vsque ad hoc tempus,
and deinceps, quotidie minuentur. Aug. l. de Diuinat. Daem ca. 10.
such faith, as ^s pregnant with seeds of virtue, containing in her bowels
the efficacy of all honest deportment, as Diodorus and Xenophon auouche. And
although faith may remain with any mortal sin, infidelity only excepted,
as it is defined in the Sacred Couns^ll of Trent, yet he, who is of a more
virtuous and debonaire disposition, will sooner yield to faith* then an other
perverted by vice: and also where sin, forbidden by faith, abounds, there
faith is ordinarily in greater Ieopard^e* in that the same affection which
once allodgeth sin, will cont^nuallie st^iue against faith forbidding sin,
and causing, that the deliciouse guest do frette the offendant h^s conscience
with painful remorce and sharp resentment. And therefore this sinful
resolution will alwaise fight against faith, to be freed from affliction of
conscience procured thereby. As touching a fit disposition of man first to
receive faith, our assertion is justified by the express words of our Savior
Christ. I^ any do his will, he shall know of my doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self. Again, how can you believe, vvhoseeke
for glory one of an other? Which point is very well pondered by Alfonsus de
Auila. The Apostle also affirms, covetousness to have made many to perish in
shipwraek of their faith Then let every one, who is inclined, or resolved, to
discredit our Christian Catholic faith, lay his hand on his breast, and
enquire of himself seriously without flattery, what is the prime motive to
such a renegate disdain of his, and he shall find that not sharpnes of wit,
nor depth of judgment gives the check and distaste, but his own sinful
conscience and purpose devoted to that pleasure, which faith reproves and
reprocheth as damnable. Now if consideration be made of the several parts of
virtue, disclosed in the boosome of our Catholic belief and credence, we
shall see it fully fraught and replenished therewith. Faith beholds admirable
gifts, by almighty God bestowed on mankind, as in proper and particular, the
benefit of the Incarnation, the assured tuition of the Church, the tresorie of
seven Sacraments, the holy majesty of a dreadful Sacrifice, the
fortification of Sanctification by grace: whereby in recognisance of such great
benefits, toward so bountiful a Lord in most ardent charity we may be
enkindled. Also for mutual love and amity among ourselves, for the auoidance
of sin, and purification from stain thereof, our says eyeth obiectes of
singular force and ability. It is our faith, which has melted into tears so
many repentants, reclamed from worldly empire Clothariusses, C^arlema^es to
life monastical: which has combined in peace and unity, as foretold the
prophet I say, lions, wolves, sheep, bears, in one heard of a civil
society: which has sweetened crude and roughe natures, moll^fied bluddie
minded persons, reconciled with friendship disagreeing affections, ouermastered
persequuting enemies, as notes Saint August. O how fortunate would I esteem my
self, if I might behold this sement of the Catholic faith, even with dispense
of my own blood, to procure a civil unity, as of so many stringes in one
instrument, so under our noble king James, of the too famous Nations of
England, and Scotland, as members of one absolute Monarchy: without all
national partiality each good subject enjoying the common blessings of our
Isles abundance! Certes nothing less then this can perform it: and this not
granted, they may sooner be disioyned in their local unity, then united in
any sincere equality.

11. There is not any thing which does so recommende the verity and civility
of Force of faith. Philo lib de Charitate Joseph. l. 2. Ant. c. 12. Haec est
doctrina Christianorum, non plane conferenda, sed in comparabiliter praeferenda
doctrinis Philosopho rum: immundiciae Epicureorum, superbiae Stoico tum
Augustine Tract. de Epicur. and Stricis cap vltim. The divinity of faith proved
by true policy, effect thereof. Gregor Nisse^ I. de Homme Christiano. Faith
serving to civility is also Catholic.
any faith, as force it has to move men to virtue. VVherby Philo and Josephus
imagined, that their pens much graced their Country of Jury, and then to
have made worthy of respect with forrainers their belief and relligion, when
they deciphered all momentes for efficacy to virtue and charity they implied.
In piety, says Philo, are contained all other virtues. From which they can
be no more separated, then a body in the sun from a shadovv. Wherefore
seems to me as most absurd the collection, that some impious persons do
make: who when they consider the long and aged times of the Catholic Roman
Church, the great force that our faith has to command the souls,
consciences, and bodies of men, through offices of religion, and other moral
virtues, as of obedience, temperance, fortitude, benevolence, justice,
abstinence, and Chastity, hereupon conclude, such faith to be merely
politic, and invented by man for an end civil and temporal. For in deed
the clean contrary is rather upon the premises to be gathered: as in this
sort. The Catholic says, by Church prelacie, and commaundments of laws, is
passing politic, and beneficial even to the wordlie good of Princes, and
Subjects: Therefore it is no humane devise, but a divine institution. For
seeing that only virtue is politic, and vice solely barbarous, as shall be
after declared, thereupon is to be inferred, that belief to proceed from
Almighty God as true in deed, which through virtue more potenthe reduces man
kind by imitation to its first auctor, and makes it to resemble thereby in
some moderation that infinite perfection in the same abounding. Which
assuredly is the very purpose of divine providence, coveting always to unite
man unto the prime cause, from which he has ishewe and progeny.

12. Lastly, most auailable to a civil society will be the choice of that
faith, which in unity is Catholic, that, which in extente is sovereign and
generally receued among Christians. For seeing that no one single profession,
in compass of place, number and majesty of empire, can equalies the
Catholic body, that Prince which is devoted to any sect is thereby to be
accounted an enemy unto many: he is to be suspected by many, and infested
from as many. And for that naturally nothing is more odious then heresy, the
harm thereof is like to fall on those, who afford patronage thereunto.
Wherefore such Princes as desire to bring to pass rare and eminent exploites,
or have a care dying in the bed of honor, to live after by fame with
posterity (the profession of the Roman Catholic faith to such grand
designs and purposes being only of moment, in comparison of all other beleefes
besides) ought to entertain the same with noble and princely minds, as a
thing of chief importance and necessity to be by them regarded and maintained.

What the Protestant gives credit unto, according to propriety of his Sect,
is altogether contrary to the honor, security, office and function af a
Civil Prince. Neither is it in any dew respect proportionable to that
expected good, which subjects are especially obliged to procure.

CHAPTER. II.
ARISTOTLE rightly affirms, Counsel to be the beguinning of action: in that
a good Arist. 6. Ethi^. cap. 2 The perfection of the understanding necessatie
to a civil life.
action of man his will proceeds from a true resolution of mind, as being a
constante, and firm endeavor, relying, on a judicious and well settled
conclusion. Which Counsel in general compriseth as parts and members,
perfectinge the intelligent faculty of man his soul, natural prudence,
humane literature, and divine faith: all ionctlie concurring to the absolute
accomplishment of a laudable and civil conversation. And as from hence all
nations what someuer stand in need of their direction, so especially those of
the Northren climates, by the use of these documentes Frudition and faith
necessary for ciuility in Northeren parts.
may gain greatest commodity, as by their wantes or impeachementes incur the
more disasterous and pitiful calamity For seeing by natures instinct, and
heavens air, they be harsh and fearce, they need the more a temperature of
mildenes from truth, from the science and study of contemplative occupations,
as being only potent in this kind, even when arms can press no farther: and
therefore they are industriouslie and carefully to be supported by a politic
prince rulinge over them. Other wise these lights neglected, or by sloth and
heresy extinguished, as such people, ordinarily engrossed with humors of a
vast norishment, are not by wit so acute to perceive their own conceued
error of purpose and judgment, they having again returned to natures ruder
bente, more violently and bouisterously will resist such enformers, Phil. Com.
li. com. Lucan. l. 8. v.. 65.
as shall seek to reclaim them to truth. Omnes Septentrionales b^losi, says
Philip Earl of Comin. Northern nations are Choleric.

Omnis in arctois populus quicunque pruinis
Nascitur, indomitus bellis, and mortis amator.
Quicquid ad Eoos traclus, mundique teporem
Labitur, emollit gentes clementia coeli.
The Northren people nipte with frostes, and hardened still with could
Are fierce in wars, and dreadles love to die with courage bold.
But this aganie in Esterne climes, and vvarmer world we find,
That there the mildnes of the air makes men more soft by kind.
2. Whereupon Antichrist by his protestant minister endeuoreth not only to
despoile The Protest^t an enemy of the mind.
the understanding in man of her proper splendour and intelligence through
falsitie, but also by barbarism to break the bond of civility, by asperous
force and cruelty to corrupt natures sweetness of amity, clemency, and good
neighbourhode: Iudic. 16.
imitatinge the raven, which prays on the eye, and those barbarous
Philistians, which be^eued Sampson of his sight, thinkinge then, that the
strength of God his Chru^h will thereby either be enfeobled, or that it will
imprudently adventure upon the pillar of its own ruin and calamity.

3. We may here design too general heads, as of all heresies taught by the
protestant, Apoc. 9. Too principles of protestancie.
so of all barbarism induced and supported by his procreinges. S. Ihon in his
divine revelations, beheld the gate or mouth of a huge pit opened by one, who,
as a star, fell from heaven: from whence, with the afflictions of fraud and
violence, disguised by locustes, vamped forth a great smoke of ignorance. Out
of this infernal cave, opened by Luther his Apostasy, he tumblinge down as
it were from the heaven of God his Church, broke out too princes of the
locustes, to wit, only spirit, concerning belief, and only faith, importing
justice of life: which raigninge among men barbarise them with foul smoke, and
hellishe herisies. Seneca by and ingenious poetry fameth, Medaea, to the
intent of the confection of a Poysen most balefull and deadly, to have gathered
to that purpose as ingredientes, what simples are especially venemouse about
the whot shore of Aphrick, and others also found upon the cold mountain
Taurus in the North: to be sure in her purposed wittcherie.

Et tristi laeua complicans sacrum manu
Pestes rocat, quascunque feruenti creat
Arena libia, quasque perpetua niue
Taurus coercet, fugore Arctoo rigens.
VVhilest sacrifice of direful sort
Medea vvitch in lest hand held,
For dreadful plauges of every coast
With magi^^ charm she cried and yield:
As well from libian shore
In South so pa^ched vvih beams of burning sun.
As from tho snovvie Taur in North,
Which men for could dee fly and shun.
O how pestiferous elements of a doubled poison are the compoundes of an only
spirit, and of an only faith! what I pray you, is the protestantish sorcerie
of Antichrist in his fiery blasting harms of Libia, but his only spirit to
sense Scriptures breking out into so many armies of differing hostility, and
fighting heresies: And what is his Northren frost and cruelty of Taurus, but
his only faith coolinge and killing the feruor of charity, extinguishing all
vitalitie of vertuoues life, and industrious civility. For the present we are
only now to discuss the burninge and fuming scorche of his only spirit, so
pernicious to man his intelligence; and after to lay open the contagion of his
cold justifying Act. 28.
faith, and idle credulity, as a snake sticking to his hand, once cast of by
S. Paul.

4. Luther emboldned with his must of a textuarie spirit, forthwith disclamed
from Protestants enemies of learning.
the school, and all humane literature, as in^urious and prejudicial to the
spirit of a true protestant, and so to the cross of Christ. Rather then the
luxurious iuie branche of Martin Luther, devoted to an idle and beasthe faith,
should ascend into heaven, by the support of the oak of sound Philosophy, he
chooses that it creep serpent like, upon the ground of a base and sensual
understanding and life: for that the Martin always loves and likes to build
his nest in the dirt: as we may hear reported Cast. l 13. co^t. Hereses verb.
scientia. Pra^eol^m Elen^.
of him from the pen of Alphonsus a Castro. By virtue of which doctrine
Philip Melancthon, and Corolstadious, towe grand protestants, persuaded the
Students of witenberge to abandon all humane contemplation, to burn their
books and papers of Philosophy, an to betake themselves only to meditation of
the Germane bible. In which civil practice to give them the better example,
Melancton became a Baker, and Carnostadious a suaine. Just of this barbarous
strain and tune were the Puritanes of late in Sussex, who among other impious
and seditions demandes, by petition exhibited to his majesty, required of his
authority; that academicall studies in the universities might surcesse,
degrees of honor assigned for students be quite abolished, and that the book
of the lord might only be among all contemplative persons in request. Fie
upon barbarous pride and insolence, when such fond fools think the
wetherbeaten peacockes feathers, they wear in their caps, can amate nature, and
make the world stoop to the busardly lure of their senslos articles. And it
seems that all heresies in general incline to barbarism by neglecte of
humane literature. When the greek Church by the profane heresy of the Image
breakers, stood in defiance and hostility against the Roman supremacy, even
then was there in it an universal want and contempt of civil learning:
schools were then shut up, Philosophy was silenced, Theology not found in
Bishops and patriarchs. And in the mean season, the Emperors gave themselves
wholly to play, and dispor^e, as it is recorded by Curopolates, and remarked by
Card. Baron. And yet these be the men Baron. An Christ 859.
which reproach the whole Catholic church with ignorance and blindenes in
faith, in work, and religion! These burning ends, dim and dead in the
socket, as flames expiring in ignorance, will cheke and control the lights of
the world.

5. No doubt but the protestant being an enemy of sound and deep
Philosophy, thereby is also a stipendarie soldier under the banner of
Antichrist, despoiling faith of her requisite furniture for war, as well to
assail the erroneous pagan, as to repulse his furious assault. VVherin as he
disfurnisheth by barbarism the intellectual part of man, in show making him
a mere Ciclops, that is enlightened with one sole eye of a vaste and arrogant
faith, in deed he depriueth him also of the eye of faith, as has been proved
against him, that hereby man blinded, and covered in darkness, like unto a
ma^sterles ship, by full sail, and perfect equipage of other natural
endoumentes, may dashe himself in fury against the rocks of perdition.

Cona^dit ardentes atra caligme currus.
Iuuolu^^que orbem tenebris, Gentesque coegit
Desperate d^em. Lucan.

The gleames of Snnnie chariot bright
In Sable clouds he buried deep:
A mist deprived the world of light,
And made men deem no day would peep.
Faith, in that it is the card and directorie of a civil and virtuous life in
this sea of danger and casualtie, ough to be of that quality, that the best
spirits of any society, may prudently and iudiciously think the same to be
most treue, and to have origin from the very mouth of almighlie God, never
falsified by humane inventions, never profaned through condition of time or
reason of state. Which soliditie is altogether wantinge in the says
protestantish, if either we regard the persons, who are principal ministers in
service thereof, or points of doctrine contained in the same. For what
judgment is there to take faith and relligion from such men's hands and
mouths, who want the race and life of ordinary vocation and mission, who have
no dew subordination of legacy unto almighty God, who profess a religion
never visible, or recorded before Luther and Calum, and broched by them, who
that they might more freely course out into liberty, forsook the Catholic
Church to invent it? and so are not fit to be esteemed by us as instruments of
the holy ghost, according to any prudent and intelligent examination. Moreover
the improbabilitie, yea the impiety and dishonesty of the relligion
protestanting, as herafter shall be declared, denounce of them selves the cause
thereof to be dishonorable in respect of any prince, or private subject, who
shall embrace any faction thereon dependent.

6. Of what weighty moment is agremente in a commonwelth, combining particular
Not unity in the con^enticles of Protestants.
forces in one corpse of power and majesty, as being evident, needs no
farther probation Whereupon passing civil is to be judged the Catholic faith,
the which has in it an unity, and that not only in regard of one sole
knigdome or province, but also in rekoning of the whole Christian world. Which
unity of faith depends on the unity of the church, as rule: and the unity
of church is perfected by unity of one Monarche over all as supreme pastor.
Therefore protestants refusing this unity of rule, of soueranitie in the
church, retain consequently no unity of faith, but are sorted out severally
according to the variable and diverse blastes and phancies of every particular
believer. When the pagans had once forsaken the acknowledgement of one God,
betaking their allegiances, and devotions to Geniall evil spirits or devils,
forthwith they became divided, and banded in a notionall hatred of one against
the other. Yea their Gods, to patronise this their dissension, fell also to
wars among them selves, and were Archipresidentes of ga^boiles and bloody
hostility every where. Diphilus as reports Plutarch, did write, that it
seemed to him agreeable to reason, Hercules Plut. in Nicia.
to have been favorable unto the Siracusans, in regard of Proserpnia, by whose
aid and assistance he overcame Cerberus: and in that respect to have ^^stlie
been also an enemy unto the Athenians, because they harbored the Agistians men
of the Trojan ra^e, when he, Laced^m^n reigning, had overthrown Troy.

Mulicber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat Apollo. Ovid. li. Ttist. Eleg^a 2. Homer.
Iliad. 1.

AEqua Venus Teu^ris, Pallas iniqua suit.
Vulcan still infested Troy, Apollo for it stood.
Venus Tro^ans grace, against Pallas ang^^e mood.
When protestants did forsake the only one rule of faith, apparent in the
dignity of the Catholic Church, then forthwith were they quartered into
di^erse and adverse factions of false disco^dant Gods, to wit true Idols of
sond^ie fa^^ed monstrous he^^^es. In veue of whom, the prince ^h^ll behold,
whilst all is on fire, as it were upon the Libian sands, no water to be found
to moderate the fury of those angry and rage^ng elements, wrath and prid^:
^he shall not occur with any allouable aucto^^e, to dete^mine the
controversy. In which tragedies, acted upon the stages of his Dominions, what
security is there for his own person, or means for public tranquillity,
unless it be his pleasu^e, to behold his sub^ects end and die by the hand of
barbaritie? And although the professors of soundr^e heresies disagree among
them selves, never thelesse all protestants and sectarians have one common
humor and genius, when they can or dare, to restranie their Prince, to
command his cro^ne and scepter, to terrify him with false reports, by their
tongues to excite his subjects to disobedience* to arm parlamentes even with
petulancy to insult against his sacred Majesty. Most true, which once vtte^ed
properly and wittily our Souuerane king James, aduertising Basil Doron.
his eldest son* and in him, our noble and hopeful prince Charles, that he
never discried greater pride, then that shrouded under the b^oode brimmes of a
minister^all bonnet.

7. Of what importance moreover is in faith a power of virtue, and good life
for The faith of Protestants is not virtuous.
the use and profession of a Prince, is most veueble and manifest. In regard
whereof the Christian belief has a show even of Divinity, and so by no other
sign so much as by this, is made unto us both credible, and also amiable. As
concerning which effect of faith, in some part we have made allredie evident,
that the c^edulitie of the protestant has no judicious probability, as being
biased pe^petually with the weight of concupiscence, warping and turning still
to favor sin and iniquity: which thing herafter by us more in part^cular
shall be discovered.

8. To conclude, that faith by a civil prince is most to be prised, as suitable
to his honor No P^otest^t a Catholic.
of estate, which is C^tholick, to wit general, as the worthy conquest and
purchase of Christ his death and passion, receued through all parts of the
Christian world. That church says S. Augustine, must we hold, as designed by
the mouth of God, from Aug lib de^ni^ ^ccle^ c. ^^ ^a 2 luc. 24 Aug E^^^t. 170
48 Cont. Donat. c. 6. 7. 8 10. 11. cont. Cres^. l 2 c. ^6.
whence it is to begin, and as fare as it is to reach, that is, which is to
begin from H^erusalem, and to ariue to all nations. Also the same S. Augustine
condemns as heretical such faith, as is found only in some one p^ouince,
and not embraced through the world. That is Catholic says he, which is
spreed over the whole face of the earth. And hereupon he proves the
Donatistes to be proud Heretics, condemning the whole world, for that their
belief was not common to all nations, as the benediction of almighty God,
promised, and fulfilled by the Messiah. But that this is performed by the
goodness of almighty God in the faith and preachement of protestants in
England Aug. l. 2 co^t Parmen. c. 9 l. 3. ca. 3. Isa 8.
for one to think, is mere madness and wilful blindenes. Then let civil and
natural prudence judge, whether it be more conformable to the greatness, honor,
and majesty of a prince, to participate with others in a relligion general
and catholic, with respect and amity from so many millions of people, from
such mighty monarchs as embrace it, or rather to border his renoume,
dignity, friendship and alliance with the limits of protestancie, confined to
a few men's mouths, entertained in fewer men's hearts, and that in some parcels
only of Britons distempered monarchy.

9. I doubt not courteons reader, but that by the perusal of this discourse
thou do clearly behold, in what sort and fashion the protestant, set one
work and task by Antichr^ste, endeuoreth to destroy the Christian faith,
applinge battery to the very substance and center thereof. The which wickedness
by so much the more perilously is put in practice, by how much in couerture of
a relligion and godly pretense it lies in ambu^h more secretly, and
breakethforth under greater shoe of a reforming piety more holyly. None so
much in Rome wasted the public treasure, as those, who talked most of it, and
pretended the surer preservation of the same from dil^pidation and robbery, as
witnesses Cice^o In like form of stratagem and plot, the protestant* Cic.
act. 1. in Ve^^em. The end of Protestancie.
who vaunteth of nothing more then of his refined faith, anouching the virtue
thereof even with inspitation of grace, and honesty of heaven and earth, thereby
in fact di^bouelleth faith, and resolves all vital spirits thereof into a
fume of a selfepleasing fancy, and fantastical persuasion. For whereas too
things especially stand in opposition against the discipline of our facred
faith, to wit, pride of understanding loathe to 2. Cor. 10.
yield assent and credit unto the sublime obiectes of the same as it were
daseleing he: eyes, and traversing her ordinary course of contemplation, and
also fervent lust after pleasures, perempto^ilie forbidden by faith; The
protestant diverse ways contemning the authority of the Catholic Church,
thereby gives advantage to the rebellious hauture of intelligence, and also to
the dissolute reach and raines of concupilcence. VVherby Antichrist does
foremind and intend, by seruantrie of the protestant, to effect towe things,
to the great loss and damage of man kind: The one imp^ous idolatry, the
other barbarous ferocitie: both wo^thie emprises sure of so deadly an enemy of
Jesus Christ. For in that every beleuer by the protestantish Theology is
remitted unto is own private spirit, as supreme Judge and sindick in matter of
faith, the very definition of faith is violated, and to a spirit, various and
diverse, to a spitit enhanced with ambition, perplexed with doubts,
disformished both of literatur, school and obedience, are recommended all high
mysteries thereof. Whereon ensues first, vncertanitie in the believer, then
difference betwixt him and others* after heat of disputing and censuring in
controversy, lastly for the vpshot, by the darte of Antichrist, fallinge upon
the eye of a protestant, adieu is given to all faith and belief. And for that
man cannot long be without some acknowledgement of divine power and majesty,
thereupon in the self same place of the soul, where once bore sway so many
spiritual idols of heresy, there will reign and command after as may
material idols of paganrie. And without all doubt, Antichrist by every heresy
endeuoreth to recall Athanas. orat. cont. Idol.
men to that old idolatry and barbarism, from which the harp of our Savior
Christ his cross by sweet music reduced us to the enclosure of his Catholic
Church.

In the virtue of hope all strength and fortitude of Christian life is
comprised: by force whereof, as man accomplisheth his office and duty, so also
thereby he attaineth to the final end of his creation and being.

CHAPTER. III.
HOPE, the firm anchor of our endeavors, has the primarie occasion and urgent
Hope is the strength of the Soul.
necessity of its proper use from a certain quality of actions to be by us
performed, compared unto the estate and condition of our own nature and
ability, related to that end, to which we are ordained. For seeing that the
obiectes of our hope S. Thom. 2. 2 q. ^^. ar. 4. Romans 8.
are toofolde, to wit eternal beatitude, and likewise fit means in this
life appointed by Almighty God in his sacred word to atchiue the same (which in
regard of our fra^ltie, weakness, and frequent hasard through temptations, are
l^able to loss and miscariage in that environed, or invested rather with a
huge number of difficulties, and dangerous greatness of attemp^) thereupon is
necessarily required in us the firm stability of divine hope and a decreed
purpose of will thereby still to persist in the effectuating of our calling and
profession, whatsomeuer impedimentes either from violence of a persecuutor, or
from fraudulent enchantementes of an alluring temptor, shall occurie and cross
us in our procedinges. In reckoning whereof Philosophers place the virtue of
hope in the will of man, as Irascible: that is in the will, as it has in
charge, to adventure upon difficulties, S Thom 1. 2. q. 60. art 5 2. 2. q. 12.
at. ^ ad ^ The seat of Hope in the Soul. Hebr. 6.
to give them generouslie the repulse, when they press upon us, either to
afright us by some terrible representation, or to drive us back by any
forcible importunity. VVhereupon the Apostle S. Paul speaking of hope, which
perceth Ad inter^ora relamin^^, to things contained within the courtaine of
heavens conceilm^nt, that is to the crown of glory, now beheld of us through
the vailing mystical shadow of faith, says, But hope confounds not. That
is, hope as sure repose and fortitude of a Christian man, will sheeld him from
confusion, whereof he is in ieopardie by reason of difficulty implied in such
affairs, as concern his office and function: and who in this life is to
strive and fight in an Agony of a doubtful and dangerous battle, as
speaks the same Apostle. Of which vigilant and industrious labor of Christian
hope in time of 1. Cor. 9.
pressure, this holy Apostle aduertiseth the Hebrews: We desire that every
one of you shovv the same solicitude of the fulfilling of hope, even unto the
end: that you do not become Hebr. 6.
slothful, but imitators of those, who by faith and patience have inherited
the promises Where the Apostle still talks of hope as of a Christian virtue
employed in works of difficulty, of stoughtnes, courage and resolution, and
therefore he calls it the anchour Cleme^s Alexand l. ^. pedagogi Prud. in
psych.
of our lives, we sailing in the tempestuous sea of this our perillouse journey
and passage* whereupon Clemens of Alexandria very propeilie tearineth hope the
blood of faith, as it were the active and valerouse spirit thereof.

Cunctanti spes sida comes succurrit, and offert
Vitorem gladium, laudisque inspirat amorem.
When dread makes droupe, then hope svveete comfort gives,
Revenging svvorde, and love of praise that ever lives.
Which virtue of hope the Chaldeans demed so connaturall unto man, that they
called Philo lib. de Abrahamo.
him ^nos, as if according to Philo, he only were a man, who expects good
things, and sustaineth himself with good hope.

2 And for that hope reareth up a man his will by a virtue Theological,
eleuating Hope a virtue Theological.
his desire and spirit of resolution even unto Almighty God, as our last end,
as chief author of good; and refers us to other his creatures, whether of
nature, or grace, in as much, as they have respect of subordination unto his
divine majesty, being his instuments and our commodities; Therefore in the
object of hope, we may both consider that which is material, and manifold: and
that also which is formal, and only one indiuisiblie. The principal material
part of hopes object is Almighty God himself The object of Hope.
as our beatitude consisting in the clear vision of his Divine substance,
whereby we are to possess intellectually his splendour and infinity. Then in
this rank succeed secondarilie all such gifts of him, by creation and
redemption bestowed upon us which serve for the obtaining of this our last
happiness and desired beatitude. But that which in the whole latitude of the
material object of hope is formal, and as it were the very soul and life of
each part in several, is the powerful and merciful goodness of Almighty God;
in veue and sorce whereof we hope, as of the principal agent, to obtain
whatsoever we here by the same constantly expect. By which formalitie in the
Christian excellency through hop.
object of our Christian hope does appear the singular eminency of our estate
and condition. For whereas many have raised up the Jacobs ladders of their
hopes to no higher a pitch, then unto the stars, or fatalitie of all euentes
in them engraued: or else to the Stoickes prestumed on natures ability. Ipse in
se spe^ posu^^ Aug l. de ^picu^ and St^^^ cap. 7.
Gr^ij or devils, Princes of the mistie air, as directors and masters of
their actions, we Christians eleuate our hope even unto the finger of Almighty
God, even unto the con natural bounty flowing in the Ocean of his own divine
heart and affection, to the spirit of his sacred mouth, in which we alodge our
desires, on which we fix our eyes, in whom we securely anchour and acquiet as
in a perfect immovable centar, the circuit of our travails, of all our
endeavors: The scripture shovveth unto us from whom we are to expect things
we pray for, says S. Augustine: that is, not from fortune, or ^ate, or from
any Au^ lib. 2. de p^^cato^ merit cap. 6.
other besides Almighty God. Whereby in our contemplations and motions we are
not beaten baeke from Almighty God by the forms of nature, as by the aspect
of the firmament, elements, or other her wounders, as befell the Pagans, but by
both a^iue unto him immediately, never cessing until we find out this high
rock, period and efficacy A divine hop pro^^th a divine faith.
of all our Christian rel^ance. VVhereupon may be gathered a notable argument
in proof of truth in our Christian faith. For seeing hope receives rule, both
for object of her trust and assurance, and also for manner of process in her
aff^ires, from faith, in that this faith brings and reduces man unto
Almighty God, who is our end, as he was our beginning, therefore by force of
the same consequently we as attendant se^uants continually wait on the
effect of his goodness and benevolence. Which carriage of man toward his
Creator* as it does well beseme him, being his best and highest desired
perfection imaginable, so likewise d^ that argue and prove some divine verity
con^eined in our Christian belief; which works in us a hope so heavenly and
souerane. So then as they Pagans stra^ed from truth in their diverse faiths, or
The origin of Idolatry.
Theology, so also did this their error falsify and delude the employments
of their confidences For whereas Almighty God proposed a vewe and spectacle of
his creatures unto them, thereby as by messengers endeuou^ing to reelame them
unto himself, they treacherously considering the greatness, the furniture and
benefit of his vassai^es, stayed in them all their dutiful service, proclaimed
them their Gods and Princes: and and so respectiuelie their hopes once abridged
by their knowledge, arrived no further, Prudent li. 1. cont Symach.
then unto a forged, and treasonable divinity. Contrariwise we Christians,
illuminated by faith, contemplate the creatures of Almighty God, admire their
forms, order and ^orces, but yet passing by them, as footesteps, or images of
one sole omnipotent God and Lord, in him alone acknowledge we all supremacy of
commandrie: and with a correspondence, our hope answering unto the reach of
faith, we live and breath Math. 15.
thereby in a continual dependancie and expectation of gifts and crumbes,
that are to fall from his table for nourishment of us his poor devout
suppliants and servants: The origin of hope belefe in God his providence. Am^r
lib de Philosophia Aug. li. co^t. Julian cap. 6.
in so much that the rock, which holds fast the beard of the anchour of our
hope, is no meaner thing, then God himself.

3. This strength then of our Christian hope is founded upon the belief we
have of the providence of almighty God: as that we believe he has immediately
created all things of nothing, and immediately frames our bodies, not
committing the fabrik of them to petty Gods, as Plato devised according to S.
Ambrose: that immediately he concu^reth with the action of every creature, even
to the fall of a leaf from the tree, of a hair from the head: that immediately
he conserueth in being whatsomeuer is existent: that immediately he beholds
all things, yea all secrets of men's hearts and couched motions in their
souls: that he immediately works all good cogitations in us, all virtuous
incitementes according to the deep counsel of his sacred will Ephesians. 1.
and pleasure. and heropon we acknowledginge by faith our most near and close
dependence we have on his sacred hand, not waitinge upon the (...) or spirits
of Plato, nor relying on the pretended authors or beginners, one good, the
other bad, of all Plut. l. de (...). and O^^t. Se^ec. l. 2. Not. quest. ca. 37.
35 Epist. 90. 91 Aug ^. ^. cont. Man^c^. Iaco. 1.
things, with they Grecians, as reports plutarch, and the Maniches according
to S. Augustine not regardinge the Empire of natures fatalitie, by hopes
expect^tion we cast our selves securely on the merciful disposition of
almighty God his comaunding providence. If any of you meede vvisdome, says S.
James, let him ask it of God, who gives to every on ^^oundantly, and does
it vvitthout reproach, and he shall geuest him. Every good gu^^^e, and euer^e
perfect benefit, is from above, descending from the father of lights. So that
although our hope be extended to sonderie creatures of almighty God, as our
means, set down by himself, yet it setleth not in them alone and finally,
but moun^eth up to her formal and original cause, the bounty and goodness of
almighty God. It was a worthy sainge of Octauianus, as records Minu^ius
Felix, we do not only li^e in the Minutius foelix in octania^.
eyes of almigb God, but also in his very bosom. This eye regarded by us, may
move us to fear if we offend, and the bosom encourage us to hope, if we be
distressed.

4. VVherby we make a difference betwixt historical verities, recorded in holy
The amiable reliance of Hope upon Almighty God.
scriptures, as objects of our faith; and others of ethnicail narrations: in
that sacred histories do not only recount the greatness or admirable
stratagemes of the event, as did those recording the affairs of the Romans,
Grecians, Egiptians, Assitians, but especially we remarck in them specified
mention of such factes and accidents as depend on the especiali providence of
Almighty God, which reduce continually unto him the reders mind by
consideration and affection; as is well remarked by Lessius. So also Lessius l.
^. de prouid. Dei Number. 159.
in reckoning of our hop, we fasten our felues to almighty God, not by means
only of any distant and ministerial linckes, as by the heavens, the
elements, by connection of natural causes, as Seneca seems alone to
acknowleg, but most immediately Senec. lib. de Prud. lib. 3. de Benefic. c. 7 l.
2. Not. quest. c. 37. Act. 17.
altogether do we unite our selves unto him, beleuinge, that by his proper
work and action we live, are subsistent, we noue, are employed in operation:
and moreover that sometimes in our principal endeavors. we travail in virtue
of his gracious gift and, benevolence. Which decreed reliance of our hope
upon almighty God, as it does more often bring him into our cogitations, so
it does likewise regard him with an affection more amiable: according to the
quality of a little child practicing to go: who looks regardefullie upon the
Nurces hand, as support: and knowing that without the same it should fall,
does behold the same as more necessary and beneficall. Our christian hope in
this respect is so great, that almighty God takes it, as it were unkindly,
if we his children and chickins perplexe our selves with to much fear and
anguish about temporal and ordinary euentes: persuading us rather by a
resolution Christi^ hope is a help against to much vvorldly care.
void of solicitude to cast our selves upon his holy and bountiful
prouindence: and fully to think, that he who couloreth the lilly in the
feelde so freshlie, sedeth the bird of the air aboundautly without their
carking industry, will also provide for us such commodities, as are requisite,
without our distrustful and painful vigilancie. And as the members of man
his body day and night increase without his knowledge, so almighty Math. 6.
Luc. 12. S Thom. 2. ^. q. 55. ar. 2.
God bestows many graces on him without means of his troublesome
consultation, or fore casting devise. In which repose of our hope, and quiet
dependencie thereby on almighty God, we Christians, as says our Savior,
surpass all other people, whilst we restinge in quiet expectation, Gentills
are turmoiled in pursuit after their worldly commodities: The nation of the
world seek after all those things. Luc. 1^.


5. According therefore to the precedent doctrine, thus may the virtue Hope be
Description of Hope.
defined Hope is a certain expectation of beatitude, to be atchiued by the
grace of almighty God, and the ^ertuous cooperation of man therewith. Hope is
said a certain expectation, for that in some proportion it answers unto the
formal part of its object, that is the maine and affluent bounty in the
goodness of almighty God: in which to conceive by diffidence want or scarcity
of assistance or benefitt, were an heinous injury against that, which is most
conspicuous in the divine nature, to wit, the liberality and mercy thereof.
Which certainty of hope in the will by a kind of Analogy accords with
Certainty of hope and says.
that proper and peculier certainty found in the act of faith: in this
respect, that as the will resolves, and undoubtedly relieth on the goodness of
almighty God without distrust, so faith in veue of this truth assuredly
believes all his reveled verities without suspicion of the contrary. But how
this same virtue of Hope is an expectation of the will, as Irascible, we shall
better understand, if preamble wise we hear the Angelical S Thom. in 2. d.
26. q 2. ^. 2.
Doctor distinguishinge three sorts of expectations. The first then is the
expectation of patience, when we look for help from almighty God, being
otherwise in danger. The second is an expectation of long animitie, when we
attend aid from God almighty, remaining yet in anguishe and distress of
labor, employed busily about some ob^ect of extreme difficulty or other. The
third is an expectation of hope, occupied in a firm confidence to obtain our
last end by means appointed by divine constitution. And for that faith,
agreeinge with philosophy, enformeth us, that man enabled with the use of
reason, and appetite, is not to ariue without their functions and industry, to
his final beatitude, therefore in the definition of hope, to the divine
benevolence of grace, is adjoined man his one proper endeavor in virtue: that
is in such works, as are conformable to understanding, and from thence have
bond and obligation of their duties and performances.

6. Heerby also enters in, as most considerable, a singular pr^pertie and
eminency Differ^ce betwixt Christian hope and expectation of the pagan.
Scotus in prolog paragraph. ad Co^firmat. Arist 8 phis. 12. metaphys. C^ril
Catech. 8. Minut Fell. in Octa. Aug. ^^. r. Confess. Cap. 8. Eusebius. lib. 1.
Praepar. cap. 5. Senec. lib. 3. de Benef. cap 7. Nature altered by Grace.
of our Christian hope, to approve the rare and divine quality thereof, as
likewise of our holy faith, directinge our hope to means and strenght so hight
and admirable. For whearas the ancient philosophers relied no farther on the
fatherly aid of almighty God, then that which might acreue unto their weakness
from nature, from fatalitie and destiny thereof, inuolued within the volumes
either of heavenly bodies, or of the elements, and shut up in such parts of the
world, as be connected and lincked up together by the hand of almighty God,
for that influence, they were to bestow on mankind, we amounted up to a
particular favor of his goodness, by the assurance of our hope, do not repose
in him only as author and giver of nature, or agent thereby as instrument, but
as a supernatural benefactor by grace, not dew to nature, either as part
thereof, or propriety thence ensuinge; it being a free dispense of him alone
procedinge from his own extraordinary and voluntary bounty of merciful
benevolence toward us his devoted children: as when he whithout our desert
illuminateth our understanding with a certain knowledge of that beauty and
comelenes which are to be found in virtue, and also of that deformity
discriable in vice: when he thereby calls and provoke us to the one, and
deterreth and disuadeth us from the other. Also as concerning nature it self
(that we may see, that he has not wholly bound up his providence by
fatalitie, and destiny in the sole bouels of his own creatures for the
menagement of our affairs) he alters by grace and miracle sometimes the
certain course of the same, thus or thus disposing of the quality of the air
and elements, in this or that manner diuerting pestiferous causes assembled
for infection and mortality Aug. Tract. ^4. in Johan. 7.
of mankind. And that the entiere providence of Almighty God is not committed
to the administration of bare nature, as if he were no otherwis^ to deal with
man in his providence, then by course of the same* infin^te miracles and
alterat ons of nature, registered Plut li. de eis qui sero a number puniuntur. de
orac. Pith Claud l. 1. Valor li de siqu^s. Alexus Alex. l 11 c. 13. Sueton in
Caspar senec. lib 4 N^tu^al. quest. c 1. B^^on. Tom 9 page 345. C^^ud. Paneg.
Honor.
even by ethnic philosophers and Historiographers do contest. Apollodorus, as
reports Plutarch, beheld in sleep a l^le before his dest^uction by the
S^^thians himself environed by that sauadge people, disbouelled and murdered
by their hands as it after fell out. Sue^onius recounteth, that there was a
prophecy of Ius^us Caesar his destruction: that is, that one of Iuliu^ his
race should by men of his own blo^d perish with great calamity of all Ial^e,
when the boones of dead Capis should be discovered. At what season Egipte
received it bane from the luxuriouse and wastefull gouer^ ^em^n^ of Antony and
Cleopatra, a little before, as mentions Seneca, Nilus did no^ ouerfloe the
soil according to custom. Theophanes, as we may read in Card. Baron.
relates, that in Constantinople was found in a sepulcher of marble, a corse
bearing this inscription: Christ shall be borne of the ^irgen Marie. I believe
in him. Under Constantine and Irene, o sone, thou shall beholdeme. Sed crine
minaci

Nuntiat aut ratibus ventos, aut v^bibus hosts,
Et terr^s mutant^m regna cometem. Although Cl^ristia^ hope depend on
Scriptures, on Sacraments, a P. stots, and Sa^^tes, yet in them it does not
ende^ but ari(...)athe unto the goodness of Almighty God August Tract 1. in
Joan c. 1 The value of grace The vvorth of grace.

The irefull star^e to ships a storm, or citise vvrac^ does show;
And comets blase of kingdoms chandge make men to know.
Thus instructed we look upon almighty God by out christian expectation of
hope, not only as immediate and primarie cause of all good in us, or as a
contriuer of the same merely by instruments of nature ordinarily procedinge,
but as immediate geuer of grace added unto nature, bountefully and lovingly, by
a peculiar so^te of his nearest prouicence, and gracious favor, afforded us:
and so we depend on him, and are recollected unto him, as to our dearest parent
and tutor, our most sovereign helper and fashioner of all our thoughts and
actions.

7. Wherefore, as we rightly consider by our faith the value and worth of
grace, hopes supporte, so thereby are we more inamored with the paternall care
of almighty God toward us his children and servants. Two things especially
recommend unto us the worth and weight of grace. The first is, for that this
grace is not natures effect, or a flower originally groing in her garden, but a
quality puerly supernatural, as the dew of heaven, and a ieuell, reserved in
the sole tresure house of God almighty his voluntary bounty. Then is to be
considered the cause meritorious of this grace: to wit, the preciouse purchase
of the same by the death and passion of the second person in Trinity. And can
grace then be of any mean poise and esteem, having of spring August Sermon.
236. de Temp.
from such a pay? can it be of a vulgar or small moment, for which was
disbused so rare and inestimable a ransom? y^ David in his hot burning ague
judged a little water, brought him b^ adventure of some men's lives from a
Cisterne in Bethlem, holy, and so ^ Reg. 2^.
not to be drunk by him, as being price of the bringers blood, but rather
esteemed it worthy to be consecrated unto almighty God, what ought we to
think of the beutie and val^we of heavenly grace, bought for us by the divine
blood of our Redemer Jesus God and man? And as herby we balance out worthily
the dignity of Christian grace, so also know we what is the greatness and noble
quality of virtue, being fruit and effect of this sacred heavenly gift
Therefore Heretics, Protestars, who auile virtuous labors with reproach of
mortal sine, undoubtedly do not value as they ought to do either Christian
grace, or the fountain thereof, to wit our Redemer hanging on the Cross, there
making the atcheuement of the same.

8. This grace then expected by hope is sorted into diverse kinds, according to
Graces deuiued into certain kinds.
multiplicity of effects thence proceeding. It is then to be noted, that by a
general name of grace may be called as gracious any free guifte of almighty
God, auailable as cause or condi^ion to our eternal salvation: as that a man
for example is of a disposition pliable what is grace in general. External
grace acknoledged by P^lagius Aug. li. 1. de Great Christi c. 2. and 4. l de
Haetesibus.
to d^scipline and direction: that he has parents careful of his good
deportment in his nonage: That he lives in such a place, or time, where, and
when is frequent commodity of well doing, of plotsormes prouokinge and
directing to laudable endeavors. Yet notwithstanding, it is not sufficient that
a natural accident be styled by the title of grace, because use is made
absolutely thereof in regard of attaining to heavenly ^lisse; for often times
Almghtie God by his grace works even out of sins in offenders them selves
great benefit of virtue, as of humility, of repentance: yet in this respect
sins, although by accident profitable to the offendant, are not to be reputed
graces of Almighty Gad, or impressions of his favorable predestination;
because they are not directly of set counsel intended or effected by divine
providence to that Aug l de Corr^pt and Great. c 9 Humiliores redeunt atq.
doctiores Bern. ^er. 25 in Ca^tica. what is grace in particular Habitual
grace.
purpose, but only occasionally permitted according to a natural law in the
delinque^res will, requiring such permission of God, as of the chief and
primarie cause. wherefore here more properly by Christian grace we mean that
francke benevolence of the divine goodness, which does accreue to nature as
accessory furniture and accomplishement thereof, not produced by force of
natural causes, but merely given by divine benevolence. The first and capital
division of grace, as into general members, is into grace Habitual, and grace
Actual. By grace habitual are understood all supernatural habits and
qualities perfecting the faculties of man his soul permanently, when no
operation is present; as the divine habites of Faith, Hope, Charity, also
inherent justice, sanctifyinge and purifyinge the same from sin: the Holy
Ghost by it dwelling, Conc. Trid. Sess. 2. c. 7.
and abiding therein. Also of this propriety may be thought to be the habits of
moral virtues, in as much as concomitants of Christian habitual justice,
together with it infused in the moment of justification. In order of grace
active, there is first a Actual grace.
grace of prevention: to w^t a holy inspired illustration of soul, inciting
and calling us to good. Then there is an other termed grace of Cooperation,
workeing conioinctly with man his will a virtuous consent and good action of
the same. Moreover there is a grace which may be reckoned grace of sit
Opportunity, when to man outwardly are tendered diverse meet occasions of
virtuous employments, to which have correspondence the inward persuasions and
illuminations imparted by heavenly favor. Lastly there is a grace of
Perseverance, sheelding a justified man against temptations, preserving in him
that precious iuell of grace justifying and sanctifying his soul: of all which
graces we shall have occasion herafter severally to discourse.

Christian hope vvaiteth in attendance upon that grace of Almighty God
according to instruction from faith, which in number of virtuous works is
most fruictfull, and in their eminency high and sovereign.

CHAPTER. IIII.
AS concerning the office of duty and action apertaining to a Christian,
philosophy Man ordained by nature to operation.
lays a foundation for faith to build on her perfection, and prepares the
way, by which her documents, declining from error, may have free passage to
truth and verity Natural knowledge then beholds man created by Almighty
God, not as a dead mass, or heuie bulk as it were of a ship, destitute of
tacling and equipage, lying upon one side groueling on the sands of the sea
shoore: but rather a substance of life, by sondrie faculties, both of body and
soul enabled to the performance of many endeavors, and that with more seriouse
and quick occupation, in regard that his Genesis ^.
soul is an active spirit, resembling thereby the eternal and euerworking
fiery spirit of Almighty God. Thus when philosophy has gathered a
generality of ordinance in Joan. 5.
man to operation, it after comes near unto his nature, and deciphereth
forth in specialitie what form of endeavor properly belongs unto him. Of
which mat^ter Aristotle enquiring, considers in man too kinds of faculties:
some he reckons peculiar to him by kind, as reason and will, others as his
sensitive apetite of carnal pleasure, his power to increase, norish and
engender, common to him with brute, and What faculties in man contriue his
perfection.
only vegetative creatures. Whereupon he concludes, that man does accomplish
his chiefest charge, assigned him by nature, by no other faculty in him, then
such as is his owen by specificall and differentiall peculiaritie, as by his
will and reason, by which he excels plants, and brute beasts. There
remains then for man a certain life, Arist. l. ^. Ethi c. 7. Greg Naz. ora
de Christ. Natiu.
fit for action, proper to that agent, who is endovved with reason. And as
reason in man discrieth that sort of action, which is agreeable to his estate,
and makes acceptance and choice proportionably of obiectes thereunto belonging,
so does the same reas^n disprove and reiecte such base employmentes of
sensuality, and also such obiectes of them, which are not suitable to its
eminent degree of emploiment. Hereupon Ovid does ingeniously and Philosophically
same the civil and learned Minerua to have cast away a pipe borrowed of Pann,
when p^ping therewith over the cristall streams of her natural contemplation,
she beheld the deformity of inflation in her puffed cheeks.

Vox placuit, fac^em liqu^des re^erentibus v^dis,
Vidit virgineas intumuissegenas. The enemies of Hope are pleasure and fear.
Aug in ps 7^. Arist. 1. Ethic. c. 3. Christian faith is a spirit of work
Basil. sermon. de virtut. and vicio 1 calls a Christian life, a life of work,
and exercise. Christa^ faith is a spirit of good works* that is a spirit of
Charity delight fully observing the law. Aug. (...) ^ de Great. Christ c. 13.
Lex ^nim auditores iustitiae facit, grati^ factores. Aug lib 3 cont 2 epist.
Pelag. cap. 2.

Arsmih^ non tanta est, valeasmea tibia, dixit,
Exc^pit abiectam cesp^ter^pasua.
The sound did please, but water clear did show her face
To have been svvol^e in shape not fit for virg^ns grace.
Farevvell my pipe she ^^^d, thy art^ is not so dear to me.
Let bancke on the other side, not Pallas hand, be place for the.
Our hope therefore is a courageous industry employed continually about actions
of virtue. And the adverse forces, to which hope gives continual resistance,
come either from pleasure aluring to indecent and unlawful delight, or else from
fear, deterring us from our purpose of intended honesty, as is excellently
well declared by Aristotle, and also by S. Augustine.

2. To these documentes, suggested by philosophy, our divine faith, which is a
spirit of work, and operation, having access, does aver unto us more
effectually ^s well our debt of perpetual labor in good endeavors, as also the
high degree of their conditions and perfections: so that accordingly
christians, by quality of their profession, before any other sort of people,
are to be studiouse and operative in the actiuitie of all virtuous deeds: yea
and are of that profession likewise in respect of a sublime and he^oicall pitch
of them by noble enterprises: whereby they ought to surmonunt the residue, as
very well S. Basil does teach. If the faith of the old Testament, lapped up
in m^steries of obscure types and signs, taking by the perspectiue pipe of the
law a long imperfect prospect of the sequel and train of the ensuing
promises, purported in the Ghospel, brought forth a hope in men, living under
so rude an institution, most busily employed in good works of all the virtues,
how much more is it now the proper instinct of our christian faith, regarding
her object displayed in light of the time of grace, performed in act, expressed
by the life, death and passion of the son of God, to make us agill, lively
and reddie pressed to all commendable occupations of probitie, and that in the
most excellent kind of service of Almighty God! whereupon the holy scriptures
oftentimes pronounce, charity, by acts of diverse virtues fulfilling the law,
to be the end, Romans 12. 1. Cor 8. 1. Joan. 2.
form and life of faith; and that faith serves to charity, moueing a man
thereunto, as to his chief office and perfection. By faith Almighty God
reconsileth us, some time alienated from him by evil works, that thereby he
might make us, Holy, immaculate, and Colos 1. 2. Thessal 3. Fet. 2. ca. 1.
blameles before himself. As you have received Jesus Christ, so walk you in
him This is the will of Almighty God, your sanctification. He has chosen us
in himself before the constitution of the world, to the end we may he holy
in his sight, in charity. And of what efficacy is our holy Christian faith
and hope to work in this sort, thus declares S. Augustine. That man might
keep the commanndementes, God works in man by faith of Jesus Christ: who
is the end Aug l de spir. and let. cap ^9. Sermon de Paschate fer^a 4.
unto i^sti^e to all, that believe in him. Where S. Augustine makes reckoning
of the spirit of faith, as of a quickening spirit, prouokeing us to the endeavors
of virtues. From which spirit of action in faith, is derived unto hope also a
spirit not of a sluggish or Epicurian repose in the goodness of our Lord God,
but rather of labor, of vigilancie, solicitude and Eccles. 5. 16.
continual employmente in the works of the law and counsels. Say not the
mercy of our Lord is great, he vvil have mercy on the multitude of my sins.
For mercy and wrath quickly aproche from God, and his wrath looks upon
sinners. To which purpose the ancient Romans made in deed supplication to
their Gods for increase of fruits of the earth; but whilst with one hand
they held the plough: their soldiers sacrifised to Mars: but in that time
wherein they armed themselves. Herupon S Bernard learnedly calls virtuous
Bern. sermon 2. de Resur. August. Tract. 9. in Joan c. 2.
work the life of faith. The life of the body is the soul, by which it is
moved, and has sense. But the life of faith is charity, because by the same
it works, as we read in the Apostle, Faith which works by Charity.
VVherby we may understand, of what faith entreats the Apostle S. Paul in his
Epistle to the Romans, attributing justification unto it: to wit Gal. 5.
Jacob. 2.
of an active faith provoking a beleuer to all good and sainctly demeanure.
Which actiuitie if it be hindered by mortal sin, contrary to charity
according to S. James, faith is said to be dead, as deuoide of the breath and
motion of Christian life and justice. Faith Faith is a Spirit containing (...)
Charity.
then first out of it proper actiuitie produces charity; then Charity once
extant sets faith a work by commaundrie in the affairs of all the virtues
prescribed in the law: so that there is one actiuitie intrinsicall to the
spirit of faith, an other extrinsicall imparted unto it by charity, the fruict
or flouer strangely norishing the root. Here for the present we discuss only
the inward and essential virtue and power of the Christian faith for the
performance of virtuous endeavors, respected by hope, as means of
sanctification, justification, and salvation.

3. Of which matter the sacred Counsel of Trent entreating determines and
makes Conc. Trid. sess 6. c. 6. How faith works a disposition to the grace
of justification. August Tract. 40. in Joan c. 8.
remonstrance, how faith inciteth a person offendant to al such virtuous
preparements, as are required to his perfect justification, and remission of
his sins: as whilst it first lays open unto him his bad estate through
sin, obnoxiouse to the justice of God his tribunal seat: and thereby upon
such veue causes him to fear and tremble. Afterward the same faith in him
considering the malicious turpitude of offense, as enmity even against God
himself, provoke the delinquent to repentance, to hate and detest his
offenses. Also discovering unto him Almighty God as fountain of all goodness,
it enkindeleth in him the fiere of Charity, of love and affection toward his
divine maistie. Lastly way inge the many fold dangers of days and times which
ensue, and the great obligation man has no more to trespass against divine
commandment, he conceiueth by virtue of faith a full purpose in the whole
course of his life to carry himself warely, to eschew vigilantly all occasions
of iniquity, to be busely occupied in the observance of all commendable
offices. By which sondrie dispositions, contrived by faith, man repentant being
once justified, in him faith slumbereth not, or is retcheles, but entertaineth
all occasions, lays hold on every divine inspiration, auailinge to merit, to
virtue, and laudable endeavor VVhereupon hope is not conuoied merely by faith to
the mercies of almighty God, which are annected to his promises, but also to
these virtues, which are effects of his grace and observations of his
co^mandementes, as means to attain to (...) ^^. S Thom 2. 2 q 4. (...) in
corp.
ou^ final end of sanctity and beatitude. According to which sense the
Angelical Doctor understands the Apostle S. Paul, when he defines faith to
be the substance of things hoped for: because it is the first incboation of
them in us by assent of mind: the which in a certain capital sum
contains in it all things hoped for. Faith has tovv effects knowledge and
work.


4 For the holy scriptures give us to understand, that this our Christian faith
is as it were eminently in simplicity of one quality, the beam of the son,
lightninge by intelligence, and also the feruor thereof heating by actiuitie of
operation. When the Apostle S Paul had notified to the world the time and
estate of it living in faith, forthwith he makes this inference: Behold, now
is the time acceptable: behold now the day of 2 Cor. 6.
Salvation: to no man giving any offense, that our ministry be not blamed: but
in all things let us exhibit our selves as the ministers of God, in much
patience, in tribulations, in neces^ities, in distresses, in Stripes, in
prisons, in ^editions, (...) labors, in vvatchinges, in fastinges, in
Chastity, in knouledg, in longanimity, in sweetness, in the holy (...), in
charity not fained, in the lord of truth, in the virtue of God, by the armor
of justice on the right hand, and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by
in^am^e and good same, as seducers, and ^^evv, as they, that are unknown, and
known, as dying, and behold vveli^e: as chastened and not killed, as
sorrovvfull, but alvvayes reioyceinge, as nedie, but enrichinge many: as
ha^^ing nothing, and possessing allthinges. Regard here a Christian described
in complete harnes, his spirit of faith exercised as it were of a busy be, of
a fighting souldior we must not then with a slothful confidence look only
upon Christ his mercy and grace, as in the beginning Pet. 3.
of the world did all mankind vnprofitable^e except a ^ew gase upon the ark of God his goodness, in the mean season as reports S. Peeter, giving
themselves over to roiot Genesis 1. Tertul lib. de Baptism. Optat lib. 4. Baptism
a type of God life. Christians ^^e o^te of sinful Egypt, and also enter into
the pure water of the red Sea. Augustine. de Fid. and. o. Cap. 11.
of bancquets and good cheer, and so worthily were enfolden in the universal
waves of the deluge: No more must we for the present harken unto the
protestantish Antichrist, who teaches us, that for the performance of our
Saving duty toward God, to be sufficient, that our spirit of faith behold
Christ his mercy redeming us, lest that the flud of his justice rather
surprise us in our retchles security* we are rather to call to mind our
lifegeuinge water of Baptism, an element of frui^te and increase, where in
first we became Christians, and from which, as spiritual fishes, and birds of
the a^er we received the prime spirit of vitalitie: and then we shall ^ee,
that element is not only a substance of representation, serving for faith, or
contemplation, but also to be a moisture, convenient for purity, for grought
of increase, of rising upward, in rekoning of our active virtuous life very
aptly purtraicted forth thereby.

5 But nothing does so effertually prove the excellency of Christian life in
work and virtue aimed at by hope, as the person of our Redemer Jesus Christ,
his sacred merits and deserts. Hereby do we Christians understand the great
nobility of our task and voration, from hence, as situated upon a mountain
of perfection near to the Angels Our Savior Christ an ^xampl^^ unto us of
vert^ouse action Math 5.
in heaven, do we behold under us as grouelinge all infidels, Turks, and
Ieues in regard of our devoted industry consecrated to supreme sanctity, to
integrity of function and endeavor, aruinge even unto a most perfect imitation
of almighty God. By the measure then and sum of expenses, disbursed by the
bounty of our lord God, we may conceive the expected and intended degree of
his purchase in man kind. Therefore first, we are to consider that admirable
descent and humilialion of the second person in Trinity, by the mystery of
the holy Incarnation being made man. O what differencie of estate betwixt the
deity enthronised in the bosom of the eternal father, and the humble
condition of that nature, to which it is personally united, taken from the
womb of the blessed virgin Marie! why slouped God so low, but to exalte us
to the imitatio^ of his father by virtue and heavenly life? why did this Egle
by President of him self give us a pattern of slight, but that we might be
elevated ^^th him both in contemplation of truth, and also affection of
justice, and honesty: why lured he us by his humanity, as h^ny comb of
mankind, as our delight of body and soul, but that by eminency of action we
might resen^ble himself, and live in sequestration with him from all gross
and worldly carnalitie: that we, his church and mystical body, might be
joined unto him as head above, in work glorious, and in perfection of faith
and Ephesians. 5. (...) ^2.
charity deuoide of spot and wrinkle, as speaks the Apostle? if the singer
of alm^ghtie God, appearing to the Ieues in the characters of the law
engrau^din stone, was a great motive unto them to follow virtue, and excel
all other nations in profession thereof, of Colles 2.
what efficacy to the same end ought to be unto us Christians the very
substance of the divinity corporally manifested in the humanity of Christ,
as the tables of the Gospel, Genesis 28.
the thurible of love and Charity! Here is tendered unto us a lacobs la^der, by
which Angels descend, as to a nature humane, inferior to their sublimitie: they
also ascend, adoring in our idea and table of good life, the divinity thereof,
as their superior lord and maker. What then remains for us Christians, but
by this ladder, both in number of virtuous endeavors, and also in prerogative of
their nobility, to scale heaven, and Amos 7.
atcheue eternal glory? This our Redemer was beheld by Amos the prophet,
standing upon an adamantine wall, and holding an adamant in his hand in token
of his forcible empire. The wall of Ad^mant signifies the vnexpugnable
strength of virtue in his Christote hom. de virtute
Church: the adamant in his hand declared the mighty power of grace he had to
draw the rude and sturdie iron of this world to the service of almighty God
by sweet Charity and busy occupations of all probitie. In whom, as our tables
of the new law evangelical, are so veuable for our instructions the capital
letters of all good examples: that according to the prophecy of Abacuc,
without laborious bend of eye, those which Abacuc. 2.
go by the way, even in their passage, may behold and read their lesson for
virtuous industry and holy employment. We only Christians are Israelites:
that is beholders of God: and strong with him by his grace in the mysteries of
our faith; a beatitude promised to Moises, as witnesses S. Augustine. No Arian,
Nestorian, or Mahometane, denyinge Augustine Quest. 45 in Exodus
the divinity of Christ, have so egar and effectual prouokement to virtue, as
we Christians in respect of our faithful expectation through Christ I^ us God
and man.

6. And this kind of Christian agilitie is very properly signified by the
day of our The Christian Saboth day.
saboth, to wit Sunday, in which our Redemer accomplished his triumphant
Resurrection. The Ieue observed his saboth on Saturday, in which he had chardge
from almighty God, for a grateful memory of the great benefit of creation, to
rest and surcease Exodus 2 31. Deuteronomy 9 Caiet 1. 2. q. 122. art 4. Sua^. lib. 2. de
vittur. Religion. Cap. ^^
from labor: notwithstanding we have no express record, that he was
commanded on that day in particular by virtue of the saboths precept, to
exercise any act of relligion, besides his obedient ^est, as sign of eternal
repose in heaven: where paradise, without our toyling industry, in an eternal
jubilee, is to afforde us perpetual: utriment of best substance, and su^test
delight. But our prime Sabbath is Sunday, sanctified to this purpose by our
Redemers Resurrection, in which we may contemplate many tokens of our active
duty in virtue and good works. The Sunn, heavens chefest planet, giving name
to our sabbath, as it most resplendent, so most industrious in motion,
perfecting it proper circular journey in the space of four and twenty hours:
and that with such celeritie, as is scarce by us imaginable; coursing out above
ten thousand miles in one hour, as remarketh Leonard Lessius. Also our Savior
Christ, first and chefest Leonard lessius lib. 1. de prouid. Number. 30.
obseruer of our saboth, after his Resurrection gave many remonstra^ces of his
spiritual iudustrie, as penetrating the difficulty of a hard and massy
resisting grave stone, conuaying himself at diverse times hither and thither to
make his apperance to his disciples, and that with such variety and
multiplicitie in the space of forty days, as it wonderful to consider.
Accordingly the Apostles in sundry passages calling to mind this Resurrection
of our savior on the saboth day, s^ill putt us in mind of death to sin,
and of lively action to virtue, and almighty God. Preparation to which busy
employment was good Friday, in which abandoning the Turkish saboth, by
mortification we died to venerie, and all effeminacie of delight. To the same
purpose served Easter Eve, in which spiritually we were entoumbed, as it may
seem in cloisture with Christ from all occasion of w^nton disportes. Then
enters our perfect saboth of Easter day, in which we are now to perform a
life most active, quick and nimble, a life heavenly and Angellical. And
therefore the prescribed quality of our Christ^an sabbath day does not consist
in a mere repose and relinquishment of servile work, as it concerned the
Ieue, but also it is to be beheld in act of relligion, as to hear the sacred
Mass, commanded us by the church in the precept thereof, and in other heavenly
endeavors.

7. Moreover valuing and pondering the busy and importunat affairs of our
savior Why Christians in regard of Christ are most operative in their hope.
his life and death, and of his holy sacred merits, we shall evidently
contemplate the operative quality of our Christianity, and how it is directed
wholly by almighty God to works of virtue: and that in manner most singular
and excellent. The entiere iconomy of Christ, his humble and painful actions
and sufferances here on earth, were ordained to make us mount up to the top of
perfection, as of all virtue in general, so principally of Charity: that we
might hereby resemble our Creator, who charitablie causes his sun to shine
upon the good and the bad. And therefore by price of this his asperitie and
rigor, we may gather, of what rate and hight our actions ought to be. Recounte
we then the tilladge used by the self same son of God upon the ground of
Math. 5.
our souls: and consider we the nobility of his inspired grace, as of an
heavenly refreshing air, of water of paradise springing up to everlasting
life, of a food of eternal 1. Cor. 3.
joy, a force above natures compass or ability. Then ponder we, how this grace
was purchased for us: namely by his poor nativity in Bethlem, by his
laborious preach^ng Joan. 4.
and teaching in Jury and Galile, by his continual prayer, and often tears,
by indigence, and injuries from the world against the divine majesty of his
sacred person, by the dispiteous usage of him from the Ieues and Gentiles, by
his agony of death, and effusion of his precious blood: and then balancing the
expenses defraied to make us virtuous, and active for increase of good life, we
shall conclude, that the professed office of a Christian man is not limited to
any labor or industry particulat in this kind, but rather Hier. Epist. ad
Eustoch.
to be such a one as is most eminent, transcendent, and close ariuing to the
very fiery agilitie of Angels them selves. Saint Hierome considering the
soue^ane dignity of virtue in Christianity, thus speaks. As soon as the
son of Ood made his entry into the Job. 39.
world, forthwith be assembled a new family, to the end, that he, who in
heaven was adored by Angels, might on earth also have his angels. Patient Job
discoursing of the admirable Greg. li. 31. in Job. c. 3.
power and providence of almighty God, to illustrate the same, makes this
demand: Shall thou tie the Rhinocerot with thy collar to ploughe the ground?
Upon which passadge S. Gregory commenting, by Rhinocerots understands
mighty and redoubted princes, Power of the Cross over great Princes. Aug
Tract. in Joan. 3 cap. 1. Tract. 11. ca. 3. Tract. 36. ^3. c. 12.
maistered and ruled by Christian grace, derived unto them from the cross of
Christ. I remember my self of tentimes to have seen Rhinocerots inflamed to
str^^e with a great blo^e, and as it were eleuating their horns with
dreadful terror to have thretned to there subjects, as small beasts, deaths,
banishm^ntes, condemnations: who upon a soudane making the sign of the cross
on there foreheades, forth with extinguished all heat of fury forgot their
mina^es, ac^novvle^ged themselves bound, that they could not perform what
they before bad determined. Never was there found in man his judgment, before
the coming of our savior, any institution so effectual to virtue, as that
delivered by almighty God to the Ieues, notwithstanding this transending
chardge was given to the world from the oracle of our Redemers mouth: Vnlest
your justice does abound more then that of the Scribes and Pharasies, you shall
not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Of which excellency of virtue, properly
apertaininge Phil. in Hipar. Joseph. lib. 2. Antiq. cap. 12.
to the old law, singularly well discourse Philo, and Josephus.

8. Upon this very consideration once a Catholic Gentleman in England
conversant in my company, even out of his natural prudence avouched unto me,
that the faith and relligion protestanticall could not be iudiciously thought
as come originally from almighty God by merit of our Savior Christ. For,
said he, what proportion is there The English religion reproved by the merit
of Christ.
betwixt the sacred Incarnation of Christ, that strange depression of his
divinity, his rigorous life, his dolorouse death, the wonderful and infinite
moment of his preciouse sighs, tears, blood, and the faith and religion of
protestants! Faith, I mean, said he, which is their justification, their
period of all virtue and Christian sanctity, the only instrument of their
hope and industry, adjoined to no remarkable labor, or any necessary
honesty? Relligion I understand such a one, as is deuoid of presthood, of
sacrifice, of alter, of church, of all majesty of outward cerimonie, not fit
to be the worship of him, who is creator of heaven and earth: whose ministers
nether have ordination, nor lawful mission: who among them selves retain no
hierarchy of a mystical body, no approved Canon of life and conversation
decreed or ennacted in general counsel. Whereupon on the one side wayinge
the worth of expenses disbursed by our Savior, and of the other the, slender
purchase or fruict thereof to be seen among protestants, substantially did
conclude, as I think: that assuredly almighty God was never man, or a
sacrifice upon the cross, to found faith and relligion of protestants: seeing
that less chardges, yea none at all, would have served, by such faith and
relligion to furnish Antichrist for his battery of Christ his Church, for the
abolishment of virtue and overthrow of his family.

9. Which excellency of our Christian hope, as it makes it self manifest in
regard The excellency of Christian hope in regard of civility. Arist. l 8
Pol.
of virtue in general, so does it appear most perspicuously in the quality
of such virtues, as concern Civil life and government, comparison being made
with diverse other politic institutions of pagan common wealths, Plato, as
reports Aristotle not imagininge a sufficiency of possible virtue to consist
with propriety of wives and other emolumentes, allowed therein a community, to
the end that Citizens minds enioyinge once in that kind what they desired,
might after more freely, Celius Rhodigin li. 28. c. 21.
as void of impossible desires or partiality, employ themselves about public
affairs: to which purpose also sondrie nations allow to one man many
concubines. But the Christ^a^ discipline in regard also of ciuility, procures
in Citizens such virtue of co^tinencie, and charity, as that willingly they
renounce this brutishe or confused comunitie: some contentinge them selves with
one wife, others wholly remaninge devoted to virginity. In many common wealths
by decree of law has been established as good price, all purchase of strong
hand, and of deceit, as is seen among the Scithians and barbarouse nations,
not expecting to attain by their discipline to perfect justice and equity
among themselves: whereas our faith makes men not only not iniuriouse to
others, but also voluntary forsakers of what they have. In Greece, where was
fountain of civility, the most famous law makers utterly despaired in times
of peace to find in Citizens hearts true virtues, and therefore, as reports
Aristotle, did not lay down any laws properly belonginge to peace, seekinge
only to establishe a policy in fury of arms, whilst one City or nation
fought against and other. And suerly this fact of theirs was grounded upon
the great difficulties which occur in time of peace Iuuenal Satyr. 6.
against virtue, being a thing more hard for subjects in seasons of flourishing
repose to be just, pious, continent, and temperant* then it is in tumult of
wars for them not to be courageous, and patient. And we understand from
histories, how weak was virtue among the ancient Romans, in that their
estate flourished at home only as long, as martial discipline stoo^ in arms
abroode* the which decayed, when pleasures of peace and ease obtained the
soueranty. And at this day nothing does so support the Turkish empire as
continual wars and combustions against foreign people. From which
martialitie if it shall once surcease, forthwith their slender and feoble
virtue at home taught by their relligion, will yield up hand to licentiouse
liberty, and effeminacie. In which point our Catholic faith is solely
effectual for virtue: the which persuadeth peace very instan^ly, as a
condition peculiarly convenient for her decuments, by reason of strong motives
she has for virtue, and for the withdrawinge of men's forces from pleasure.
Nether as yet in peace any community in the world has so long flourished, as
that of Christians: which is a pregnant argument of virtue and heavenly grace
therein implied, able to resist the forcible allurements of delights in
tranqu^litie and abundance. Aristotle reherseth unto us, that the Sages of
Greece, although they Arist. l. 4 Pol.
thought a monarchy to be the best form of government, yet consideringe the
eminent degree of exemplar virtue requisite in monarchs, judged it as
impossible, that Sines l de Rep. Titulo 1
such desired virtue in one man should be found, as was once by Appelles all
the beeuties of the women in Greece expressed in one picture of Helena: and
therefore did not lay dowen laws for that government, but rather advertised
nations not to trust to kings or monarchs. Nevertheless this moral
impossibility by the Christian faith and hope is taken away, and among us
subjects voluntarily covet to live under kings, and monarchs: whose choice
is much approved by the divine monarchy of the Papacy in the common wealth of
Christ his church. Likewise kings and monarchs courageously among us resolve
to be eminent phenixes in all virtue, and integrity of life.

10. Here against the perfection of the Christian faith began to swell the
mighty malice of Antichrist, which endeuoreth by his forerunners the
protestants, to damn up and restrain the course thereof in virtue and good
works, devising under an heavenly Hope of the Protestant void of virtue and
good works.
coulor of a faith pretended, and quality of Christ his deserts believed, to
cut the very virtue and sinouse of true Hope, to persuade a compendiarie
abridgement of Christian office, and estate of the Gospel, consistinge in a
mere belefe apprehending the merciful promises of grace, and bliss thereon
solely depending. To which project I have seen in England certain tables or
chartes, draune our surely by the pencill of Antichrist, divided into too
ranks of abominable doctrine: in the former under the title of Grace, and of
the Gospel, were laid douen all such places of scripture, as apertaine ^o
the benefits of faith: In the other under name Of the law, by Catalog was
rehearsed such sacred textes of holy writ, as concerned the natural and moral
precepts of honesty: as forbidding adultery, fornication, injustice, neglect
of the saboth day, dishonor of parents, injustice of stelth, murder, and
disobedience against superiors VVherby was intimated to the rude Euglish, that
the obseruances of moral virtue and probitie did not much touch Christians,
no more then did the old law abolished by Christ our Redemer concern to their
duties: and also that if any beleuer did trangresse against them by turpitude
or iniquity of life, yet still by privilege of his faith he was a guiltles
child of grace and of the Gospel, free from ghostly detriment through any
dishonestie thereby. O strange Gospel of a protestant, thus sequestered and
rancked a part from endeavors of natural honesty! O admirable grace of his
faith, retaining life of justification even in the sloth of not workeinge, yea
in the donghill of most filthy and loathsome deportementes and workeing ill! Let
him the^ know, that he is enfolded in darkness of a mystery of iniquity,
plotted by his captain Antichrist, let him also learn of the Catholic, in
what sense and meaning the Apostle S Paul in How the law of faith is
distinguished from the law of virtue. ^^daicall instice was reposed in
works separated from faith in Christ Non ex fide, sad ^^ quam ex open tibus
tum e rant. August. Tract. 54. in Joan. cap. 12. Iste ergoconflictus no^ I^dae
orum, ^^quorum lib aliorum, sed pl^ne Chr^stianorum fidelium Aug l 3. cont Iul.
c 26. De Fide and oper c. 8. Aug. l 3. cont. 2. Epist. Pelag. ca 4. Quis est
tam impius qui di cat ideo se ista l^gis non custodire praecepta, quia est ipse
Christianus, nec sub lege, sed sub gratia constitutus? Digito enim Dei lex
scripta est, sed propter duros in lapide scripta est. Nunc iam Dominus in terra
scribebat, quia fructum quaerebat. Aug Tract. 33. in Joan. ca. 8. Math. 20. 1.
Corin. 3. Joan. 9. Gall. 9. Ephesians. 5.
his Epistle to the Romans distinguishes by way of opp^sition the law of
faith, and that of the Gospel, from the law of works, and natural
integrity of behavior

11, Some times the holy Apostle by style of the law signifies the ceremonial
law, properly belonging to the Ieue, which by faith and grace of the Gospel
was to expire and determine: at other times by title of the law he compriseth
the entire tenor of the same, purporting moral life, in as much as it does
not include the spirit of christian faith, but only as it lies ingraued in
the hard and dead tables of stone, severed from faith in Christ, serving merely
to instruct, and to afright man his frailty or rebellious disposition by fear
of punishment assigned therein to transgressors. But in deed, faith, grace,
and the Gospel do contain in their bouels as it were the self same
natural law of works, and probitie: which by reason of an inward burning
charity, more effectually and industriously does execute them, then the
moral documentes of virtues of themselves delivered by almighty God unto the
Ieues, and regestred in stony tables, were able to perform. So that the
proper spirit of faith, of grace and of the Gospel, is a spirit of Godd
works, and in this kind more operative, the^ ever was the law of Moses.
VVhereupon then assuredly does a Christian man, not a Ieue, as teaches S.
Augustine, behave himself according to the spirit of faith, Grace and the
Gospel, when by virtuous endeavors he is most obedient, and humble; when he
is eminentlie chaste, and mortifieth the flesh by rigorous discipline of life:
when he fasteth, prays, gives alms, helps his neighbors, pays what he
owes. In which endeavors he is not a Ieue, or a follower of the law, as
Turchishly and barbatously protestants do teach, but rather a perfect
Christian, shining in the grace and light of the Gospel according to S
Augustine. Good God, can natural honesty of good works be estranged from
faith and freedom of the Gospel? Is a Ieue, or a bare philosopher, by
instinct of doctrine, an honester man, a man of greater perfection, which
consists in good action, then is a protestant professing the liberty of the
Gospel? when almighty God is to judge all Christians at the latter day, he
is to judge them by their faith, their grace, and liberty of the Gospel: yet
by virtue thereof, and their one vocation, as workmen, as soldiers, pilgrims,
husbandmen: in whom the spirit of faith, of grace, and of the Gospel is
intrinsically and essentially operative, allotted to task of labor and sweat
in virtue: from whose estate and faith are not to be distinguished their
travails, as the Gospel is severed from the law. Call the workmen, says
our savior Christ, and give them their reward Then Christians by nature and
proper conducte of faith, of grace and of the Gospel are obseruers of the
law. He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly. And when sondrie places
of holy scriptures exhort us to works of virtue, doubtless we are spoken unto
as Christians, by faith, grace, and Gospel ordained to work, and that more
efficaciouslie then either Ieues by means of their law, or Gentill by force of
his philosophy, could be enabled.

The reliance, which Christian Hope has upon the endeavors of virtue, is not
only sacred and heavenly, but truly civil and politic.

CHAPTER. V.
SVCH is the excellent quality of virtue, that it is not only auailable for
man to purchase with favor of Almighty God his own eternal beatitude, bnt
also necessary for the civil institution, preservation and happy estate of
any humane society: heaven and earth in a sort tendering unto us most
important motives for study and practice thereof. So that if a careless neglect,
not regarding celestial bliss, should bread in us a forgetfullnes of the
same, yet worldly emolument would still support and maintain in our breasts
toward her a great love and affection. In this manner Virtue heavenly and
civil.
therefore in virtue conspire things mortal and immortal, visible and
invisible, the dew of the fi^mament, and the fat of this loest element.
Plutarch recounteth it as a thing wonderful, that the ancient Ethnickes did
never build up any temple To the Pluth lib. de Fortuna.
virtue of temperance, or sufferance, to magnamanitie, or Continence: But to
fortune, even with the first foundations of Rome* have been erected many
boeth sumptuous, and of great antiquity. The reason perhaps was, that they
demed these virtues in their seeds so to be in grafted in man his nature, that
they needed no prompter to put us in mind of them, whose actions with us were
to be in continual ure, depending on our own industry, not wholly upon any
external favor or benevolence of others.

2. No doubt if virtue hold a continual souerantie in the actions and minds
of Citizens, or patriots, all would pass among them with great contentement,
commodity, The civil force of virtue is generally declared.
and flower of civility: I mean, if virtue were embraced of them for it
self, and expressed not only with outward show, and painted coulor for some
other end of interest, but even harbored in loyal love of their hearts and
judgments. For if law only by penalty extorte from a subject good
abearance, no sooner shall terror of justice be out of his sight, then crafty
conuayance of proud auaricious, or voluptuous concupiscence, or from it open
violence, will perform some one feate or other of impiety. The distemperature
whereof, as an inward ague in the bouels of a body politic, will in short time
^ret and consume the whole substance of good policy; and increasing daily in
couerture of d^ssimulation, finally will rush out apparantlie into barbarism,
to the overthrow of the community. Therefore if virtue be wanting in any
society, as well remarketh Aristotle. Namely when justice is vvanting in
man, no fraud, says Arist. 1. pol. c. 2. The disorder of man great without
ver^^e.
he of vvild beasts is so great, no such is their malice, as may be compared
with the malice of him: for when injustice is armed, as it is most horrible;
so seeing that man is armed by nature, as by his prudence and force, to use on
this side, or the other, if he once want virtue, nothing on earth is so
wicked as he, nothing more cruel, or more given ^o lust and intemperance.
Brute creatures by ordinance of nature are so balanced and appointed, that they
cannot excede or decline from that end for which they are created, or use any
proposterous means thereunto. Aug. Epist* ^^.
But man, as by noble endowementes of reason and free will is furnished to
accomplish Three instruments seruinge man in his actions. Omnis societ^s
fraudulentum socium naturali^e^ non v^^ Aug l. de Nup^. and Con^. cap. 4*
Mercury of Barba^^sme. C^l. ^hod^gin ^ 10. A^^ cap. ^^. Only virtue is the
instrument of pollici^.
his office and function, so when not restrained or ordered by virtues law,
those ve^^ gifts of nature, by so much the more in him violently break out
into barbarism, by how much his mind is more sharp and intelligent, his will
more free and resolute. Wherefore Aristotle very properly and consideratly in
his books of Ethickes haueing entreated of moral life and virtue, so
concludes them, that he makes in the clos^^^ a fit transition to his ensuinge
treatise of policy.

3. There be then three instruments, by which men in civil focietie effect
there driftes and purposes. Fraud, strong hand, and virtue. Fraud, and might
are instruments meerelie of barbarism. Nether do we understand here by
barbarism only a Scithian invasion of a savage cut^hrote or highlander, or a
rank rider, but also the sly and craf^^^ invasion of the pirat, of the but
feue, of the curpurse, of the false broke: and advocate. For barbarism has
attendant a Mercury with his winged head of subtilitie, and with a purse at
h^s belte of commodity, as well as Minerua, or sincere Civility. It remains
then only, that virtue be the sole organ and lawful mistres of true policy.
In which order of civil ^ertue, next after religion, is most necessary
justice, ordained to the procurement of the common good, belonging to many: so
that Citizens, as aduertiseth us Aristotle is not to repute himself as his
own, or at his own disposition, but rather Arist l. 1. pol. c 2. Civil
Charity.
to appartaine to the common wealth. For seeing all Citizens are parts of the
multitude, nature has given charge to every part to have an especial ^are of
the whole. And as each part in d^gnitie and place excedeth other, so
proportionablelie in every one is to be a great care of charity and piety
toward the comunaltie. And how virtue does concur to Arist li 1. pol. c. 8.
the office both of prince, and subject, thus Aristotl^ likewise declares: If
he who is to command, be not moderate and just, how can he well command? if
he, who is to obey be in likesorte disfornished of virtue, how vvil he
mod^stlie obaye? for one being an intemperat slugarde, will perform no
obligation of good duty. Wherefore it is manifest, that both are to be adorned
with virtue, although not in all points with equality of degree. Of which
difference, allthough accorded in a civil consonance, we are now to discourse.

4 As the end of a law enacted by a prince, is to make the subject good and
virtuous, Virtue of a (...) A^^st Ethic. c. ^^. ^. (...) c. ^ ^^o 1. Magn.
Moral c. 2 Arist ^. pol c. 8
especially just, and well effected to the common weal, so the prince being
himself a liui^g and speakinge law, is by example of work not only to
appear virtuous, but also to be endowed with virtue in principality of
highest quality. H^ who is to command, says Arist. Is to be fornished and
adorned with perfect and absolute virtue of manners. For his office is as it
were of an archi^ect, or crafts master, to whom especially belongs the
name of virtue. Then the prince, by his oune profession, also by institution
of almighty God and nature, is to shine with virtue, and that not in vulgar
kind, but in souerantie and exemplaritie: so that his purple, croune, and
scepter be not so much signs of his power The Priest and the Prince by bond
of office ough^ to be virtuous.
and majesty, as of his singular emine^t virtue, and integrity of life.
Whereupon the politickes of our days might propose a question, as more
disputable, so also more profitable unto the world, to wit, whether the priest
or the prince by office and duty are obliged to be more virtuous, then whose
power is the greater According to An non cernimis, optimo cuique Dominatu^ ab
ipsa natura cum summa v^ili^a^e infimorum, datum? Cice^o l. 3. de Repub. Aug.
l. 4 cont. Iul. cap. 12 Virtue required in noble persons. Arist. 2. pol. c. 7.
which proportion of virtue, answering unto power of co^maunderie in dew
measure of the same, Aristotle does very well thereon conclude, that noble
persons are obliged to be more virtuous, then the vulgar sort, the husband,
then the wife, the master, then the servant, in whom, if he be a slave or
bond man, is regardable minima virtus the meanest estate of virtue. Whereupon
he examining the proper temper of spirit and disposition of a prince, says.
He is to accept of the government willingly, and yet in some sort against
his will, vvhosomeuer shall be vvorthie of Empire. That is he ought not to
aim only at superiority for his own avail or pleasure, but rather to
undergo labors, pains and travails for the common good: his charge seming
rather to be unto him i^kesome, then delightful. Also the same philosopher
talkeing of one fit to be elevated to the top of government, thus discourses:
When it so falls out, that one whole race, or one among the rest, does so
excel in virtue, that he surpasses they virtues of others, or of that
prog^n^e, then it is convenient, that kingly right be granted to such a
family with high^st power, or that one of it be king. Therefore as an
absolute monarch is placed in chief top of domination, so is he by God, and
nature the more obliged to be virtuous, Arist. l. 5. Ethi. c 1.
and that in a kind singular, rare and monarchical: and is not so much to
regard his own power absolute and independent, as his duty and function of
cheifest virtue architectonicall. Kingly ancthoritie, says Arist. To that
end^ is ordained, that the people thereby may be defended* and from among those
which be good, kings are to be culled out: either in reckoning of their
virtuous actions, or surely of their dignity and excellentie in this kind.
Princes by virtue like unto almighty God. Arist. l. 5. Ethi. c 1. Aug. Epist.
^0^. l 2. C^^ c. 21. 22. 24,


5. Herby we may understand, that princes by nothing so much as by virtue,
especially such virtue as is beneficial to others, as by ^egal justice,
comprising in it self all other virtues like a blazinge Venus and Lucifer in
the firmament, as speaks Aristotle, do express that simil^tude they have
with almighty God. Tr^th it is that their power of soueranity, which in them as
a sparcle of that huge furnace of authority abounding in almighty God, does in
some sort make them resemble the first cause: yet this in a prince is not his
especial grace, or chiefest dignity ariuing nearest unto his creator. For a
prince may abuse his regalitie and estate applying it to barbarous tirannie: he
may amiddest his subjects become Belua, a cruel beast, as notes Aristotle.
But virtue, Arist li. 3. pol c. 12. 10. Ethic. c. 9.
as marketh S. Augustine, cannot be by him abused, and it will still recommend
the prince as honorable and amiable, as in an especial manner representing the
high perfection of almighty God. A prince says Aristotle rightly graced
with virtue is with good Plut. in Arist.
reason to be esteemed of others as a God. Plutarch likewise to the same purpose
thus discourses: Almighty God, unto whom men by study, care, and vvor^^,
endeavor to make themselves like, does excel in three things: to wit,
immortality, power, and virtue: among which the^ virtue no thing is more
beneficial, nothing more honest, nothing more divine. Also worthy the
consideration of a prince is an advertisement given by Philo. A^ ser making
other Philo l. de Iudicio.
things vvarme, is first hot of it own nature: contrary wise snovv^, by
nature coldef^^s^th other things, so a Judge ought to be full fraught with
justice, if he administer the same to others, from whom, as from a fountain
do sto^e the svvete streams of laws to those, as desire justice. Again in
an other place. In the law of Moses it is a most just command, that the
prince in the Common Philo lib. de (...) Prine.
vvalth do not deal* fraudulently with his subjects. For deceiptfull
manners, vvhilest dissimulation covers intended affairs, apertaine to
ser^ile and base spirits. Wherefore a Prin^e is not so to handle his vassalls,
who among them is a father, and from them as his children, is to receive
dutiful respect. For priuces (that I may tell the truth) are so ma^^e public
parents of cities Virtue only makes a man amiable. Aug. Tract. ^2 in Joan.
cap 7. Decus ergo corporis animus, decus animi Deus. D^triment to a
commonwealth from a Prince of a wicked life.
and nations. How many then of them be good are not inferior in piet^e to
natural parents. Contra^i^ wise such princes as to the det^^ment of the
subjects abuse their power, are not in deed princes, ^ut rather to be t^rmed
enemies, do^^g^ th^ctes of enemies. After talkinge of certain noble princes,
notorious for yertue, as examples to be proposed to other princes, he thus
concludes: Let princes imitate these presidentes, if they coue^ to be like
unto almighty God.

6. Whereby we may understand, what a civil damage falls upon the
commonwealth, from the vicious life of a Prince, and from such acts of his,
when public honors and offices are by him committed to wicked persons. By
nature a subject is prone to prise that at an high rate, which is esteemed in
the choice of his Prince, and to imitate that seriously, of which his Prince
has given him by his action a pate^ne. Whereupon, when he shall behold
impiety, atheism, incontinencie, injustice and intemperance graced by the
demeanure and manners of his prince, fo^th with he will judge such vices not to
be of that deformity or turpitude, as others more scrupulousl^e do suppose:
and so think, that they will beseem also his own person and cariadge very
well, being graced by his Prince. In like manner when he esp^eth vicious
persons ennobled by the Prince with style of honor, with public chardge of
commaundrie, enritched by ample revenues, forthwith he will deem, the only
way to be preferred by such a prince, is to be vicious su^ablely to his humor,
and to that of his favorites: whereby he shall resolve accordingly. Which
practice and life of Prince directly tends to barbarism. For as nothing is
substantiallie civil but virtue, so nothing indeed harsh and rude, nothing
falselie fraudulent, or importunelie violent in a society, but vice and
iniquity. And assuredl^e I think, that from no other fact of tyranny
proceeds such balefull loss to the common wealth, as from the Princes evil
cariadge employed to favor vice, and disgrace virtue.

7. Out of the same principles evidently also are deduced consequences
implying V^rtue required in subjects.
semblable virtue, in the performance of civility, on the behalf of
subjects. For indeed civility is nothing else then an aggregation of all the
virtues intellectual, and moral, referred to legal justice and equity:
whereby public good of many is procured, preserved and augmented. Therefore
Seneca deciphering the particular articles and Se^. Epist. 90.
parts of civility, thus recounteth them: It is the only work of
Philosophy, to find out truth, both in divine and humane affairs; from
whence never departs justice, pi^^^e, relligion, and soci^^ie of all virtues
combine^ together. This science teaches a man to worship divine things, and
to love humane, to acknovvledge the empire of the Gods, and to admit a feloship
among men, the which was once (...) before ^o^^t^^usnes pulled it in p^^ces.
And doubtless the golden world under king Satu^ne, so renoumed by the
auncientes for happy policy, was nothing else but a socie^y of men knit
together by the bonds of all the virtues: VVherby they were friendly, just,
charitable, continent, and temperant: and the method to br^ng in again this
golden age, is by the same virtue, through the merits of our Redemer. Therefore
a Citizen mu^t be established with continence and temperance, moderating the
inordinat motions of his sensual desire ^he must also be strengthened with
fortitude so restraining fear in him, that it never upon veue of terror make
him to retire from his place and office of public service. Also his will by
puer affection toward justice, and the public weal is so to be inflamed,
that not only for his own private emol^ment he perform the outward endeavor
and formality of virtue in regard thereof, but that moreover even out of
cord^all choice, he employ and engage himself in procuring and maintaining
public utility. Otherwise if these civil virtues be exhibited only in a
coulourable show of honesty in some artificial plott of invention, first the
Citizens perceuing such artifice, will abandon all confidence one toward
another: and so never will frankelie consort for the effect of any noble
enterprise; suspicion continually attending upon their words and actions: then
where without danger of penalty injurious appetite may race it out in them for
private purchase, there it will adventure, and so by night as it were of a
stratagem, demolish that civility, which was ^arst bu^l^e by day of sincere
meaning. Aristotle affirms, that the perfection of a Citizen, Arist. l. ^.
Ethi. ca. ^. ^^. 7. Pol. c. 10. Sen. Epist. 7^.
intended by the law, is virtue: We have determined, that the best end of
civil science is that, which ^^esh diligence, vvhe^by it may render the
Citizens good, rightly affected, and sit to perform honest ^ndeuors. And
therefore as he in civility chiefly respects probitie of manners, so he
defines, that civil authority apointeth for subjects outward commodities of
riches, and honor in a common wealth only in that measure, in which they be
most s^ruiceable to virtue: So that good men will not increase their wealth
inordinatly, nor evil men have power so to do. It is a floolish avarice of
some writes Senera, who puta difference betwixt possession and poprietie:
and think that not thiers, which is of the community.

8. But as virtue in general is requisite to civility, so times being
distributed to Proper times deputed to proper virtues.
those of war, and others of peace, some virtue will seem as proper for war,
and some other for peace. For as to each season severally certain vices and
inordinate passions are incident contrary to virtue, so in each of them
peculier virtues by aucthority of the magistrate are to be in use and practice.
And therefore a civil politician must ^s well know the civil arts of peace, as
of war. Whereupon Aristotle makes this distribution: Fortitude and patience
are necessary to entertain and perform laudable attemptes in times of
trouble: philosophy serves for quietness. But temperance and justice are
profitable for booth occasio^^: Arist. l. 7. pol. cap. 14.
yet more specially concern times of quietness and repose. For as war makes
men to be ^uste, and frugall, so prosperity and ^ase with peace rendereth
them licentious and unjust. Therefore virtues are by a prudent prince in all
times by his own example, and his laws, to be fortified against their opposite
vices and perturbations, respectively in each time rise^^ge in uproar against
reason, and the common good. So then we may see, what is supporte of our
Christian hope, and matter of industry thereof; to wit virtue: the same to be
also the goulden chain of Homere linkeing heaven and earth together in one
band, containing eternal beatitude, and temporal policy.

Our Christian hope as it bears strong hand against pride and voluptuousnes,
so thereby stands it against two mighty engines of barbaritie and
inciuilitie.

CHAPTER. VI.
AS divine hope in astedfast curse by endeavors of virtue passes on to the
guerdone Hope an enemy of pride and pleasure.
of felicity, so does her constancy with semblable courage give repulse to
all vice either pleasantly persuading, or dreadfully threatening ou^ stay or
fall. All which deformity of mischef in this our voyage has too heads: to
wit pleasure and pride, as man his universal coinquination of the flesh and of
the spirit, as speaks the Apostle, 2* Cor. 7.
to be eschued, if they assail us, or scoured out, if they once pollute us.
And that the more effectually our Christian hope might resolve to overcome the
forces, to refuse the offers of these vile monsters, by reasons eye they are
discovered unto us in hew so ugly and deformed, so balefull and damegeable,
that not only we behold the^ to debar offenders from entry in^o heaven,
place of felicity, but also with barbarism to disturb all humane society,
and to overthrow that civility, which virtue by he^ la^es and customs
laboreth among men to frame and establishe.

2. Pride, although in regard of the obiect^, to wit, honor and soueraintie,
perceuable The seat of pride in man.
only by reason seem to be a vice spiritual and intellectual, yet
notwithstanding in that it aims at excellency situated on high, environed
with soudrie difficulties, as with opposition of hatted and emulation, therefore
it dominireth in man his will, as Iraseible, the proper seat of fiery and
cruel barbaritie. And as the object by the mind is apprehended as man his
chiefest good, so the irasc^ble affection accordingly pursues the same with
hottest commotion of wrathful rancker, when impedimentes of adverse
countermines, of hostile competencie from any enemy, or corriualls industry,
with Arist. l. 3. Ethi. c. 7.
resistance does occur, or confronte her procedinges. Therefore Aristotle
affirms, that a bold and audacious person is also arrogant: because, that he
may the better prevail, and attain unto his enterprise, he bears a
blustering show of pressinge still forwards, with contempt of all peril or
power to the contrary.

3. Now to conceive, how insolency violating moderation of cariadge, is
likewise Pride an enem^e of Civility.
iniuriouse to a civil society, to omit the rehersall of histories,
recording the same by soudry euentes, it is most manifest, and without all
difficulty to apprehend. For as the desires of arrogant men are excessive and
ardent, so do they engender in envious persons the greater hatred, and more
bitter alieuation of mind from others. How the^ shall the Citizens, so severed
by private ambition, so suspicious of each others actions, agree in united
force, for the performance of any rare or eminent exploite in the common
wealth? Nether will pride only so disperse them into diverse quarters of
dislike, but moreover will enkindle them banded in sondrie factions in a
desire, by all means possible bent, to endamage the aduersant party: by which
hostility, necessarily the Pride atte^ded upon by other vices.
common good must finally perish and decaie. Also this insolent vice raiuing
in subjects minds, is not commonly alone, but rather has in retinue and
furniture all other sins of iniquity, as stelth, rapine, malediction,
perjury, invasion, yea also licentiouse concupiscence of sensuality.
Ordinarily, says S. Gregory lust Springs out of the root^ of arrogancy.
Therefore the final butt, of this swelling and swimming elation in all
society, Greg in ca. 12. Job. ^os. c. 8.
is barbarism, and violent irruption to disorder and confusion. The vaineman,
says the prophet Hoseas Is elevated into pride, and as ^f he were a colte of
a vvilde ass, thin^eth himself borne to fredome. S. Gregory recounteth
excellentl^e well thus the barbarous Gregor. Homil. 4^.
effects of pride and arrogancy. In all, who svv^ll within themselves by
proud conc^ptes, are to be found clamor in spe^he, bitt^rnes in silence,
dissolution in mirth, surie insad^es, d^sh^nestie in action, d^shonestie in
imagination, la^^t^nes in gate, ran^or in answer. Such men's m^^des a^e alvva^s
pote^t to repr^ch^, and vveake to bear disgrace* sl^e to ^bay, by contuneli^
to pr^n^^e others immoderate. They seem to be car^ed betwixt hea^^n and
ear^th; forthat nether they re^aine^^ ^nferior matters equalit^e of
^raternit^e, and yet ext^lling themselves cannot ariu^ to (...) great
sub^^m^tie.

3. Besides this bo^sterouse violence of arrogancy, tending to barbaritie, the
same Pride accompanied vvit^ ignorance
vice is moreover always accompanied with ignorance, to the great detriment of
civility. For proud men, to the examples of Giantes, or soliuagant lions,
build themselves up mansion places in the solitude; whilst reputing their own
knowledge excellent, Arist l. 1. ^^ ^it. cap. 2.
they disdain to learn of others, and so remain still as Bellephorons in the
darkness of their own ignorance. VVhereupon Plutarch reputeth pride a sin in
this respect uncivil, in what it is injurious to the light of reason: and
therefore he reports, that the Egyptians did feign their Gods Isis to be
altogether contrary to ^phron: that is* i would: Pl^^arch l. de ^id and O^^.
in that this Iphron svvellen with errors and ignorance, does rent in pieces
and abolish all doctrine gathered by the g^ddes.

4. Therefore our Catholic hope rightly informed by faith, chuse^h for her
foundation Hope relieth upon humility
the virtue of humility, upon which once settled beloe, she raises after by
obedience and contempt of worldly greatness, all the state and hight of her
sublime fortunes and perfections. Especially at the very beginning of her work
she submits her power to authority of Church, and regarde^ully takes
guidance from the oracle of the fame in all mysteries of almighty God. Here
hum^litie of top sail makes first the anchor sure beloe and safe for
preservation of the ship.

5. But as no bad disposition is more hurtefull to a common wealth then that of
pride, Christian hope staineth against the pride of ^eresie.
so in th^s kind, none so pern^cions as heresy and private interpretation or
choice of scripture, with m^spritall of unity and quietness: generalite and
sancti^ie in the Catholic Church standing against such arr^gant presumption.
For as the quality of the curiosity is of chiefest importe* so the pa^ties
therein dessenting will be more egar and intemperat in their contentions There
is not a protestant in the world, be he never so Pride of protestancy.
very a busard, or ass never so ^^e bloen with his own swelling fancy, who
comparing his personal light of faith with that, which did shine in the whole
church before Hus, wi^leff, ^uther, and Calvin, will not resolutly condemn and
contemn the authority thereof, the general bel^efe, the universal manner of
serving of almighty God then by sacrifice and ceremony, as times plunged in
darkness of false and superstitions ignorance. Thus much of late, have we
vnderdoode, with our great laughter, from the pen of an Archeminister in a
chi^dish bableme^t of his, concerning a case of ma^rimonie: George Abbot
Interrogat* about a case of ma^rimony.
calling the Church visible in time of Hin^marus, Bishop of Reim^s* a ch^lde of
darkness what privilege of study, of school, of education, of wit, has his
corpulent Minerua to reject the Curehes law, then in practice, as engrossed in
darkness, as a decree of palpable ignorance! what is his monish light, whose
weak blase in the night brings onli^ dead corpse of sinners to their spedier
corruption? what discovers he in heaven, I beseech him, by his light? He
beholds for sothe, that Almighty God Arist. Probl* Obiectes of prorestantish
light.
is auctor and actor of sin: that the second person in the sacred Trinity is
God of himself, and not God of God his fasher: That the holy ghost has not
appointed any visible authority in the Church, to rule the faithes of
Chrinstians, but has left all to the Babilonian spri^its of each bible
Clarke, or malepert expounder of scriptures. That ^ainctes in their glory and
frendshplie with their Redeme^, are not to be worshipped by us mortal men on
earth. What by his light does he behold? for soothe, that to a beleuer nothing
of filthy or injurious action is to be imputed: that the law of God and nature
is imposible: that virtue and vice are bare titles, and names of fair or
deformed qualities: that there is no preesthod or sacrifice in the Church: that
a puritan minister may prate out his service in his doublet and his hose: and a
Protestant perform his liturgy with a cap, and a coope, a dog, and an ape.
How truly falls out that, which S. Gregory relates of proud heretics,
having in their own conciptes as many candles sticking in the muddie
Candlesticks of their own heads, as the firmament above has s^arres and
lights: being so proud, that vvre^ as they ^novv not to be wise with Greg,
in cap. 12. ^ob.
moderation, they utter ridiculous saulsities? There will come one day when
such vncirconsised Philistians shall want tongues to reproach the whole arm^e of
God his church, and it will be verified the tenor of divine promise: I will
not permit that Bet^all insult against Nahum 1.
thee. no child of confuse Babylon, and hireling of proud Antichriste, shall
have ability to injury or disturb the Jerusalem of God his church: for that
arrogant heretical eye, vvhi^h scorne^h his father, and despises the trauail
of his mothe^ in bearing him, that is Proverb. ^0.
the church in her copious and abundant catholic generality, according to S.
Gregory, let the ra^ens of the torrent p^^ke out, and the young of the eagle
cate it. It sauoreth Greg. lib 18 in ^ob. Cap 25. Qui damna^e audent orb^
inauditum. Aug. lib. 2 cont parm^. Cap 9. lib 3 Cap. 3. De unit ecclesi^ Cap.
13. lib 3. con^ lit. Pelit. cap. 2.
therefore of an arrogant and seditiouse spirit, to misprise with the Donatistes
any general judgment and practice in the church as works of darkness, and
stumbling blocks of blind ignorantes without sound proof of argument: For
herby may any sectaries in a commonwealth traduce the received faith and
religion therein as darkness, and blindenes, style themselves corn and others
chafe: all laws of princes may so be disgraced, if passionate malecontentes
venting their hot spirit into rebellion, by such spightfull titles do obraide
them. Wherefore that the minister may make good his slander against the
Churches knowledge in the time of Hin^marus, Arch bishop of Rhemes in France,
he must show what falsitle was then taught, what superstion was then in ure
contraire to purer faith and religion in former ages of the Church, and it to
have been some times disalowed by Fathers and Counselles. But that such
devised darkness is his own mere malicious fiction, may be thence proved, for
that the famous Doctors of Christ his Church in Hincmarus time, and after him,
which were lights of the Christian world, never discovered, or forced away by
the beams of their literature any such devised mist of ignorant obscurity,
no mention or reprehention thereof was made by S Eulogius martyr of Corduba, by
S. Fulbertus Bishop of Charters, by Pe^rus Dami^ni, ^anfrancus, Guitunudus, S.
Anselme, S. Bernard and others. Therefore this imputed darkness is an object
only of his heretical pride, and malicious fury.

5. Morouer there is nothing, the which* does ^o deflouer the beauty of a
common Pleasure is an instrument of barbarism. Pausan in phocia.
wealth, so enfeoble the substance thereof, as dissolute pleasures, ^oyot and
incontinencie. whereupon well accorded with true philosophy the fiction of
Homer, reporting the illelandes of the luxurious Sirenes to have been
replenished with scattered dead men's bones: for that carnal delights of
disport, idleness, excessive diet, and unchaste life, end in death and
put^efaction of body and soul. where then raineth contempt of discipline
restraning the extrauagant ouer^eaches of the wandering understanding by a
certain rule of divine commaundrie, and courbing the will from immoderat
irruption into sensual lauishementes, there first will ensue darkness and
ignorance in the mind, Pleasure hur^eth the wit.
with neglecte of learning, by reason of gross vapors from the body arising
up unto the head, and there engrossing the spirits: also in regard of the
particularities of things vehemently sensed by pleasure, different in
condition from the elevated, abstracted principles of contemplation, dilightes
hinder speculatiue knoledge. Then is man by these dregs of sensuality
disgraced, ^hilest base impuritie does with the outward purtraicture of a
beast au^le the form of man, as notes Seneca, no other wise then if by a
draught of Circes Cup he were transformed into the shape of an unreasonable
Seneca Epist. 122 Arist. lib. 5. polite cap. 11. Pleasure an enemy of courage.
Seneca Epist. ^1.
creature. Therefore Aristo^le prudently diswadeth princes from unlawful use
of pleasure: for that nothing says he, does make them so contemptible unto
their subiectos, as such brutish deportement. After these damages, proceeding
from voluptuousnes in a civil society, follows also an effeminacie of all
virilitie, proper to the will of man, as irascible. In regard whereof persons
delicious are still fearful, and dare not adventure upon any commendable
enterprise, where difficulty or hazard are presented. Beasts of portage
says Seneca endure any way never so rough: houses are hardened in a course
soil. But if pampered in a soste and morish ground, they are soon worn. So
a sould^or, who is strongest, comes from a craggie country. The Burgise, and
the household servant are s^othfull. Therefore Homer Hiad 2.
Homer delivered good and sound philosophy, when he reported, Hector being
returned from combat, to have refused a draught of sweet and aromatical wine,
tendered him by his mother for his refeeshement.

Mell^tum mihi chara parens, ne po^^ige vinum.
Ne me debilites, roburque a corpore demas.
No vv^ne give me with honey svveete my mother dear,
Least courage fail, and bodies strength surprised be by fear.
Lastly where pleasure is in a commonwealth predominant, there suspicions,
^iualities Pleasure ^^ cruel. S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 31. art. 1. and 2.
and hatred w^ll sever one subject from an other. for although pleasure do
couardise her followers, yet still when opportunity of revenge is offered, it
will make them cruel and fearce in their affections, as they be irascible:
accordingly as it is observed, that commonly voluptuous princes are also fell
tyrants.

6. From this balefull delight, both for search of truth, and love of
probitie, the Christian hope is ^oyned to austetitic of life.
christian hope relying on seucrity of discipline, in both kinds, does
altogether decline: aiming at the atcheeuement of her end by rule of faith
according to prescription of church; and by abandoning of sensual
allurementes, with correspondence to seue^e decree of virtue. VVherby she is
not oneli^ well proportioned in reckoning of heavenly beatitude, but also in
respect of civil life and community excellently accomplished. Pretended hope
of the protest^t admits no restraint.
Contrariwise the Protestant is engaged in the service of Antichrist, as to
license the understanding to what faith it shall please the same to derive from
scriptures, so likewise to enlarge the appetie to what disorder of carnality it
shall much desire: as well to the loss of heavens worth, as also misprise,
though barbarism, of true policy and humane society, as hearafter shall be
proved.

7. But, as if it were not enough, that our Catholic faith be assailed by
sondrie heresies, The barbarous policy of vice examined.
all isshuing into barbarism, of late days a certain kind of preposterous
policy by form of government and institution of civil commaundrie and
principality to the effect of the same barbaritie has given hot charge
against it. In which ^orte of devise Nicholas Machiauill, a Forentine
counselor, has seemed to hane been an excellent Architect and sectmaister: in
whose schole many have so profited, that for thi^ own private gain they have
mightily endamaged the community, they have sold heaven, confounded the
earth for imaginary purchase of reuendge, or some profitable increase of their
private substance. Of whom I dare boldly and peremptorily auouche Marchiauill
a scholar of old Politickes. Arist. iib. 5. Polit. Cap. 11.
three things. First, that in these documentes of pretended policy, nothing
of moment is to be attributed to him as prime inuentor: In that Aristotle
himself, and other ancient philosophers expressly lay down all his
documentes under the title of Tyrannical and uncivil government. Secondly I
affirm, all this Marchiauillian art directly to be bent against the common
good, whose ruins are made matter for Ty^antes to build up their strong
castles of princely security* Lastly I avouch, the final end and driste of
this false policy to be barbarism and destruction of true ci^il^tie. All
which things will evidently appear by ^^c^tall only of some principal s^ate
points, upon which all their procedinges in menagement of common wealths have
support and foundation.

8 In that some princes refuse to be vertuons in their oune persons, or to
undergo Grounds of profane policy.
labors, to fashion their ^ubiectes according to dis^ipline and perfection of
pro^^^e: for that such pr^nces in regard of their proper vices, benige made
od^ous, may stand in danger of some outrage from the people, nothing being so
hateful to the natur^ll indgeme^t of a man as a viciouse life, especially in
his superior, Therefore in our days has sp^onge out a profane and
barbaro^se policy, ^ortifi^ing princes in the courses of their wast full
pleasures and tyranny, and securing them also from any anoy by subjects, eu^n
when they live in loosest manner of luxu^^e and pr^dig^l^ty, consuming their
own substance, and also that of the comunaltie So that the ver^e sum and
bulck of this politic ^^^e is to bring in vice under coulor of virtue, into a
common wealth: by ^uill customs whereof, a prince offended by his subjects,
may take ^eu^nge of them at his pleasure ^or ^f he fear their united forces in
regard of his ^aultie ca^^age, to disioine them, that severed into factions,
not only they shall no^ be of ability to p^rfo^me any attempt against his
soueranty, but also easily may be impoue^ished by ta^es and subsidies, subdued
and brought under by a fearful and dre^d^ull subjection. To this Aug. Epist
3. Qu^ nolunt sta^e Remp fi^m^tate vir^utum, sed impun^^te viciorum.
purpose such policy thinks it good, by mul^pl^citie of faithes, and
relligions, to divide the subjects affections, to set them on fi^^ of hostile
combustion and controversy, that the prince in the me^ne season may discou^^
each pa^tie his secrecy, and oppress them all, whilst they be employed in
^iu^l dissension, one against the other. whereby also it will come to pass,
that many of them being proved and convicted offendantes, forfeting their
est^tes, deuolution of them may be made v^^o the prince, to the end h^ may
thereby gratify his especial servants and fauor^tes. Also it is held
expedient, that excess of pleasure, in eatinge, drinkeing, and venerie fr^ely
be permitted among subjects: for that they once deboshed thereby will not after
find any great fault with the princes carriadge, thought never so
intempera^, or have any feruente alienation of mind from him featured in
manners like unto themselves. Then for that it is the nature of Glotrony and
luxu^^e to besot the mind, sub^ectes by such gross delights once surprised
will not be able to suspect or perceuie any tricks or stragemes of policy,
lyinge in coua^ture of painted equity, attending their ruin and d^struction,
but improuidently will rush upon the pickes, even when they imagine themselves
most assured: one will be r^dd^e ^^ill to accuse and betra^e the other: they
w^ll likewise be deuoide of all courage and resolut^on to defend or procu^e the
common good, which is the proper and inseparable effect of ^a^all and material
contentementes in all communities. whereupon besotted and enf^obled hearby,
they may easily be turned whith^r it shall please the princes hand to divert
^he stern of his empire and commandri^ To which purpose is much auailable,
that the prince depressing good and virtuous men, only perfe^^e to honors and
places of government under him, such as are vicious and lo^hsome. ^ffo^ herby
shall he be first assured, that such persons riased to hight of aucto^itie by
him, will never enterprise any thing against his estate, as well for that they
are base minded, ^s also in regard that they be not beloved by others, in
reckoninge of their known turp^tude, and so will never band faction
strengthened by numbers of friends and dependantes: Then on the other side,
they will continually offer themselves, as redd^e priest instruments, to
accomplish any designement of the prince, be it never so tiranicall,
barbarouse or abominable. These be the principal and fundamental heads of
state policy, now as rebelling against the Catholic Roman faith, so also
infesting virtue, civility, whose end and issue is barbaritie and im^^anitie
of life, finally expiring into a Scithian manner of solita^ie the^ish pilladge.
m^k^nig men even wea^^e at length o^ Cities and commonwelthes, so anoyed by
fact^ons, frauds and rap^nes: and cause them rather to desire mountains and
forestes, where they may live with some liberty and contentement. Of which
practices thus utters Aristotle his i^dgement: Nullum non s^^l^s ^uo
complex^^ continent: Arist. l. ^. po^ cap. 11.
Th^^^ ^^ no wickedness, which is not implied in them. And namely a prince is
not to suffer the subjects to know one ^n other by commercement of school
and academie, not to trust one an other: he must procure, that they be
continually perple^ed with fear and su^picion, that they be poo^e and needy,
that they behold virtue among them in disgrace, and only admi^e infamous
persons sea^ed aloft to command the good; and so judge ^t to be a bootles
study that of virtue; yea hurtefull, to which the prince proposes no reward,
but rather beats it down with opression, con^um^lie, and repro^he.

Pe^iere mo^^s, ius, de^us, pi^tas, fides. Senec. in (...)

Et qu^ ^^dir^, cum p^rit, nes^^t, pud^r.
Da ^r^na, and om^^m pro^^ nequitiam incit^.
P^r s^^l^ra s^^p^r sceleribus ^u^um ^st ^^^r.
(...) are dead, with r^ght, p^^^ie, honor, and trust,
With mod^st shame, which p^^sh^ once, ^^^th still i^ fatal dust.
Loose we then the ra^nes, let vv^^^dn^^ ^r^^y ra^^
To h^^n^st ^r^mes by cr^mes let ^orn^y ^unne a pase.
9. Antichrist, that mortal ^duersa^^e of Christ, to bring his purpose of
iniquity Ant^christ uses toovv^^pons aga^^st the catho^^ck faith. Heresy and
^a^se policy.
intended to hight and perfection, in these our days first has endeavored by
Heretics protestantish, o inf^oble our holy faith by many errors, to fo^ce it
into soundry sects and divisions, and so to imp^ire the nob^l^t^^ of virtue
working by diverse ^al^e assertions of h^s ^he decaie and misprisall ^herof.
Then after for an vpshot by a certain race of unnatural and mon^^r^use
polit^cians he now laboreth to persuade, that sin and vice in subjects a^e
best and safest means for security of princes: and therefore that w^se and
prud^nt Counselors are to employ their industry seriously, how they may
defile and barbarise the people with ignorance, with abiection of mind and
body, with mutual ^a^^ed, with impure lusts and concupiscence: as if Priamus
good hap were in no other place to be found, but in the flames and ashes of
Troy But good Vini^^^^^ll policy
God, how is it repugnant to nature, that the father should plot the
destruction of his own children, the shepherd contriue the ruin and rot of
his proper sheep, the Captain procure the massacre of his banded soldiers!
The prince is a father to his subjects, he is their shepherd, Captain and
pilot: may he then retaining the name of a man endeavor to live by their
deaths, to loyter by their poue^tie, flourish by their wi^kednes, to triumph
by their ouerthro^e and damnation* may nature be thus armed against it self,
and the head conjure the misery and calamity of the members! Here certes
Antichrist thinks to give a great blo^ to virtue and true civility, when his
^erbingers and agentes politi^ians pre^ent vice shining in glory of gold and
purple, as the only mistres of the world, attended on by temporal auailes:
exclude virtue causing it to drope under the barbarouse tyranny of intemperat
iniquity: in that men ordinarily poyese at a high rate soueranitie and
greatness in a common weal^h, whose purchase now they ^ee to be found no other
disbursed come, then fraud, and ^u^pitude. Most detestable is he to be
accounted. says Aristotle, who Arist. lib. 5. ^thic. cap. 1.
is dishonest toward himself, and toward fr^^d^s. Contrarievvise he is
b^st, who in r^gard of h^mselfe and others does show v^rtue: although this
be diff^^ulte, and a to^^some thing. Notwithstanding the courage and
magnanimity of a prince are endebted to perform this Princely hope in a
Christian prince.
excellency of a virtuous charge, as well by such virtues, which concern the
moderation of his own personal affections, as by temperance, continence, and
fortitude, as also the good of others, which have relation to the public, and
particular commodity of his subjects: as justice, charity, bounty,
magnificence, amity, piety: by whose endeavors Princes do not only
accomplish their own duties, but also become amiable to others, and are
harbored in their hearts, as in strong and impregnable castles. Of which
Princely perfection in virtue, thus Seneca discourses. It is a decree of
nature, Seneca Epist. 90. Arist. l. ^ (...) c. 1.
that things of meaner quality be subject to others of greater dignity. In
flocks hold principaliti^ either the greatest bodies, or the strongest. The
couerdlie bull does not conducte the heard, but he, who by bigness and broad
breast excels in the male kind. The most gallant among the elephant^^
guides the residue. Among men he is chief, who is best. In those a^ncient
times therefore, a governor was chose^ according to the quality of his mind*
and there upon were they happy, among whom none could be more potent, but be,
that vva^ better. He may well have authority to do what he list, as
Prince, who thinks, that be can do no more, then he may with equity.
Whereupon in those days of the golden world, Posidonius reports, that only
wise men held principality. These restraining their own might, defended the
weaker from oppression of more pouerable. They persuaded, they disuaded, but
shovving what was profitable, what unprofitable. Their prudence was
directed to this, that no thing were vvanting in their subjects. Their
fortitude drove away dangers from them, their bounty increased and adorned
their commodities. Their office vva^ to command well, but not to be kings.
No subject made trial of attempt against them to do them what harm they
could, by whom they first had their ability, so that among them was
correspondent good obedience. And then a king could never threaten greater
revenge against such, who would not obey, as when he made them bel^ue, that
he would quit his kingdom.

10. Wherefore a Christian Prince layinge hold on the virtue Hope, coupled to
so The resolution of a good Christian Prince.
many strong means and helps, is to resolve, first in his own person to
excel in princely exemplaritie of all probitie and piety: then to procure
that his subjects be graced with the same ornaments of virtue: lastly by the
sinouse of virtue and learning to govern them, tying thereby their rebellious
hands and spirits from disobedience, and applying them to the performances of
all good offices and duties, apertaining to the civility of the common wealth.
well may the great lord Turk, wanting a relligion and faith of forceible
virtue, think upon his labors, stratagemes and wickedness, of blood, of
ignorance, of base seruilitie and compulsion, of luxury and intemperance, to
menage the important affairs of his brutish empire: But Christian Princes,
whose hopes are settled on the person of our Redemer, God and man, enriched with
the might of his infinite and precious merittes, are to make rekoning of the
virtues, as of the sinouse of all their policy; and hearby are so to be
animated, that by power of them they may judge if they will, themselves able to
perform their own office; and effect that desired end of civil policy, to
wit temporal utility in society, to which common wealths are by God and
nature ordained. This, this is our golden world, gilded by our Redemer, of
which dremed Seneca, in which, in the time of the Gospel, under the rule of
Jesus Christ, are found such potent motives to virtue, and against vice such
strong munition, as never before were exhibited to man kind, or in any place
appeared. Only now then it belongs to Princes to be industrious and
vigilant, to be less addicted to pleasure and ^ase then their meanest
subjects or vassales. Wherefore Homer very properly induces Agamemnon, king
of the Grecians, worthily rebuked, for that he was found a sleep early in the
morninge: Home^ ^liad. 1.


Hand decet heroem, ^^i gemtis and ^nica r^^um
Cura subest, totam somno traducere noctem.
Of Prince, whose chardge is others good, must be a vvachfull eye:
N^r all the night by slu^gish rest, in bed he is to lie.
In this respect the kingdom of the church is called by almighty God in the
prophecy Daniel. 2,
of Daniel the kingdom of heaven: Almighty God shall s^s^itate a kingdom of
heaven, which shall not be dissipated: in regard of the heavenly power of
virtue, dominir^ing and commanding therein among Christians.

What sufferances the Christian Catholic Hope undergoes, the same it
endures by true fortitude. Contrariwise all pressures and martirdomes
tolerated by Protestants, are nether passages of Christian Hope, nor
enterprises of virtuous courage.

CHAPTER. VII.
AS the the Catholic faith by most certain assent of mind emboldeneth Hope
to The outvvard appea^^nc^ of (...) co^^on to catholic and protestant. Aug l 2
cont G^^dent c. ^^.
encounter with all occurrent adversity through patience and fortitude: so
heresy being an obstin^t choice of the understanding and will, countrarieth
this resolution in a desperate manner of animositie, prepared to suffer what
loss someuer, either of goods, life, or liberty: so that on both sides is
outwardly sometimes maintained a constant purpose to bear adversity, yet
risinge out of a different origin, and leueled at a diverse intendement.
whereupon seeing that our external sense perceives semblable show of
virilitie and firm expectation of reward, as well in the penalties of
protestanes, The valor of the Catholic hope. Romans 10. S. Aug. Tract 53. in
John affi^meth Christians to sign their fore heads with the sign of the
cross, That they bl^^^e not by faith to profess the name of Christ: the
forehead being the ^ea^e of shame fastnes. Terror and fear enimles to hope.
Aug. l. 1. cont Gaudent cap. 16. S^obaens se^. 7. Plutarch d^ Soc^* D^m^.
as martirdomes of Catholics, we are now for the present by certain indicious
and p^udent animaduersions to distinguish the constancy of the one, from the
obstinacy of the other.

2. We must then suppose, the Christian faith, although it do formally
importe no more then a voluntary assent of the mind, given to heavenly
mysteries, yet more over in virtue and efficacy to contain in it a valerous
spirit of fortitude, to persist still in the outward service of allegiance we
owe unto Almighty God. And hereupon S. Paul avouches, that in heart we
beleuinge obtain thereby the grace of justification, also confessing by mouth,
enjoy health of soul: because the office of faith is to be courageous and
constant in auerringe that publicly by word, and deed, whose verity
inwardly in affection we credit. From which fortitude, (ma^ger all occurrences
of fear and persecution) a saving faith can not be divorced. All effeminacie
rele^ring, all couardise refusing, all dissimulation conceling, are far
estranged from the perfect active and lively spirit of Christian faith: they
do rather stop and stay that vigor of visible operation, which to a beleuer
it affords. Wherefore, as the Theological virtue of Hope adorneth man his
will being Irascible, appointed to overcome difficulty of enterprise, so does
it much rely on fortitude, placed in the same faculty, fencing and garding
hope from fall of disloialtie against almighty God. A principal object of
which fortitude is terror of persecution, iniquity of fraud or violence from
those, who hate virtue. Therefore Plato was wont to say, as reports Stob^us:
If all men were good; there should be no need of fortitude. which defect of
goodness, is excess of wickedness in such, as are professed enemies against the
servants of almighty God. For as notes Plutarch, it may well be incident to
humane fragilitie* upon some occasion to abandon virtue, and pursue pleasure,
but to anoy and persecute such as be virtuous, is more then humane malice, and
an imitation of that deformity, which is proper to the devils, and is the very
extremity of offenc^, to which viciouse persons may ariue.

3. But ou^ Christi^n fortitude of hope is of hat remarkable qual^t^e, as
thereby we Constancy of Christian hope proves the verity of Christian faith.
Arist l. 3. Ethr. c. 7. Plutar. in vit. Ag^s and Cleom.
prove tow things concerning faith, from which it springs. First from hence
may be inferred, that a man considered personall^, who is to live and dve
according to reasons rule, as he must not for dread of any danger and ha^me
forsake the office of virtue, follow or profess vice, or error (for otherwise
^is course in goo^ endeavors would be uncertain, childishe and variable, to the
open disg^ace of manly dignity, and damage of cruil society, every citilen
flitting and yeldinge, as seares shall prescribe) so we may conclude, that the
original cause of this valorouse constancy of hope, is no humane judgment,
or natural knowledge, but some divine fai hand persuasion For so uncertain is
our science attained unto by study, so perpexed and encombred with
difficulties, that s^w would endure loss of goods, l^bertie o^ life, in
main^enance of their own invented intelligence: few would oppose them selves
against the favors of mighty persons, the grand anctoritie of esteemed sages
gainsaying their conceited inventions. Therefore all lawmakers to engender in
men a perfect resolution to persist still eauen until death, in their
credulity, and action thereby decreed, have either fained themselves Gods, or to
have had intercourse of conference with some divinity. Wherefore our
sufferences in way of hope, being every where notorious, do prove, that we
are led by the guidance of some divine faith and illumination. The other
property of our faith, to with the supernatural verity thereof, is from this
self same hope strongly deduced. Whereupon the fathers considering the infinite
multitude of Psalm 41.
martires, their prompt and ready will to endure martyrdom, yea thirsting
after it with a most ardent desire, as chased Haries inflamed by heat of
charity desired to bathe themselves in the waters of their own blood:
pondering their conditions of race, of sex, of age, of worldly endouemeates:
in that they dyed with an humble and charitable disposition toward God and
man: in that they were, as speaks S Ciprian highl^e low, and lowly high,
small, yet vigorous, or fiery as a mustard seed, as Cipt. Exhort ad Mattir.
Greg. praef. in c. 3. ioc.
speaks S. Gregory, auerring against the Pagans the truth of the gospel
herupon, and of the divinity of our Redemer: prudently demeing it not to be a
thing conformable to the sweet providence of Almighty God, to pe^mitte men,
women, and children, in such maine troops, so purely sekeing for his only
glory, to perish and melte away in pain and calamity for asseue^ation of
falsi^e, or of any humane deluding opinion. What they maintened in judgment
had no relish of their own proud Marc. Aurel. in sua vita. Gaten. li 3. de
pulls differett. Justin. Apol 1 ad Senate Ters li. cont. Pcaxeam. Lactant. lib.
5. diuinar. inst. ca. 13. 14 Chrisost. Hom. quod Christus sit Deus. De sancto
Babila. Basil. or^. de 40 martyr. Aug in Ps 47. Cipr Exhort ad mattir.
invention, whilst they only regarded the fountain of their believed verity
in the person of our savior Christ, in the commanding authority of his
catholic church. It had no unseemly declination from reason to impute lust or
voluptuous baits, but rather withdrew their affections from thence, resolved
them to take a course against natures stream, and inclination, aiming only
and wholly at virtue, and imitation of the divinity. Which motives being
unknown to M. Aurell. and Galen, they attributed all Christian valor to
obstinacy: as of late some did judge of the unconquerable martyrdom of
certain catholic priests to ishew from bravery of an haughty spirit. From
hence in proof of the Christian faith drew a forceible argument S. Justin
martyr. Tertullian, Lactantius, S. Chrisostom. S. Basil, and others. S Augustine
thus declares the estate and quality of ancient martires. What has
preuailea against them the temptations of cruel terantes? the received
violence as well from the eyes of their vveping friends, as from the hands of
persequ^tors. How many were held back by their own children from
martyrdom? How many of their vviues prostrate at their seete, beseched them
not to leave them disolate? How many parents endeavored to hinder their
children from suffering death, as we know and read in the passion of S.
perpetua? Therefore the excellency of mattirdome is thus declared by S. Ciprian
what thing is therso high and exceliente, as among so many instruments of
tormentinge executionars, by strong battaille of faith to preserve truth! what
thing so great and amiable, as amiddes so many glaues of standers by, with
reitetated voices to profess the lord of his liberty, and auctor of his
Redemption! whereupon diverse of the fathers, namely S. Ciprian, and S.
Augustine affirm, the blood of martires to be the seed of the church: and
that in too Aug. in psalm. 8 How martirs blood is seed of the church
respects: first because martires by their merit and sacrifice of their lives,
much pleasinge almighty God, have been mediators thereby to apply his gracious
benenolence unto many: yea with S. Stephen to their persequutors. Moreover men
considering theit invincible courage, their humble, yet magnanimous charity in
suffering death, have prudently esteemed that faith and religion as true and
divine, in cause whereof such of their sort have patiently sustained torments
and loss of life.

4. Antichrist bearing high wrath and indignation against the palm of
martyrdom, Heretics enemies in martyrdom Eusebius. l. 6 hist. cap. 18 Aug. l.
de haeres. c. 2 haeres. 7.
the flowet of fortitude, by sundry practices of his sectaries, has holy
endeavored either to hinder the course of it, or to disgrace what it performs.
To which project certain heretics in the primative church, as writes
Eusebius, and S. Augustine, termed Helcheesites, and Priscillianistes, sought to
rebate Christian valor, and maintened as allow able, that the faithful with
all indemnitie from fault, or damage of justice, might by word, or work deny
their faith, retaineing in heart and soul in them mean while, an in ward
persuasion of the truth thereof, and devotion thereunto. In effect this heresy
of base couardise, and of denial of that visible and corporal duty we owe
unto almighty God, was long before professed in the turpitude of the
Gnostickes, or infamouse Puritanes; who as they thought no turpitude of sin
to work harm against the sonnie beam of their justification, and election,
so deemed they, no renegacie of foreswering of faith to endamgae their estate
of perfection: as we may understand from S. Iren Ire l. 1. EPiphan l 1. haeres.
26 24 Tertull scorpiac.
S. Epiphamus, and Tertullian. But this foul disgratious heresy is first
reproved by the words of our savior Christ, who threateneth, that his
heavenly father shall deny such to be his children and servants at the latter
day, who here in this life shall renounce their allengeance as conceruing the
profession of his name. whereupon the Math. 102
Apostle S. Paul accoumteth this public protestation of faith, as necessary
unto salnation. Then the same verity may well be inferred upon consideration
of man his nature: Romans 10.
who as he consists of body and soul, so is he to perform his subjection
and homage dew unto Almighty God, both by inward action of mind and heart, and
also by generouse fortitude of member and limme. Likewise in that fortitude is
a perfection apertaining to christian function, he must needs swerve from this
virtue, who surprised with fear, or environed with terror, shall leave his
place, abandon his voued task, and for sake vndutifulie his chiefest lord and
prince. And seeing that in the fabric of man, body and soul are so coupled,
that the body is not only joined to the soul, but appointed subject thereunto
in degree of subordination, most absurd shall it seem, and repugnant to this
union, if the body shall run from that truth by recantation of mouth, which
the soul embraces by belief, which the heart priseth at highest rate by love
and affection: man herby remaining deuoide of fortitude, by his natural parts
Pride and impatience in herickes have disgraced treyye mattirdome. Aug. de
haeres. c. 69. lib. 3. cont Epist. patmen.
hunting, as it were, counter, distracted by pursuict, and flight, the prince
holding one course, and the vassaile a contcaire,.

5. Other Heretics by an invention of a quite opposite disposition have
endeavored with animositie, pride, impatience, and plain phrency to impeache
the glorious virtue of martyrdom. Such were in Aphrick certain erringe
persons, who had their race from the Donatistes, and Petelians, called
Circumcellians, and others, as we may understand from S. Augustine. Whose fury
was so great, as that their expectations frustrated, either they would kill
themselves by fire, water, doounefalles, or force others to boucher them; as
reports Theoderetus: in this madness im^tatinge the barbarous Theodot. de
Haetet Fabulis Aug. l. devnit. Eccles c 19 li. 1. cont. Gaud. cap. 26 17. Clem.
Alex. l. 4 Strom Aug. Tract. 6. in Johan. c. 1. Tract. 11. ^ 3 Aug li. cont.
Gaudent. c 4. ^8. 1^.
Gymnosophistes of India, of whom writes Clemens Alexandrin But there is no
need to remove this scandalle of vnnaturrall fact from true fortitude, it
proceeding both from excess of extreme passion, and also weakness of courage:
whilst men not being able to supporte disgrace, or disaster, contriue the
remoueall thereof by their untimely deaths, couardly rather running away from
adversity, then manly withstanding the same, as notes S Augustine.

6. The protestants also of our days in sundry manners labor to debase this
principal office of fortitude in martyrdom, whose several documentes and
practices thereunto belonginge, we shall now recount. First then the protestant
accords in this with the old Gnostick and Puritan, that to a faithful
beleuer no badde fact is reputed by almighty God: or that it works any
detriment of loss or extenuation unto his received justice. Therefore they
avouch, that S. Peter denying his master Christ was not thereby damnifyed in
respect of grace and favor with almighty God. Whereupon Calnin confesses,
that the elect people of God did outrwardlie profess the religion of the pope
and Antichrist without misprison to their sanctity one jot by it endamaged.
Upon which impious conceit, as co^sequent, must needs follow, that men be
potently inclined to perform this renegacie, when occasion of luker, or
threats from tyrants Protestants do profess that public denial of faith
hurts not.
appear. For when esteem of spiritual impeachement by profession of a false
religion and faith is not present, when indemnitie from that hurt, which is
sole and principal in weight, presents it self this foul yelding up the
body to error and superstition, what remains as fufficient ability to
restrain weak men's appetite from the same? Whereupon in An^werpe I have
known Anabaptists, puritanes, and protestants repair ordinarily to
Catholic Churches, and outwardly by their presence and gestures there profess
the Catholic relligion: the same daily and veuably to be performed by the
French Hugonot, public testimony affirms, A great strong relish of this
impiety has that which the Centuriators protestants blame in the fathers of
the Ceturiat. C^t. 3 c. 4.
primative church, to wit that they to much by their praises extolled
martyrdom. Also Calvin in his first and second Epistle of a book entreating
of Christian office, promises security to men of his profession, although
outwardly they seem in our churches Catholic and Roman. which heresy of
the Helchesire by fact and credulity revived in the protestant, as it is
repugnant to man's nature, to christian fortitude, so also it is opposite to good
civility and policy. For what relligion can a prince expect as solid and
firm of his subject, when he beholds him to be as diverse and variouse
therein as a Protheus, as a Camelion, as a marigoulde giring after the conduct
of the son, having in his hand the goulden rod of Mercury by touch to turn
every relligion to his own commodity? How can he judge such men to be of
great and brave spirit in wars, or in any other civil exploiet, who so
fraielly yield to each blast of adversity or utility, in the cause of
almighty God? And for that all other virtues are grounded upon faith and
religion, if these be mutable and changeable upon every occurrence, no virtue
will or can hold a constant course toward the atcheuement of the common good.
whereupon Tertullian with very approuable reason avouches Christians to be the
best Martialistes in the world in an allowable quarrel: for that with undaunted
minds they dread not by effusion of their vital blood, to maintain in Tert
in Apoll. c. 37. Eusebius. li 1. de vita Constable c 50. Zom lib 1. Hist. cap. 6. Aug
in Ps. 34
martyrdom the truth of the Gospel, and profession thereof: For what wary
had vvbene unfit, or vvreddie, yea although in noumberi inseriour to the
enemy, who so vvillenglie in martiredome loose our lives? Therefore the pagans
had no just reason to repute Christians as stothfull and base minded in regard
of war, or patience in suffering. vvher someuer the pagans meet with a
Christian, faith S. Augustine, there they insult upon him, provoke him, and
mock him, calling him a dullard, senfles, and a man of no courage or heart.
The Emperor Constantius when he made some show, as if such Christians should
be dear unto him in his court, who for his love should forsake by outward
sign Christian relligion, and follow that of the Ethnic, haueing thereby
gained many to his part and rank, others refusing to make any such
protestation of infidelity, he rejected these Eusebius. in Vita Constan. c. ^ and
10.
renegates, affirminge prudently, that they would never be true unto him, who
were so disloyal to their Creator: and contrariewise accepted into his service
and familiarity such Christians, which manfully persisted in their vocation
and profession, as persons in any good attempt resolout and valerouse. But here
we are to distinguish the noble sincere spirit of charity seen in martyrdom,
from a barbarouse insensibilitie or inhumanitie of Scithians, and other
Northren people, who are termed by the ancient, mortis amatores, lovers of
death. And by how much a nation has the more entered into Luca. l. ^ verse. 3^3.
barbarism and feritie, by so much the more it contemns death, and valueth
at the smaller rate loss of life: and this thing is apparent in the Turk,
either deminge nothig to succeed life expired, or reputinge mere childish
fantacies of devised pleasures to be reward of a desperate dispense thereof. To
which protestantish impeshement of A Protestant will hardly among Christians
be a martyr.
martyrdom is also available the distinction betwixt fundamental faith, and
that of an other nature: in that according to the same, no contrariety to
divine truth, never so obstinatly defended or professed against the Church,
making a man an heretic, it may semee a thing indifferent for a protestant to
hold profession of his faith either in Geneua, or in Rome, with the Grecian
scismatick and heretic, or the Catholic: no thing being against stomach, or
against a saving faith. Which largure of belief and vain relligion may well
preserve a protestante from the bloe of martyrdom, having still a starting
hoole of some faith not fundamental for his escape.

7. Lastly English protestant paralelling and comparing his martirs, as Husites
in Bothemia, valdesians in Burgundy, Sacramentarians and Solifidians in
smithfield of London, with ours, which died in sundry places, and namely in
England under king Henry the eight, Queen Elizabeth, and king James, suffering
in cause of the Catholic and Roman faith, imagines to work outs dishonor of
crime and treachery, and for thirs to wreath a victorious croune of eternal
memory. Wherefore in regard of the virtue hope, it shall be requisir to balance
each parties blood, endurance, and constancy, and so by a prudentiall examen
try out, where is to be found the true gold of martyrdom, and where the
dead ashes of counterfeit insolency and temeritie.

8. No man can so absurdly think, that men either by mere sufferance of pain,
or The cause of martyrdom.
that any by schism, heresy, Apostasy, or infidelity exiled or separated
from the Church may perform the sincere work of martyrdom. For if to be a
martyr tollerance of penalty were only sufficient, then the devils should be
martyrs, as says S. Augustine, Aug. l. 1. cont. ep. parmen. l. 2 cont. lit.
p^^ till. ca. 93. 98.
when the Emperors by fire and sword forced them out of their temples. And
herupon when the Donatistes vanted of the great number of their martirs, they
were thus justly reprehended by S. Augustine: Let them first prove them selves
no heretics, or schismatickes, and than let their envious tongues complain of
their unjust punishments: then let them dare to brag of themselves as martyrs
of truth, when they endure afflication. For we must suppose, that heretics,
scismatickes, and infideles are deuoide of charity, without which S. Paul
pronounces no sufferance in the burning fire to avail, but to be in effect
just 1. COr. 23.
nothing. Farthermore that humane prudence may discrie the proper spirit of
fortitude Disposition proper to a martyr. Aug. l. 1. cont. Gaud. c. 20.
and martyrdom in a patient endurer, it must have an eye to his disposition
and carriage. For what admirable fortitude is there in him, who upon a sensles
desperation, with ostentation of pride and vain glory, with intemperat hear
of wrathful ire and revenge, suffers torments or death? It follows then,
that comparatively we discuss the disposition of each party, arising from
the cause of penalty or damage of life, equally on both sides sustained.
VVhereupon S. Augustine proves the sufferances of they Donatistes to have been
no martyrdom, or penalties endured for faith, or Christ, in that they, as
protestants now do, did resist the faith of that church, which was spread
over the face of the earth.

9. First then in reckoning of the Princes enacting penal and bloody laws
against Difference betwixt Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth in regard of
penal laws for relligion
offenders, diversity in them of minds are to be considered; on the one side
might and violence in distemperature of i^e for revenge, on the other justice
with mild moderation proceeding to repress abuses. Queen Marie, of happy and
blessed memory, decreed no new statute offensive to the lives of protestants,
but only put in executisuch as were gravely ordained before, generally
received and practiced in all christian common wealths. But king Henery the
eight, and his daughter Elizabeth, in matter of relligion ennacted new laws
against life and blood of Catholics, which in their days knew no light, or
were ever in use and vigor at any Christian tribunal. Moreover Queen Marie
in this kind of case spiritual shed no protestants blood, but where the
cause was before by general Counsels condemned as heresy, and judged worthy
of so sharp a punishment. But king Henry, and Elizabeth in matter of faith
and relligion, deprived Catholics of their lives, and their corpse of
Christian burial, when their cause was not first tried at any competent bench,
nor censured by any general Counsel as heresy, or by Canon of the Church
^^med worthy of death or punishment. So that Queen Marie, although by form
of justice had slain triple Si terret^tur, and non, doce^^tur, improba quasi
do minatio vi deretur. Aug. Epist. 48.
the number of us Catholics suffering under Queen Elizabeth, or king James,
yet had she been far from all violence, her manner of process considered:
and such succeding princes, which have massacred us, are rightly to be styled
cruel and violent, punishinge that work in us with death, which justly never
was by good authority misprised as false, or censured as heretical. What
greater cruelty, what more stormy violence, then to kill us for that fact,
which is allowable and warranted at this day in the church by her general
Counsels and practices! Heresy dominiring, assuredly is not acquanited with
sound wit, or conversant with equity or verity, but only rusheth out with
furiouse Mars in passion, seeking rather to euerthrow gainsaiers, then to
convert them, to murder them, then to reconsile their persons.

10. After it shall be to this effect behofefull, to ponder and way the
different qualities Personal differencies betwixt Catholic martirs of late
in England, and such protestates which for heresysuffered death in times past.
of these patient parties on both sides: whereby prudence in her prospect may
better ariue through judgment to the true virtue of constancy. Those who have
entered as priests in misson to serve in the harvest of our countery for
recovery thereof, for the greater number were, and are by blood gentlemen: who
before they forsook their native soil, had good and liberal education: they
well understood what misery therein was sustained by Catholics, and how that
retorning home sacred with holy orders, they were to expect no other
entertainment, then in continual labor, in danger, in prison, in marti^dome
When they had in foreign parts sufficiently furnished themselves through
collegiall discipline, diligent course of studies in Philosophy and Theology,
then might they be valued justly as intelligent persons, and well talented: and
such, as upon ignorance or temeritie would not pursue an enterprise of that
peril and weight, as is the Apostolical entry into England. And as all these
spiritual harvest m^n had one commaundinge rule of faith, so therein did they
all accord, they fought manfully, and died courageously in one and the self
same cause and quarrel of the catholic Church. Who if they would have yielded
but a little to the adversary, they might not only have saved their lives, but
also have been partakers of many temporal commodities. When they came to the
period of the tragedy, as they accomplished their martirdomes with undaunted
fortitude, so with profound humility, with ardent charity praying for their
deadly enemies, and freely forgeuinge their bloody and sacrilegious trespass. On
the other quarter Protestants, which suffered under Queen Marie, except some
few Apostaticall priests, were almost all rude, base, unlettered, a^^^sans,
cobblers, Curriers, and such like ras^alitie: who besides the arrogant vaunt of
their own proud spirits, had nothing of substance to say for their faithes,
only reuiling in immodest terms catholic pastors, and their relligion, with
a despe^at barbarous breath Father Persons Example of Fox his calender c 3 cap.
5. number. 7. 8.
calling for the fire and the faggot; whose spirits were not only unlearned and
turbulent, but also of sundry suits and fashions, agreeing no more in the
fire in matter of belief, then does on the gridiron a herring and a carbonado
in substance of meat. What consentment was among them? was it in fire and
smoke, in which the devils, damned souls, in hell do accord? when they came
to the stake, good God, what reuiling and fuming words they breathed, how
little they prayed, what confidence of salvation had they in bags of
gonepouder tied about their bodies, what triumphs they song of their
victories in disputations against doctors and Bishops, what delight took they,
that The disposition which is proper to a martyr not found in any Heretic.
much and frequent assembles should behold them shine in the flames, and from
thence hear them a maine cry out against superstition and idolatry? wheare
may any prudent search here find ground of piety and heavenly doctrine in
the sufferances of these Bedlam and idiot offenders?

11 But what I shall now rehearse is chief in this trial, and even to the very
eye of natural judgment shall yield an argument to approve the true fortitude
of our martirs, and condemn the extreme mad sufferances of protestantish
delinquentes, wherefore if one should behold some one sect master, dying or
burning for an opinion coined Aug. l. 3 cont pa^men. c 3.
in the forge of his own fancy, he might probably think, such a one to
excede in pride, vain glory, and arrogant obstinacy, in that popularly it
seems a thing both rare and prisable for one before all others besides to
pretend particular illumination Calen. l 3 de (...) different. Aug. l. de unit
ecclesiae c. 20. Sunt multi qui ^actan^er ^^^ud faciun^, non ^um charitate.
Tract 6. in Joan cap. 1. Bernard. sermon. 6^. in Can^^c They had cloven t^ges of
sundry sects, but not the Do^e of unity and charity August. Tract. 6. in
Johan cap. 1. In columb 2 vnitas, in ling^is gentium societas.
in divine mysteries, for one before the residue to challenge to himself great
and secret conserence with the holy ghost. In regard whereof S. Augustine
reproved worthelie Donatistes as extremely proud and arrogante, who being
buta few in Aphrick, condemned all the Christian world besides, accounting
themselves as solid grain, others as light as chafe. And herupo^ to gain
this principality, man his haughty mind is often times strongly against
public authority armed, and obstinatly resolved. whereupon in matters of lower
quality, as of physic and philosophy, as Galen notes, diverse inuentors of
new opinions have been as pertinacious (according to his words) as I^ues and
Christians are in profession of their faithes constant and unremovable.
Therefore to behold a sectmaister dye or frye for his relligion and belief, who
with they Donatistes does condemn the whole world, can not be an argument very
efficatiouse for a judicious porson to deem his death martyrdom, or his
couradge an effect of a divine and heavenly persuasion. For which cause S.
Bernard recounting how the Abligenses heretics went merrily to the loss of
their lives, and seemed much to desire the same, gives this advertisement:
Wherefore the constancy of martirs, and pertinacitie of heretics are nothing
like. for that piety does work the contempt of death in the one, and
hardness of heart in the ^ther. But no protestant suffering death in England
under queen Marie, or in other places, did in any diverse sort endure the
pain, then according unto the proper tenor of spirit in a sect master,
Therefore such sufferances, according to prudent esteem, were rather animosiries
then moderation, expressions of pride, then fruits of humility. For not only
did they by a private judgment deduce out of Scriptures false and heretical
senses, contrary to the decree and doctrine of the visible church in general
counsels, but also in their confidence they did not rely on the authority of
the first inuentors, as of Luther, and Caluim, whom they thought, being but
men, might as well be subject to error, as the pastors of the Roman church,
every one of them according to the form of sectmaisters and Archeheretickes,
having. recourse, as to pillar and anchor, alone unto their own particular
spirits, not doubting with the Donatistes to style the catholic church spread
over the face of the earth, an (...), and an humane invention, Aug De Ge^^^ cum
Eme^^^ lib (...) Ga^^. ca. 33. 36.
as of the Donatistes reports S. Augustine. Which thing being odious, and in
any good society intolerable, no wisdom of a consideratiue person, may
esteem their embraced or desired deaths, to be martirdomes, or certain signs
of any supernatural illumination in them. wherefore deservedly was their proud
folly punished by the fire, it being a thing most absurd, that every Jack
Daue, or Ioane pie, in a common wealth, should contradict the general sense of
faith and relligion in the same. And in particular, seeing that the
protestantish heresy, is not only in oposition against truth, but is also a
strong bias declining to sensuality, to rebellion; to which the vulgaritie of
people are very prone, and so consequently a bane to civility, the fruit and
effect of severe discipline, of virtue, lest that such a flatteringe sect, like
a Cancer creeping a long, should disturb peace and unity, tender unto men's
hands and mouths the Babilonian strumpetes cup, replinished with sweet
liquor of unclean pleasure, by death it is most justly to be chastised, and
extinguished, if not otherwise amended. Right well did S. Augustine prove, that
the Dona^istes did not suffer for justice sake, but but rather in regard of
their impiouse wickedness. and therefore when the vaunted of their righterouse
cause, S. Augustine thus reproved them: you have great matters, the which you
may brag of, as of justices: to wit the division of Christ, the euacuation of
Christ his Aug l ^. cont. Gaudent. c. 35.
sacraments, the forsaking of Christian peace, cr^mitations against the Spoues
of Christ, the denial of the promises of Christ. All which parts of
Donatisticall justice agrefullie and completly Protestantish justice.
to broyling protestants, who have hereticallie Divided Christ into sondrie
factions, who have abandonded the peace of the universal church, waging
wariagainst her: who have empeached the number and efficacy of sacraments,
who have Disquictted all Christian repose, who have persequuted the members of
Christ, who have accused the spoucs of Christ as an adulteres, as an idolatres,
as an humane invention, as a slave to Antichrist: who have frustrated divine
promises concerning the extent, the infallibility, the continuance of the
Church, with they Donatistes reclaming all to the corner congregations of
themselves: and so enduring death for heresy, are no honester men, then they,
or better martirs then they. Doubtless it must needs seem a fault very
punishable, when one private person, to the empeachement of the gospel, and
destruction of many, shall dare to maintain a private opinion against the whole
Church. S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 10. ar. 6. The malice of haeresie. Si passa es o
pars Caluini corporalem afflictionem a^ Ecclesia Catholica, a Sara passa es
Agat: redi ad (...). Aug. Tract. ^^. in Joan. cap ^. Aug l 2^. cor ^ Gaudent.
c. 12.
Which malice of an heretic considering the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas,
affirms, that it does pass in odious quality that which is to be found in
an obstinate Pagan, or an Apostata. For although an heretic does not so far
depart from divine truth, believing some mysteries of the Christian faith, as
does an Apostata, or an Ethnic renouncing all, yet his personal disposition
is worse, more hatefulll, and more wilfully culpable, because he admitting
some points of faith, by which, he might be reclamed, as scriptures, and
certain definitions of the church, in that after he refuses thereby to be
reformed, as his conversion also in that respect ought to be easier, then that
of the Ethinck, acknowledging no grounds of Christianity, out of which he
might be refuted, thereupon the heretics obstinacy and wilful pride are more
detestable and condinglie liable ^o sharper correction. Wherefore concludes S.
Thomas: simply speaking, the insidelitie of heretics is vvorste of all.
Therefore unto protestants enduring death in catholic places may be fitly
applied the saying of S. Augustine: Your persequnter loves you, and your oven
surie does persequnte you he desires your light, this eggeth you The
proprieties of Catholic martirs signified by the tipes of grace, a ^oue,
nerytongues, and mustard seed. Ergo ne Spiritu sanctificati dolum habeant, in
columba demo^strat^ est^ ne simph^^tas frigida ^emaneat, in igne demo^stratu^
est. Aug. Tract. 6. in Joan cap. ^. By the Dove is signified a Charitable
unity, by fiery tongues a courageous vi(...).
to destruction.

12. But on the other side appear not in our martires any remonstance or token
of any mositie, of pride, or va^ne glory, but rather in them shine out
contrary virtues, as humilit^e, charity, contempt of worldly praise and
estimation. In which regard, no show of a spirit incident and proper to a sect
master was veuable in them, to any discret consideration: for in the cause,
for which they suffered, they did not pretend any thing as their own
prerogative by muention, election or choice, but were most willing to suffer
for such verities, which from auctority of others they had dutifullie received:
unto which they professed their humble obeisance and subjection. So then their
persons valued, as in number many, in quality mild, intelligent, well
lettered, their spirits nothing savoring of private conceit, of rebellion, or
obstinacy against great aucto^it^: after this their doctrine scanned, as
teaching obedience, mortification, charity, and in sum all other vetues,
their fufferances will amount to the confection of an argument, to prove the
verity of the catholic faith, most and unanswerable.

Seeing that our Christian hope is a firm expectation of supernatural
beneuclences, purchased for us by our Savior Christ God and Man, herupon it
follovveth, that no sort of men alienated from out Catholic Church, has so
certain a repose in the mercy of Almighty God, as we. which assurance, and
establishement, by the Protestant, to that purpose addressed by Antichrist, is
in sundry respects weakened and diminished.

CHAPTER. VIII.
AS the sacred and most magnificent benefit of the holy Incarnation gives unto
beleuers Christian hope in Almighty God.
singular and great motives of arde^t charity toward almighty God, as in the
third part shall be discussed, so also never in the world to any sort of
people appeared any such strong efficacy of hope and expectation in divine
assistance, as we Christians enjoy, crediting this admirable support, through
the Incarnation of the second person in Trinity our Redemer, Christ Ihesus. If
we consider the quality of almighty God, as our Creator, we shall conceive an
effectual hope thereby of his manifold succourse in all our wantes and
distresses. For he does not, as many unnatural parents do, casting away
from their care and tuition the child borne of their own bowels: but we once
haueing from him our being, and necessary furniture of operation, are
continually by his goods assisted, protected, sustained from decay, and
erected after miscariage, whereupon he compares himself in the old Testament
by the mouths of his prophets, to an Eagle, not only entysing his young ones
to flight, but also flying Deuteronomy. 52.
over them, and by protection of his shelding wing defending them from the
violence of the air or heavens, yea he makes protestation, that if a mother
should be vnregardfull of her own child, or a noble virgin forget the
decentattire of her body, yet that Hierem. 2.
he would not abandon his servants, or be vnminde full of their auailes, and
ornaments. In cogitation whereof we forsake the school of such minute
philosophers, who deemed almighty God immediately only to have created the
heavens, as his own court Philosophers in separation from God.
and mansion place, committing the creation of man, the direction of all his
endeavors, with other things under the moon, to the workmanship of smaller
Gods; or to the moon it self with the Egiptians, as we may understand by
Plutarch, Lactantius and Eusebius. Plutarch. li. 1. de plac^t philos ca 4. de
Isid. and O^^^. Eusebius (...) 11. praepar ca. 15. Lact^^t. ^^ de O^^g enous. ^ 6
C^^l 1. de Natu^. deo^^. He^m^as tom 4. Bid, Sauctae page 155 Zach. ^bid.
Matthew. 11. Joan 1. 1. Cor. 8.
we teiect the commentaries of the Epicures, as of Lucret^us and others, who
adscribe the constitution of world, and consequently the ordinance of humane
actions to the original concourse of certain sinall indivisible mootes,
conglobated in one mass and bulcke of this visible sabrick of things: as is
recounted by Hermias, and Zacharias Bishop of Malta. And therefore we have
recourse in hope to our beginning, not to Angels, not to mootes, not to
elements, but immediatl^e to almighty God: saying with our Savior. I
con^esse unto thee, o^ father, lord of heaven and earth. And with the Apostle:
All things are made by him, There is one father, from whom all things, and
we unto him. And as we behold this sovereign God our first auctor, so make we
his immedite gracious help matter of our hope and consolation* not confining
our expectations herin in the sole virtue of any creature. Also that our
confidence in almighty God may be more assured, we acknowledging in him power
of our creation, not necding any precedent matter, as artificers do to support
their works (vnworthly so conceuing of God Seneta) So also we behold him in
his goodness and bounty infinite, Senc^. Epi. 6^.
without circumscription of measure: and consequently our trust in him is mors
firm, whose merciful influence streameth our naturally from the ocean of his
infinity. Nether can it be trauersed or dammed up by any obstacle or
encombrance what someuer. We reprove Aristotle his opinion of divine
providence, as not sufficiently theological, who as write Minu^. Felix and S.
Cirill, thinked almighty God to work by necessity Minut Foelix in octa
Ci^ll. catech. 8.
of his nature, and thereupon haueing once created the world, to have left the
directorie of man's actions, and all our hopes in the bouels and concatenations
of natural causes: as if our hope were to expect nothing from God, which is
not alreddy decreed in nature, and enfolded in the womb of her enclosures. For
we believe our Sauioar Christ saying, that both he, and his father, work even
now: and that on them is to be cast Johan. 5.
the whole prospecte of our hopeful expectation. Notwithstanding foam passages
we have in Aristotle, which insinuat that almighty God does immediately by
freedom of his own choice order humane affairs: as when into bodies, disposed
by generation, he Arist l. Magn. Moral. c. 7. and ^. l. 10. Ethio.
inserteth reasonable souls: when by certain excited cogitations men are by
him provoked to actions, whose successes make them fortunate. Likewise we
reject such restraint of help from almighty God, the which bordereth course
thereof with the magnitude of humane affairs: as if others smaller moment were
by him abandoned, The Cieer^ l. 1. de ^at. deorum.
Gods, says C^ceto, tare for great things, but neeglect smaller matters,
VVheres we are taught to believe, that the flight of the lest bird in the air,
yea the falling of a leaf from a tree, or a hair from the head of a man never
so co^temptible not to happen without his immediate Luc. 12. Math. 5. Act. 17.
Nature app^^nted and altered (...) Almighty God in his proui d^cetovva^* des
man. Aug l. 1. de Great. and ^^rbit. ca. 20. Psa (...) 10. de legibus. Theod.
lib. de provident. Cie. l. 2. de not. Deor Plut. l. desapt^^st ^^ Sense. l. 2.
Not. quest. Pausan in phocid. Senec li. 3. de Benesici^s. ca. 7. lib 2 Not. q.
37 Eus l. 6. praep. cap ^ Aug. li. 5. Ciu. cap. 8. Ovid. Metamorph. 15. Placit
peneg^vic. ad The* odos. Pausanias in Eliaca.
providence and disposition. And herin we comfort our selves in that as it were
we being but emmats in his sight, yet are regarded so by his never sleping eye,
protected by his puissant, and ever extended arm: and herupon with a dutiful
admiration, we as creatures under the couerture of his wings and ^^stled in
his goodness, cry out unto him: What is man that thou have made thy selse
known unto him, or the son of man, that thou do visit him! Even unto
this divine reliance of Christians hope in all affairs, never so small,
arrived the Philosophy of Plato, as reports Theodoretus. Nether let us so
think God to b^a vvor^eman, in^erior to those of mortal condition, who do
exactly accomplish such works as be convenient ^or their uses, be they great
or little: and yet to repute that almighty God, although most wise, and of
ability and will to care for all, with more case to provide for matters of
great reckoning, then he can forthinges of smaller account: as if we were to
think him slothful and resty by reason ^o^ labor, seeking for repose, and by
ease to restore his strength Whereupon the Epicures possessed with conceit of
almighty God his neglect of our euentes, appearing to him of minute moment and
consideration, did never, as record, Cicero and Plutarch in good earnest by
prayer and relligion make recourse unto his goodness, but only in outward show
of hipocrisy seemed so to do, to avoid the evil will of the popularitie, But
iubiter, as says Seneca, May vve^^ be called the best, and greatest, the
thu^^e^er also, and the stauner: not for that, as^ stor^es report, after
religi^us voues of the Roma^es, he made their flying arm to stay, but rather
he is termed the stanner, because all th^nges stand by his beneficence.
Whereupon as witnesses Pausanias, subiter was painted with three eyes, for
that his providence rained in heaven, on earth, and in the water. And al^hough
Seneca does not absolutely deny divine providence over our aff^ires, yet in
this is he blame worthy, that he will not have it an immediate cause of all
humane euentes, but only to work them by satalitie of natural causes
interposed and combined together by it self, and to no farther effect, then
may from thence have issue and origin: as of the Stoickes in general auouche
Eusebius, and S. Augustine.

Cernis hic volumine vasto
Ex are, and sol^do rerum tabularia ferro?
In might^e volume of rast extent digested be,
Engra^^ in brass, and solid non, that time shall see.
And to signify the unchangeable and wearing force of fate, they painted it
out, as tells us Pausanias in similitude of a fury, haueing teeth as
dreedfull as any cruel beast, and long nails at the fingars ends. But
excellent this respect is the conceit of S. Ambrose, who compares almighty
God in his care over all things great and small, Amb. l. 1. offic^orum. c. 14.
de Apoll. Dau^d. ca. 2.
unto the son, which as it brings forth as well the weed, as the flouer,
the shrub, as the Ceder, so does it by graciouse influence norish and foster
them continually and immediately.

2. So then as we regard almighty God, most sweet and flouing in goodness
toward Christ^ hope crected to God artired with our nature.
us, considered even in his own proper nature and quality, so likewise looking
upon him by faith, inue^ed with our mortality, we behold him yet as more near
aproching unto us, more familiar with us, more indulgent, careful, and
bountiful toward us: so that if there be any bitterness of his justice, the
which before we might apprehend irksome, now we may behold it to be with the
orange peele steeped and cand^ed in the liquor and sugar of our substance, and
blood of the virgin Marie, made unto us altogether comfortable and delicious:
the stately title of the lord of hosts exchanged into the name of the son of
man, of Jesus, of our brother, our friend, our lamb, our Nazareth, and
sacrifice, Of what comfortable news was Evangelist S. Marie. Magdalene
takeinge this in charge from our Savior his mouth, after his glorious
resurection: Go unto my brethren, and tell them, I ascend unto my father, and
your father my God, and your Joan. 20. Bed. Hom. in vigil Paschat.
God! Upon which place thus commenteth venerable Beede: O vvonderfull piety of
our Savior, o strange benigni^e, whom before his pasion his custom was to
call disciples, and sometimes servants, after his resurrection he calls
brethren, that he might ^hovve himself to be of the same humanity resumed,
of which he was before, that he might erect them to merit and hope in his
flesh the croune of immortalit^e, which now ^e had purchased for them! Also
our Savior signifying a certain commerce and commune interest in almighty
God betwixt himself and us through his person and desert, he added that he
departed to his father, and our father, his God, and our God. O blessed and
fortunat combination, as it were of fellowship and consanguinitie betwixt us and
the son of God: thereby being made the eternal father our father, and his
father, our God, and his God: so that by what power and worth the son of God
is of force with his father, by what efficacy his precious merits are
auailable for himself, by the same w^ightes of dignity, by the same strength
of ability, he is also comfortable and beneficial unto us! The holy Apostle
S. Paul oftentimes in cultateth this our hopeful encouragement to live and
strive in God his service against all tempests of temptation, as in that we
are the very house of Christ, in which he dwells, and so better to be
pouided for then were the (...)
Israelites, under patronage and conduct of Moses, Christ being God and lord
of his household. Moses only being a faithful servant therein: for we are
made participantes of Christ. Haueing therefore an high Bishop, who has
penetrated the heavens, ^e^us the son of God, let us hold our Consesion: for
we have not a Bishop, that cannot have compassion of our infirmities, being
tempted in all respects by similitude without sin, Let us therefore with
confidence go unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace in oportune help. By his holy example of life we see before our eyes all
pathwayes of virtue beaten and traced for our instruction: in which passages we
behold sondrie erected trophies and notorious monuments ^rected against pride,
concupiscence, disobedience: all difficulties ^^e. 1. Aug. Epi. 5 and 42. Hope
made easy by the Gospel.
of mountains, of rought and narrow ways, all valleise of drouping despair
in the journey toward heaven are leueilled by his own hands Neither does he
help us as Moses stony tables did the Ieuese, to acertaine us only what is
to be done, leaving us after to our own weakness, to the tribulation of our
own fears, serving God under that hard, earthly, and rigid discipline of the
law, but in our Savior as we behold engraued lively figures of all, and of
every several duty by us to be performed, so do we from him receive force of
grace, that we may be able for love, not for dread, in a sweet disporting
labor accomplish our traua^ll in the observance of divine precepts: not in a
toilsom agoine or werisome languishement perform out task. We behold our
Captain Christ as fiery pillar, giving us guidance in the de^art of this
world, as Exodus ^
well shining to give us direction, is burning to impart unto us a spirit of
fervor and actiuitie. And as our Savior in himself is resplendent in
knowledge, and also ardent in operation, so accordingly did the prophet
Ezechiel behold the similitude of a man, Ezech. 1. Creg. hom. 2. in Ezech.
Philip. 3.
to wit of Christ, blazed forth in those four admirable beasts, that is his
saints, as notes S. Chrisostom: whereby all his servants by his grace in
their lives, in their souls and bodies, resemble his flame of knowledge, and
his heat of godly industry. Wherefore as the rain boe, in which are most
apparent the forms of fire, and water, is a tipe and figure of divine mercy
through our savior Christ, so must our Christian hope resolve to pass by
water of purity, refreshing contencie, and also operative sier and flame of
good action, thereby to ariue to heaven, and attain unto the promices of (...)
^^ quest. Romans quest. 1.
mercy. And so as it were espoused to almighty God, we resemble the old
Romans, who as recounteth Plutarch, in their matrimonial rites touched fire
and water, thereby vouing cleannes of life, and diligence of laudable
conversation.

3 Besides the person and actions of our Redeme^, our hope anchoreth in the
i^mensitie Hop of Chris^^s is grace.
of his infinite merit, so gracious, so amiable, so priceable, such
inforcementes even unto almighty God, that Sampson might sooner break in
piecces the cords, wherewith Dalila tied his arms, then God the father can
refuse his son his petition graced with that valor of desert and work. O
what adama^tes of affection are the merits of Christ, registered by the scarres
of his precious wounds, shining in his virginal body in heaven! O what an
eloquent supplication and plea make theie for mankind still in eye and veue of
his eternal father! where according unto the prophet, ^e (...) 49.
are described and written in the very hands of almighty God. Which thing
considered by the Apostle S. Paul, by way of amplification, he makes this
demand: How has he not given us all things with him? For our Saviors
good deeds were not only (...) ^
Passing many in noumber, his continual diligence and wachfull eye, as is were
of the nightingall, considered, but in that they were endeavors of a person
infinitely holy and dear unto his heavenly father, they were also semblably
infinitely meritoriouse, above all measure commodious for us, beiond all
bounds of sti^t and limitation efficatiouse and auailable unto us: of which
point we shall have in the third part ensuing a fit opportunity more largely
to discourse.

4. This great strength of our assured hope is not only sacred and heavenly,
but also The ciuiliti^ of Christian hope.
passing civil and politic. For as when prince and subjects minds either
vainly floote, having quit them selves of all good and virtuous endeavors, or
droupe in distrus, when they consider their miscarriadge toward almighty
God, are unfit to accomplish in perplexity any brave exploit with hasard of
their lives, so may we deem our Christian hope excellently conu^nient for
service of state, in that it gives us so sweet a repose, so suer a confidence
unto true beleuers. In reagard whereof toils and labors will seem pastime,
accompanied with such an heavenly Zephitus of divine assistance, and
unspeakable comfort: iorneies will be gladly undertaken, wherein the traua^ler
is never to depart from the penthouse of Christ his shadow and protection.
When death occurreth whilst the faithful labor in their countries service,
they shall scorn and ^ocke at his wonted egar force, and demand with the
Apostle O death, vvheare is thy 1. Cor. ^.*
^^inge! What is become of the bitterness thereof, have thou lost the same
dashing it against the rock of my Redemers body, and so to me art no more an
object of dread or hurt* Never any institution, devised by man, or devil, did
any time so pluke up men's spitits, so recollect them, so animate them, as our
Christian reliance. The Turk, besides his own scimiter, regards only over
his head, and round about him, the enclosure of fatalitie, as instrument of
his whole resolution: being at it were a brute beast driuenalong either to the
shambles of a balefull event, or to the garden of his devised good success.
His cogirations in war and peace ariue nto to almighty God his especial
favor and benevolence, not to his sweet disposition of things, but only he
comitteth his purposes at unawares to the empire of natures, course, as it were
to the teeth and nails of a rageing fury: yea not only their expectations
do not ariue to the merciful and pleasant haven of Almighty God his goodness,
but also they so conceive of him, as if he were not good or merciful.
Whereupon one precept of the Alcaron is, in which they are forbidden to pray
unto almighty God that he will convert greuouse Actor. 26. 14.
and great sinners, whose certain damnation by their factes, is already (as
they are resolved) discovered: and that smaller sins are often forgeuen they
affirm, but never greater. What matter from hence is offered of inhumanitie,
of desperation, and retchles deportement?

5. To effect and accomplish at full this barbaritie of distrust in almighty
God, yeldeth Barbarous distrust in a Protestant VVieklef l. 2. T^^al. cap. 9.
Luth. art. 36. Calvin libr. 2. Instit. cap. 1.
his helping hand Antichrist by the vasillage of the protestant. VViclef, an
archepro testant, defines, that every operat^ue creature is by necessity
driven to performen it work. In which point Luther the patriarch of
protesters, approves his doctrine: although condemned in the Counsa^le of
Constance: to whom also accords Calvin, as shall be herafter examined. If men
be thus enfolded, within the bands of necessity, what need we by piety of
relligion, by access of hope, have any recourse unto the goodness of almighty
God* See how Antichrist distracteth men's cogitations and hearts from Christ,
only remarking with the Turk, the unremovable stake of fatalitie, to which
he is tied? what hope the Catholic establishes, relyinge upon Christ, as God
and man, Calvin does diminish and violate, auouchinge, that Christ is not
personally Calvin lib^. 1. lust. c. 13.
God, acknowledging in him a double person, one of the divinity, and an other
of the mediator. Whereupon if our savior be not God by person, but only by
grace, as was of opinion Nestorius, and is at this day the Mahumetan, our hope
ariuing only unto a man, and to a creature, is not to be thought so assured
and firmes, as when it reaches to a God, creator of heaven and earth. From the
person of our Redemer passes Antichrist unto his merit and satisfaction: In
reckoning whereof we have recounted the firmitude of Christian hope. But Luther
yeldeth no thanks for Christ his sufferances on the cross, as man, as to
penalties of small importe: and therefore says, that either he is redeemed by
passion of the divinity, or else that he is yet far from redemption: Luth. in
Conf.
and that Christ needed himself a Redemer Behold likewise the blasphemous
belching cur Calvin, absolutely denying all merit for our hope in him. In good
earnest ^^onfesse, Calu l. 2. Just. cap 17.
that if any do simply and by himself oppose Christ to the judgment of God,
their will be found no place for merit: for that in man cannot be found such
dignity, that may merit with God. Consider, gentle Reader, the author of our
hope enfeobled by Calvin, and we in him The Protestants deny the Redemption of
mankind.
by his blasphemy weakened: first in that according to his doctrine, we are not
redeemed, sithence that no just ransom is disbursed, and so by Christ we are
not to prevail at the tribunal of Gods justice. Then for that our Savior is
but a man, and so can not give us that assurance we desire, the same
inconvenience of distrust is consequent. Yet these Antichristian enemies of
Christ will needs seem to be his only Euangelisters, and geueing him bloes of
disgrace, will cry out hail king of the Ieues: And so far of is Calvin from
affording true redemption unto the passion of Christ, that he avouches no
thing to have been by him effect! thereby, unless thereunto he had adjoined the
horrible pains he sustained in hell, there despaireing, and impaciently
yelling out under the lashe of Satan. What a disgratiouse thing is Christian
hope, when it must search and behold a redemer, nor perfecting the work of our
redemption bleding upon the cross, but despairing, rebelling against his
father, under the tirannie of the devil? what confort, what refreshing breath
is to be expected from such causes, and base accomplishementes? must our hope
diue into hell, before it can mount up unto heaven? Is it not sufficient, that
it regard an humble pacient lamb, sacrificed on the cross, but it must
respect a miserable slave enduring horrible and hellish pains, thereby to take
courage and spirit in the service of almighty God? Assuredly hear Antichrist
in the protestant is no counterfeit angel of light, but a grimed devil,
defiling and auiling our Redemer Christ, and the whole miste^ie of his
Redemption. If at Rome in the papacy appeared any such coulor of blasphemouse
hostility against Christ, then the protestantish wrathful Retorick would
declame against it in words of fire and sword: but to sinother and conceile
their own close conuaied emnitie against Christ, he holds it good, to seat
Antichrist in Rome, diuerting the eyes of the simple thither, from the feats
of his proper fingers at home, and under their own eyes.

6. But what remains now as substantial for Christian hope, when as
Antichrist, by Redemption denied by the Protestant.
the protestant, has once annullated and made void all poise and moment of
man his Redemption of Christ? if as yet be not paid an aquiualent price of
honor, of merit by Christ unto his eternal father, in comparison of Adam his
trespass, and all actual offenses of mankind dishonoring God, how are we
redeemed? well we may be freely pardoned, and adorned with grace by francke
gift, but never properly ransomed: well may bounty forgive the offense,
defraie the charges necessary for our recure, but justice Psa. 84.
shall in this effect have no part, nor shall meet with truth, and mercy, in
the sweet kis of man his reconsiltation. Wherefore in that no creature by
valor of Hebr. 10.
work was able to redeem man kind, sacrifice and relligion thereunto being
deficient, as affirms the Apostle: Thereupon was decreed the Incarnation of
the second person in Trinity, for that no meaner worth of merit thereunto was
requisite* then one infinite, only to be found in a person divine, and in
worthy infinite: which infinite is utterly Amb. in ps. 48.
overthrown by the protestantish adversary of Christ: for if every good deed
of his in his life, was not of infinite price, and so competently valueable for
the worlds redemption, nether can all his sufferances of hellish torments,
especially impatiently and desperately endured, as Calvin blasphemeth, amount
to the expenses of infinite merit: whcih wanting, we are not redeemed, nether
from Christ is our hope with assurance to expecte any graciouse assistance. For
it is an axiom in philosophy, that one thing finite and limited, added unto
another of the same quality, can never in the total mass amount to infinite:
so that if by reason of a restrained and determinat value, Christ his passion
of the Cross, yea or if the meanest action of his life, in regard that it was
of estimate and price finite, could not perform the work of our redemption,
according to rigorouse worth of the thing tendered (now to speak nothing of
justice thereof, as we ordinarily conceive and define the same among men) in
that all such penalties, which Calvin avouches the soul of Christ to have
sustained in hell, were not more prisable, then his passion upon the Cross, as
they cannot implie an infinite of ransom, so of necessity must they be
deficient in the very moment and quality of a deserving redemption. Which
infinity of merit in the works and passions of our savior, as excellently
well teaches Pope Clement the sixth, serves much for our comfort and hopeful
expectation For whilst men do contemplate that in Clement 6. Extrauagant
vnige^^^us.
finite ocean of God his mercy, they cannot harbor any fear, as if frequent
benefits abundantly bestowed in value thereof upon mankind, might diminish or
dry up at last that huge fountain of grace: o^ that any sin may be in
enormitie so outrageous, as if to pardon it, cancel it, and wash it away, were
not superaboundantly sufficient the blood of our Savior Christ. In which
respect whilst the protestant impareth the first cause and motive of our hope,
he does not only thereby subvert all virtue, appartaining to our spiritual
end, but also he cutteth the very sinouse of civil policy: in that, as we
have declared, hope of assistance from heaven, is not only sacred, but also
civil: and in that the want thereof is not only sinful, but also harshe and
barbarouse. Of which sort may be esteemed the philosophy of him, who for that
he neglected all piety toward Almighty God, thought fortune to be fashioned
not by any especial grace of his providence, or our relligion, but rather by
every man his peculiar industry: as if only it depended on our labor, thus
or thus in manners, in anoye, or felicity, to be ordered. Which brutish
conceit diuorceth man his mind and affection from almighty God, ruling and
disposeinge all things according to his best will and pleasure.

The virtue hope, that relieth on the grace of God, purchased for us by the
merittes of our Savior Christ, imports also our cooperation of francke and
free consent. Whereas the Protestanter denying both the vital motion of man
his will, and also the free consent thereof in the works of faith, hope,
and charity, as likewise in the offices of all other virtues, requiring the
especial assistance of God his grace, together with the empairinge of this
heavenly gift, he also does resist and cross the very nature and essential
quality of hope, and confidence in Almihgtie God.

CHAPTER. IX.
THE root and origin of hope settled and couched is below in the humble valley
The use of Hope.
of the acknoledgement of man's own weakness and infirmity: the which by
faith once discovered, as occasioned through the trespass of our first
parents, then the same faith after mountinge up as high as the goodness of God
himself, engendereth in our souls a strong assis^ance in his most gracious
assistance, to the end we may avoid sin, resist temptations, furnish our
selves with such virtues, as are conducent to our eternal salvation. This
ability of faith serves both to free and clear the understanding from the
power of error, as also to fortify the affection, not only enfeobled and
effeminated by a propension to unlawful pleasures, but more over assailed by
the slightes of that subtle feinde the devil, whose Lyonlike extreme malice,
^. Pet 5.
furthered by crafty conuayances, is eager, fearce, and potente to contriue
our fail in good, and in badnes our bane and destruction. Hope therefore is an
operation of man his will, firmly through God his mercy, expecting eternal
beatitude; so that this virtue Theological of Hope does regard the goodness
and bounty of almighty Hope what it is.
God, as the formal part of her object, and the sole means to obtain here
in this life the succourse of grace, and in the other, the reward of
blessedness: into which mercy and goodness in God Hope resolves her self as
end, final motive, prime cause and Aug. Tract. 1. Joan.
first prouokement. For although sondrie things, as our ghostly commodities,
like many lives in the circumference of a general desire, are hoped for, and
in this respect the obiectes of hope be large and spacious, severed into many
branches of particular emolumentes, yet they all meet and are knitt up in
the goodness of God as center, by whose virtue and favorable influence they are
by us to be summarelye atcheiued. The principal wished perfection, aimed at by
hope, and unto which in strength it especially reareth up the soul, is our
beatitude, the guerdone, bliss, remercement and issue of all Christianity* as
speaks the Apostle, an Iuheritance incorruptihle, 1. Pet. 1.
vncontaminate, and not decayable, reserved in heaven. All which members in
this great object of Hope, make it in contraposition and difference with
worldly delights and contentmentes: and declare the same to be of a far more
eminent precious and pearls condition. Then for that man his infirmity is not
fit to arrive so high, or to perform that excellency of behavior, which is
required of us as suitable thereunto, hope reposeth the soul also in the goodness
of God, as beneficial unto us by his inward inspired grace, by his sacred
breath of certain holy inspirations inciting us to virtue, representing before
our eyes the amiable hue thereof, together discovering the ugly shape of
sinful pleasures. So lifting up the drouping forces of the will, ready
otherwise to yield to unlawful sensuality, to grouell on the ground of
earthly carnalitie, notwithstanding wind and stream make strongly to the
contrary, yett we may in God his service maintain our estate of justice, and
fulfill his holy commnundementes. Now our paradise has not in that fountain
of nature, and home bredd water, or the Egiptian Nilus, to fertile the soil
thereof with the diversity of virtues, as gay flowers Genesis ^.
of variety, but rather it being dried up and scorched by these hot raise of
concupiscence, we lift up our eyes to the clouds of God his mystical
benignity, and cry by trust in earnest suit: You heavens bedevve us from
above, and you clouds rain upon us Isa. 45.
the just one: the grace then of justification and remission of sins,
together with final perseverance in good, amiddes so many temptations to the
contrary, are the effects Solin. l. de Situ orbis. c. 55.
of this celestial benefitt. And as the pearl is conceived in the shell of
the cocle, the morning dew distilling from above into the same opened by the
fish to that effect, so is sanctity, and the force of virtue infused into the
soul from the bounty of almighty God. No man can come to me says our
savior, unless my father, that has sent me, Joan. 6.
dravv him. A sweet and potente drawght, when grace allures in persuasion
without deceipte, and fortifieth in operation without constraint. For to
obtain that goal of happiness, Neither it is, as speaks the Apostle of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, hut of God having mercy. To will
everlasting life, or to race out the endeavor for the Romans 9.
same, is in vain, unless from the mercy of God descend into the soul the
ability of Conc. A^ro^. Can. 4. Hier epist. 66.
his holy grace. And although we will and run in the performance of virtue,
yet as says S. Hierome That which is mine therein without the help of God
should not be mine. Two kinds of graces, as has been intimated, by hope do
we expect from God: the Grace (...) all and actual. 2 Pet. 1.
one a grace, called Habitual or iustificatorie, infused into the soul by the
holy ghost making us void of crime, children of almighty God, and consortes
with Christ in participation as it were of one heavenly nature: the other is
actual or operative, as a 2. Pet. 1.
vocation inspired by God enticinge the will to keep his commandments, to
resist temptations, and strengthening the same to so happy a purpose of good
action and behavior. The effects of which active and mouinge grace, S.
Augustine excellently The effects of actual grace. August l. 2. de peccat.
merit, cap. 17. Ignorance and infirmity two causes of sin. Matthew. 25. Job.
4.
well does thus decipher: That it may be made known unto us, of which before
we were ignorant: and that delightful, which before did not please us, it
is the grace of God, that helps the vvilles of men. The grace then of God,
first does illuminate the vnterstandinge freeing it from the miste of passion
or error, and so represents vuto us by a secret persuasion, and splendor o^
lamp in the earthen vessels of our bodies, the beauty of virtue, and of that
action, which is conformable to her commandrie: also tells us in a
whisperinge blaste of secrecy, how base and vile, how dammadgeable and
pernicious it is to pursue our sinful lusts, with revolt from God; and that
more effectually and expressly then can any force of natural wit, or depth of
the most profound Philosophy perform: whereby the affection so informed,
baited by reasons lure and directorie, leuelled by her, becomes propense, well
affected to obey her admonition. Nether is our aid so from grace, as notes S
Augustine As if we would not, or did no thing, but because Aug. libr ^. de
great. Christ. ^. 25. Genesis 30. Aug ep. 105.
without his help we net^er will, or ^oe any good. Then for that the
choice of virtue is ircksome to sense, Benoni a child of regreet, when desires
thereof are a floate, and stirred up in heat of concupiscence, and to the
reasonable part thereby restrained also in chains of an hurtful socieitie,
prove to grant flattering sense her wanton request then does God crush as it
were his honey comb of grace, sweetneth and seasoneth the Aug. l. de Great.
Christ. cap. 13.
conceit of virtue with a delicious juice of contentment: and so roses amiddest
the thorns become more amiable; in the moritifed catcase of a lionis found
with puissance, the liquor of honey, virtue in agoine seems more pleasant, and
Jacob more Iudic. 16. Gen 27.
odoriferous in rude skins, then sensual taste is with all the delicacies of
Cipris, the Colden shore of Tagus, or glitteringe shows of princely courts.
When therefore Psalm. 18. Ps 118 Psa. 26. Gregor. l ^ i^ Job. cap. 42.
God by his grace brings the touch of true knowledge into the mind, and
breaths upon it that sweet and mild zephirus or blaste of consolation, then
is man furnished with actual grace to run gladfully in the way of God his
commandments, like unto the son, which raceth out as a giante, to vanquish
satan, the world and all carnalitie. Our lord is my illumination, and my
health. These too effects of Christian grace hoped for, have been deciphered
as by liuele embleames by those representations, Resembla^ces of graces. Act.
2. Aug. Tract. 6. in Joan. cap. 2. Ibi simplicitas, hic ^eruo^ ostenditur.
Columba sinc fell saeuit. 5.
which were then expressed, when the church received first the holy Ghost. For
in the fiery tongues, then appearing, we contemplate as in certain pictures,
the light of that clement, as sign of a graciouse illumination: in the heat
thereof, and in the shape of a tongue, we behold the couragiouse active spirit
of the same: the will professing that in action, which the understanding before
conceived by illustraction, as notes S. Augustine, which violency also of
work was declared by the forcible resounding blast of wind, at that time by
the faithful perceived. In like sort S. Ihon in his divine Revelations
beheld the visadge of almighty God, the which in holy scriptures sainctly
person^ so much desired, to be enlightened and turned toward them, as a Apoc
1.
perfect testimony of his graciouse providence, shining as the sun, and
from his mouth to proceeded a noice as of maine streams and fluddes; the on
betowkening his Psalm 66. ^^^.
favorable light blasing in our vndersta^nd^nges, the other his strong
efficacy pouerfull in our wills and affections.

3 Besides which effects of divine grace in our souls, seems remarckable
unto me The effect of grace in our Bodies.
also the lovely composition, which is wrought thereby even in our bodies: and
this does floe from it, as cause, and depends altogether in the quality
and degree thereof. For as our illuminations of grace in the mind, and forces
of endeavor in the will, wholly tend unto virtue, so does virtue once seated
in the soul imparte her comely and amiable ^aies and graces unto the body.
imitat^ng as it were that supreme grace of glory, which once entertained in
the souls of the blessed, stremeth forth by admirable beams to their bodies.
In sign whereof, when out savior was transfigured on 5 Thom 1. 2. q 4. 2 7.
mount Tabor, his divine visage did not only shine as the sun, but his
garments passed in whitenes nature it self in the fairest snoe, and art in
the depest or cunningest die that could be found. Contrary wies pagans when
they receive illuminations from their Gods, or devils, because such
phrencies apertaine not to virtue, but vice, they are in their bodies and
countenances thereby made most horrible and ghastly: and they do thereby come
near to the very dreadful resemblances of the wicked spirits themselves: as
we see daily in wirches, Nigromancers, obsessed and possessed persons. I have
read of the East and west Indian people, and also have understood as much
from them, who have lived with them, that in time of their phanatichall
inspirations and diuinations they appear most horrible to behold, what by
yelling out, what by figure of their countenances. Also this ugly deformite
is declared by the pictures they have of their geniall Gods made of Bombast, or
cotton, in shape hellish and most ugly to behold. And of this sort of oulde
time were the Bachanalians they Mantes, Ouandus de Nan^gat Ind^^ Boterus
Gosmograp. par. 4.
they Scibills, and generally all southsayers, and prefects of oracular idols,
as we may understand from ancient poets, and historia graphers. Wherefore the
opposite decency of body in Christians proceeding from the illustration of the
holy Ghost, is a great argument with me of truth in our faith and relligion:
and it seems unto me a thing very considerable, that all nations for their
instructions, besides their one personal light of understanding, have sought
for information from some spiritual intelligences

4. Yett notwithstanding a Christian man does not so rely on grace by hope, as
if The will of man concurteth with grace.
th^s grace in his judgment should only be active cause of that good behavior
in him, which God expects; or does imagine, that his soul is nothing cls but
as it were a mere table, a subject, or matter passiuely to receive the externe
impression from God; but hops rather for that calling and enforming grace,
that sweetning and forcing perswation, to the which he himself is after to
yield consent, to cooperate and work with the same vitally and effectually;
as namely together with that active grace to Non volentis neque curren^^s sed
miser^tis est Dei: non quia nullus est hominis atque volunta^is cursus, sed
q^i^ nihil potest, nisi ^lle misere^tur. Aug. Ep. 106. 2. Tim. 4.
believe in God, to hope in him, to love him, to be chaste, to obey him and
nature^ and so expects salvation with this dependencie, if he do work and
endea^our to answer God his grace, and industriously bring forth the acts of
a good life together with that grace of heavenly benefit. Which thing is
most evident by scriptures, affirming men to believe, to hope, to love, to
observe the commandments, to chastise their bodies, to do penance, and the
l^ke; which could not be verified if that man did nothing, or did not move his
will by consent and cooperation with the grace of God: no more then it may by
said, that the paper writes, the stone builds, or the wood carueth; in that
these only passiuely behave themselves after a dead sort, without any motion,
under the hand of the artificer. I have striuen says S. Paul a good
comba^te, I have consummated my course: I have kept my faith: Did not S, Paul
then work and sweat in the harvest of our Lord, did he not traficke for
lukar of souls in the ocean of the world? then did he behave himself
actiuely, not alone by sole nature, but conioyntly with grace. Charity says
S. Augustine o^ him, that vvorcketh well. Aug. in Psalm. 31. l. 1. de Great.
Christ^e 25. The protestant denies all act^ors of virtue in m^ ^ Joan. 5.
Calu^n. l 2. Inst cap. 2. Sect 6 and 9. and 11. Luther Tom. 1 in Genesis fol 27.
306.
giue^h him a hope of a good (...): so then the conscience in quietness must
hope for salvation respectively, if m^n endeavor well by charity, which
keeps the law. But the Protestanter frames unto himself an hope in the
grace of God, and rather indeed in no grace at all; as if man did not vitally
move or work by consent with that grace, but as if the impressed grace
contrived all, the soul in the mean space passiuely receiving what grace
shall imprint or imparte. If it were said in scriptures, affirms Calvin,
that God did help our in^^^mitie, no small part then should be attributed
unto us: but when it is said, that grace does ma^^ a good will, thereupon
vvhatsoeu^r good is therein, it is altogether without us: so that our
infirmit^e, being not assisted b^ grace, does not efficiently work with that
grace: rather all proceeds from the erterne aid and efficacy of grace it
self. He adds: Therefore S. Augustine does vvorth^lie as vv^ll de^^de those,
that do assnme unto them ^elues aliquas volend^ parts, any function of
vvilling, as he does reprehend those, that (...) that which is an (...) of
fr^e ele^tion in God, to begiuen indifferently unto all. An English minster
thus defines to the same effect: The depra^ation VVi^tak l. e. de peccat.
orig. cap 3.
of nature we say to be so great, that in our very conversion to God, which
is by grace eff^cted, our free will has no force to help this conversion,
but rather in this affair, pror^us passive no^ haheamns, we behave our selves
merely passiuely. Au other Puritan reprehendeth the Catholic: eading that
place of S. Paul, Gratia (...), the grace of God with me, assuming Rainold.
Apoll These. 5. Sect 32. 1. Cor. 15.
nothing to himself: Not I, but the grace of God: by their gloss they
challenge part to them selves, and say^ontrarin^se, I and the grace of God: so
then by this reckoning, it was not the minister that did work with God his
grace in says, in hope, and charity, but all was done by grace, he not
mouinge, lying under the same as a mass or lump of lead. Certes this
resolution of the Protestanter is unnatural, it is monstrous, prodigious,
impious, against the dignity of man's nature, against the ornament of virtue,
against Hieron lib. 2. cont Ionin. Aug l. de Great. and l Arb t. c. 2. Genesis 2.
the very substance of grace, and against the meritt and passion of Christ our
Savior. It bears indeed a fair show of hypocrisy, with the alluring
serpent b^oaching sin and iniquity: as when the Protestant says, that he
surrendereth all good in himself to God, as to the sole and total cause
thereof, renounceth and disclaimeth in himself any concourse, or cooperation
with the grace of God, as the Romans teach and believe. The worthy quality of
humane nature does therein notoriously appear, that we are not subject to God
his providence, as things without sense or life, externally only to be moved
to their ends and perfections by others designementes, but rather we being
enabled with vital faculties of soul, as with understanding, and will, by
operations of them we ought to give correspondence to God his prescript and
providence, and also atcheiue thereby ^uch ornaments of good endeauours, as
reason and virtue do require: and we hope, that God his favorable grace will
excite and direct these faculties of nature in ^s, as pencilles to draw out
that amiable counterfaite of honesty, and meet behavior, salvation depending
upon their worckes, and comportmentes. Basii. de v^^ virginitat. page 6^0.
Nature (...). graced ^y the Protestanter.
Whereas the Protestanter debaseth and dishonoreth this preeminence of nature
in us, lookinge for his famed senseless virtues of faith, of hope, of
charity, of repentance, of temperance, of chastity, which indeed are none of
his, nor effected by his motion, but merely imprinted in him by a satalitie and
force of outeward grace. How then is a man virtuous in act, commendable or
endowed with those pea^les of honesty, if he work not, if he strive not, if
he fight not, but only surrender as it were a piece of paper, sometimes to the
holy ghost, at other seasons to satan, to have therein purrated what forms and
shapes shall please such actors? And for a man to hope for salvation only by
means of grace, he not stirring or acting any thing, is no humane resolution,
but a misprision of himself, as of some block, some rude paste, to be
fash^oned, as shall please an other to devise and the pasterer to (...). No
Protestanter, grace does not (...), decreed in her secret constitution, but
perfecteth it rather, and enhaunc^^^ ^^ to a higher (...) of worthiness: and
therefore (...) cooperate with grace by understanding, and will, as actu^lly
believing, louinge God, and our neighbor, keeping the commandments, and
Virtue injured by the protestanter.
breaking fa^hans temptations. What is virtue by the account of the
Protestanter, as faith, hope, charity, religion, (...) dead, and engraven
qualities into the soul by grace, as is the painted form appearinge in a
tabl^ (...) any lovely effects of man's own soul. If the color and pri^e
of virtue be no better, who may have any reason So luther Tom 2 latin. page 62.
Mat^ 13.
to be enamou^ed with it, an^ for it once found by (...) to sell all other
worldly commodities to purchase the same, as being that (...) in the gospel
mentioned by our Savior? D^ubtless^ (...) in the (...) the blow of his
heresy to the disgrace of virtue, and to (...) men's desi^es, that in her
l^ue they be not p^odigall o^ (...) whereas we Cathol^k^s ma^^ke out virtue not
as a quality (...) powered into the ^o ^e, and ^ffecting it as pla^ster does
the wall, but as a vital operation of the same, a (...) endeauou^, a (...),
and in sum the e^peciall office of a man. The Protestante^s blow given
against virtue a (...) Derogation from Christ's me^^tt by the protestante.
even by sacr^ledge and blasphemy to empe^ch and depresse the very grace of
Christ O how contrary are the deeds of Antichrist to his preten^es! what good
in us by actual grace, if here by no virtue be produced, if (...) thereof men
actually do not believe, do not hope, love God, or per^orme in their
conversion the duties of Faith is a work of God in us Johan 6. Augustine Tract.
2^ and 26 in Johan c 6. Credcie non potest n^si vo^^ns De (...). (...) 6.
Council Au^os 2 c ^ T^^dent. Sess. 6 c. 6. Phi^ 2.
other virtues? And i^ a man do not cooperate with God his grace, but in all
effects thereof behave himsel^e only passiuely, how is he w^^^out his proper
action truly and indeed virtuous; or how is the verteu his, or where is
virtue, being no humane work of understanding, or w^ll? Is grace no more
bene^^ciall unto us the^ soc; have we thereby no true virtue, no pra^sable
endeavor? Are all our virtues now become mere impressions of grace, and no
actions of men? O (...) of the Protestanter, so utter an enemy to grace! But
how can in the mean season the cross of Christ, and his sacred blood, pass
without con^umel^e from the barbarous and ungodly opinion of the Protestanter?
Is it not a principal thing, purcha^ed by our sauiou^s death, that we men he
virtuous, that we believe in God, hope in his goodness, love the same, observe
the commandments? all which benefits afforded us by Christ, are cashed and
annullate, if there be no virtue in us of good deserte, no seemly deportement
of moral, or Theological decency: as there is not, if man do not cooperate
with grace, and work his oune salvation, as counsaileth the Apostle. But
whitherto aims this foolish fancy of the Protestanter, under coulor of
magnifyinge the grace of God, but to his common center of vice, of libe^tie in
pleasure, and contempt of all virtue? For if man do not work with God his
grace, why should he be continually in expedition to keep the
cammaundementes, to resi ^^ temptations, to believe, to hope, to love, seeing
that these things appertain only to God to imp^^nte or (...) in the soul?
They which, if in the same soul be deficiente, and not to be sound, the want
comes only from God, and not from man's idleness in not endea^ouring. What
care is the table to take under the pencill, what exquisite shape therein is to
be expressed by the (...): or the common lump of clay under the fingers of the
potter, ^^ regard of the diversity of vessels thereof to be compounded: seeing
that to be good, to be virtuous, to believe, to hope, to love, to keep the
command (...), are the ^^le impressions of God, and man only their passive
subject? who whither he be a sleep or awake, droncke, or sober, it smally
imports; in that it is all one to God his grace, if the soul only be a
subject passive to receive, and no vital agent to perform. O bestialitie, an^
^^^thsome (...), the final issue of this base heresy in the Protestanter! A
(...) this opinion, and indeed transformed by the witch Circes and (...) of
(...) a beast, may speak thus unto God: To thee O lord, my (...) is always
(...): subject, and matter to entertain what shall please thee to Calum. lib.
2. Inst c. 2 Sect. 9 and 6.
(...) not me therefore to labor, but rather as wills Calvin, to (...)
saboth of ce^^at^on from all my worckes: thou only art totallie to cause in
(...) ^onuersion (...) thee, the acts of faith, of hope and charity: no bad
behavior of (...) give resistance to ^^y good impressions, in that thou do
sometimes (...) the most greu^^us ^^nner: and as for good worckes, thou only
art the efficient (...) o^ (...) and (...) it please thee to work them in
me, I shall admit them, if not the (...) employed in my negligence. Yet this
vile sense protestantish (...) he^, that is the very blemish and shame of the
same providence of All(...) (...) should God condemn men eternally to
everlasting fire for want (...) and charity, seeing these virtues are only his
worckes, and the defe(...) (...) the wicked truly proceed from him, and are
not procured by the souls (...), barely pa^^iue (...), and matter of such
qualities? Foul heresy.

5 (...) Roman Ca^h^like d^^h continually seek to magnify the grace of God
The benefi^^ of free will and consent though grace. without free will the
laws of God should be unprofitable. Aug. lib De Great and lib. at. bit cap. 2.
Aug quest. 1. ad H^ at. ^^chirid. c 63. Gregor. Hom^^. 9 in Esech^^l.
(...) us, and con^equently to extol ^he passion of our savior Christ; in
that (...) other seem ^he more illustrious and the greater, by how much (...)
effects of better marcke and esteem. For how is the conning of (...) owen,
but by his work: and the affection of a benefactour declared, but by h^s
(...) benefit^? whereupon we hope for a grace at God his hands, which no^
only (...) and effectiuely to be virtuous, as to believe, to hope, lou^ God,
and (...) commandments, but also to perform them after the fa(...) of a
(...), and (...) beast, as ^ther by force, constrainte, or necessity: but
rather (...) behavior in our employmentes, so cooperating with God (...)
grace, as (...) ^hoose to do otherwise, and to perform the opposite vice, or
(...) from con^^nte to good. For example, if we believe in the misteri^s ^^
Christ (...), yet we so believe, as either we may yield to infidelity, or
refuse in this moment to exercise the act of belief If we in charity toward
God obey his commandments, and beat back the impetuous temptations to
evil, we so demean our selves in virtue as we may consent to the contrary
vice, or neglecte to put in (...) these good ^^^eauours. Which manner of
worcking by free consent, and D. Thom 1. 2: q 1. a^t. 1.
with (...) ^od (...) contrariety, as to consent, and not to consent, is
called humane: as (...) to man his nature, being a reasonable creature, and
fit not only to perfect an action by v^^all motion, as brute beasts do, but
also by liberty and ind^^feren ^^ to adue^se p^rtes of contradiction: as to
do this or that, to accept or refuse, to (...) o^ (...), to l^^e or to hate.
For in deed th^s quality of actions ^s the proper ground of virtue, of ^ll
(...) in man's behavior, and of laud^ble carri^dge in his conversation:
^herfor^ we see, that the endeauours of brute beasts, or of frantic Greg.
Nissen. lib. de creat. hom. cap. 7. Iren. l 4 c. 9. Greg Na^ o^at de Christ.
Nat^u. Epipha^. l. t. he^e^ 5 Free will is not Peliagianisu^e.
persons, are not praise o^ price worthy, as neither the actions of our
^enses, in seeing, smelling or hearing, because they want liberty and
freedom, which is found in the will: othe^wise wh^t note of e^^eeme may th^se
ga^e in any attempt or choice, which can do no otherwise, which of necessity
are carried away to this or that by consent? Whereupon S Gregory N^^en
affirms, that man by this freedom of will is crea^ed to the sim^^^^ude ^f
Alm^^h^^e God: quod ab omn^ ne^^s^itat^ libe^^ si^us: in that we be free from
(...). S. Epiphan: (...) it is mani^^st to all and ^eare, and not to he doubted
o^, that (...) will (...) by himself: ^^ you will, and if you will not.

6. Nevertheless ^o avoid the calumnition of the protestante, that seeks with
the common people to empeach this our doctrine about free will, as if it were
heretical, and according to the error o^ Pelagius. It is to be laid down, as
a refuation of their ignorante malice, in what sense P^lagius held an opinion
of man his freewill, and why Hieron. dial. cont. Pelag.
he was by the church condemned. Truly it was not his heresy, that he
granted free will, for that the Manichies, denounced heretics, before denied
the same, as affirms S. Hierom: but it consisted in this, that he to the
empairing of God his especial grace, thought the merittes of Christ, to much
vaunted of the force and strength of free will, Augustine l. 1. de Great Christi
c. 2. and D. Pelagius reduced all grace to possibility ^^e^^geuen, unto
nature, to action, and being, effected by nature. Epist ^0^ 107 Council T^d.
Sess. 6.
as not in his conceit any thing weakened by original transgression;
whereupon to believe aright, to hope assuredly, to love God entirely, to
observe his commandments dutifully, to vanquish temptations manfully, to
arrive to salvation happily, he acknowledged no necessity of inward grace,
besides the natural forces of ^ree will, ad^oynd to an external favor of
God, when the gospel is preached, by miracles and reasons approude: when men
are taught what t^escheue. And if at any time God, of his sing^lar favor to
any particular person, imparted his grace, as having access to nature, then he
^ffi^med, such grace to be a purchase of nature, not* serve as necessary
means to ^ertue and salvation, but only to a facillitie, and to make easy man
his car^adge in that behal^e; otherw^se deming natures ability a sufficient
and competent cause of ver^e both moral and divine: and finally of bea^titude.
But to this error the Catholic Roman church has opposed her self in
Councels, as well in the times wherein S. Augustine lived, as also of late in
that famous Council of Trent: wherein is defined against Pelagi^^, that no man
can believe, hope, and love, or resist temptations, Grace and free will. How
do they deny frevvill, who confess man to bele^ue with free will? Aug.
Epist. 107 Grace is ^ecesary to frevvill. Greg in 22 c 105 and in (...) Aug
Epist 106. sivere vol^mus deserdere liberum (...) oppugnemus vn^^e sit libe*
^um: nam qui oppugn^^g^a ^^, qua nostru^ a (...) a ma^n and fa^rendum honum
l^be ^atur (...), ipse a^bitrisi snum a ^huc vult esse cap. (...) Ecclesiast 7.
as is requisite to salvation, without the inward grace of God, through Christ
in ^p^red into our soul; the external declaration from the mouth of the
preacher or Evangelist not sufficiently serving to such effect. VVh^ch grace,
as it perfecteth nature, and is ad^oyned to the same, so do we hold it
absolutely necessary to virtue, and salvation; without which, to the one, or
to the other, we think to remain a plain impossibility in our free will,
so enfeobled through sin, as well original as actual. And in these terms
d^sclaine we with all antiquity, and the scriptures, the heresy of Pelagius.
Notwithstanding, granting the necessity of grace to be added unto nature, we
do not imagine, as teaches us S. Augustine, that by a fatal destiny or
necessity grace carr^eth, conuayeth, or bends the will of the soul, as the
^inde does toss, role, and tumble the cloades; or move the same, as nature
worcketh in things insensible, or in b^ute beasts, but rather free consent in
us to concur with the same, to faith, h^pe, charity, continency, and the
rest, leauinge a liberty in the w^ll* that does well, to do evil, if it
please, or to surcease, or omi^t to do well being provoked to good. Yea we
make grace a part and consummation of free will, and do not, as by a member of
opposition, divide it from the same. For example, a man that is greuiously
tempted by ^a^han to carn^li^e, and yet stands for virtue, and restr^nes his
will from an unlawful appetite; if he had no grace at all but were left to
his own pure natural for, ces it being a thing impossible, at lest morally,
long to resist, he should not by freewill m^ntaine virtue against that
temptation: in that free will consists in this, that so a man perfo^meth this
action, or that as he may choose whether he will do so, or not so d^ mean
h^^sel^e. Consider the vvorckes of God, that no man can be converted whom he
des^iseth. Virtue we make an effect of freewill, not in sense of Pelagius, that
is of the natural forces of freewill, but of freewill, healed and cured by
grace, fortified by the same: and vet of freewill, because not proceeding from
necessity, from constrainte, from destiny but from the will as cause* which
performs it freely, having ability to do otherwise, or to the contrary.
This is the true tenor and meaning of our doctrine as concerning freewill.

7. Surely the protestanters hope, and reliance on grace in pretense, is most
monstrous The Protest^ denies the good manners of men Hieron lib. 2. ^ont
Iouin.
and ungodly, as against the nature of grace, so against the perfection of
virtue, and against the merittes of Christ, and inspirations of the holy
ghost. What does the protestanter hope for a^^ God his hands? Mary for a
grace, to make him believe in his merciful promises, to hope for salvation,
and to lead the life of a Christian of mere necessity, without his free
consent, without the motion of a man, being not able otherwise to dispose of
his manners, then such grace shall in dest^n^e determine? No marvel the
p^otestan^er den^eth freewill to cooperate with God his grace, seeing neither he
admits as ^rewe, that the w^ll of man is corroborated by grace, or vitally
worcketh with the same. Who will affirm says Calvin the infirmity of
man's will to Calvin lib. 2. Inst. cap. ^
be strengthen^ by the i^spe of grace? No help, no concourse, no motion, or
action, but a block^sh, and more then brutish stupiditie in man. O heresy
gross and senseless! And why Calu^^* Least that, says he, we deu^de that
betwixt God, and us which he wholy challenges unto himself. Surely
mankind is much beholden I see, to the protestan^^e, that makes the souls of
men no better then stones, stocks, mee^^ subjects to foreign impressions.
We rob the Lord saye^h he if we take unto our selves any thing, either in
the will, or in the vvor^e. There is not a mutual co^urren^e in comon^e
^ocurse betwixt grace and man his will: neither and the Apostle make himself
Confor^em labor^s, ioyn^e worker with gra^e A proper piece of theology in
the protestante, that man does not believe in God not hope in him, nor love
him, but only grace does act all these offices! for if men work the^e good
things, either they perform all without grace, which is false and Virtue
denye^ by the Protest^nt V^inc^^sitar, nec corona est H^eron! ^ cont. (...) Aug
de Not. and (...) and l. arb. c. 2. 3. 4.
Pelgaian^sme, or cer^es they cooperate with grace, and so have part in the
labor and virtue.

8. The protestanters hope aims art the open reproach of virtue as well
moral, as Theological, therefore brutish and dete^^able. The antecedent is
evident by the light of nature, in that virtue, be (...) the greatest
perfection in man, and an action of his praise worthy, cannot be effected but
by freewill, and ability to work, and not to work: for why otherwise in
brute beasts is there not virtue, in infantes, or mad perssons their actions
not commendable, but because they move by sense only, by instinct of nature,
not able otherwise to do? Then what virtue protestant is it* in a faithful
married man to keep his fidelity, tempted to the contrary, to observe the
commandments of God and nature, if he be not of power to do otherwise? O
gracious virtue by the doctrine of a protestanter, or rather the grime of a
coal upon a wall of fatallitie and necessity! Are not protestants worthey
commendation, that do well by destiny, and can do no otherwise, like men in
chains and ^etters of irresistable E^sebe. l. 5. Praepar. cap. 3. Theodoret.
quest. 19 in G^n Chrisost. humit. de cruce Agu. ep. 46. Neque enim
praecipe^^tur, n^s^ homo ^obere^ prop^^^ voluntatem, qua diuinis praeceptis
obe^^et. Aug. l de Great and l. arb. cap. 4. 83. quest. q. 2. 2.
constrainte? If they had free will, they would surpass the Angles. If there
be a fatal necessity as speaks Eusebius: Caesar. Nulla e^^t lau^ vvtut^s,
their should be no praise for virtue. Ignotressent egreg^ p^etatisathlet^, as
says Theodoretus, the soldiers for virtue should be unknown. S. Crisostome
expouding those words of our Savior, if any man will come after me,
remarcketh, that our Saviors speech does importe a freedom of will, in that
he says not, I constrine any, or I compel any: sed su^quemquam^ud^^ij ac
voluntates Dominum fa^io, I make every man lord of his own judgment and
will. And that without freedom of will then should neither be virtue nor vice
in man, avouches S. Augustine: If their were no grace of God, how should God
sa^e the world? because salvation, and redemption from sin, and the
acquiring of virtue, proceed from grace: If there were not free will, how
should he judge the world? in that without freewill, when necessity holds
the empire, there should neither be virtue to be rewarded, nor offense to be
chastised. Then I conclude, that the protestanters hope destroys virtue,
enforcing upon it a necessity: and that if he be chaste, temperate, devout,
charitable, yet by these qualities he is not commendable; because not free in
the performance of them, he so workinge, as he can do no thing to the
contrary, as brute beasts prouo^ed by instinct of nature, are carried hither
and thither, as it shall appoint.

9. And if their hope pass to the disgrace of virtue, must it not also produce
thereby Protestantish hope against Christ.
an injury against the very blood and meritt of our Redeemer? For what (...)
in greater need of, then of virtue, what ornament more desired, then that of
virtue, what gift more beleeminge the passion of Christ to bestow on the
world, then virtue, Ita fit vt neo^ fideles fiant (...) arbitrio, and tamen
ibius gra^^a fideles (...) corum^a p^te state tenebra^um liberauit arbitt^^
Aug. Epist 1^7. Sloth of the Protestanter.
what greater glory to himself, honor to his father, then from the virtue o^
his servants? wherefore if man for want of freedom in will do not express or
cause through grace an^ virtue in himself, how is Christ beneficial to us how
is he renowned in us how does those great and maine expenses of his travails,
as ^f his swea^e, of his blood, of his life, of his death contriue any singular
effect, if man do not g^ine thereby that diamonde of virtue, and commendable
behavior? O Antichrist Protestantish, thy hope is a sacrilegious darte to
wound even Christ, and force virtue either out of the world, or to strike it
dead, as a motion not of man, but as an impression of some fatal necessity;
and a mighty poise of lead, resting in an i^sensible repo^e!

10. This hope Protestantish taking from virtue the freedom of consent, as
it blemisheth the shape thereof, and defiles her pu^tie with infa^ie of
inispr^sion, so does it wholly encl^ne man to foul pleasures of sinf^ll
desires. It faith, if hope, charity, repentance, chastity, be not the
operations of man in liberty to perform them, and otherwise in ability to
behave himself; why should he labor, c^rcke and c^re for that virtue, which
may be expected of him, seeing that only from God they proceed, and not from the
industry of any humane faculty? Le^t man then refer in the death of his
sloth all to God, it not concerning him to busy himself: for that fatal
necessity, without respect to his free will, has already determined, whither
he shall be faithful, or faith less, continent or ^asciuious, black, or
white, for G^d, or for the devil; Grace and free will, how they co^curre.
Non a^tem ego, sed Gratia D^^ me^^* id est non to lus, sed great a Dei mecum:
perho^nce gra^^ D^^^ola, necipse solu^ se grotia Dei cum ^llo. Aug l de great.
and l. arb cap. 5. Ench^^ c 32. Epist 106. 107. Council T^id. Sess 6 cap. 1. Cap
16. Can. 1. 23. 4. Council M^lu. Can. 3. Can. 4. Aug. lib. 1. de Gr^^ Christ.
cap 22. Tract 26. in Io^^an. cap. 6.
whose disparities dep^nde nothing on his behavior, but of the mere outward
impression of grace. F^e upon the loathsome and suggish hope in ^uch a lasie
Protestanter.

11 I wish the protest^nters malice corrected and his ignorance better
informed. Let him then vnd^stand that we make the freedom of a man's will
suitable unto the grace of God, both concurringe ^s one abs^lute cause to the
consent of virtue. Yet in the process of causal^t^e g^^ce has the p^oritie,
in that no man can believe aright, repent him of his sins, or love almigh^ie
God in perfect ^haritie, unless fi^ste graciously without all dese^^e. God
inspire into him his vocation, and per^wasion, indu^inge the will to perform^
the duty of so good an endeavor. Yea this precedent grace is of such request
and necessity, that as speaks the Council of Trent, without it not only the
Gentiles by force of nature, but neither the Jews by their law, coulabe
delivered, or rise from sin: which grace does always ^oe before, accompany,
and follovv our vvorckes: And the blow in these terms ^s giu^n in the same
Council against the Pelagian heresy, and also s^launder of the protestanter:
If any man shall say, without the preuen^ent inspiration of the ^oly ghost,
an this help, any man to be able to believe, to ^^ue, to hope, to repent, as
is required, that unto him may be given the grace of justification, let him be
accu^sed. Loc here the weakness of our nature acknoledged, the force of grace
graciously imparted, confessed; and yet our vital and free concurse of consent
preserved: Q^ipp^ qui illam abueere potest. in that man may resist the call^ng
grace of God. If we said, that grace was a pay and guerdon of worckes, wrought
by pure nature, as Pelagius affermed according to S. Augustine, or that grace
was not absolutely necessary to the virtues Theological, and also moral, in
which by reason of temptations is found any difficulty, then might we by the
protestanter be accused of Pelagianisme; but unjustly by him in this respect
now Videre q^omodo ^^ahit Pater: do^^do deiectet, non necessitatem impon^do l.
8^ quest. q 2. 24. l. 1 Rectra^r. c 26. Epist. 107.
e^peached sithence that we accu^se all such assertions. Let the protestant
rather purge himself from deflowring of virtue, from pursuit of idle
pleasure, making no freedom of choice in any good action, but allowing a
necessary determination of will in the same as a thing not l^udable, nor
worthy the price of the cross, or to be effected by any heavenly grace. If we
freely then stand^n virtue, when temptation raises and enrageth the passion to
the contrary vice, we do it, and yet not we alone, but we fre^ly worcking
with grace: it is God, which by his grace enlightneth the understanding to
behold the truth, for^t^fieth the will in it passadge to virtue, and to make
refusal of sin; we perform all good in efficacy of this grace freely
bestowed upon us only forth deserte of our savior Christ: yet in liberty,
not as stocks and stones, not as brute beasts, carved away ^^sway and
comma^ndrie of necessity, as basely of man the protestater does devise. Our
hope therefore h^re ex^pesteth the grace of God to be granted unto us by ^he
only goodness of himself, and not for our deserte: yet hopinge for such a
grace, as shall in us bri^ge forth: he fruits of virtuous and laudable
endeauours: that is moving us to a free consent, without which as no virtue,
so no grace no redemption, no salvation. H^^ better, as speaks the w^^e man,
that vvorcketh, and Ecclesi^stic. 10.
abounds in all things, then he, that b^^st^th, and needs bread. The
Catholic is to be preferred, that so hops for grace, and so furni^heth
himself with all virtues, before the protestanter, that glories by certain^e
of f^i^h that he is justified and predestinate, being in the mean season idle,
reachle^se and so wandeth the bread of the soul, good life and demeanu^e.
What virtue, good p^otestante, actual I mean, in that operation or quality
to which man does not ^o much as vitally concur, and which is caused by a
necessity of grace, without man's free con^en^e? which grace says Calvin,
Does Calvin supra
move the will not as for many ages it has b^^n delivered and believed, as
that it is in the power of our choice, to obey the motion or to r^siste, but
rather aff^^^ing is most ^fficaciously. Then he that believes in God, or
repents himself of his sins in virtue of grace, can do no otherwise, he
worckes not with grace, he worcketh not at all: it is imposible in cause and
antecedencie, that it should othe^w^^e fall out. Then O virtues of faith, of
repentance where are you! What O Christ, is become of thy grace and
redemption! This mon^truous absurd hope of the protestanter exceeds in ill
deserte all human hatred and con^empte.

12 Moreover such a dependencie there is betwixt wordly civility, and Christian
virtue, Fatalitie of the Protestante contrary to civility.
that Antichrist moving the protestant to withstand the Catholic truth, does
thereby seek also to barbar^se him. and make him an enemy of polliticke
estate and government. For the espetiall part of policy concerning the
Prince, it consisting of his prouokement, inciting the subject to laudable
attemptes by price, and reward, wherewith he graceth their laudabble endeavors,
is by the protestante made frusrate and of no importe. Assuredly their is no
just cause, why he should exhort them to valor, to justice, and temperance,
when he is persuaded that all these good ca^riages are mere impressions of
fatalitie, or of divine pro^dence: to be expected idelie rather from heaven,
then industriously performed by men on earth* What hope can he conceive of
their labor, watchefull^es and loyalty, when he beholds them attendantes in
sleep of sloth upon destiny, and forr^^ne benevolence of outward actiatie*
Nether is there any reason, whic the Prince should much affect^ subjects
employed in virtue, or enlardge his good will tow^rdes them by guerdone, if
that they only bear show and coulor of that hone^ty and virtue, of which they
never were causes or contriuers; but only receivers, and patient porters. And
wh^e should the Prince be incensed against subjects surceassing from virtue,
and wholly given up to concupiscence, when as they, without their free
default, want such ornaments of action, the which it pleased not God to bestoe
upon them, or engraue in them? This is the barbarouse resolution of
Protestancie in this affair.

The Catholic by hope expects from God such bounty of grace, as is not only
cause of good consent, but also in generality a grace of sufficiency, afforded
to the wicked and reprobate, although they misdemeane themselfes in sin:
vvheras the fained hope of the Protestante makes account of no such favor from
almighty God, as if he should even to offenders imparte at any time his grace
of ability or possibility to do well.

CHAPTER. X.
THE Catholic Christian man by faith exposes to his hope as obiecte the grace
of ^^^e effectual.
God, called Effectual, to wit such a grace, which infallibly worcketh the
effect of ^ virtuous consent, together with the free will of man. In gift
whereof he also acknowledges the especial goodness of almighty God, who has
decreed to bestow on him such a potent and effectual vocation, as he knew
condicionally before the donation thereof, that it would produce in him some
good and virtuous action or other: as of faith, of hope, of charity, of
repentance, of justice, of temperance, and the like. Which peculiar efficacy
in the kind of grace, and holy inspiration, does not prejudice or infringe the
liberty of man his will, in that it worcketh co^sente in us not of it self,
but jointly with our free election and action of the will. For our will first
by an active motion cooperateth with grace, God not procuring in us salvation,
virtue, or justification, as in stones or logges, as tells us S. Augustine:
then we so Aug l. 2 de peccat. met. c. 5. De Great. and l. arbit. cap. 2. 5.
Calvin. lib. 2. Inst. cap. 3.
conspire with this effectual grace to the act of virtue, as we might do
otherwise, and yield our selves captives to unlawful concupiscence. Our hope
^erein looks for a worthy effect of divine grace, that is true virtue, when
as the Protestanter denyinge the mutual concurrence of freedom by nature, and
grace together, as he destroys virtue thereby, so does he also condemn and
auile grace in the effect thereof, as if of no commendable price or estimation.

2. But besides this grace Effectual, we make reckoning also of an other,
termed Grace sufficient.
Sufficient, that is such a grace, as imparteth to freewill sufficiency of
force to overcome temptation, and to consent to God his calling. Yet for that
man by default, and by deprauation of his will, does rather choose sometimes to
follow the suggestion of sensuality, he falls freely into sin: being able
by a sufficient grace to avoid the same. The which disposition and
mannadgement of man his affairs by God is declared Eccles^^st. 15.
in the words of the wise man: I have put before thee sire, and water,
extend thy hand to which it pleases thee. So also almighty God told the
people of Israel, that he had presented them with life, with that which is
good, and also with harm and death, concluding: Choose therefore life, that thou
may li^e, and thy posterity. This freedom is also De^^. 13.
approved by all such places of Scripture uttered by God to the^, whom he knew
before would yield to sin, ter^ifying them by menacinge speeches from such
guilt, and exhorting them to virtue: which providence in the goodness of God
toward the wicked, should be altogether absurd, if they were dispoyled of
all sufficient grace, and by necessity cast into necessary occasion of
offenses; as a folly it were to persuade the blind to see, the lame to run,
or the stone to stay in descent to it center. Basil. homil. 6. in hexam. Chrysostom.
1. Co^. Cap. 4. Aug. in psalm. 91. D^ origin. Animae c. ^1. l. de Not. and great.
cap. 69. Hieron epi. ad D^^^s. Matthew. ^. ^onae ^. Potest dici, homo in co quod
audi^^as, and ^^nue^as, in co perseuera^^es si velles. Aug. de Cor. and Great c.
7. Epi. 105. In ma^o^ibus ^^alibus merito dici potest hi nolu^runt intelliger^
vt ben^ agerent. Hi, quod gra^^^s ^st, intellexerunt, and non obedierunt. Vnde
no^ obediet, nisi su^ pessin^a voluntat^* ^ui gra^i^r damnatio diuina aequitate
debetu^? Lactan. Carm de phenice Claudian. Eleg^a de Phenice S^nne is no sin
by the Protestant. Calvin. lib. 2. Inst. c. 6. Sec. 6. Adam had sufficient
grace not to have sinned Aug. l. de co^^ep. and Great. c. 11. 12. Calvin. lib.
2. I^st* cap. 2. Sect. ^7. Cap. 4* Sect. 1. Sect. ^. and 9.
For as spea^^^^* ^. Basil, if such necessity should domin^ere in man his
operations and crimes, In vain should ^vve makers prescribe things to be
done, or to be abandoned: and in vain are there any judges to reward virtue
with honor, and punish vice with detriment. ^he laws them s^lues ^novv,
says S. Crisostome, to pardone trespasses in them, that transgress of
neces^itie, yea to account ^^ no sin at all Most clearly and expressly S.
Augustine avouches this liberty in offenders by a sufficient grace: Satan
cease not to persuade evil, but God does neither omit to suggest good:
Satan does not enforce one that is vnvvillinge; for ^t i^ in thy power to
consent, and not to consent. To esteem one as guilty of sin, becouse he
did not, which he could not do^, is extreme iniquity and madness. Which
doctrine concerning our Catholic hope is first is worthy of that bountiful
goodness in God, procuring his sun to shine* upon the just, and unjust,
alluring those by grace that contemn him, running after his disloyal
servants, the which with Jonas depart from so loving a master: then our hope
herein yeldeth unto us a full notice and intelligence of the turpitude, of the
ungratefulness, of the disloyalty in sin toward God: in that we have
offended against him not const^ained by any necessity or fate, but of
freedom, having power to do otherwise by a sufficient grace from God, to
forsake the suggested iniquity, as teaches S. Augustine: upon which conceit,
the crime being committed against almighty God, so good a lord, wilfully
forsaken, such bad demeanor of our will considered, may cause in us a fervor
and heat of greater contrition: and so as sweet spices under the phcnix
enflamed, may in sacrifice of a contrite h^rte, to God make some recompense of
the injury, of the rebellion against him, our cheifest benefactour, and
prince, most sovereign.

3. Here now presses in the hope of the Protestanter in horrible show of a
loathsome smoke, vamping from his opinion, and accompanying the same:
endeavoring even by blasphemy to stain the sacred throne of God, yea to
deprave that his most sweet providence toward us with forged iniquity. what
makes he of sin, as of adultery, of fornication, of murder? nothing else but
as of certain effects of man his will in temptation, as in a whirlewinde,
without all grace from above, through necessity transported into breach of God
his commandments: acknowledging no grace at all present, or imparted, where
is not the consent to virtue. I respect not, says Calvin. such mad persons,
that affirm grace to be given pariter and promiscue, together and
indifferently: so then, who have grace, but solely the predestinate, and such
persons as persist in virtue? others despoyled of all grace, are be queathed
to the tyranny of corrupted nature, and to extreme necessity of offenses. Man
has not free will says he to do good, vnlest he be helped by grace; and that
with especial grace, qua electi soli per regenerationem dona^tur, by which
only the elect by regeneration are endovved. And whereas hence it does follow,
that men sin, and are adulterers or thieves by necessity, and so seem not
to sin at all culpabelie; thus Calvin does answer: What does it importe,
whether with a free or a servile judgment men sin, so they do it
voluntarily? Then adultery and murder are damnable sins, if voluntarily
committed, although the party offendante could not avoid them. And talkinge of
the deprauation of man his nature by original sin, he affirms, that the
will, as seat of sin, is bound arct^s^^mis v^^culis with straight chai^es;
it sinning of necessity irresistable. Which miserable will in man,
notwithstanding the ^rosse of Christ, and his grace, he affirms, Satan^
pr^st^^^ ^as^inatam, illi se ad omnem d^ct^^ ^bs^q^^ntem necess^r^o pr^bere: so
to be b^vvit^hed by the slightes of satan, that of necessity it ^bay^th his
inclination: from which will no otherwise does continually, and of necessity
without end break out sins, then from a furnace are cast out sparkles, from
a fountain runs the stream. Yea sometimes, says ascholler of his, the
very sai^ctes the^ selves do necessarily sin. And for that original sin is
not taken away in any, VVit^ker. lib. ^ de pecca^. orig cap. 10. l. 2. cap. 11.
A^oll Co^fess. Augustan.
according to the Protestanter; which being To^tus decalogi^^^^ (...) the
certain transgres^^on of the whole decalogue, or ten commandments, all men
are of necessity murderers, adulterers, blasphemous, infidels, and
participantes of what knauerie can be imagined; and that of necessity, with
want of all sufficient graciouse assistance to the contrary. Which vile and
brutish doctrine is altogether consequent to that belief, which denies
freewill in man, and the distinction of grace, as one to be effectual, and the
other sufficient: for if a man yield his will in consent to adultery, and can
do no otherwise, he trespasseth of necessity, and by natures bad fatalitie:
if he might have rejected the temptation to that end, then he consented,
having power not to consent which is to have freewill, in that freewill
punctually and definitiuely consists in this, that a man acts this, able
not to perform it, or not to do it: which ability, in that it is not employed
in the forces of only nature, includes grace; not effectual, for supposall is
made, that the sin be committed, therefore mere sufficient: and so freewill.
But indeed a protestante must confess, that an heret^ke, and infi^ell, a
murderer, and an adulterer can do no otherwise, as being dep^^ued of all
grace: yea that they elect and predestinate do mortally offend, I mean,
committ damnable sins of necessity, having not always effectual grace, and
being not any sufficient only, as he supposes. Therefore he desineth, Christ
by collation of grace, from the ^^lew of his redemption, Rainol. Apol. These. de
s^rip. Sect. 14.
to affecte and benefi^t only the faithful and predestinate; and reputeth all
the rest to be clean forsaken, wrongfully comparing suffic^ent grace, given to
the reprobate, and other offenders by catholic verdicte, to the aples of
Tantalus, deceiving in vain hope the diuing lips of that poor damned
creature.

4. Certes most execrable and Antichristian is this hope of the Protestanter,
the assured Gre^fe for ^inne.
bane of virtue, scorn and reproach of all Christianity. We Catholics,
lovers of purity and virtue through the grace of Christ, enter into the
greater hatred of vice and sin, by how much we discrie in it a shape of more
odiouse deformity, and of a more disproportionable constitution; which we do,
when we deem sin a francke and free departure of the will from God, a
choice, preferring in liberty of consent, the trash of a momentary pleasure,
before that ocean of his infinite goodness: No fierce adversary, or foul fiend
enforcing in the mean season upon us that lamentable de^^iment by our
election: no combination or volumes of natures causes driuinge us into the
calamity thereof, but we with our own hands to strike the heart of the soul
with a mortal dinte, we of free demeanor to comtemne God, preferring the
cup of Babylon, before his cross of Caluarie, the stable of carnalitie,
before the paradise of heaven, we Isay enabled from above with the splendor
and dew of grace; that sovereign court, now after the entry of Christ, made
favorable unto us, no more dreadful by thunder and lightninges, but gracious
rather by fiery tongues of truth, by a vehement breath of mortification, and
comfort in distresses; and yet to sin, and yet to defile Act. 2.
the soul by sin, yet to dishonor God by sin! But the Protestanter
graceth sin by his ungracious hope, telling us, that we sin whether we be
just or unjust* whether Sin graced by the protes^ante.
predestinate, or reprobate, by a cruel necessity, not able otherwise to
demean our selves Alas, how is in God his sight that trespass ugly, or worthy
damnation, which breaks from us by necessity of nature? If adultery have a
necessary cause in nature, yea in the very decree of God himself, how is it
culpable, how worthy punishment, how of a malignant quality, otherwise then
is an ague in the body, or distemperature therein, occasioned by some defect
of health? What conceit may we have of Christ, and of the mercies of God, if
all the repaobate never receive touch of his grace, but are for one sole sin
of Adam* tied in chains of impossibility, exiled into a corner of refusal*
and never visited there by any rays, beams or sparckles of his mercy: by God
Aug. Epi 49. De cor^^p^ and Gr^^ ^* 7. Breac^ o^ any co^^^a^deme^^ if it be
culpabl^ supposes sufficient grace not to break it ^0 Adam had sufficient
grace to perse^er. Aug. li. 13 c^^. c. ^5* Aug Epist. 106 107. Free Will denied
by the protestant in eue^y particular man and also ^n Adam. According to the
P^otesta^t a child or a mad man may sin by reference of his fact to Adam
his sin, as well as a sober and understanding man: which is ^^futed by S.
Aug. Epist. 23. No^ antem trahit alter ab al^^ro, qua^do suo vnoquoqu^ propria
vita viuente, iam est vnde dicatur: Anima qu^ peccau^^ it ips^ mo^ietur. Epist
89* quicquid enim postea homines ex malis sui^ operibus addunt, non pertine^ ad
illam gen^rationem, sed ad humana^ conuersatio^em.
his punishment necessarily made thieves, adulterers, and murderers? or what
mercy, yea what justice in God, to condemn these forelorne malefactors, as
fuel for hells eternal fire, in their l^ues never sufficiently being potent
to be good, to pray, or not to be malefactors in all extremity and outrage of
iniquity? Is sin nothing else but a necessa^y effect of a nature depraved?
Why then is it a thing detestable, and not rather pardonable, to be pityed,
not punished, let pass, not examined? Yea being sweet, embraced, and not as
vnlaw^ull, rejected? In humane conversation, if one man inflicke some damage
upon an other, either, of ignorance* or of constrainte, not able to dispose of
his fact otherwise; we know it to be no offense, nor thinck that one can be
justly angr^e with him, that so endammadgeth an other. How then either to God,
or man, are adultery, fornication, or murder sins, saying that both the
prede^^inate, and reprobate, committ them of necessity, and importunity of
concupiscences, raigninge in their nature so deca^ed and ruined? And as the
protestanters hope drowneth men in sin, as in a pleasant r^uer of a
retchlesse life, so takes it away all means of repentance and recovery: in
that every such persons, as against whom our savior Christ shall prouonce
his dreadful sentence of damnation not only by necessity were cast into
sin, but in their lives never had from him sufficient means ^o repent, to
wash and clean^e their souls, all sufficiency denied them by that adamant of
God his decree, and natures infelicitie, and that in revenge of that one sin
of our first parents. Did not ^e^se culpablie t^espasse against faith, who
refused to believe in Christ, acting in proof of his doctrine such worckes, as
neu^r man did the like? But how could the offend in that particular sin of
insidelitie, if faith to them was impossible* which must needs be, in that
they wanted sufficient grace and that necessarely required to the act of faith
substantiallie, and not only to the facility thereof, as proves S. Augustine
against Pelag^us? Whereupon speaking of those, who sinfullie refused to believe
ou^ savior preaching unto them, says: They were not const^a^^ed to be
infidels, but r^fusing to belelue, they vvanted not the crime of infidel^^ie.

5 The Protestanter perceiving that without a freedom and liberty of will the
action of man, as it is not humane, or moral, so indeed thereby should not be
odious, or deservedly punishable; tells us, that although men offendinge
aginst the law of God and nature, can do no otherwise in their proper
persons, by necessity destined to sin; yet says he, in that all men had
once original justice and liberty of will in Adam, that sufficiency in him
does make now in us his progeny, murder and adultery culpable, although
effects in us of necessity, and so damnable in the sight of God. Doubtless
sin, for this gloss and color, is much beholden to the protestanter, it
standing still in flower and perfect^on throug his doctrine and estimation*
Truth it is, that to or^ginall sin, which we contracte to our mothers womb
without personal conse^te of will, is sufficient our common freedom, and
ability in Adam to have wanted such original crime, to make it in us a sin,
and that also in propriety of speech a sin* but I hope the protestanter is
not so gross, but he knows, that infidelity, murder, and ^d^l^erie are
personal sins, and so must proceed from the personal liberty in the
tran^gressour. Neither is it enough that they are occasioned by Adam, in whom
we had sufficiency to avoid them; for in Adam we had also a power and
sufficiency to want evil favored faces, quartane agues, and namely the
protestanter ^ece^ued ability not to be so troubled with ignorance in
philosophy and Theology, as he i^, and yet I hope, such defectes, by his
account, are not actually and personally deadly si^^s, o^ worthy dam^ation.
Then I see the protestanter is a fi^t painter for the devil to color and
grace his sins with the excuses of natural and ncessarie deportementes Is
the freedom then of Adam his sin sufficient to make the personal knauerie
of a wicked person odious and detestable to God and man, although the knave can
do no otherwise, but is conuayed and tombled thereunto by fatallitie? O
foolery* O foul water, not drawn from the chaste fountains of Pernassus, but
from the stigian lake of hell! But what if the Protestanter teach, that Adam
himself sinned also by necessity, and could not do otherwise then consent to
the devil? how then are murder and adultery now sins, or punishable? We
adore by faith a sarre of says Calvin Calvin in op. Genenens. 4.
that secreat Council of God with all sobriety, by which the fall of man
was predestined. So then Adam trespassed by God his appointance, to the
which he could not resist. Adam fell not, but God seeing, and ordaying his
fall; and so by necessity he has undone himself, and his whole posterity.
Then answring this objection he adds; But it could not fall out otherwise,
Quidtum, says he, what of that? to theiust damnation of man it was
sufficient, that sponte, willingly he fell out of the way of salvation. Thus
Beza: But Beza respons. ad Castall.
you will say, that our first parents coula not resist the will of God, that
is his decree: I grant as much: but as they could not, so they would not.
Then the Protestanter wipinge out of the world free will from every one in
particular, and driving it also away from Adames first offense, thereby he does
abolish all sins, as demeanures of no bad estate: so Antichrist, and the
devil. Indeed the Protestanters principles of doctrine do demonstrate as
Protestants denying free will establish the hersie of Manichaeus: as if
sins were of God, and things natural and real
much: for if all grace be effectual, and none merely sufficient; seeing that
Adam in the moment of his sin committed, wanted effectual grace; for if he
had had such a grace he had not consented to concupiscence; and sufficient
grace being a mockery and delusion of Tantalus his water and apples; therefore
to resist he had no grace at all, and so sinned of necessity: unless without
grace against temptation he might have persisted in virtue, and his allegiance
to God. The issae and marcke of the Protestaniers hope is, in disgrace of
Christ his meritt, turpitude of life, and a coulorable dissembling of the
nature of sin.

6. VVherby also Antichrist by the protestant, as he offends against virtue
by The protestant denying sufficient grace does favor barbarism.
wickedness, so also does he trespass against civility by barbaritie. There is
no doubt, but that it much concerns a common wealth, that the Prince, and
subject, conceive great hatred against sin and iniquity: for otherwise
they would nether abhore it much in their one actions, nor punish it
deservedly in others by public justice. But how can according to reason a
Protestant be incensed against an offendour, against an heretic, or a
blasphemer? how can he warrantablely chastise a catholic, whom he thincketh to
folloue error and impiety out of extreme necessity, as despoiled of all
sufficient grace to the contrary? Does the^ his choler and rage, out of
reasons ten or, hold key in mood of phrencie, so cruelly afflicting us, or
any other offenders.? In deed the purpose of Antichrist is, to conceill all
greuouse concepte of sins deformity, and so make way for fell barbarism in
course of all brutish liberty.

VVheras faith assures us of natures decay by originally sin, so does the
Catholic hope design that grace of God by our savior Christ, as serves to
the recovery and perfection thereof: but the hope of the Protestanter blaming
and complaining too too much of natures calamities, affords nothing to grace
or virtue.

CHAPTER. XI.
AS that prime transgression in our first parents from them passed to every
one All coceiued in sin by course of nature.
of us in particular, that is through defect of grace, which has virtue to
justify; so also in penalty thereof we gave received detriment in each
faculty of the soul, and also of our bodies, as is a apparent: so that the
whole man thereby, as speaks the Council of Trent, is altered into a worse
estate and condition, from that he once Council. Trid. Sess 6. Cap. 1.
enjoyed, created in the quality of original justice. And as the tree
corrupted in the root loses the beauty of his green and flourishing
branch, so mankind depraved in the origin of our first pare^tes, retains no
more that first integrity of graciouse perfection, wherewith once it was in
happiness adorned. To descend to the particular damages, inflicted upon humane
nature by original cirme, presents it self first that dulnes of mind and
intelligence, which encombreth us in the pursuit of truth; Palues of otigir.
ah. nne in the v^derstandinge will and appente. Excles. 9.
that gross cloud of ignorance, interceptinge our sight, and hinderinge it
from ariuall to the proper natures of things by contemplation: so that now
without an espepeciall illumination from the grace of God, we are not to know
or discern that, which by common concourse and ordinary ability of original
perfection we might otherwise before have prceiued: The thoughts of mortal
men says the Sage, are fearful, and all our prouidences are uncertain.
Where upon the will of man deprived of that sure and perfect sight in the
understanding, from thence not receiving such instruction and aid, as it had,
if original justice had not perished, is more subject consequently to
sensuali^ie, more prone to corporal delights, redier to play and disporte
with pleasures, and finally to yield consent to her enchauntmeutes: so that
thereby, ab teaches also the Council of Trent, we perceive, the forces and
vigor of free will to be much Concill Trid. Sess. 6 Cap 1. Free^ vill decayed
by original sin.
impaired, weakened, virtue in this respect made the more difficult, and sin
more potent and preualent. For seeinge that free will is nothing else in the
soul of man, then an ability to perform each part of contrariety or
contradiction, as to do, and not to do this, or the opposite: if the will
eitheir by error and ignorance of the mind, or by passion and perrurbation of
the appetite, by as it were effeminated, and made propense to follow that
part, for which stands concupiscence, it must needs ensue, that the poyse,
and inclination to one determinate side must diminish some thing of the
forces of liberue: which principaly remains in indifferency, equally
balanced betwixt the extremities, as the median center in regard of the lines
opposed by a diameter. Lastly as concerning the soul, through the fall of
Adam, the sensrue appetite, divided into the facultife Concupiscible and
Irasoble is become more immoderate and distempered, as well in the wanton heat
in desires of pleasure, as in the irefull radge against those, that hinder our
delights: whereby as above, the understanding is in a miste of ignorance, so
below the appetite sensitive dissolute in loose and wrath full importunity,
have more power to draw the poor will of man to sin and iniquity. As for
the calamities of the body. procured by Adam hisfall, as infirmity,
mortality, thirst, and the rest, they are more known and experienced, then
needs in words to be by us expressed. All which afflictions and disasters
standinge for grief and dolor, for abettering and advancing sin against
virtue, are remanent even in the just and regenerate: and we partly thereby
understand, how heinous a thing it isto trespass against God, vewing the
whole world for Adame his sole revolt so turmoyled in miseries; and also learn
hereby to know the great wisdom and mercy of almighty God, who in the
infirmity of our nature will yet show the power of his heavenly grace, in 1.
Cor. 4. Romans 10.
the poverty of our ruin remonstrate the riches and treasures of his
benevolence, and there make a conqueste of sin, where it seems sin most
to preualie and dominter.

2. Although our Christian faith in this sorre displayeth unto us the ruefull
estate of our humane nature, yet also it points to the meritt and cross of
Christ, to the mercies. of God, contained in the person and action of our
mediator Jesus Christ: and then Grace hoped for against original sin, and
penalties thereof Romans 5. 1 Cor. 15. Tit. 3.
hope in us arises in a Godly couradge, and firmly expects a grace to
match, yea to surpass in good success, the bane of Adam his transgression,
the second man his justice preuayling against the first man his iniquity; the
excess doubtless, the advancement is in the balance of a parallel comparison
to be surrendered to the redempt on by our savior Christ, as teaches his holy
Apostle. Wherefore against original sin we have in hope the grace of
Baptism, a grace of regeneration in the word of life, to wash the soul from
that guilt in the blood of Christ, the efficacy of the holy ghost Exec 36.
Math. 3.
working in that element of water, as it was foretold by the Prophett Ezechiel:
I will power upon you a Ceant water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
uncleanness: performed by Christ: He shall baptize in the holy ghost. VVhereupon
we accept of the meritt of our savior Christ, as so beneficial and bountiful
vnte us in his sacrament, that we firmly believe, by purifying grace thereof,
altogether from the soul to be expulsed the stain of original sin. In
baptism says S. Hierome all crimes are forgiven. And whereas ignorance
Hiero^ ep ad Ocean. Aug. l 1. de peccat. merit. c. 16.
and blindness do press upon the understanding, and conceal from it the
knowledge of truth, as of the beauty of virtue, and of the deformity of
offense, our hope, through Christ, notwithstanding expects holy inspirations
and vocations for sucourse for clearing the eye of intelligence; in that our
Redeemer, on who^ weerelie is the light Joan. 5. Jacob. 1.
of the world, the wisdom of his father, and child of him, that is father of
lights. As concerning the will, although it be infeobled and impaired by
originally sin, yet have we an anchore and sustenance from hope in the
mercies of God, by the merit^es of Christ, assuringe our selves, that we shall
not be tempted farther, then we are well able Jacob. 1.
to resist, or that satan shall attany time drive us into the sins of
murder, of theft of adultery, or into any other offense, being not of pouer
competent to withstand, and avoid such misdemeaoours. Free we are, not
slaves, but free in that freedom, Gall. 4.
which Christ Jesus has given us. And as the appertie, both Ceneuti^cible and
Irascible provoke us greatly and continually to breach of God his
commandments, so our hope respects a fortifying grace to establish reasons
designment in virtue, when senses folly or fury make head for vice and
wickedness. Neither are miseries and calamities so urgent from the body, as that
our hope leaves us forlorn amiddest them, but rather gives to our
consciences an assured promise, that through our savior Christ his grace we
shall be able patiently and courageously to supporte them, nnd turn all
endurances thereby, to the eternal advantage of our souls, and likewise glory
of our immortal bodies.

But concerning the harms and detrimentes of nature, the doctrine of the
Protestant The protesta^ter maintains sin and Adam his fall against the
grace of Christ. Genesis 41. VVitaker. l. 1. de peccat. orig. c. 50.
is much for the proclayning and enlardging of them, and as touching our recure
and assistance through the grace of our savior Christ, his hope is passinge
sparinge, small, and as one of the lean kine, sterueling, seen in Phaaroe his
dream of no comfortable supportance. Original sin he acknowledges
contracted in all, but in respect of faith, in the faithful prrentes, not to
be imputed to their children: although in them regenerate, and in all other
persons justified by their personal faith, he is of opinian, that it does
remain, that it does still infect and contamina^e their souls. Remission does
not procure the sin net to be at all in the soul: but that it be not
imputed. Freewill the Protestanter takes away partly by force of grace, and
partly by the imbecility of nature: in that where the grace of God is present,
there of necessity the will is perfected by faith, hope, and charity, it not
being of strength to give that grace any resistance, or otherwise to do, then
grace has determined. And as much as imports sin, as well in the just, as
in the wicked he allows of that frailty and malice of nature in men, whereby
of necessity they commit offenses continually against God, implying the
damnable breach of all his commandments. Then for the number, kind, and
continuance of sin, as well in the just, as unjust, the Protestanter
enlarges the kingdom and empire of the same: affirming the corrupt will of
man without end or measure to viter forth sins perpetually, as the furnace
does vampe out flames and sparckles, or the fountain gives issue for the
floing current; making man, Quasi diluuio Calu. l 2. Inst. c. 1. Sect. 8 and 9.
Luth. ar 6.
a capite ad pedes obrutum: over vvhelmed by the inundation of sin from the
head to the foot: that no part of him is free sin: and therefore what
someuer proceeds from him is imputed as sin. The deprauation of nature is
so great. says Luther that also is sticks in the regenerates in such sort,
that they cannot be without sin: the very vvorckes of just men in the nature
of the things themselves, being mortal sins. By nature we are all sinners,
and not only Call l. 2 cap. 6. Sect. 2^. cap 3. Sect 2 VVitaker. l 3. de peccat.
orig. ^ 5.
evil custom, sed nature a quoque prauitate, by the deprauation of nature.
Sometimes says an other the holust do sin of necessity, by reason of the
law of sin dwelling to them. And although the spirit does fight against
ige sins of this depraved nature, yet manner atque esse in (...) Des peccatum
intellgas: thou must acknovvledge that sin remains in the children of God.
Now then seeing that hope beholds, and holds as anchore the grace and
goodness of God through Christ our savior, trial must be made comparitiuely
betwixt the hope Catholic, and the other Protestantish, in regard of this
grace: so that conclusion be for the preferrement of that hope, the which
acknowledges and greatneth more the grace of the Cross, the merittes and
deserts of our Redeemer.

4. The Catholic hope is in expectation of a justifying grace from Christ to
purge Grace in hop against original sin. Tit 3. Iean. 3.
and abolish the spott, stain, and guilt of original sin clean out of the
soul, warranted to such effect by Scripture, that terms our justification a
regeneration, fashioning out a new creature spiritual, a washing, a
cleansinge, which do importe the utter election and abolishment of sin:
whereas the Protestantish hope takes from Christ in this respect the deserte
and action of a redeemer: for if the sin abide after justification, how is
not the soul thereby yett polluted, and how may it not said Christ his
justice not to be of ability to exclude that detrime^r of sin, which Adam,
and the serpent have cast into the soul? which is to deny the very benefit of
redemption, to misprise the grace of Christ: yea it is blasphemy to auoche
that God does not impure as sin to man, that which is sin in him, makes
him sinful indeed: for hateful to God is: impious person, and his impiety
that God the otherwise one may affirm, that God Sap. 14.
beholdinge a man actually to commit adultery, does not impute as sin that
wicked trespass of the offendant; which were to assecure sin from damnadge
to belie God, that detesteth sin; and judges sin condignely to hell fire.
A goodly blasphemous hope of the Protestanter, for one to be wicked and
damnable in fact and yet to hope, that by God such odious crimes are not to
him imputed! The Catholic hope takes hold of that grace, which is inherent
in the soul, where once sin had seat, dethrosing sin and satan from that
place, where the holy Ghost, as Prince, is now to reside. The Protestant a
proud beggar.
The Protestanter only hops for pardon and indulgence, in that Christ his
justice, which indeed only is in the soul of Christ himself in heaven, is to
be imputed unto him. A proper grace, whereby a poor Codrus is become rich by
the imputation of Cresus wealth, a diseased criple in good health and beauty by
those opposite qualities in Apollo; and yet still in beggarie, still in
misery! O poor pride in the Protestanters imputation! Pride to mount so high,
as to be as just as Christ himself, with all that ininfinitie of merittes: and
why not even as wise, as omnipotent as Christ, if all in Christ be imputed to
a Protestante, and he laying hands on him by faith cry truly all is mine? yet
beggary, for in deed the Protestanter by this imputation is never the better,
his sins still remayninge, and Christ's justice no more his, to him
appertayning, or can make him more just, then the aples and waters did satisfy
the desires of poor damned Tantalus. What sense in this hope, that
justification must be effected by that form, which is not in the just person,
and by which God without falsitie cannot judge any person truly just? For his
divine eye beholds the spots of sins verily inherent in the soul of the
Protestanter, and sees, that the justice of his son Christ cannot to him
actually sinninge be so imputed, so as it may indeed make him a sinner just, no
more then imputation of his omnipotency or wisdom can bring to pass, that a
poor silly foolish Protestante become thereby omnipotent and wise. Ha painted
hope, ayminge at no grace by Christ, in the dream of a miserable deluded
Protestanter!

5. The will of man so to be assisted by the grace of Christ, that it may bring
forth Grace for virtue and against sin.
the good deserts of virtues, as moral, and Theological, we Catholics
firmly believe in faith, and by performance expect as much in hope. For
although that grace be given without all our deserte to work in us, as faith,
hope, and charity, yet do we fre^ly cooperate with this grace, not in a
servile guise directed and destined by constraint or necessity thereof: seeing
that upon this freedom by grace and nature is settled whatsoever is laudable
and humane in man his endeauours without which freedom D. Thom. 1. 2. q. 18.
at 3.
the motion is only vital and not that kind of action proper to man, as
distinguishing him from brute beasts. Behold then how the Protestanter making
the effect of grace by Christ a necessity of work, thereby rendereth such
grace void of virtue, and The Protestanter hops for no virtue by grace.
of all praise or remercement; in that where reigns necessity of worcking,
there cannot be found any action either moral or Theological commendably
good, or worthy the office and function of a man, as ha^h been declared. The
Protestants hope what respects it, but as it were in the hand of God a
pencill to draw out in the tables of his soul a character without his one
operation or cooperation? A sweet hope cer^es, a virtuous hope, so far from
all morality or honesty, waltering in the lasie liberty of a retchles life.
He hops that God will do well, but not that he himself laudably is to
perform any good: sortish and beastly presumption.

6. The will of man in his ability and freedom, we Catholics censesse by
original Free Will helped by grace. Aug. Epist. 89.
sin to be much decayed, weakened, extenuated: yet as we in grief record
this great calamity of ours caused by that original sin, so do we in
comfort and hope likewise regard the mercy and grace of God thorough Christ
Jesus, the which shall keep us from sin by necessity: rather in temptation
procuring for us the commodity or isheue of virtue, as teaches the Apostle:
otherwise we had our just excuse in this necessity, Jacob 1.
saying unto God, that through his decree and course of nature, we are thus
plunged in sin, not defiled or abased by any culpable cariadge of our actions
and behauiours: complayninge also, that upon us does tirannise the flesh and
the appetite, inflicting upon us by necessity every moment deadly and mortal
sins, as the sins of adultery, of fornication, of murder, of injustice:
yea of all sins imaginable, that violate the ten commandments: and
therefore, we poor captives, in this necessity, although offenders, yet are
to be excused. No no foul Antichriste, this will not serve thee in pretense
to corrupt the purity of the. Christian hope, or Christian grace* But rather
if in us be found any sin, it is found together with liberty, with potencie
in us to have avoided it, and therefore culpable, punishable and in no so^te
excusable, as thy flattering coulors of the man of sin, to make us neglecte
our selves, would induce us to believe. Excellently well Tertullian, that
ancient writer, and just according (...) l. de monagam.
to the tenor of the faith in the chuch in her prime and virginal flower:
How long shall vv^ ex^use our selves by the flesh, because our lord sa^^, the
flesh is vveake? for that he said before, the spiri^t is ready; that the spirit
may vanquish the fl^ash; that which is vveake may Matthew 25. Matthew. 19. Luke.
^6.
yield to that which is stronger* for he has said, he that can take it, le^t
him: that is he that cannot, l^tt him be go^e. That rich man vv^^t away,
which did not obey that precept of dividing his substance to the poor, and
left by our lord to his o^ ^^e opinion. Yett for that no hard entr^ati^ can
be imputed unto our savior Christ^, as conce^ning the francke service of
every man his Isa. ^.
free will, Behold he has said, I have putt before thee good and bad: choose
that which is good. If thou ca^^^st^ not, it is because tho^ vvillest not*
(for he has sheevven, that tho^ may* if thou vvillest) because to thy
free will be has proposed both* What injury then to Christ, and to his holy
grace, from the Protestanter, affirming that the will as well of the
regenerate, as not regene^ate, is now carried away into all manner of sins,
C^rtam ^otius Decalogi pr^^ar^at^onem by necessity, otherwise it being
impossible for the will to eschew such abhom^nable offenses? No Protestante so
conceiuinge of his sins, can in regreete accuse himself thereof as culpable;
or think that God is so cruel, as to punish in him, that he could not avoid;
and so in security and beastly liberty he may persist in sin: whereunto he
will be easily persuaded with indem^ty, only believing such inniquitie not to
be imputed. Wherefore our Catholic faith and hope assures us, that if we
sin damnably or hainously, that our will in liberty does perform such badd
offices, we having from the Cross of Christ a sufficient grace to repel them,
and their author Satan, that suggested them. We know that the temptatation of
the enemy, or radge of the wo^ld^s sea, can proceed no farther, then the
strenght and shore of God his grace shall permit.

7. As touching the dominion of sin, as well in the just, as in the unjust,
we acknowledge Dominion of sin impaired by grace against the Protestant.
in man generally concupiscence, that is pronitie and bente of the ^oule, and
also violencie of motion in the pertu^bed sensitive appetite, as well
Concupiscible, as ^ras^^ble to be much increased; and so the power of sin, in
the cause and origin thereof strongly enabled; yet not with standing so
sauourable is God by the grace of our savior Christ, that as we are to wage
war against all sin, so may we subdue thereby the malice thereof, and avoid
all guilte and crime of offense. Otherwise to what purpose serves actual
grace, if in ou^ despite, we not being of force to the contrary, Satan by
the corruption of nature do engender in us the contamination of sin, as of
adultery, of fornication, of injustice, and the rest? Why are we by Christ
to stand for purity, sithence that from nature flows by fatal necessity
the abundance of all iniquities? Manifest it is therefore, that all deadly
sins do not break out from nature, without our free consent, as it were in
sleep, in frenzy, or in other estate, where in freewill is surprised. And
whereas S. John says him to be a liar, that thinckes no sin 1. Io^^. 1.
to be in him, he affirms not thereby, that sin proceeds from necessity
without man his free consent, but only expresses that which is in act and
effect. And he is vnderst^od of certain minute offenses no^ repugnante to
justice, or incompossible with the childshipp to almighty God: unless the
Protestanters la^dge conscience thincketh, that the just man may seven times a
day, remaining just, blaspheme God, murder his brother, or committ any other
villainy, as well as trespass seven times a day in form and model mentioned
by our savior Christ. So that neither there is any venial Luc. 17.
sin a^signable in particular, the which by the grace of God we may not
eschew: for where is necessity, there is pardon and excuse from sin;
although in comprehension Freevvil in venial sin.
of all venial sins generally, for the space of a day, it be morally
impossible, to shun them all; in that never yet any without especial
privilege has repelled them, no^ ever for time to come any shall; and
therefore to want all venial sins is morally Aug. lib. ^. de pecc^t. mert.
cap. 6. So also S. Ambros. l. 1. in Luc. in ini^^o.
impossible: yet nevertheless phisically, as the school speaks, there is no
one venial sin that may not be re^ected. For although all men daily fall
into venial sins; and few for the space of a long life avoid all mortal;
yet S. Augustine tells us that it is absolutely possible for man to be
without all sin whatsoever. I confess says he, that it may be by the grace
of God, and ^^berum ^^u^ arbitrium, and by the free will of man. Wherein the
Protestanters assertion in this point first debili^ateth the efficacy Ep. ad
Valent. Tom. 7.
of Christ his grace, and meritt, then enlarges the dominion of sin, lastly
makes sin a matter of no great deformity or misbehauiour; finally thereby
encourages men to sin in all liberty and impunitie of barbarism The
Protestanter makes in man to be a deadly sin, and odious to God, the very
natural inclination of the so^le Luther* Tom. 2. in Gen* page 314 Tom 4. p.
1^^. 377. 39^.
unto unlawful pleasures; then he accuses as sinful every motion of the
same, as damnable and displeasant to the eye of almighti^ God: which sins,
caused by Adam his fall, are yett remanent in the just after justification: he
affirms grace and deserte of Christ not to be of effica^ie to free the soul
from contagion and pollution by such enormities: as if sin by the devil has
^reuailed yet against the cross of Christ, and that in the very elect, and
servants of sanctificat^on. Then why by grace are we exhorted in Scriptures to
strive against sin and concupiscence; if whither we will or no, by necessity
sins swarm in us, and have a continual race from a natural concupiscence?
If the just do offend in all worckes they do, and continually break the ten
commandments, what use and commodity from grace in regard of purity, of
integrity, of that Nazarean Christianity? Is grace ^ecome a cipher in algrime
with the Protest^n^^^, and sin the prince of his soul! And what thing more
efficaciously can stand for the mag^ifying of the kingdom of sin against
the blood of Christ, then to avouch that in the very regenerate are remassed
innumer^ble mortal sins; that they from head to heel are l^zures in
leprosy of sin, that the just by nature are sinners, in n^mber of crimes
not countable, in quality breakers of the ten commandments, as th^^^es,
adulte^ers, infidels, and yet just, and yet by imputation the white ch^ckines
of a foolish brain? What soever man does, be it according to reason, or
against ^t, is deadly sin by verdicte of the Protestanter: all motions
i^deliberate, not free, or voluntary, in the appe^ite, are dealy sins. O
freindes of Satan, and meet trumpeters to resounde the glory of his emprises!
Sins in the just infinite, in condition detestable, are seated in the soul
of man, whereas the grace of justification is but one, and that in heaven, the
justice of Christ himself, the which in veretie can no more make a
Protestante just, being loathsome in sin by his fact and ^^auer^, then can
the beauty of a Frenchman cause a More to be fair, or amiable after the
Europian hue! But that, which is cheifest in consideration with Antichrist in
(...) of Protestan^^^h Doctr^e.
the Protestanter, is to enduce men to sin and barbarism under pretense of a
faith apprehending the outward justice of Christ: that without fear or stay
they may committ what vallaine is imaginable. If the act of adultery, of
murder, or theft, were dammadgeable to offenders, the^ it should so be, in
that they are greiuous sins against the commandments of God, and nature,
and so drive out of the soul all grace of iustifi^^tio^, giving unto it a
mortal blow even to death of the spirit, and debte of eternal ^amnation: but
seeing that in the just, remaining just, are found millions of mortal sins
in act and operation, yea a continual violating of the ten commandments, as
the Protestante^s affirm, and that in the best is nothing to be found but a
laza^^e, a pudle of inquitie, why should one dread to injury his neighbors,
to follow his lusts, to rebel against his prince, seeinge that these are only
natural defectes, and crimes semblable in guilt to those offenses, the which
of necessity accompany original sin, resident in the regenerate, and not
imputed! And if in the multitude of these sins do consist a justifying
faith, making them not to be imputed, why is any wickedness against nature or
state offensive or hurtful to a Protestante? or why should he care for
innocentie, it being impossible by natures decree, and the opposite guilte or
nocencie is not to him imputed? Then has he his devised faith, as a nurse of
concupiscence, as a defense, not against sin, but for sin; as letters
patentes of mart, yea an inchauntment from the devil to shield him from
annoy, when the flesh gains in him the victory against the spirit, as
filthy Beza deuiseth. Let^ now the tea^es of grief Beza. 6. Romans
in me^n^s eyes be d^yed up, and thorns of doleful panges be removed from the
heart in cogitation of sins committed, ^i^hence that sins are the proper
hea^bes, that grow by necessity in the garden of a regenerate Protestante,
they sprout out from a root of fatal necessity, and are covered with a faith
of a comfortable persuasion. Mercy good Protestanter, says the devil: but
fie for shame, cries the Catholic. The Protestante de^^li^ateth nature,
confesses his sins, preaches the mercyes of God; but why? that men securely
may play and disporte themselves with sins, deem them the effects of nature
and necessity, easily pardonable, dissembled by God, not impu^ed through
faith; and so his hope ends in that ^gnonimious diso^der of lawless
besti^lit^e. Hoe that the sadge governors of our common wealth, knowing that
all good policy is to be grounded on virtue, here would consider how the
doctrine Protestantish tends to vice and iniquity, and so consequently to
make men brutish for destruction of all civil and pollitike demeanor!
Doubtless then would they not judge the Roman Catholic worthy of death and
loss of worldly commodities as traitors and rebels, only for teachinge a
doctrine of purity, a doctrine, that extolleth the grace and meritt of our
savior Christ, and so establishes in lincke of virtue and charity the
societies of Christian people.

The first or indeliberate motions of concupiscence befoore fre consent are not
deadly and mortal, but rather adversaries for Christian Hope in her purity
and constancy, set upon by their temptations, to fight against. In which
combat the Protestante blemisheth and disaduantageth Hope, accounting them
deadly crimes vvher^ such consent is vvanting.

CHAPTER. XII.
BY the name of Concupiscence in this place we understand the disorderly
motions of man his nature, preventing the use of reason, and free consent,
considering the same as ishuing from a triple faculty of the soul, greuouslie
hurt and weakened through orig^nal sin. we may the^ first regard the
general work of Concupiscence in the inferior part of the soul, to wit
in the sensitive faculty, distributed into the appetite, called C^cupiscible,
and the other named ^ra^^^ble. The^ is concupiscence found in the
concupiscible fa^ultie, when is therein a desire of lustful pleasure
unlawful, inclyning and ent^^ing the will to a consent for accomplishment of
sin. After, the like concupiscence is ^xpe^^enced in the power ^pas^^ble,
when hatred, anger, wrath, presumption, break out unadvisedly, and with
distemperature, against the hinderers of the forbidden delights aimed at by
the Concupiscible. Lastly concupiscence now questioned* may be regarded as it
is in the very act and consent of will itself by a sudden motion and
compla^^nce thereof, before the perfect use of reason and deliberation, and not
no^ an effect of free consent, but of a consent only natural, necessary, and
precipitant; as it may fall out in s^eepe, in infancy, in frenzy: in that
the will of man is How Conc^piscence is ^uill.
prone to yield unto sense in the pursuit of plea^ure and sensual
contentment. Of which concupiscence in general we affirm, that it inclines
to ^uill, and so, as cause is evil: that it debili^ateth the native forces of
free will to virtue, and makes it lean too much toward the vicious wishes
and actions of bad designs. Nevertheless we deeeme it not sinful or
damnable, but only when a man gives a free consent of will unto the
suggestion and allurement; and that willing and witting after deliberation of
reason, and full consideration of the fact proposed. But in that this natural
concupiscence is the effect of original sin, and an enticement, yea the
ob^ect and matter of actual sin, therefore it is termed by the Apostle
sin, the law of sin, or the flesh: In mind I serve the law of God, but in
my flesh the law of sin. It is also a trasgression Romans 7.
of the law of reason this concupiscence, and forbidden by the law, but as
object of sin, and not as sin in propriety. For example the outward act of
stealing is against the law, and sinful, not that it is in formalitie
sin, for so should it be sin without use of reason sometimes, as when the
thing is his by whom it is taken away, for that the external act is all one
in physical nature: but it is sin and forbidden, as an evil object of
consent, and so forbidden that men consent not in will to the same. In like
sort concupiscence is a sin, that is an object of sin, and forbidden to be
consented unto; i^ which consent is reposed meerlie the formal part of a
sin, and the dispraise worthy action. which distinction the same Apostle
allows of, saying, I work it not, but sin the which dwells in me.
There is sin then of concupiscence, as cause and object of sin, and there
is sin suggesteth, and sin performed by consent. Against the which he
adioyneth this good counsel: Let not sin reign in your mortal body. Then
in the Apostle was sin dwelling, but not sin reigning, that is, he
consented not to Aug ^. 1. Ciu c. 2^ ^ 2. de peccat merit c. 4. cap 22 Si^est
autem peccatum, Visit poena peccati. lib. de Nap. and co^cupiscent. c. 23.
vocatur peccatu^, quia peccato facta est, and peccatum si vicerit, facit.
Jacob. 5. Aug. lib. 2. de peccat mer* c. 28 li. 5. cont. Iul c. 25.
sin, or was sin his master commanding his choice and free election, by
which is accomplished the nature of that sin, the which makes a man in
estate of death and damnation: for of the former concupiscence says S.
Augustine: how much more is it without fault in the body of one not
consenting, if it be without fauls in the body of one sleeping? And of the
latter, and other concupiscence of consent, thus he avouches: God forbid that
the soul should through any pleasures of the flesh give consent to
turpitude: Affirming this to be contrary to a firm hope in God, that relieth
resolutelie on his assistance: whereby if men be tempted, they may, if they will,
through grace, auoyed consentment, and so abandon sin it self. To the which
effect also the Apostle S. James makes a distinction betwixt sin, and
concupiscence: Concupiscence when it has conceived, brings forth sin: in
that sin is caused, when consent is surrendered to concupiscence. The which
concupiscence S. Augustine does not terrme sin absolutely, but the law of
sin, somes, the incitement to sin. And to this purpose does he expound S.
James: That which is done in sight against concupiscence, is done that
concupiscence do not bring sortb sin. And if at any time this natural
concupiscence be called by S. Augustine sin, he means it to be sin first
as effect of sin, and a viciositie of nature, then as an allurement to sin,
lastly as the object of sin, for that an object bad and contrary to virtue
and right judgment: lastly as the material part of original sin, and so
it is likewise termed by Saint Thomas. The reason also of this is manifest;
for that these motions, although D. Thom. 1. 2. q. 82. ar. 1. 2 3. 4.
they be the actions of a man, as vitallie and effectiuelie proceeding from the
faculties of his soul, yet they be not actions humane, that is freee ones, and
considerate, but rushe and break out of nature, as they do in brute beasts
by impetuositie of the soul distempered; as it falls out in sleep and
frenzy: And so it is impossible with judgment to esteem of them as of
actual sins, and culpable misdemeanures of man, he being not of ability to
avoid them, yet laboring against them what he may through the grace of
Christ. For most absure it is to place sin in that motion, which has no
freedom of work in it, but is rather meerlie natural and necessary, as it
falls out in the first motions of concupiscence. And therefore if Adam had
eaten the forbidden aple only of a natural and necessary concupiscence, his
fact had been no sin or culpable. Prudent Hamar^.


Quod prohibente deo, persuasit callidus anguis,
Persuasit certe hortatu, non impulit acri
Imperio.
What serpent dire to Adam did persuade, as serpent sly to kill,
He did not force in any sort, but studied how to gain free will.
Consensit; licuit ne hortantem spernere recti
Liberate animi? licuit: nam and deus ante
Suaserat, vt meliora volens sequeretu^: at ille
Spernens consilium, saeuo plus credidit host.
Most true it is he gave consent:
But could he take an other way?
He could: for God his advertisement
Did better side to him display.
Only this: Gods word he did despise,
And let the Fiend himself surprise.
So also virtue if it be not free, is no virtue or laudable, that is; if it
proceed not from a will able to do this, or that.

Non sit sponte bonus, cui non est prompta potestas
Velle aliud, flexosque animi conuerter^sensus.
None of freedom is made good, who wants, a power as competent
To alter choice, and that to think, what will shall deem for best content.
Also to determine of these first and necessary motions of concupiscence, as
of sins without freedom of will and consent, is blasphemouslie to make God
the author of Romans 7. Concupiscence a sin by the Protestant. Calu. 3. Instit.
c. 3. Sect. 10. 13. Nature is defamed by the Protestant with Manichaeus, as
bad and sinful. Sect. 11. VVittaker. ll. 2. de peccat. orig. cap. 11. No real
or substantial thing is sin or bad. Aug. l. cont. lul c. 8. Ipsum malsi
dicit esse naturam: speaking of Manichaeus: but all inclination is natural and
real, and so not sinful.
sin; in that these motions are his penalties and miseries inflicted by him
upon man for original sin. unhappy man that I am, said S. Paul, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? being vexed and turmo^led with
concupiscence. And in that these motions are real qualities and actions, if
there be no intercourse of free will in man to derive unto them the spott of
sin, as the whole and total cause, God must needs be author of what sin
is in them: for that naturally and necessarily without freedom they are
sins, and so God author of nature and necessity, is also consequently
author and mouer of what iniquity is found in them.

2. The Antichristian Protestanter to magnify against the Cross of Christ,
the empire and burden of sin, and also to give a free passage to licentious
wickedness without fear of any harm, accounts of all these motions, yea of
every work of the soul, as of a deadly and mortal sin, although not any
consent of man be present, or deliberate choice made of forbidden pleasure by
the law of God and nature. We hold all that for sin, says Calvin, the
which with any lust tickleth a man against the law of God: yea we affirm
to be a sin the very prauitie, that brings forth such lustful desires.
Then is first the faculty of nature sin, and after also all motions vitallie
from thence proceeding are sins: yet adds he, we confess that they are not
imputed to the just, as if they were not. The infection of nature, speaks an
other, is not only an inclination to evil, see the beast making an
inclination natural, sin; but also an evil disposition: this adds nothing
but a foolish word or two, An evil nature and evil mind: O monster, is a
mind, and nature it self sinful! whereby, concludes he, we are still
incited to do evil. Then of the motions, vented out from this nature and
inclination, thus does he denounce: Therefore original injustice is a
certain transgression of the whole decalog. That is, concupiscence in all men
is an actual breach of all the ten commandments, and the motions thereof
still are with consent of will, sufficient to make them adulteties,
fornications, thestes, murders, injuries, and all other wickedness possible. Is
not here a neat Christianity, so plunged in iniquity, so defiled with
concupiscence by Protestancie?

3. The first comparison between th^se two opinions shall be deduced from
Hope, By the grace of Christ concupiscence is not sin without consent.
Quibus si no^ consentitur, nullus peccati reatus contrahitur. Aug. lib. de
peccat. orig c. 40 l. 1. de Nup and concupis. c. 23. 1. Joan. 1. 1. Joan. 3.
Omnes homines iudica^t lasciuiae non esse peccatu^, nisi quia concupiscentiae
consentitur. Aug. l 3. cont. Julian. c. 14.
respecting the merits and graces of our Savior Christ, and the goodness of God
thereby inclined, yea powered out, to our great commodity. Hope in the
Catholic arises upon consideration, that we deem the just and regenerate by
Christ his sanctifying and guarding grace, to be preserved from mortal stain
of sin, importing a sufficient force in man to repel and euercome all the
banefull temptations thereof. God is saithfull and just, that he remitt unto us
our sins, and cleanse us from all iniquitte. All that remain in him sinn^
not: He that commits sin is of devil. Every one that is borne of God
does not committ sin, because hi^ seed remains in him, and he can not
sin because he is borne of God. Lo here a defense of the just and regenerate
by grace from the harm and anoye of sin. Is not this a singular benefitt
aimed at by hope, so to be shielded from heinous and deadly crime, from the
fire brandes of Satan, and the flying darts of natural concupiscence? If so,
then is Hope in us greatly increased respectiuelie toward so dear and
bountiful a protector Christ our Savior. Contrariwise the Protestanter
impeacheth the gift, weakeneth the defense, auouching the just actuallie to
committ by a continual disorder of works a million of mortal and deadly
sins, flowing and gushing still out of concupiscence, to the violation of
all the ten commandments; and thereby such just persons to be formallie and
reallie polluted, defiled, and worthy in fact and demerit of eternal fire in
hell. O is Christ no better a Savior, no suerer a friend, no more afluent a
fountain, then to suffer his children thus to be corrupted and poisoned with
mortal sins, with all vices forbidden in the law; to be very Lazares of
iniquity, from top to toe unclean and loathsome! Here certes is Antichrist
defacing the majesty of Christ with dishonor, impairing his ability with
penury, auiling his liberality with nigardise, and placing Christ with a
rain bow of a fantastical justice under Satan, domineering and tyrannising
upon the souls of men with the excrements of all offenses, and filth of
forbidden concupiscence* yea this vile heresy raises it self to the very
misprison of God his eternal and just providence. The Protestant is heretical
against the providence of God.
For if concupiscence be a deadly sin, then is it to be punished, it
remaining as due cause and procurement thereof; and so the very just in
justice, in whom they abound, are liable to damnation, and in estate of
perdition, as enemies of God, rebels against his sacred majesty and Empire.
How then just, and yet to be saved? If concupiscence be a mortal sin before,
and without free consent* then in those that believe not, they shall work
effectually eternal punishment in hell. But must poor souls broyle in fire
for mere motions of nature, the which they could not avoid? must they be
tormented perpetually in hell, for perturbations breaking out in time of
sleep, of distraction of mind, of frenzy, or passion ouertopping the use of
reason? Can so small a crime, so excusable a trespass against man his will,
and he resisting rushing out, deserve at God his hands so severe, cruel and
horrible a castigation? what doo^t thou make of God, Protestante, in this thy
judgment, or what of sin, in so slender an offense!

4. Farthermore what Hope the Catholic does establishe for honesty of life
by Catholic purity against the Protestant.
the doctrine of this point, the Protestanter endeuoreth to anull, and make
frustrate. We by the preceps of Hope and charity, which keeps the law,
strive manfully and resolutelie against concupiscence, to the end we may
eschew deadly and mortal sin, that concupiscence conceive not, and bring
not forth sin, that concupiscence Jacob. 5. Romans 6. 7.
do not rule and reign in our souls, as the holy Apostles do advise us.
But if true; what the Protestanter defines, to wit, that the very first
motion of the appetite, and the abrupt consent of will, is deadly and mortal
sin, the which none can shume or or hinder, what need is there of any
farther painful labor to resist and withstand temptation, or the first
impressions? For now allreadie sin has made breach and entry, now is sin
raining and raging in the soul in number and quality infinite, and therein
are found continual violations of all the ten commandments, as confesses
the Protestanter? Neither can our fight abridge this number, in that
perpetually the violation proceeds from a corrupted nature day and might in
all moments; bringing to pass also, that our very sight and resistance, the
withdrawing of consent from concupiscence, be deadly and mortal sins, and
whether we stand or fall, abide the battle or yield sine still, yea mortal
sin, will prevail. In vain the^ Hope and charatie employed are in the field
against concupiscence, against sin, when in their despite concupiscence
contriueth sin and offenses against all the commandments of God and nature.
I enquire then of this impure Protestant, whether in the just or righteous
sin of concupiscence do reign or no? If he admit the reign of
concupiscence, and her empire in them, how then is he obedient to God, saying,
Thou shall not be concupiscente? and to the Apostle: Let not concupiscence
reign in your mortal bodies? If he deny such reign, let him yield me a
reason: Is it for that the will consents not to concupiscence? Sin reignet^
in the just by the Protestant. Exodus 20. Romans 6.
he can not allege that cause, in that he grants with Calvin, the will of
man to be the seat of sin, and that all concupiscence is performed with some
consent of will. What meant then S Augustine and others, in their scrupulosity
to cry out, God forbidd that we should yield consent to concupiscence, seeing
that our holy Protestanter a uoucheth a necessity of consent to
concupiscence, even in persons justified, and an impunitie thereof as not
imputed? Or finally does not concupiscence reign, because the just do not
consent unto it freely and deliberatelie? Nothing less, will say our
Protestanter, in that according to his Theology, adultery, murder, theft, are
sins Calvin. 3. Instit. c. 3. VVittak li. de concupise. Aug. l. 1. Ciu. c 25.
not of a free will, but of a will, that could Do no otherwise, of a will that
wanted all sufficient grace to repel them. Then I conclude, that by the
doctrine of a Protestant, In the very just reigns concupiscence, that is
sin in all kinds enters whether man will or no, it defiles the soul,
whether man will or no, it draws out a consent of sin, whether a man will
or no, and so is absolute mistress and commandresse of the soul. Is not this
to reign, to domineere, to command? It may be that out of his Puritanicall
paekerie he will tell me, that concupiscence reigns not, although sin do
command in the soul by motion and consent, because through a lyuelie faith,
in on apprehending God as his God, Christ as his Christ, all the varletrie No
concupiscence hurt full to a lou^^ Protestant. S Augustine denies that bad
motions of concupiscence in saints, namely in S. Cyprian, did make the^
sinful. l. 2. co^^. Julian c 8 as if fighting against motions of avarice, they
were auaricious^.
and paltrie of concupiscence is not imputed. A sweet resolution for a good
hog, and the devils larderhouse: surely if the protestant use no perfumes,
none can abide his loath some trashe. Let him now soil this argument, if he
can: There is no law that forbids the sudden motions of concupiscence
before free consent; neither is there any damage or loss to the soul by such
concupiscence, or is it possible for any man to want the same concupiscence:
Therefore neither is there any law forbidding theft or adultery, there is no
damage to the soul by theft and adultery, no possitlitie for any person to
avoid the sins of theft and aduterie, and so a faithful Protestant in a
gospelling liberty, may commit what wickedness he lists. The first part of
the antecedent is evident, in that no reasonable law does prohibit any action
befalling man of necessity, as well in sleep as in watchfullnes, in frenzy
as in prudence, without a blasphemous imputation of a fond providence unto
Almighty God. The other two members, to wit, the impossibility to be
without concupiscence, and that concupiscence hurts not a Protestant by his
faith not imputed, they admit themselves. The sequel then of the consequent
is most apparent, in that according to to the Protestant, concupiscence is
intrinsccallie and essentiallie theft, adultery, and all sins against the
whole ten commandments: neither to theft nd adultery is requisite by his
doctrine freedom Notions of c^cupis^ence without frevvill are things of
nature and real qualities. and so cannot ^e sins. ^or thus etred the
Manichies: vos autem assertitis quandam naturam atque substantiam malam esse.
Aug. lib. 2. de Mo^. ^^ccles.
of will* therefore as it is impossible to shun concupiscence, so also to
repel theft, and adultery: and as concupiscence is not imputed for sin to a
faithful Protestant, so neither are theft and adultery imputed for crimes, or
are deadly staynes of his soul. Here then is our Protestanter stamping and
swearing in the dirt of his own wickedness, with his nimble lively says,
still making God his god, and Christ his Christ, whilste he defiles himself
with the excrements of hell, and odious humor of concupiscence. Nevertheless yet
from his mouth, his person, and action so plunged in filth, issues out the
sacred words of the lord, of the justice of the lamb, of confidence in
Christ, remaining just and righteous in the very act of knauerie and villainy!
How can here be any civility, and good aberance from our Protestanter to his
prince and contrie, when he may attempt and effect what concupiscence shall
determine, without loss to his sanctity, and to the justice of Christ
apprehended by faith? How can remain on foot, or in flower vrbanitie, the
pronenes of nature so licensed to turpitude, to vice, the only maynteiners
and abetters of barbarism? where may virtue appear when fight against
concupiscence and sin is misprised, for that sin continually will abound,
be committed by all, and no means at hand to avoid the same? Auant foul
barbarian Epicure, who under a pretense that God is his god, and Christ is his
Christ, sacrifices to the devil upon the altar of his own belly, and
abominable concupiscence. Fie Puritan, fie, are these good subjects, are they
Christians, are they men* no rather the hatred of all honest and chase
conceiptes of men. For example; why should a man strive against the suggestion
to adultery or fornication, when the very temptation procured by the devil,
the first apperite and desire is now al^edie fornication and adultery, and the
breaches of the law? And what a Prince is the devil, who according to
Protestancie stirring up the first motions at his pleasure, does make men
adulterers, fornicators, whether they will, or no! Impure Puritanisme.

Hope in the Catholic is much provoked to virtue by faith believing the
commdandements of God and nature to be possible. Contrariwise the Protestanter
making them impossible, empaireth thereby the strength and courage of that
great and sovereign virtue.

CHAPTER. XIII.
ALMIGHTY God has enacted some laws and decrees for our good, and more
Divine laws some natural some positi^e.
perfect direction in manners, which were nothing else but the very precepts of
nature and right reason, as be the Ten cammandements, only excepted the
religious observation of the Saboth upon a determinate da^: to the end that by
a d^uble obligation, to wit of nature, and so the written law of God, men
might be addicted in more strict and rigorous sort to virtues, agreeable to
nature, and her right enformance. Other laws there be appointed by Almighty
God, only depending in particular on his sacred will and pleasure, as weere to
the Jew the legal rites, appertayning to religion, and in regard of us, of
the same quality are the precepts of faith, of receiving the Sacraments, and
of the profession of this faith, as is recorded in the new Testament. By the
law of nature is meant that prescription of mind in man, the which proceeds
from him as a creature endowed with a reasonalbe soul, and is therefore a
common What is natural law.
rule of life with all nations, and in all places, where reason is not clean
ouerruled by sin and concupiscence, as the law forbidding adultery,
fornication, stealth, murder, oppression of the poor commanding justice,
temperance and fortitude, and such like natural desginements, tending to the
mayntenance moral and civil of a society and commercement betwixt man and
man: without the which, as vice would abound, so also barbaris^e, and the
destruction of all common good by necessity would ensue. which law is termed
by the Apostle a natural law; in respect whereof they Gentiles by reasons
document were a law to themselves. And this very self same law of Romans ^.
nature is reduced to the divine law of God, in that reason, by God, as a
representation of his one natural perfection, is imprinted in man, and
consequently what trespass does tranerse this natural law in man, ariueth
to an open injury against God, and is a contempt of his eternal law,
fountain and cause of all natures precepts and commandries. Psalm. 4. D. Thom
1 2. 9 71. art 6. How the lavv^s difficult yet possible.


2. In regard of which law divine, and natural, for the observance thereof,
we confess, the same to be made now more difficulte; in that free will, even
in the regenerate, is much enfeebled and weakened by concupiscence and pronenes
to unlawful contentments, forbidden by both those laws. yet nevertheless
our Christian faith attributes so much to the merits and grace of Christ, as
that thereby the law is made possible unto us, yea a sweet and easy burden
through the delight and force of charity, either to avoid sin forbidden by
the law, or to perform the office and duty of Aug de spi^. and l^^. de Gr^^
and l. a^b. ca. 18.
virtue prescribed by the sme. The which verity is approved by all such places
of Scripture, as pronounce the law of God and nature to be the rules of our
actions and lives, and that the transgressors of them small be eternally
punished, as enemies of God, rebels against his will and pleasure. For a rule
has this essentiallie, that it is to The law is a rule of our act^ons,
conducteth men to grace and is fulfil^ed by Charity. Lexigitur adducit fide^,
fides impetrat spiritum largiorem. diffundit spiritus chari^ate^, implet
charitas legem. Aug (...) 144. Aug. lib 2 de pecc^^ merit. c. 6. de Na^ and
Gra^ c 68 Firmissime (...) ditur, D^um iustum and bonum impossibilia non
potuisse p^xcipere. Aug. lib. 1. de Not. and Great. ca. 8. Rom 6 13 ciu. c 4.
rule the work of which it is rule: and so the work is to be adjudged as
good, if conformable to the rule, or reproved as bad and culpable, if
discordant or deficient from the directorie thereof. Then if the law of God and
nature be rules of our conversation, it is possible that we may answer unto
them, they not exceeding over ability: for if the were place, as it weere, out
of our reche and compass, they should not concern us, or weere we to aim at
them with obligation of conformity; no more than are the Drapers in VVa^ling
street bound to measure out their Cloth by Paul's steeple, or by the distance
betwixt the two poles Artike and Antartike. Likewise if sinners be to be
punished eternally in hell fire for transgressing the law of God and nature,
and such transgressionsis displeasing unto Almighty God, then may they
consequently square out their demeanures just according to the tenor of those
laws, otherwise in them there should he no culpable trepasse or offense: as
one that is in drink through his defaulte, has no obligation from God or
nature in that case, to stand on his see^e, or to take the rightie way in his
journey, because i^ is to him so to do impossible. This is the express
doctrine of S. Augustine. By these, says he, and many other innumerable
testimonies, I can not Doubt, that either God has commanded any thing to man
^mpossible, nor that any thing is impossible, or that God afforderh not
sufficient help that man may do that which he commands. And hereby it is
manifest, that man if he will, helped by God, may be without sin. Truth
it is, the law of it self, as teaches the same Doctor, and we experience it,
does rather cause in us a preuarication, by the corruption of our nature
egging us to rebel against the superiority of the law, if i^ be severed from
faith, and helping grace of God. ^he law does she vvou^ disease, but recureth
it not; yea by that it is not re^ured, it is increased: to the end that we
more attentively and carefully search after the medi^ine of grace. Then
viewing our own weakness and the difficulty of the law increasing the same, we
must not surcease from work and observance toward the law, as the pilot does
from his charge beholding all round about in desperation: but we ought rather
seek after grace, and labor with the same resolutelie to the keeping of the
law: that is after the law of charity, the which can with facility and
delighte perform the same. Therefore in the office of man, S. Augustime does
teach to be combined and coupled the double law of faith, and charity, the one
serving to show us Christ as a means to assit us against the harshe empire of
the law, the other as an heaven lie force to obey the same. To that end the
law commands, that it may advertise says what she is to do: That is, that
when a man is commanded, if yet he is not of ability, he may know what he
is Aug. de Spi^. and Lit. cap. 13.
to pray for. But if he can performent, and do it ^ffectuallie, ^e must also
know, by whose gift ^e is of that ability. Hereupon the same S. Augustine
moves a question, why the Apostle opposes in contrariety the law of faith to
the law of works: For; says he, i^ the old law was a law of works
because it prohibited badd works as when it commanded thou Non concupisces;
v^ique and Christ^anis, nullus ambig^^, esse d^cendun^ Aug. Epist. 200. Aug.
lib. de Spir. and lit. c. 13. cap. 14^ Aug. l. 3. cont Iul^an c. 26 l. 3 cont
2. Epis. Pelag^on. cap. 4 l. 4 c. ^. de ^^d. and Oper. c. 22. Epi^ 200. verum
hoc fit non lege quae ho^ impe^at, sed fide quae hoc impetrat.
shall not kill, so does also says forbidd the same. Then laying down a
supposed answer, that faith is not a law of works, ^or that it does not
prescribe the works of the old law, now antiquated, he says is not to be a
insufficient solution: for allthough the Christian faith do not command those
works, yet it command^th others, proper unto the Sacraments of the n^vv law.
Therefore he acknowledges the law of the Christian faith to be a law of
works, of virtues, as well as the old law: yea in a more perfect manner, in
that more eminent active virtue is to be expected of a Christian, than of a
Jew; only designing this difference betwixt those two laws of works, that by
the old law of works was in man increased concupiscence, and that an
external terror was adjoined to perform with enforcement the work of the
law: but by the law of faith is detected Christ unto us, and by him is obtained
grace delightful, to fulfill the law, giving these words to the old law of
works, Do that I command, and these to the law of faith, Da quod iubes: O
lord gene me grace to do as thou do command. Then the law of Christian
faith is a law of works, that is a law of charity, as expounds S.
Augustine: The which delivers us from sin and preuatication By the law of
faith, which is in Christ Jesus, when charity is povvred out into our
hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto ^s. Now the Portestantish
heretic in this matter first abuses the law of faith, then makes void the
law of Hope, charitiy and all honesty, as shall by the sequel appear.

2. Faith is placed by the Protestanter as a virtue opposite to all virtue, and
a security The Portestants obedience to God and nature in only faith, and the
svveete burden of all by this faith. Luth. l. de ^ibert. Ch^^st and Tom. 4. p.
^8 Q^^^ h^c (...) ableges Moise^ Bal^un^ and H^^sum c^ s^a lege, 1. c 9. vllo
^odo ^^ moue^nt ter^o^^s and m^n^iphus. Hic simpliciter ^^ tibi suspectus, vt
haereticus* Excommunicatus, Damnatus, dete^ior Papa, and Diabo^o, ide^ pro^sus
non audiendus Calu. 2* Insti^. c. 7 Sect. 7. Sect. 10.
for the concupiscence of all sin* wherefore when this faith in the brains
of a Protestant beholds, through man's weakness* notwithstanding any grace to
the contrary, the law of God and nature to be impossible, and not to be
performed by him without deadly sin and disobedience, it does not excite in
him hopeful charity to resist Satan and concupiscence, and so to keep the
law, as it ought, that being impossible and as botteles, as if a man would
strive to beat back the flowing waves of the Ocean sea* but lays fast hold
on the justice of Christ, telling the party, that he in Christ has fullfilled
the law, and does now fulfill it, although mortallie breaking it, and
sinning against it, in that such breach and violation is not to him imputed.
He can play the coll^or, and yet not grime his fingers; rebel, and be a good
subject; keep the law, and violate it both together: a strange iugling trick
of a Prote^ant! I pray God it be not some sorcerie from the devil, and such a
fa^^ and loose, as will tu^^e finally to his own ruin and damnation. First
then he deemeth it a thing absolutely impossible to observe the natural and
divine comma^dements of justice, of temperance, of continency, of obedience to
God and man, so as none can avoid the breach of them all by as many mortal
sins, as continually boil ou^e of con^upiscence, making men by necessity
guilty of adultery of fo^^ication, iniusti^e and the like; so that it is
impossible in this respect to keep the law of God and nature forbidding such
offenses. The law therefore, as speaks Calvin, is to us as it were a
glass^, i^ the which we behold^ our imptencie, and of it iniquity, and
lastly of them both our malediction. ^o then the law is no means or
directorie for virtue, but a mere occasion of offense and trespass: to the
end, That men naked and void may fl^e to the mercy of God; believing by faith
their own imbecill^tie, and that nothing committed against the law is impu^ed,
which impossibility for the observance of the law, they also acknowledge to be
found in the just and regenerate: By the folly of the flesh, yea the children
of God, laseiuiunt, do play the wantons. Where the law does not bridle them
from inward breach of the law by a consent against God, and nature, given unto
sin, but only in some sort restayneth them from outward performance of
iniquity: yea neither thus much. For who knows not, that any Protestant may
remaining in estate of apprehending faith, by external action offend? And if
by internal consentment, why not by outward execution, when means and
possibility are presented? Then against the possibility of the law the
Protestant defines, that the very keeping of the law is sinful in two
respects against the law it self. First for that every observance of the law
is infected with Observing of the Law is sinful by the Protesta^^*
deadly sin, passing as clear water though the channel of a natural
concupiscence, and of a faculty of the soul sineefull by an inclination in it
to sin: then for that every duty toward the same a^^iueth not to that
perfection of deggee and pitche, by resista^ce of an adjoined concupiscence, to
which it ought, although in that respect it be impossible, and so is sinful
and worthy of damnation, as a manifest transgression of the law. And whereas
the question about the possibility of the law of God and nature enquireth,
whether men by the grace of God may by continency, and justice, avoid
fornication, and adultery, and by other virtues tempted to vice repulse or no
the whole crew of mortal sins, as of envy, murder, rebellion, sacrilege,
blasphemy, the Protestant although he think it impossible for any man to
live chaste, or righteouslie, to be free from their crimes, yet ashamed to
utter his opinion, plays and dallieth only with a certayn^ quality of the
law, making the law to us impossible not absolutely, and Abb. def. page ^69.
in substance, b^t According to the full measure and perfection thereof. The
trial will clear^ the truth.

3. Whereas the Catholic both in love toward Christ our Redeemer, as also in
Impossibility of the substance of the law according to the Protestant.
the employments of all the virtues, which fulfill the law, is through Hope
buselie occupi^d, acknowledging a sufficient grace from Christ his merits to
observe the law, and so to shune such deadly offenses, as violate the same,
the Protestanter takes the sentence of the law as a thing impossible,
confessing, that in him concupis^ence does so reign, as that of necessi^ie he
by action thereof continually offends against the law of God and nature,
having no possibility to the contrary, and so remains guilty of
fornication, of injustice, of in^emperance, pleading an impossibility for any
man in the very substance of the work, to keep the law, or to avoid such
mortal sins, as are in the law p^ohibited. Whereby he takes the law not as
a means to virtue, to integrity of life, as the Catholic with S. Augustine
does, but only as an accasion and Sarcina quippe illa, quae infirmitat^
grau^s est, leuis efficitur charitati. Aug de Great. and li. arb. c. 17 ^pi.
144. 200.
inducement to sin. Neither does he behold Christ in faith, as from him to
receive a grace of a competent force to keep the law, and repulse such crimes
as are therein forbidden, but only beholds him on the cross as a
benefactor, the which will not impute fornication to a fornicator, disobedience
to a disorderly person, hat^ed to a rancorous humor, or finally any sin to
a man believing, never so sinful. Is not here then in the Protestant the
course of Hope abridged, the life thereof struck dead with an insensible
stupiditie, when a christian man can not in substance observe the law, but of
necessity ouermaistered with concupiscence must permit sin to invade and
beseege the soul, to possess it, and ouerwhelme it with all iniquity,
proscribed in the law? This, this is the best^alitie of Luther, imagining in
his drink and apostasy all the laws of God and nature to be kept in one sole
act of faith, not in charity otherwise crossed and violated with act of
intemperance and disobedience! All which laws Luth. l de Libert. Christ.
says he, Thou may after by a comp^^dious way fulfill by only faith.
Then a Protestant according to a new trick, after the old damned Puritan,
can trespass against temperance, against continency, break all the ten
commandments by concupisence, by fornication, adultery, murder, steelth and
yet keep them all believing such crimes not to be imputed! O goodly Hope
Protestantish, idle from good fact, and secure in a licentious turpitude, when
the ^ais of faith shall make all whole and clean, where against Hope and
charity all sins have made up their games! A proper manner The law is not
fulfilled in only faith Ne quisquam e^^stimer. (...) ei^s ad solam fide^
pertine^e Aug. de Fid. and oper. ca. ^^.
of obedience to the law, when an oftender in act against the same obsetueth it
by faith, and so a dronkard in Christ is sober, although a beast in the
tavern: when his will diueth to hell in despighte of God, the understanding
mounteth to heaven to apprehend the justice of the lamb! And for whom? for a
varlet, for a dronkard, for a libidinous person, for one that keeps the law
of God and nature with his eyes, and breaks them with his hands, feet, and
all parts of his body and soul? O vile Antichristian faith? Then let the
Protestanter take it for a fether of his own wing, and a declaration from his
own mouth, and be not ashamed at it; to wit, that the law of God and nature
is in substance absolutely impossible, and not only so in quality of degree
and perfection: that is the law is impossible to man, as that he may either
furnishe him self with such virtues, as are prescribed in the law, or eschew
such sins, as are forbidden in the same; in that it is impossible, that when
temptation is present or urgent, as always it is, that concupiscence should
not break forth into deadly offenses against the law of God and nature, or
bring it to pass, that the very regenerate be not guilty of licentiousnes in
wanton pleasures, of injury against their neighbors, of impiety against God.
VVhereupon does it ensue, that not only the law of God and nature is in
substance impossible to the regenerate, but also that such persons may do what
they list without hurt to their justice, in that the manifold violations of
all such laws to them by a certain faith are not imputed. why then should
Hope or charity endeavor to fulfill the law, it being impossible in substance
to perform it? whey should Hope dread and fear any breach of the law, it
being not imputed? But this bestialirie of a justifying faith, where charity
and friendship with God is lost and violated by breach of his holy
commandments, is thus reproved by S. Chrysostom. Let us not think, Chrysostom
hom. 9. in Joan.
my dear frinds, that faith is sufficient for us to salvation: for unless
we add a pure life, and clothe our selves in garments, vvorthie of the
heavenly vocation, vv^e^eby we may be admitted unto the marriage, nothing,
nothing shall defend us from that punishment, vvhere^^th that miserable wretch
was tormented. Let the Protestanter show unto me, how one preserves in his
soul charity, and is attired with the wedding garment of that virtue, whilste
he breaks all the ten camaundements, hates and iniurieth his brother, and
finally is ^oan. 2 4.
oppressed with all vice and deadly sins? To the same sense also
excellently well an other doctor of that Church, S Cirill of Alexandria,
R^mayne you in me and I in you. as the palm: etc. most man^^^stl^^ out of
this place we learn, that men are branches by a sincere Joan 16. Cuil: Ibid.
Psalm 62. No consent to sin hurtful to a Protestant. (...) l. 3. de (...) o
(...).
faith ingra^ted into the vine: But we must have no less care also, to stick
unto Christ by charity, that is by observing his commandments, crying with
the Prophet, my soul has been fastened after thee. Therefore it is not
sufficient to perfection, which is by Christ in spirit, to be in the number of
branches, but it is behooue full with burning charity, and continual
innocence to follovv Christ: In which thing especially consists the virtue
of a spiritual con^unction VVhereupon it being evident, that this doctrine
Protestantishe is wholly bent to turpitude and dissolution of life, thus one
of that sect endeuoreth to smooth up his matter and soul heresy: The
regenerate by grace can in this life not obey orconsent unto evil desires: but
for th^^ not at all to be concupiscent, that the law commands, that is to
want all evil desires, is only reserved for the estate to come of the
blessed. First this resolution implies a flatt contradiction, distinguishing
desire from consent; as if the just might choose whether they would consent or
no, but not whether they desire that which is evil or no: for consent is
nothing else but an act of the will agreeing and according to the inducement D.
Thom. 1. ^ q. 30. and 40. ^^ 1. Azor l. ^. Just. c. 8. Luc. ^^.
and persuasion in the understanding or suggestion; but desire of bad pleasure,
is of that quilitie, therefore desire is consent. Did not our blessed Savior
consent to his father, and his own charity, saying; I have desired in desire
to eat of this pasche with you? Then thus I argue: The just and regenerate
may desire any forbidden act by consent of will without damage to their
justice, therefore they may with the like indemnitie perform in outward work
any wickedness desired. The Antecedent is granted, in that it is impossible
otherwise to happen, or for any to want bad desires. The consequent is also
thus proved. The outward act can be no more deadly of it self, when occasion
is presented to perform it, than is the wish and desire thereof: yea the
outward act has all malice derived unto it from the souls inward will and
affection: therefore if D. Tho^^. ^^. ^ 74. a^^ ^.
it be no loss to justice the desire, neither is the outward operation; and if
the regenerate may persisting in estate of grace wish the forbidden use of any
creature, they may also effect the same. Then it as apparenthe false according
to the doctrine Protestantishe, that a man although just may by grace choose
whether he will obey or consent to evil desires or no. For if the just do
committ deadly sins, and continually do violate in act and work the whole
ten cammandements, as this writer himself confesses, how do they not obey
then and consent to evil desires? in that sin is an obedience and a service
due unto the flesh and Satan: yea this same Caluinister admits, that
VVittak lib. ^. de p^^^. orig. c. 1.
concupiscence in the just is always with some consent. Therefore the just
may obey and consent to any wickedness forbidden in the law, and it shall not be
to them imputed, or prejudicial to their justice; and they themselves know
certaynlie by faith as much. Did not David in his murder and aduoutrie consent
to evil desires, and obey them? did not also S. Peter in the denial of his
master consent to a sinful desire, and obey it, being bad and forbidden?
Then thus I Dispute: The just may without loss to justice obey evil desires,
and consent unto them, and so break the law of God and nature; Therefore
according to the Protestant, that law of God and nature to the parties so
offendant was in substance impossible to be kept, and they could do no
otherwise. The Antecedent is admitted by the adversary; the consequent is also
manifest: for men have not free will, as the Protestant deemeth; they do then
sin and break the law of God and nature of necessity, as David and S. Peter
did: If of necessity, then there was no ability in them ^^ the contrary, and
so the law forbidding such facts absolutely, was to them in substance
impossible. Then is the law of God and nature impossible to the just, and they
have no power not to consent, or not to obey concupiscence, to the violation of
the law of God and nature. Yea hereby the Protestanter intending nothing else
but a liberty of sin, debarreth himself of sin, and turns all sin into
an harmles delighte. For what man does against the law of necessity, being an
impossibility implied in the observance of the law, is excuseable, and not
justly to be reputed as sin, no more than are the motions of cernalitie in
one, that is asleep, according to S. Augustine. Suerlie a pretty trick of
the Protestanter, Aug. li 1. C^^ c. 5.
to enjoy his pleasant bayte of pleasure, and in the mean while to couson the
devil of the sin! Thus is it auerred, how the Protestantish doctrine makes
the law of God and nature absolutely and in substance impossible, in that
deadly sin against the law, of necessity, by concupiscence, by consent and
choice, yea by external act, enters and possesses the iustest, that lives.
Let him then not blushe henceforth, or restayne his pen from witnessing this
fair document of his own soul Minerua. 4. We Catholics in all diligency of
Hope employ charity in good action, in that we Possibility of the law is
matter of virtue, the impossibility, of vices.
think by her operation, and the works of the virtues, we may answer in a
competent sort to the prescript of the law, and that laudablie to the
performance of morality, decency, honesty, and auoidance of deadly and mortal
offense. This hope makes us exactly as we can to compose and square out our
actions according to the rule and measure of the law; reputing it an absurdity
to think, that God proposes to our intelligences a law, or rule of a matter
or endeavor impossible, or that men are indeed culpable, for not attayning of a
thing, or a degree of action, the which to them is not acheuable. But the
Protestanter, to the end he with his pleasant faith may clippe from the Sampson
of Hope all the hairs of fortitude, depriues it of all courage to do well, or
to observe the law, esteems in general, the obedience, by the just performed
toward the law of God and nature, by two means as has been rehearsed, to be
deficient and polluted with deadly sin. First in that the very keeping of
the law by grace, and as deed of virtue, passes from a faculty of nature
corrupted, and being therein seated, is stained thereby with mortal crime
odious to God, and justly derseruing hell fire: so that in this respect the law
is impossible to be observed, to wit to the auoydance of mortal sin.
Moreover he teaches, that every good work of the just, or the obedience of
Nothing but sin is by the law according to the Protestant.
them toward the law, to be sinful, in that it arriueth not to the highte of
that perfection and quality it ought, throughte the impediment of a natural
concupiscence to it adjoined, and therefore the fault is culpable, hateful to
God, and a very breach of the law worthy hell fire: although that degree of
perfection assigned by the law, be to every one impossible. VVhereupo^ for the
mayntenance of sin by Antichrist, thus may be framed an argument. In the act
of virtue, or abseruance of the law, is included two mortal sins; the one
derived from the corruption of original sin, yet remaining, the other from a
defect, in not attayning to that perfection it ought, and has in charge from
the law: therefore it is better not to work at all in virtue, or to violate
the law, than to keep and observe it. The Antecedent is granted by the
Protestanter; the consequent is of like admittance; for in breaking the law, or
in not keeping it, is found one only sin, as for example, that of
fornication, adultery, theft, or of such like offense: But in the observance
of the law are committed two sins, one of concupiscence, the other of
violating the law, prescribing a thing impossible: therefore it is better not
to keep the law, than to keep it: in that it is better to commit one sin,
than two, especially when these two are deadly and damnable, as the
Protestante teaches, and of equal guilt each of them in several with that
one. And as concerning the perfection and degree of excellency in the
obedience toward the law of God, and nature, we What perfection is required
to keep the law.
confess, by concupiscence and pronenesse to forbidden pleasures it much to be
in all hindered: not that internallie the act of charity or virtue observing
the law, is sinful, but in respect of many venial sins accompanying it,
evil habits and customs acquired, hindering from that perfection of virtue,
to the which we might else attain, Aug l. de perfect just ca 8. In qua plen^tud
ne Charitatis praeceptum illud iniprebitur, Diliges Domin^ Deum t^^m.
and the which in final degree we are only in heaven to enoye, as notheth S.
Augustine. Yet not with standing as by the grace of Christ these venial
offenses may be subdued, and good habits and customs induced, so we may
continually perfect our selves as concerning the commendable quality of our
duty toward the law. But to affirm with the Protestanter first, that the
degree of this our obedience prescribed in the law is to us impossible, then
that men sin deadly in the very act of virtue and observation of the law,
for that they ariue not to the same, is blasphemy against God, and very open
valla^ie injurious to humane society: blasphemy imputing to God his
providence under pain of deadly sin an exaction of a task to us
impossible, and that many are to be damned in hell eternally, for not
attayning to that they could not: likewise a villainy against virtue, stayning
it by necessity with mortal sin, discouraging men from endeavor of keeping
the law, and making the law of God and nature no law at all, or rule of our
lives. For that which is beyond our reach and power, is not to us any rule;
seeing we cannot apply the rule to the action to be ruled, or by our action
answer to the rule; and then as the law is impossible, so no rule, no law at
all; or are we bound to observe the same, and fashion out our lives to the
prescript thereof, and therefore breach of the law in us is no sin; for
where is no law, Romans 4.
there is no sin, as determines the Apostle.

5 Then Christian reader, consider well with thy self, whether to tends the
protestantish The cause why a Protestant deemeth the law impossible. Hier. l.
2. cont. ^ouin. Aug li. 3 de l. arb. ca. 18.
faith of justification, and thou shall perceive it to have for full burt and
period nothing so much, as the destruction of Hope, Charity, and all honesty
with civility: which faith of theires makes the law of God and nature, in
substance of good action, impossible: it war^anteth men with indemnitie from
any hurt by violation of the law of God and nature, or by any bestiall
misdemeanure what soever against reason and her commandrie. It takes from men
a zeal and promptitude to fulfill the law, persuading them, that it is
impossible: It directs to all wickedness, telling us that the law is not given
us to observe and keep it by the grace of Christ, being impossible; but only
that we trespassing deadly and mortallie against the same, acknowledge our
infirmity, curse and maledict^on of estate thereby, meerlie all relief and
protection to be reposed in a faith, not in that, the which by grace Keeps
the law, but in a faith, the which looking upon Christ, believes that no
breach of the law, no consent and desire against the law, finally no sin
against the law, is imputed, or is Damageable to the soul: and that men
actuallie violat^ng the law of God and nature in such manner believing, and by
only says Do in Christ undoubtedly observe the law: that by Christ they are
above the law, freed from the law, as not concerning their behauiours. And
hereon will thou conclude, that this Doctrine Protestantish bends wholly to
an unreasonable, unconscionable, brutish and a hellish life, to the mayntenance
of sin and wickedness, to the barbarising of all humane soci^tie, and as a
fi^t project of Antichrist, so an evident argument of his empire in the
designs of the Protestanters; let the matter be never so fraudulently
coulored under a pretense of faith, of trust in Christ, confidence in the lord,
or of Christian liberty.

The positive laws of the Church, and of the Civil magistrate, are admitted
by the Catholic Hope as bands and obligations of men's consciences, and
therefore for purity and integrity of life it stands in prime and flovvre
against the Protestanters, acknovvledging no such debte of duty from them
arising.

CHAPTER. XIIII.
THE effects of divine grace, as has been declared, on which Christian hope
How hop^ does respect authority of magistrate.
relyeth, are most ^ullie signified by such figures in the new Testament, as
did represent as well the person of the holy Ghost, as also his inspired
guiftes, bestoed on the Cathol^ck church. Namely tow of them, as remarketh S.
Gregory, do principally afforde such signification: to wit the shape of a
dove, and that of fire. In a dove, and infi^r the holy Ghost appeared, for
that all who are replenished the^ with do so accommodate Greg. l. ^ Job. Cap.
1.
them selves to the simplicity of ma^su^tude, that also they be inflamed
with Zeal of justice against the saultes of delinquentes. Humility therefore,
figured in the dove, is the proper spirit of Christian Hope, not only
couragio^sl^e as by fire, setting upon adverse difficulties, but moreover
enclining by meekenes of the dove to lawful superiority: as that of the
church, and civil common wealth, with all duty, and obeisance. For in deed
not only churches laws do avail us to virtue, and beatitude, aimed at by
hope, but also the forms, and decrees of civil society serve much to the
same purpose of virtue, and beatitude: and therefore effectually are to be
regarded by hope, as fit means to accomplish her desired end and designement.

2. Public authority is a necessary means for a community to procure and
preserve The power of a magistra^e or co^munity of what force.
in it self the general good of many, and to prescribe to each particular
subject what is to be done, and what to be eschewed. And as every single
member of a society aymeth at his proper and peculiar good, so the magistrate,
whether ecclesiastical or civil, sets before his eyes as the end of his
commandrie the universal commodity of the whole body and common wealth.
Wherefore in that particular persons are to live accordingly* as their
actions may stand with the common advantage, therefore as in innocence of
conscience they cannot any wise endamage that common good: yea rather for it
they are to be content to loose or impa^re their private utility; so likewise
by bond of conscience, and under that great damage of sin, they are to
subm^tte their allegeances to the obeying of their superiors just laws and
decrees. And How law does ob^ge
as one which trespasseth against right reason, the nearest and most immediate
rule of our behauiours, consequently offends against God, author and giver
of that reason, so one rebelling against public superiority, as concludes
the Apostle, by a consequent Romans 13.
offends against the soueraintie of Almighty God, who appointed and
imparted the same unto man: Therefore they that resist power, do resist the
ordinance of God. what ^. Pet. 2.
greater harm to conscience, than to oppose it self by transgre^sion against
the decree of God? Those that do resist, acquire to them selves damnation. Be
you therefore subie^^ to e^erie human^ creature for God. Damnation is not due
but for offense and sin of conscience: neither is obedience to be surrendered
for God, but for that conscience so prrescribeth. So likewise the Apostle S.
Paul exhorts servants to obey their masters, as in place of Christ, doing
the will of God from the m^nde, and not only to the outward appearance Ephesians.
6.
of the eye, but in simplic^tie of your hearts, as for conscience sake, and upon
a fear not to offend God by sin. The quality of which offense we understand
to be, according The quality of offense committed against the law. Romans 13.
to the moment of the thing commanded or forb^dden, in regard of the common
good: and so by disobaying the public magistrate in a matter much concerning
the same, is contracted a mortal sin, as the greatest harm of conscience,
according to which conscience, and not only propter iram, to avoid pain, as
counsels the Apostle, men ought to live in subjection.

3. Neither is this obligation in conscience to obey ecclesiastical and civil
laws against Christian liberty v^^erein it consifieth.
Christian liberty, yea rather it is greatly conformable thereunto: for what
can better beseem our liberty, than occasions of virtue, and bonds that tie
men fast to honesty and decency of action, as vows do, and precepts of
superiors; in that the law still commands one virtue or other, and so is an
obligation to virtue, to the exercise of right reason, as an office most
fitting Christian liberty? For our Savior Christ is not so according to the
Apostle the end of the law, as besides only faith, either the law were
superfluous, impossible, or not of force to oblige the conscience, but in this
sense expressed by S. Augustine, he is rather the end of the law: He is said to
be Augustine in Psalm. 45.
the end, not for that he does cons^^e it, but for that he does perfect it
for so vvesay meat to be ended, which is eaten, and a coat to be ended, that
is finished; Christ is then the end of the law, because without him none
observe the law. So that faith only is not the complete observance of the
law, whileste one believes, transgressing the same, such breach by him
committed not to be imputed, but charity is absolutely requisite keeping the
law. ^^en, says S. Augustine, have seared, to wit, those of the old
Testament, and they have Aug. in Ps. 98.
not fulfilled the law; others have loved, in the new, and they have
fulfilled it. So that the differences, which part those two laws, are fear,
and charity, not obligation, and no obligation, condition, and no condition in
respect of the law, as brutishlie the Protestanter deuiseth. Those men
seared and robbed others, these have loved, and given away their ovv^e:
whereupon the true liberty of the gospel is reposed in charity, that keeps
the law* not to faith that excuses from offense, when trespass is against the
law. There is, says S Augustine, a killing letter, but when the quickening
spirit i^ present, it does ma^e Aug l. de spi^, and lit. c. 18.
this vvitten (...) in us is be beloved, which before written outvvardlie, as
law, made us to fear it.

3. The Protestanter generally by his privilege of the Euangelical liberty,
exemteth The Protestants liberty against the law. So did A^rius the A^^a^
heretic exe^pte himself from appoincted fastes: Ne videatur esse sub lege.
Romans 14. Aug. de ha^es. Call. ^ 2 Instit c 19. Sect. 4. Field. l. 4. page 271.
himself from all bond of conscience in respect of external things commanded
either by Prince, or Prelate; admitting no power in man to oblige him in
conscience. Thus Calvin determines, expounding those words of the Apostle S.
Paul. I know that nothing is common: By which words the Apostle subiecteth
all things external to our liberty, so that in our minds we conceive the
reason of that liberty. Here also are comprised all ceremonies of free
observation, that by no necessity men's consciences be bound to ^eepe them;
but they are to ^^^mber, (...) by the benefitt of God the use of them to be
subject unto them to edification. A counterie man of ours in his course and
country Theolegie says, that no Prince has power to prescribe any thing
under pain of sin, unless, the party, whom the law respects, in some
sort weere bound before such law, by the law of God to the same: yet he
confesses, that some humane laws bind to performance by their utility, and
that they can not be transgressed without sin. In which doctrine with
falcitie is combined a contradiction. For if some humane laws can not be
transgressed without sin, then those laws bind the conscience as humane
laws, and not by virtue of sole divine law: in that before the decree of the
Prince, no such law or bounden The law of a Prince is of force from God to
oblige. Aug. epi. 166. Nam and inter homines p^nas l^^t, and apud Deum sortem
non habebit, qui ho^ sacere noluit, quod ei per cor Regis ipsa veritas iussit.
duty was known, or appointed for us as rule of men's actions, and therefore
the Princes heart, as teaches S. Augustine, by his new decree does oblige in
conscience, for that the contrary fact to this obedience had been no sin,
if the prince had not enacted his law. How then true, that no humane law can be
commanded under pain of sin and damnation, as he says it can not? And if
humane law has such force of obligation, in that the law of God is contained
in the law of the Prince, from which all power of commandrie is derived, we
agree that Princes laws bind in conscience, in that they can not be
transgressed without sin against the law divine. But hereon to impute the
whole obligation to God his law, and none to the Princes statute, is folly and
ignorance: For although God his law be a general rule of men's consciences,
yet of them an inward and particular rule is right reason, and it byndeth
under sin, althoug he with resolution of bond in it to God, as author of
right reason. So a rule of men's actions, externe and immediate, is the power
in the Prince to make a law for virtue, and to draw forth a particular
conclusion or determination of matter deduced from general reason, which law
of prince is our rule with obligation, although it implie in it as cause the
prime power of God, from which the Prince originallie derived what he has for
the government of others. Then as Princes laws under God are rules, so under
him are they obligations of consciences, and conclusions or determinations of
right reason: and here on the transgression of the Prince his law, is a
robelling against reason, and against God, fountain of law and reason. But
will you hear of a trick of the Protestantish liberty? It is a matter of
conscience to seek and procure the good Field supra.
of the common wealth, and that therefore it is a matter of conscience to obey
good and profitable laws, so far as we are persuaded our obedien^ess
profitable. So that when the Prince has enacted the law, the matter must
appear at the bar of the ministers conscience, and the liberty of his
gospel for a pasporte: and if he break it in conscience, his faith will help
him with a quittance from hurt, believing either it did not bind in
conscience, or the breach of it not to be imputed. Finally as concerning
resistance that may be given to princes and their laws, the Protestanters are
g^erallie of opinion, that Power of the subject against the Prince by the
Protestant.
the subjects may bear arms in the field against Princely proceedings that
sha^ empaire their rightes and liberties: and that they themselves, or the
nobility, exempted from the prince, may judge or examine the same. Princes
now, says one. have certain terms assigned them, the which of they
excceede, those of the nobility think (...) lavvfull by force Abbat l. 1. de
Antich. cap. 7. sect. 6. Bilson sur. Lord Salis.
to depulse unjust oppression, and to cast of that yoke, by which against the
laws they are oppressed. How then do Princes hold immediately of God, and
how the whole controversy, in any bad demeanure of his, is to be only
remitted to God, as last period of a subjects obedience, when the nobility may
rise in arms against the princes unjust proceedings? yet for fear, his pen
quaking, as it seems, ^n recording of this puritanicall doctrine, he adds a
sovereign treacle. It must be done Citra principis (...), without injury to
the Prince. Mercy, good wise man of Gotham; The common wealth may ^^se in
arms, the subjects may by fire and sword defend their liberties against the
Prince, they may refuse to depose arms at his commandrie, they may beseege his
servants in their own houses, or in his court, and yet all this gentle man
l^ke, and courteous war in rose water, must be done withouto injury to the
Prince! How do men of arms laughe to hear this flattering minister in his
deep policy! But to the trial.

4. As we Catholics acknowledge in our selves an obligation of conscience
toward Virtue procured by bo^d of laws against the Protestant.
the laws of the ecclesiastical and civil magistrate, so do we deem, that
most strictly we are bound to obey their laws, as thereby directed to the
exercise of virtue, in that every good law aymeth at virtue, and commands
nothing else but the honesty thereof. On the contrary side, it is a wonder to
consiter the ^arnalitie of the Protestanter, and to mark how in some things he
confesses a necessity of sin, and in others freeth himself from the same.
The sudden motions of a natural concupiscence before consent must needs by
his verdit be mortal sins, to the end that men care not to sin, ^r to
busy them selves much to resist the forces of such enemies: and now the
breach of the Churches and Princes law must be no sin, or of any ability to
endamage the soul of a transgresser with sin, to the end that a gospelling
or gossipping liberty may range at pleasure, and respect no souerayntie of
superior. A strange kind of scrupulositie in the former, and here in this
later a vast manner of liberty* the one and the other suitable to the desires
of pleasure, and lawless concupiscence. If then the positive law of the Church
and Prelate do not bind in conscience, no sin is committed if they be
broken or violated, and danger of sin is also avoided, and thereby a
principal inducement is taken away serving to the use of virtue in the
oblyging law. Also where commodity and delight shall in priuacie make lure to
our Protestant for breach of civil and ecclesiastical laws, what may
restrain him from disorder, from hurting the community? Not sin, whose
princely conscience is elevated far above the reach of any law of man. Not
penalty; in that secrecy of the fact, and crafty conueiance of the same, will
bar out the proceedings of any tribunal. Here is our Protestant now in his
perfect liberty, sometimes to sin, and yet not to sin, at other seasons
not to sin, when he well deserves the cord, and the stretch due to a
sinner. How can any Protestantlyuing thus invested in his fancy and malepart
liberty, prove himself a good subject? I do not say, a good christian, for
this is but a waiting man of the former, but a good subject, an office pretnded
by the Protestant above heaven and earth when he shall not sin, offend God,
or hurt his soul by robbing by transgressing of all the princes laws and
statutes? And who knows not but to obey this particular prince is originallie
from a positive and humane law of the common wealth? If then civil laws bind
not the conscience otherwise then does the divine Seditiouse Doctrine of
Field.
law before civil ordinance, neither is the Protestante obliged in conscience
to accep^ his majesty in England for his prince, or to obey any of his decrees;
in that before such civil co^stitution his personal dignity was not ordained:
how then a good subject? Can a parliament, or a commonwealth enforce a man his
conscience to accept of this man for a prince, says a Protestant? No
answers the Caluinister, for we must always know our selves free from all
humane appoin^tmentes, as things indifferent unto us, either to be accepted by
the conscience, or otherwise. Here lies the good subject ship, that is the
Christianity of a Protestanter, on the ground. Were not these the sonets of
Protestantish ministers, recorded by our Sovereign king James? In their pre
Basil. Dor.
v^hments they often times defamed me, not that they accused me of any vice,
but only that I was a king; the which they deem to be of all evils the
most heinous: some of them spo^e playnlie to the people what they thought in
their minds, saying, that kings and princes where in deed enemies of the
ecclesiastical liberty, neither that they could patiently bear the yoke of
Christ. But we will more closely for the mayntenance of virtue, honesty,
religion and civility press the Protestant with this argument.

5. Right reason enformeth any subject, that good and profitable laws, serving
well Why human laws bind ^^ conscience.
to virtue, and to the common utility, are to be observed, therefore the
violation of them is against righ reason, and so sin The Antecedent cannot be
denied; in that right reason prefers the common good before any private
interest, and tells us, that if the law be violated, the common good is
thereby empaired, and finally all princely co^mandrie is like to come to
contempt. The consequent is also evident: for that sin is nothing else but a
contrarying of right reason, the immediate rule of humane actions, and so a
breach also consequently of the divine law, from which reason does descend.
Therefore if the breaking of a civil law be against reason, it is against the
ordinance of God, and a sin If it be answeered, that it is a sin indeed,
yet not in respect of any bynding authority of the law, but only in regard
of God, and Reason, it will appear but a foolish evasion. For Almighty God
as he governs men by reason, so also by power of superior, by his decree and
law. For the determination of reason in many things to every particular
subject is not known, before the law of the Prince be enacted, and then reason
concludes by conscience, that is by a practical resolution, that the law is
to be observed. Also positive laws of the Prince be not allwaise the first
general principles of active and civil life, or conclusions, evidently
traced from them, but rather ordinatilie are applications of them to particular
matter, and to circumstances of time, and place: and so bind the conscience by
a proper virtue, and not only by virtue of divine and natural law. VVhereupon
the Apostle says that this power of commandrie in the Prince is of God, and
so our rule of Romans 1^.
reason and conscience is from God. Also he affirms, that the violation of
the princes law, is a resistance against the power of the Prince, and therefore
vicious and culpable, because it is a resistance also against God, that gave
that power to the Prince. Then is the power of a prince from God a rule for our
reason and conscience, and a trespass against his law is sinful, in as much
as repugnant to his law and power of commandrie given him by Almighty God.
But what needs the Protestant be so No sin imputed to a Protestant: no
black butter will stick on his bread.
scruptulous and dayntie, as to deny the breach of the Princes ^aw to be
sin, as if he were afraid of sin, and not rather famil^^^lie acquainted
with it? Why should he dispute wh^^h^r it be sin or no, whether the law
^ynde in conscience or no, when let the worst fall that may, a lyuelie faith
will pay for all, will suppe up all, will ransom all? And if he, in his faith
and justice, may without damage violate by concupiscence all the ten
commandments, as he says he may offend in fornication, adultery, theft, and
yet be never the worse, to what purpose should ^e dr(...) to deceive the civil
magistrate in smaller matters, as in transporting of a little corn and armor,
in wearing apparel forbidden, in not contributing to a^mes houses, to the
building up of Paul's st^^ple, and in such minute observations, when a faith
strongly apprehendant, in a conscience never so rampant, will clear the
coaste before the Lord, and satisfy God, where the Prince is never so much
iniu^^ed? The^e be the fair sweet civil subjects of the Merilands.

Hope by the Catholic faith is busily set on work about prayer and piety
for the obtaining of heavenly grace: the which v^^tuous function is abolished
by the faith Protestantish.

CHAPTER. XV.
AS the virtue of piety and prayer performed towares Almighty God, in
recognisance Prayer is religion, and p^tition. D. Thom. 2^. q. 8^. ^^. ^. A^o^.
l. 9. I^st. c. 29. Aug ser. 230. Ep. 121.
of his supreme power and majesty, implies a certain worship of him as the
diui^e Lord, and a repay of that duty* we o^ unto him as creator of all
things, so likewise is it a singular means to incline his sacred providence to
mercy and indulgence, as well to preserve in us what grace we a^lredie enjoy,
as also for the future time in the imparting of that gift, of which we stand
most in need. Prayer therefore as well notes S. Augustine, is an ascension
of the mind from earthly things to heavenly, a searching after heavenly
commodities, and a d^sir^ of that good, which (...)sible. Principally this
office and duty of prayer is effected by the inward faculties of the soul: To
th^e O Lord my heart has spoken! and sometimes is declared and sti^red up by
the voice: I have Psa. ^6. P^. 141. Conditions of pra^e^. Sermon. 2^0. Aug. Ep.
121.
cr^^d with my voice unto our lord, and with my voice I have requested our
Lord. VVhereupon it receives an especial force from the quality and
condition of the person, out of which it proceeds, as from the purity
thereof, and from a remouall by repentance of all such grievous offenses, as
are odious unto Almighty God: also from humility, prostrating in deep
submission the infirmity of ou^ frail natures before the infinite perfection
of this sovereign king and essence; as teach very well S. Cyprian and S.
Cypr. in orat. Dom Chrysostom. hom. 19 ad pop. Aug in Ps. 4^. Greg ^ 1^. ^n Job. c.
3. lib. ^3. c. 27. Psa* 64. Isa. 55.
Chrysostom. For as fire the more pure and sincere it is from ashes, or other
Drossie admittance, heateth in greater feruor, so does charity deuoyde of
sin and contagion of vice as^^nd by prayer with a more vigorous and violent
motion toward Almighty God. Moreover this is the counsel of S. Augustine:
vvilt thou, that thy prayer ^o^^t^ up svv^s^^e to Almighty God? make then
sor^t two vvings, fasting and alms deeds. And then, as from the earth be
drawn up certain vapors, the which after above congealed, then resolved,
stream and fall in great abundance upon the same, and make it drunk again
with fertility, so what we in prayer present to Almighty God, will procure
the rain of heavenly benedictions for the souls be^efitt, and increase in
all virtue. Therefore nature her self, informed the Gentiles, that they were
not to pray being rash or in negligence, but rather when their bodies and
souls were best advised recollected and sequestered from all other affairs,
that with more reverence and Plut. in Number. Ci^ l. de legibus. Senec. li 1. de
Benefic c 17. Clem A^^x. 4. strom. in fine.
affection they might furnishe so sacred a duty and function for passage
thereof to heaven. On the holiedayes and feasts of the Priests says
Plutarch, the criers go abo^te in circle before, compelling the d^uot^d to
sur^^ase and r^st from all vulgar employments. So it is reported that the
Pithagor^ans do f^rbide men to adore the Gods passing by, or then to pray unto
the^, but only to perform such p^^t^e after a s^tt purpose, even after the
departure out of their houses. Also Clemens Alexand: a Christian Doctor in the
primitive Church reports the same Pithagorians to have enacted a law, that
none should pray but in certain express terms publicly c^nc^^u^d and
decreed, and that with a loud voice: Not that they deemed, as I Prayer ^o^
re(...) ^^ sin^e^ and prote^t^o^ ag(...) (...) Aug (...) l. ^. (...) c 8. and 9
Ma^^ 6. Luc 11. Math 7. Joan. ^6. Aug. Ep. 105. Ps. ^^9. Ne d^s^r^i eius
ad^^^otio, alicui^entatio^ vel cons^^^amus decepti, vel ^^damus a^^icti. Aug.
^p. 121. c. ^^. Aug. lib. 2. de sermon. Dom. c. 14 Cyp^. in Ora^. Dom. Apoc. 3.
Hie^. cont. ^o^^n. ^p C^esiph. P^aye^ for others. 1. Cor. 12. Match. hom. 1.
Romans 12. 1. Tim. 2. All virtue referred to p^aye^. F^des credit, spes and
Cha(...) oran^. Sed sine fide esse non possu^^, ac per hoc and fides ora^. Aug.
E^^^ir c 7. Eusebius. l. 8. vi^. Constable. c. 58.
think, God could not hea^e those, which prayed in silence or s^^rec^e, but
because they would have men's prayers ^ust, the which none should be ashamed
to pronounce before the company Hereupon vv^s it said, ^o must we sp^ake to
men, a^ if the gods heard, and so with the gods, as if men heard.

2. And as in prayer we are to make petition of God his grace for sondrie
effects and our indigences, so principally for nothing more, then for
remission of our sins, and for delivery from all harm by temptation and
ghostly perils, that frequen^lie occur in this mortal life, as we are
taught in the prayer of our Savior* Forgive us our trespasses, and lead^ us
not into temptation. Pra^e^ therefore proceeding from faith, from the
illumination and incitation of the holy Ghost, has force in it to move
Almighty God through Christ his son and our Redeemer, to cancel and
forgive us all our sins by justification: P^^^te and accip^^^^s, As^^ and you
shall receive: whereupon excellently well S. Augustine: Neither is the
^emission of sins without some meritt, if faith obtain it: Neither is it
to be said that there is no me^^t of faith, by which faith he said, O God be
merciful to me a sinner: And ^e departed justified by merit, faithful, and
humbled. Moreover knowing this grace of justification to be intertayned in our
souls, as into so many b^itle vessels through infinite occasions of sin
subject to loss, and wrack thereof, therefore we pray to have our head
shielded and shadowed by the holy Ghost against s^orche of concupiscence in
time of battle and war, from above with the protection of grace from
grievous sin, whose malice to be such we believe, as that committed it will
berea^e the soul of so precious a jewel. We pray then for to obtain
munition and strength in the season of temptation, as one according to S.
Augustine, The which is to be tried bys^er, does not pray that the s^^r do
not touch him, but that he be not burned in the si^r. So we pray not to be
clean ^idd of all temptation, but that against it we be desended by the grace
of heaven. Hold that thou have, says the Evangelist S. John, least that an
other take thy crovv^^: Out of which words Saint Hierom refuteth both
Pelagius, and ^ouinian: the one denying the necessity of grace, the other
affirming, that by no sin justice is subject to forfeture or miscariage.

3. Also when as faith discovers unto us that all Christians in general are
members of one body, forthwith charity is ready to take care of all that be
united in this mystical body to our head and sovereign Christ Jesus, mourning
and weeping with those that are in affliction, and helping all by prayer which
stand in need of succors from Almighty God. I beseech you says the
Apostle S. Paul, let prayers be made for all men. Neither do we forgett our
brethren in their paynfull sufferances and satisfactions enduring God his
justice in Purgatory, procuring by our sacrifices and prayers, in what we may,
their releese and indulgence from the mercy of God: upon which opinion
Canstantine the great, as records Eusebius, took careful order to be
^ntombed in Constantinople near unto the bodies of the holy Apostles, that by
the pious concourse of the people thither, and their prayers, he might,
departed this life, gain pardon and remission.

4 I omi^te here to recounte the opinions of certain philosophers, as of the
S^oikes, Enemies of prayer. Tyr maxim. sermon. ^0. Castro verb. or^^^o, P^^^. in
vit^ Epic. Pagans, Jews, P^l^gians, and Protestan^es, presume of the^ selves
against the providence of Almighty God* Jews presume upon the letter of the
law, Pagans, and Pelag^a^^ on natures, forces: Protestants on a de^ised
grace. August. Tract ^^ ^^ Joan c. 12. de bono vi^^it cap. 17. 18 vt quid pe^o
a Domino quod in mea posuit potestate* E^i 92. Aug. de here is. 88. Ep 109. de
Great. Christi c. 4 epi. pa^^. ad Innoc ^^. 1. Council l. 2. de pecc. mer. c 5.
epi 107. Waldensis. Tom. ^ c. 1. Luth. Con^. 4* Aduent. Prayer for remission
of sin against the Protestant. Psalm. 67. Mich. 1. ^uc 7. Luc. 1^. Psalm. ^0.
The backwards pra^e^ of the Pro^estant.
and Epicures, attributing all events of things either to for^une, or to
fa^alitie, and so acknowledged no v^e of prayer or devotion to obtain any
effect the which otherwise was not to fall out from God his especial
providence. Diverse heretics, some directly, others in consequence have
opposed their errors to this heavenly duty of prayer and devotion, but above
all two; namely Iou^nian; and Pelagius. Iouinian held opinion, that the grace
of justice once attained could not be after lost by any misdemeanure of man,
and so thereby he made void all prayers for grace against temptation, and the
manifold hasardes of this mortal life; as if the just in this respect had no
cause of prayer or supplication to God. Pelagius denying the necessity of
grace inward, and super natural concourse of God with man, did likewise
render vain and superstitious all prayer acquiring of Almighty God remission
of sins, protection from the evil of temptation, or finally for any
benefitt of God free and gracious, frelie i^spired, as reports S. Augustine.
Accordingly the Albigenses, the wiclefi^ns empaired also the use and practice
of prayer, deming that God did not require at our hands the office of prayer
and supplication, being content with the externe works of the other virtues.
Luther and Calvin upon the conceit they make of their pestilent faith of
justification, as they destroy thereby all virtue, so in particular this high
and necessary function of prayer. Euer^e heart, says Luther, the which has
this knowledge of himself more parfect; has a way ^or^ red^^ and fac^l^ unto
the ^^rde, although in the mean time he should drink nothing but malm^sie,
walk upon roses, and never pray one word. Calvin likewise teaching that
every just person by a divine faith is to believe, that his sins are
remitted, and that he cannot possibly loose his justice, makes void the use
of prayer for remission of sins, or protection against temptation. To pray
for the ghostly good of ^h^rs, neither is it by him available, in that none
have the grace of justification or operseuerance by an others prayers, but
only by the faith of their parents, or by God his predestination* Lastly
abolishing the ecclesiastical tradition both of liturg^e, and all so of
d^urnall and nocturnall prayers, used in the Roman Church, show themselfe^
maine adversaries of prayer and devotion, as in the Trial shall appear.

5. Allthoughe faith inform us, that innocence and the estate of justice make
our prayers more grateful and acceptable unto Almighty God, least that in his
presence, as dreaded the kingly Prophet, offenders ^^ovv away from the ^^ce
of him, as wax do^th from the sier: nevertheless in the new law for sinnners
also we know to be appointed a sacrifice and expiation; neither doo^h our
Savior Christ disdain the approach of a penitent Magdalen, of a lepar, or the
miserable estate of a prodigal child having wasted his substance for heaven
with misca^iage of offense and lauishe deportment on earth. For hereupon cried
hol^e David: VV^^h m^more O Lord, from my ^^^quitie, and cleanse me from my
sin. And hereby we understand, that not only faith is available to the
remission of sin, but also prayer, as effect of faith, is to contriue the
same. On the contrary side the Protestanter even after great and heinous
crimes acknowledges no reason or cause of prayer tending to the remission of
his sins; in that by his faith, it remaining in the very act of any crime,
he believes no sin to be imputed to him by God, no sin to endamage his
soul, no sin to be allredie vnforgiuen: therefore for one that is faithful,
and well intelligent of his own predestination and childeship with God, it is
needless, yea ^^pug^ant to his faith, to pray for pardon of his sins. Can
any man considera^^^e pray for that, which is now obtained, and certainly by
divine faith known to be for the present in possession, and that as suerlie,
as God reigns in heaven? May any pray with reason for the Incarnation past
and believed, for the creation of the world? how then for remission of sin
before prayer certainly attained? They answer, that the just and faithful
pray for remission of sins, first thereby to confess the same all^ed^^
performed to be the merciful gift of God* then that they may more and more be
confirmed in faith against temptations to the contrary, by a knowledge and
inward feeling of spirit. But what a gross abuse it this against the word of
God, a violent wresting it from the proper and natural sense? Does not our
Luc. 11.
Savior expresslie will us to make this petition, And forgi^e us our sins?
Yet forsooth the meaning must be by his extrauagant gloss, to give him thanks
for their pardon So Pelagius did inter^ pre^e S^^ip. (...) 90. 9^* 9^* 1^7.
Conc. Aur^s. (...) ad (...) Con^. (...) 1 T^^. 2. The (...) is a p^lag^^n
here^^^k.
and remission. O foul devise of Antichrist against piety and devotion! Did
not Pelagius himself thus pray, an enemy of Christ, and of his grace, and so
understand these two petitions, forgive us our sins, and lead us not into
temtation, as spoken in way of humility, and recogn^sance of God his benefitt
alredie bestowed; p^aying for humility sake, not for necessity of a future or
farther effect from God, as is reported in the Council Aurosican, by S
Augustine, and by the Council Mileuitane? It is one thing, as tells us the
Apostle, to give thanks, an other to make entreatie and postulation; and the
Protestantish minister turns with Palagius, all prayer for remission of
sins into thanks giving; as if he prayed for the creation of the world, for
the passion of Christ. As concerning the other cause of prayer in this affair
alleged by the Protestant, it is supe^fluous, and expresslie against the word
of God: for the scriptures and fathers tell us, that we must pra^ for remission
of sins, and the minister aduertiseth us, we must not pray for remission of
sins, but only for the perfect feeling and touch thereof, and ^or our
comfort in assurance of the same. Is this to stick to the word of God, so
iniur^ed by the vile impious babbling minister? And of what purpose then is his
prayer? For a strong faith. But he knows this faith can not be lost at any
time: so The Stoicke^ rel^^^g on fatal^^^e prayed for a fa^hion: Plutarch De
placi^ S^o^c. so do Pro^^stants.
then if he suffer a little perpelxitie and anguish of dubitance, why should he
be so busy about prayer, seeing that faith, justice, and infallible
predestination do not depend on prayer, but only a little needless
refreshment, to the end that a minister when he has played the knave, yet may
believe without all doubt that he is a child of the lord and predestinate?
A ^^eete piece of prayer! If here he s^ffer his purgatory in some distrust
and temptation, and yet be never the worse, faith still remaining with justice,
and he always a child of the lord, why should he trouble his brains with
idle prayer? Is it not a fine ceremony of prayer, that comes from a man
doubtful in his faith and half an infidel, and from one that prays for no
necessary thing, but for a little sweet meat of consolation, for an aple, or
a fig to expuls^^ sooles pensiuenes? Is there then no more urgent causes of
prayer? ^y impious Antichrist.

6. To the like vanity also does the Protestanter reduce the other petition
of our The Protestant does not pray aga^^st temptation* no less then
P^^^g^ans: Aug. l. de Not. and G^at. c. ^4. ^8. ^. (...) c 13. P^^^^stants
(...) p^ag^an hereti^^s denying necessity o^ pr^^er in regard of perseuer^nce
in gra^^: Aug. Ep. 107.
Lords prayer, And lead us not into temptation: for if the Protestant be now
assured that by no ensuing temptation he shall lose his justice, or hurt his
soul with damage of grace or heavenly (...)sse, to what avails this
petition? He needs no more rain, whose harvest is all reddie in the barn;
neither the Protestant any more grace from a boue, all cocksure at home. What
a bestialitie is this for a Protestant to deem hilself in this life out of all
hasard of temptation, and to doubt of it is infidelity by his accounte* yet
he will pray to this effect, that he may not seem altogether irreligious,
desiring in his prayer a comfort in his conscience, that as indeed he is free
by a present faith from all anoy by temptation, so he may in full assurance and
persuasion of the inward man know and feel as much; and be no more vexed with
suspicions, with doubts of the contrary* Well then prayer, I see, is not of
any necessity with the Protestanter, but only an idle banqueting dishe for a
few confectes of consolation. If he pray not at all, yet in virtue of his faith
shall he be sufficiently defended from temptation: yea if only his father was
a good Christian, his personal justice i^ su^r enoughe in a castle not to be
expugned, by sin or the devil, And let the worst fall that may in want of
prayer, he shall Non quia ^o^ au^ent ap^^^e d^c^re, ^ed ^orum sententiam
velint, nolin^ ho^ vtique s^quitu^ Aug. Epist. 144. No cause why a Protestant
should pray for his brother.
suffer only now and then a little pang of distrust, begin to shake some
thing in the sockett; but after it will pass, and his fair faith begin to
rise up merrily in the pleasant morning of self pers^asion, and then it shall
acertaine in a merry mood the crased conscience of our Protestant, that all is
w^ll, that he is just, the child of God, and ever so to remain in that
estate. Is not this a pretty plumme for a fool, or a d^licate soppe for a
dog, that resolves never to c^^e more for praye^, heaven or religion?

7. And why should he pray for his brother, or for his congregation? Are the
honest men, good Christians, or no? yea forsoothe: Then what need of prayer,
when as God his predestination depends not upon the prayer of any Protestant:
for whom sufficiency to salvation is fixed in the faith of their patents, and
God his covenant with Abraham* Are they perhaps infidells and aliens out of the
Church? If so, what can avail for them prayer, yea of the best, being indeed
a mortal sin in him that prays, as the Protestants grant, and odious to
God, needing it self pardon and remission by faith* Thus the wiked
Antichristian faith in the Protesta^ter destroys all occasion of prayer and
supplication to Almighty God: to the ^^^e of all piety disgo^ged from out
the mouth of Calvin* Sanctification in the children of God has such a root
in them, Calu. in ca. 5. Joan. and 13.
that it never can be pulled out^: Let the devil pull and hale with the
breach of all the ten commandments, yet justice sticks fast in the soul
of an offender. Good God, if wicked persons need not to pray, what small
need have honest men! Well now I see, that it is sufficient for the
Protestanters, that they e^^oy Luthers roses and mal^esie, and never pray at
all. Of which protestantish pride, vanity, and impiety a president was given
by the Bishops of the Donatistes, as reports S. Augustine: who avouched
themselves so to be so settled in grace and favor of almighty God, that they
neded no prayers of the laity. Whom S. Augustine thus worthelie derideth:
Assur^^lie ye^ are great Aug. l ^ cont. l^^ (...) c 10^. (...) ^ccle^^^ ^. 16.
men, high, heavenly and divine: and ^n deed now not so much men, as
Angels: y^e that pray for the people, but will not that they people pray for
you: Do you se how d^testable ^s this pride! In like manner protestants
chalenging to them selves an estate of irremoueable justice, disdain the
prayers of others, as available for remission of sin in them, or continuance
of god his grace. Moreover Protesta^tes do tread the steps of Pelagius, who as
notes S. Augustine, euacuated all the petitions of our lord his prayer, denying
the necessity Aug de Do^o pers^u. c. 4. Ep. 9^. ^05.
of grace. For if the Protestant be now assured that his sins are not
imputed, can he pray: Forg^^^e us our transpasses? if he be established in
grace vnloseable, how can he pray^ Halou^d be thy name, thy kingdom ^oom^,
lead us not into temptation? he standing in need of no such grace, which all
reddy is not granted and established. To what Aug. Tract. ^^. in Joan. c. 12.
purpose says S. Augustine pray vv^e not to be ^uercome by temptation, if ^^
be absolutely in our one ability?

8. But the Catholic Church is wonderfully careful how day and night and
continually, Prayers of the Catholic Church. 1. These 5.
as the Apostle ex^orted, she may employ her children in prayers, in familiar
speeches with Almighty God. By reason whereof as we make a more evident
confession of our own weakness, so likewise by so frequent an appeal to God
his high goodness, we much recommend the same We have therefore a liturgicall
prayer of s^^^ed persons expressed in certain rearmes, comprised in a recorded
form; and to use another manner of devotion in public service, than is laid
down in some synod or Council, is forbidden by the Mil^^^tan Council, and
also the Tolle^an: which publi^e (...) M^l. ^^. 12. Toll. 4. c. ^.
prayer we divide into certain hours, as into the M^tins, the first hour,
the Third, the Six, the Nynthe, Euens^ng, and Compl^ne: as it were in this
observation of seven times prayer to imi^ate holy David, who every day to that
number prayed unto Almighty Psalm. 118.
God. And also this set number of religious hours we apply to the
signification and commemoration of certain memorable and considerable points
of Christ his passion, figuring them lively in our thoughts by this our p^ouse
custom.

H^^ sunt s^pt^nas propter quae p^all^mus horas,
Mat^t^n^^l^gat Christ^^a, qu^ ^rimina purgat;
Pr^ma r^pl^t ^p^^^s, (...) ^m d^t Tertia mor^is;
Sexta cr^^^ ne^lit; ^a^us ^^us Nona ^ip^rtit,
v^^pera d^^on^t: tu^^lo C^^p^^ta r^pon^t.
For these respe^^ (...) vv^sing, as vvil^s ^ite:
The^ (...) by^des (...) ^ (...) vvh^ (...) by gra^^ our si^^ull (...).
Prim^ does his face with sp^^t desile: the Third or death al^v^^e ^t ^^^ed,
The (...) ^ayles h^^ unto the tree: the Nynthe with ^an^e did ^or^ his side
v^spers ^^p^se him from the C^osse,
And Compl^ne in grave ^n^om^^ ^is ^^ars^.
S. Cyp^ian applies this manner o^ ours to the Presidents of God his Sa^ntes,
as of C^p^* de O^a^. Dom. Act ^. Act 10. Hierom ep. ad (...) ad Eust^ h. in ^
^4 Math. Clem Alex. ^. strom and 7. Chrysostom hom. ^9. ad pop.
Daniell, who prayed th^^ce a day, of the Apostles, that went in^o the Temple
to pray at the ninthe hour, of Cornelius, who at the same time had a v^sion
from an a^gell which sp^c^s and tim^s before the vvorshipper^ ^f God had
determined; and for their prayers ob^erued ap^^nted times Name^^e the prayers
and p^almes used in the devotions of the ancient clergy in the night time S*
Hierome records; In the night we must rise tvv^^^, or thr^^e* And before him
Clemens of Alexandria makes mention of them, who designed for their prayers,
certain^ and ^^^ted hours, as the Third, the Sixth, and the ^^the: and of n^ght
prayer: Therefore the holy myst^r^^^ (...) in the night. Also Saint C^rill of
H^er^salem: When is the my^de to (...) pra^^r an^ psalms more s^^lie? is it
not in the nigh^ time? S. Chr^sostome thus rela^e^h the practice of the
ancient and hol^e monks: After the coc^e ^rovving ^ncont^^^ (...) the
Prela^^, and by a stroke of ^^ foot^ only calls th^^ all ^p: neither is it
lavvfull ^or them to st^^p^ (...) ^^ ^^en ^lothes* Th^n rising they sing
prophetical ^ymnes, with ^uc^ dec^nta* r^^ment of voi^^^ and tune^ ap^l^e
composed: They celebrate after Chrysostom. hom^ 6. de p^n.
the Third, Sixth, and ^ynthe ^e ^^vv^^s, and last^^e their ^u^ns^ng. To
conclude, as concerning the recital by alternation of vo^ces of the spalmes of
David, thus S Chri^ostome: To those that vv^^^^e ^^ the Church, the ^^^st,
midst, and and ^s David To those that ^^se ear^^e to sing hymns, the first,
the midst, and the last ^s David: If any pomp be to be ^^evven in any
s^^^ralles, Hie^om. ^pitap^ Paul. c. 1^ Eph^^m. ^^st Greg. Naz. in S. ^^sil.
Greg. Niss de ob^tu. Ma^rinoe.
David ^^ first, the midst* and the last: If r^lig^^us v^^g^n^ be at vvor^e,
Dau^^ ^s the first, the midst, and the l^st. Also ^. H^erom, S Ephrem, make
mention of David's psalms song by verse: likewise S. Gregory Naz^^nzene, S
Gregory Nissen. To which piety expres^^^e the Protesta^te^s profess and
protest themselves v^ter enemies, deeming the sacred tradition of the Church i^
this point altogether superstitious. Protestants rise in the ^^ght to pray!
Protestants observe such distinct hours of prayer! Only says, onel^e faith
makes to them day and night all one for impiety, and all licentious liberty
Here might be added the ceremon^es of the Catholic liturgy, the majesty of
Churches in their furniture, the presence of the dreadful hos^ upon the Altar
for sacrament and sacrifice, wonder ^ull^e incl^ning all to prayer and
de^o^ion, ^mpa^red* denied, and abolished by the Protestan^^^^ faith of a
quick d^spatch in justification: But of this in the matter of religion
occasion will offer it self more convenient* The protestant therefore hoping for
beatitude without prayer, doet^ presumptuous^^e endeavor to s^ie without
wings of grace. But especially according to the doctr^ne of the Protestant,
no person through greiuouse offenses o^te of God his sau^r, and estate of
justification, ought to pray: for by his opinion, as all works of they
virtues be mortal sins in the very reg^n^rate, so is also prayer, and
therefore in such as be not regenerat, it is not only a sin, but also
imputed to them as sin, where justice is wanting to excuse it: and so
remains damnable.

Catholic Hope willingly undergoes the works of mortification; whereas
the Protestantish faith of justification abhors and ^aketh utterly void so
necessary and holy a practice and institution for virtue and goodness.

CHAPER. XVI.
THERE be two things of especial recommendation in the Christian doctrine;
Mortification necessa^ie.
The one concerns a perfect acknowledgement of the infirmity and malad^es
accompanying man his nature, The other a trust and hope in the mercies of God
through our Savior Jesus, and a firm ^^pect^^ on of help and s^ccou^s from
thence. Yet not with standing we are not so to (...) ^n ^he benefi^t o^ Ch^^st
and of his grace, as if to the recuring of our diseas^s, to the co^^^ct^^n of
our ^u^ll ^ncl^nations, we weere not to move at all, or work, but amongst
other holy ^nd^uors ^f virtue, and cooperation with grace, we are to have a
principal care, tha^ ^^ by mo^tification ^est^aine, and by rigor of
d^scipline, seek to la^^ur against the str^ame o^ our own concupiscences, and
so thereby weakening them, and c^asti^ing them by some severe af^o^te, the
reasonable part of the soul may be more ^^rong and resolute ^n the pu^suite of
honest* ^ctions, and effectual procurement of the honor of Alm^ghtie God:
Mortify your Colos. ^.
members, says the Apostle, that are upon the ^arth: If you mortify the
d^^des of the flesh you shall (...). This practice of mortification ishueth
orig^na^l^e from the soul cu^b^ng and Rom 6.
restraining the inward affections thereof* and from thence proceeds to the
sharp discipline of the sense and body: which seems unto me, as by a
picture, signified by the Matthew. 20. Mar^. ^^. Inward mortification.
cupp of our Savior, proposed to the children of zeb^deus: not onl^e
representing their ma^^^^domes, but all ^o the interior mortifications of
their inward dispositions: as of their judgments, of their freewill, of
their inclinations in their appetite sensitive through love, hatred,
presumption, and fear. ^or to omit sondrie si^^litudes taken from the cupp in
this behalf, in this most apteli^ the doctrine of mortification is declared,
that as the liquor droncke out of the cupp passes in to the body and secret
pa^tes thereof, so ought mortification not only to fall upon the exterior
shape of a man, but it is to be taken in, that is, it is to be applied to the
repression of natures in^olences in h^^ most retired and conceiled passions and
humors. By the drink of which cupp promise was made to the Apostles, and in
them to us all, that in virtue thereof they weere to be kings and princes
dom^^^^ng over their affections, as lords of the beasts of the feelde, of the
fishes of the waters, and birds of the air: as interprets Men made Prin^^
by Mortificatio^.
that place of Genesis morally S Basil: and sin^l^^e as ^rewp^^lates and Rulers
to sit on the right hand of Christ, and on his left in the kingdom of his
church. nether by prosperity or adversity to be removed from their decreed
purpose of Basil Hom. 11.
virtue and go^d life

R^x est qu^ posuit m^tus and d^^a p^ctoris mala
He is a king, that s^a^nes to fear and dr^ade, Ho^at. se^m.

who passions force in breast do^en does ^^^ad*
But let us come to the particular practices of this mortification.
Mortification of a ^ol^^a^^e ^^fe.


2 First then, as we see in brute beasts, their natural concupiscences and
fiercenes of them to be calmed, and as it were hushed asleep, when from their
fantasies are sequestered the objects and allurements of their delights, so if
man withdraw his conversation from the occasions of forbidden pleasu^es, as
from the matter of ambition, of carnalitie, his sensuality, although
otherwise unquiet and dis^empered, w^ll yet be more mild, and lurk as it were
in her den with the ^ionesse in a slumber, having forgotten her prey or
contentment. Cl^^d^an.


Suad^^que licentia luxum.
Occasion caused by licen^^ large,
For pleasures force does g^ue the charge.
In this respect the ancient ^^thers, men now of so rare memory, and then of
so great S. Aug. lib. de Mo^^^. Eccl. Ca^^^ c 31. ^^ ^^ describes ^^e ^o^^s
of Mon^kes and Nun^^s: and all so of others in the clearg^e, as ^on*ce^n^ng
their chast^^^e, fasting, and obedience. ep. 86. Can. 4. 3. Reg. ^8. Luc. 1.
Luc. 5. Greg. Naz. orat. 27. Orat. 16. Basil. de vita so^^^.
desert, did retire themselves from popula^i^ie, from the aduan^ements of this
world, as a means to cu^^e and over m^^ster concup^scence, otherwise potent,
turbulent and outrageous, both in respect of the understanding, as also of the
will and affection; as S. Chrysostom, S. Ba^^ll, S Gregory Nazianzene, S.
Hierome, monks and devout worshippers of God, also exemplar reformers of
nature; who fiered with zeal for the conquest over concupiscence, departed the
Cities, to receive with Moises in the des^^t the law of the Gospel, that is
perfect charity. Let v^go into the s^ld and make our abode in the villages
Having therefore such presidents, as al^o from H^lias living in the mountain
of Car^el^s, from the Rechabits inhabiting in solitude the banks of ^ordan,
from S* John the Bapti^t, yea from our Savior Christ an inhabitant also of the
wilderness, and at the time of prayer generall^e withdrawing his person, we
are to harken to the counsel of S. Gregory Naz^anzene: we must procure our
rest, that with a mind not troubled we may converse with Almighty God:
Again Sol^^ude is a goodly thing, which I am taught to think by the
Carm^l^^an^ mountain of Helias, by the desert of S. John, and by that ^^^,
unto the which Jesus did depart so often, and remained there with a que^t and
recollected ^^^de. Yea the Apostles, following Christ our Savior, abandoned
what worldly commodies they had, to enfeoble in themselves concupiscence. what
advantage made S. Basil of his retired and mortified life, thus he reports.
I depart into the mountains as a l^^le spar^ovv: thereby as a sparrovv am I
delivered from the snares of the fovvlers* I remain in that solitude. O
malicious cogitation, in the which our Lord did ab^^e. Here is the o^^ Psalm.
123. Math 4. Genesis 18. Gen ^8. Leuit. 16.
tree of Mambre, here is the ladder reaching to heaven, and an host of ang^lls
scene by Jacob. Here is that wilderness, in the which the people of God
was purified, and received his law, and so brought into the land of promise
did behold God: Here is the mountain of Carmell, in which living Helias did
please Almighty God, Heere^s the field, into the which Esdrass descending by
the commandment of God, brought forth all the divine books Here is the
wilderness, in the which blessed John did ^at^ of the loc^stes* and pr^a^^ed
p^na^ce unto men. Here is mount Ol^uett, to the 3. Reg. 1^. 1. Esd. 7.
which depa^^^d our Savior to pray, and taught us to pray. Here is Christ a
lover of solitude, for he says where two or three are assembled in my name,
I am in the midst of them. Here is the Math 3. Math. 18. Heb. 11.
straight and narrovv way lea^^ng unto l^^e. Here be doctors and Prophets
wandering in vvildernesses, ^n moun^aines, and (...) of the ^arth. Here are
the Apostles and the Evangelists, and the so^^ta^^^ lyu^^ of m^n^^s. The
proportion and measure of this ret^aicte and mortification is to be taken
according to every ones voca^ion and quality of affairs belonging unto him:
so that although all be not to imitate the monk or the ^remite, or the high
perfection of this mortifica^ion by departure from out the world, yet all are
in genera^l to withdraw themselves from hasard of sin, where is probable
danger thereof in any conversation. And a^ s^a and land serve m^^ d^uerslie for
their uses, so the priu^te and p^^l^ke life are to be mixed and tempered for the
more good of every particular person; but especially for the community, for
whose sake the monk and the (...) ^^ charity are to quitt and leave sometimes
their closets and cells, to preach, Greg. Naz. orat. 20.
teach and converse among others, as well notet^ S. Gregory Nazian. Besides
this sacred reason of mortification by a retired life, and by the alteration
and succession upon good occasions of both the lives contemplative, and
practical, Seneca yeldeth an other commodity of it civil and politic.
Conversation ab^ute different affairs, not well Senec. l. de Tranquil. cap.
54.
appointed, d^oth both trouble, and al orcnevv affections, and makes sore
again what in man's mynde^s vveake, and not well cured. yet notvvithstanding
solitude and the active life are to be mixed and mutuallie exchanged* Solitude
will make us to desire the compan^e of men, active life cause us to desire
ourselves: and so one vvil^ be the remedy of the other. Especially we
Christians are to imitate the Elephants in chase and d^nger, who knowing
themselves pursued for their yuorie tuskes, in the course dash and break them
in pieces, as records Sol^^us, to Solin. ^de si^u. orb^^.
the end the hunters may surcease from their game: so we are to mortify such
splendor or graces of our bodies and souls, as in us the world desires for
it service against Almighty God.

3 To mor^ification also appertains a more hard entreatie and handling of
our bodies, to extinguishe or mitigate the heat of concupiscences humor
therein, to A life p^^itentiall.
make it saint and tractable by reason and virtue: For it is Satan, as notes
Saint Ephrem, which seeks, according to our Savior his testimony, after
mo^ste places Ephrem. l. de Poen. Math* 12.
for his seat and empire: that is for such bodies, as flow again in (...) of
diett, and ^u^plussage of pampering delights.

Tunc viuere cast
Asperius, cum prompta venus. Tunc durius irae Claud^^n. in Hono^. verse. 260.

C^^^ul^mus* cum pana pat^^.
Mo^e hard it is then to be chaste,
VV^^n v^nus has her ^fferings cast;
So from anger then to r^^ra^ne,
When power affordes desired pain.
We must always repute there to be Troy, where is found Helena, that is a
l^fe Sense. Agam.
continually subject to flames and destruction, where pleasure bea^eth the
rule: whereupon speaks the Apostle S. Paul I chastise my body, and bring it
into servitude, least 1. Cor. 4. Basil. l. de Virg.
that when I have prea^hed to others, I my ^elf become a reprobate. No man can
be ignorant what force the body has upon the soul, when it commands
unbridled, whose motions, as tells us S. Basil, ariue even to the secrecy
of the mind, as a stone, says Itaque non rei^^iendis generibus cibo^um quasi
po^lu^i^, sed concupiscentiae p^rdomandae, and dilectio^ ^^a^rum ^^linendae
(...) omn^s iudustria. Aug de Mor. Eccles. l 1* c 3^ and l. 2 c 1^ Epist 86.
Ca^^^od lib ^ ^ap. 49.
he, cast into the water, does not only move those pa^ts, which it
substantiallie touches, but also far of by certain o^bs and circles, that
thereon ensue. Therefore we must be provident in soul, in spirit, and in
reason against this ^eopardie, and by mortification ^uffer not the bod^e to be
supe^iour. If nature has ^nstructed diverse creatures, deuoide of ^eason, to
help themselves against perils and dangers, and their own infirmities, how
much more are we, knowing the incommodies of a corporal liberty, to rep^esse
the rage and fu^^e thereof? what in this kind is practiced by fowls, fishes
and beasts, is thus b^ C^ssio^orus recorded from the mouth and penn of king
Theodo^icus. Certain b^^d conue^sing with (...) f^^^seeing natura^^^^
temp^st^ to come* (...) the deep and retire them^elues to sh^re. The d^^ph^^s
^^aring the tempest^ of the ^^a m^ke stay about the rocks ^n shallovv places.
Fishes called (...), as (...) honycomb^s, or bonn^^^e t^nde^nes, purple
delights, the riches of the sea, vvh^^ste they know of temp^sts to come,
d^siring to change places to bala^ce their lightness, ta^e what stones they can
hold, ^ as ^t were thereby anchored svvymm to the ro^^es. ^oul^s do change
^ontr^^^* when vvinter approaches. VVilde beast^s for the (...) of the times
take order for their (...): And should not men be more careful to furnishe
themselves with such things, as they may after desire? But how much the more
impo^tan^^^e a^e we in this kind to be vig^l^^t, in that the pleasures of ^he
body, and ^ol^^^e thereof tend to the eternal hurt of the body and soul in
man! What by the example of Christ S. Chrysostom exhorts us unto is worthy
the noting: Christ as man Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad pop. Psalm. 4.
has humbled himself, he has redeem^d thee with his pr^cious blood, that
^eedeth all fle^h; he that has crowned the heavens with star^es, has been
crowned with thorns, obedient even unto death: wherefore it is convenient
for the in this life not to be iocund, but to lament, and S. Aug. l. 2. de M^r*
Eccles c. 13 distingui^heth our ^ast^ from that of M^nic^aus Greg. hom. 16. in
(...) A^^. 10* ad V^^^. (...). c ^. The (...) (...)tion. A^^* ^^ (...) ed the
obs^ruation o^ ^ast^ng d^ye^e Aug ^^ Haeres. (...) the P^^* ^^^stes and
Ma^^^h^^s fasting upon sondayes. Aug. ^pist. 86.
to believe him, that spea^^t^: you that say in your hearts, and are compuncted
in your beds, meditating by night upon that we have done with ^obs and
sig^^s: wherefore mort^fie thy body, that thou ma^^st praise God in the
timbrell and in the quire. A principal exercise we take to be fasting, serving
to mortification, that is a sacrifice or decimation of the body it self, as
speaks S. Gregory of the lent: thereby not only practicing the virtue of
temperance, but also satisfying for temporal pa^^es due to sins remitted:
Almighty God will spar^ us, says S Ambrose. if vv^ ^^a^e not our selves.

4. The maine soul and substan^^ of the Protestantish religion is wholly
against the doctrine of mortification: For if all be just by the justice of
Christ, and by no other work, yea if men are to to abandon ^^^st in their own
works, of what purpose or commodity is mortification? In the act of any sin
one may by faith believe Christ his justice imputed unto him, that God is his
God, and Christ his Christ, therefore he may perform the same all^o when
concupiscence is neue^ so strongly pampe^ed, and most impo^tun^te in
commaund^^e* who will say, that one with a ^att belly can not as well believe
the gospel, as an ^ther of a lea^^, or one inflamed in hot blood, as suerly
as an other in cold? For there is no oppositio^ betwixt concupiscence,
business of the flesh, and faithin Christ, the one placed ^n the body, the
other in the soul. Ne^^her does the iolitie of the fles^e incite always to
^^^re^ul^t^e, to distrust the promis^s of God, but rather to fornication, to
(...), (...) and such l^ke: so then fa^^h is ^n ^ecurity freed from all
imp^dime^ts, whilst del^gh^s are purchased and pursued for the body: and even
then the As^e of Apuli^s graseth on no other past than vp^n r^s^s. It is not
mortification, say they, or works of penance that justify, that maynta^ne
justice in any: no, only the work of faith, that stands for all in Christ
Jesus; whilste the Romans vainlie take hold of ^usteritie, of sharp
d^sc^pline, thinking by their ^orks of hair^ cloth to procure or preserve
justification, and thereby salvation. No, all is in the Lord: believe and then
thou have all, and whilste thou beleeuest, no work of thine, nor of the
devil, can ^ndamage thy soul. Is mortification expedient at the least to
avoid mortal sin? Nothing less: seeing that it is impossible for the
iustest man to be without mortal sin, yea without the manifold breaches
of all the ^^nne commandments. what needs then this co^osiue of works?
believe and thou art mortified enoughe. Examine we now the pa^ticular
differences by the rule of Hope.

5. Although it be a bitter thing and distastefull to weane our senses by
solitude and Solitude serves. for Cha^ity against the Protest^^.
retraite from the desired allurements of their objects, of their best and
dearest ^oves, yet who sees it not to be a thing available to virtue, and
especially to the love of Almighty God and heavenly things? For seeing that
the will cannot be utterly severed from all love, if it be deprived of the
sight of worldly contentme^ts, it must thereafter more suetely, entirely, and
earnestly mo^^te up to the author of love by an unfeigned and ha^tie charity. To
which perfection in excellen^y ariue with Hierom. ^d Paul^n* O^ (...) ^^ served
by Monckes S. Aug. mak^th mention lib de Mor Eccles. c 3. Epist. 86.
us in the Catholic Church such as lead a religious and claustrall life,
wholly devoted to God, and by angelical motion every part in the^ mo^^th
together ^bstracted from the world: whose princes were, as speaks S.
Hierome, Elias, H^l^z^^s, and th^^r g^^d^s or capta^nes the children of the
prophets, that dvv^ll^ in the fields, and in solitude. But when I speak of a
monk, of a religious person, I entreat of the ver^^ ha^^ed of Antichrist in
the Protestanter, whose justifying faith does pers^cu^e such men ^uen to
flames, ashes, and destruction. And who is a principal agent of theirs in this
mighty spite against a retired life? Is not in the East that ignoble
Emperor Copronimus, surnamed Caballinus, Copronimus an enemy of religious me^.
Stercorarius, half a Jew, denying with his blasphemy the divinity of our
Savior Christ, as writes Theophanes, thus blaspheming: Marie brought him
forth, ^uen as Marie my mother brought forth me^* and finally justly
condemned to hell fire by his own confession upon his death bed for
doshonoring the virgin Marie, as is reported by C^^renus? C^d^n. in Co* pronimo.
do not Luther and Calvin in the violent fury of their justifying faith
teach consecrated persons to religion to forsake their cloistures* to defrocke
themselves, to launche out into the deep of the world, and b^dding adieu to
all virtue, to stick solelie unto a pleasant faith in Christ? These just dance
after the pipe of Copronimus, thus proclayning by his officer; He that will
obey the Emperor and us, forthwith let him put on a white garment, and ^uen
within this hovv^^ take a vv^^^. Asp^^die disp^tche of only faith, if not a
dangerous resolution of only f^llie. An English Puritan, that is a loose
Abbat Resp. ad 6 Rauon.
Carnali^n, thus tuneth his pipe in the kitchen of An^ichrist, telling that
many in ancient times betook them selves to solitude, falsel^ thinking
thereby to attain greater sanctity of life, as amongst the Jews did the
Ess^^. Truly if only faith justify, I see no reason why any man should be
melancholy, or afflict himself in the wilderness, when in any place of joy,
honor, and solace, a man may believe that Christ is his Christ, and God his
God, which is enoughe for a holy Pro^estant. But what a bestialitie is this!
does no^ solitude withdraw men's affections and desires from worldly
delights! does it not thereby increase in them a greater love toward
Almighty God, procure a purer auoidance of sin, and a more busied
employment in virtue? And from all this good Sir, is there no sanctity? Are
they only thorns of affliction without all flowers of commodity? where is
sanctity, if not in charity, in innocence, in virtue? If not here, then no
where; or is it in the persuasion of only faith for a Puritanicall liberty?
It is enoughe, will he say, that what I do in court or conversation, is not
imputed unto me; that by my apprehending faith, God is my God, and Christ is my
Christ; what needs any more? Then I see that there is no difference betwixt
the Theology of a minister, and a larges of the goldefynder; and so a minister
may with the substantial meat of Christ his justice, use what sau^^ his
maisterships sense best likes. But I leave him to his draffe in the f^yued
golden vessel of only faith, the very brokreis indeed and baude for all
turp^tude. Was not S. Hierom of an other strain and key in his spiritual
doctrine? O d^se^t ad^^^^d with the flovv^^s of Christ? O solitude, in the
Hieron. ep. ad H^liodo^. Apoc. 20. Mortification of the senses against the
Protestant.
vvhi^h those stones do grow, of which is said ^^ the Apocalypse, that the
C^t^^e of God is builded of them! O life er^miticall more samiliarlie (...) God!

6. And as the precious and rich treasu^^ is more ^arefulli^ fenced and
protected against thieves and robbers, so our justice, being that inestimable
pearl worthy of heaven, is preserved from loss by us Catholics through the
wo^kes of mortification: we keep our bodies by rigor of discipline from the
ass^^lt of flattering pleasure; we rebate in them force of unlawful desires by
hard entreatie: that as a polished glass affording no footing to the fly
gives unto it a spedy fall, so we may reject the illusions of fond delights,
nothing found for them in us to fasten hold. In which respect the
Protestanter by the Cross of Christ breaks and debaseth the same Cross: for
supposing that through the Cross of Christ his justice is eternal, and out
of all peril to be lost, he makes no use of the Cross for mortification, for
any voluntary subduing by penalty concupiscences: as if the Cross were for
him a tree, that only did swea^t balm for his pleasure, and never administered
him gall or mire for his affliction. If justice can not be expelled by any
sin, why should mortification enter into desire or practice? So long as a man
can believe Christ's justice to be his, so long needs he no mortification more
then of the understanding by faith, why should he dream then of chasticing his
body, seeing that in faith is all sanctity and security? It is no marvel,
if he repute fasting only the emptines of the belly, corporal molestation, a
needless superstition, if faith justify* and if justice can not decay a spare
and lean ca^kesse, Ab^a^s answer to the ep^stle de^^ca^o^^e.
naught else but the image of deep hypocrisy. These these be they unto whose
fingers of works sticks the serpent of a flowthfull faith, and who fly from
God and his Church in the winter of a dead charity, and in the Saboth of a
lo^tering liberty. Solinus reports, Lucius Plocius proscribed and pursued to
death by the mag^strates of Rome, ^urking in a certain ca^^, to have bewrayed
himself to ^he searche^s by the smell and Act ^8 Math. 24.
sent of sweet powders and spices he used about him for d^l^caci^; even so
the Protestant by fau^r bestowed upon his own concupiscence, and flattering of
himself for pleasure, still dis^^uereth of what sect he is, and how wholly
devoted to pleasure, to (...) d^ (...) c. ^^.
the very (...) and fall of virtue. He will repute the observed and de^^e^d
fasts of the Church as sup^r^itious, and thereup^n in ^equell of effect he
will not fast at all. And why should he fast, s^ thence that his faith ^an lay
as sure, and as ^^rong hold on the justice of Christ feasting, whether the
belly be full, or empty, so he be not drunk or asleep? But doubtless as
pleasure and dissolution has wr^ught the ruin of many nations, so will it
finally deal with the Protestanters, who against all virtue, against good
manners, and civil policy abolishe mortification of the bod^e and s^^le,
refuse severe discipline, reposing the whole sum of their es^a^es in a wanton
faith apprehending the promises, whilste in contempt of virtue, and good works
their sen^es wallow in disport, and their har^s are a fire again with
concupiscence. Su^rl^e the Protestant^sh doctrine of a justifying faith, as it
^s against mortification, so is it in full saill of opposition to
Christianity; whose profession especially is verified and inured in the
contempt of Plut* in Pi^^. (...)
pleasure, and practiced in a severe rigor of a life ruled and ^estrayned by
bitterness. A pate^n^ whereof we behold in Christ himself, the Prince of
Saints, and in all his perfect followe^s and disciples. Nothing so Christian as
chasticement of our selves, as salt of penalty against the putrefaction of
pleasure: and if we (...) with Christ by compassion and 2. Cor. 1. Rom 6.
Colos. 2. Romans 12.
mortification, we shall reign and joy with him eternally. They conditions
are taxed and laid down by the Apostle, to wit compassion, putting of, and
crucifying of the old man, burying of a sensual life, ^yding our actions with
Christ from the glory of the world. It remains then we accept of them,
hoping by them to attain to the cheifest point of beatitude, and joy we aim
at, and wish for. We must be living ^^sts and The adam^^^ o^ Prot^stanci^.
sacrifices, that is having our bodies by charity in a certain sort
spirituallie slain, consumed and offered wholly up to the service of God. And
to this office of charity only avails the Catholic faith and hope,
whereas the delicacie and wantonness of a justifying faith avouched by the
Protestanter, tends altogether to abolish the same, and to bring in bombase
from Cyprus, with ^iuet^ from Gr^^^^, to please the senses of our corruptible
carcases, and itching humors of our carnal desires.

7. This brutish doctrine of the Protestant, opposed to catholic
mortification, bears The Protesta^tish refusal of mortification is
ba^^^^ou^e. Sen^^. Epi. 51.
all so a strong hand for the bringing in of barbarism into a commonweal^he.
For as sequestration of life from the vulgaritie, moderation of diet, and
refusal of lustefull pleasures, purify the understanding, sh^rpen it for the
better attaining of knoledge, harden and fortify the body to endure martial
adventures, and with agilitie to undergo all virtuous endeavors: so to much
popularitie, excess of mea^e and drink, slothful repose, maintained by the
Protestant does dull man his intelligence, effeminate his proves, waste the
fru^ctes and increase in any country: whereby has ^sh^w ba^baritie, as a
necessary effect of such la^ish and sensual depo^^ement. Nether is it
sufficient for the auoidance of these in commodities, if a P^otestant Prince
enacte many severe laws for the observance of temperance, of contin^^ce, when
as the common faith of the people takes from all such mortifications the
gust of virtue and spiritual avail thereby, as is evident that the
protestantishe does:* for as their obedience in this kind well be violent,
and contrary to their natures, so together with hate of the law well be
coupled often breach thereof, and contempt, weere danger of penalty may be
avoided: and so in deed pleasure, by the Protestant prevailing against
mortification, by stupiditie, by ignorance, and effeminacie, will induce
barbaritie finally with the ouerthroe of all civility.

The christian catholic hope has confidence and repose in the goodness of
Almighty God, accounting him an hater of sin, and in no ways worker of
it in man: vvheras the hope protestantish regardinge this sacred and just
providence, attributes to God, as aucthor, cause, and effectour all iniquity
contrived by the malice of man or satan.

CHAPTER. XVII.
IN that almighty God by the light of nature, imprinted in our souls through
his gift of creation, as also in his sacred word disswadeth us generally from
committing God no auc^or of sin.
sin: and to that effect proposes to our considerations the terrible
spectacles of his most seue^e justice oftentimes chastisinge the same with
revenge: also sithence through our savior Christ here fornisheth us in this
frailty of ours with competent grace against the power of sin; there upon we
gather most manifestly, that his divine hand, and providence is in no sort
cause or actor of in^^^uitie, but only the free election of man, culpably
preferring unlawful pleasures before his most right and best beseeming
commandments. Which thing as it is universally true in respect of all
offenses, so is it in particular especially nototius in that grand and capital
Adams sin not of God.
crime and trasgression of our first parents, it being of such a greiuous and
malignant moment and nature, as not only it dispoyled their proper persons of
that rare iuell of original justice, but also disroabed all mankind of the
same ornament, and engolfed it in this maine ocean of calam ties, wherewith we
for the present feel our selves perpleved, molested, and overwhelmed. For
althought that fair and amiable hue in the forbidden fruit, the sugared
speeches of ^ua to Adam, and those sl^ght collusions of the wily serpent under
pretense of honor and liberty, were like unto drawing adamantes, and very
forcible motions, to sed^ce their affections from their loyalty to God, and
respect to virtue, yet by the express precept of God was forbidden them that
unlawful Gen 2. ^u^her l ^. in Gen c. 1^. God did fo^^see Adam his sin, not
decreed it. Aug Epist. (...) lib. 1. de ^rat Christi cap. 19. Ambr. l. de
paradiso. c. 8.
taste under pain of death, that is as well mortality of the body, as
deprivation of a gracious life in the soul; they were also protected by that
complete h^rnesse and munition of original justice, created in freedom of
will, and potencie to persist in good; therefore their fault appertained only
to the transgression of their own will les, and in no sort to the providence
and decree of almighty God. Truth it is, that God in his eternal oversight of
all things, did evidently know, that our first parents would trauerse and
infringe the bond of his iniunction; nevertheless to their offense he
concurred not as caus^, aucthor, or effector: for as says S. Augustine God
does sortell the finnes of men, the which al^o he^ of (...) to ^orekno^^, and
yet not to produce them. Excellently well S. Ambrose speaking of the fall of
Adam, and of the persidious treachery of Judas, thus writes: Neither d^ (...)
^^y that God did not ^novv the prcuarication to came; yea I affirm he knevve
it; neuerthel^s to him could not be derived the faul^e of the per^^^^ng
traytore: or that it may be imputed to God, that either of them sell by sin.
Then he yeldeth the reason, why their miscariadges could not be ascribed to the
providence of God; in that both of them trespassed by act of free will, and
not of any necessity imposed upon them by God or nature: For God did not so
press by necessity, that either Adam should preuaricate, or Judas play the
traitor; because both of them if they had kept that, which was bequeathed
them, they might have abstained from sin. So then S. Ambrose teaches, that
the reason why sin is not caused by God, lies grounded ^n man his free will,
and that without such freedom he insinuates either sin should be no sin,
or God author of the same Sin should not be committed says Justin Martyr,
if by impotencic Just in mart. ^^^spon. ad quest. 13.
of nature, and not rather peruersity of free will, mortal me^ did offend.
Hereupon the Catholic hope lifts up the soul in confidence to obtain a
great benefi^t of a gracious gift by the goodness of God, and mer^t^ of our
Savior, to wit: Redemption, prop^ciation, and expiation from all greiuous
sins and crimes, from an estate of damnation, that is from sin derived unto
us all by that great fall and error of our first parents. which degree and
heinous wa^ght of offense should be clean taken away without the merittes of
Christ, if they had sinned by necessity, and not of franck and free election,
if God had ordained and decreed their sin, and not only the proper
per^ersitie in their free w^lles had performed it. How odious then and damnable
are the Protestantets, auo^. hing, Adam to have tre^passed b^^ng enclosed with
imposibilitie of the centrarie: to have offended by the very decree and
appointance of almighty Calu. opuse. Geneu. Beza. respon. ad Castal. VVirtak l
2 de peccat orig. Cap. 3.
God; to have been viged to that greiuouse evil by po^^e of nature not
resistable, to have offended by a will before consent bound by a fatalitie, and
so depressed into sin, as Calvin and Beza do affirm* One of their suit
gives an instance thereof in the devils, that sin of necessity, as he
speaks, and yet sin, liberr^me most freely. Here these fellows with
Mahomet make God the aucthor of Ad^m his sin, and principal agent ^here^n;
for as we learn by the Fathers, the only way to divert our judgments from
God as aucthor of sin, is to suppose sin an effect of freewill in man and
Angel; so then ^^ ^dam had offended not by his freewill, but of necessity,
God had been the cause and aucthor of his miscariage and trespass. And where
O Christ, is then thy redemption by this calculation of the Protestanta^s: for
if Adam offended through necess^tie, what need was there that thy blood, so
precioue, should have been shedd for exp^^^ion thereof sithence that Adam was
otherwise faultles, he offend^^g by excu^able (...) by the law, decree, and
concourse of thy heavenly father? well he might be ch^^t bly p^t^ed, but I s^e
not how justly condemned, or mercifully redeemed O the foul ma^h nation of
Antichrist against thy cross! Do the Protestan^es know as much, en plo^^g
themselves to that effect in his service? If they do, hat^full then and
sacrilegious is their name; if not their pride is co^temptible, yet to be
lamen^ed Surely the^r (...) gno^ance is the more reprouable, in that it
contradicts it self, and ru^net^ out by p^^cemeales in a muti^^e and
contra^ie^^e. They are accuston ed to a^^i^^^e, h^^ the l^sse of freewill in
man proceeded from a precedent sin, whose penalty it ^s, (...) ^^^cted upon
him by the justice of God: yet affirminge A^am to have off^^de^ not by
freewill, but of necessity, be^o^e any such offense they make him vo^de of
free will; in that this will of his was by a ncessarie determination from God
and nature applied and carved to si^ne: sin being the effect of a will
first pressed and (...) by necessity and not of a faculty potent and able ^o
comm^tt^t ^^ ^o. Did then Adam suffer the loss of freewill given him by nature
and grace, having not as yet d^me^^ed such a defect, or ^endered himsel^^ by
any fault punishable? What makes the Protestante^ of the justice of God! Take
from Adam once freedom of will in his trespass, what must be reckoned as
cause of his crime, but nature? and what is his crime but nature? and who is
cause of nature and works jointly with Manichey did affirm substance and
nature to be sin: as the Protestant does. Aug. li. 2 de Mor. Eccles c. 2.
the same, but God? then shall God in the blasphemy Protestantish be cause and
aucthor of Adam his sin. And if the Protestanter yield no place to sufficient
grace, as has been rehearsed he does not where the effect of virtue and good
consent is wantinge, then seeing that Adam had not effectual grace to obey the
commandment of God, he offending against the same, was utterly void of all
grace to withstand the temptation, and so yielded thereunto by force of
necessity: whereupon not having freewill, he might for his excuse impeach God
as aucthor of his offense.

2. Now as touching the particular sins and trespasses of mortal men, the
Catholic God no cause of any actual sin in man.
hope so conceiueth of the merciful providence of almighty God, as that it
reputeth it in no sort cause or efficient of any crime or transgression.
Which verity is evidently deduced from those dehortatorie spea^hes of
almighty God in holy writ, which deterr us from sin, and counsa^le the
contrary virtue; and also declaring that great hatred and detestation he has
of sin. Thou have destroyed all that forn^cate from Psalm 72. Ezech. 18.
three; the which words could not be consequent from reason, if God in men did
work their offenses, and according unto a platform of a perfect rule in the
idea of his own understanding, drew fourth that monstrous shape notorious in
sin. It is not lavvfull faith S. Gregory Nissen to ascribe unto God si (...)
actions. Even as to the preuaricating Greg. Nissen. l 3 Phil. ca. 21. Aug. li.
de arb. c. 6.
Angels God did not impresse that will, vvherby they stood not in truth,
neither has he inspired unto men that affection, whereby they imitate the
devil. To the end therefore we may distinctly lay down the Catholic doctrine
in this point, it is first to be understood, that the cause or aucthor of
sin may be conceived as of two sorts or kinds, the one is physical the
other moral. The physical cause is employed only in that faculty of the
^oule, Two ma^ners of causing sin.
the which commits in action the sin in substance of vital work, as the
will of him that offends: the cause moral designeth that motive or
inducement, which persuades sin, as when the devil by suggestion, or men by
words and scandalous deeds, give occasion to any to offend, and so concur
there unto: in no which manners of cause is contained the Sacred providence or
decree of Allmighty God, adm^nistring the affairs of sinners. No moral cause
is God of sin, because although he permit the God is not moral cause of
sin Aug lib 2. de peccat merit. c. 19. Epi 120. Praedic^^ ergo and peccata
hominum, quae pote^it praescire, non fa^ere.
devil to engender in the mind of man any cogitation inciting to evil, yea
or effect it himself, yet does he not perform it in affection and desire that
man committ the fact of sin, as if this sin were the end of his divine
providence foreminded, and intended by the same: yea rather he enformeth the
understanding by grace of illumination and vocation to the contrary, and that
with an affection, that man thereby avoid sin: sometimes by reason,
contemplatinge the beauty of virtue, the deformity of vice; art other seasons
by threats and minacies terrifying from sin: and in this respect although
sin do ensue of the suggestion by sa^han, yet is not God auct^or or mortal
cause of sin. In which sense S. James says that God is not a Tempter of
cuilles, nor tempts any, because man consenting to temptation does it
against the will and pleasure of God, that hates sin, and of himself would
that man sinned not.

3. As for the cause physical and real of sin, neither is he accessorie
unto the same, God is not the Physical cause of sin Peccat^ quidem non per
ipsam factum est. Aug tract. 1. in Joan c 1. Nisse^ Cath. mayor. c 7. Plut. l.
defa^o.
although producing with the will of man the very substance and quality of
that act, which is sinful. The reason whereof excellently well the fathers
have rendered from the manner of worcking proper to man offending: that is from
his freewill in not sinning of necessity ordained by God and nature, but of a
liberty, as being able by grace not to offend. whereupon the Stoikes that
maintained a faralitie from the influence of the stars into men's souls,
affirmed those stars to be causes and aucthors of sins, as reports
Plutarch, Sophocles, and Pierius. So also Epiphanius affirms, that if man
ttepassed by a fatal necessity from the stars. The stars themselves
vvere^ sp^^^ally to be punished, that cause necessity of sin And if God
himself be cause that man sins Sopho^. O^d. Pi^^ius verb. stella. Epip^. l.
cont. haerel. Tom. 1. Euseh. l. 5. pcaepar. c 2. Aug. lib. 2. de ^^^es
Free Will in ma^the cause why God is not auctor of sin Aug. Retract. l. 1.
c. 7. Eusebius. l. 6. praepar c. 5. orig apud eum them. cap. 9. Clem. Alex. 1.
strom. Aug. ^3. quest. q. 4. 21. Re^^. l. 1 c. 26. Aug. 12. Ciu. c. 7. Tract.
1. i^ Joan. c. 1. Hate of sin. Sinful deserte not caused by God, because it
is rather nothing then any real thing. Aug. li. 1. cont. Julian. c. 8. Ambr.
de Isaac and anima. c. 7. malu^ priuatioboni. Sin like an idol which is
nothing. Aug. Tract. 1* in Io^n. ^a. 1. A relligion invented by the Devil
^ou^ng men to sin.
of necessitic, Eusebius says, it would follow, that not man, But his
creator should be a sinner. Therefore the Manichies, that denied freewill in
man, and in place thereof remarked a necessity of sin, consequently avouched,
that the maker of the flesh in man was also auctor and worcker of his sins:
likewise generally the Mahometanes, excludinge from man freewill, affirm God
to because and aucthor of all sins committed by him. The reason whereof is
pregnant: for if men offend through necessity, then there is a certain nature
conuaying them to sin, as the quality of weight and poyse does cause the
stone to descend: and God being cause and aucthor of nature in all respects,
ther^y as cause of that which necessarily causes sin, fi^ally is also
himself cause of the same. How can God move man to sin, solicit him
thereunto, and by course of nature so ordain, that he shall sin of
necessity, but also by nature, so by himself combyned, he be cause of sin?
and so as says Eusebius either adultery, stealth, and the like are no
sins, or else, The cause of sin is to be beheld in the creator himself?
But considering the diversity betwixt God his concourse and providence in
regard of the substance in the act of sin, and the operation of man, it will
evidently appear, that only man is aucthor of sin, not God, that does but
permit the same, and not always effectually hinder it. What concourse God
imparteth to the will of man offending, he does it according to conueniencie
of order, and disposition of natural causes, as teaches S. August: the which
connot act any thing without his aid and maintaynance: whereas the will of man
endeavors, it self offendinge contrary to the rule of God, and his own
natural reason, with bond and obligation not so to demeine itself: and
therefore the freedom of man his comportment being defective, and against the
percept of God and nature, the viciositie or mortal culpabilitie of the fact
issues from that quality in the same, which precisely proceeds from the
will of man, and not from the action of God: in that as remarcketh S Augustine,
the cause of sin is rather defective, then effectiue. Upon which
consideration by virtue of our doctrine herein we conceive the greater hatred
against sin, being not produced by the finger of God, but by humane freedom
erroniously and unworthily choosing pleasure before virtue; whose evil feature
has no conformity with any idea or resemblance in the mind of almighty God,
but rather is an excrement of a v^cious action, breathed upon the soul from
that loathsome spirit of satan: and so sin committed, upon the estimation
thereof, we abhor the more, and bitterly in penance, in contrition of ha^te,
bewail the disgrace, the dammadge enforced upon us thereby.

4. But Satan* enemy of man kind, thincking it not sufficient for our
contamination with si^ne, that we are therun^o much inclined, that we be
environed on all pa^tes with strong allurementes thereof, moving us unto foul
consent, to establish his empire of iniquity, has devised, even from heaven,
from the diuini^^e, from relligion in men's conceiptes, to present us with
motives to sin, to furnish us with excuses from the same. To this purpose he
diuulged an erronea^se Philosophy, teaching a fatalitie contained in the
staris, as finger of God, contriuing all wickedness on earth. Then d^d he place
befoore the pagans eyse a certain number of Gods, whose habi^s, whose
ceremonies, whose histories declared them auctors and abettors ^f murder, of
whoredom, of stelthe, rapine, leacherie, and dronckonnes. Sed m^, quod (...)
sim semper amori
Ipsa renu^ ^am^o^ ducet in Elys^os. T^bul l. 1. El^g 3.

But me ^o fa^^l still to gentle love
Venus grace will seats in heaven above.
whose statues beheld by the people, gave them encouragement, espetially being
instruments of religion, to all abomination, as presidentes and allowers of
their deboshementes. Senec. lib. de Breuit vitz c. 16. Piutarch l. de
Superstit. Aug. Epist 5. Arist. l. 7. pol. Cap. 17.
what other thing is it, says Seneca then to eutice men to vice, vvhilest
we make the Gods aucthors of sins, and so by example of divinity give them
a ^^ en^e excesable to cure their diseases? VVhereupon Aristotle aduertiseth
parents; that they, suffer not their children to behold filthy pictures, or
scenicall representations. but in these words lays dowen his one, either
blind, or abiecte misery. The magestiate is care, ullie to provide, that no
sign or picture be allowed, which by similitude does imitate faith
things: only except the case of they Gods, unto whom the law pernittteth
laseiuiousnes, and moreuer allows men for them selves, for their children,
and for their vviues, to sacrifice unto the God^. To this abomination of sin
endeuoreth Antichrist to bring the world by instincte of the relligion Pin l.
1. Hist c 7 Cic^to. l. 4. Tuscul.
Protesantish. It does exceed all impuden^^^ ieth Phnie to feign that there ^e
Gods of ^ob^^ries and wickedness, O vvorthee reformer of man his l^se the
Poot, exclameth Cicero, the which places love, aucthor of essence and
leuetie, in the Counsatie of the Gods!

5. The Protestanter, as minister of satan, and agent for Antichrist, blusheth
not to defame the very providence of almighty God with the effecting of sin,
making and diuulging him aucthor and cause thereof, not only morally, but
phisi^ally and insubstance, although ashamed a^t this our reproach, he faineth
semblance, as if he never minded or harbored any such thought, or comm^tted
like opinion to paper and incke the records of man's memory Man says Calvin,
by the ^ust prou^^ement of God, Calu l 1 Just. c. 18 Sect 4.
De impulsu, does that, with is not lavvfull: then is God a perswader, a
wisher of sin: one that in^^ndeth sin by his action and cooperation as end
thereof purposed Man performs nothing, but what God has dec^^ed with
himself and appointed by (...) direction: lo then God wills sin,
predestmating ^t, disposing and ordayning it by h^s decree, So consequently is
cause and ^ucthor of sin. When man or fath an offends God holds
thest^^rne, and turns their endeauours to the execution his judgments. Then
the purpose in God is, that men and devils shall warcke sin, to the end that
his judgments be brought to passetand so is principal agent in sin. Mo^^
expressly also avouches Calvin, God to will actiuely those operations of men,
the which says he, others L. 1. c. 18. Sec. ^. l. 2. c. 4.
idely think him only to permit. Wherefore vainly protracinge, so they
escape, affirmenge, them only to come to pass by God his permission, and not
by his will. The words of the Protestantersaie expressly for this point of
blaspheme: the deductions of their doctrine mosste evident and pregnant for
illation thereof: why then are they ashamed of the report, and endeauo^r so
carnestlie to divert from their writings and conceiptes so odious an infamy?
Take it to you Protestanters, it is yours, the devils, and Antichrists, that
you prove, and we chardge you withal. One of them more audacious then the rest
to excuse in printe this foul fault in his conforte, denies that the church
of Robb. Abbot. see 14 against D Bishop. Lib. l. de Antichrist.
England ever entertained any such document; and yet the ignorant minister
himself affirms, that by the evil of God many we are deceived, and followed
Antichrist, reading and credittinge the worckes of the fathers. Again says
he, God veth the wickedness of man, and disposes it to such ends and
purposes, as he thinks good: and sometimes in his just judgment takes
occasion to prouoke^^ See the blaspheme of the ignoratnt miscreant! If God
dispolse men's sins to any end, intended by him, before they are committed,
or whilst they are in act, then as such sins are means to those ends, so
are they intended and predestined by God, even as the ends them cl^es are:
in that to will an end dependante of these or these means, implies an
efficacious purpose and deciee of the means; and so sins as means to the
ends proiected by God, are in virtue of those ends semblably or dayned and
predestined: which is flatly to make God aucthor of sin. Moreuer if God
provoke men to sin, he is moral cause of sin: as the devil is, who
enciteth men to committ the same: for provocation to

sin includes an affecitn in the prouoker that one should sin, or effect
that act, which is sinful: in which affection and desire is reposed the moral
efficacy of sin: and so is the English Protestantish Church defiled with
blasphemy, having drunk the Apoc. 17.
very dregs of the heretical harlottes cup of abomination. But how dare
they deny that, with which we, and they themselves empeach their one credits!
Do they not abolish freewill imman, makig all men, yea the very regenerate to
harbor VVitak. l 2. de peccat. orig. Cap. 3. Apoll. Co^fess. Aug Stapiprefat
ad (...) l (...) Calu l and lest. cap. Sect. ^.
in their souls original sin, the empire and domination of wickedness: as of
necessity to break thereby continually the tenn commandments, to be guilty
of infidelity, of blasphamie, of idolatry, of whordome, of fornication, of
rapine and stealth: yea as speaks the Augustan confession: To contemn God,
to hate the judgments of God, to fly from God, being angry, to despair of
grace? And where the is innocence, where virtue, where itstification? mary say
they, in Christ, who is sent, not to help us to attain justice in operation,
But that he may be our justice by believing: that is although through farall
necesitie we commit all the villain imaginable, yet are we scotfree and just,
honest men and no knaves, believing Christ to be our justice A strange logike
of the Protestanter, that a man acting knauerie by original sin should not
be a knave through benefitt of faith, but a fair pure Christian: a knave in
Cencreto in fact, and yet right Clean ^opicke of a Protestant.
holy in abstracto in belief! Fast then this abominable doctrine of the
Protestanter allows as good, that ordure of conceipte v^nted forth by Simon
Magus, and Eunomius to wit, that the perpertration of any sin or
perseverance in the same, does Theodo^et. (...) hete^lcot. fab. het 54.
not hurt the faithful, as records Theodoretus: then is the Protestanters
hope rendered heer^y presumptuous What do I (...) presumpruous? ea plainly
sacrilegious: for he (...) faith hops for salvation not only void of verue,
required thereunto by God and nature, but ^urcharged with all (...) fithie
sins; as if his excrementes of a liberty (...), his dongh ^ll of sensua^^^,
his dominion of slnne, his guife and lake of curpitude, his original come,
fount^^ne and furnace of all wickedness, should press up to heaven, to the
court of ^nnocencie, of splendor offactitie: fie foul dog fie. Then hereapo^
does it ensure, that he makes God author, and cause moral and physical Ergo
ista non sunt facta per verbum, sedu quecumque naturaliter sunt facta Aug tract
^. in Johan. cap. 1.
of all his heallish actions: for as we have learned by the fathers, if men
sithence Adam his fall sin of necessity; God is cause of their sin:
therefore free will to consent unto sin denied by the Protestanter, and a
necessity. litie of sin established by God and nature in his opinion he
makes them both causes consequently and aucthors of sin, yea God the
principal and most effectual. If man do sin of necessity, and by an
antecedente determination of the will as cause of sin in tht the will applied
to sin, co^summateth the same by necessity of nature, as does the stone
descend by quality of poise in it, then such loss of liberty, and necessity
of doing that which is sin, for that it is a punishment of Adams sin, his
caused by God: for as sa^eth the Prophett, Is there any cu^ll in hte (...) that
God has not made? that is no evil of penalty and castigation. Amb. 3.
wherefore God causing in man this necessity, which is cause of sin,
thereupon is also cause of sin, as by his necessity driving man to sin:
and in that man Sin natural without ^re will, and so of God.
his action of sin has not in it any culpable defecte, which might take upon
it from God the efficacy of sin, in that where is necessity of work,
there is rather excuse and no discommendable behavior, as sense teaches;
therefore God havinge decreed and ordained this necessity, and not man; the
blow and pain infl^cted by God not only is the cause of sin in man, but also
he himself is principal actour by this penalty, and procurer thereof. What
blasphemy more he^^ous, or more audacious, then this, mounting as high as the
sacred hands and heart of Almighty God, from the Aug l. 2 de Morib. Eccles.
Cap. 2.
mouths of the Protestanters! And not only does the Protestant denying free
will to sin make God author of sin, but also with Manischaeus imagines a
real nature which is a creature of God, intrinfic^llie sin: which is
abominable. For consider we original sin according to the Protestant, and
we shall see it to be a real inclination of man his nature, or a quality
created by God. Take we a veue likewise of the indeliberate motions of
concupiscence, reputed as sins by the Protestant: which having no morality
from free will, remain real qualities produced by God. Lastclie waighe The
Protestat is a Manichey.
we the condition of actual theft, or murder, respeciuely to Protestantish
principles, and they wanting choice of free will, shall appear as only
natural and real actions. VVhereupon will follow to we foul heresies: first
that God is auctor of sin; unless some realitie of thing be not effected by
him: which to thinck is heretical. secondly that sin is a real quality or
substance according to the blasphemy of Manichaeus. And that the ugly
doctrine of the Protestante might surprasse in abomination that of Manichaeus,
he adscribeth to the good God as auctor all filth of bad action, where
Manichaeus only relates the same to a God malignant and of an evil
disposition.

6. But good God, what difference is there betwixt the Israelite, and the
Aegiptian, Putitie of the Catholic doctrine against the Protestanter.
the Catholic, and the Protestante! We Catholic so prise and admire the
sacred providence of almighty God, as deeming it in no sort concurrent or
appertaining to that contagious blemish of sin: whereas the Protestanter in
hope regards this his divine care and government of humane affairs, as
operative in that, which is most detestable, to wit in sin and iniquite. And
why should God in displeasure then be enraged against that, which himself has
produced! Why should by that pure and precius blood of his only son, procure
redemption from sin, sithence that he by his power, decree and will, has
stained man his nature therewith: poor man in the mean season through
necessity of harm and imbecillitie, not of force to shune the offense? And
seeing moreover that all effects proceedinge from the action of God, are
imitations of his goodness, and perfections correspondent to the idea in him, in
whose view they are expressed, how can sin caused by God have any deformity
in it, yea not retain some degree of excellency in reckoning of the worck
man? Then is not sin so detestable, as the Romances devise and speak: Then
for sin need not the heart to feel the corifiue of grief, being imprinted
in the soul by the finger of God himslefe. lo the common center of the
Protestanters Theoligie; Excuse and liberty in all villain of sin and
turpitude! Who can deem himself accusable or condemnable by God throught his
sin, firmly believing, such sin to be effected by God; raised up through
necessity, and not by the freedom of his on straying will? VVhereupon
Eusebius, an ancient writer in the primative church, declares what is the
demeritt of the Protestanters, making in their opinion, almighty God cause and
aucthor of sin: He is the vvorst of all, that by the creator of all does
(...), some to be induced to committ adulteries, Eusebius. l. 6. prae par. c. 5.
others into robber^^s, others into other vices: because such teachers, as the
Protestanters be, aid the devil therein, and endammadge mankind extremely
For satan not content with that great blow he has given us throught original
sin, making us prone thereby unto vice, lenow and weak to virtue, adioyneth
to our bane the doctrine Protestantish, to persuade by art and faith sin
unto us; telling us, that sin is occasioned by necessity, not of free
behauior; and that God is aucthor and cause of sin. Then what benefitt by
Christianity, by the passion of Christ? not to resist sin, not to avoid
sin, which is impossible, but to sin by every part of the body and soul,
to violate continually the ten commandments, to be in concupiscence
thieves, murderers, Cal^ (...) Inst. c. 3.
infidelles, traitors, and yet only believing to remain in safety, and in the
estate of justification! O unworthy obiecte of hate and shame to be seriously
battered by the pen of any Catholic writer! Let then the Protestanter know,
what lesson in this point he has learned of the devil, endenouring to grace
and guild his sins with the manifacture and worckmanship of God himself.
Let him understand, that No treason is a sin according to the Protestant.
no Prince is to be much offended against his subjects rebellion, who is
stirred up by god to rebel, and who is God his mere instrument in act of
rebellion.

The Christian Catholic confidence expects of the goodness and justice of
almighty God eternal salvation; supposinge that we before justification
cooperate with his grace by faith, fear, hope, repentance, charity, and
after, by obseruinge his commandments: whereas the hope Protestantish,
emboldened in presumption, looks for beatitude by only faith to be obtained,
contrary to all virtue, and the grace of Christ, whose effect is virtue.

CHAPTER. XVIII.
HE that shall consider the excellency of person and operation in our savior
Christian excellency of action.
Christ, and also the great surpassinge value of the meritt of his cross and
passion, must needs resolve with himself to think, that Christian men
benefitted thereby, before all other professors of religions what soever, be
ordained to a more high degree of virtue, of paritie, of sanctification, of
good endeauours For as speaks Amb. de Noe and arca c. 4.
S Ambrose the samilies of men are ennobled by the splendor of their race; the
grace of the soul is clarified by the spendour of virtue The law of Movses was
given from God to the people of Israel, not that: they should stay and demurre
in the sole illuminaiton of says and speculariue complement of the
understanding, but that from thence they might be instructed in those things,
Quae ad animae discipl^nam spectant; That appertain Amb. l. 1. of. sic. c. ^.
to the descipline of the soul: and the holy Prophettes of almighty God,
directed to that people, did especially drive at such purpose, whereby they
might abandone sin, and garnish themselves with virtues But most effectually
our savior Christ aimed farther then at the bare perfection of faith,
incultatinge unto the world the necessity of houest endeauours, the commodity
of them; willing us to be the good seed which Math. 7. Luc. 13. Math 22. Math
24. Luc. 18.
brings forth an hundred fold of increase, to enter in at the narrow gate
of a mortified, curbed, and restrained (...): to purchase that precious
margarite of heaven with dispense, yea loss, of all worldly commodities: to
imitate the prudent virgins, as well provided of oil of charity, as lamps of
virginity; to adioyne unto a faithful repair unto his church, the wedding
garment of virtuous life: to play the true and industrious seruante in
procuring garment of virtuous life: to play the true and industrious seruante
inprocuring increase by those gifts and grace which we have received: and to
conclude with the Apostle, The will of God is our san. ^ification. So that
according 1 Thessalonians. 4. Basil. de spir. sanct c. 15. Nis sen l. de chatact hom.
christ. Psalm. Ion
to S. Basil the gaspell of Christ, or the profession of Christinitie, is
nothingeels, but the sorme of a life from resurrection, that is the active
accomplishment in virtuous offices, after sin, once by death abolished, and
newnes of good life succeedinge, appearing in a resurrection, as it were in the
revived phoenix, or imping out of new fathers in the eagle by course of nature
hau^nge recovered her youth. Christ dyed for us to the end That the
justification of the law might be fulfilled in us: that is, we employ
ourselves Romans 8.
in virtuous actions prescribed by the law of God and nature: which do not
walk according to the flesh, but according to the spiritte. A spiritual
walking then and passadge in Ephesians. 2.
the operations of virtue is the diadem and flouer of our Christianity: we
being a People followers of good vvorckes: that we may walk to nevvnes of
life, created in Christ Jesus in good vvorcles, the which god has prepared,
that we should vval^e in them. To which effect nothing can be uttered ^ither
of grater h^ght and exellencie, or more for the recommendation of our
Christianity, then what avouches S. Gregory Nissen, sayhing, Greg. Nissen I
desorma ho^in. Christ^at Math 5. Hope o^^u stification by faith, hope, charity*
that Christianti^e is an ^mitation of God* according to the co^nsaile of our
sauiuor. be you perfect as your heavenly father is perfect.

2. To the end therefore we may asiue from sin to the grace of justification,
we Catholics acertaine our selves* that first we are to be disposed by an
assent of true and uine faith, creditting all the ministeries belonging unto
the subst^nce of Christain redemption: and that by such faith, as whose object
is general, and jointly to be believed of all the faithful: as are the
articles of faith comprised in the Apostles Creed. Which act of faith we make
a vital operation of man his vnderstaning cooperating with the grace of
illumnation: apperrayning also to the work of faith the consent of a good
will, we voluntarily an^ freely, through the grace of vocarton and persuasion,
Heb. 11.
crediting the mysteries of the Christian rel^gton. VV^thout faith it is
impopib^eto pleased, says the Apostle. In this humility of ours we subdue
both reason and w^ll Cor. 10. Greg Naz. orat in Iul Origin. ^ l. in Celsum
H^eron Prefat I de seript. Iren. l 1. lob. 4. Romans 10. Aug. despit. and l. ^ c.
13 and. 19. Council. Trid. Sed 6. cap 8. Aug. lib 83. quest q 76. Crisost ho.
mil 51. ad pop. and 19 ad Romans Jacob 1. Qu^a fidem Ab^azae bona opera conse
guata Aug 83. quest. q 76. Cit. Catech. 5. Hope. a dispontion to justification.
Math 9 Ecclesiast. ^. 1 Joan. 4. Act. 2. How hope looks for justification
Greg. (...) in Job cap 21. Math 19. Luc. ^0. Rom 8.
in cap^uitie of faith in those th^nges, that surpasle our naturl^ knowledge,
and are content to su^^ne reproach from ^^. han the Apostata: Say^ge your (...)
me is nothing ^s but a Cred^, a be^eese: from Celsus likewise, tearming our
holy faith a Rusticall simplicity: from Valentinus also, and the G^ostickes,
calling Christian bele^^rs carnal and gross concerptors. But we answer with
patient Job: Moriouor there was an bidden vvordesp^^en unto me, and mine ^are
in stealth received the raynes of the vvh^^pering the^of. And with the Apostle
(...) th^^ shall confess with thy mouth ^^r L^d Jesus, and in thy heart
believe that God has ray ed (...) death, thou shall be saved. And for the^
from faith as foundation of the sp^ituall bu^lding^n our soul, beginuneth our
first c^nue^sion to God, thereout branching^ hope, (...) and justification by
Christ, Qua^amns quod ^ubet, as speaks S. Augustine, by which (...), that,
which (...) are comm^unded: therefore unto faith is attributed in h^ly
Scriptures justification; especially when in opposition to the law of the
l^w(...) without fath in christ, the text is directed against the Sinagogue. To
which work of faith we must adtoyne the r^^sing up of hope, the ferour of
charity. and b^^tetnes of r^pentance* in that faith of it self is so f^rre
from remitting si^nes, that in aggra^^eth them, and ma^eth them more odioud in
the sight of almighty God. Faith b^ it self says S Chosostome, cannot b^ng^
any into the kingdom of lea^en but rather it imports that. the which may
condemneeuil. (...) an^ without good vvorckes^ dead in it salfe as speaks
the Apostle. Neu(...) was Abraham, tells us S. Cirill. called the (...) of
God, (...) ad^el^eaed, and (...) word, according to his says. That hope s^lso
p^^te of that d^^ osit on which is required of vsto justification, de^reth our
Savior: Hope son, thy sins are forgiven thee: fear also must have its
place: The sear of ^od ex(...) sinee Charity semblaby appetraineth thereunto:
He that remayenet^ in charity (...) God, in him. Repentance finally is
expacted: Do you penance, and be euerieone of you baptized in the name of
(...)us chris^e, to these regiuenes of your sins. Then whenas into the soul
this prepared by the holy ghost is inspired the inhertent grace of
justification; hope confientl^e reareth her (...) to the expectation of ternall
salvation according to the promises of God ma^e^n our Sau(...) lesus Christ:
which promises, faith a sue^^iseth hope, that they are condicionall, that they
do concern and importe out good behau^our, our worck ^ge through vital and
free motion of will with the inward grace of God: If thou (...) cu^ers to the
kingdom of heaven, keep the commann lementes. Do this, and thou shall lius I
vve^uss^^ together, that vvemay beglorisied together. That to conel^de, our
^hristian Catholic hope expects iustisication and remission of sins
respectrueely to the works of faith, of hope, of fear, of charity, and
repentance: also it gives us confidence that we shall be saved in heaven
condicionally if here by good worckes and virtues we observe the
commandments, mortify and chastise the concupiscence of the flesh, and in
some sort conform onr selves to that perfection and puritic which is drawn
forth, as examplar before our eyes, in our Savior Jesus Christ.

3. The Protestanter expects the grace of justification to be attained only
by an Faith Protestan^^sh how it iustiheth.
act of faith apprehending in firmitie of belief the promises of God, that
is, that to him in particular in imputed the justice of Christ, and notimputed
whatsoever sins committed. VVhereupon he makes a distinction of two faithes,
the one historical, Calu. l. 3. Inst. c. 11. ^ec. 9. and 19.
as the faith of all the mysteries of our Savior Christ historically laid
down in the gospel, the other particular and especial, when he believes
that he himself is just: which he reckons the principal proper faith, the
other in comparison of this tearming a shadow, and an Image, Of no importe,
not worthy the name of says. Furthermore the Protestanters judgment is, as
has been declered, that this conversion of man to God by faith, is to be
entierly effected by sole grace, the will or understanding of him supposed
thereunto as a pass^ue subject to admit the ^^pression of God. To this they
enforce themselves by their own empeachment of our doctrine: and first in that
according to them, the grace of justification is not to be acquired by worckes
of men, as by faith hope, and charity, the will cooperating with grace; they
make faith therefore no work or operation of man; for otherwise they should
encurr^ the inconvenience, Joan. 8. Aug. l. 1. de praede^^ Sa^ct. ca. ^.
to wit, that although justification be not the effect of worckes, yet it is
of a work according to our Savior: if faith were the workce of man actually
by grace consenting thereunto, and so a man should be iustisied by his worck.
Then they seek for a perfect repose ease and assurance of justice; which
security could not be obrained, Rainol. These. S. ^ect. 33.
if it depended on the work of man, as they say themselves: therefore their
justifying faith must be no work, action, or motion of the soul, but a bare
impression from God into the same, as subject passiuely receiving it.
Protestants differabout the union of says and good works.


4. Now there grows a difference and altercation amongst the Protestanters
themselves, as concerning the efficacy and force of this faith: The Lutherish
attributing so much to faith, as that it does iustfie with out all good
worckes, yea with any sin, only insidelitie excepted. Luther seeing in deed
the evident consequent of his iustifyinge faith, to be ^mmunitie with sin,
after the Gnostickes and Eunomius frelie acknowledges as much; as he is of a
round spirit, and loves not to dissemble: only Iuth. l. de lib. Christ.
Quando audierimus, sides tua te saluani fecit, n^ acc^p^nius e^ dicere absolute
eos futuros qui quomodocu^que crediderint, nisifacta quoque fue^nt consequuta.
Clem Alex. l. 6 strom. Solin. lib. de Orb^s situ. c. 9. Sclussel. ar. de bonis
oper
says he, by imp^et^e and ineredulitie of heart is made mangudtie of sin,
and to be damned, and not by any outvvarde sin or vvor^^. Lo here a
^ustifyinge faith consists will all external tr^pitude of adultery, of
fornication, and the like. Is not this Euangelister a sweet puppy* and well
deserves his grand fathers blessing the devil? yea he makes by his
justifying faith advantage and commodity by sins: their is not thing so bad
that does not vvo^^ ceme good, if I believe A near belee^e! No bad vvorcke
rend^reth a man damnable but incred^l^tie. A privilege of the Protestantish
says in all iniquity. like to that grace, the which had a family in Rome of
the Mar^i, the which as records Solinus, could not be hurt by any venomous
beast, in that they descended by race and lineage from Circes, that famous
witch: so the Protestanter engendered of the witcherie of Antichrist, endures
no damage through any crime, reserving faith a cloak for all bad wether, and
all badd wether well acquainted with his cloak. Sclusselburge, a Lutherish
Protestanter, thus defines of the necessity of worckes to be adjoined to
faith: Asby faith without vvor^de, we are iustisied, so by faith without
vvorcles we are saved, we are i^ste, we are blessed by only faith without
the law, without vvorckes. And whereas S. James pronounces that faith
without worckes is dead in it self: he says, that James cannot be reconeiled
to the epistles of S. Paul without Operosa expositione and mitigatione, a
difficult exposition and mitization; as is if the Apostles in doctrine about a
capital point were. at variance. Other Protestants with Arecius exactinge
good worckes to salvation as a necessary effect of faith and sign thereof, he
terms in scorn legistas and operistas Leg^stes and operistes: and so beyond
the filth of Iouinian and Eunomius is marched on this Protestanter to the
abolishment of all virtue and honesty.

5. The Caluinister well perceiving how disgraceful a thing it is even to
nature Calvin ^oyneth works to faith in ^hevv.
and common sense, to attirbute justification so to faith only, as if faith
dispoyled of all good worckes, and defiled with all enormities, did apprehend
the grace of iustication, says, that indeed the a^t of sole faith iustifyeth,
yet of such a faith, as is not alone; in that necessarily faith brings forth
good worckes: It does follovv that faith must not Calu l ^. Inst. c 11 sect.
6. c. 2. sect 5 and 9. Rob. Abbot. sect ^. against D. Bishop.
be severed ^n no case from a p^ous affection. To which purpose Calvin
compares the justifying faith to charity and good works, as the sun to the
heat and light thereof: all being inseparable: Together says he vverece^ue
justice and sanctification. Whereupon they conclud, that faith only is
suffi^e^t to iustisication, yet no faith sussicient to salvation. But in what
^e^se a iustifi^ng faith is conjoined to purity, sanctity, and to virtues, he
himself de^lareth, admiting actual and deadly sin as companion of faith:
for to affirm man now to be in himself just and clean in the sight of God,
is ^^ iustle Christ out of his place. So that by this deep Theolog^e, purity
by Christ, innocence, absence Sect 17.
of deadl^ sin, do stand against the meri^t of Christ: yea more then does
deadly concupiscence and breach of the whole ten commandments, it remaining
with a justifying faith* and perfect acknowledgement of Christ as redeemer!
Good God, then virtue, VVitark. l 2. depeceat. orig c. 3.
true justice* innocence iustle Christ out of his place, but adulteire,
fornication, ha^^ed of God, united to faith approve adn maintain his
soueraint^e! Now let us proceed to the tr^^ll and touch stone, and search by
the rule of faith, and quality of God his grace through lesus Christ, which
hope is to have the preferrement.

6 The Catholic hope is industrious, active, and virtuous, looking for
salvation Hope Catholic operative against the Pro^estante.
by faith, as a vital and free work of man his consent and understanding:
whereas the hope Protestantish expects for justification and salvation in
means of a sole faith, the which is not any action of man, but a ba^e
impression from God. O foul presumption! must God justify and glorify that
soul. which moves not in act of faith, but lies dead in the letargie of an
idle subjection! Can such a fatal grace in the so^le make it am^able to God,
or commendable to man, the which is not to be found in man his behau^our,
car^^dge or function of any faculty in him! Is it all one to walk in newness
Coloss. 2. Romans 8.
of life, to submitt the arrogant creste of a proud spirit to the humility of
faith, and to be carried away by an other, or depressed by externe violencie!
No, no, Al^^d semper (...) Chr^sti(...): aliud l^xuria vinolentorum, of one
kind if the severe Aug l. 2. cont. Faust. c. 21.
and studious discipline of the Christian Catholic, and of an other the
retchles laisy liberty of the dronken heretic. To this effect Calvin argues
against the school divines, which placed the grace of Christ in that, whereby
man his will is aided ad studium^an^litatis, to he study of sanctity, rather
reposing it in the receipt of Christ his Calu l. 3. Inst c 11. Sect ^. and 1^.
justice imputed: granting to man his will no cooperation with grace, as has
been declared Or if the Protestanter informed by shame shall admit his
justifying faith to be the work of man, cooperating with grace, he should be
deprived of his honey comb of security, and turned to grase amongst his
fellows upon netles and thistles of acerbitie, and then must the merry,
secure, and idie Protestanter go whine and lament having pricked himself with
thorns of distrust and dubitancie, If says he my justification, my remission
of sins should depend of any work of (...)ine, in my concept, I should
first injury the very nature and benefitt of grace, being a free gift of the
Lord without all respect to my worck or endeavor: then also if justification
and salvation depend on my good work or worckes, I could not have any
certainty Calu. l. 3 Inst. c 1. sect. 38. Rainol. sup.
of my proper justification or salvation, but still rather doubt, whetehr I
have demeaned my self in says, hope, and charity as I ought to have done,
and is required. Which inference if he maintain as good, then must he not
accout of faith as any worck of man, least that he seem thereby to promise
himself justification and and salvation respectively, if not to his worckes,
^ett to his work of faith. Then a Protestant is converted to God not actiuely
but passiuely, as the marigould is gired by the sun: he conue^^eth not
actnally himself endeavoring with grace: and so indeed the Protestant does
not believe in God, no more then the paper writes; the which I easily and most
firmly believe of him. A vain, a presumptuous hope, a monstrous cogitation
to look for justification and saluat: on by that, which man acts not,
excluding his actual faith, hope, and charity! The Catholic truth is
avouched by S. Augustine: Aug. lib. 2. depeccat. mor. c. 9. de Great. and l.
arb. c. 7.
No man canbeleeue by any free will, is there be no persvvasion or vocation
why a man is to believe. Surely the very will to believe God vvo^cketh in m^n,
and in all things his mercy does prevent us. But to consent to the vocation,
or dissent, as I have sa^d, is of euer^e man his will.

7. We Catholics esteem that precious iuell of a justifying grace art such a
rate Augustine de fide and oper. cap. 14. affirms only faith not to make man
differ from the d^uills. Epist. 106. De praed. Sanct. e. 16. Reformation of
will to justification. Ci^ill. in 10 an. l. 2. c. 16. Isa. 7. Jacob. 2.
and excellency, that we deem not to be the price therofan act of sole faith
before charity and repentance: for seeing that the will of man is the seat of
sin, and has actually transgressed, the same will by good work thereof is
first to be corrected, reformed, and turned to God almighty, before the soul
can receive that gracious pearl of justification. S. Cirill, Pat^^arch of
Alexandria, and the most learned of the Greek church, excellently well
delivers unto us in what sense justification is attributed in holy Scriptures
to faith, and why it is called by our savior Christ eternal life. But saves
he if the knovvledgement of God be eternal life, how will one (ay, do we
stand in need of any thingeels? And if we stand in need of nothige else, how
is it reported, says without vvorckes to be dead? But says what is it else
then the tiue acknowvvledgement of God? For that by says knowledge is
atcheiued, witnesses Isaias saying: if you do not believe, you do not
understand, But that a bar^sight of knowledge is vnprositable, the voices of
the saints do affirm. For a certain disc^ple of our Sautour says, thou
do, thou do believe that there is one God, and thou do well, yet the
deuilles believe, and are in horror, what then shall we say to this? or how
are the words of our Savior true? But they be true without all deubt.
Knowledge ther^ore is our life, because it brings forth the whole virtue of
the mystery, and affords participation of the mystical bl^sing, by which
we are toyned to the word of life. For the same cause as I th^^le, S Paul
vvriteth that the Gentiles are participantes with Christ, and as I may say,
concorpores: and concorporat^ Real pres^ce.
incorporated with him in one body, for that they do participate of his flesh
and blood: so that the members of Christ are said to be our members.
Knowledge therefore is life, bringing Charity in perfection like to oil
suimming above. Aug. Tract. 6 in Joan. c 1. Romans 5. F^dem habebant, charitatem
non habenat, id co daemones erant. August. Tract. 8 in Joan. c. 1.
: unto us the spiritual benediction, by the which the holy ghost dwells in
our hearts to the adoption of the children of God, and truepietie, by an
evangelical life and a reforming incorrup^ibili^e. S^t^ence therefore that the
beginning and origin, and as it were the paranym^he of all the said goods,
the knowledge of God is sound to be, right, by our Savior it is cal^ed life
eternal, as the mother and root, in virtue of it nature bringing forth
eternal life. So that faith justifies, faith saves, because it begins and
commenceth out conversion to God, which conue^sion proceeds from faith to
hope, and from this to charity, where it is consumma^ed: there by being
finally infused into our hearts the holy ghost by his grace of justification
and sanctification Then the Protestanter in his hope mispriseth the velew of a
justifying grace, making no other preparement unto it, then by a sole faith;
the will never a white abettered or d^rected to God, from whom it has strayed
by sin. Faith therefore is the cause. the root, the origin, the paranimph of
justification, not the attayninge of it in it own formal and proper nature So
also Clem. Alex. terms Clem. Alex. 2. strom. in princio. Aug. l. de spit.
and lit. ca. 30. 31. and 17. Heretics have thought only faith to justify
when men live ill, and have no good vvorekes Aug de great. and lib. ar^ c 7 8.
Puri^^e of disposition to justification against the Protesta^ter Aug. lib. de
spit. and lit. c. 36. l. t de Baptismo c. 8. 10. l. 1 cont. Crescon. c. 20.
Fulgent de Incarnat c. 1. Council Trid. Sess 6 c. 9. Calu. l. 3. c 1. sect. 40.
faith The first inelination in us to health, after that fear, hope, and
penance, with continence and sufferinge, do bring us goeing onvvardes to
charity and knowledge. To the same drift S. Augustine: Neither is the law
fulfilled but by free will: but by the law comes the knowledge of sin, by
faith the impetration of grace against sin, by grace the recuring of the
soul from the vice sin: by the health of the soul freedom of will: so
that the grace of justification is not included in faith, but it is an effect
of prayer after faith: which grace is inherent, because it takes away sin,
and also for that it enableth the will to keep God his commandments: the
which power S. Augustine calls Freedom of will. Then let it here be
concluded, that the Protestantish hope by only faith promising unto himself
justification and remission of sins, is open and manifest presumption.

8. The Catholic knowinge that faith always does not effect reformation of
the will, but may stand with the evil demanour thereof according to S.
Augustine: A thing may be known and believed, and yet not loved, therefore in
humility faith makes us seek farther after a iustifiynge grace by charity
and repentance: neither have we that certainty, which is proper to faith, that
we believe, love, or repent as we ought to do; and therefore reserve our
selves in a moderate temperature of submission; when as the faith of the
Protestanter is extremely arrogant and presumptuous, assecuring himself with
as great certainty, as that God is existent, that he is just, that he has
his sins remitted, and can in no wise through slight or malice of satan
loose his justifying grace. It is a preposterous thing says Calum to limit
to a small time the certainty of faith, whose propr^e^^e is from the times of
this life passed, to rea^ch out to eternity. So that justifying faith is only
found in the predestinate, and once conceived in the soul, it can never thence
after by any sin be expulsed. Is not then the hope Protestantish
presumptuous, so desyning of justification, the establishment thereof and
assurance, whereby it declares unto a man, that he is predestinate: where is
then the fear of God, where humility of spiritte in this hauture and
arrogancy of a Protestantish belief?

9. The Catholic hope reaching in expectation to the grace of justice, aims
thereby Faith of the Catholic pure, but the Protestantish justifying faith
most impure.
at purity, at a perfect remission and extinction of all damnable sin, at
the virtues in general, which observe the law of God and nature; and in sum
at Christianity: whereas the hope Protestantish, reposing justice upon one
sole act of faith, under the couerture (...) attri^uting all to the iust^ce of
Christ, destroys all justice of man, all gra^e of Christ, yeldeth to
liberty, to sin, and gives a free dispensation from any dammadge, either in
the kind, or number of abominable offenses. The Catholic Aug. De Fide and
oper. c. 16. 1. John. 5. 1. Tim. 5.
regards by faith Christ upon the cross, as thereby from him to derive unto
his soul the fiery grace of charity, to burn out there the frettes and
spots of sins, to live according unto the law, in the charity observes
the law, and is the end of the same, and therefore cannot abide together with
any mortal trespass, consisting in some notorious breath thereof. But the
Protestanter in faith looks upon Christ, as if by the benefitt of his
passion, apprehended by faith, he had an immunitie from detrimente violating
the law, it being, not with standing all grace from Christ, unto him impossible
to be kept: yea all virtues effected by such grace remaining in him mortal
sins: Calvin. lib. 3. Inst. cap. 19. Sect. 9.
and therefore believes Christ to be his justice, and his sin not to be
imputed, that he may freely committ what enormitie he shall please to putt in
practice. This, this, is the very but and Scope of the Protestantish faith and
hope. Do they not confess, that in the very regenerate and justified, nature
violated and disordered breaks out by actions of all her saculties from topp
to the toc, as we have heard out of Calvin, into all manner of offenses, to the
breach of all the ten commandments? so that faithful and just persons,
according to the tenor Protestantish, are guilty of fornication, VVitak. l.
2. de ^eccat. orig Cap. 3.
of infidelity, of murder, of treason, of blasphemy; and yet in the hea^e and
act of all these sins remain just and pure, with absolute indemnitie from
spiritual annoy? And why? because they believe these sins, breaking
continually out of the furnace of concupiscence, not to be imputed: The object
and matter of their faith is sin Cal^^ lib. 2. lust. Cap. 1.
committed, and to be believed, that it is not imputed: how then does it
disagree from iniquity, or produce the opposite virtues? The act of seeinge
does not rep^gne with the light of the air, because one is cause of the other:
nor the flame of the lamp is vncompossible and vncombinable with the liquor of
the oil, for that one is the nurriture of the other: so sin being the
obiectiue cause, meat and drink, as it were, of a Protestantish faith, why
should not this faith cohere and consiste with all manner of turpitude, with
the excrementes of hell; yea afforde a privilege of safegarde to all
offenders? The Protestanter esteems as mortally sinful all motions of
concupiscence in the regenerate, and as offenses against the precepts of God,
contrary to the virtues of chastity, of temperance, of justice, of piety,
and the rest, and that with some consent VVitak. l 1. de peccat orig. Cap. 1.
3. 5. No^^ tamen ita ^n^ell gen dum est, vt acc^pt ^side, si (...), dicamus eum
iustum, e^^am si male vixerit. Aug. l 83. quest q. 76.
and complacence: whereby thou may understand sin to rem ^ine in the
children of God. So that the children of God are no more honest men, then the
children of the devil: yea those are worse by a lie and blasphem^e, believing
nothing imputed unto them they do: which faith these of the deuilles brood,
honester men a great deal, are de^oide of Forremission does not procure the
sin not to be, but only that it be not imputed as sin: so that the
remission of si^nes by the Protestantish belief does abide and consist with
the very act of damnable concupiscence; not absent either in habit, either in
operation. Lo here then the old Gnostikes and Puritanes transformed into
Protestants: neither of them receiving hurt from sin, both their justices by
faith remaining with the actual breach of God his commandments, with
actual blasphemy, with actual adultery, murder and the rest! And what
benefitt then and grace this Ciprian wanton faith The Prote(...) hell. Calum
lib. 3. Just. cap. 11. Sect. 19.
of the Protestant does perform to one that actually offends? mary says
Calvin, the least drop thereof, instilled into our souls, makes us to
^eholde the face of God most pleasant and fair, and to be propitious unto us.
O satan, this is thy plott and devise, that not only by evil bente of nature
men should be allured to sin, but also that the very grace of heaven, the
cross of Christ, should yield men courage and resolution to sin: some Iudaei.
transferringe as foretold S. Inde the grace of our savior Jesus Christ into
riotousnes! How then is a Protestant by his justifying faith protected from
sin, or what damage suffers he by sin? One answeareth, that no faithful
Protestante can sin with a full Feeld. sup. His full consent.
consent: without the which all sins in the world may be heaped upon him, as
he confesses. What means this man by a full consent? Does he take it to be
an act of freewill consenting to sin? no surely, for then should he renounce
suit, and become in that behalf a Romance: or that no Protestante can sin if
he be awake, not in drink, or in his wits, all sins creeping upon him
before he be aware? if thus, happy Protestante if he would always be allerte
and wachefull! But what if a Protestant be found to have had his hand in an
other man's purse, will he grant that such a companion was not a sleep, having
eyes as well in his fingers, as in his head? or that he fully consented to that
pickerie? No, doubtless will he say, if he were a good Protestante, yea or his
father had a justifying faith, he never fell to caruinge of an other man's
purse stringes with a sull consent, no although he felt the purse full of
Baptized persons sinned in incontinencie. 1. Cor. 2 Aug Epist 108.
money, or if the judge sentence him after to the gollowes as a varlett full of
knavery. In deed I must needs confess, that I can sooner believe, that a
Protestante sins sometimes with full consent, then I can prove it, in that
his full consent lies lurcking in the closert of his own conscience: but I
may see sometimes the full moon of knauerie without all doubt shine in his
masterships sphere of actiuitie. I demand Aug. Epi. 108.
of this enemy of all full consent, whether without the same the just do
offend deadly and mortally, God hating their fact, and deeming it worthy of
hell fire? if he grant the affirmative, why then does he exclude full consent
from the trespasses of the faithful, seeing that the fact is as badd as
damnable, as odious to God, as if it ^ad conjoined unto it the fullness of
consent? Then if the Protestantish justice may remain in safety with
adultery, with fornication, with infidelity, and blasphemy, fullnes of
consent removed, so it may also consiste with them although committed by full
consent; for that the opposition that sin has with justice, as contraries
not compossible together in one soul, is the perfection of justice, and the
adverse turpitude, demeritt, and st^ine of sin. Besides that, if all sins
may stand with justice by faith, where there is no full consent, then also
with infidelity; if with infidelity, where is faith, unless by the wise
Theology of this Menippus, together a man be faithful, and ye^t an infidel,
believe in the promises of God, and yet discreditt them, go forwards and
ba^wardes, swime and sincke? Moreover these sins committed by the just, and
not imputed unto them, are true breaches of God his commandments, and so
contrary vices to the virtues moral and intellectual in them employed:
whereupon it does follow, that a Protestant without loss of justice may be an
idolater, an infidel, a blasphemer against the first commandment, and
against the virtues of faith and religion: he may also trespass in impunitie
against charity by murder, theft, infamy, against temperance by glottonie,
against chastity by adultery; against relligion he may play the Hell chesite,
and openly deny his faith. where then is a faith accompained with newness of
life, with charity, with the virtues intellectual and moral? Let us hear.
Calvin recount, what damage the just and faithful Protestants endure by
sin* Truly they effend says he, yet not thereunto induced by their
confidence in God, but only by infirmity: (...). l. 3. Inst. c. 1. sect. 40.
and they ought to reckon great loss in that, when the glory and will of
God are violated. In deed it were too too gross a villain to define, that
faith and hope in God should egg one forwards to wickedness; although by and
by we will prove, that the faith and hope Protestantish encourages men to
sin: notwithstanding he admits, that the just sin of infirmity, that is
they break the ten commanndementes, be guilty of adultery, of theft,
impiety, desperation, and swarm again in the eyes of God in mortal
offenses: this Calvin cannot, nor will deny. But what loss then comes to the
delinquentes in these crimes? Mary says he, they Violate the will and glo^^e
of God. Do Protestants, do saints, enfolded in the justice of Christ
promised them by God, his children and deareones violate his will and glory?
What can the most filthy offendour go more, then infringe the will, the
glory of God? so that the great Turck and the faithful Protestant in the
seals of just consideration are of equal weight and poyse their manners
considered, and alike violate the glory and will of God: only the Protestante
has hanginge over his head the raynbowe of an imputative justice; that is, the
one must sincke into hell by the weight of his badd actions, the other as
massy, and as mustie as he, yet must be elevated forsooth unto heaven: the
same sins in one ordained for smoakie hell, and in an other for a shininge
paradise. But the Protestants, as they know themselves sinners, so also by
faith they are assured that their sins are not imputed; and that God will not
reckon their robberies for Faith is so far from perdoning sin that it makes
the same greater. Non enim. pe^ se in regnum Introducere potest fides, sed
potius habet, vnde malam de gen^es vitam con d^net. Chrysostom. hom. 51. ad Pop.
Iten l. 4. c. 66.
robberies, their adulteries and concupiscence for such, their violations of
his will and glory for any injuries against his divine majesty. VVhereupon I
see nor, why a Protestante in recognisance of his sins, should either break
his will, or his sleep: he knows that notwithstanding all his sins, his
soul lives still in justice, and that the Lords face, as speaks Calvin, in
his beastly hypocrisy, simileth upon him, that he may rest in Christ, he may
sleep and repose, the Lord will cover his sins both from the justice of his
father and malice of the devil: he is assured that he has trespassed through
mere necessity, by a necessary effect and motion of a corrupt nature, that
even naturally all his best endeauours are foul mortal sins; and so holding
himself half excused, and wholly assoyled in Christ, he will betake himself
to his ease; to his rest, to the sugar of his gospel; let God think what
he will in the mean season, that his factes have violated his will and glory:
Volent^ non sit iniuria no injury against him, that wills and causes the
injury. O Beetle and Scarabey of the Protestanter, taking up his lodginge
toward night of darcke ignorance, in the excrementes of such filthy
beastlines!

10 In this faith justifying, devised by the Protestanter, as we have
discovered the The hypocrisy and liberty. of the Protestantish faith.
note of vanity and illusion in the predecent treatise, so now it remains we
impeach the same of deep hypocrisy, and of filthy liberty. The Protestant
intendinge wholly by his sect, and bulk of his faction, to give himself the
full scope, and loose raines to all sensual liberty, finding such an intent
even to nature in every one to be passing odious and reproachful, covers the
same with an hipocriticall appearance of Christ his justice and mercies,
contraposed to men's endeauours and deserts: as if the Protestanter meant in
good earnest to magnify Christ, to rely only upon his justice, and to take
the same as his full dischardge and pardon from all iniquity. Yet not with
standing he speaks a lie in hypocrisy, as says S. Jude: for a lie it is,
that a Protestant Iud. 1.
is as just as Christ himself, or that he is exhibited just by his justice: a
lie it is, that a Protestant can be just by the outward justice of Christ,
remaining in his soul, not only in habitt, but also in act, the manifest
breach of the whole ten commandments, as concupis^ence of adultery, of
fornication, yea of rebellion, with a Protestante the greatest sin. A lie it
is, and that grimed with blasphemy, that God does not impute sin, to him
that sins, knauerie to a knave, or couercth sin in any offendante before
the act of charity and repentance. O lie of hypocrisy, employed in Contra
euidentissima testimonia securos faciunt de percipienda salute nequissimos,
nequitiae suae pertinacissime coherentes, uec emen dando aut pae nitendo
mutatos. Aug. li. de Fid. and oper. c. 15.
this justifying faith Protestantish! The only way the Protestanter has to
excuse his faith, as fairest flower in his garland, from licentious turpitude,
is to affirm, that of necessity it is coupled with charity, with the virtues
performing a new and Christian life, and in sum with all good worckes. The
fool in his nett, or in a cadge of glass, thincketh no man to epsy him with
his asinarie. David a just man committed adultery, and murder: he had a faith
justifying according to the Protestants Theology: but where was for the time
his charity, where was his chastity, his newness of life, of his
sanctification? S. Peter a just person in that moment denied his master, as
the Protestanter will define: his faith was remanente, but where was his
charity, his profession of the gospel, his fortitude, his complete furniture
of Christan perfection? O the purity of a justifying faith, when adulterers,
denyers of God with all evil worckes, and in want of all good, may be just in
aquicning faith, be lapped in the cloak of Christ his innocence, washed in
the blood of the lamb, endowed with the stole of his righteousness, and such
cosening colors, to conceile and guild the bad project of liberty and
sensuality! The object of faith by them is sin what someuer, as to be
believed, that Faith of the Protestanter stands with any sin.
it is not imputed: Why then can not a man actually committing adultery
believe it not imputed, or believe adultery by him hereafter to be performed,
and now purposed, not to be imputed? the fact of sin is in the will, the act
of beleefee in the understanding; so that there is no reason to the contrary,
why he should not believe not to be imputed unto him what soever he now does,
or is in purpose to putt in execution: because as I said, there is no
contrariety or incompossibilitie betwit any operation and the obiecte thereof,
in that the object is cause of that act, and the marcke art which it aymeth.
Then we have the Protestanter his justifying faith first severed from charity
Such faith is condemned by S. Aug l. 1. de Baptismo c. 8. l. 2 de peccat me^. c
^8. Fides itaque christi, fides gra^ae Christian^: id est ^a fides, quae per
dilectionem operatur. De Fid. and oper c. 16. in Enchir. c. 67. Epist. 105.
Jacob. 5. Beza. Romans 6. Calu. l. 2. Inst. cap 3. VV^^ak. l. 2. de peccat. o^ig.
cap. 3. Si autem male and non been operatur proculdubio iecundum Apostolum
Paulum mo^^ua est in semctipsa. Aug. in Enchir. c. 67. The Guosticall
puritanical^ faith of George Abb. page 308. This liberal squire promises moore
then christ means to perform, beestoing heaven upon on that wants his
wedding garment: or commun honesty, and is in affection, not retracted from
kana^^^y. Faith of the Protestanter against state.
and good worckes, yea drowned in bad offenses: then receive we from his says
an encouragement, a prou^kement, an enchauntment to sin; in that a man is
bound to believe that no sin is, or shall be imputed unto him: and so freed
from anoy by his faith through sin, then bayted with the swett contentment of
the same, the Protestant in virtue of his justifying faith may rush bodlely
upon all wickedness; play and disporte himself with the flesh and the devil,
and receive no scratch or scarre from his foul fingers. Fie filthy Gnostickes,
Eunomians, Valentinians, Puritans, fie. ^his is the porckarie of their
Christianity. The Apostle S. James tells us, that faith is dead without good
worckes; and therefore reproves the Protestanter seekinge for iustifycation by
a dead, yea a stinking carionely faith What worckes had the faith of Adame in
his offense, of David in his murder and adultery, of S. Peter in his denial:
to conclude, how, in all protestants, in whom the flesh does sometimes
overcome, as says Beza, who ^^ow again in concupiscences by act of all the
facullies of the soul, as tells us Calvin: that violate continually the ten
commandments, as pronounces an other; that being the children of God, yet
del^^^antur play the wanto^n^s, is to be found innocence, purity, the good
worckes of virtues, of charity; seeing that their opposite vices do abound?
Unless the Protestanter together will have a few good worckes, and a mass of
bad ones, be virtuous and vicious, in charity, and out of charity, black and
white, for God and for the devil. Take me one I beseech you, that is justified
by only faith, either in the fact of murder, or soon after; in that it is not
necessary, that straight way as soon as a man believes his murder not to be
imputed, he should forthwith repent, work well, or love God, and his
neighbor: I demand if such a faithful Protestante should dye before good
worckes, where would he take up his lodginge? Would he sincke, or swim?
Purgatory he means not to visitt, to hell his justifying faith will not
suffer him to descend: shall he then to heaven, with a dead faith, having not
the lively motion of good worckes, shall knaves mount to heaven? is not a
murderer a knave by guilt of his murder, and does he not remain a knave
retayning in his soul the spott of knauerie, the affection of knauerie, the
which he does keep before repentance, and retractation of the will? Yet you
shall hear a bold fellow, that will grant a pasporte in this case to a
deceased Protestant, and send him roundly to heaven in all his knavery: belike
being well acquainted with the porter, be presumes of his favor and
admittance for his Client; I^ he dy^ immediately having no time to vvorcke, yet
he by believing is iusti^yed. It is a jesting man! Now then what a hope is
that, which supporteth the Protestanter, so ^amiliar and conversant with sin,
so pro^e to sin, so perswasiue to sin; hoping that he is to be the child of
God committing what sin soever, and by the justice of Christ apprehended to
suffer no detriment from sin? he has a box of hope in which is a receipte
against all poison of sin: let either he himself, or the devil power them
on him as fast as they will. But let the civil magistrate look as well to
this, as the Christian Catholic: and know hereby, that no faithful
protestante can be a good subject; and that not only by his privilege of
equivocation and lyinge, by a gross ignorancie, and very infami^ of our
schools and country, charginge the Catholic therewith. Let the prince have
an eye to his subject Protestantish: for he believes no treason, no robbery,
no adultery to be imputed unto him, or to hasarde his soul in danger of
damnation. If the breach of God his law be not imputed to a Protestante, why
should the transgressio^ of the princes decree? if he meet in the darcke with
the prince or his parliament, what soever he shall do with them, he will
believe in Christ that it is not imputed: he w^ll cloa^e himself from the
reign in the righteousness of the lamb, he will enlardge his conscience by the
benefitt of the glospell: and then what not? Let the Master dread the fingers
of his servants, which have a faith, that nothing shall be imputed, have a
tea^e to take away their sins, to make God smile upon them, whilst they play
the knaves: and in sum let every honest man trust a Caluinian Protestant no
farther then he sees him: his faith has a wide mouth, and will devour much:
it is passing strong, and can break the very stone walls; it is in joy and
mirth, and therefore if you greiue for him, he will lawghatt you: go he whither
he will, he does continually keep in his pockett a iugling box of an
apprehending faith: an if he once lay hold on the justice of Christ, you may
bid him good night, for he is sure enough. Such is the ish^u and resolution of
the Protestantish hope. But of this matter I am to ^nlardge my self hereafter
more particularly.

The Catholic hope although surely grounded in the promises of God, and his
grace, by our savior Christ, yet it is adjoined to fear and dread of the
divine judgments, so recommended in holy writ. But the hope Protestantish,
enemy to such a fear, is a desperate presumption, and an arrogant refusal of
all heavenly favor and benefit by the cross of our Redeemer.

CHAPTER. XIX.
THE virtue hope principally serves the soul of man to that purpose, that
whereas The use of hope.
sondrie difficulties occur to give us the repulse and check in our best
course for the attaining of heavenly bliss, as are the well known calamities
of our fra^^e nature, the experienced sly and forcible machinations from
outward tempters to evil; they ^ust and secrett judgments of almighty God,
discovered in in faith, to afforde us encouragement to proceed in virtue from
sin, and amiddest al d^stresses to yield us that sweet breath of heavenly
consolation for our refreshment and fortification And for that the obiecte of
our hope, if consideration be made of the quality of us poort m^serable
sinners and infirm laborers, that do expect that final joy and guerdon in
heaven, includes a great difficulty in the atcheiuement of things hoped for,
therefore Philosophy reposeth hope in that faculty of the soul, which is
called tra^^^ble tha^ is eff^caci us, fearce, and courageous in the
accomplishment of hard and daunge^o^s enterprises. So that when we regard this
difficulty in our foreminded end as we hope assuredly in the mercies of God,
so al^o do we fear Concill T^^ S^ss 6.
and mistrust our own selves; hope and fear tempering and compound^ng on
fortitude for the souls m^re profitable supporte. For as the ship by balase
is strengthened against the waves, the whith otherwise would make her fl^at, and
yield to every billow, s^ has God provided, that his fear should setle us in
moderate humility, least sole confidence should break out into a presumptuous
audaciousnes, and ^^u^tie into a careless kind of security. Of which mixture
^f hope and fear, and as it were access and recesse, e^^ and flow of the
soul, thus speaks the Philosopher: It is necessa^^e that Arist ^. ^he^or.
those r^taine some hope of good, that are superprised with ^eare. and of this
is an evident sign, that absoone as man his mind is troubled with ^eare,
there enters into cogitation a purpose to ta^e good counsa^ ^: but no man
vvil deliberate his estate being desperate. And to the same Basil in Psa ^.
effect S. Basil ^legantly by* sundry examples recountheth, how hope is still
in action, where difficulties and adverse winds make for the contrary: as is
seen in the traua^ler, in the seafaringman, in the tiller of the ground, in the
soldier, who all ^n hope endeavor, when repugnant hindrances give just
occasion of fear and dread. And for that an espiciall part of man his office
does consist in hope, Philo thereon does infer that the Chaldeans called a
man meetely Enos; that is one that expects good Philo lib. de Abraham. D.
Thom. ^. a. 2.* q 17. ^^ 1.
things, and sustanieth himself in a good hope. In deed h^pe as it reaches
out to the mercies of God, and reposeth therein, includes no cause of fear,
those mercies being still in flow and spring most abundant free and
benefi^iall, yet in that we hope to gain our end not only by the mercies of
God, but also by our faith, by our affiance, charity, repentance, and
observance of the law, therefore it admits fear as companion, and that for
our more sure and established direction He ^^at v^il have a good Augustine. in
Psalm. 31.
hope says S. Augustine, let him have a good (...): and that he may have a
good conscience let him believe and vvorcke.

2 And as there are sondrie motives and inducementes to this holy and
commodious Gauses of the fear of God.
fear, so there is no estate of man the which remains not benefitted thereby.
He that takes acknouledgme^t of his sins through faith, and would feign
asp^re ^o the grace of justice and pardon, in consideration of those ete^nall
harms, the which are due to offenses* has most right and good cause to fear
Where upon says the wise man, He which is without ^^are, can not be
justified. Again: The fear of God is the begini^g of Eccles. 1.
vvisdome Like wi^t the Prophett: From thy fear have we conc^iued and brought
forth the Isa 26. Aug. tract. 9* Joan. Tra. 40 ca^. 10 Qua^ multi^tus laudan^
bl^sphem^tur* Matthew 25. Matthew. 12.
(...) of salvation. A ^^ste h^l^some fear says S. Augustine that produces
sanctity. So also those, which have attained justification, may pass on in
virtue with the guardia^shipp of fear, in that such persons may d^ead with
horror to committ any grievous tresp^sse, knowing the punishment due thereunto
here in this life to be the w^thdrawing of that most potent, sweet, and
desired grace, and after, the sufferance of hell fire eternally. Then
farthermore when we consider, that God is not only merciful, but also just,
and shall call to examine districtly each particular action, and several
thought of our lives paste, appearinge upon his judgment s^at with that
majesty, as shall entrance and astonish the world, nature it self then to be
in arms Luc. 21.
to execute his designs upon offenders, what urgent reason will press upon
us for fear!

3. But the hope of the Protestanter is sugared with the delights of Cipris,
and so delicate, The hope of the Protest^ter licentious
as it must not converse with any fear to be pricked or goared therewith; but
rather in disporte it is to mount to heaven with a full sail of assurance, and
a pleasant breathinge gale of self persuasion: A hope certes, utterly in
opposition to the fear of God. In virtue of this hope, the Protestante
assures himself as certainly that he is just, predestinate, and that by any
sin he cannot for the time to come fall from this happy estate of favor
with God, as that God himself is: knowinge hereby, that judgment in the later
doom shall not pass against him in regard of his worckes, being all deadly
sins, but according to the mercies of God, the justice of Christ apprehended
by faith. Whereupon he fears not sin as any occasion or cause to incur
damnation; he trembles not at the sight of God is justice, his secreett
decrees, being acertayned of eternal bliss: he in vewe of his own life and
comportement dreadeth not the examine, perfectly and undoubtedly
understanding, that the judgment seat of God shall not call him to trial for
any carriage of his own demeanure, but solel^e pronounce sentence in his
favor for apprehending the promises of God through Christ his son. And
whereas the holy scriptures make frequente mention of the fear of God* and
his conceiled dispositions, Calvin to no other sense interprets them, then
that thereby we are admonished, to ackowledge God as aucthor of all good in us,
^uacuatinge and debasinge our own abilities: so far would Calu^ keep
himself and his from the ac^rbitie of this most sovereign fear. Whereas
Calu l. 3 Inst. c. 2. sect. 23.
says he the Apostle teaches that we vvorcke our salvation with fear and
trembelinge, he requires only that we humbling our selves very profoundly,
look upon the goodness of God. For this his pleasure of assurance, and auoy
dance of all fear, he makes his use of the testimony of the Apostele, Fear
is not in charity: as if the just and charitable person 1. Joan. 4.
had no reason to fear,

4. For trial now and exact discussion of the one hope, and the other; first
be it Fear goodi^ sinners ag^ist the Protestante.
known, that the hope Catholic, proceedinge from faith, in him whose sins
are not yet remitted, seems passing pure and sacred: for our faith as it
p^oposeth unto us this benefitt of redemption, so also detecteth it the bad
estate of our sins, the danger, that ensues thereof, the necessity of our
repentance, of our newnes of life, of our mortification: disclosing also, that
God in his most just judgment may debar from us the influence of his
me^cifull grace, suffer satan frequent^^e and prowerably to assail us with
his temptations: and hereupon we conceive the greater hatred of sin, the
very origin and source of all such woes. Fear says S. Augustine Augu. ^p
^^^. How ^eare is seru^le and bad by reason of si^n and e^^ll ^ffectio^, to
which it i^ co^^led, is excellently declared by S* Augustine. Epist 144. Fear
in the just ag^ist the Protestant. Aug ^p^. 120. c 20 Denies charity to
expel that fear^, quo time^ anima^ne am^^tat ipsam gratiam: by which the
soul fears* to loose* grace. Romans 6.
entered once into our hearts, drives away custom of ^uil vvorckes,
preparing a place for charity, because that this, as it were the lady,
entering may be seated, fear departs. But the Protestante, as soon as his
faith is present, he remoueth therbie all argument of fear, knowing that
although his sins remain, or shall her^after press upon him in suarmes, yet
that he is not to endure any loss by them; as if in sin he had innocence
and indemnitie from punishment in all l^bertie of behavior Most impure and
wicked hope.

5 Mor^ouer the Catholic hope of grace and salvation at the hands of
almighty God, is actompanyed with fear, even in the just, and his dearest
children. For although it were better to eschew sin by force of love and
charity, then by any horror conceived of penalty, yet if such charity do
fail in operation, and the forbidden pleasure prevail in suggestion as more
potent and strong, and so cast us in ieopar die, that if the scourge and
reu^nge of God were out of ou^ m^ndes, we could be content against ^haritie
toward him to taste o^ that forbidden delight, yet fear, as notes S.
Angustin, would hold the raynes, give the check, withdraw the will from such
attemptes, we benig assured, the rep^ie o^ sin and fruits thereof to be the
displeasure of God, and ou^ own eternal dam^ation. Is not the just and most
holy in continual danger to violate by concupiscence the law of God and
nature, as to be unchaste, vncontinent, intemperate? and do not they know
certatai^ly that such breaches o^ pr^^crip* and decree gives the soul a
mortal wound, enradgeth God his justice against them, and finally rendereth
them l^able to hel^fier? Is there not then good cause of fear in this frailty
to sin, in this misery of sin, in this providence of almighty God en^a^ed
against the same? This fear was entertained by the holy Apos^le: I fear,
least that when I have preached to others, I my self become a reprobate. A
reason 1. Cor. 9. Chr^^serm. 8. in cap. 2 ad Philip August ^p. 17. Creg^ in Job
2^. c. 90. Debet in spe esse non sol^ securitas, sed etiam tim^* ^^
co^uers(...).
whereof yeldeth S. Chrysostom: If such things, as appertain to this life,
without fear cannot will be acquired* how much less spiritual things?
Also S. Augustine: The garment o^ pr^c^^s with a greater fear prese^ued from
sta^^e: the pearl bought with much gould is possessed in greatest sol^^^uae:
and generally the greatest things ar^^ept with greatest ca^e: where upon
that thou may^st will maint^^n^ thy self, thou ought continual^^e to
thin^ke upon thy honor and (...). Contrar^wise the Protestanter w^ltereth in
his wanton repose of a vain and imag^na^e hope, acertayning himself, that by
no si^ne he can exclude his justice, or that a^^e sin^es in the decou^se of his
life shall be imputed unto him: He evidently sees God to s^^le on him, and
his sins not to be reckoned for such by the sentence of his judge. But is not
this conceipit of hope brutish and licentious, is it not uncivil, and against
all good society either betwixt subject and subject, or the subject and his
prince? If the Potestanter be assured that no harm shall befall him for h^s
adultery, his theft, his rebellion, then is not he any thing deterred from
such factes, yea rather hereby animated to committ what concupiscensce shall
design. Do he what he likes, he sees still God will not be displeased,
Christ apprehended by faith serving for the concealment of his actions never so
abominable: and as for humane detriment, either he has means to avoid it,
or a strong heart to contemn it: and to neither fears he God; man, or the
devil. What good subjects then can be the Protestants by the very
institution of this doctrine, holding all sin as not hurtful unto a
believer, and not to give just occasion of any fear? VVil charity always
keep our Protestanter pure, and preserve him from iniquity, from violation of
the laws of God, of his conntrie, and Prince? surely it will not ^he
confessing in himself the necessity of sin, the empi^e of sin, the
continual transgression of the VVitak. l 2 de peccat. ori. c. 3.
whole decalogue. VVat ensues then, fear excluded, the ugly shapes of God his
justice removed, but a liberty of sin, and a disporte in all wickedness?
What Prince can there be assured of subjection in any Protesta^ter, when the
(...) of God keeps him not in a tenor of obe^sance* If he fear not God for
sin, why should he fear his prince for pain? and if God as it were wink,
and for a bare faith in Christ does not behold the crime, or will not impute
it, so also may the prin^e cover his eyes, and let all villainy pass without
imputatio^. Then certes, would ou^ Protestanter singe, ^o p^an, to triumpi^e O
ghosp^ll of the Lord, and true freedom of the spirit! But ^^^her O hell of
confusion, and d^ngeon of all extreme Antichristian calamity! ^f the
Protestanter enter into account of those conditions, the which God has
appointed for the purchase of eternal life to wit of his faith, of his hope*
charity, and observance of the law, shall he no^ find in his reckoning
occasion of fear? or does he rely confidently on his own innocence, on his
work, and cooperation with grace, as if it were most pure, absolute, and
perfect? or rather does he not think, that how soever he has lived and
behaved himself, yett by faith in the promises of God to obtain ^uerlastinge
glory? O refuge into a sincke of turpitude, to divert and shune the puncture
and corr^siue of a sacred fear! Verily if we merely respect the mercies of
God, there is no reason of fear: yet if we take a scantlinge of our own
faith, of our hope, charity, and living accordingh to God his law, we may
with right good reason fear: unless the Protestanter to discarde this fear,
deemeth it sufficient to salvation to rely on the sole mercies of God,
howsoever in action and endeavor he behave himself. This this is there true
sac^ifice to the Gods Clo^^^na, and the Protestanth abuse of Christ his
cross, for the performance of all lib^rti^e intentes. But ancient Tertullian
was f^rre of an other sense, admitting our Catholic fear, as a preservative
against the Putrefaction of sin, as mirhe to keep the soul from decay of
corruption: It is more Tertull. li. de cultu sae^. ^. d^ pani^ August li 11.
C^^ cap 12. Judgments of God causes of fear. Ag^^^ 2. Matthew. 24. Io^^ 3.
Luc. ^.
profitable, we think, that we may sin: for so thinking we shall sa^^
our selves: For who can tell* with out a special reu^lation, assuredly, as
teaches S Augustine, that he is predestinate, and that by sin he shall not
loose finally his justification and salvation?

6. VVhe Catholics upon the recognisance and meditation of the judgment of
almighty God at the latter day, deduce most pregnant and forcible arguments
of fear, considering the port and majesty, which shall bear that chief
judge and Lord; all creatures in his ^etinue reddie priest to execute his
decrees: I shall move says he, ^eauen and earth, the sea and the land. The
sun shall be darckenned and the moo^e shall not give her light: Men
vvitheringe again for fear and expectation of those things, which shall
befall the world. That day says de Prophet Sophonias shall be a day of
tribulation and Sopho^^. (...).
anguish, calamity am^ misery, a day of dar^^^nesse and bla^^nesse, a day of
miste* and vvh^^le* vvinde, a day of the triumpett, and ^on^ding upon the
de^enced cities, and upon the h^^h (...)ners. And as the same stone that
sharpine^h the steel, can break the edge, the same sun that now shines,
covers after the earth with a sable mantell of vapors, the same meats that
maintain life, intemperately taken destroy it, so the good^es of God through
our savior Christ as it is beneficial, ^o cause also to aggrauate men's
sins* to e^^ierce divine i^stice against offend^urs In which respect ou^
(...) Christ, once so mild a lamb for sacr^fi^e, shall ^e his fathers
substitute and u^ge or just revenge on those, that have in their lives
empeach^d his honor and (...) Therefore says S. Augusti^e: He shall come to
judge with great power, because (...) was Augustine i^ Psalm ^7.
on^^ judged with great humility. But the Protestanter in his hope has
noth^^g^ to regard in God of terror: No no, his faith looks upon a God
smiling in ^auour to wa^^es him, and in deed regards him is no judge, but as
sole benefactor: and it does nothing concern him what prep^^ance is made for
his judgment, as daunted with the form of the judge in ma^estie, the horror
of nature, and trembling of Angels, the de^ectes of s^nne and moon, the
sh^uering of the earth, the motion of the sea, the Luc 21.
falling of startes: he is cockesure in his faith: God to him is not cladd ^n
fiery purple color of justice, but rather in show of delight, of daliance,
and as it were the banquetter Basi sermon. de Iudicio.
attending his guestes. O sugar, o fit morsel for a ^oole, ag^wgaw, and the
lure of the devil, to draw bus^ardes into the kitchen of hell and Antichrist!

7. Now if we make a view of the th^nges, for which we accountable shall endure
Fear in respect of ou^ ^ actions.
examine and search from God himself, that is the universal behavior of our
souls and bodies, implying every thought, every desire, and each several
action, have we not urgent and important matter of fear, when, as speaker S
Basil: I^ si etiam iust^ Hasil orat de iudicio. de hom. dig.
tr^p^d^ and anxij pro sententia, quae tanaem prosere^ur: the just them ^lus
shall remain ^earfull, and be perplexed, attending what sentence shall be
denou^^ed? Which consideration made Ezechias to say. I vvil call to mind in
dolor of my soul all my years past* and holy David: O lord remember not the
sinne^ of my youth, nor my ignora^ces* From my e^rett sins, O lord, Isa 38.
Psalm. 24. Psalm. 18. Ecclesiast. 5. Sophon. 1.
cleanse me, and from others spare thy servant. Yea the wise man gives this
Counsel: Be not without ^eare about thy sin forgiven thee. And God to
express the quality of his enquierie even toward the just, says: I will
search Jerusalem with lanters: fire, and light, instruments of the bench: the
one to discover, the other to punish. Whereupon S Bernard VVat shall in
Babylon be safe, if in Jerusalem bemade a s^rut^^^e: if the just man Bernard.
se^. 55. in Cant.
shall s^arce besaued, where shall appear the sinner! what will she
planches do, when the pillars shall shak^! From this cogitation in the
Catholic does proceed a watchful care to live a virtuous life, believing that
sentence shall pass on all according to their worckes. And as the Aegiptians,
as speaks Rod^ginius, knowing, Rodigin. lib. 2. cap. ^.
that after their deaths question should be moved of their manners, and
accordingly their body^s either decently to be buried, or cast contemptiblie
away upon the dong^ill, endeavored to deserve by good actions their desired
funerals, so we in contemplation of God his judgment, and sequel thereof, that
is either damnation eternal, or everlasting joy, buckle our selves to all
good endeaours, to gain our expected beatitude The Protestanter neither at
this will fear, it being ordina^ilie in his mouth, and thought, that God will
not judge him according to his worckes, deserts, or defectes, but only
according to his mercies apprehended by Christ in faith. For in view of his
worckes, he confesses, that no thing occurreth to his cogitation, but
distrust, but desperation, but horror and perplexity of a turmoy led
conscience: But when once with faithes pearcinge ^y he looks on Christ, then
is he in security, in repose, in the ha^uest ca^te for the barn of heaven: in
that in Christ he has kept the law, although broken it: in Christ he
obtains iustifiacation, and in the midst of millions of deadly sins
procures that they be not imputed. But we will cast a scruple or two in to the
dish of our delicious banqueting Protestanter, who still sings and carolleth
in security, and try how he can digest a litte horse bread, after his fine
manchet. I can not imagine, that the Protestanter in the midst of his mirth
expects salvation in heaven mee^ly by the mer^yes of God and his promises
without all respect to his own deportement; for so their should appear no
reason why God should not as well save all, as one, a Turcke, as a
Protestanter; in that the mercies of God are general to mankind. Whereupon
at the least the Protestanter must make his reckoninge in verue and quality
of his faith apprehendingh the justice of Christ. Wherefore in regard of sole
faith, in his account does not the Protestanter find and experience that there
be many which pretend to have the same faith he chalendgeth, and yet are
vainly deceived, as the Anabap^ister, and others? And why then may he not
fear, that when his faith shall be applied to the touchstone, cast into the
balance of God his judgment, it may be found conterfeite Job. 9.
and too light? And if holy Job, so replenished with inspirations from God,
dreaded all his worckes, may not a Protestanter fea^e his o^ne endeavor in the
work of faith? Moreover the Protestanter is not ignorant, that part^e the
corruption of man his nature, and partly the malice of satan does assail
offentimes this faith with distrust and infidel^tie; and then what revelation
has the Protestanter, that he in this respect has absolutely performed his
duty, believed as he ought, and is requisite to justification; neither that in
his life he has yielded to any temptation of incredulity? Farthermore it is
flat against holy writ, yea the ver^e nature of divine providence, that men
shall be judged only for their faith, and not for their worckes universally. O
lord says David just art thou, and thou rend^^^st to every one according to
his vvorckes* Joan 5. Matthew. 25.
And does not our savior tell us, that those, which do w^ll, shall be saved,
and those which have done evil shall be damned? saved for deeds of charity,
in giuinge to Christ in his members meat and drink, in visitinge him; damned
for ^eglect and ^efusall of such good offices* And those which have done good
d^ed^s, shall proceed to resurrection of life: those which have done evil to
resurrec^ion of judgment. Al^o seeing that says ^^e. 12.
makes the sins of men the greater, and more odious to God, in that they be
factes of those, which by faith know the will of their eternal father, and yet
break and violate his laws, and so worthy of many str^pes, it concernet^ the
providence of almighty God to chastise such offenses, and that with eternal
damnation, if not retracted and cancelled by repentance. For seeing that God
has formished man his Luc. 2^.
nature with diverse faculties as well of body as soul, it appertains to him
to take account of all their actions, yea as he says, of every idle word,
and not only to discuss one sole office and function of the v^de^standing, to
wit faith and infidelity. Moreover this hope Protestantish is flat^
Epicurisime, Gnosticisme, Puritanisme, condemned so highly by antiquity: for
if only faith and infi^elitie must appear at the bar, what need men care
what else they do? a thief in belief is quitt before repentance in th^s
sort, a breaker of God his laws in faith is his duetifull servant. But if
reckoning be to be made according to o^r worckes, that is temperance, justice,
co^tinence, religion, mortification, charity, penance, then presents it
self nothing to us but fear, in that every man never so faithful sins in
all f^rtes of crimes to the violation of the whole decalogue; and therefore
according to the Protestante, that a man may cast a side fear, also he may
abandon all care of life and action O Brutish presumption of a loathsome hope!
is this Christianity, thus for grimed co^^ers to presume to aspire to the
court of heaven, and by only faith face out the justice of God, and press
among the troops of his saints and innocents! Fie filthy Protestancie, fie.

7. But behold the Protestante thus argues for his dripping pann, and beastly
How fear is not in charity 1. Joan. 4.
Puritanisme. Fear is not in charity, as the text says: therefore just and
charitable persons neither fear God, man, nor the devil. An argument certes
of a most resolute and hardy Protestante, fit to be captain in the hottest
war: he fears neither the power in heaven, nor the malice in hell: butt
thincking on the bastonado, o^ gallows, he trembles. A semblable argument:
gould is not in silver, therefore he that has silver has no gould. Truth it
is, that charity in her act and operation includes not fear; in that ^t
worcketh by a contrary mo^iue for love, and not in dread of any pain:
although yet in respect of the person, in whom is charity, may with the same
charity consist fear: I mean a holy fear remaining for ever, as speaks
David. And Psalm. 18. 1. Joan. 4.
whereas the Apostle says, that charity expels fear, it is to be
understood, in regard of the seruilitie and slavery of fear: in that
charity makes man the child of God, and so not to work for fear of pain
out of an outward disposition, but in a filial Rom 8. Gall 4.
kind of affection toward almighty God our sovereign parent: yet who, all
though in charity, seareth not the dangers of this life, so propence and
liable to sin? who fears not the malice and slight of Satan so bente to
seduce us by sin? Who fears not the secret, just, and searcheing
judgments of Almighty God, to proceed against sinners, if he have but the
common sense of Christianity in his mind and soul? Calvin confesses, that
in man his conscience are so many secret corners, in them to be conceiled so
many covert designementes, that men in all respects do not thoroughly know
themselves: how then must fear be exiled, that retcheles m^rth brought in by
Antichrist, may by a banquet of a justifying faith dissolve in an Epicu^ean
delight the soul from God almighty, and the body from all civility? Patient
Job speaking of the wisdom of allmighty God, creating the world, makes this
demand: who set the measure thereof if thou ^novv? or who stretched out the
line upon it, S. Gregory Job 38.
discoursing of the building of heavenly Jerusalem, by occasion of that
passage, thus writes; ^et no man presume of him self any thing* vvhilest he
dreadeth the secret judgments of Grego. in Job lib. 28. cap. 9.
God: but beholding above the incomprehensible measu^es and lines drauen out,
by so much the more he is to remain in the humility of fear, by how much
the more clearly he beholds all things to depend on the power of the
measurer. VVhereupon in this trial is made manifest, how perverse, audaciouse,
and impu^e is the pretended hope Protestantish, so estranged and strained from
the fear of God, yea so in opposition and fight against that suer defense and
munition of our good estate.

Catholic hope by contrition for sins committed, and also by the love of
God above all things, as due dispositions, expects the grace of
justification: whereas the Protestanter by the quality of his justifying
faith, disanulleth the necessity of them, their use or practice.

CHAPTER. XX.
CONTRITION for sins, as offenses against the divine majesty, and also love
Faith the cause of charity.
of that infinite perfection and goodness in almighty God above allthinges,
have their issue and origin from faith, diuers^lie opening unto us the
intelligence of Council Trid. Sess. 6. ca. 6. Sess. 14. c. 4.
heanenlie verties. For as teaches us the sacred Council of Trent, when faith
in a certain knowledge of understanding, lays before the eyes of an
offenda^t the turpitude and deform^t^e of sin, as not oneley a blemishe to
nature, but also an injury against God, so beneficial unto the party
delinquente, a contempt of his unspeakable kyndenes, Ista scientia bonae sp^^ho
min^ se non (...), sed lamentantem fac. ^ Aug de Doctr. Christ lib. 2 cap. 6.
VV^at is co^^tition.
in preferring some base and momentarie pleasure before h^s sacred will and
commandment, then the mind so informed, procures that the heart in view of
such a spectacle, as of the sacking and burning of Jerusalem, grieve, repent,
and in earnest desire of recompense hate and detest all offenses, as they be in
opposition to God his mercies, and fullnes of all his one excellency and
so^erantie. Wherefore by this contrition we entreat of, is not understood
whatsoever hate and detestation of sin, as if one shoule defy and dislike
the same, as cause of some wordelie endamagement by infamy or penalty, or as
a means to fall into hell fire, but such a particular hatred and grief
rather, as detesteth sin, in as much as contrary to the friend^hip with God,
to this What is Charity.
sanctity, to that goodness which abounds in his infinity. By charity
toward God almighty, we understand that affection of spirit, the which
embraces God, the cheifest god and that for himself; and therefore
respectiuelie is it termed in holy scriptures, Joan. 5.
friendship betwixt God and man; whereupon exclude we from out the compass of
this virtue, such love, as affects God one he as beneficial unto any, or as
a means of an escape, to au^ide thereby his justice, and due punishments:
accepting in this kind Sole^ie of the pure and sincere love of him, when he is
beloved for himself, as the cheifest and sup^eamest good. And although
ordinarily we destinguishe charity by these two acts and functions, to wit
contrition, and love of God above all things, Contrition is joined to the love
of God.
yet the school does inform us, that ^ontrition, or true and perfect
repentance, is properly an act of charity, and includes in it self the love
also of almighty God An example is apparent in one, that lamenteth for any
loss o^ (...), that is (...) to his friend, bewayling the casualitie for his
love, in as much as contrary to that good of his friend, the which he does so
decrel^e tender: In which case a ce^^a^ne mixture should meet and occur of
sorrow and love So likewise when a^^e offendour, reputing his trespass
displeasant and repugnant to God, and to that amiable goodness in him, as he
morneth in dolor for his one offense, so does he in love embrace that Matthew:
August. in. Psa. 127.
high perfection. In regard whereof S. John, that famous preacher of
repentance, was feed with wild hon^e, wheare with the delight of liquour, was
tempered the acerbitie of the savage soil, in which it was found. And as from
the brackish seas have race the sweet streams, so from the corrosiue of
contrition, flows the pleasure of love and kind affection: Just as the book
eaten by the Prophet Ezechiell Ezech. 3.
contained the verse of Jubilee, and the sighe or scriche of lamentation. Which
combination and temperature of grief and delighte, is proper to this estate of
our lives, in heaven being found only joy without all sorrow, in hell
sorroue entire deuoide of comfort, and in earth we participating of both in
one repentance. Svveete and most Theodore in 3. cap. Ezech. Contrition and
charity dispositions to justification Luc. 13. ^^cles. 12.
pleasant, says Theodoretus, is the bevvayling of sins That these two
actions and endeavors, to wit contrition, and charity, are due preparements in
the soul of a sinner, to obtain the grace of justification and perdon, the
Scriptures do evidently witness and approve: Unless you do penance, says
our Savior, you shall all perish. Then before repentance, the soul yet is in
quality and estate of Damnation, and has not attained the forgiveness of
sins. Whereunto appertain all such passages of holy writ, as (...)
sinners to (...) cheer and sorrow promising thereunto remittance of sins.
The wicked man* if he shall do penan^e, shall be saved. Do ye penance, and
be every one of you baptized. This repentance, says Tertullian, shall lift
thee out of the waters, Ezech. 1^. Act. 2. Tertull. li. do poen. cap. 4.
Cyprian de coepa. Basi. sermon. de vir. and. vit. Amb exhort. ad L^p. Senec.
Agem. 240. luc. ^. Augustine. in Enchir c. 117. l 2 cont Crescon. cap. 16. lib.
2. de peccator me^i^. cap. 8. de great. Christi ca. 30. tract. 7. in Io. cap ^.
tract. 9. c. 2. Tract. 32. ca 7. tract. 74. c. 14. Ber. ser. 27. in Can. and
29. 2. Cor. 13. Why is contrition, and charity necessarre to for giuenes of
sins. Men iustyfied by Baptism may after be incontinent 1 Cor. 12. Augu ep.
108. D. Thom. 1. 2. q. 113. ar. 5. Council Trid. Sess. 6. ca 6. Aug ser. 7. de
Temp. Chry. de cor dis compunctione. in Psa. 50. Dispositions to justification
and carry thee to the haven o^ God has clemency and mercy. As often ^n, says
S. Cyptian, as I s^e thee sighing before our Lord so often doubt I not but
that thou art inspired by the Holy shost: when I behold thee weeping, I
perceive God pardoning thy offense. Take hold strongly, admonishes S.
Ambrose, on repentance, as having made ship vv^ac^e, catch at repentance, as
at a bord^ sloating, hoaping thereby to be delivered from the depth of
perdition and sin: Quem paenitet peccasse, poene est innocens.

Who does for sin in heart lament,
From sin departs half inno^ent.
Likewise that charity and the love of all mighty God is a disposition for
justification and remission of sins, the same scriptures do auouche. To
Marie Magdalene were forgiven many sins, Because she loved much. We are
translated, says Saint John, from death to life, because we love our
brethren. Charity says Saint Augustine, the which the Apostle affirmed to be
greater than ^aith, or hope, by how much it is in higher degree found in any,
by so much is he the better in whom it is found. For when it is demanded,
whether on be a goodma^ or no, it is not enquired whether he believe, hops
or no, but what he loves. For he that loves aright, certaynlie believes and
hops aright: but he that loves not, does believe in vain, although those
things be true, the which he believes. To no purpose does he hope, although
he understand such things as he hops for to appertain to true felicity,
unless he believe and hope for that the which may be given him, demanding it
to the end he may love the same. S. Bernard also, declaring the greatness and
excellency of this virtue charity, says; The quantity of every man his
soul, is to he esteemed according to the measure of charity, which it has:
as for example, if it have a great deal of charity, it is a great soul,
and that which has a litte, a little soul: that which has none, according to
the Apostle is nothing, If I have not charity. I am nothing. Which thing
importing the necessity of repentance and charity to obtain the grace of
justification and pardon, is also evidently deduced from reason Theological
and from the very natures of the thinghs themselves. For in that sin was
committed first by act of will, choosing pleasure before almighty God,
preferring one before the other in love and affection; seeing moreover that the
will is the seat and subject of sin haroouring the same, as a faculty
principally offending, therefore before pardon and justification, this will is
to be reformed by repentance, by a contrary love, and so to satisfy for the
former misdemeanure, that the soul may be justified. Which mutation of will in
a sinner, the Angellicall Doctor excellently well reposeth in two things, that
is, in a departure frow sin, and in an approaching to God The will then
departs from sin, when it griueth at the same, when by hatre^ and
detestation it does sequester and witheraw it self from so harmeful a
deformity and detriment: then it approaches to God, when it conuerteth it self
by charity and affection unto almighty God, as fountain of all goodness,
mercy and benevolence: which assured repentance, says S. Augustine, nothing
does make, but the hate of sin, and love of God.

3. That faith, hope, charity, and repentance, are due preparementes to the
sacrifice of a sinful soul by the grace of justification, is very prope^lie
signified by such ceremonies which in the old law by Almighty God his
appointetance where specified: to wit when in the sacrifice of A red covv of
full age, vvherin is no blemish, and that has Number. 16.
not carried yo^e, should be immolated; vvood also of the cedar, and hyssope,
and scalrett Grego. li. 6. in Job cap. 25. in cap. 5. Act. 15. 1. Pet. 1.
twice died shall the pressed cast into the flame that vvasteth the covv, which
wood of cedar, hissop, and scarlett, by S. Gregory most elegantly are thus
understood: that the purging hyssop signifies a purifying humble faith
according unto the Apostle S. Peter: cedar wood our hope incorruptible, as
speaks the same Apostle: and scarlett our burning Charity.

4. The Protestant, although by course and bent of his main doctrine about
The Protestant in show teaches repentanc^.
faith only justifying, whilste it apprehends the justice of Christ, does
abolishe all use, service, or necessity of contrition, repentance, and
charity, either to justification or salvation; yet nothwithstanding in that
the holy scriptures auouche the contrary, preach, prescribe and exhort
nothing ofter, and more effectually then repentance, and charity; and for
that it seems likewise in all ouerture and appearance to be turpitude of
liberty and bestialitie in that opinion, the which should directly deny the
practice of such virtues, in outward show of words, seems to exact them
both to justification, and also salvation. So Calvin pronounces, that to be
the True conversion of Calu. l 3 Inst. cap. 3 sect. 5. ^arl. Conf.
men's lives to God, the which arises from the sincere fear of God, the which
is composed of mortification of our fleashe, and of the old man, and
^^u^fication of the spirit. To which purpose also, at the Conference in Hampton
Court, when a certain minister, of late superintending, declared to his
majesty his opinion, that he thought that heinous crimes did expulse out of
the soul the grace of justification, his majesty approved the same, and
added, that such sins were not after forgiven neither by only faith before
repentance. Then for that the just after justification oftentimes fall in to
sins, Calvin thus defines of the fear of God in them, and of repentance.
When man begins to think, that God shall once mount up to his tribunal
seat, there to take accounte of all his sayings Calui 3 Insti. cap. 3. Sect. 7
and de^des, such cogitation will not suffer the vvretched man to be quiet,
nor to take breath for a moment of time but will ^^ge him to purpose a
nevvkinde of life, that securely he may appear before the Judgment seat. The
Lutherishe Protestanter, making no other reckoning The Luthera^. denies
penanc^.
of repentance, and charity, than of the works of the law, holds that
without them, and before them, one may be justified by only faith, and then
also saved by virtue Scluiessel. ar. de fide.
of sole faith, in want of them in the very moment of death. And truly this
doctrine is euidentdlie consequent from that, which all Protestanters hold of
a justifying faith, apprehending the promises of God, as hereafter shall be
declared. No works, says one, before b^leeuing hellpe to justification. If
so Sir; then I pray you, what need of Geor Abb. ad ^ Rat D. Hill. page 308.
charity and repentance? Does your charity and repentance go before faith
justifying, or come after in a red coat? If before, then are they not
auayleable to that purpose, by your own words: If after; then in that faith
solelie justifies, charity and repentance are not needful preparations to
justification. How then true, that ministers ordinarily say, that for one to
be justified from sin, in this order concur these virtues; Augu. De Fid.
and open. ca 15. Abbot will not wear the hair cloth, nor the Coote of S.
Benn^^. Fructus aute^ totus charitas sine qua nihil est homo, quicquid aliud
habuerit. Aug tra. 7. in Johan. A m^ strange lie Saved. Ne sibi quisqu^ de
fide, quae sine op^^ib^s mortua, protuitt^t ^ternam vit^. Augu. de Fid. and
oper. ca. 25. Necessity of Repentance. Chrysostom. ho. in illud Psalm. Ne
timueritis Boethius lib 4. Phil. Prosa. 3. and Metro. 3. Paulin epi. 4. Ephrem.
li. de poen. Leui^ 6. Psalm. 50. Genesis 22. Claud. in Phoe nice: Number. 65.
first contrition, then faith in the Promises? So now we have an Abbot, I pray
God not a lubber, that will be justified without repentance and charity by a
dead faith: will he be also stripped to his shirte, yea remaining as bare and
poor as a shotten herring; without works, without virtue, without
honesty, without repentance, and charity, attain likewise to salvation?
Marie will he, and buy that heavenly pearl with his three farthings, or a
flattering baubee after his pilgrimage: Believing actuallie a man is reputed
just before God: and that if he dye immediately, having no time to work, yet
he by believing is justified, if justified, also saved. How then is a man no
thing according to S. Augustine without charity?

5 The Catholic, whether he consider sin committed as a thing contrary to
nature, or a trespass against Almighty God, ministers to himself in
contemplation abundant matter of grief and contrition. Sin he beholds as
a deformity, an odious stayne of natures perfection, and a mere imitation of
brutish life in a reasonable soul, as remarke. Saint Chrysostom, and Boethius:
the making also of an Idol of some vile creature, thereunto ^n service to
depute all endeavors of the life, and as it were the working in a m^lle, where
man, as an horse, is at the commandrie of vile sensuality, as tells us
devout Panlinus. Against which harm of sin, and for expulsion thereof, we
have the sovereign remedy of repentance. Once the old law, says S. Ephre^,
had the sprinckling of ashes; but we now retain the mortification of
penance: Then where they purged by ashes, but we eating our bred as ashes,
are delivered from all offenses. Moreover we considering Almighty God to
detest sin, to strive against it in us by his holy inspirations, by his
gracious Sacraments, by his divine laws, by his benefits of creation, of
conservation, of justification, of redemption, especially by the death of his
only Son upon the Cross, by so many panges of bitter dolor, so many drops
in agony, so many tears of complainte, so much blood of cruel entreatie,
must needs lament to have offended so kind a benefactour. Whereupon we
think of a sacrifice of the soul delinquent upon the Altar of a contri^e
heart to be offered up to God in satisfaction for the offense. Isaac must in us
endure a deadly blow from repentance, and bear on his shoulders the fuel of
his own sins. The Penitent must devise a furnace by whose flames he is to be
purified from sin; and the spices of good meditations must be prepared to
burn the aged Phoenix, that after ensuing life of grace may work the repair.

Victurs cineres, nullo Cogente moueri
Incipiunt; plamaquerudem restire fauillam.
The ashes dead ordaynd for life,
Not moved, do move by natures force:
And ^inders rude for flight make strife
Attired in plume, as living corse.
6. VVheras contrariwise the Protestant hardens his heart, neither taking
sin for Sin not any matter o^ repentance by the Protestant.
any offense, o^ his Redeemer notably iniuried there by. He reckons sin,
as a fact of natural necessity, and so not culpable, rather to be pitied by
an other, than deplored by our selves: a disease and casualtie of a depressed
soul through fate and extremity of event by Adam his sin. Why then shoule
he deem nature disordered by such defaulte, or God justly offended, sithence
the decree of God has despoiled mankind of original justice, and left
therein, yea cast thereon a poise and weighte of sensuality, disfurnished of
all grace and possibility to the contrary, and also concurreth himself by his
oune action and will to the fact of sin? Who will weep at Augu. tra. 6. in
Johan. cap. 1.
such a loss, but he that with the loss of virtue has lost his wits? None
certes in this tenor of conceit must mourn as Christian turtles, but fools,
in that sin, if it be enforced upon any by necessity, and by the work of
God, is not dispraiseable, is not damnable, or the party offendant thereby is
justly to be reproched. Doubtless the Protestant in his conuersasion to
almighty God after sin rather resembles the creking croe, then the
dolorouse Dove: for as notes S. Augustine, the Dove sigheth in love. Nether is
it a thing of small moment, that the Holy Ghost does teach us to f^ighe;
seeing vveliue in pilgrimage and thereupon are taught to fight for our country,
and with desire of it, to sighe for want thereof: But the Protestantish
heretic for a dove has the carrion croe. The voice of the croe says S.
Augustine is clamoro^se, not dolorouse: and heretics vaunte of themselves in
great voices: vvherby it appears that they are croes not Do^^s.

7. Let us now examine what room and place the Protestanter according to his
Repentance taken away by the Protestant before faith justifying.
own principles of art, can afforde to contrition and repentance. If unto this
charitable dolor he shall give admittance, either he must grant it to go
before his justifying ^aith, or to follow the same, as the effect does the
cause. If in regard of faith it have the precedencie, then is man justified not
by only faith, but also by his work of repentance, by the law, in that such
repentance is a disposition to justification, and so the material cause
thereof: as for example, in framing of man, the dispositions of nature are
cause, why the body is after animated with a soul; against the bulk of their
own faith and religion: denying in that sense any to be justified by their
works, because so graced by only faith, and that before such, nothing
thereunto is auaylable or requisite. Then if repencance go before a instifying
faith, in that such repentance is the proper action of charity, as has been
declared, charity shall go before faith, which is most absurd, and also
contrary to the Scriptures, that ascribe justification Ezech. 18. Ioc.. 22.
to the very moment of an hearty contrition, and so it must iustifi^e before
faith, and without it, if it enter the soul before the same. Moreover the
Protestanter is of opinion, that all the works of man are indeed mortal
sins, and displeasant to Almighty God: only adorned, and so not reputed,
but rather taken as righteous, by the presence of the justice of Christ
apprehended by faith: the which alone, as Calvin says, imparteth a sweet
odor unto them, otherwise bad, vicious and damnable. Whereupon doth^t ensue,
that if repentance and contrition be entertained in the soul before a
justifying faith, then is such contrition and repentance not only in fact a
mortalland deadly sin, but also taken in that form by Almighty God,
seeing that is in the soul before faith, the which justifies, and
apprehends the justice of Christ to pardon it and amend it. But it is extreme
blasphemy to term the action of charity, a gift of the holy Ghost, a
deadly sin, and so by God esteemed; or to affirm, that God does exact of a
sinner that endeavor, which is a mortal sin, and in that sense No repentance
after faith by the Protestanter.
also as imputed, and to be judged by him self not perdoned: then is there no
place for repentance and contrition before faith by the Protestanters own
Doctrine. After faith neither is there any conueniencie for the entertaynment
of repentance: first for that the holy Scriptures and Fathers advertise us,
that repentance and contrition are necessary dispositions requisite to the
forgiveness of sins, and so must not follow that faith, the which of it self
does justify, but rathe^ is to have the precedence. Then Deuo^^on of the (...).
^^ repentance come after a justifying faith, the cause and motive to that
dolor and grief is thereby clean abolished: for in that such faith works
the pardon of sin, either whilste it is in act, or after, and seeing the
Protestant most certaynlie is assured by the same faith, that his sins are
thereby allredie remitted, that he is just, and that no offense or breach of
God or natures law can work him any hurt, being a faithful and a justified
person even in the actual offense and transgression of them; thereupon he
knows, that it is bootles and vain, to grieve at sin, to weep for the
same, to fear any thing after the conscience of what soever bad action, or to
dread the judgments of God, in that faith has allreddie exiled and remitted
them, and procured that they never were imputed. What good then, what
commodity, by repentance, by contrition? It avails not against sins
committed, being otherwise assoiled by faith: It satisfies not for any
temporal detriment remaining, as is confessed, it meriteth not a reward in
heaven, as is acknowledged: Then is by the doctrine Protestantishe avoided with
fear of God repentance, contrition, grief and sorrow, yea charity it self,
in that such contrition is a principal work thereof. O strange faith of a
Protestant, that eats and beats out chat^tie, the primarie virtue of the
Gospel, and of Christianity! O devout faith, expelling the fear of God,
disposed only to mirth and security in the Lord, and to eschew all corrosiue
from a lamenting and mournful bewayling in repentance! Why should a
Protestant repent, knowing by revelation from faith, that he is before
repentance the child of God, that his sins are forgiven him; that he never
can by any sin for the time to come lose his justice, and that if he should
dye now before repentance and charity towa^des God and man, yet he shoule be
saved in heaven: and so of the three Christian virtues, faith, hope, and 1.
Cor. 13.
charity, wanting this the principal, as defines the Apostle, to be blessed,
and in felicity by a dead cation faith, separated from charity, from actual
remouall of the will from sin, yea coupled to all manner of sins not
imputed, to pass into heaven, and press up there to the crown of glory* Fie,
fie, loathsome faith and religion, unworthy to be beaten by the style of any
learned writer. By the same argument the Prosta^t takes away all occasions
likewise and necessirie of charity toward God or man, of reconcilement with
his neighbor before he come to the Altar, in that only Matt. 5.
faith justifies one that hatch his brother, yea one who blasphemeth God, at
least one that before has committed such heinous crimes is justified from
them by only faith, before due love returned to God blasphemed, or his
neighbor iniuried: and if such a v^rlet should decease without actual
charity, yet so blasphemous a wrec^, so cruel and inhumane a barbarian, is to
be saved by his only faith. Yea moreover that charity toward God and man, is
not always a necessary effect of faith, ^he Protestant can not deny; in
that as David did, so do many Protestants with their justifying faith,
trespass against charity, and yet if they shoule decease in that bad fact
against charity, surprised suddenly by death, notwithstanding in virtue of a
faith remaining, that these, that traitor that varlet, that ribalde, that
impious dog, should mount to heaven, Matthew. 22.
and without his wedding gearment have a place there at the table, in the
supreme kingdom of Almighty God. O vile, sacrilegious, barbarous, and
loathsome faith Protestantish! So then it app^eareth in consequence, that if
riall be made of this difference betwixt the Catholic and the Protestant by
the rule of the virtue of hoped charity, in that the Catholic establishes
the same, and gives it a convenient place in the soul of man, ministers
many fit occasions to procure the same, contrar^wise the Protestanter
deba^ring it of it proper room, and casting aside all due motives thereunto,
is to be censured as an enemy of that virtue, and so of Christ Jesus and his
Gospel; 1. Tim. 2.
the perfection, consummation and end of christianity butting upon charity,
and so upon all the virtues; in that charity is the end of the law, and a
virtue that fullfilleth the same. Diversely the Protestant does infest this
eminent and sacred virtue of How the Protestant is enemy to charity.
charity: First against the same frames he his confused and hell^th forcies,
prescribing no other rule of faith, than the word privately by a spirit
understood: VVhereupon do arise diversities of opinions in sacred and
mystical affairs, every spirit in supremacy, not controuleable, expounding
as it shall fancy. From hence has offspring dissentions, alienations of
minds, departures, and in fine hostility, fire and flames of rebellion, of
wars, of blood and massacres, to the utter ruin of charity and exclusion
thereof. Then he rendereth fruitless and unprofitable the charity of
contrition and repentance, the charity of affection toward God and man, as
has been entreated; not so much as exacting to the estate of justification
the presence of charity, whilste he confesses, that a just man in act of
sin without repentance, is secured by faith from anoye: that the child of
God through faith may with David murder his brother or friend, and not only
without charity, but in arms and defiance against the same, yet justified;
and if in that case he should decease, to enjoy heaven, as competent
inheritour thereof. Under what color is persuaded and vpheld this villainy
Colorable heresy and wickedness. lud. 1.
against charity? By this: in that they pretend the inward spirit and
illumination of God, for their direction in matters of faith, and no humane
supporte or warrantie that they accept no justice of works, of virtues, of
contrition, of charity, of satisfaction, but only the justice of Christ
apprehended by faith. This is the gloss, the foam, the mask, speciem quidem
pretatis habentes, retayning a show of piety: But what is the issue and the
^uent? (...) eius obnegantes: they deny in work and violate all power, verity
and substance of that heavenly virtue, whilste they auile charity, debarring
it from the place of a disposing quality to justification, separating it from
the grace of justification; and so in charity, moother of all the virtues,
that keeps the law, in charity remarked, especialle by the Gospel, disanull
all honesty, all integrity of life, all ornaments of action, sleeping in an
idle security of a dughill and abominable pretended faith; a faith I say,
that is the bait and lure of the devil to draw men to all enormitie of
impuritie, to make a Christian inferior to a Turcke or infidel, yea worse
than a beast, and little better than a devil.

8. Which thing as it seemed to be discovered by his majesty at a conference
in The necessity of repentance avouched kills the life of the Protestantish
Religion.
Hampton court about Religion, this question falling by chance into the
altercation about other disputes, as concerning the necessity of repentance,
the forgiveness of sins, pronounced first, that certain gross and great
sins do expel from out the soul the grace of justification: then that
only faith did not justify and purge a man from the guilt of such crimes
before contrition and repentance: by which two positions he broke the very
bones and marrowe of the Protestantish religion, and killed the soul and life
thereof: and in that allmoste all controversies betwixt the Catholic and
Protestant depend on the opinions of justification, in them all he determined
for us against the Protestant; especially against Luther and Calvin, two
enemies of virtue, two hellish heretics, who by the word of a Gospel, and a
feigned faith seming to magnifiie Christ, labor in deed to bring in Epicurisme
among Christians; the old filthy Gnosticisme of the Puritans: and in sum
all excrements, either of a decayed nature, or of an ouglie and malicious
feind. If justice be lost by the more heinous trespasses, as by adultery, by
fornication, by robbery, then is there no such faith true and lawful, whereby
the Protestanter believes his sins not to be imputed, or crediteth the
promises of God in the Gospel, and so falselie takes himself by the same
faith to be justified, in that every such offender is not before his bad fact
an Infidel, one that has expelled his justifying faith, or in auersion from
the Gospel discreting the promises therein contained, as common sense
teaches: for so none should sin but infidels. Wherefore if a justifying
faith remain, then is not iustiee lost by The down fall of Protestancie.
such offenses; or else as imports the doctrine of his majesty, there is no
such faith that justifies, to wit that faith, the which believes Christ's
justice to be imputed, and no sin reputed by God as sin to one that
entertaineth such a credulity. For in that this faith may abide with any
sin, it must still justify, or ^^s remaining be a false faith, believing
sin not to be imputed by God, when (...) it is imputed. Then if for remission
of such sin and justification be necessary repentance, first it follows
against the Protestant, that men are justified by their works; that is not by
only faith, but also by repentance; when as to exclude justification by
works, the Protestant ordinarily affirms only the work of faith, and
Christ his justice to justify. After hereon may be inferred also, that it is
a faith altogether false and vain in the Protestant, whilste he believes his
sin not to be imputed, or that the justice of Christ is to him imputed: for
in that faith goes before contrition and repentance, if faith believing the
sin not to be imputed in that very moment be not joined to justification, it
is a false faith, seeing it believes that, which is not true; that is, that
sin is not imputed, when in fact it is imputed still, until contrition,
repentance and charity be in presence and have access. Then as only faith
does not justify, so that especial faith of a Protestant is a false faith,
and not to be admitted: the which notwithstanding is the very life and soul
of the Protestants religion, and the chief engine erected up by Luther and
Calvin to impugn the Roman and Catholic be feel. Lastly here on does it
ensue, that man is not justified by the justice of Christ imputed to him for so
to that should suffice only faith: but that he is justified after contrition
by some other quality as inherent: for the justice of Christ does not
otherwise justify, as teach the Protestanters, but when it is apprehended by
one as his own; which apprehension, if there be any such, must go before
repentance, and so justify without it; or if justification be not until the
instant of contrition, it can not be by the justice of Christ apprehended, but
by some other means. And so from Hampton Court, let the Protestanters know,
that they have received the canuasado, a deadly blow, a battery of the very
bulk, corpse, substance* centar and heart of their Religion.

9. And surely here the Theology of the Protestanter in the great subtilitie
there The physic and metaphisick of a Protestante.
of amaseth the world. They profess, that by the law of God and nature
provision is to be made for the good estate of body and soul: yet in the
division they observe no mathematicull proportion of equality For to fattup
and pamper the body, the elements every where ransacked can scarre make
purueiance for necessary repast: to which purpose fasting days must be
violated to enlardgie the shambles, that no thing entering in to the mouth
hurt the soul. Enclosures of monasteries are to be broken dowen, that the
body may find it pray and pleasure upon every bancke. Laws of restraincte
are to be adjudged impossible, unprofitable, to the end, that the corpulencie
of the paunce encounter with no girdell of stinte or stay. But when he comes
to diet and feed the soul, alas his lardirie is small and lean: and poor
creature it must be content with a litell morsel of apprehensiue faith,
feding on a crust being thanck full: only faith is meat and drink, and so
it becomes in fine as fine and gaunte as a shotten hearing, or a litell
devil, as nimble as a schipiak flea, as subtle as the poincte of a nedell:
and yet a massy borden of all vices is to be heaped upon the back of this
sterueling wretch! Is not this partition of pasture ingeniously very
physical, and metayfisicall? Doubles it is better to be acquainted with his
Kitchen, then his chapel. A soul in abodie as a nedell in a bottom of hay.

Faith, the which is sufficient, in as much as is exacted to the true nature
of faith, through man his frailty may be separated from charity; allthoughe
the Protestant to make a color for his justifying faith, as if a faith
charitable and holy, denies the possibility of such a separation. But
indeed his drift is, to establish a faith of it self alone, deuoyde of
charity, yea accompanied with the opposite vices, as competent to
justification and salvation.

CHAPTER. XXI.
MOST certain it is, that as faith is of necessity a requisitie cause of
charity and Faith is cause of charity.
contrition, without the which it can not in any sort be produced, so also
most assured, that it provoke much the soul of a man to the same virtue,
and still eggeth it forwards to that perfection and consummation of a Christian
profession, when as by view it lays before our eyes the goodness of Almighty
God, especially C^ Trid. Sels. 6. cap 6. c. 8. 15. Can. 18.
manifested and imparted unto our kind by the Incarnation, death and Passion
of our Savior Christ: no other information of mind by Philosophy, or
otherwise, so effectually soliciting us thereunto, as this our Christian faith
and belief. VVhereupon Bern. Ser 2. de Aseensi^: Ser. 2 de^. (...) D Tho 22.
q. 4. at 2, 3. 4.
the inflamed charity toward Almighty God, is very properly termed by
the best divines, the life and form of faith: The life, in that faith works
by charity, the which among all other vertu^s, both by her peculiar act and
likewise by her general commandrie of all other good functions, is most
op^ratiue and industrious. Also it is the form of faith; not that it is any
way the essential and internal part thereof, seeing Tollet in cap. 12. Joan.
that faith is placed in the understanding, and charity in the will and
affection: but in that sense, wherein charity is understood to be the end of
faith, and final perfection Heb. 11.
whereunto it tends: Faith being, as speaks the Apostle* the foundation or
substance of things hoped for, whilst it once settled in the soul, as ground
work of a spiritual Aug. de S^ir. and. l. Tract 20. in Johan. li Tract. ca.
7. Quid est ergo credete in e^^? credendo amare, crede^. do diligete. ep. 205.
edifice, according to Saint Augustine, supporteth and brings forth charity,
as the roof and top of Christian complement, and so at last atriueth to
glory, and beatirude in heaven. And without this charity of repentance, and
love toward God and man^, faith ana^leth not either to justification o^
salvation, in that none can be justified by only faith, before the same
charity, as has been entreated: but justification is then effected in a
sinner, when he believing loves and repents; and in the self same moment one
is a penitent, and also a justified person; allthoughe according to prioritie
of cause and disposition, first is charity and repentance, and then ensues
justification by inf^sion of grace, and entry of the holy Ghost.

2. Nevertheless it is a truth apparantlie auerred both by authority of
sacred Faith may be diuored from charity. Augu. lib. 1. de Baptismo ca. 8 9.
10. deGra. and lib. ar. ca. 7. 1 Timothy 1. Colos. 3.
writ, and also by a demoustratiue inference from reason Theological, that a
sufficient faith, in as much as is required i^ way of faith to justification,
may consist with any mortal and deadly sin, infidelity only excepted:
and so that faith may be divorced from charity, that keeps the law, from
repentance, that puts of the old man, and consequently that it may remain
in that soul, which is actuallie in estate of sin and damnation, yea be so
far from iustysifying one from his sins, or imparting to him righteousness,
that rather it will increase the malice of his offenses, and aggrauate in God
his sight the calamity of such a miserable condition. True it is, that Bern
set. 2 de de Resur.
affirms Saint Bernard, The life of faith is charity; in that as operation
is the effect and sign gf life, so is faith in life and endeavor by charity,
and without that charity, in any time or moment before the same, it is a dead
faith, as says the Apostle, deuoide Jacob. 5.
of life. And the same devout doctor avouches, that charity does comoyne
and marry the soul of a sinner to Almighty God, and so lastly is a most
perfect disposition to justification. Ergo si perfect diligit, n^^fit:
vherefore if the soul love (...), it is Bern ser. 73. in Contic. Aug. Tract. 6
in Johan. e. ^. De peceato origin. c. 25. Johan. 12.
thereby married, But that this matiage of the soul with almighty God, this
life and form of faith, may be severed from faith, partly by negligence of
the will, not consenting to the good instigation of faith, or holy inspiration
thereon proceeding, and partly by the committing of some grievous offense
against charity due to God and man, holy Scriptures do auouche; namely when
the Gospel recounteth to us, that many of the Princes believed in Christ,
although for fear and affection to the world, they refused te profess their
faith, or to embrace our Savior by the charity of a christian life and
profession, yea rather agreeing and consenting to persecute him, Augu. Tra. 54.
in Joan. Tollet ibid.
even until so cruel and reprochefull a death. In whom notwithstanding Saint
Augustine in his exposition acknowledges no defect^ of faith, as meet and
answerable to the grace of justification. Mroeouer ou^ Savior in his Gospel
proposes a parable of certain persons invited to a banquet, and sitting at
the Table, not invested Matthew. 24. Hier. in. c. 22. Matthew. Greg. ho. 3 8. in
Euangel. ^ulgenth. de Inccat. cap. ^. Aug. li. de baptismo cap. 8. c. 11. l 1.
cont. Crescon. c. 29.
in their wedding garments. In which narration was signified, that such guests
wanted not faith, in virtue thereof repayring to that place, and acknowledging
the marriage accomplished by the mystery of the Incarnation betwixt our Savior
and his Church; but for that faith in one of them was not adjoined to
charity, therefore he wanted his wedding garment, and upon that defaulte was
sentenced to eternal damnation. Finally whereas the Scriptures reach that
charity fullfilleth the law, theie pronunce consequently the same charity
to be expelled by the greater offenses, as adversaries unto it; as by
adultery, fornication, robbery, and such like. But that faith is always
expulsed by those crimes, they can not affirm* sithence that faithful men in
Why sin expels charity and not faith.
their frailty, are subject unto them: so then from scriptures may be deduced
as a conclusion, that faith may be parted from charity, and that charity
continually is not a necessary effect thereof. To which end also of proof,
Theological reason it self, is most pregnant and efficacious. For in that
faith resideth in the understanding and sins of evil affection in the will,
as adultery, stealth and such like, the will may misdemeane it self allured by
concupiscence of pleasure or wordlie advantage, whil^ste the understanding is
rightly informed by faith, and enterteyneth not any infidelity. It is the
force of concupiscence, the which transporteth the action of the will to
pleasing vice, against judgment, reason, and the law of faith in the offendour.

Part alia violentus aquistorrentibus amnis, Prudent in Hama^tin.

Transilit obiectae repagula ripae;
Et vagus euersis late dominatur in agris.
The torrent breaking out o^ side,
Does pass in rage command of bank,
And streams abroad in conquerous pride
As lord of field, beyond his rank.
And seeing that virtue is excluded only by the opposite vice, as light by
darkness, heat by cold, life by death, in that faith in the mind of man has
no opposition but to infidelity, and contrariwise charity, the which is
employed generally about the D. Th. 2 a. 1. ae q. 25 art. 12. Valent. 2. a.
2. e. disp 34 pun cto 4. How works do justify according to the Protestant
and are required to salvation. Jacob ^. Ezech. 18. Isa 38. Psalm. 6. Call. l. 3
In c 2. The sole act of faith is a dead faith, and is in deniils. Aug de Fid.
ct oper c. 21. So Sclussel. Art. de fide and bon. op. a Luther^ arguing against
the Protestan^er Caluinian. Ista quippe fides est Christianorum an Daemonioru^.
nam and daemo nes credunt? Augu epi. 105.
whole observance of the law, as well natural as divine, has in opposition
any trespass notably violating the same law, therefore can it not at one
time consist togewith such breach and disloyalty. VVhereupon excellently
well the school Doctor. What fact soever is repugnant to the precepts of
God, manifestlee is also repugnant to charity. For in that a man by choice of
sin, preserreth his offense before the friendship with Almighty God, the
which friendship requires that we follovv his will, it is a consiquence,
that by every act of deadly sin, the habit of charity is lost. To the
same purpose commendablie disputes Valentia, a famous doctor of the Society
of Jesus.

3. The Protestant destinguishing betwixt justification and salvation,
diuersely thereon does define as concerning the necessity of charity and
good works. To justification he makes no reckoning of good works, as if
precedent thereunto; only attributing the same to faith, apprehending the
promises of the Gospel. And whereas the Scriptures affirm, that works do
justify, that charity and repentance do forgive sin, he interprets them
to that sense, in as much as they be the necessary fruits, effects, and
signs of faith, the which before has allreadie remitted sins, and obtained
the grace of justification. Then as concerning salvation, he reputeth charity
and virtuous deeds, as necessary in precedencie, in that a true justifying
faith, can not be without them, they being the necessary effects of such a
faith, as heat is of the blazing sun. The which is avouched by the
Protestanter, to avoid in some show that filthy conceit framed by the old
condemned Puritanes, to wit, that faith, in all turpitude of life, and
despoiled of all virtue, sufficed as to justification, so also to salvation.
But the Protestanter agreeing with that Puritan in the antecedent, that is
that to justification only faith serves, before charity and repentance,
shows, himself either simple and ignorant in disagreeing with him about the
consequent, to wit that only faith without virtue, is competent also to
salvation, as shall be declared, or else a false dissembler, conspiring with him
both in the one and the other, yet concealing or disproouing the latter, only
to avoid reproach and refusal of the former, even from a natural modesty
and shame of mankind. Yet wh^leste they intend thus to grace their faith by
charity, inseparably issuing from the same, no great honesty or decency
they mark out for their faith, in that they hold Charity defiles faith
according to the (...).
opinion, that charity it self, repentance, and finally all other virtues
commanded and prescribed by charity, are deadly and mortal sins, defiled
with original guilt, even in the just, worthy of damnation, and so as bad as
adultery, or any other fact of abomination; only not taken in that tenor by
almighty God, by reason of faith apprehending Christ his justice: so that
will they, ^ill they, their justifying faith is impute and contaminated; and if
it be necessarily coupled to charity, as necessarily it is united to all
iniquity. He are we now the trial by the rule of virtue.

4. The Catholic as by faith he knows certanly the goodness of Almighty God
^ fear by faith to lo^se charity through sin.
through our Savior Christ, and firm stedfastines of his promises, so
discovers he his own infirmity, frailty and casualtie to do and work
against conscience informed by faith, to yiele unto valawfull pleasures, when
faith seeks to retire the will and affection from their baits; and so to be
still in icopardie to loose charity, the soul, life, and form of faith: And
hereupon he conceiueth a great feate and dread to approach near to the
occasions of sin, or to procure a diuioreement betwixt faith and charity by
the breach of the law: as if faith should abhor, that the Altar of the
soul, consecrated to the divine fire of charity, should be profaned, as once
were 1. Match. 1.
Altars in Jerusalem, with a fire of brutish and foreign concupiscence. The
Protestanter in force of faith, is assecured from this wholesome sense, knowing
that his faith, once ingendered in mind, never possibly can be distracted
from charity by any misdemeanure, and therefore if he only provide to
nourish faith by reading and hearing the word, no frailty of his can rent and
tear it away from charity, from sanctity. He is assured that he enjoys a
true justifying faith, and thereby is acertayned, that also his charity is
cotrespondentlie as divine and sacred, and that it ca^ not possibly be lost. O
vile sense of opinion, so contrary to the fear of God, and perseruation
against sin! If a Protestant have this certain information of his charity,
as perpetual and eternal, as not exposed to danger of ruin, in what
security may he not loyter and tryumphe in ^ollitie, knowing that no Dalila,
no Nero can allure or force this his charity to forsake his soul, but that in
all presentemente of iniquity, in all temptations, in banketting, in courtly
enticements, his charity shall remain inviolable, and still possess the
seat it has, in his soul? Fie proud and filthy faith, a peacooke in plume,
and a swine in the soil.

5. We Catholics esteem with S, Augustine sin the more detestable, in that
it despoileth ^inne the grater by reason of faith. Aug. l. de Gra. and li. ar.
c. 3 de Fid open. c. 24. Tra. 2. in lohan. cap. 10. Epist. 122. Sciens voluntate
Domini sui and faciens indigna plagis vapulabit multis. Luc. 12. Matthew. 12. The
purity of Charity. Joan. 15.
the offender of charity, persisting still the instruction of conscience by
faith, the which does aggrauate the sin, and so accounte this loss of
charity in a person faithful, and of the family of Christ his Church, as
more damageable, so more culpable, in that it is a transgression of one, and a
perseverance in the same, that knows by faith remaining, the turpitude and
vnlawfullnes of the fact, and thereby condemns himself worthy of many
stripes, in that acknowledging the will of God, yet violaeth distoyallie the
same, as witnesses our Savior. And as we attribute this quality vntho the
Christian faith reclayming us from offenses, so also ascribe we to the virtue
Charity that innocence and purity, the which can not consist with the
enormitie of any grievous breach of God his commandment. For holy
Scriptures advertise us, that Charity makes friendship betwixt God and man,
so that as one friend in value and efficacy of frindship agrees to the others
desire, conspiring as it were in one thought, heart, and conversation, so
likewise dissension, opposition, forsaking of either party, does destroy and
break such link of friendship and amity: VVhereupon that person, the which
is endewed with charity, as friend with Almighty God, will for his sake and
love observe his commandments, and in regard thereof forsake any pleasure or
emolument, making or inuiting to the contrary: otherwise being impossible, as
spreaketh our blessed Savior, yea a lie in spirit, to think that one loves
God Johan. 41.
and keeps not his ordinances. Therefore in the violation of any of the Ten
commandments, as in consentment to adultery, fornication, theft, robbery,
and the rest, in which is employed a preferment of pleasure before God, a
contempt of God, a misprisall and breach of his law, appears that wickedness
and guilt of crime, the which can not abide with charity, and union unto
Almighty God. In which respect the Catholic judgment is most pure, whereas
it hates sin by faith the only obstacle against charity, and that which
gives by privation of the same a deadly blow unto the soul offendant, even
cold again thereby to death, wanting the vital hear of that heavenly
virtue. But the Protestanter making his charity as not remoueable from faith,
entertayneth thereby an absurd and false charity, an impure charity, yea a
charity affording security and innocence to all treachery contrary to God
and man. Wherefore against the charity Protestantish, so inseperable from
faith, I frame this argument: The justifying faith of a Protestant is not
repugnant to that fact which is a VVitaker l 3. de pec. or. c. 2.
mortal sin, and a damnable breach of all the ten commandments, nor with
charity it self, in his accounte a sin; therefore neither is it adversary
and opposite to the defect and want of charity. The Antecedent is made good
by the Protestanter, The Protesta^tish faith despoiled of Charity.
acknowledging that the just and regenerate transgress against all the
commandments of God and nature, sin continually in concupiscensce worthy
damnation; and affirming the just to have that charity, which passing by the
will of man, as water by a filthy sincke or channel, is defiled, and a dealie
sin hateful to God, and worthy eternal fire in hell. The consequence is
thus assured. The privation and want of charity by evil life, can be no worse
than those sins that stand with a justifying faith, and are not imputed to a
man in virtue thereof: in that all equally deserve eternal punishments, and
are indifferently in God his sight deadly and mortal sins: Therefore if
the crimes of concupiscence, of charity it self, do consist with a justifying
faith, and by grace thereof are not imputed, or hurt not the offender, so also
may the want of charity, and expulsion there of by hatred of our neighbor, by
murder and rapine remain with a justifying faith, and obtain thereby pardon,
remission and forgiveness. Why then can not faith keep hold in the soul
without charity, as if the purity of faith could not admit such a defect?
And if faith procure indulgence, and that one mortal sin be not imputed, why
then to that effect can it not provide as much for The faith of a Protesta^tmay
be in his soul without moral virtue, and so without Charity.
any trespass, or for loss of charity? Secondly thus I dispute. The
justifying faith of a Protestant, may abide without the moral virtue of
justice, of cominencie, of temperance, therefore also may it stand in
sequestration from charity toward God and man. The Antecedent is admitted by
the Protestant, granting to David a justifying faith, in the very act of
adultery and murder, and to all the regenerate, the which continually
trespass against the moral virtues by concupiscence, yea against the whole
Ten commandments, and are sometimes blasphemers, and men plunged in despair.
Moreover reason approves the same, seeing there is no cause, why one should be
first an infidel discrediting the promises of Christ in his Gospel, before
that by frailty and heat of nature, he yield consent unto lust unlawful; for
so none should offend against temperance and continency, but infidells, and
men that believe not in the Gospel: the which is most false. The consequence
is thus putt into demonstration: Where is deadly sin opposite to charity
toward God, there can no charity remain; as continency and temperance are
not to be found in persons impure in dronkennes and riotousnes: For what
agreement betwixt light and darkness, Christ 2. Cor. 6. Luc. 25.
and Beliall? Or can any man imagine the prodigal child to have been chaste
and and moderate, or in fact of lust endowed with the mo^all virtue of
continency? But all sins, notoriously violating the law of God, and
iniurying our neighbor, are quite opposite to the Theological virtue
Charity, that observes the law, and that affects a neighbor in love and
good affection for the sake of God: therefore the faith of a Protestant may be
found in separation from charity, and so charity is neither requisite to
justification, nor to salvation. The former proposition neede^h not any
proof* seeing experience and sense reach and allow it. The minor neither can
be denied: For how has he charity toward God, that by his had fact
co^temneth him, loves him not, but prefe^reth in the balance of his ^hoice,
some vile co^tentment before his infinite goodness and ex^^llencie, that places
the last end of his will and desire in some creature disorde^lie beloved, when
it should end and setle in God Almighty alone? Therefore a libidinous person,
a pro^aner of God his holy name, retayneth no charity toward his heavenly
lord. Likewise he that hat^th his brother, he that consents in wish and will
to hurt him in name, in body, and faculties, can not possess any charity
toward him, unless a thief, a murderer, a cut^ethrote in the act of villainy
and injustice, by the accounte of a wise Protestanter, may be said to be in
charity toward his brother and neighbor: or that David harbored charity
toward Vrias, procuring wickedlie his death. Then is it most manifest, that a
justifying faith is not of necessity still coupled to charity, or produces
the same, or that true justification is annexed to sanctification of life and
action: but rather, that a justified person by the Protestanters reckoning, may
remain just for some days and mo^thes, yea years, in virtue of a vile faith,
severed from charity, from honesty, and all other commendable ^ Joan 3.
qualities: flatly against the E^angelist, affirming, that he which lo^eth not
his brother, abides in death, that is, where charity is deficient and not to
be found, there is resident the empire of sin, and of due debt to eternal
damnation. The same verity is approved by our Savior, recounting in a
parable, one to be cast into outward darkness, for defect^ of the wedding
garment, which is charity, as the doctors Hie. in Mat 22 Gre hom. ^8. in Euan.
do commonly expound that place. How then is their justifying faith good,
allowable, honest, that believes such breach of charity not to be imputed?
Certes a villainous faith; It is a puritanicall gloss to cover all filth of
carriage, and to guild a dunghill of ordure* with the name of the lord and of
the Gospel. And that faith may be in separation from charity, from
repentance, is manifested also by experience; in that many offend against
charity, and harbor evil purposes, knowing by faith that such c^nsentments
and proiects are naught, and not to be by any good person conceived in device,
or putt in practice of execution: then in that case does remain a ^aith voyd^
of charity. Moreover it is one thing to believe the Gospel by ^aith, and an
other to work in charity, as to overcome temptations persuading to injury
God or our neighbor: to which office of charity, concurreth in the mind, not
only the act of belief, but a peculiar vocation and persuasion to that
purpose, inspired by the holy Ghost: so that as faith and such vocations ^re
not of necessity coupled together, no more are faith and charity in such
sort conjoined. From hence may be concluded, that according to the doctrine
Protestantishe, charity, that is the works of the virtues, observation of the
law, or newnes of ^^fe, as they be not necessary preparements to
justification, which they them selves confess, so neither of necessity are
they conducent to salvation. To which asse^tion, I propose this argument:
Charity, repentance, and the rest of the moral virtues, are not necessary to
justification, therefore neither to salvation. The Antecedent is declared as
good by the adversary. The consequent I thus prove. Where justification is
found, there is also innocence, purity, a childeshippe with God, a worthiness
to heavenly bliss, as the Scriptures expressie affirm: therefore if
imputation of the justice of Christ be a sufficient justification, it is also a
competent seed for glory thereunto due, by the v^lew of that justice imputed,
and promises of God made unto the same: whereupon nothing else beside this faith
is necessary to salvation. For what goodness or commendable qualite rises from
charity following faith, is wholly derived unto it from the pr^cedent faith,
as Protestants define; otherwise charity, and all the works of the virtues,
as they pass by man his will, are contaminated, and dead^^e sins, therefore
in the justice of Christ apprehended by sole faith, is included only that
penyworth and guerdon to which is due the reward of salvation: then is not
charity necessary to salua^ion; for from ch^ritie the worker gayneth no
abetterance or commodity, besides that which is emplyed in the justice of
Christ, before that charity have access, apprehended by sole faith.
Wherefore Charity not ^ e. ^ssa^^e to Salvation by the Protestant Aug l. de
fide and op. cap 15. Let no mani^ deed promise to himself eternal life
through faith without works* which is de. ad. l. de. Bapt. c 8 tract. 6.
i^ Johan Noli d^ fide glo^iari adhuc dae^monibus co^parandus. Zachar. 7. Iaceb
5. Protesta^tenemie to charity. 1. Tim ^. G^or Abba^ page ^08. Po^e^it erg^
saluare sine ^peribus fides! falsum e^it quod dixit eius co^postolus Iacobus.
Falsum crit and illud quod, id^ ipse Paulus (...): Nolite erra^e neque
fornicatores? Aug (...). cap. 67. The ^^ ^o^-rage of a (...).
the Protestant ought not to say, that charity and repentance are necessary
to salvation, but only that they be necessary effects of a justifying faith,
the which only justifies and saves. But it is proved against him, that
neither in this sense, charity or repentance are necessa^ie, in that faith may
be separated from charity by diverse sins opposite unto it. In which season
of separation, be it for an hour, or a day, or a monthe, if one should
depart out of this life, the Protestanter will afforde unto one, in virtue of
his bare faith, beatitude in heaven: How then is charity necessary to
salvation, some being salued without charity and repentance, with hearts
hardened, as s^eele and adamant, as speak the Prophets, by a faith that is
dead, which lives and moves not by charity?

6. From hence may thou gentle Reader receive intelligence of the Catholic
truth, in that it only avouches the necessity of charity, as to
justification so also to salvation; and as the grace of justification is lost
by grievous sins, faith still abiding, so is also thereby charity expelled,
the end of the law, and a virtue that observes the same: Whereas the
Protestanter only in word and color makes resemblance, as if he were a
friend to this charity, and pronounces it necessary to salvation, allthoughe
not to justification: When indeed he reputeth one just by only faith in
absence of charity, and in the act of any wickedn^s, as David in his
adultery and murder, S. Peter in his cold of body and spirit, denying for
want of charity, to know his dearest master and Reedemer: intending as
purpose and final end of Doctrine, although vile and brutishe, although so
shameful, as the impudency of a Protestant dare not expreslie auouche it, to
wit* that only faith apprehending the promises of God in the Gospel,
without charity and virtue, and all honesty justifies, sau^th, maynteyne^h
a man from any hurt by sin and villainy, emboldeneth him to use the
liberty of his faith, and in virtue of a strong credultitie, to yield to all
concupiscences that occur, and enor^ities of nature so decayed, and bent to
foul pleasures. This, this, is the drift of his preach and s^ile in service
of Satan and Antichrist, only graced with a gloss of says, of the gospel,
of the lord, and of many such fooleries, mee^lie to the cousenage of the
simple and evil disposed. But let the Politic magistrate hither turn his
w^tchfull eye, and he shall see that no Protestant can be a good subject to his
Prince, or a good member of any common wealth, in such sort a professed
enemy to charity, and in it to all virtue, decency and civility.

Charity aimed at by Hope, according to the Catholic accounte, is a work of
man his soul, proceeding from grace, and the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
good and laudable; although the Protestanter enemy thereunto, repute it as
naught, had, and defiled by original sin, in the very regenerate children
of Almighty God.

CHAPTER. XXII.
THE holy Apostle S. Paul, mentioning the three virtues Theological, Faith,
1, Cor. 13. 12. The excellency of Charity. Math. 22. 1. Cor. 12.
Hope, and Charity so auailable to justification and salvation, pronun^eth
charity to be the cheifest, and in perfection most eminent and sovereign.
And our blessed Savior terms the precept of charity, the fist and greatest
commandment: according lie his Apostle calls it the most excellent way or
demeanure of man his action and con^ersation, and an abridgement of all other
precepts: which verity is so manifest of it self, that Calvin comparing
Charity with faith and hope, affords Calu. 3. Inst. c. 18. sect. 8. Charity
pre^err^d before mo^all ver^^^^. Aug. Tract 6. and 7. in Johan. ^. 1. de Great.
Christ. c. ^^.
charity the primacie and principality. And if first we balance this virtue
charity together with moral virtues, charity doubtless will appear the
most noble, and transcendent; in that moral virtues respect no^ as object
immediately any thing or quality in God, but some other creature, as to be
squared and fashioned according to reason. So temperance regards meat and
drink, continency carnal delights, justice that which is to be surrendered
to an other: But Charity, in that it is a virtue Theological, leuelleth in
action to God him self, and makes man his soul in due proportion of the thing
ruled to the rule, correspondent and agre^able thereunto: that is to that
infinite goodness and pe^fection in Almighty God, beloved of a person
charitablie disposed. Also if comparison be made between Charity, Faith, and
Hope, Charity will have Charity preferred before faith and hope. Quant^ est
ergo charitas, quae side ^^^, (...) haben tur c^tera, si ad^^ rect^ haben^ur
omnis? Aug ^^. 9 in Johan. c. ^. D. Thom ^. 2. q. 25. a^ 6. 7. 8.
the crown, flower, and dignity: for although in as much as all three be
virtues Theological, they arrive in operation to God himself as object, yet
Charity in a more perfect manner thereunto carries man his deportment, than
either faith or hope. Charity aymeth at the goodness of God, absolutely in it
self, as in that kind infinite, and most ami^ble, whereas faith and hope
respect God, as in reference to man: to wit, faith beholds as object the
truth of God, in as much as revealing some thing unto man: Hope ^ixeth the
soul upon God, in as much as beneficial unto man by grace and favor:
Wherefore se^ing that an absolute quality is more divine and eminent in
Almighty God, than that which is relative and respective, in reckoning of the
object of charity, and of manner of working thereaboute, the same obtayneth
the prime and chee^e, as excellently well concludes the school Doctor Saint
Thomas.

2. And assuredly none can imagine a more perfect union of man with God, than
by cha^itie, it being a mutual conjunction of affection, a pouring out as it
were of man's love in to the bosom of Almighty God, and so a perfect
friendship betwixt him and Joan 1^.
the charitable person. And what degree of excellency can be greater, than for
man to be the friend of God, participating with him in communion of will and
desire, to beallodged ^he authority of Charity (...) the virtues.
in God, as final end and pe^iod of all his endeavors? Farthermore the virtue
Charity, not only in reason of her ob^ect, and manner she observes tending
thereunto, does great^n the qualit^e of that enterprise of love in comparison
of all the rest, but also she imports an authority and empi^e included in
her operation, over all other virtues, as well Theological, as moral, and
intellectual, to wit an ablitie to D. Aug l. de vi^tutibus charitati^.
command them, to refer them to their due end, which is God him self, and so
to impart unto them that ornament, which is to be most desired, and is that,
the which in them may be esteemed the very principal. The moral virtues,
alltho^ghe they have their proper and peculiar ends and objects in meet
proportion to humane reason of them selves, yet they may be farther elevated by
charity* as when charity will fast for God his sake, give a^mes, endure
calamities, execute justice, in view of the same motive: in which sense* the
Apostle S. Paul attributes the actions of the moral virtues to charity, as
if they were the peculiar endeuous of the same: Charity (...) patient, 1. Cor.
1^.
charity is gentle, charity vvo^keth no vvro^g, charity abides all things.
And as concerning hope and faith, although they have their carriage and issue
of action in Almighty God, yet they do not respect any thing in God, in
formalitie of end, which is goodness it self, and therefore are subject likewise
to the command^ie of Charity, as when one believes and hops for the love of
God; by which external reference they are not only in subjection to charity,
but from the same receive true life, meritt, value; and that which is chief,
to wit to be reposed in almighty God as last end and final term.

3. To conclude, in that Charity is more immediately, more coniunctlie united
to Charity vn^ted to purity. Ani^a tua sine Spiritu Sa^cto, id est sine
charitate si fuerit, mortua deputabitur Aug Tra. 9 in Johan. c. 2. 1* Joan. 5.
1. Joan. 2. 1. Joan. ^. Ro^. 13. Inseparabilis est quippe bona vita a fide,
quae per dilectionem operatur: imo vero ^aipsa est bona vita Aug. de Fid. and
Oper. c. 22. 1. Cor 13. Prud. Psych.
justification, as notes S. August^n, to purity, to sanctity of life, to
remission of sins, than is either faith or hope, therefore charity is the
most noble and pee^lesse. He which charitablie embraces God, and his
neighbor, as friend to both, remaining in that estate, as occasion is
presented observes the law of God, of nature, and of lawful superior, and
can not abiding in charity mortallie or grieuouslie offend either. For if one
by sin should prefer either pleasure or commodity before God, he should
thereby loose his Charity, and violate all friendship betwixt him and his
divine person offended. He that remains in Charity sins not, as tells
us S. John. And the Apostle Saint Paul thus recounteth unto us the force and
efficacy of Charity. He that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the law:
for, Thou shall not committ adultery, Thou shall not kille, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not be concupiscent, and
whatsoever other commandment, is in this vvo^de summed up: So that Charity
is a virtue, which produces good abearance toward God and man, keeps the
law of God and nature, as witnesses S. Augustine: and where is any notable
violation of the law, either in respect of God or man, there is not charity,
and where is wanting charity, there no virtue is of any moment to salvation of
it self, but a man by want thereof is become nothing, as speaks the Apostle,
having lost his full and whole substance and possession, whatsoever virtue
moral or Theological remain behind.

Quid ^^^at indomitos bell^ sedasse surores,
^t sanctum vitijs pereuntibus omne recepium,
Si vi^tu^ sub pace cadit*
What praise, if warlike force in field, do hostile furies qu^ll,
Yea all vice subdued, if peace domestike war in ^arring wrath expel*
When as one endewed with faith and hope, such virtues persisting still in the
soul, may yet break the law of God and nature, by s^ayltie or malice, because
there is not that contrariety betwixt faith and adultery, or stealth, as
there is betwixt these offenses and charity, that keeps the law, and iniu^eth
not any VVereupon we Catholics in this respect attribute justification rather
to charity, than to faith or hope, as coming nearer thereunto, and
vnremoueablie united to that pearl of heaven; sithence that in the same moment
one is justified, when he in charity loves God, or repents himself of his
sins, allthoughe this actual charity be not the formal justice, serving
only as disposition precedent unto the same, yet both are together in the
soul, and can not be severed; when as from faith may be d^sioyned grace of
justification, in that faith may consist with any sin, infidelity only
excepted. Wherefore in respect of these reasons, Charity is chief, and that
which principally concurreth to justification.

4 In consideration of which prerogative and principality in charity, we
shall find The precept and degree of Charity.
no virtue in holy writ, so district^^e commanded us, as the virtue Charity,
both for the necessity thereof, and also degree and quality of the same. The
object of this Charity is that main sea of goodness and perfection in
Almighty God, into the which we are counseled to diue our selves as deep as
may be: It is a mount of the heart through an aspiring heat, where in can be
no excess: a dispense of the soul, in Matthew. 22.
which can be found no loss or prodigality; we being willed to love God with
all out heart, and all our soul; and with all our mind: where the fervor of
heart is to be employed, the spiritual vigor of soul to be occupied, and the
intelligence of mind to be applied. Truth it is, that by reason of natures
decay, and bad inclination weakened by continual concupiscence, we do not, or
cannot, ariue to that highte and intension of love, as is the end thereof to be
performed in heaven: yet in the least degree that is of charity, is there no
sin or breach of commandment, only being allotted unto us and prescribed
that degree of love, which is contrary to all other unlawful love of
creature, implied in mortal sin. And for that every degree of endeavor
therein is a amity with God, places the last end of the soul in his goodness
best beloved, and pulls it away from the disordered affection toward any
creature in mortal sin, therefore it is a love sufficient to justification,
and so a love of all the heart, of all the soul, and of all the mind, a love
exceeding all other loves that may be reputed damnable in the sight of
Almighty God. Upon which point excellently good and sound seems to me
the doctrine of that famo as Clearcke and blessed Martyr the Bishop of
Rochester, who destinguisheth three sorts of men employed in works Roffen^^s
art. 23.
of charity: The first is of those which do^ many works repugnant to
charity, as those that committ theft, adulter^e or manslaughter, who are
far distant from Charity. Another there is of those, the which perform the
work of charity, but by negligence, which s^lie enters by dest^action, or
humane frailty, do not endeavor so earnest^^e as they might, if they ben^
thems^lues thereunto? And these also ariue not to that degree of charity, to
the which they might have a^^ayned, if in case they had been more attenti^e
to that business: although not as the former altogether suaruing from the
whole compass of charity. The third kind is of those, which by the
assistance of grace, employ their whole force in the work of charity, in as
much as they can by reason of the infirmity of the flesh: Yet
notvvithstanding these attain not to the full^^s of charity, although that
defect be not to them voluntary, but altogether accident against their
vvilles. Amongst them all there is this difference, that the first manner of
vvorking, is mortal sin, the second a venial, the third neither mortal or
venial, because not voluntar^lie procured. So this excellent Doctor. In the
second form of operation is remarked by him a venial sin; not that
intrinsicallie such sin is included in the act of charity, for so the work
would not be good, containing in it any defect, but in that such a venial
defect of negligence does accompany commonly and follow the same. Therefore
we must know, that the highest degree possible of charity is the end of
charity, and not commanded us in this life, so propense to vanity, and so
hindered from this sacred love, and desired high^e of affection. And that in
charity is included no sin, but rather a work, that pleases God, the
scriptures do auouche: Be vvatchfull you just, and look you sin not: Then
in charity is there no sin. Performing these things, 1. Cor. ^6.
says S. Peter, you shall not sin at any time. He that observes this
word, says S. John, 2. ^er. 1.
truly in him is the perfect charity of Almighty God. And that men do not
sin in not acting that which is impossible, the ancient fathers with
apparent reason do contest. We detest the blasphemy of those, writes Saint
Hierom, that say God to have commanded Hier. ep. ad Damas.
man any thing impossible, or that every one can not keep his precepts.
Neither could God, vv^yteth S. Augustine, command any impossibility, because
he is just, neither is he to condemn any for that they could not aueyde,
because he is merciful. Aug. l. de not. and great ca. 69. The Protestant enemy
of Coa^itie.


5 This sacred and heavenly virtue of charity the heretic does mightily
malign, as an ornament and duty, that principally stands for the Catholic
against his sect and faction: wherefore to the end he may work the same the
greater disgrace, in deep hypocrisy and Antichristian deceit dissembleth his
feate under the name and color of faith, setting the Theological virtues at
variance, and then b^ttering one by the other. It is his faith, whereby he
excludes all necessity and use of charity, as appertayning either to
justification or salvation, as has been entreated; and now by a feyned
humility upon acknowledgement of natu^es infirmity, by faith endeuoreth he
the ruin of so holy and singular a virtue. First says he, so are the
faculties of man his soul not only weakened, but polluted with original
sin remaining yet in the just So the Priscillianists as vvriteth Vin. Li^.
cap. 34.
and regenerate, that the very effecting of man his charity by the will, is
sinful and odious unto Almighty God. Then on the one side considering the
pitche and strain of commandrit in holy writ, acknowledged by faith,
prescribing unto us the degree of charity, that is to love God with all our
hearts, with all our souls, and with all our minds, for that such an
observance in that quality is impossible, therefore all men, Matthew 21.
infers he, in loving God, offend against that, which is commanded, and
thereby do sin by an offense damnable and wicked: so labors he in
charity, as fountain and mother virtue to poison all the stream of good
works, issuing from the same: that finally may be contrived in men's souls a
contempt of virtue, of sanctity, of civility, and indeed that the rudenes of
barbarism and confusion may be induced.

6. The goodness and excellency of Charity we Catholics do gather from the
Charity most excellent.
object thereof, to wit from the perfection of God beloved thereby, and from
the motion of the Holy Ghost, cause efficient of the same; and so esteem it,
as pure, deuoide of sin, yea ado^ned with the best flower, that grows in
the garden of virtue, or watered from heaven by grace. Charity is a flame of
that fire, which so once vamped out of the sacred body and soul of our
Savior, hanging upon the Cross, and was p^w^ed Luc. 12.
out by him from above to fall upon the hearts of men; and therefore no fire of
impuritie or of smoakie concupiscence. And as it shoule be a presumptuous
insolence, and a great injury against the Prince, for one to take hold of
his person or purple with hands polluted or unclean, ^o likewise an arrogant
blasphemy is it in the Protestanter, Joan. ^5. Charity can not be sinful
by original sin. 1 Cor. ^. Joan. 3.
to impute sin to that act of charity, which embraces God, is perfect
friendship betwixt him and us, and a principal at cheeuement in us from the
blood of Christ And why Protestant is charity a sin* Because says he, it is
adionyed to original sin. A false ground to support a ^oule heresy: for
Scriptures tell us, that original sin by the blood of Christ is washed
awa^e, is expelled, or otherwise how are we redeemed, how purified, how
justified, how restored to that justice we lost by Adam his fall? Moreover
admit we, it remain in all, yet can it not give any stayne or odious brand to
charity. First for that it a^ pertayneth not to charity, as cause, object,
end, or circumstance: then for that charity is effected and procured by the
Holy Ghost. In virtue of the former position, I frame this argument against
the Protestanter: The sin of adultery, remaining in the just, does not
infect with adultery the work of a justifying says, the work of justice, or
of alms deeds, therefore neither can charity from original sin, receive
any crime or gui^t. The sin of adultery suerlie is greater, and of a more
malignant nature, than is original o^^ence, in that it is procured by a
personal act and liberty in the offender himself, and so worthy of hell
fire eternally; whereas original sin is caused only by the free consent
of Ada^, and is not in power of us now to avoid it: therefore if original
sin do co^taminate all works of charity and virtue, much more shall do
the like the actual and personal sin of adultery. Wherefore i^ the
Protestanter shall deny the antecedent* his deep Theology, or rather gross
ass^^arie must con^^sse, that the act of ^aith is (...) and takes from it a
touch in the same kind, and held of God as worth^e of eternal damnar on
because defiled with adultery; and yet is not any act of adulte^^e. Yea in
that protestants confess the regenerate persons continually to sin against
all the commandments VV^^ker ^ 3 depe^^or. c. 2
by concupiscence, and to be in act the^ues, (...) and such (...), and fit
puritans for the hogstie, they must grant also, that the virtue (...) a
justifying faith, is polluted with adultery, with robbe^ie, with original
sin: and so with all villan^e imaginable. Is not this sweet stuff, and a
worthy Theology (...) upon admittance of the Antecedent, he den^e the
consequence, he shall (...) to want reason, and show, that the ^irdes of his
ne^ste are flowe^ toward the (...) of fo^les For why should not adultery
infect charity, as well as (...) Yea he ^dmitteth as much, and can not deny
what he confesses by (...) own mouth: For he makes Original sin
includes all sins by the Protestant.
original sin to (...) in two things, first in the (...) of nature to (...)
full pleasures, then in actual concupiscence to the breaking of the ten ^^mn
andements by sins opposite thereunto, as by adultery, fornication,
blaspl^em^e* desperation: so that if original sin cont^m^^^te (...) this
charity must be defiled with fornication, with a million of mortal sins,
l^ke sparkles (...) flying ou^e of the (...) of concupiscence. This is the
Protestanters persuasion to charity and good wor^es. VVhereupon thus I argue A
man loving God of ends him in as many sorts as he retayneth in his soul
actual sins of concupiscensce therefore in omitting this love seeing there
can be but one sin committed, it is better not to love him than to love him.
The Antecedent is approved by the Protestanters sink of concupiscence,
defiling the whole current of water with as many sorts of ordou^e and filthy
savors and smells as ate found therein. The consequent is manifest: First,
for that in equality the omiting of charity is a sin with the effecting of
the same all one then for that the producing of charity, deriueth from the
^^nke all sins therein contained and exposes them to God his (...) which
does not the sole omis(...) (...) Fie base dothsome and ^^e heresy Here i^
them answer if he can, or suck until the acknowledgement of truth hail him
out. As concerning the second, I affirm it to be a main blasphemy of the
Protestanter against the grace of Christ, and against the holy Ghost, to
affirm, that the work of charity is a mortal sin. And the Protestant
con^deri^g the double cause of charity, to wit the Holy Ghost and will of
man then affirming, the same work to be good, in as much as it proceeds from
the Holy Ghost, and bad as issuing from the will of man, declares, with his
(...) his gross and most absurd here^^^. First for that is impossible that
one and the self same work should be good and bad, please God and displease
him, seeing that all moral and Theological bonitie, does a^^le ab integra
causa, from a D^onys.
ground and cause not empeached with defect Then to affirm, that he holy
Ghost does honest, grace, and dignifie a mortal sin, by his motion, besides
the blasphemy, includes an impossibility: for as this sacred spirit can not
adorn with such a gift and quality the act of adultery, or of any breach
of the commandments of God, so neither ca^ it extol and beautify the work
of charity, if it be other ways naught, defiled, and a manifest breach of
God his co^mandeme^ts, as the Protesta^ter does accounte. Let the Protestant
tell me, why it cannot stand with the providence, wisdom, and goodness of the
holy Ghost, to co^curre with man to the act of adultery, of concupiscence,
to move and incite him thereunto, and by the same moreover render such
bestialitie, gracious to Almighty God, and virtuous? If he answer me, that it
may so be brought so pass by that sacred spirit, he shall denounce a villainy
most horrible and intolerable, as if Almighty God might not only cause
sin, but render sin good, commandable, and invested in the colors of
heaven, sanctified with the breath of the Holy Ghost. But if it be answered,
that no such thing can be brought to pass, for that the act of adultery and
concupiscence is sinful, and so not capable of so precious an influence from
the holy Ghost, how then if Charity be a sin, corrupted with
concupis^^nce, if it be an actual vialation of the precept of charity, not
aspiring to that pitche of degree it ought to do, can it be occasioned,
provoked and sanctified by the Holy Ghost? Auant foul and filthy heresy,
that makes Charity a sin, that attributes the ornament of a sin to the
Holy Ghost, that takes away from men all courage and disposition to
charity, and charitable acts, in that by his accounte, sinful, damnable,
and stained with all the sins, that may be committed against the ten
commandments: should men in any reason be incited and stirred up to sin, to
wallow in a dungh^ll, to displease God? O Doctrine detestable, and a fit cry
for the swine heard of the devil, for a slave of that great beast Antichrist!

7. But assuredly it seems to be a very monster of Protestantish madness, to
condenne Charity no sin (...) vva^t of the highest degree.
the act of charity in man as a deadly sin, because in the frailty of this
life it arriueth not to the most eminent and ardent degree to be imagined.
First I say, a monster it is of conceit, yea a very blasphemy to affirm God
by his law to bind us under sin to such a task, which to us is impossible;
and we affirm the cog^tation thereof to dep^aue God his providence, to make it
unjust and unreasonable; as wro^gly also to censure and (...) man, taking him
guilty of a crime, the which he could not a^oyde; yea the which he was obliged
not to eschew; in that every one is bound to love God ^s he may, and so
should be tied and constrained by precept to a defect, which is mortal sin:
so to define of God, is a v^le and mo^^e wicked determination. And whereas S.
Augustine affirms, that in this life perfectly we can not observe the
commandment of charity, he understands the end of charity, and perfection
thereof, whereunto it tends and directs; not that a man does sin
mortallie in loving God, for not raising his a^t to that degree, which to him
is impossible, being only obliged, as he says, to endeavor to fulfill
qualicunque modo, as we may, the which absolutely we can not perform. And
whereas we are commanded to love Aug. de pers. lust. c. 8.
God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind, is not
thereby understood, that we be tied under sin to perform an act of will,
either infinite in degree, or that which is greatest imaginable, in that the
first absolutely is impossible, the second neither in heaven is performed. For
who doubts, but the charity of any Saint there might increase; or
acknowledges not, that one Saint loves God more in^ensiu^l^e than an other?
but only we are bound^ first to love God, as expounds the divine law S.
Thomas, by virtue of the four faculties in man his soul, that is by D Th 2 a.
2. ^ q. 49. a^. 4. and ^.
the vnderstang by the w^ll, by the appetite sensitive, and by the senses, when
an external work of charity is ex^^cted. Moreover we have in charge to ^eare
that love toward Almighty God, the which excludes all other love: not that
it must needs be more intense, a^dent and strong than any love, the which is
not vnlaw^ull, but that it exceed in appreciation all other love, that it
permit not to reign or domineere in the soul any love as mortal sin,
reposing and allodging man his will unlawfully and distoyallie in any
creature contrary to God his law, but rather rearing up the same to God, as
final end of our life, action, soul, understanding, and body.

8. Hereupon may the Christian reader by rule of virtue perceive, how the
Catholic By the virtue of Charity the Protestant is refused.
persuadeth this supreme virtue of charity, and how the Protestanter
endeavors the disgrace thereof, and to withdraw the affections of men from
the exercise, study and use of so excellent a work. The Catholic admits
Charity a necessary preparement for justification, the Protestant yields no
room thereunto, satisfying himself to that effect with only faith. The
Catholic gives the principality to Charity before all the other virtues:
the Protestanter will needs advance faith to that superiority, contrary to
the Scriptures, and all good intelligence. For although Faith is a work of
man, as well as Charity. Aug. tra. 25. in in Johan c 6. Ipsam fidem Apostolus
dixit esse opus.
he do equalize faith and charity in this, that both of them be mortal
sins; yet for that faith justifies immediately, assoileth and sanctifies
the sin of it self, and charity is remitted by faith, apprehending first the
justice of Christ, faith must needs be the chief, as most sacred, and
nearest attayning to the justice of Christ. Last, whereas we make charity, a
gift of the holy Ghost, and so good, laudable, and heavenly, the
Protestanter to hinder men's endeavors from that virtue, will needs persuade the
world, that charity is a mortal sin, a mortal sin contaminated with
original sin: the which, as defines the Protestanter, is a continual
breach of all the ten commandments: and so charity is guilty of all the
sins possible to be committed by ma his frailty or malice. O heinous sense
against so sovereign a virtue, when as hereby it is manifest, that it is
better to omit charity with one offense, than to bring it forth with so
many crimes begrimed and defiled? And does God then command that, or bind
us to perform that, the which implies all manner of sins, and is as odious
and detestable in his sight, as is original sin, that is concupiscence,
breaking forth into the sins of the flesh and of the spirit? Lothing and
disdain enforces here a Period. And that men should not busy themselves to
observe the law of Charity, they be advertised from the Protestant, that it
is impossible, and so always deficient and culpable, and thereupon a mortal
sin, and breach of God his commandment. Do then Protestants, in the very
act of charity and friendship with God, violate the precepts of charity?
What more can do they who hate God and man? What esteem makes the
Protestant then of charity, the princess of the virtues, the origin, source,
and root of them, of all goodness finally, and integrity of life? Also in
regard of ciutlitie the spirit and humor of the Protestanter in this respect,
is harshe, rude, and full of cruditie. For who knows not that Charity and
mutual love is that virtue, which principally cruiliseth men's manners, that
conserueth society, loving friendship, commandrie and obedience amongst them?
And therefore if Charity be not necessary to justification or salvation, if
it be a work of the law, a deadly sin, an imperfect monster, as the
Protestanter makes it what cause is there that men should cares^r^^, or labor
against concupiscence to entertayne it and increase in their souls, but rather
avming at pri^ace pleasure and commodity make choice of violence, of
collusions and cousenages, and of what other distemperature is to be found in
barbarisime?

What mixture of love and gricfe the Catholic conceyueth and nourishes in
his soul by the meditation of our Savior hanging upon the Cross, the
Protestanter impiouslie and presumptuouslie impugneth, hinders, and
endeuoreth to abolishe, as vain, superstitious, and of no spiritual importe
or commodity.

CHAPTER XXIII.
DOVBTELSSE as our Savior Christ suffering upon the Cross, did there show The
Charity of the Cross
the greatest excess of charity, the which Almighty God in the divine
person of his dear son did bear and declare to mankind, so assuredly did
he thereby exhibit to our cogitations for us a spectacle, a direction, and
incitement to the perfection of Christianity, as an especial procurement to
attain unto that, the which by his holy Gospel was remarked and by his whole
iconomie in life and death espetiallie Genesis 3. The proper spirit of grace is
signified by the sighing dove. Ge^u^t aute^ colu^bae in ^more Au. Tra. 6 in
Ioha^ca 1 Christa Seraphine and a Cherubine.
intended. Once a Cherubine at the gates of Paradise, brandishing a fiery
sword, as instrument of God his divine justice, was a great terror to our
first parents, and in them unto all mankind: Where as now we have a Seraphine
upon the Cross, at the port of Paradise of his Church, all burning in
charity for our comfort, for our inuitement and encouragement to enter and
enioe the beatitude of such a place of entertaynement. Then most fitly was a
Cherubine, so for knowledge surnamed, used in fire of revenge, in that it
concerned the providence of Almighty God, to take notice of our trespass, to
lay it before our eyes, and balance out the weight thereof with his judgment
of severity. But now in the time of the Gospel, when charity, love and
mercy bear the sway, have we a Seraphine glowing hot with affection to
resolve the world into the moisture of repentance, to exile through heat the
frost and could of sin and infidelity. Notwithstanding so excelent and
admirable is our Redeemer, that he in his own person represents the quality
both of a Cherubine, Joan 1.
and also of a Seraphine: Of a Cherubine, being the word, the light, the
understanding of his divine Father, and of the world; of a Seraphine likewise
enfolded in our humane nature, and lying upon the Altar of the Cross for
sacrifice, in the flames and coals of his own love and benevolence. Yet: his
difference may be discovered, that our blessed Savior his humility has
diversely sought to dissemble as it were, and to conceal the splendor of his
Cherubines intelligence, as once sleeping on shipborde Turbantibus aequora
ventu; as if not attending to the distresses of his Church, sleeping Lucret
lia. Isal. 3. Number 24.
the lions sleep, that sleeps with eyes open and uncovered, that is sleeping
in body yet vigilant in heart and mind: accubuit vt leo; couched asleep like
to the lion: and also when he suffered his eyes to be veiled in despitious
sort by the miscreant jews; Joan 19.
scorned with these terms, Prophecy unto us, who it was that smoteshee: Yet
that, which whas in him Scraphicall, ardent and charitable, he never did hide
or keep in couerture, still manifesting his love to the world in live and
effectual means, especially by his death upon the Cross, whereon hanging,
he was for his Church in her Number. 23.
Pelgrimage by night, through the wilderness of this world, a fiery pillar,
both to shine by advertisement and wisdom, and also to bu^ne in love and
desire of our good and heatitude.

And as the thing suffered and endured by our Savior, was extremely paynfull,
damageable and reprochefull, and so required great charity to be endured;
Charity of Christ to ward his enemies.
so likewise the quality of those considered, for whom he undertook such
penalty and loss, it does show unto us the excessive highte and incomparable
degree of charity in him, taking upon him for our sakes, to recover us by his
death and passion Generally were we all contaminated with that great and
capital sin imparted unto us by our first parents transgression: many
actual and personal crimes had also maintained war a long time in our
souls again^ heaven, and all holies therein; and finally that sacrilegious
trespass in the massacring of this divine person, was most horrible and huge;
he being one of such excellency both of nature and grace; of grace as well in
habitt as in action, and yet to dye upon the Cross, for the redepmtio^ of all
such offenders, and for their lives, that sought, wroughte and contrived his so
ignominious and cruel a death: was not this unkindness, this disloyalty, this
outrage of ours against God, sufficient to quench the flames of his love, to
beat back the course of his benevolence, and make the sin to withdraw the
beams of his gracious and merciful influence? O force of charity that
ouerslowed with breathing flames, all such impediments and traversing trenches!
O might of the sun, that pierced by beams, so hard, gross and rude a
cloud of our sin and ingratitude!

2. VVhereupon as the fire purged by wind from ashes, and increased by
nourishment, Catholikeme ditation of the Crasse.
yields the greater heat, so do the Catholics seek out to discuss in
particular the measure of charity showed by Christ upon the Cross, yea and
curiously ponder, what degree of grief and dolor, he there endured, to the
end th^r they may from thence receive the greater fe^uour of mutual love, of
tenderness, compunction, piety, devotion, to maynteyne in themselves in some
sort answer to that excess of charity, found out in so beneficial a
Priest and sacrifice of himself. S. Bernard thus deciphereth the panges of our
Redeemer in his passion. Novvfollovveth the day of the Bern. Tom 3. in Do. Palm.
Passion, in the which as our sauiaur Christ has ^aued the vvole man, so of
all himself he has framed a saving host: as vvhes he exposed his body to so
many, to so great torments and injuries, Bern. Sen ser. 56. in fer. 6.
Patasceu. Bern. ser. de Pass.
his soul to a double affection of a most proper and kind sufferance: on
this side considering the uncomfortable grieses of the holy women, then the
desperation and dispersion of his dssciples. The Cross of Christ seems to
consist on these sovvre things: he has suffered them all for us, who with so
great charity had compassion of us Again: In this pas^ien brethren we are
to consider three things especially; thevvorke, the manner of it, and the
cause. In the work patiencess commended, in the manner humility, and in the
cause charity. Yea so desirous was this our redeeming Champion to purchase our
lives by his death, that as notes S. Athanasius, Athan. ser. de Pass.
he gave occasion unto the devil, more fiercely to assault himself: no
otherwise than if one espying in his adversary fear to sight, should feign
himsel vveake, that he might dravv him to battle. And therefore a little
before his deatb, he began to be perplexed, to be heavy, to desire that the
chalice of death might depart from him: he tried that his spirit was ready,
but his flesh insi^ne, to the end that our enemy aduenturing upon him as man,
should meet with the forces of D. Tho. 3. pat. q. 46 art. 5.
his divinity. Yet nevertheless he knew that he was to encounter with these
harms recounted by the school doctor S. Thomas, and willingly for our sakes
made acceptance to endure and undertake the^ all. Our Savior has suffered all
manner of humane passion, the which may be (...) in three sorts First in
regard of the parties, of whom he suffered. For he suffered of the (...), of
the Jews, of me^, and women, as is manifest of the maid that accused (...)
Farther (...) of the princes and of their servants, of the people, according to
that of the Psalm, why have the people been in (...)? Also be suffered by
familiar friends and acquaintance, Psalm. 2.
as in Judas it appears manifest betraying him, and in S. Peter denying him.
Secondly the same may be (...) in regard of those things, which a man may
suffer ^^. Christ suffered through his friends forsaking him; he suffered in
his fame by blasphemies vitered against him; in his honor and glory by works
and contrmelics: In his necessaries, as in that he was despoiled of his very
clothes. I ^suffered in his souls by sorrovv ^^ sins, and fear; in his
body by vvound is and stripes (...) the same may be esteemed according unto
the parts of his body in which he suffered. In his bead h(...) the priking ^^
wne of thorns, in his hands and feet the piercing nails; in his face
li^vves and spate; in all his body stripes. Moreover he has suffered
according to all the senses of his body; in the sense of tending in being
what and nailed: in his taste throught gall and ring (...) meiling, ^^u^^sied
in a lethseme place of dead men's scuiles, the mount Caluene; in his learing
(...) with (...) speeches and mockeries; in (...) the, beholding his ^ other
and (...) one be l^ue^, (...) All which alf c^ions as they The pains of Ch^^
his pas^ol. in. regard of his person Care^ exp. 4. alt Symbol.
were of themselves great and extreme, so in regard of the person which
suffered them, especially of his soul and ^idie, they were most excceding
and surp^sling all other afflictions of mortali^ren Form respect of his soul,
wen (...), as teaches the Roman Catech^ime, that (...), and therefore he
said, may soul sorrevvs^^ cu^^ vnot death. Neither did the divinity give that
^uccour to the humanity it might have d^nne, infrecing it from annoye, of in
diminishing any whitt the sharp co^^csiue thereof: for (...) of his paison,
a^s there D. The 1. pat. q 46 ^ 1. 6. Christ the pa(...) roste at the fire of
^^^hu latio, retto invva^er c: any consol. ^on. l ^ 12. Dam. l ic. Iusti Matti
in di^^ingo. Try phone. Ti^r cn. 1. Redemptio effect of the Passion. Romans 4. 1.
Cor 15. Apoc. 1. Council Trid. Se 6 cap. 7. D Tho: par. q 46 at 3 Grah in Sym.
Genesis ^8. Number 20. Christcon^t c^os abuncha of l^sopp, tied with a redd (...) to
the cedar shck. Athanas ho. de Cruce. l co. lcri. de Pass. Aug Tra. 119. in
Joan.
had been no such (...) of (...) with his umanitie Yea the soul neither was
permitted to help itself: for as say^h the school Doctor; lu other men that
arraisie^es, the inward griefen natigated, and any the ovtvvard penaltu, by
reasons consideration, (...) being dersued from the use even for c^s to
themseriour; the which happened not in Christ suffering in such sort, as he
(...) faculty to vvorig that which was proper unto it, as reads S
Damascene To this if we adioyne the delicacie of complexion in the body of our
Savior, as most passible and ^enfrice, the (...) of his person, deserving all
good, as rather honor and love in place of these hatmes le et dured, the
great charity he bore toward his even yes and torments, may be verified that
of the Propheet Hieremie, That there never was such doleut in any one, as in
our Savior Christ. There things doings and pargs of affi^ci^o^ do were
collect diligen^he in pious meditation, to the end we may willingly suffer
with Christ, that has suffered them for us, that we may hate and detest sin,
inficting such ind^gnities upon so holy and divine a Redeemer: finally love
him, that so wept, did sweat blood, and died for us.

3. VVhereupon although every action and sufferance of our Savior Christ,
were of infinite virtue and prise, in reckoning of the person, by whom it was
performed, and so a competent, yea a superaboundant ransom and price to
satisfy for all man kind, yet in that his holy Passion was the end of all
his travels to that effect, the most singular and remarkable thing by him
accompl^ssed, as in itself of greatest difficulty, and an emprise of his most
surpassing charity, therefore we according to holy writ, a scribe our
redemption, our exptation, and delivery from sin to that sacred passion and
death of his upon the Cross; taking from thence Jacobs blessing, the
Patriatchs hands then crossed, to prefigure this our benefit: and what liqu^u^
we have to refreshe and make settle our cu^es, scotche so with concupiscence,
we receive it from this rock twice beaten and stricken with the rodd of the
holy Cross And as our blessed Savior hanging upon the Cross, is to us a
glass therein to consider and behold the pu^raitures and forms of all the
virtues, as teaches S. Athar^sus, so in particular in his so great and bitter
sufferance, he ^nstructed us to pa^ence, to f^^titude in the practice of
virtue. For in that, death upon the Cross was most ^gnominious, deservedly
to be infi^cted on the upon slaves, and ba^r offenders, hereupon as speaks S.
Leo, he gave us to understand that no manner of de this to be dreaded of man,
the which he did show by brown death upon the Cross. Also S. Augustine:
That wood whereunto were nailed the members of Christ suffering, was the
chair of himself teaching. The effects of which passion, thus does sum up
S. Athanas. VVhilste he so Athan. ser. de Passione. D. Tho. l 8. de verit. cap.
20 The harm of the justifying faith in a Protestant. The Protesta^te instcade
of a dove has a croe. Vox ^nim co^ni clamosa est, non geme bunda. Augu. Tra.
6. in Ioha^ ca. 1. No contritio^ of commodity with the Protestant. A
Protestant is sure believing Christ to be his Christ: that is, Christ his
pains and mortificatio^ to be his: his grief to be his: by which, as rich
enoughe, he takes as superfluous his one personal and actual pains
mortificatio^, dolor, yea as iniuriouse to those in Christ his honesty be his
also, what needs a Protestant actual honesty. Luther I dell bett. Christ.
Luther his croe. Exultant ^u grandis vocibus vt appa rcat quicorui sunt, non
columbae. Augu Tra. 6. in Ioha^ Luthers catia^. Calu in c. 27. Matt. Beza
Colloq. page 418 So did also Poteus de bruis, burnig crucifix at records S.
Bern. Ep. 240.
hange^ upon the Cross, he purged the air stretching forth his hands, and the
earth he redeemed with his blood, and vvashed it with the liquour of his
own side. The school Doctor S. Thomas thus teaches: Our Savior Christ by
his passion overcame the devil, whom he bound; conquered hell, the which
he spoiled; amaistered the flesh, the which be subdued; subiecte^ed the
world* the which he contemned; exceeded his tormente, the which he endured;
and gained heaven the which he opened.

4. VVonderfull is it to consider, how the Protestantish opinion of a
justifying faith, infecteth with error the whole censure and esteem allmoste
of all the Articles of Christian belief; in that nothing now in controversy
is denied by the Protestanter, as avouched by the Catholic, but has issue and
color from this wicked ^aith, to which they attribute justification. And as a
poisoned liquour once admitted into the stomach, after conueyeth contagion by
the vital spirits and current of blood to all members of the body, so
Antichrist possessing the Protestants mind with this sense of a justifying
faith, thereby empeacheth and strikes to death the whole corpse and bulk of
Christianity. In particular, in this only faith, apprehending the justice of
Christ, he reposeth the grace and compass of the Gospel, affording no other
place to the works of virtue, as to charity, to repentance, to tears of
grief and compassion, than what may be judged solelie meet for the law, and
killing letter thereof: which if it be true, why should a Protestant beholding
Christ upon the Cross, exceed the limits and bounds of grace, of the
Gospel, not be content with only faith apprehending his righteousness, but
thereunto adioyne the penalty, the acerbitie of the law, grief and gryping
pangs of dolor and compassion? Must the Jew be in our reckoning of esteem
afther the Cross of Christ? Then in that this sole faith does justify,
looking upon the Cross, what use or necessary effect of charity, of
repentance, of commiseration: and after gathered flowers, what judgment to
graspe the thornie bushe? Luther well possessed this sugared sense of doctrine,
and applied his iustificatorie faith accordingly to mirth, to security, to
joy, to the delights of a pleasant conscience, and refused to yield his heart
to the law, thereby to be strooken with a pensive and mournful contemplation
of Christ his Passion, or to lend thereto his eyes, to become fountaynes of
brackish tears, or his breast to serve for a furnace vamping out the throbs
and sighs of an aggreeued conscience. No, he restayned the Cross to the
gospel, and disdayned to apply it to the law, to the smart and rigor of the
same. Hear then under the Cross what Theology he utters, and how he
mourns as the Turtle having lost her mate, how he seasoneth his mirth with
the ta^^ mire, how sharp and bitter is the Cross to the breast of a faithful
stout Ge^manicall Protestanter. Now a days says he, are to be found not a
fevv, the which to that purpose preach Christ, and read the Gospel, that
they may move humane affections, as to condole with Christ, to be angry with
the Jews, and to procure such childish a^^ vvomanish toys. Luther then a
good stout Germane, fortified in faith as I see, and in drink, will not weep
or mourn with the dove of Christ viewing the Crucifix, or hate the crime of
the Crucifiers, least he should be accounted a child or a woman. Doubtless
a resolute fellow, if he were in squadron to march against the great Turk.
But what must a man do then? what conceits is he to f^ame, that beholds the
Crucifix* Christ, says he, to that end ought to be preached, that faith in him
be promoted, that Christ be not only Christ to himself, but be Christ to thee
and to me. Here Luther his faith smiles and laughes, having hand on the
Crucifix: permitting his croe to sease on carrion, and cries ou^e, all is mine.
But assuredly the Martin builds his neaste in the mire: and the croe is
gorged with corruption. Could the Cyprian eyes of Calvin abide to afforde one
dolorouse glance toward the Cross. In the death of Christ, says he, nothing
occurreth to me but a spectacle of desperation. So then the Cross of Christ is
ready to make a Caluinister and a devil to run madd, and to shroude them
selves in hell for fear. I confess speaks Beza, that with all my heart I
detest the Image of the Crucifix, the which is an image of the cruelty of the
Jews against Christ, and therefore I can not abide it. O devout Geneuian,
that has no better eyes to behold Christ on the Cross, or more tender
affection to embrace so kind a Redeemer! Lastly if a man will contemplate
Christ redeeming the world, he must descend to hell, according to the
Protestant, he must in pilgrimage with the Puritan depart from the Cross on
Caluarie, and there see Christ subject to the devil, suffering hellish
torments, despayring, repyning at God, blaspheming, and so with a black
sanctus recovering the world. The piety of a Protestant then is so massy and
heavy, that it must needs descend as low as hell and cave of the devil. But
let the trial make issue for truth.

5 It is admirable to consider the spirit of the Catholic Curche in her busy
recognisance Catholic use of the Cross Noluit stella^ esse in front u^deliu^
signu^ suum, sed crucem suam. Aug. ^ra. 3. in Johan. cap. ^. Cyt. l. 3. de In.
Amb. lib. 3. de Abr. c. 3.
and memorial she has always made and now does, of that great benefitt
which mankind received from the Cross * hoping hereby, besides the piety and
charity surrendered to our Savior, as remarketh S. Cyrill of Alexandria, also
to the imitation of Moises praying, and exhibiting the form of a Cross,
Abimilech to be vanquished, the ghostly enemy of our souls. This virtue and
conquest of ours against all enemies, the Fathers deem presigned and
prefigured by the conquest of Abraham atcheeued over certain Idolatrous
Princes, overthrowing their forces, and surprising their persons by the number
of three hundred and eighteen only of his soldiers. Those, says S.
Ambrose, the Patriarch made choice of, the which he judged vvorthie of the
number of the faithful, which were to believe in the Passion of our Savior
Christ: For the Greek letter ^. Tau: Does signify three hundred, the sum
of eighteen do express these characters I. N. Likewise S. Pauline. Abraham
did overthrow those princes his adversaries, not in power of Paul. ep. 2. ad
Sever.
his legions, but then in the Sacrament or mystery of the Cross, the which
number of his three hundred men, is declared by the Greek lettter T. Tau. In
the virtue of which mystery also once the Arc, or deyned to escape the
deluge, being made of the lenght of three hundred Cu^^^s, did flote above, as
now the Church does sail over the billovves of the world. Hereupon the
Catholic Church in her prime and purity took all occasions to draw out the
picture of the Cross, to use the pious ceremony thereof, as a trophie of
Christ his victory, and a protestation to the world of her devotion. The
Cross, says S. Chrysostom, we place Chrysostom. ^ho. de Crnee ador.
about our bed, and every where weather we go. And as ordinarily
souldio^^s do not dyne with out their arms, nor sleep, so do we now,
having about our bed, the Cross as a svvorde, upon the door as a bar, in
every part of the house, as a wall and a defense thereof, then inward and
outvvard parts with the Cross do we ^hield and guard. S. Cyrill of
Jerusalem thus recounteth Ciril. Care. 12. and 4 Illum.
the Catholic vsance and practice. Let us not now be ashamed to confess
Christ crucified, but rather confidentlie dravv we out the same with our
^yngers upon our forheads, and in all parts else let the Cross be made; as
upon the bread we eat, upon the cup we drink, in our going forth, at our
return, reposing our selves to sleep, and rising: thereby is a custody of
great strength given to poor men, and to infirm without their labour^, in
that by God his ordinance, this grace is a sign of the faithful, and the
terror of the devils: for by this sign did he triumph. Boldly thevv it
out then, for when those ^iends shall se the Cross, they will call to mind
the person crucified. Hereupon proceeds the devotion of the Primitive Church
Genesis 28. 1. Reg. 17. Exodus 15. 2. Reg. 10. Plin. epi ad Traian.
toward the Cross of Christ, as instrument of our redemption, as to the
ladder of Jacob, the sling and sword of David, the palm tree in Helim, the
wood of Elizeus, the Altar of God; in that as a preservative against corporal
infirmity, as reports Pliny, they faithful wore in secrecy a piece
thereof about their necks, of a parcel of ou^ of the nails lapped in
bumbast. Of which dispersion, or rather multiplication Ciz. Ca^ec. 10. and 4.
Illum.
of certain small parcells of the Cross, through the world, thus writes S.
Cirill. The wood of the Cross is witnessed by us at this day remaining
with us, and with others, who according to their faith retain some
quantity thereof; vvhereupon in a manner this Cross now has filled the
world. And for a protestation and acknowledgement of the benefitt Tertul. l.
2. ad v^orem ca. 4.
received by the Cross, Christians ordinarlie imprinte the figure thereof in
their forheads, as in an eminent place, not ashamed to profess the precious,
the glorious Lib 3. con Iudaeos. cont Marrion. Cyp. ep 56. de lap. Eusebius. l 2
Hi Prudent: Can. de pot Crucis Chryso. ho. 3. de paen. Hom. 2 ad pop.
ignominy thereof; Christians thereby, as says Tertullian, according to the
prophecy of Ezechiell, being marked with the sign of Tau: Let those head be
defended, says S. Cyprian, that the sign of God be kept without de^^ment.
Also Constantine and his souldiou^s, bore as cognisances of Christianity,
Crosses upon their helmets and waged war under a principal standard of the
Cross, as record Eusebius, Prudentius, and others Heretofore, says S
Chrysostom, Kings were once impious persequutors, but now their piety
mounteth to heaven; when as entiring into the Church, they depose their
diadems, and dravv forth on their forheads the Cross of Christ; namely
Theodosius the father, and the son of Theodosius, both for religion and
piety admirable Princes. This was the counsel of the sam^ good Doctor: Going
out of the house, say I renounce thee Satan, and then cross thy self in the
forhead: for so neither man nor devil meeting with thee, ca^ hurt thee,
appearing thereby armed and defended. Et because the the sign and badge of a
Christian was the Cross, therefore in that Serapis, the Egyptian god, was
marked therewith upon his brestplate. Saint Hierome said, Now the Egyptian
Scr^p^s is become a Christian But is not Antichrist in the Protestanter clean
adverse Hier. ep. ad Let.
and opposite to this Christian and Catholic piety, abolishing as
superstitious this religious use and ceremony of the Cross, not erecting it
in places of frequentation, not signing their bodies or houses with the same,
but rather endeavoring as enemies of the Cross, to exclude all custom and
memory thereof from the eyes and Ruf l. 2 ca. 28. Protestants enemy of the
Cross. Alan. Cop. Dial 4. cap. 3.
minds of Christians? Yea Luther affirmed, that if he had all the particles of
the holy Cross in his hand, he would cast them thither, where no man should
ever discover them, as tells us Alan Cope Is not this fury of impiety a way
and means to exclude from our cogitations the Cross of Christ, and all his
pain endured thereon? Doubtless it is; and so a fit preparement for misprisall
of the Cross, and finally for Antichristian infidelity. Yea by this
Protestantish contempt and oblivion of the Cross, is avoided in the behalf of
Paganes and Ethinkes, a great argument, wherewith the Fathers in the Primitive
Church proved Christ to be God and man: in that no less than divine power
could bring it to pass, that the Cross otherwise so base and infamous, could
be used so ordinarily in men's actions, so stately on Princes diadems, so
sacredlie Theo. Phil in cap. 19. Joan
in r^tes of religion, unless Christ true God, and true man, had sanctified
it, and brough it to that exchange and perfection. Once it was to a Jew a thing
abominable Deuteronomy. 21. Chrysostom ho 84. inio a^. l. quod Christ. u^t Deus.
to touch a Cross, the instrument of an accursed death, but after Christ
Passion, as says Saint Chrysostom; All men are more adorned with Crosses,
than they with diadems besett with precious stones; And it is not only
every where drawn forth, but it is desired, it is be loved, all man are
careful of it, every where it shyneth on the wales of houses, in roofes,
in books, in (...) and villages in places which are inhabited and not
inhabited. Therefore I would know of a Pagan, (...) the sign of accursed
death and punishment, is so desired of all, if the virtue of him crucified be
not great? See then how the Protestantish impiety banding war and defiance
against the Cross, fights Antichristianlie for infidelity, and for the
disgrade and neglect of our Savior Christ. Petrus de Bruise, an infamous and
condemne^ Bern. ep. 240.
heretic by S. Bernard, and the whole Church, was a Protestant; who upon
pretense that the Cross was an instrument of the Jewish malice against Christ,
burned as many Crosses, as he could get, roasted flesh at the fire in
despighte, and sent it to his friends for a repast. An heretic he was of the
humor of a Protestant, odious and execrable to all Christians, and worth^lie
burned alive after for this sacrilegious injury against the Cross.

6. And as there is frequent use of the Sacraments in the Catholic Curche, so
therein Use of the Cross in the Sacraments.
oftentimes is used the ceremony of the Cross: partly to call to our minds
the passion of our Lord, and partly to declare, that all efficacy and
working of sanctity by the Sacraments, are caused by the price of the Cross,
issuing from thence, as founteyne August. tract. 118. in Joan. li 22 Ciu. c. 8.
Chryso. hom. deado. Cruee
and principal occasion. Unless the sign of the Cresse, says Saint
Augustine, be used, as impressed on the forheads of thee believers, or in the
water, by which they are regenerated, or on the oil, with which they are
anointed, or upon the Sacrifice, by which they are nourished, nothing of them
as orderly is performed. So also S. Chrysostom. By the Cross are perfected
such mysteries, as are performed by us, or appertain unto us: As if once be
baptized, the Crossess at hand, if the mystical food be to be eatin, when
one is to tak^ holy Orders of the Clergy, or at any other divine affair,
the Cross is used. For which cause we make the Cross in houses, upon the
wales, upon the doors, and upon our forheads most studiously. VVhereupon
the Cross is termed a seal or a sign, for that all testaments and statutes
we receive, we seal up with the same, as with the Princes ring or signett,
so that thereunto no harm dare approach. If we order any of the laity, and
consecrate him Priest, after many prayers calling upon assistance of the Holy
Ghost; we seal him up with the sign of the Cross, as it were shutting up
in a safe place the heavenly gift to him imparted. And in process of
discourse, he co^pareth the Cross carried before the Bishop and Priests in
their sacred functions, to a whippe or to a sticklers straffe, that frighteth
away the devils and their temptations. Which ceremony Eusebius. li. 1. de vita
Constant cap. 2^. Hist. l. 9 ca. 8. ^. do vita Constant. 2 c. 78. Lact l. a. c.
26. Ruf. l. 10. ca. 8. Epi. ^naeres. 30 Cyprt ad De^et Athanas. ^ de human.
verbi. Chryso. ho. 5. cont. Iud. Socrat. lib. 7. Hist. Romanu^ labarum finis
laboris, an end of labor Phil. 3. The holy week. S. Augu. epist. 119. cap.
14. Attend igltur Sacratissimu^ triduum Crucifixi. S. Epip. haeres 78 calls
it serumanam pascha^s.
of crossing, and of bearing the Cross, we gather to he approved by Almighty
God, and to have been inspired to the Church from the Holy Ghost, for that
many miracles from heaven have been wroughte thereby, and for the allowance
thereof. So Constantine beheld the Cross as a covenant betwixt him and God, in
promise that he should vanquishe his enemies, as records Eusebius: In this
sign shall thou overcome. The which sign of the Cross, as means of his
victory, he publicly after erected in Rome, and matle it the trophie of his
christianity. Also Eusebius reports, how that miraculouslie one was shelded
in fight against the flying da^tes of the enemy, carrying the ensign of the
Cross. Lactantius, Ruffin, and Epiphanius record, that the sign of the
Cross, has made the oracles, and devils in them mute, and to have broken the
enchantments of evil spirits. Yea Saint Cyprian, S. Athanasius, challenge the
Pagan infidells, to come and experience the same when they will; and they shall
see, that by force of the Cross, the devils fly away, southsayings cease,
coniurations and vvi^ch crafts lie ^^ustrated. Likewise Saint Chrysostom
relates how that this sign of the Cross, broke open certain gates in his
fathers days, avoided poisons, and cured men bitten with wild beasts. So
then as the sign of the Cross, was a token of salvation and happiness, as
writes Socrates with the Egyptians; so now among Christians it is most
effectually a cognizance of truth, of religion, of preservation both of body
and soul. To this consideration and practice, how in devotion may be
equivalent the Protestanies contempt of the Cross, and exclusion of it from
ou^e all ri^e of religion, deeming ^t superstitious to display the same upon
the forheads of those, that be baptized? Inimi^^ Crucis Christ^: Enemies of the
Cross of Christ?

7. And although our use of the Cross be in this sort frequent, and thereof
daily ceremony made in our devotions, yet allott we peculiarly to pieti^ to
wards the Passion of Christ, the yearly season of that time, wherein our
Savior suffered his bitter Passion, as in that week especially before Ester,
called vulgarly the Holy week, reco^mended by S. Augustine and others to our
devotion. From hence also proceeded the ordinary fast of Friday, sometimes
profane, by dedication of it to Venus, as Rupertus Rupert l. 6. de divine off^c.
1. Tertul. conc. Prax. cap. 14 Augu. ^p. ^. 6.
with others Does consider, and now sacred and devoted by religious austeritie
to the passion of our Redemer: the which the Primitive church did consecrate
with fasting, and stationibus, as says Tertullian, pilgrimages or stations.
No man doubeth, writes Saint Augustine, [but that our Savior suffered on a
fridaie: The which day therefore fitly is deputed to fasting.] And as the
Jews on this day provided necessaries for the ensuing Orig. bom. 10 in Leuit.
saboth, wherein they rested, so this life of ours is as it were a friday, to
gather the fructes of the Cross, and to cause our eternal saboth and repose
in heaven. But of the holy week makes mention Saint Epiphanius. [By the space
of six days before Epi. Haeres. 75.
Ester, all the people uses only dry meats, at night eating bred and salt
and drinking water.] To which austeritie and band of tradition opposed them
selves certain heretics even in those days [VVhen we Cathol^kes, says he,
lie upon the ground, use temperance, afflictions, dry meats, prayers,
watchings and fastings, and by holy mortifications procure health of the
soul, they from the morning till night glutt them selves, laughing with scorn
at those, who accomplish this sacred practice of the holy week.] So Aerius an
arch heretic derided such penal compassion with our Savior dying upon the
Cross, as superstitious, and injurious to the liberty of his gospel,
imputing no season to this fast, but as prescribed his fancy, especially on
Sunday choosing to abstain. Wherefore seeing the Protestants abolish that
strict observance, and rigor of piety on the holy week, on friday, and in
the lent, so in ure with us, how do they keep in memory equally the Passion
of our Savior, or procure in themselves the like charity toward so great a
benefitt of the Cross!

8. Finally the very sum and p^th of our religion being the dreadful
sacrifice The Sacrifice of the Mass a memorial of the Cross.
of the Altar, daily celebrated in our churches is a most lively, fresh, and
efficacious remembrance of the Passion of our Savior Christ: when as the
people acknowledge that sacrifice in real presence of the same host, to
signify unto them his death upon the Cross. The divine body of Christ,
reposed upon the Altar, and his sacred blood contained in the chalice in out
ward show and signification of the words of consecration, as it were one
being according to place separate from the other, cry unto us, that Christ
died for us, and shedd his precious blood upon the Altar of the Cross for our
Redemption. Is not Christ himself more than a picture of himself, and so
present upon the Altar in oblation, fit to recall to our minds his one death
and passion upon the Cross? For the Priest, as speaks Saint Cyprian, [in
imitation of Christ, does sacrifice Cyp. ll. 2. ep. 3.
upon the Altar a sacrifice true and full to God the Father, so offering as
before he saw Christ to offer him self] Can the Geneuian bread and drink
equalize this forceible and strong representatio^ of Christ? It can not not.
Why then, with what face do these me^ inculcate unto us the passion of
Christ, his redemption, and satisfaction, so abolishing and rasing out all
memory and devotion thereof? In deed they have specum p^etatis a color of
religion to that purpose. And why? that they may deceive the more potentlie:
yet in effect, virtutem eius abnegant, they break and deny all efficacy of
the same: Iud. 1.
and as Antichrist prescribes, they do endeavor to bury in oblivion the
sacrifice of the Cross, to conculcate the Cross: and only when necessity of
opposition from the Catholic urges to mention the same in words, or upon an
hypocritical show to semme not wholly impious, to turn up the white of the
eye toward the welkine, as it were an outward sign, that their souls mount
to heaven, there to apprehend the passion and mediation of our Redeemer. Let us
try now, which party in contrition of heart, and also amorous affect of will
does most regard Christ upon the Cross, working Charity of the Catholic
toward Christ on the Cross.
there our redemption.

9. Even as the greater fire heateth most, so that immensitie of love, which
upon the Cross did show toward our kind Christ Jesus, does admirablie in
flame any well disposed Ex hac deformitate Rede^toris nostri manauit precium
decotis vestri. Aug. de Bono viduit. cap. 19. Genesis 27. 2. Reg. 18. Can. 5. Genesis
29, 1. Reg. 18.
heart, with the like heat, the which attends still in mind seriously
contemplating the same. This excess by Jerusalem upon mount of Caluarie
exhibitd Christ, as most beneficial to us, so also most amiable; when as the
sun covered in a sackcloth shyneth the cleerer, Jacob attired in rouge
skins, breaths out a most sweet and odiriferous smell; and if ever this
our Absalon was beautiful, now he is in the highest degree amiable, hanging by
the hayres of his love, upon the tree of the Cross: his beauty a perfect
mixture of white and red: white in virginal purity by nature, red in his own
blood, by gift and affection. In which dispense of goodness from our suffering
Redeemer, we do not behold the seaue^ years service of Jacob for the marriage
of Rachell, not the kyndenes of Ionathas toward David, with hasard of loosing
his king fathers good will, not the inflamed desire of Moises to save his
contriemen the Jews by his Exodus 32.
own accurse of himself, but above all these, the te^dernes of piety in out
Savior Christ God and man toward us for our sakes, not expecting any
commodity, exposing his fame Job 1. Matthew. 17.
to such dishonours, and his person to such cruel pangs of horrible death.
Naked with Job he entered the world, and naked despoiled of all ornaments, yea
necessaries, was he forced to abando^ the same. But if the iniurionse world
had bereaved him of no more tha^ it gave him, the loss had been more
tolerable: but to despoile him of that soul, which God the Father bestowed on
him, of that living body fashioned by the Holy Ghost, and by his mother the
virgin, far above the worlds ability, exceed all measure and co^ceite of
iniquity. Base miscreants hale him bound to the judgment seat, of the same
quality others strike him, spitt upon him, rent him as a lasour with whips,
cast him upon the dunghill of men's contempt, nail him to the Cross and kill
him! Nevertheless it was not the Christ died for love.
force of the Philistines that so enfeobled our Sa^pson, that extinguished his
eyes of life, not any cunninng secrecy of policy, wrought him this despighte,
but his own love was his own enemy, his tyrant, his executioner, his Jew,
his Dalila, and bloody Gentile, his bear and his lion, he permitting all such
damages and penalties, for the love of Luc. 9.
our ease, lives, and recovery. Once in mournful tune he lamented and
complained, that the foxes had holes to shrowde them selves in by retract from
trauelle or harmefull pursuit: that likewise the birds of the air enjoyed
neastes for their securities; and yet that he, prince of all, possessed no
house, wherein to cover his doleful head: and now has charity made him
inferior to the fox or bird, taking from him flight to save himself, and
clypping his wings otherwise able to escape what nett on earth might be
displayed by malice or subtilitie of man's machination. Yea this love so
strongly breathed a main vampe out of his sacred breast, that it made him
forgett his own estate, and to turn his cogitations wholly to work good to
his distressed Apostles. VVhereupo^ most effectually he recomma^ded the^ to
his eternal Father, praying: I do not ask thee, that Charity of Christ.
Joan 7.
thou take the^ out of the world, but that thou d^^ preserve the^ from evil.
But thou most loving Redeemer, for their and our sakes wishest of thy Father,
to encounter with death, to quitt this world, to loose thy own delights,
which were sometimes to converse with the sons of me^: thirsting after the
baptism of thy own blood, aflicted, straytened with Prou. 8. Luc. 12.
the eager desire thereof, and speedy occurrence with the Cross: And as if
the Jew and Ge^tile had not been sufficient to procure thee affliction, thou
do permit one part of thy self, to wit the appetite se^sitiue to abhor
death; the other as reasonable to choose it, and so to meet in adverse forces,
that at the joining of contrary arms, they cause in conflict, thy sacred body
to sweat water and blood; I mean those drops of liquour, as precious streams
worthy of a million of worlds* Like as the heart chased and sore embossed,
near the fall, is said to weep pearls and precious stones. Yet amidst all
these waves and agonies, must not by the be forgotten. Saint Peter his fall,
the^ having a care with Marc. 14.
the basiliske, looking upon him, to kill sin in his soul, to melt his heart
with repentance, and cause his holy affection of amendment to gushe out of his
eyes. Hereupon Saint Bernard considering the dignie of person in our Savior,
the dying Phoenix, and also the extremity of misery he endured for our loves,
exclaymeth. [O Christ most Bern. sermon. de pass.
low, and most high, O most humble, and stately, O the contempt of man, and
glory of the Angels!] Therefore the meditation of Christ his passion stirs
us up to charity, and to the love of God, we fynding in the carcass of a dead
lion the sweet honey Iud^. 14.
comb of comfort, of affection, and in him dead we dwelling with the be,
making her allodgement in the comb pasted by the Holy Ghost. How can we be
cold and frosen in hardness of heart toward God, sithence that we behold our
Christ, as it werein the firebushe of the Cross, so inflamed with love toward
us? How may depart from our cogitations his pains on the Cross, his streams
of pure and innocent blood, his agony of death, and expiration of his sacred
soul! No, doubtless the Catholic will be still reposed at the foot of the
Cross, inflamed with the fiery light thereof, as of a pillar shyning in this
our passage to heaven. VVhereupon surprised and amaistered with a loving
charity, we in our selves resemble his sacrifice of affection, and hear him
willingly sing his swans song and melody, thus playing upon his harp of
stretched and well tuned strings.

Flecte genu, lignumque crucis venerabile adora Lactan. Carm de Passi.

Flebilis, innocu^ terramque cruore madentem
Ore petens humili, lachrymis suffunde subortis;
Et me nonnunquam de^oto in cord, meosque
Fer monitus, sectare meae vestigia vitae.
With bended knee to sacred Cross,
To ground bedewed with guiltless blood,
Think honor of thy tears no loss,
To sprinkle that place where grows thy good.
Let heart in mylde d^uotion bent,
Bear me and my prescribed law,
That life according to good intent,
My footesteps may still hold in awe.
The Jew mourned from the heart, understanding of the loss of the Arc, and
spoil of their temple: and shall not we make dole in view of Christ on the
Cross, especially when our own sins and hands have effected so vile and
vnderworthie a treachery against our kyndest Lord and Redeemer! Commendable
and renow^ed was the devotion of the Cardinals of Rome, who hearing that the
holy land was surprised by Saladine, Annal. Baron. An. 1187. page 987.
king of Babilo^, the Cross of Christ to he gained among other spoils, and
used by the Tyrant in mockage of our religion, made a vow never to mount on
horseback in state, until that nature soil of Christ was recovered: and that
for grief at the loss: which vow they kept for the space of Twenty and
seven years. This, this is our Catholic spirit, and the proper tune of a
faithful dove: To which efficacy of charity gives great hinderance the
Protestantish manner of justification, in that it deemeth Can 2.
for expiation and forgiveness of sin, Christ not to be exposed to our
affection and love, but only to our faith; the which solely justifying makes
needless the access of charity, without the which he thinks a man's sins
to be forgiven him, and perfect justice attained. What use the^ of charity,
of the fiery beams of such a virtue: It being no better then a mortal sin
excuseable by faith, and of no necessity to justification, salvation, or for
any reward?

10. Neither does the Catholic in contemplation of the Cross meerlie endeavor
Contritio^ and grief in the Catholic in meditating upon the Pas. Can. 2. Ge
munt in amore colu^bae Aug. Tra. 6 in Ioha^. c 1. Genesis 22. Ephrem. de Pass.
to hear himself in love toward so bountiful, a Redeemer, and his frank
bene^olence thereupon, but also becomes thereby a turtle do^e to mourn and
lament at the view of these our sins, the which gave occasion to such cruel
entreatie toward our Savior Christ. For as once the brethren of Joseph
sprinkled his garmen^ with blood, so did our sins make purple the blessed
body of our Redeemer with his own blood, joined to the loss of his life,
although his divine nature escaped ^ntouched, as Joseph did in person: and
Isaac before, redeemed by the death of a ram taken in the thorns [Let us all
come,] says devout Ephrem the Syrian Deacon, [and wash our bodies with
sobbing tears, for that our Lord the king of glory was delivered to death for
our impieties.] Whose funeralles in dol^ did solemnise nature it self, to
cause in us the Matthew. 27.
greater grief thereat: as the sun cladd in darkness, the earth trembling,
the pillars ^ent and torn. Embrace we his thorns to gore in us the ulcer and
aposteme of unlawful concupiscence, and so by repentance to make issue for the
corruption. Vhereupon S. Pauline. [Better unto me are the wounds of my friend,
the which Christ received Paulin ^p. 2. ad Sever.
that he might heal me, tha^ the desired kisses of mine enemy, by which the
deceitful flesh does flatter me with her delights; indeed my enemy
rather, as a Judas, by a treacherous kiss endeavoring to draw me into
captivity.] Lament we that our offenses have wroughte so great an injury and
despite against Christ, as to have broken the crystal box of his humanity,
receptacle of the divinity, that they have slain the Physicion of the world,
dishonored the mirror of Angels, and murdered the heir of the heavenly
vineyard. When the Patriarch Jacob was to part with his tender Matthew. 21.
and young son Benjamin, thus he spoke to his elder children, who were to
convey him in to Egypt: [If any aduersiue befall him in that country, to
which you travel, you will bring my gray hairs with grief to hell] In like
sort let our most grave Genesis 42.
and mature considerations descend as low as hell, and then we will grieve,
that our sins from thence have called up Satan to contriue the death and
passion of our bountiful Redeemer. And not only our sins were they which
inflicted upon his sacred person these calamities and indignities, patiently
and willingly borne by himself, but also he has pardoned them in us by his
death, and sealed the quittance with his divine blood. VVhereupon just cause
have we to bewail our offenses, so injurious, yea so outrageous against him.
To which contrition and compunction of heart at the The Protestant will not
mourn.
spectacle of the Crucifix, is opposite the justifying faith of a Protestanter,
ordained for mirth, not for myrrh and dolor, for joy and security, not for
tears and dread, having already possessed in a precedent faith all good in
Christ, by him being pardoned all sins, and he made a believer just, and
child of God. VVhereupo^ consequently Luther and Calvin make no accounte of
our Catholic contrition or repentance, consisting of a grief for our sins;
and auouche that their justified person has no reason to lament, being already
in so good an estate, and placed in that freedom of the children of God: but
admit repentance only, the which consists in a purpose for the ensuing time
to abstain from sin: so loath is Antichrist in the Protestanter that
Christians should mourn, or rent their hearts for their offenses The joy then
of their justifying faith disdayneth to weep or grieve in meditation of the
Cross. Before such dole, the Protestant by faith is assured that his sins
are remitted, and so needs no tears or shower of divine waters to wash them
out of his soul; Christ apprehended abundantly sufficing in him to that
effect. Mortificatio^ of the Catholic at the meditation of the Cross.


11. Moreover the Catholic viewing Christ on the Cross by faith, does not
only lament his own evil facts, the which crucified him, but also seeks by
mortification and co^fo^mitie to his sufferings, to chastise sensuality, to
live in austeritie and restraint. Once nature was so well furnished that the
earth of itself in Paradise, through a native Fountain, abounded with all
manner of fruits, but after by sin changed became unto us beneficial only
through the pains of tillage, rain from clouds, and men's toil some
endeavors: so in us during the flower of original justice virtue was practiced
with ease, issheuing from the same, as from an enjoyed spring head, but
sithence the loss thereof, austeritie and pains m^st soke and dry up the
over flowing humor of wanton concupiscence, and we are to become white in
innocence with the lynnen cloth by stroke of a penitential life. To which
good purpose most effectually serves our blessed Savior displayed upon the
Cross; who as it were the serpent erected by Moises, through a faithful
aspect in us, is to give us recure. That serpent in substance no serpent, but a
resemblance thereof; so Christ on the Cross Number. 21.
in show seems a malefactor, a man of sin, yet most pure and innocent. The
serpent was hurtful to the Jews and odious unto them, yet raised alost in
sigure of brass, became amiable and healthful: so the first man Adam was once
damageable unto us, and also sufferances of persecution hateful and
dispriseable, yet now in Christ the second Adam, the same nature is sovereign,
and amaritude in his person highly prised and recommended. Wherefore if we
behold all unlawful pleasure punished in him, and by his Cross reprehended,
how may we entertayne the same, and bear by choice there of defiance to his
penalties and satisfactions? Plutarch does report, that Lic^rgus Plut. in
vita Licurg^.
having enacted most rigid and severe laws for the Lacedaemonians, by a
certayno young man, whose delights thereby were restrained, was stricken upon
the face with a staff, and one of his eyes beaten out with the blow. But he
presently did show his visage so embrued in blood, and his eye lost, to the
people; whereupon the Cittisens were much incensed, and beside the chasticement
of the offender, enacted a decree, that from that time in solemn meetings
there should be no use of any stra^e, in detestatio^ of the forenamed fact.
Much more are we forbidden to make show of the arrogancy of our sense and
flesh in any manner of action, the which has so direfullie by torments and
death entreated our Savior Christ: as teaches Saint Ambrose, all virtues
appearing Ambr. ser. 55.
in our Savior upon the Cross, reprehending and dissuading any vice that may
reign in our flesh. If any man will come after me, says our Savior, let
him deny himself Joan. 11.
daily take up his Cross and follovv me. It is the desire of Christ, that by
compassion, by mortification we conform willingly our selves to his
sufferances upon the Cross. Also S. Peter. Christ has suffered for us,
leaving to you an example, that you ^ollovv his foosteps: Aug lib Sent. Sen. 68.
And therefore Saint Augustine affirms that copious sweat of blood issuing
from the sacred body of of Savior in the garden, to have signified the
diverse martyrdomes in Church, his mystical body, to ensue. To which example
conveniently likewise, the 2. Gor. 9. Col. 1. The Clergy is to be conformed
to the Passion of Christ. Baron. tom. 9 page 11. Council. Nic. 2. act. vlt. Grc.
in cap. 9. Job. The Catholic Phoenix and dove.
Apostle S. Paul bore in his body the marks of Christ his sufferances, and
supplied in his own flesh, that which was vvanting to the sufferings of
Christ. And as all sorts of Christian people are to signify this conformity
of compassion, so especially those it behooves of the clergy: in regard
whereof the holy Curche has ordained sundry things thereunto appertayning: as
that such persons and Christian Nazarites should go weeded in black in side
gearments; profess the glory of Christ his Cross with Saint Peter, bearing a
crown framed upon the head, by cutting of the hairs from thence. The which
mark and note the profane Sacracens in Spain were wont in our Priests and
others to deride and scorn, as reports Lucas Tudensis: and also so did the
impiause heretics in the East called Imagebreakers. But certain, true, and
grateful unto us Catholics is this saying of Saint Gregory: By the Cross
are all redeemed, and it remains, that all, which will with Christ by
redeemed, endeavor to reign with him, that they be crucified. Gaudetque
morifestinus in ^rtum.

The Phoenix toyeth to dye, Claudian. de Phaenice.

Forth with by birth to fly.
Unto which doctrine of mortification, as the effect of faith regarding Christ
on the The Protestant enemy of mortificatio^.
Cross, is ^tterlie opposite a Protestantish belefe of justification. For why
should such rigor be used, if only faith do justify, and these ac^rbities
and mortifications? If justice can not be lost or increased, to what end
serves the pemaltie of the Cross, and the hard usage of the flesh? And
therefore in that we attribute more to this myrrh of mortification, the
Protestanres pronounce, that we know not how to look upon the Cross, how to
gain commodity by meditation thereof, in that only faith justifies, a thing
refused by us; not penance or sufferance with Christ. And hereupon Illit. 1.
par. Glau.
avouched Illiricus, that his contrieman Saint Hierome practicing to the
example of Christ crucified so great restraynte of his flesh and punishment
thereof, not to have known the use of the Cross, the benefitt thereof, or
redemption by Christ. We, say they, behold the Lord on the Cross in liberty
of spirit, not in a womanish affection of sorrow, of commiseration, of
mortification, but in joy of heart, deeming that Christ his tears, his sorrows
may serve; and we in him are to be merry, as assured of our salvation. And to
this end of delighte does he expose him self on the Cross to our viewes, to
apprehend him and his penalites by faith as our harvest, riches and jubilee.
The gospel, the gospel is preached from the Cross, not the law. Assuredly
the Protestant takes for the Cross the profane Idol of Venus, placed where
the Cross was before erected, by the appointment of Adrian the Emperor, to
abolishe the memory thereof by the worship of wanton venerie, as record
Ruffinus and Seuerus Sulptius Ru^^i. l 1. Hist cap. 7. Scuer. l. 2. Hi. page
152. 149.
Here is the Protestantish laughter, although mortal to the soul, as that
of the Sardonians: this is the sugar of his Cross, and the delights of their
pleasing faith to apprehend Christ, and no more a do. Alas, they be enemies of
the Cross, slaves to their own bellies, lovers of worldly carnalities, and
run in brutishe race to their end of destruction, as avouches the Apostle.
We behold Christ on the Cross, to weep and Phil. 3.
lament for our sins, to punish sins in our selves, to abhor sins, as
occasions of so great a dishonor and smart to Christ, to derive grace from
the Cross, to keepet the commandments, to the desire of mortification: The
Protestanter applies the Cross to wickedness, as a lure for iniquity, and a
warrantie for all intemperance: he apprehending all that is in Christ as his
own by faith, it sure before repentance, with out compassion and
mortification, and believing in him obedience, he observes the Luther lib. de
libert. Christ.
commandments, when he violateth them, he keeps them in Christ, when in his
own person he offends bestiallie against them: finally secured of his
justice, that it will never be lost, remains at the sort of the Cross
buried in a fleepe, retchelesse dissolute and wholly defiled.

Hope leueling course to the benefit of justification, acknowledged by the
Catholic, as consisting of a gracious quality in hearing in the soul, aims
at a purpose vvorthie it self, and Almighty God: co^trarivvise the
Protestantish reputation of this grace is not so serviceable to to such a good
affection toward our heavenly benefactor.

CHAPTER. XXIIII.
HAVING hitherto disputed of such virtuous dispositions as are requisite to the
Grace of justification a great grace.
grace of justification, it remains we entreat of this grace it self, and so
make a dew reckoning of the value and worth thereof, for exercising of our
Hope toward Almighty God, giver and author of the same. Doubtless we are to
esteem of this grace, it being the most principal perfection in man from
God, as making him Tit 3.
his child, participiaut of the divine nature, washed from sin, and a
mansion place of the Holy Ghost, as a thing of great worth and de^rest
accounte. Thus therefore do we accept of the grace of ^ustification, according
to the verdite of the sacred Council of Trent, that we deem it not to be
only Remission of sins, but moreover sanctification Council. Taid. Sess. 6. c
6. Justification described.
and renouation of the inward man by a volutarie acceptance or receiving of
grace and holy gifts: vvher^ by a men of one unrighteous, is made just of an
enemy of God, a friend unto him, that according to hope he may be an inheriter
of everlasting life. In which description we place the form of justice not in
any work or man, in any observance of the law, natural, divine, or
positive, but meerlie and preciselie in an habitual grace of quality infused
into a prepared soul by the Holy Ghost, in price and desert of the passion
of our Savior Christ. This point of Catholiked doctrine is proved by all such
places of Scripture, as pronounce in the justification of a sinner the Holy
Ghost to be given, to Joan. 14. Tit. 3.
dwell and reside in man, to be powered into his heart, to wash, cleanse and
purify it to sign and mark it by a divine impression. All which phrases and
forms of speech do demonstrate some quality in a justified person, bestowed
on him, residing in him, and inherentlie perfecting the Image of God in his
soul. He has given us of his own spirit: Joan. ep. 1. c 4 Joan 14. 1. Joan.
^. 2. Cor 1. Romans 8.
we will come to hime, says Christ, and we will make our abode with him.
The seed of God is in him: God has signed us, and given a pledge of the
spirit in our hearts You have received the spirit of adoption of the sons of
God, in which we cry Abba, father: You have been sinners, but you are
vvashed, but you are sanctified, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
the spirit of our God. In regard whereof baptism is called the lauer of
regeneration, in that it purifieth by an infused gift of a justifying grace all
duly baptized, yea children, as avouches S. Augustine against Pelagius: in
whom can not be any actual faith apprehending Tit 3 August. lib. de Baptism.
the externe justice of Christ, and therefore from baptism they receive
inherent justice, as reaches the same Doctor. Also this verity is contested
and assured by all such passages of scripture as report, man by the grace of
justification to be translated from the estate of iniquity to justice, from
darkness to light, from Bel^all to Christ, and to be as says Saint Peter,
Consortes of the divine nature: In that God has bestovved on them most great
and precious promises. Which mutation in man and arrival to so high a 2.
Pet. 1.
quality does import some renouation, and alteration inherent in him; for
that all outward justice imputed has no contraritie with sin, neither does
in deed and act perfect any whitte man's nature, as shall hereafter be
declared. In respect whereof Saint Paul counterposeth justice by Christ, to
original sin by Adam: For as many are become sinners by the disobedience of
one, so by the obedience of one many are made just. No doubt, but the seat
of sin through Adam his fall, is man his soul and will, and therefore the
same was to be freed by Christ from such harm, and in that self same Romans 5.
The fathers avouch justice inherent. Dion. de ece. hi^r. cap. 2 Chry ho de
baptis. apud Aug l. 1. cont. Iul.
place was to reign and command the justice of Christ, through his gift
inherentlie affecting and adorning it.

2. To th^s tenor of belief the Fathers generally have written: namely Saint
Dionyse, calling justification statum an estate of the soul by a most secret
and ineffable operation of God: which estate and permanencie of quality he
affirms to be acquired in Baptism and so must needs be inherent therein and
resident in the soul througe information of form and perfection. We baptize
infants, says Saint Chrysostom, that unto them, being not contaminated with
sin, may be given sanctity, justice, adoption, inheritance to be brethren of
Christ and his members. The which can not be understood of an actual grace in
children, but only of an habitual and abiding benefitt imparted in baptism,
and by the same. Saint Cirill teaches justification to be a certain framing
Ciril. li. 4. Isa. cono. 2.
or fashioning of Christ in a justified soul, by a perfection of beauty and
comelynes therein reforming the image of God: The holy Ghost reforming us by
sanctification in him self. Saint Augustine is most plentiful and pregnant to
approve the same. He avouches Aug. ep. 55. ad Coscu^inum.
children in baptism to receive occultissimam, a secre^ grace, the which the
Holy Ghost, latenter infundit, mystically povvreth in them, and so their
justice is inherent. And generally he affirms, that God iustificationem
nostram etiam intrinsecus operatur, do^th effect intrinsecallie our
justification. He also compares a justified soul unto a torche lightened Aug.
in Ps. 17. L. 2. c^o^tra^ par. men. cap. 14. Tract. 24. In Iahan. cap. 3. How
Christ is our justice.
by God, according to the Psalmist: Thou shall enlighten my lamp: VVereupon
thus he does interpret these words of the Prophet: Judge me O Lord according
to my justice: It is said, according to my justice, and my innocence which is
upon me; as if a burning or lightened lamp should say: Judge me according unto
the flame which is upon me, that is, not by which I am, but by which I shine
kynaled by Allm^ghtie God. Then is justice inherent, against the Protestanter,
because in every one that is just: it is also a gift gracious above nature
from God, against the Pelagians, in that it is not the ability of nature, by
which man is, but by the merciful operation of God. Moreover the same Doctor
does expound in what sense, our justice is the justice of Christ, and his
grace against Pelagius; in that it is an effect and a benefitt graciously
proceeding from the justice of Christ: in which meaning many times the holy
Scriptures and fathers, call our justice the justice of Christ in
contraposition to the justice of free will, by workees, without faith in
Christ, Aug. de Spirt. and lit. cap. 22.
and his especial grace. It is said the charitee of God is povvred into our
hearts; not that charity by which he loves us, but by which he makes us his
lovers; as that justice by which through his gift we are just is termed the
justice of God. Then as charity is inherent, so is also justice; and as our
charity is the charity of God, because an effect thereof, affecting the sold
of man, so is our inherent justice the justice of Christ, not the justice of
nature, the justice of free will, or of the law, for that it is the effect of
faith in Christ, and of his grace freely bestowed. To the same purpose thus
also writes S. Gregory. That is said to be our justice, not that which is
ours of our one, but that, which is made ours by Greg. l. 24. in Job. cap. 7.
divine gift: as we say in our lords prayer: Give us to day our daily
bred, Behold we say it to be our bred, and yet pray that it be given us. It
is made ours when it is received, which also is of God, because taken from
him. So then it is both God his by benevolence, and is made truly ours by
acceptance In like manner in this place we give justice to a beleuer, not
that which he has of himself, but that which being created he received,
in which, being fallen, he would not perseu^rs.

3. The Protestanter pretending a resemblance to magnify and extol the
meritts Protestantiso justice.
of Christ acknnowledgeth no other justice, than that which is formal in
Christ, imputed outewardlie unto a believer by God the Father, traducing
inherent justice of works, as justice of flesh and blood, justice of the law,
and not of grace by a frank gift of Calu. l. 3 Insti. cap. 11. Sect. 9.
Almighty God Some there be of this crew aspiring so high, that they believe
themselves justified by the eternal and essential justice of God imputed unto
them: all though Calvin dislike and reprove such a conceit. Others repute
them selves just, the Calu 3. Instit. cap. 11. Sect 9.
children of God, and pardoned from all sins, by the justice of Christ,
believing that God the Father imputes it unto them VVhereupon Calvin likeneth
faith to a vessel apprehending the promises of God, and the justice of Christ:
so that faith is not justice of it self formallie, but only a means to take
hold of justice in Christ. Ve compare Sect. 7.
faith to a vessel, by which unless we be emptied, and with open mouth do
desire the grace of Christ, we be not capable of him. Color for this opinion
is made from holy scriptures, that term Christ to be our wisdom, our
justice and redemption: as if in us were no formalitie of justice, of wisdom,
of redemption, but only in the justice of Christ apprehended by faith, and
imputed unto us as ours, we possessing what good is in Christ. The trial shall
detect this painted falsitie, and confirm the Catholic verity.

4 I propose this argument: That belief the which affords the more argument
Inherent justice true justice and a greater grace than justice imputative. 1.
Tim. 1.
and reason unto man why he should by charity love Christ for his benefits
bestowed, is the principal: But faith crediting justice inherent, in
comparison to the other faith, agnizing justice only imputed, does render
greater cause o^ charity toward our Redeemer, more extolling his grace;
therefore such a belief is most true and to be preferred. The first
Proposition can not be denied, in that charity is the end of the law, the
perfection of Christianity, and a virtue of greatest esteem: and therefore if
the Catholic belief a^aile more thereunto, than that of the P^o^e^^ant. ^t is
rat^er to be embraced, as more subteable to the gospel, and ^om^ng of Christ,
which was ^o pow^^fier Luc. ^2.
of charity upon the earth. The Minor thus I prove: Justice inherent is
verily and truly justice of a person thereby justified by Christ, and so to
be named in propriety of speech: But justice imputative is no justice at all
in ver^tie of fact, nor to be signed by any propriety of word as iusti^e*
therefore if charity proceed according to the quality of the gift and grace
from the Cross of Christ, our Catholic faith serves to the same
effectually, and nothing at all to such purpose that of the Protestant That
inherent justice is in verity of deed and form justice; and so in property
Can a Protestant deny the Saints in heaven where is no faith to be
^^herent^^e* just*
of speech to be declared, is manifest. First example proves it, ^n that the
Angels were created in justice inherent, and now a^e just by a grace inherent
in heaven: So also were our first parents sanctified in the beginning of their
creation by a quality of justice inherent, before any faith in Christ in them
di^ecte^ to the expectation of a Redeeme^: the revelation whereof unto them
p^es^pposing their sin and f^ll* therefore inherent justice is tr^lie and
propetlie justice. Also reason does eu^den^lie show the same: for inhe^encie
of qualit^e is only the p^ope^ ground of a true and substantial
denom^nation: as a wall ^s truly white, because whitenes ther^in is inhe^ent:
a man is deemed wicked, for his evil action inherent in his will. Ne^^her to
^his effect is there any hinderance in that our justice is the grace and gift
of God: ^or ^ man is truly and prope^lie chast^ and continent, who rec^^ueth
inhe^en^lie from God that grace: truly and properly wise, as notes S.
Augustine, the which in his understanding by Aug i^ Ps. 17.
inherencie of form retayneth the gift of wisdom: truly and properly
charitable, as l^uing God, and believing his promises, when as by inhesion the
soul entertayneth from God his benevolence the f^ruou^ of cha^^tie, and the
light of ^^i^h. Then may one be truly and properly just and acceptable to God
inherentlie, although he take it as a free gift from Almighty God. Truth it
is* answers the Protestant, that inherent justice is true and proper justice,
if there could be found ^nie such qual^tie of that moment and force in man's
soul: But what soever is inherent, as justice of man, ^s a justice Justice in
heaven ^s defamed by the Prote^^ant.
of w^^kes* a justice of the law, prescribed against by the Apostle as flatt
P^^llag^^n^sme, therefore no such inherent justice is to be thought of, but
only the outward justice of Christ, accepted of God for all believers, if it
be apprehended by faith: otherwise all inherent justice not including the
formal justice of Christ for justice, is ^^urious to the justice of Christ, as
the justice of man, and an abandoning of that in Christ, who is our sole
justice and redemption* In this ^^asion sue^lie is n^ substance of judgment
Inhere^t instice ^^ the justice of the* Gosp^ll.
or learning, although to the simple and ignorant somewhat colorable and
hypocritical. For that there is such a quality in man's soul, p^oportionable
in wo^^he framed to the effect of justification through the merit of Christ,
and workmanship of the Holy Ghost, we know by the style and phrases of holy
scriptures, calling justification Tit. 3. Romans 8. Joan. 14* Act. 15.
a cleansing, a washing of the heart, a dwelling of God in man, an infusion of
sanctiti^, which declare some inhering quality bestowed on man. Neither has
the Protestant any reason to call such inherent* justice the justice of the
law, the justice of works, or the justice of the Jews, reproved by S. Paul.
For either it is so be esteemed, for that it is inherent, or for that it is
attained unto by faith, hope, and charity, as disposing works of men. If the
former cause be alleged, then the justice of the Angels, and that of the
blessed, being inherent, is Judicial, and justice of the law; yea the justice
of our Savior, the which is inherent is of the like condition. Truth it is,
that the Jews endeavored to atcheeue an inherent justice, but it was a justice
of works observing the law of Moises, and of nature, without faith in Christ,
and so they sought for their own justice, and not for that of Christ, as well
concludes of them the Apostle. Rom 6.
But our inherent justice is acquired by faith in Christ* alto^ghe not by only
faith, but also by charity, by repentance, and the fear of God: then is not
inherent justice in this respect Judicial Neither ca^ the Prote^^a^te^ judge
it ^udaicall, for that ^t ^s obtained by works of faith, hope, and cha^itie,
as p^eparements thereunto: for so ^f ^an we^e Aug de Spi^^. and (...). (...).
^9*
formally just by the justice of Christ, and ^et before the obtaining of that
iust^ce, he was to dispose himself by faith, hope, and charity, such justice
of Christ also should ^e Judicial, and the justice of the law, which is most
absurd. Moreover in this ^en^e the Protestant can not deny his justice to be
the justice o^ the law, for that to none is imputed the justice of Chaist,
unless first he exercise the work of faith, to wit a work of the
understanding, and also of the will and affection, as he gran^eth himself, and
s^ is he preparatiuelie justified by his works. [True and unfeigned faith,
which the scripture Abb. defense page 68* His absurd Ch^me^^ca^l* faith.
commends for iust^fication, is a mi^t action of the understanding and will
The action of the will implies an affecting, desiring, embracing, seeking of
that which it beleeueth] Then is the justice of a Protestant a justice of
works, that is a justice which is effect of a work in the understanding, and
of many works in the will and affection, as of desire, love, ^oy, feeling, and
the rest; which are different operations in number, kind and nature But here
in this Doctrine is first an absurdity, then an heretical falsitie Mose
absurd is it, unheard in any learned schoole^, nor uttered ever by person of
judgment, that one virtue should consist of so many actions in diverse
faculties of the soul, as in the understanding, and in the will, and having
different objects sorted into sondrie specifications and qualities, should be
remassed and vnit^d into one virtue in substance and defin^tion; and that to
the virtue of faith, whose essence is reposed in assente of the mind and
intelligence. Good God, what base ignorance is it to say, that one and the same
virtue believes for authority sake, loves, ioyeth, desires, embraces, as
the sweet of goodness apprehended! If all these actions be not Only faith
^o^th not justify according to the Protestant.
included in the definition and natural essence of says* but be effects only
thereof, as they be indeed, what ignorance is it to define the cause by the
effect, and to pronunce that faith is a mixed action essent^allie importing such
effects from them so distinguished? O^ if the works of the affection be
external to faith, and ^e^ are necessary to justification, only faith does
not justify; but also love, desire* feeling, loving, embracing, and such
affections of the will, contrary to their own posit^on, that only faith
justifies. And if he grant, that faith justifies, because from faith issues
the l^^e of God, and of his righteous^es, and then man to be iu^^ified, we
accord with him. But why ^hen is our justice the iust^ce of works, of the ^
we, and Judicial? His heresy consists in this, that he puts no
distinct^on betwe^^e faith, charity, or hope: for if faith be a mixed action,
^^porting an affe^^ of ^he mind, and also a desire and love of God and his
commandments, and that essentiallie; faith shall not be distinguished from
hope and charity, contrary to the Apostle: Now these three remain, faith,
hope, and 1. Cor. 13*
charity; the greater of them is chari^^e. And that his faith is necessarily
conjoined to charity, or to the desire of God his justice, I have proved it
false, and shall more effectually perfome it hereafter. May not sir, a
faithful man sin in concupiscence, and desire that which is contrary to the
object of faith? VVher is then the holy feeling, desire, and embracement of
justice? Yea he will con^esse in a beastly Theology* that the Princes of the
Jews, yea the Apostles abandoning Christ, which loved the praise of men, more
than the glory of God* aduersal^uel^e to the commandment of God and nature,
yet that they were faithful men, and loved God, although they had a weak
faith, and a weak love, yet sufficient^ie were furnished thereby to
justification. Lo the large raynes of an imputative justice! Thus let it
remain proved, that inherent justice is true justice, according to the thing
it self, and also propriety of speech; and that it is not a justice of
works, of the law or Judicial: Yet it is a justice, say they, savoring the
heresy of Pelagius. Let it be examined.

5. It can not be denied, but the heresy of Pelagius was opposite to the grace
of Catholic inherent justice against Pelagius. Augu* lib. de Great* Christi
cap. 30.
Christ, both actual and also habitual, to wit against that grace which the
Catholic avouches as necessary to keep the commandments, to live a
christian life, and also against the inherent grace, which we repute as the
form and life of ius^ification. As concering the former, he taught that man's
free will without all inspired succors of grace might believe, hope, and
love, as is requisite to salvation: and what grace in Co^. Trid. Scss. 5. 6.
cap. 6. Aug. l de gra. Christ. cap* 31. De peccator. merit. c. 9. 10. M^n a^e
justified by ^n hidden com^unication and inspiration of a spiritual grace*
which justice is not that whereby God is just, but that which is in man by
God De gra* and lib. ^^t. cap. 12. Tract 26. in Johan. cap. 6. Aug* l de not.
and great* ca 71. ^e Spir. and lit. 17. cap. 26. Epi* ^^0. ca. 30. Iust^ti^, qua
De^ numere iusti sumus, significatur in Psalmo. Cap 17. Cap. ^0. ^ap. 25.
this kind was bestowed mercifully by God upon man, he said it was merited by
works of natural ability; the which two positions we condemn in him as
i^^^ious and heretical. As concering the other grace of iustificat^on, the
Protestant is igno^anly malicious, ascribing to us his error, sithence that
flatly in express terms as Pelagius denied all grace of necessity, so also
habitual grace of justification, reposing the same in the works of the
virtues wroughte by the forces of man his natural faculty; whereupon Saint
Augustine thus does worthily charge him with his heresy, and free us from
the Protestantish calummation, and impeacheth the ^^ed^t of the Protestants
themselves. This grace by which we ar^ iu^tified, that is whereby the
charity of God is povvred into our hearts by the holy Ghos^e, which is given
unto us, could I never find in the vv^yting^ of Pelagius and C^l^stinus
confessed as it ought to be. Thus Saint Augustine reposeth i^stification in
habitual charity formallie inhering in man's soul, affirming Pelagius to have
denied the same; and so by this testimony are we opposite to Pelagius,
acknowledging inherent justice, and the Protestants themselves are proved to be
Pelagians, with him disallowing of the same justice inherent And that to this
charity habitual infused and inherent, S. Augustine does attribute
justification, is manifest otherwise by his words, saying. Perfect charity is
perfect justice: When cha^itie is povvred into the heart, it is the law of
faith, and by love quikening the spirit: adding that the office of this grace,
is to adorn the Image of God in us, and that sin therein is to be cured In
this sense he interprets the Apostle affirming good Christians to have the
law of God written in their hearts, to wit habitual charity there inherent,
as the grace of true justification. In the old law, says he, justice was
engraven in tables of stone, vvh^reby wicked men should be afrighted, here
the law is given internallie, that they may be justified. That was written
without the man for his terror, this is written in man, that i^t^rnallie it
may justify him. He also affirms the finger of God so writing, to be the
sp^r^t of God, and the law written, which is justice, to be charity powered
into our hearts, man made thereby, Dilector per viuisicantem spiritum, a lover
of God through the quickening spirit, which is Justice and righteousness
inherent. Remain it therefore proved, that justice inherent after the
Catholic rite is true, real, and proper justice in fact and deed, and also
according to ordinary sense of speech, nothing appertryning to the justice of
works, or of the law, condemned by the Apostle, neither to be any thing
defiled with the heresy of Pelagius, it importing justice inherent a free gift
of Almighty God, through Jesus Christ, not deserved or merited by any
precedent endeavor of man, as defines the sacred Council of Trent. The which
Doctrine highly aduanceth and extolleth also Council. Trid. Sess 6. cap. 6.
Justice inherent comme^d^th the m^^its of Christ.
the merits of Christ our Savior, that from thence it accepts of a true,
real, and proper justice, and such a justice, as we must needs confess God
to have effected in any, whom he should perfectly justify, as he did in his
own son Christ Jesus, in the Angels, and in our first parents, who all were
justified inherentlie by the quality of habitual grace, or charity. For what
more noble and absolute form and manner of justification can be imagined, than
such a gift inherent, whose formal effect is to make the subject thereof just
and gracious to God, as hear in the fire inherent rendereth it hot, light
in the sun brighte and shyning* w^sedome in the mind sage and prudent? And
as in this our esteem the benefitt through our Redeemer is the greater, more
absolute, and excellent, so does our charity for so high a degree of
benefitt and redemption, return the greater love and mo^e efficacious*
acknowledgement of such a grace and favor, magnifying the Redeemer his meritt
in so notorious and goodl^e and effect and impression, as is the justification
of a sinner by a quality inherent and permanent in his soul. If the son of
God, says our Savior to the Jews, has a^^^^red Io^n. 8.
you, vere l^ber^estis, you are truly d^l^uered* It res^eth now we make
demonstration, that the justification Protestantishe by an imputative iu^tice
to be at all no benefi^t or commodity by Christ, but rather a profanation of
his Cross, and abuse of his grace to vanity and turpitude. Proceed we.

6. It is impossible, contrary to the nature of things, and not conceiuable by
the understanding Justice impu^^tine cannon be conceived true justice.
of God, in that false in object, and repugnant to all nature, that man should
truly and in deed, remaining a sinner either in act, or estate o^ si^ne, be
just by the outward justice of Christ, or thereby made gracious or acceptable
unto Almighty God: therefore such Protestantish justice is not true and
d^u^ne, but rather erroneous, heretical, and Antichristian. For the
intelligence of the anteceedent, we must distinguishe three sorts* of justice
in our Savior Christ; the first concerns the personal union, the which the
Greek Fathers call the sacred oil of divinity, peculiar to Christ, What
justice of Christ may be impu^ed. He^^^h. in 6. c. E^od. Dam. lib. 4. Psalm 44.
as perferred thereby before all his brethren and participiants, according to
the Psalmist: the second is grace habitual and inherent, such as Catholics in
an inferior degree maynteine to be found in all persons just and sanctified:
the last is contained in his actions, as in his charity, obedience,
humililitie, continence, mercy, and penalty for us upon the Cross. Now
examine we whether all these three kinds of justice, or any of them can be
imputed to a sinful man, or make in truth and verity him just, honest and
innocent. First therefore it is impossible, incredible, and most absurd, that
the union hypostaticall and personal should be imputed to any, or judged by
Allmight^e God to imparte unto man in truth and verity any formal effect or
denomination. For in respect of this union, if imputation were sufficient, as
the Protestan^er makes it in case of justification, then in virtue of* such an
imputation might every one to whom that imputation is made, be in deed and
name the natural child of Union hypostaticall can not be imputed.
God, substantially and personally united to the divinity, as is found in
Christ; be also powrable to work miracles, to institute Sacraments, to redeem
the world, which to conceit is most^e monstrous and exorbitant. Then farther
thus I argue: If the personal union in our Savior Christ, his infinite
wisdom, his knowledge, his power of excellency, can not be imputed to any,
and perfome that the party to whom such imputation is granted be truly the
son of God, wise, intelligent and redemptiue, neither can any justice in
Christ, only in him inherent, be so imputed to man externallie, as that in
verity it render him just and holy; in that the reason for impossibility of
the former imputation is grounded upon the distraction of the form from the
subject, to which the foreign imputation does appertain; as for that the
personallvnion in Christ, his infinite power and wisdom being only
inherenthe in this one person, can not indeed re^de: a man participant of
their formal effects: therefore in that the justice of Christ is solely in
Christ, and not inherent in man, it can neither by any imputation in truth and
deed cause him to be just, or that the judgment No man just; in fact and
truth according to the Protestant.
of God should deem him just. We must therefore suppose, that the judgment of
God does not efficientlie make a man ^ust, but because rather that man is
just, and a true object of that judgment, therefore Almighty God judges him
just. As when Almighty God judges one to be a sinner and damnable, he is
not made of that quality by the i^dgement of God, but because so it is in the
thing it self, therefore is it so judged by his divine understanding. Likewise
when he judges an Angel or man to be perfect, beautiful, and of good
understanding, the judgment does not effect these p^oprieties, but presuppose
their truths, otherwise caused by his work of creation and providence; no
more than in regard of man, snow is white, because so judged by him, but for
that in fact and realitie of form whitenes inhereth in snow, true it is, that
snow is white, and therefore is it so adiuged: upon which Doctrine I make this
inference: But the external justice of Christ is not in realitie of fact and
deed the justice of man, or he thereby in truth of thing and object, before
(as we spreake according to humane co^ceite) the judgment of God have access,
is rendered just and holy, seeing that truth of any proposition affirming one
thing as form of an other subject, thereof can not arise without inhetencie
of one in the other, and so by a formal combinatio^ of them both: for
example, in virtue of fact and deed, an ignorant man can not be learned;
unless he have learning inherent in his soul: Yea it were blasphemy to
attribute a judgment to Almighty God of falsitie, which is when the thing it
self is otherwise than it is judged by the act of the understanding; therefore
seeing that in verity of deed and fact an ignorant person is not learned by
the learning of an other, without all erudition in his own soul; and it
should be an erroneous judgment to judge a rusticke as learned and wise as
Aristotle; so also in that according to fact and deed a sinful man and one
offending in act damnablie, can not be just and righteous, deuoide of it in his
own soul, by the outward justice of an other, the Protestanter is not only
false, but also blasphemous, making God to judge an offendant in act just,
being not in deed and fact of thing so qualified. Farthermore when the holy
scriptures lenounce a believing and a penitent person just, holy, amiable to
God, I inquire whether in the letter be propriety of spe^che, together with
truth in the object and thing signified, or no? To say that the text
transgresses in propriety of speech, were to empaire the authority of the
holy Ghost, as a recorder only serving to deciue and abuse our
intelligences; and to affirm that in the thing it self there were no such
verity, is blasphemy, making the scriptures to affirm that, which is not a
parterei in the thing it self. Then must he grant, that man is just indeed, in
vertie of fact, with as great truth and propietie as the snow is white, the
sun resplendent, and therefore that truth being avouched by scriptures, in
the^ with verity, is also found propriety of words and speech. But I have
proved, that without full inherencie there can be no truth a part ^ei in the
thing it self, and for that cause truly and in deed no man is capable of
denomination from the union hypostaticall, from the infinite wisdom and power
in our Savior Christ: and for example a parterei in the thing it self a cole
is not as white as the snow, or hell a partere^ so glorious as heaven by any
imputation: therefore the Protestanter, inducing an imputative justice without
verity and substance of form, attributes falsitie together to the words of
Almighty God, also to his divine judgment, who erroniouslie writes and
judges that man is just, holy and innocent. Here beyond the pride of
Pelagius is transported the Protestanter to the disgrace of Christ his merits,
acknowledging no justice in man, or that man is truly just a part rei with
verity of object and substance: man to be no more just by Christ than the
devil is, if to him the innocence of Christ were imputed; no more just than
was Lais continent, to her imputed the chastity of Susanna; no more just, than
Absalon 2. Reg. 18.
was dutiful, to him being imputed the service of Ioab; no more just than a
black Moore is white, to him being imputed the hue of a Germane. O monstrous
doctrine of Antichrist, thus to reduce the price of the Cross, justification,
to a shadow, to a vanity, to nothing, to a chimera, yea to a falsite and
delusion!

7. Now as concerning the habitual justice of Christ, neither can it be
imputed to Ha^ituall justice in Christ not imputuble to man.
man, or because of his justice in any verity of fact or deed: which thus may
be proved: The union hypostaticall in Christ, or his infinite wisdom and
power can not be imputed to man, or exhibit him the natural child of God,
wise and virtuous, as has been entreated, therefore neither can any habitual
grace by imputation serve to the like effect of justification. The consequence
is equally allowable with the antecedent, in that the forms imputed are in
like sort external, and not inherent, and therefore semblably not fit to
work an^e verity of fact, or true denomination in man^, to whom they are
imputed. Neither can it be imagined, that a quality inherent, for example sake
in John, can render Peter truly endewed or qualified by the same, especially
when in Peter are found qualities of clean opposite and contrary natures. As
if Peter be ignorant, he can not be learned by the habitual learing in John,
in that an habit is a peculiar grace and perfection only of that faculty,
wherein it is inherent, VVittaker l. 2. de peccat. or. cap. ^.
and by whose acts and employments it is acquired Then seeing that all men by
the Protestants confessions are actuallie and habituallie sinners, worthy of
damnation, and so in opposition to the justice of Christ, it is impossible that
thereby any man should be just and innocent in truth and in fact: for otherwise
the one and self same subject should be a seat of extreme contrarieties: as
one man at the self saine time to be habituallie unjust and habituallie just.
And who can think that either in substance of the thing it self, or in any
property of speech one in the estate and habit of adultery, can be
continent, or so named by the habit of that virtue residing in an other?

8. Come we now to the actual justice of Christ, importing the price of our
redemption, and tric we also whether by imputation thereof man in quality of
an actual sin, can be justified and made thereby truly acceptable unto
Almighty God. Thus I argue: The actual justice of Christ, as his obedience,
his humility, his patience, his Christ actual justice no^^m putable ^o (...)
fortitude, his charity, his virginal integrity, as they are infinite in
worth and value, so are they the peculiar perfections of his own person, and
of those faculties, by which they were produced, therefore by no imputation can
they make any man truly and indeed actuallie obedient, actuallie humble,
actuallie patient, actuallie courageous, actuallie charitable, or actuallie
chaste and contine^nt The Antecedent is manifestly true, in that there is a
relation be^wixt the faculty and the vital operation thereof, the one
limited to the other; as the actual vision of this man his eye, is only a
vision of himself, and can not make an other actuallie by the same vision to
see the same thing: The actual knowledge of Aristotle, can not make actuallie
an ignorant person Philosophical o^ intelligent. The consequent as truly
deduced, so true in it self, and to be admitted. Moreover to the same issue of
conclusion thus I dispute. In all men justified by Christ are extant actual
sins, clean opposite to those actual virtues in Christ, as acknowledges
the Protestant, making the just man continually to sin VVittaker l. 2 depec.
or. c. 2.
in concupiscence, to the violation of the whole decalog; as actual
incontinencie, actual disobedience, and the like, therefore to them can not be
imputed the actual continence and obedience of Christ, as thereby they might
indeed, and according to the judgment of Almighty God, be rendered
actuallie continent and obedient. The Antecedent is admitted by the Protestant:
for as the just do actuallie sin, so offend they in opposite vices to the
actual virtues in our Savior. The consequent may thus be proved. This man
actuallie trespassing against justice and chastity, can not be a just, honest
and continent man, if to him were imputed the actual justice and chastity of
some other good person: for so a knave should be a knave, and yet an ^onest
man, virtuous and vicious in deed, chaste, and in deed adulterous, in fact a
thief, and in truth an upright dealer, the which to imagine is most absurd
and monstrous. And according to the contrary sense, if imputation be so
strong, as the Protestant would, then the most honest man in the world in act
of virtue, might be as sinful in act and detestable to God, as the devil
himself, if to him were imputed his offenses: and contrariwise the devil
actuallie blaspheming might be a devout person, if the actual piety of
Christ or of sum other good Christian were to him imputed. O vile conceit of
an heretical brain! where then in the imputative justice of the Protestanter,
is there either truth of fact and deed, or property of speech, yea any
verity? Is an actual offender actuallic just by the actual justice in
Christ? auant insolent pride and brainsicke falsitie. Is it not extreme and
more then Pelagian pride to Protestants exceed Pelagians in arrogancy, they
making the^ selves in possibilittie as just as be the Angels. Aug. l. 3. cont.
2. epi. Pel c. 7. Rob. Ab. def. page 425. Is the Pope Antichrist be leeuig
Christ to be God? the^ what is Rob. Abb. denying it? Au. Enc. c. 40 Non
gratiasilio, sed natura in vnitate personae modo mirabiliter incffabili
^diunctus and concretus. Arist. lib 1. Metaph. ca. 1.
pronounce of himself, as euetie Protestant does, that he is as just actually,
not only by Pelagian possibility, as Christ is, and consequently infinitely
just, as he is; as amiable to God the Father, as he is, as well deserving as
he, and finally as precious and holy as the Prince of all holies? To avoid
which inconueuience a Protestantish minister enters rank with the Turk, and
denies the actual justice of Christ imputed to a believer to be infinite in
value and esteem, because it is the righteousness of a finite creature, which
is not capable of that, that is infinite: Where first he denies the
redemption of man kind and full satisfaction for our sins, in that no other
ransom could condignelie deserve grace for man, but only that which is
infinite: otherwise a pure creature might have redeemed man as rigorously and
justly as Christ did, in that there is no repuguancie, why any finite desert
might not be found in a pure creature by the grace and gift of God; which to
auouche is blasphemy and an Antichristian herefie against the blood of Christ
and his Incarnation. Then he plays the Turk and denies Christ to have been
the natural and substantial Son of God by personal union of two natures in
one person or subsistence: for if he had granted this union, then had he
admitted infinity of actual justice and merit in Christ, for that actions be
suppositorum, that is of persons, according to the Philosopher; and so the
infinity of worthiness in the person working must needs imparte to the work
an infinite price and value: therefore the minister denying this infinity in
Christ, thereby denies him to be the son of God, or personally God, calling
his works the works of a finite creature, as if Christ were a pure creature,
and no otherwise God, than by a favor or accidental gift of grace, as
Nestorius once defined, and now the Turk accounts. This is he that will
needs brand the Bishop of Rome with the note and name of Antichrist, whilste
he himself disgraceth Christ in the highest degree, and that in his divine
person, in the purple robes of our humanity, and in the moment and worth of
his blood and passion. The impious and blasphemous minister thus refuted, I
return for conclusion to the argument: No mortal man can be infinitely
just, or equal to Christ in justice, therefore may he not be just by the
actual justice of Christ to him imputed. Quantallbet cuim homines (...)
praepolleant, nond^^ sunt aequales Ange lis Dei. Angu. lib De Dono Per^eu. cap.
3. Imputative justice favors sin against the me ^^^^ of Christ. Tit. 3.
Romans ^. 2. Cor 6. 1. Joan. 2.


9. Lastly against this justice imputative I propose this argument. The
Catholic justice inherent takes away sins, is repugnant to sin, deterreth
from sin; whereas the justice imputative of a Protestant, abides with any
sin either actual or habitual, emboldeneth to sin, therefore that is
Christian justice, and this Antichristian heresy. That Christian justice is to
abolishe sin, we gather by the phrases of bolie scriptures calling
justification a washing, a clear sing, and purifying of men's souls. Also that
the same Christian ipstice is not to consist as copesmate with sin, we
collect out of the same places, and also from others, making an opposition
betwixt sin and justice, as betwixt light and darkness, the seed of God, and
the devil. But if justice be external in Christ, not inherent in man, not
renewing inherentlie his spirit, it can not clean exclude from thence sins,
as darkness does not expel light, unless it affect the same subject which
light did before. VVhereupon seeing that the justification Protestantish does
not exclude sin from out the soul, it may be demand how a man then is
truly justified from them? They answer, that man is just, not Protestantish
justice of law examined. Rob Ab. def. page 423.
after the formal manner of quality inherent, but in course of law and
judgment, in that God the Father takes the justice of Christ for the justice
of an offendant man; as in law one is just and pardoned by the Prince, exempted
from penalty, not liable to any action and process of accusation, without
farther mutation. But this answer implies an absurdity, and a blasphemy.
Absurd it is, that God should accept the knowledge of Christ for excuse and
expiation of culpable ignorance in an other, for so all sins and villainies
might by only faith be pardoned without charity, repentance, amendment, and
honesty. Then how can a luxurious person be accounted just by God through the
chasti^ie in Christ; When as Almighty God sees that such justice can not
make him just, or an honest man actuallie offending against chastity? The
blasphemy consists in this, that he compares justification by the sacred
blood of Christ, to the forgiveness of a trespass by the Prince or magistrate
toward a transgressor. For the Prince may by his royal power exempt a
traitor, a thief, from process in law against him, o^ from punishment, yet
the party trespassing being thereby not rendered any whitte the better, or the
honester man, or in deed just. So then if man be only so justified, in that
God decrees not to punish an adulterer, well he may free him from pain
hereby, yet notwithstanding in fact is he not just, in that he remains
actuallie and habituallie a transgressor, a villain, a knave, and well worthy
the gallows. Is then Christian justice in form of law no better, but a bare
immunitie from pain, without all adieyned perfection to the person so
justified, he remaining still in act and habit unjust, ungodly, unrighteous,
only delivered from the rigor of law and pain due to such a transgressor? Is
not here freedom of sin with this lawlesle manner of justification, when a
man actuallie sinning in disobedience is justified from that crime by the
obedience of Christ? O Christ, has Antichrist in the Protestanter wrought thy
justice, the price of thy Cross, to this shadow and falsitie! Are Christians
justified, because only excused from pain or terror of judgment, otherwise
plunged in act and habit in all wickedness: As the Prince does justify
sometimes a knave remaining in estate or act of knauerie? Does God through
Christ justify a sinner after no better a fashion, but that indeed he is
still unjust, wicked, and just only in freedom from chasticement? And how is
a wicked man in act of mortal sin free from punishment, Romans 6. 1. Joan. 2.
seeing that according to scripture, the rew^d of sin is death, and he that
sinnthis the child of the devil? No, no, we Catholics against the vile,
base, and Antichristian heresy of the Protestanter, purt a difference betwixt
justification by a Prince, and tha^ by God throught the merits of Christ: that
the Prince justifying an offender* makes him never a whitt the better* or the
honester man, but that still after such justification he may remain a knave:
Whereas contrariwise justification from God alteteth the party offendant,
causes him to be justin deed, and gracious Apoc. (...). Joan. 14.
to himself, it washes him in the blood of the lamb, it purifieth him and
imparteth unto him of his own spirit, rendereth him a new creat^re of
regeneration and ad^ption of childeship with himself, and toward the
inheritance of his heavenly kingdom. If God should exempt the devils
persisting in actual blasphemy from punishment, were they good Protestant,
just indeed, and as Christianlie just, as is the best Protestant? O
Christ^^nitie auiled and extenuated to a lewd fancy of a foul imagination!
Is Antichrist at Rome, and not rather in the brains of the ministers!

10. Nevertheless they fall to objections from a typical place of similitude,
and How is Ad* his sin im. pu^ed to all.
say, If Adam his offense be imputed to every one in particular of his race as
guilty thereof, why may not in like ^ort to each believer be imputed the
justice of Christ* But this opposition that it may be clearelie solued in the
understanding of the Protestanter, is needful only some explication, and a
little learning, to be by him in mind comprised. Let him therefore know, that
after two manner of means, one may suppose imputation of Adam his offense to
all of his posterity: the first by efficiencie, in regard of the will and and
cause, the which produced the same: then in respect of denomination, such
offense truly and indeed making man a sinner, to whom it is imputed. And
accordingly as we define of imputation by efficiencie, must we think of the
other by denomination, that being the former and ground of this the later and
consequent. Therefore Adam his sin is imputed to every one of his posterity
according to efficiencie, not that every one in his proper and singular person
is cause of that sin, as is evident, in that the sin was committed long
before our conceptions and natiuities; but in that Adam was a public person,
the head of our mankind, received grace not only for himself, but
condicionallie also for all his posterity, we hau^ng a debt and obligation
together with possibility in him to persist in grace and favor with
almighty God, sinned in him, as he disobeyed personally, and as speaks the
Apostle in whom all have offended: that is the efficient cause of sin was
Adam his will, as a general and Romans ^*
a capital will, in which we had sufficiency and obligation Lot to have
transgressed. So then as Adams sin was ours in efficiencie, not of our
particular persons, but in regard of his generality, we are denominated
sinners by the same sin, not in our own persons, but in, the person of Adam
in whom we were, as in our head and fou^ta^ne of all humane nature: We sinned
in him, and are named sinners in him, being neither the one nor the other in
our singular and proper persons. For if the offense of Adam should be imputed
personally unto us, then were our original sin actual sin, not
original, and worthy of hell fire, not only of poena damus of the want of
the vision of Almighty God, contrary to the definition of the divines, and
consent of the fathers. But the Protestant must admit, that the actual
obedience and charity of our Savior Christ is imputed to each one in
particular, which believes, as his proper and personal justice, and so the
comparison is defective, and therein is a falsitie colourablie deduced from a
verity: whereas the Scriptures do not barely say, that men are just in
Christ, but that they absolutely are just, are sanctified and purified by the
holy Ghost imparted unto them, auouching expresslie on the other side in
respect of Adam his transgression, Romans 5. Aug. 16. Ciui. c. 27. Rob. Abb.
Defen. p. 401.
men to have sinned in him, In whom all hau^ sinned, as expounds this place
S. Augustine.

11. Then enters in an other similitude most false, exe^rable and
blasphemous, Christ not being a ^inner, yet was reputed as a ^inner for our
sa^^s, and for the sin^e, that (...) us: so we not being in our selves just
and righteous, yet are reputed just and righteous for his sake, and for the
righteousness that is in him. We must grant unto the minister, that according
to the phrase of Scripture our sins were imputed to Christ; first that our
Savior sometimes takes upon him the person of How Christ is a sinner. Matthew
27. Psalm 21. Romans 5. 1. Pet. 3. Ose. cap. 4. C^^ill. ^bid. August. lib. de
peceat me^it. c 32. l 3. con^. 2 Epi pel. c. 6. Ep^. 120 ca. ^0.
a sinner, and speake^h of himself in our behalf as a sinner: Mygod, my god,
why have thou forsaken me? ^ar from my health are the words of my sins:
Then for that he sus^ayned the pains of death due to our sins* in similitude
of sinful flesh bearing our sins in ^o^poresu^, that is by pains
inflicted upon his sacred and divine body dew to our sins. According to
which sense thus speaks S. Augustine: God therefor unto whom we are
reconsiled, made him sin for us, that is a sacri^ice, by which our sins
are ^orgi ^en: ^ic^^se sacri^ices for sins are called sins. But most
ab^ominable is it to affirm, that out sins made him formallie a sinner,
either according to truth of speech, or verity of fact and deed: and in
that all men are just and truly just by some form either imputed or inherent,
the comparison has in the parts no proportion or resemblance. Man are just and
holy in verity of the thing it self, otherwise that judgment should be
false, which should esteem them just: they are also amiable to God, worthy to
be his children, and his coheires. Therefore if Christ in the same guise Apo^.
3.
was sinner and unjust in verity of fact and in deed, he was also odious to
God the Father, reputed by him as worthy of ethernall damnation, the which to
write or conceit my soul and hand trembles. VVhereupon thus I re^o^^e the
argument, and return his blasphemic upon his own face. Our Savior Christ
was not a sinner in adultery by man his adultery, nor thereby odious to his
eternal Father; therefore neither now is man just by his justice, and gracious
to the ^yes of Almighty God. The Antecedent is thus proved: The will of
Christ neither in his own person committed sin, nor in us as general heads
of his nature, as we make reckoning of Adam: therefore as he in no sort sinned
actuallie or originallie, so neither was he in any manner a ^inner in verity
of thing and fact. Yet they say, ^o make him a sinner sole imputation was
sufficient. It is most false: for if to one employed in actual chastity
should be imputed the loosenes of an other badlie demeaned, were that chaste
person sinful thereby through^ the will of the imputatour, without all
ground or cause in the things themselves? Loathsome absurdity! VVhereupon
sithence that in our Savior Christ did abound all manner of actual virtues
and justice, the contrary vices of wicked persons could not be imputed to him,
or he made thereby sinful, odious to God, or worthy of eternal damnation.
Then the consequent is manifest, in that the minister placed a similitude
betwixt the sins of the world imputed to Christ, and his justice imputed to
man; and so none are truly just, truly gracious to God, truly worthy of
heaven. Moreover thus I argue: Christ was only a sinner enduring the pains
of sin, and so indede no sinner: for an honest man in way and act of
honesty Cirill. Alex. Epist. 39.
may satisfy for a knave, therefore men are no otherwise just than remaining
in act and habit most unjust, yet for Christ his sake are exempted from pains
due unto offenders. The antecedent perhaps will scarce have ^ree passage with
the minister, in that he compares Christ to one that by promise takes upon
him to discharge an other man's debt: making Christ to have undertaken to
satisfy for our sins, and to bear our sins vpop himself not onley in
their penalty, but in their guilt and crime. For as the undertaker or suertie
is truly and formallie a debtor, the obligation derived from his fidelity in
promise and covenant, so^s, by this accounte, Christ for us a sinner with debt
and dignity of sin, worthy obliged to answer for us suffering death: and in
this sense is avouched by the minister outrageous blasphemy against Christ,
pretending like a false broker for Antichrist, to extol and magnify his
deserts. Truth it is, that one man may become a debtor in place of an other in
virtue of some promise, contract, or inheritance; and so our Savior be a
debtor to God his Father* in that he vowed and accepted personally to satisfy
for us to his death and passion. For example, if Robert contracted a debt of an
bundred pound by his fact which was his sin, as by ^ money, or such like his
friend Richard being innocent and an honest m^n, might take upon him the debt,
but ^o^ the sin, in that a debt might arise in him by obligation o promise:
but whereas sin grows from a voluntary action contrary to reason, the
honesty of Richard will not suffer him to be a sinner: so Adam contracted a
debt for himself and us all, of eternal damnat on by his sin: comes Christ
to discharge Christem pronobis pecca tu^ ^ecit Deus, cui reconsi ^and^ s^mu^:
Hoc est sacrifici^^ pro pe^catis petcuod reconciliati valexemus. Aug In Each.
c. 41
and satisfy both for the one and the other, not that he is sinful, but
only obliged to satisfy when he promised for our ransom as sacrifice
acording to S Augustinn for sin, to dye upon the Cross, and to surrender a
thing to his Father more precious and amiable then was Adams sin
dishonorable. But let him tell us, how Christ discharged our debt of pain, he
dying only a temporal death upon the Cross, and we worthy of eternal
d^mnation in hell, espeiallie sithence the minister makes the value of his
charity and de^ert only finite and included in a certain compass of worth
and value. Then if the minister will auc^de blasph^ mie, he must grant, that
Christ was a sinner, and a debtor in no other sense, than in that he endured
torments and death due unto sins, promising his eternal Father so do do;
and then to maynteine the proportion of his similitude, also must he admit,
that Christan justification is nothing else but a bare remittance and acquitance
from all praine of hell and damnation; so that men are just, because not
punishable by the benevolence of Almighty God; just after the law fashion;
the which indeed is no justification, in that a man may be exempted from
pain, and yet be a most grievous offender in act; how then just indeed, if
in fact moset unjust, wicked and abheminable? Moreover it is against the sacred
and just providence of Almighty God, thus to justify transgres^ors after the
Protestantish rite; yea it is blasphemy to say, that God does justify one
that is in 1. Joan. 3.
act of robbery, of villainy, in the same moment of time, in which the sin
is committed, Isai. 30. Ezech. 34.
in that such a one is of the devil, hateful to God, who does not justify
the wicked, as he in scripture exprobrateth against the Jews saying good to be
bad, and light darkness. Thus endeuoreth Antichrist for the enlargement of vice
and empire of Satan, to deb^litate, yea to make void all Christian justice, to
render it nothing worth, or of any remarkable accounte.

11. Seeing therefore that the measure of our Hope and charity toward our
savior Christ arises from the esteemed degree of his mercies and benevolence,
the Ad Tit. 3. Joan. 3.
Catholic agnizing justification in an inward renewing of the spirit, in
washing and eleansi^g it from sin, in a sormalitie of fact and deed, the
Protestanter only acknowledging the same in a fo^ren imputatio^, without true
effect and denomination, to the mayntenance of sin, and misprision of the
Cross, therefore by the rules of Hope and Charity, out doctrine is sound and
christian, attributing more to Christ: the other of the Protestant, adverse
impious, sacrilegious, and extermely injurious against Christ, and his sacred
grace of justification. We behold Christ in opposition to Adam and the
serpent, believing that by his merit justice is inherent^e procured in our
souls, as was sin by their misdemeanures: and pray unto Christ with the
Christian Poet:

Sed Samulis read t^^S qudo perdidit Adam, Aleuin. Auit, lib. 3. de Sent. Dei.

Quodque tulit primum vitiate stirpis origo,
Ortu restituat per te pia vita secundo.
Restore O Lord, What Adam lost.
What poisoned root did take avvey:
Retourne-to us on thine own cost
By life a second living day.
The benefitt of a instigfying grace remitting and pardoning in us original
sin, Catholikelie esteemed, makes much for the vvorth of christion Hope:
contrariwise what in this affair is defined by the Protestanter, is as
hurtful to the same confidence, so derogatiue also to the Passion and merits
of our Redeemer.

CHAPTER. XXV.
ORIGINAL sin we acknowledge in every one contracted, descended from
Original sin in cuerie one personal lie ihher^s, is a sin in proprietue.
Adam by way of carnal propagation, personally in all inherent, although not
personally committed. For sithence that our first parent received grace and
original justice not only for himself, but also for us, consequently he lost
it not only in himself, but procured that we should be conceived and borne in
guilt of original crime, to wit in the want or privation of habitual grace
and justice. The which defect Romans 6.
we also believe to be a sin in propriety of form, as making us by nature
the children of wrath, as says the Apostle. If children of wrath, then
sinful and odious to Almighty God, if children of wrath by nature, then is
it no^ derived to us by personal act, but by natural propagation, supposall
made of Adam his fall invested with those conditions, in which he for himself
and for us also accepted and received original grace By the disobedience of
one man many are made sinners, affirms S. Paul. The Romans 5.
which he approves by death the punishment of sin, to which all are liable;
by the gravity also of such a detriment arguing of the quality of original
sin: And so unto 2. Cor. 5.
all men death did pass, in whom all have sinned. To which verity opposed
them selves Pelagius, Celestinus, Ruffinus, Cassianus, auouehing Adams
miscariage to have only Augu li.1. de pee. merig. ca. 23 l 1. ad Sim. plic.
hurt his own person, and no body else; but were refuted and condemned in the
Mileuitan Council, Aurosicane, and lately in the Triden^ne, Dareame mansay, as
speaks S. Augustine, Christ not to be a sautour and Redeemer of infants? But
bovv has be saved them, if in them was no malady of sin?

2, Wherefore seeing that original sin inherent in every one in the first
moment Original sinncis an habitual prluatio^of justice. Rom 5. D. Thom 1. 2.
2. ae. 9 81. a^. 2. Lib. 3. cont. Gent. ca. 7.
of conception, can not arise arise by any actnall misde meanue of the party,
yet depruid of reason and judgment, and is found de in those qui peceauern^t,
which have not actuallie trespassed, as teaches the Apostle, in must needs
consist in some habitual and permanent estate of bades and deformitgie: and
therefore is termed an habit by the school doctous S. Thomas: not that it
imporreth any real quality, commonly signified by the name of an habit,
but for that it is remanent in the soul, when no act is exercised, after the
manner of an habit in that respect: Originali sin then is the privation of a
iustisying grace, caused by propagation from Adam offending: Which want and
privation is culpable, damnable, and hateful unto Almighty God. By reason of
which defect in the the soul, as from cause and origin, do descend and are
propagated in our humane nature other calamities as penalties inflicted by God
upon us for the same; to wit in the sensit^ue part of the soul a propension
of lustful and unlawful desites, a distemperature and discorder of
perturbations and affections, troubling reason and bending the will to the
manifest breach of God his commandments, a dulnes and blyndenes in the mind,
a fountain of maladies in the body. The which bad inclination and poise of
nature in us depraved, is not formal^ie original sin, but an effect thereof,
a punishment of it, and therefore termed by Saint Thomas, the material part of
original sin: for because the superior part of man his soul once refused
in our first parents to be obsequious and obedient to the law and empire of
Almighty D. Thom. 1. ^. 2. ae. q 82. ar. 3.
God, therefore worthily now this superior part is to endure the rebellion
from his inferior sense for molestation of it, for harder practice and
inurement in the carriage of virtue, and using the principality of reasons
commandrie. For in that christian justice is an inherent quality and
perfection in the soul, making it grateful and amiable unto Almighty God,
original sin, or injustice is consequently seated in the self same subject,
and is the expulsion or want of that grace, the which in favor and friendship
exposes the soul unto Almighty God his affection and benevolence gracious
D* Thom. ^ 2. pa^ q. 95. ar. 1. 1. Cor 15. Original sin taken away by
Christian justice. Aug l. 2. cont. Julian cap. 5. ^nch cap. 15 and 16.
and priseable.

3. But as according to the Apostle Christ as savior and second man, stood in
opposition of the first Adam, so is his grace, h^s de^er^ also in contrariety
to his sin and iniquity: whereupon is to be inferred, that as Adam by guilt
of crime defaced the image of God in our souls, so Christ our Savior by his
grace and redemption has recovered nature from that stain and bane of sin,
and also has illustrated the same by his sanctity, and gift of an internal
beauty and renouation: so that our redemption implied is in these two things,
to wit in abolishing sin, induced by Adam, and in adorning the subject
thereof, man his soul, with the precious endowment of justification And for
that original sin is the capital sin, the first and general ruin of all
humane nature, and gulf as it were from whence issues all other actual
offenses, therefore the Cross of Christ and his divine merit was especially
directed against such a calamity he being a lamb to take away the sin of
the world, according Joan. 1.
to the Greek edition, that is original and primarie sin. That such an
abolishment of original sin is procured by the blood of Christ and his
justice, the holy scriptures do directly affirm: namely when Moses thus
recommended Exo. 34. Psalm. 50* Micheae. ca. 7. Tit. 3. Rom 6. Joan 3. Nihil
aliud mors Chr^sti crucifixi nisi remissionis peccati similitudo: and que^
admodum in illovera mors facta est, sic in nobis verare missio peccatorum. Aug.
in Ench. cap. 52. Zvving. li. de Baptismo. What is original sin by the
Protestanters acc^un^s.
the goodness of Almighty God: Thou have ta^en away iniquity, crimes and
sins: According to the multitude of thy mercies, prays David, take away
mine iniquity: Thou shall vvash me, and I shall become m^re white than snow.
He shall* says the Prophet Michaeas, cast into there deapth of the sea all your
sins. Hereupon the Apostle terms Baptism the lauer of regeneration, that
is a washing out of sin, the death and burial of the same, to wit utter
expulsion of it; so that in the regenerate, there is nothing of damnation
worthy of hell And as original sin is the death of the soul, so baptism a
new regeneration and re^iuing imparteth life to it, and expels death:
unless a man be together spirituallie dead, and yet spirituallie alive,
inherently dead and odious to God, only externallie alive, as not heald for
dead, in regard of punishment and damnation. Let us lay down now what the
Protestant in these matters defines.

4. There be of them the which ext^^uate original sin, and scarce with
Pelagius afford it any passage into the souls of men descended from Adam
Zinglius a Protestantishe Caluinister or Puritan, reckons no more of
original sin, tha^ of a disease hurtful, yet not damnable. Others will that
original sin be nothing else but the actual transgression of Adam imputed to
every one of his posterity: so that in deed it makes them not defiled or
sinful, as has been proved But the general opinion of them is, that
original sin does consist on two parts: first on the faculty of nature
prone and inclined to unlawful acts, then in the actual motion of
concupiscence before and without consent of will, necessarily breaking out
of the inferior part of man, to wit the concupiscible and trascible power of
the sensitive faculty: the which motions, as they say, continually rushe out
into all manner of deadly sins, to the violation of the whole ten^e
commandments, cause man to be sinful and worthy damnation from top to the
toe, and do pollute all other endeavors of the virtues, in such sort, that they
be con^aminated in God his sight, truly and properly deadly Call. l. 2 Inc. 1.
sins, and ^ustlie deserve eternal damnation in hell. The (...) prau^^ie and
corruption first makes us hateful to God, thy brings forth in us works,
which the Scripture calls the works of the flesh: so that the very
inclination of nature by his accounte is damnable, sinful, and hateful to
God: then consequently of the same condition are all such evil motions as
continually break out of that furnace of nature, so in^aged and distempered.
The which motions one styles the violation of all the precepts of God and
nature, so that men, in whom it is, be by original sin borne guilty o^
pride, of gluttony, VVittaker l 1. de pecc. o^. g. c^^. ^ (...) sin (...)
taken (...) according to the Protest.
of infidelity, an^ at a word of all inquitie. Then as concerning the
remission of this original sin, or rather sins, the Protestant denies
them by baptism, or by any impu^^tio^ of Christ his justice by an apprehending
faith to be (...) out of the soul but in this he places the benefitt of
remission, that remaining in nature sins, they be not imputed, or held by God
as punish^ble: so that betwixt the wicked and the childr^ of God by
regeneration the difference is not in respect of their l^ues and actions, for
that all do violate con^inua^l^e the whole (...) and a^e defil^d with all
iniqu^^i^, but only that in the faithful God does not behold the^ as
damageable, o^ damnal^le unto the^, the which he does m^thers for want of in
apprehending faith. But by the way of digression, I can not sufficiently
wonder at the monst^ous, yea blasphemous absurdi^ie Nature accused by the
Protestant.
of the Protestant, designing as part of original sin the bad incli^ation of
nature, making it hateful to God and a just cause why ever (...) may be
condemned: especially in that a certain minister accounts of this
inclination, not as some want or defect of grace, but a positive evil quality
that ought not to be. O monster! Is sin a Abb desen. page 229. Aug in Ench. ca
13. Omnis (...) in (...) natu^^, bonu^^ est
positive quality, a piece of nature, in that nature in it whole compass is
either in substance or in accident a creature of God, every positive ^^alitie
being in mediatelie produced by his operation, and so good as teachet S.
Augustine! Is not not the minister then a Manichean heretic, (...) nature, as
in^rinsecallie sinful, bad and damnable? Fie fie upon such ^regs of
Pr^te^tantish doctrine! How came this qu^litie into the soul, but by infusi^n
of it there^nto by God* Does God then by his proper and only action make the
soul of an infant sinful, and by a quality imprinted thereinto by himself?
If this quality be re^ll, and as it were an habit, c^rt^s in as much as it is
a thing, and framed by God, it is good and perfect; how then the form of sin
and injustice? Then to esteem of the motions of concupiscence as of original
sin is likewise monstrous in tha^ such motions, ^f sinful, are rather
actual and personal sins: And how sins in us, if against our wills and
desires they make issue for their distemperature? Do sins harbou^ in
distracted and mad persons, in young children, in those, that are surprised with
sleep? Do mad men, children, sleepers break actuallie all the ten
comm^ndements, are they actually sinful in all manner of iniquity, yea
infidells? why not then thieves, murderers, sorcerers, rebels, and slaves of
Satan? But return we from this gross asinarie Protestantishe to our
intended purpose, and let us make trial by the rule of Hope, on which side
abides the Christian truth: this argument proposed, is to decide the
controversy.

5 A greater benefit is it from Christ to esteem original sin in the
regenerate The benefitt of regeneration according to the Catholic.
and justified to be clean taken away, than to imagine it abiding, only not
to be imputed, as liable to penalty: But the Catholic accepts of Christian
justice as of a form by opposition utterly excluding original sin, the
Protestanter imagines Christian justice to procure solelie that it remaining
be not imputed; therefore the Catholic attributes more to the meritt of
Christ by Hope, than does the Protestanter; and as the gift is greater in
benefitt not thought of by him, so consequently in respect thereof the
Catholic is more enkyndled with charity in recognisance and acknowledgement
of so singular a grace and favor. And who sees not the truth of the first
proposition? in that evident it is, that a far better thing is it to have such
quality thrust clean out of the soul, tha^ therein allodgedy, only not to
be imputed, or forgiven by exemption of the offendant from due and deserved
penalty. VVhereupon the Pagans by the very institution of nature endeavored
according to their conceits by certain rites of religion, as by flames of
fire, by lauer in sea water, by brimstone, to ridd their souls of the spotts
of their offenses, deeming them before such an expiation and purification
unfit to sacrifice, or to be present thereat, as odious to God, and in his
sight deformed. Senec. Hipp. ver* 9. Hom. Odyss. 22. Verg 6. Aenead.


Quis eluet me Tanais, aut quae barbaris
Maeotis vndis Pontico incumbens mar^?
Non ipse toto magno Oceano Pater
Tantum expiaret seelus.
What Tanais can me now so wash,
Or Maeotis bog consine to Pontike sea,
I think the Ocean fathers do^he
Can not acquit my crime in plea.
Saladinus king of Babylon having taken the Temple of Jerusalem washed the
same Baron. Tom. 12 page 983.
within and without in rose water, to free the place, as he deemed, from
superstition. Also by the appointance of Almighty God the Jews had their
washings and purifications by blood and water, to represent that innocence of
soul, which he did require Heb. 9.
in his suppliants and servants. And therefore the Apostle S. Paul to our
purpose, and to signify perfect remission of sins under the Gospel, thus
concludes: If the blood of goats and bulls, or sprinkled ashes of a calfe
do sanctify those that are defiled to the cleansing of their flesh, how
much more the blood Christ shall cleanse our conscience? Therefore it is a
great grace of Christ our Savior, and so a worthy emprise of his Cross and
blood, to ridd our souls from the spott of original crime, to expel that
harm from thence by virtue and benevolence, the which was cast into it by the
trespass and defaulte of our first parents. How are we otherwise redeemed from
that general fall and ruin Rom 5. 1. Joan 2.
of our kind, delivered from that deadly poison instilled into our souls by
the suggesting serpent, if sin, the death of the soul, the festering
corruption thereof, remain after justification by our Redeemer Christ? Then
must be admitted, that we surrender more to our present justification and
passion of Christ, than the Protestanter; accounte of him as more beneficial
and gracious, than he does: and then why not more charitable, more thankful
toward so bountiful a benefactor, toward so good Luc. 10.
a Samaritane, that has recured us, not only by a foreign imputation of
health, by a freedom from pain, but by pouring in wine and o^le into the
bosoms of our souls, where original sin had once harbor, and from whence
it is now eiected? They answer, that allthoughe it were a more absolute and
perfect justification to be purged Apoc. 19.
from the sin and guilt thereof, than on^lie pardoned externallie by
exemption from penalty, as in heaven it falls out, where is a full and
complete forgiveness of sins by their utter exclusion, yet in this life no
such state is to be expected, wherein the will continually is inclined to
evil, and by a deordination and corruption continually wills naughty
things, contrary to the law of God and nature, and so actaallie there Rob Abb.
Defens. p. 249
is even in the best, a serving of the law of sins; Therefore sufficient it
is for remission, that such mortal sins be not imputed. The answer is
wicked, unnatural, yea blasphemous, According to the Catholic Christ takes
away our sins. Joan. 1* cap 1.
the which by this argument thus I demonstrate. Our Savior Christ in holy
scriptures by his forgiveness is said to take away original sin; but it
remaining and not imputed as punishable, in no verity of thing or deed, or in
propriety of speech is taken away, therefore absolutely it is taken away by
an inherent and opposite form of regeneration, or not at all. The mayor
proposition is avouched by S John: The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us
from all sin: We know that he has appeared, that he might take away
sin. He is the lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, that
Cypri lib de dupl. ci ma^tyr. Beda in illum locum.
is original sin, according as S. Cyprian and Beda expound that place. The
minor I make thus good. No essential part or propriety of original sin is
taken away by the justice of Christ imputed, therefore original sin is not
taken away in any verity or fact. The Antecedent is manifest by confession of
the adversary, admittingthe wole essence and nature of original sin to
remain still in the souls of the regenerate; and by consequence also reatus
paenae abides, the guilt of pain; in that as sin formallie does defile the
soul by essence of it, so does it make it odious to God, and worthy of
eternal fire, the essence not altered: and as the propriety of ^isibilitie
can not be sequestered from the nature of a living reasonable creature, no more
can misdesert, or worthiness of eternal punishment be d^stracted from the
essence of sin not changed. Then seeing that original sin neither in
essence or in internal propriety is taken away, it is in no sort taken away:
Yet, say they, it may be said to be taken away, in that resident, it is holden
by God not punish^ble, and so forgiven. Nevertheless the Protestanter that thus
strives to mayntaine the empire of sin, and of Satan, in the very children
of God, must grant, that in comparison, notwithstanding the blood of Christ,
sin is rather in truth and deed not taken away, in that it abides in
essence and interne propriety, only taken away by an externe effect, that is
by exemption from pain in hell, sin being hindered by the pardon of God,
that it work not morallie such a calamity. Then in prejudice of Ghrist his
grace original sin is more properly and truly not taken away, than taken
away: Yea I add, not taken away at all. For to Dan. 3.
hinder a cause from working an effect, is not to remove the cause, and take it
away; as when God repressed the actual heat of the Babilonian surnace, the
fire was not taken away: therefore God only hindering that original sin
contriue not effectually the burning of any man in hell fire, takes not away
original sin. Then the Scriptures affirming original sin to be washed out
and taken away, are either false, or the Protestanter heretical. If a Prince
should pardon his son or subject, in act of rebellion, should he be said to
take away the offense, it during in operation and combustio^? Well he may
hinder that their trespass bring them not to the block, or the gallows, but
he can not take their offenses away actuallie and essentallie inherent and
apparent. How then does God take away original sin from the regenerate,
whliste actuallie they committ iniquity, yea of pride, of infidelity, of
adultery, and the rest? well may he hinder the effect which is damnation, but
he takes not sin away in essence, inhesion, or propriety: suerlie a subtle
manner of taking away invented by the Protestant, and a plain iugling trick,
worthy the practiced of a sott. But farther I press him; Original sin is
neither taken away in essence, not in propriety of misdesert, nor in
hinderance from working damnation, therefore in no sort taken away. That the
essence of original sin is taken away, or the inherence of it from the
soul, the Protestant denies: then therefore is it not taken away in
propriety, that is in worthiness of it to be punished eternally: for as the
sin remains formallie, so does it formallie pollute and defile the soul:
as it does so pollute and defile the soul, it makes it odious and detestable
to God, that beholds the turpitude thereof; therefore he truly and
condignelie judges the soul, wherein it is, according to his true and ^ust
judgment worthy of hell fire and damnable: unless the Protestant will veil
God his eyes, and affirm, that he sees not original sin abiding in the
regenerate, nor the formal effect thereof. Hereupon I infer, that it is
blasphemy in the Protestanter to affirm, that together with this his
knowledge, he hinders such sin from effecting damnation, or imputes it not
for sin or punishable: first for that in this sense the very blood of Christ
and his mer it should patronise sin, encourage men to sin; then that he
should determine and decree contrary to his own justice, the nature of
things, and his own words recorded in holy scripture. Proceed we
punctuallie, and by the minute in the proof.

6. Men know by faith, according to the Protestanter, that actual sin of
concupiscence Christ apatto^ (...) the Protestant.
or original sin in act, is not imputed unto them, not is hurtful, being
restrained by God from working them damnation: therefore may they boldly
venture upon any abom^nation or barbarouse villainy with inde^nitie and
patronage from the Cross of Christ, as hindered from the effect of penalty or
of any torment in hell. Original sin, as is confessed by the Protestant,
breaks out into all manner of damnable sins as into the sins of (...),
of ang^^ or hatred and the rest, st^^^ng up mame noisome and evil motions and
(...), from the (...) of no man can say VVittaker l 1. (...) cap. 1 and ^ Abb.
(...). page 254.
^^ts altogether free. Then d^e the just and regenerate conten^ deadly and
damnablie to ad^herie, to forni^ation, and such like crimes, yet by (...) of
regenerat^^n are preserved from all harm thereby. Then may such beleeue^s b^
^st^^^d from ^nnoy of pain or damage, performing whatsoever (...) shall
design. O filthy regeneration of this brutish generation, when as according
to their doctrine, Christ contrary to his own words, came not into the
world, That (...) d^ssolue the works of the devil, and take away the sins
of the world, but ta^he^ to emboldenmen 7. Joan. 3.
to sin upon (...) of pardon in the (...) act of (...) sin: (...) if
original sin be pardoned breaking out also with consen^ into lust, and into
al^ sins opposite to the vettu sprescribed in the law of God and nature, th^^
by (...) acquitted, acted how soever, in that it is not imputed. This, this is
the (...) Minerua of the Protestantish Theology, to license sin, to excuse
sin, to lighten sin, to point out sin as freedom of an apprehending
says, and the sug^ed duty liberty of the (...) gospel.

7. Is ^^ also bla^phemous in the Protesian: uouching original sin in form
and (...) of the (...) his (...)
essence of crime to remain in a justified person, in that it is impossible to
the just judgment of so right a judge and beholde^ to deem him just, which
actuall^e and habituallie is informalitie and quality of fact and form
inhere^^e a kn^^e and wicked: it is repugnant to his will and affection to
embrace in love of a father that person, which in work and condition is
rebellious, a breaker of his sacred laws, one guilty of adultery,
fornication, ^^ealth, robbery, impiety, and such misdemean^^es. So that as
the Protestant is blasphemous, affirming God to accept of the vertue^ and
works of man as good and (...), which indeed are (...) na^ght^ and lamnable,
so also is he blasphemous in the samde degree, defining that God (...) him for
his child and just, the which is worthy by act and habit to (...) in (...),
and that in truth of th^^g, of form, and mi^^eserte. General (...)
pronounced of God his prou^d^nce: The (...) man and (...) are (...) to God: ^
^^w then is a regenerate (...). ^4.
man grateful to his eyes, defiled with original and actual sin, being
truly in (...).
(...) and realitie, his enemy and worthy of hell (...): Thou have loved
justice, and have hated (...). Is then au evil deserving person by damnable
con^upiscence, accepta^^^ to his (...)* Is not such acceptance aduersa^^e to
his justice* It is: O lord thou (...).
have loved justices, and they countenan, ^hath beheld equity: Certes no
equity apparent in that censure, the which priseth him for an honest man, for
a regenerate creature, who indeed of fact is rather wicked and de^^^^able. The
(...) like doctrine (...) for (...). (...) Luc. ^0.


8. Hereon conclude we according to the rule of charity, that our doctrine
Catholic concerning remission of original sin in the regenerate
recommendeth and highly extolleth Christian justice, and the work of Christ
in taking clean away the sin so by him pardoned and asso^led; washing the
soul once polluted in his sacred blood working in baptism, his wine and oil
of grace penetrating to the seat of sin, and thereoute expelling the very
blott and stain thereof: his wonderful power entering Luc. ^^.
into the house and kindome of Satan, b^nding him there annd dispo^^ing him of
all his right and interest to man his soul; in that ^^ excludes sin from
thence, by which he claymeth title to domineere: yea surpassing in obedience to
his divine Fath^^ the disobedience of Adam, and malice of the serpent,
procuring that in ^^^ his soul should be found not only grace (...) but
also abundance of grace, where Ro^
once sin held empire and pessess^on in abundance, as disputes the Apostle
On the other side the Protestantet as slave to Antichrist endeuoreth by all
means possi^^e to extenuate this gift and grace of regeneration, denying it of
ability to take away original sin, to purge and wash the soul, and to be
only of force to provide, that sin remaining and flowing in act and habit,
be not imputed as punishable, rep^gnantl^^ to the nature of justification, to
the purity of a Christian life, and blasphen^ouslie in regard of the
providence and judgment of Almighty God.

9. The same inconveniences against charity, the merit of Christ, and the
divine Sinful liberty.
prouidencence, do also follow, if remission by Christ take not away actual
sin. For otherwise should on be an offender, still a violater of all the
commendements, be worthy of hell sier, be polluted with sin, be odions to
God, and yett ^uste, which are unworthy properties of a justified man, and
disgraces even to the very blood of Christ, by which justification is procured.
Also if actual sin according to spott and stayne be not taken away in
justification, but abides with faith covering the same, it may also stand with
faith in act and work, without ani^ loss or damage to the offender; which is
brutishe and detestable to imagine; in that by virtue of such a faith, men
should have letters patents from God to commit any outrage, of villainy, yea
to kill them selves by protection from the same faith. The sequel is evident,
for sin in habitt is as bad as sin in act; yea it is the same form, and on
thing diuerselie considered; as heat remaining in the wood, is the same
heat, which was in passage and action beefoore from the sier: then if
habitual sin be not taken away by faith, but abid^th with, it, so also may
actual sin shake hands with honesty, with innocence, with a justifying
faith; and so the Protestantish faith of justification is a brother and broker
to knauerie, to concupiscence, and all disorder of barbaritie.

Great Hope of God his grace toward us, through Christ our Savior
conceived by us, and moreover exhibited unto us, when we expect, and enjoy a
washing away of actual sins by the grace of justification: an enemy of
which sovereign Hope is the Protestanter, denying the effect and is hevve of
so desired a favor and benevolence.

CHAPTER. XXVI.
MAN by the very instinct of nature knows sin once committed to putt the
The harm of sin.
soul in a certain estate loathsome to the reason of it self, and also odious
to the divine and supreme authority of almighty God. The one is proved by
that irksome remorse of conscience we feel, greeuing and repyning at sin
acted and conceived; the other by the general esteem we make of an ouerruling
soueraintie above, whose prescript by offense we transgress, and after dread
to encounter with that part of his providence, which takes just revenge upon
offenders. VVhereupon Nature desires an explation from sin
the ancient Pagans so informed, when they were to attempt any notable
enterprise, in the which was requisite some especial assistance from
Almighty God, feeling as it were their offenses to have disgraced the^ in the
sight of so great a majesty, that they Hom. Odyss. 1 22. Aenead. 6.
might purchase his grace and favor, by certain ceremonies called
lustrations, as by fire, dust, brimstone, sea water, they endeavored after their
manner of religion to ridd themselves of their sins. In this sort Homer
records how Atrides did purge his army by water, and cast the fil^h into the
sea, before his battle: the like Virg^ll reports of Aeneas. Especi^llie
before sacrifice for reverence sake they practiced this kind of expiation and
abolishing of sin, perceiving it to be right true, which affirms Seneca of
piety toward God: Neither is the honor of God cheeflie reposed in the
quality of Seneca l 2. de Benesi cap. 6.
the sacrifice, although of the best, and shyning gold, but rather in the
prous and good will of them that adore.

Sed tamen vt fuso tautorum sanguine centum Ovid. li. 2. de T^^st.

Sic capitur minimo thur^s honor Deus.
An becatombe of bulls blood povvred out in sacrifice
All one to god a^ fra^incense, in which devotion lies.
2. But this more effectually, and to a far better purpose, was practiced by
the Expiations of the Jews. Leuit. 9.
Jews in their diverse institutions of purifying by water, outwardly
representing how that they endeavored by an hearty forrowe to extirpate out of
heir souls the infection and rust of iniquity. And almost every ceremony
and sacrifice of that people so usual in shedding and sprinkling blood,
declared the inward purification of the soul Heb 9. Amb. lib. 2 de Abta c. 11.
from sin, it being from thence to be washed and rinsed out: Therefore
generally S. Ambrose teaches: Both Jew and Grecian, and he, who soever,
which believes, must know how to circuncise himself from sin, that he may
be saved.

3. In which debt of sinful men to be delivered from their trespasses, to be
cleansed ^rue expiati^ by our Savior. Remission of sins pro^ureth that
sins do die and be not. Augu. Ench. c. 52. 1. Joan. 2. 1. Joan. 3. Heb 9.
from their defiling turpitudes and blemishes of the image of God in their
souls, nothing is so serviceable, so beneficial, as the Cross of Christ, and
his sared blood, cleansing all true penitent believers from so odious an
excrement of offense, and foul stain imprinted therein by the workmanship of
Satan. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and son of God does cleanse us
from sin. To that end he appeared, that he might take away sins. Upon
which ground Saint Paul discourses by a comparison betwixt the blood of the
old law, and this sacred and divine of the new. If the blood of goats, and
bulls, and sprinkling of the ashes of a calse, did sanctisie the desiled for
the cleansing of the flesh, how much more the blood of Christ hall cleanse our
concsciences? Then this our christian blood has the preferment in two
respects: first in as much as that blood, arrived only to the flesh, by a
legal justification, ours attaineth to the soul for righteousness pleasing
unto Almighty God: Then for that this out blood is more operative and
effectual How sin is taken away. Aug in Ench c. 15. 16 l 2 co^t Julian
cap. 5. Nusqua^ sunt, perierunt.
for sanctity and purity in the soul, than the other was for an outward
integrity and regularitie of the body. Sin therefore is taken away by the
presence of an inherent justice opposite and contrary unto the same; and
therefore by it the holy Ghost expels sin, as the sun does darkness by
the light, and God the devil by his grace, so that remission of sin is an
effect of justification inherent, as expulsio^ of darkness, an effect of light
in presence, and is brought to pass not by any action or urgent motion, but
only by incomposibilitie and disagreeing natures of two so repugnant forms
not combinable or coherent at one time in the self same soul or subject. There
is nothing of damnation to those that be in Christ Jesus, that is there is not
any spott or Romans 8. Gre. Naz. Or^. in Sanct. Baptism. Hier. in cap 2. Sophou.
Aug. li. con 2. ep. Pe^. cap. 13. li. 3. de Symb. cap. 10. The hereti^^ an
e^^n^e of forgiveness of sins. T^tt. l. 1 cont. Marcion l. de paenit lib. de
Carne Christ
stayne in them worthy damnation. S. Greeorie Nazianzene affirms baptism to
be a virtue purging (...) man his sin, and a washing away of all such
obstructions and staynes, as are contracled by sin Saint Hierome affirms a
soul to be vvashed and purged by penance: S Augustine: we a^firme Baptism to
give indulgence of all sins, to take away offenses; not to shave them: Holy
baptism takes away all sins.

4. Antichrist has always shown himself a great enemy of this singular
grace of remission of sin, by the help of heretics his confederates; and
namely by Marcion, auouching sins to swarm even in the children of God; and
all works effected by man his nature, the which he deemed intrinsecallie bad
and vicious, to be sins hateful to Almighty God. But especially he has
aimed at this mark and disgrace of the Cross by an opinion of justice
imputatine, not affecting the soul, but residing outwardly in a mediator,
avouched by Protestants, rainboe iustificatorians. For if the grace of
justification be not inherent, it can not alter the soul, and expel any
form whatsoever out of it, before therein allodged; in that the opposite
justice distant from the soul, comes nothing near the place of sin seated
in the same; and therefore this externe justice can not exclude sin, but
only procure it be not imputed, abiding still in quality of act or habitt.
So in ancient time the Gnostiks, and Puritans in Iren. l 1. ca. 6. Epi. here is.
64.
what sin soever deemed themselves just, and the children of Almighty God,
as witnesses S. Iren: Likewise Proclus an archeretike, as reports
Epiphanius, denied remission of sin, to avoid the effect of extinguishing
and abolishing sin, affirming it after justification rather to abide and to
live in the root, although lu^king and in some conuerture defiling the soul.
To the self same tenure define Luther and Calvin, and that in force of their
imputative justice: Wherefore, says Calvin, from hence doubt Calu li. 3
Inst. c. 11. Sect. 26.
not, how God does justify, when thou hear that hereconcileth us to him
self, not imputing our offenses. Then sins in this guise are remitted,
because God decrees not to punish them, or beholds them in the soul not as
effectual causes of any damnation. If original sin remain, if the same
break out co^tinuallie, as a furnace into flames and sparkles, so into all
manner of sins and violation of all the commandments; if every work of man
be bad and damnable, as Protestants desine, then suer in the just sin is not
taken away by forgiveness, but only not imputed by indulgence. This
imbecillitie and insufficiency of Christian justice they color with certain
texts of Psalm. ^^.
holy scriptures; as when David says those to be blessed, whose sins are
covered; as if remitted nothwithstanding they still remained: also when it is
pronounced, no man, Psalm. 142. 1. Joan...
no not the just, to be deuoide of sin, or justifiable before God. But the
trial will clear the truth in this controversy.

5. As theris no such such harm and disgrace of man his soul like unto sin
therein The benefitt of remission of sins.
festering and inherent, so is there no benefitt more to be desired, than to
have the soul, a proper mansion place of the holy Ghost, restored to
purity, and ridd of all such evil favored shapes and forms, as sins be
therein abiding. Wherefore the Catholics attributing this grace and benefitt
bestowed on the children of God to the meritt of Christ, have the greater
occasion of ardent char tie toward so pious and bountiful a Redeemer* whereas
the Protestanter contrariwise attributes no such desired effect unto his
benevolence, yea no perfect and just redemption by him from such great anoyes,
and so detracteth from the virtue Hope in a notorious degree and quality. That
sin is so grievous a detriment to the soul who can deny, considering how
nature it self mispriseth it, repineth at it, reproves it; and christian men
informed by faith apprehend it even enmity with Allmihtie God and a deserving,
that the offender burn eternally in hell fire? O wonderful deformity of
sin, all the forces of nature in arms against it, to revenge the disloyalty
thereof against so sovereign a lord and Sap ^.
commander! Is it not then a singular blessing to bear no more in our souls
that foul brand and ugly purtraiture of sin? to object no more our souls
as loathsome and ugly spectacles, yea odions, to the pure eyes of God his
intelligence, to have rather such foul marks burned and pulled out by the
grace of justification* Doubtless it is? For what other end and drift of so pure
redeemer, of so unspotted a lamb, than our purity and utter auoydance of
sin? Who can live in comfort o^ quiet repuse, as long as he perceives his
soul so polluted, and so detestable to God, so euillfauored in visage, so
disorderly in behavior, so dishonored with the excrements of hell and
wickedness? Assuredly Christ upon his Cross, as fountain in Paradise,
yields Exodus 12. Rupert. l 2. in Exodus cap. 36
forth the precious liquours of water and blood, to bathe and wash Christians,
that they be whire and pure And as the passage of the Jews through the
redd^se a prefigured the cleannes exacted by God at their hands, so does our
very first entry into the household of Christ by baptism, declare Christian
neatnes and ablution from sin: Otherwise how are good Christians by Christ
his meritt in Paradise, not slaves of the serpent? how otherwise reduced to the
perfection of justice, to the childeship with God, and damiable how of the
soul, we lost in Adam? VVhereupon considering this recure and translation of
the soul by Christ, we inflame our selves toward him in charitable
thanksgiving and affection, by a dew acknowledgement of such a benefitt
received.

6. But according to the Protestantish doctrine, there is no remission of
sins, no Sins notremitted according to the Protestant.
aquittance for them, and no reconc^lement of offenders with his divine
majesty. If the actual sins now past of concupiscence, as of adultery,
fornication, robbery, envy and the like* be not taken away, they are not
forgiven or remitted* but that indeed a man remains still truly and
properly vuiust, wicked and odious to Almighty God, and such as the devil
may challenge justly as his slaves and matter of his infernal cruelty. I
demand of the Protestant, sins abiding, whether in the soul of a believer,
they have their formal effects or no? To deny that they have, were in answer
to implie contradiction, and impossibility; for if they stick formallie in
the soul, to the same they impart a formal effect of denomination: as if upon
a wall be formallie inherent whitenes, it formallie makes and names the wall
white Then I conclude Just me^ rather wicked than just by the Protestant.
that just persons are formallie adulteres, thieves, malefactors, odious to
God, worthy hell fire. O goodly estate of the regenerate! Yet if they might
be just with the like substance, amiable to God, it might in some part give
satisfaction. But that it is so, it can not be imagined; in that the forms of
adultery, of fornication, of theft, of in justice, formallie are inherent in
the souls of believers, and so the persons formallie and indeed are
adulterers, fornicators, thieves; whereas their justice is only in Christ,
and they thereby redeemed, never a whit the better or honester men: then
according to truth the children of God are rather knaves and wicked than good
and tighteous. A proper imprise of the Cross, figured by the Protestantish
Antichrist: sufficient it is, say they, for Christian expiatiou, that sins
remaining be not imputed. What means this iugler by not imputed? Does he
thiuke that God sees them not? that were to impute blynd^nes to him, who
discovers all things: Does he signify thereby, that God hates them not, or
the soul for their sakes? Then is he blasphemous; for all sin Just me^ hated
by God according to the Protestant.
is formallie hateful and makes the soul, wherein it is, likewise in
formalitie hateful: then as the object is truly hateful, so the just
judgment and affection in God does hate the same. Are then the children of God
hateful to God, are his recovered sheep, his washed Nazarites odious unto
him, and from them does he in disdain turn away his gracious countenance? I
grant, says he, that they be truly hateful and odious to God, and that God
actuallie hates them, in that Scriptures say, that God Sap. 14.
hates the impious person and his impiety: yet are such sins not imputed,
that is they be excused from hurting the party by hell fire, in whom they be.
O full and worthy forgiveness of sins! Yet thus I urge the argument: God
hates all just persons according to the manner of the Protestanters, therefore
he does not exempt them from punishment. The Antecedent is alredie proved; for
if he hate the sin, either in act or in habit, as no doubt he does, so also
as the soul formally thereby is hateful, so is it likewise hated: that the
soul is formallie hateful, is evident; because that subject in which is
formallie an hateful quality, is formallie hateful: but in the just formally
are hateful qualities, to wit deadly sins, therefore their souls are
formallie and in very deed hateful: then are they either hated of God, or else
he does not hate all things truly hateful, and so is there an object in the
world not sensed as the thing requires by Almighty God; as if there were
any thing intelligible in this world, not actuallie known by God his
intelligence were defective, not comprising all; so if in the world were an
object truly and reallie odible and hateful, yet not hated by him, his
affection were not infinite or complete. And that God does hate such justified
persons is moreover evident, in that if the justice of Christ were not imputed
to them, in whom such sins are found, they should be actuallie hated of
God; but the justice of Christ external does not alter the nature and
formalitie of sin in the soul, therefore as without imputation of Christ
his justice they were odious to God, and such souls as formallie entertained
them, so after the imputation they are semblably hateful, the same object and
cause formallie not changed* but still abiding. Neither is it sufficient to
say, that God does not hate such sinners, because he imputes not the sins to
pain in hell; in that for example sake the Prince may hate and detest the act
of treason, and also the traitor, and yet for policy or other respect, exempt
him from punishment: so if Allmighty God should decree never to punish sin or
a sinner in hell, yet nevertheless should such sinners be odious still unto him,
in as much as they be ma^a, naughty and damnable in form and fact Then God
hates and detesteth the children of regeneration according to the Protestant:
VVhereon I infer, that he does also impute sin unto them, that is he
holds them for sinners, and does not privileged them from penalty, and so
sin remains in all sort in them, as it does in the children of Satan and
perdition; for sin as it is hateful to God, so makes it the soul likewise
hateful where it is: But it appertains to the justice of God to punish such
offenders, not amended, in form of offenders; and if a sinner by the justice
of God remaining in sin is to be condemned the object of such hatred not
changed by the justice of Christ, as is apparent, as there is still the same
cause of hatred and imputation to pain, so is there after the imputation of
Christ his justice to the soul the same cause, it nothing reallie or Justified
persons n o^sters by the Protestant.
morallie altered or exchanged Hereupon the Protestant is constrained to frame
a monstrous conceit of a justified person, as to be indeed and verity
together good and bad, beloved of God, and hated, worthy heaven, and ^ert
deserving hell, sithence that all sins committed remain with the grace of
justification.

7 But is it not also blasphemy to surrender the better and greater title of
interest The Protestant pleads for the devil.
to the souls of justified persons to Satan, not to Christ their redeemer?
the which he does evidently out of the grounds of his own position. For if
a plea should be d^liuered about this controversy, the Protestanter is so good
a proctor or advocate for the devil against Christ at the bar of equity,
that suerlie the devil would by his means gain the suite, and enter lawful
possession upon all the very children of regeneration. The Protestant will say
for him, that in these children of regeneration inherentlie are found the
sins of adultery, of extorsion, of rebellion, of impiety; and that thereby
such children are adulterers formallie, extortioners, rebels and ungodly, and
so conclude that they be children of the devil his generation. And as for
justification to exempt them from his claim and title, when the Protestant
tells the world, that they be just only by the justice of Christ in heaven,
not just in deed, in form, or verity of fact, but in an apprehensio^, as an
ignorant man may be said to be well lettered by the knowledge of Plato, a
diseased person in health by the good constitution of Apollo, Satan will cry,
all is mine, in that my right is founded in the things themselselues, that is
in my sins instilled into their souls there inherent, and that, upon which
Christ seems to ground his plea, only is external, it is not indeed, it
is not true in realitie of form, it is fantastical, therefore these children
of regeneration are of my generation, my adulterers, my thieves, my rebels,
scullions of my black guard and retinne. If the minister so arguing for the
devil, yet grieve to subject himself unto him, or any of his brethren, let
him then with any reason recover them out of his claws if he can: let him
answer the devil only disputing and urging upon his own foundations and
doctrine in matter of faith; understanding from him, how he with the children
of regeneration are contaminated with deadly sin, by an apprehending faith
only not esteemed knaves, varlets, impenitents, allthoughe foul and filthy
in soul in deed, hated by Almighty God according to his justice, and the
nature of the things themselves.

8. To conclude, this opinion of the Protestanter is far distant from Christian
charity, Impure doctrine of the Protestant.
in that it bends altogether to impuritie of life, to a licentious liberty,
and a disportfull loosenes, and that by the allowance of the Cross of Christ.
For if any sin in habitual blemishe and stain may consist with justice,
and by virtue thereof be not imputed, so also may actual wickedness what
soever, as has been said, abide with the same justice in indemnitie not
imputed: By which persuasion the malice and frailty of man may adventure upon
any abomination, privileged and warranted from spiritual harm by the Cross
of Christ and his justice; the which to imagine is monstrous against all civil
honesty, and blasphemous, repugnante to the perfection of Christianity. Pure
then and heavenly is the Catholic doctrine, attributing that excellency to
christian justice, the which can not remain with deadly sin, and
contrariwise descrying that deformity in sin, the which may not allodge
together with christian justice and sanctity; as hereafter shall be more
amply declared.

When therefore the Psalmist says, that Christian justice covers men's
sins, and How sins are covered.
hides them, the sense is that they be no more objects of God his view and
intelligence, because they are not extant: for if they remained they could not
be concealed from the eye of God, as is manifest: When sins are forgiven,
says S. Augustine, the sins descend, and grace does arise: meaning the
expulsion of sin by grace: Not that just men August in Psa. 102. 1. Johan. 1.
be without all sin whatsoever, as speaks the Evangelist S. John, but
only freed from mortal offenses repugnant to the grace of justification:
Unless the Protestant will admit as good, that a person regenerate may
without loss of justice, or hurt of justice, or hurt of soul, as well kill
and murder his neighbor, as speak an idle word, or offend in quality, as
all do in certain small daily offenses. Ch^ritie approves Catholic
doctrine.


9. Here then by the rule of Hope may a resolution be made to approve the
Catholic verity, in that according to our Doctrine, forgiveness of sins is
an expulsion of them, a purifying and cleansing of the soul; whereas
Protestantish indulgence makes a man never a whitt the better, is also
contrary to the justice of God, and not worthy the Cross and merit^ of our
so so benign a Redeemer: yea according to the Protestanter, there is never in
man brought to pass a true and perfect forgiveness of sins, no not in heaven,
as if defiled souls therein were in glory, and coheires with Christ. For in
this life faith only justifies, and so does not expel sins, but barelie
Sin never taken away by the Protestant.
procure the abiding be not imputed; and in heaven the just seem to be in
worse estate than on earth in regard of their sins; for that sins can not
be taken away without justice inherent by a contrariety renewing aed
purifying the soul, which justice inherent is not in heaven, in that according
to the Protestanter inherent iusticie is justice of works, of the law, and not
the justice of Christ; so that if Saints be eternally just by the imputative
justice of Christ, they retain eternally inherent all their sins, and
eternally remain odious unto Almighty God; and if there be no better
justice for man than that of Christ, as their only, and sole justice, they
are always to be imputed unto them, and then sins shall never be forgiven:
and according to this respect there is an equality betwixt the just in this
life, and those in bliss. But here the blissful come behind: for upon
earth sins are not imputed by reason of a faith apprehending 1. Cor. 11. The
vision of God is not given to make innocence, but to revvard innocents. Apoc.
21. Cant. 4.
the justice of Christ; but in heaven is no faith, as the Apostle teaches, in
that it is euacuated as imperfect, by the clear vision of God: then are sins
in heaven immortallie in crime and guilt formallie, and also in imputation to
damnation, for want of faith to procure justification from such harms and
calamitise. Foul, base heresy! sins are in heaven in all manner of filthy
kinds! In heaven I say, whereinto comes nothing defiled, as pronounreth Saint
John in his high and pure Theology! Wherefore we Catholics desire of Christ
purity, innocence, to be sheep newly washed, as speaks the spouse in the
Canticles, every one enriched with two young ones, as by contemplation and
action, and among them none to be barren of virtue and good life.

Intend nostris sensibus Prudent. him matur.

Vitamque totam despice.
Sunt multa fucis illita,
Quae luce purgentur tua.
Durare nos tales iube,
Quales remotis sordibus
Nitere pridem iusseras
Iordanis tinctos flumine.
Quodcunque nox mundi dehinc
Inficit at^is nubibus,
Tu rex Eot syderis
Vultu sereno illumina.
Tu sancte, qui atram picem
Candore tingis lacteo,
Ebenoque crystallum facis
Delicta tergens liuida.
Guard well our senses Lord,
And life through aid above,
For we with spotts are blured
Thy beams them far remove.
Grant that we so remain
All filth abolished from sight
As shyning without stain
In lordane pure and bright.
What darkness brings the night
In mist our souls to infect,
Thou king of Eastern light
By splendent face reciect.
Thou holy, who pitche so blackt
Reformest to milkie white,
Thy Ebonie crystal make,
Sponge Ugly sins out quite.
Catholic Hoope causes fear to loose the grace of justification through
occasions of sin, and therefore is heedfull and pure. On the other side the
Protestanter is a flatt Puritian, that is carnal and bestiall, defining
justice once acquired not to be loseable, or in peril of falling from the
soul.

CHAPTER. XXVII.
ALTHOVGHI we prescribe no limits or bounds to the infinity goodness of
Almighty Why justice subject to loss. Rom 11. Quomodo moritur caro
amissianima, qnae vita est cru^: Sic moritur anima amisso D^o, qui vita est
eius Aug Tra. 47. in Johan. c 10. D Th 1 a 2 ae q 8 ar 2 and 2 Que 111 ar 2 1 a
2 ae q ^4 art 11. Intuemurquisque animam su5. si peccat moritur pecca^u^ more
eil ani^nae D lu ct^^^: quod malu^^st: con(...) illa occidit. it Tra^in Johan,
49. cap. 11. Ezech. 18. Isa. vltimo. Marc 9. Apo. 14. 1. Cor 6.
God, as if deficient at any time for the preserving of justice in man, or
that he is mutable and changeable to reuerse and contremand by a later fact,
what before absolutely he has once ordained; yet in that justice, his gift,
in residence depends on the quality of our lines, and can not abide with
certain sins forbidden us by himself in holy scriptures, therefore we
define, that upon man his infirmity of malice, this precious grace of
justification may be lost, and we offending of the children of God, become the
Slaves of Sachan. For as excellenilie well teaches the school doctor S. Thom
as; the estate and quality of justification does or absoblutelie and wholly
rely on the will and pleasure of Almighty God, but also on the property and
behavior of man his free will: the which being subject by reason of
temptations from the flesh the world, and devil, to commit such crimes as
are dealie wounds to the soul, and contrary to justice, therefore this
justice is to be reserved in fear, being h^ble to hasard of expulsion through
offenses incident to our nature, especially so mfi me of it self, and so
hardly and crastil ^lett on by the a suerse power of seduction. In lice then
in man mis^arrieth, when by sin accomplished either in the understanding, as
by infidel^^ie and error voluntarily procured, or by misdemeanure of the will
no oriouslie God or natures commendement are volated: When the just man,
saves Ezechiel, shall tur^e (...) away from ^^ justice, and commit uniquitie,
he shall dye in the same Lothen the just in reopardie to fall behold h^s fall
the action of in qu tie: regard the h^r^n^ of such a fall, the death of the
soul, an lauoidance of I fe by the grace of justification. The holy
scriptures do denounce sent ^nce of damnation to the committies of certain
sins, yea an inward consent only without outward per for mance, as to
adultery, to fornication, to unnatural uncleanness: then as such facts are
damnable, so do they putt man in estate of damnation, utterly cast him out
from the favor with God, as his child and dutiful servant. Nevertheless to
such crimes the just and best men are exposed, as in danger and possibility to
fall into them. Therefore they lose their grace of justification, and exclude
the feed of God from out their souls by the malecuolence of free consent and
disordinate appetite toward such unlawful pleasures. Be offendersin these
grecuous facts, in act of wickedness, just and beloved of God! And who is
absolutely secured from the snares of these grand offenses? If the dragon with
his tail drew from heaven the third part of the stars, that is so many bright
Angels created first in estate of justification, is it marvel, that upon
earth, in the empire of sin, the same dragon with his breath poison us to
death, and cause our ruin by deadly sin? S. Augustine affirms some
children baptized and justified Apoc. 12
after in the course of their lives, to because them selves of that justice,
and so dye finally the children of Satan: Of the litleones baptized, let
any man tell me, why one is prevented Aug lib 1. de pec. Merit c. 19. 21. l.
de Baptismo cap. 3 Quid enim skhodie videmus, quid, cras ignoramu. The
Protestant a filthic Putitane.
by death, least malice change his understanding; and another baptized is
suffered to live, and becomes animpious parjon: If they had both died, had not
both entered into the kingdom of heaven? Here christian Hope thus informed
stands upon her guarde in a watchefull fear serving God, knowing salvation
and present justification to depend on virtue performed by grace, and on sin
accomplished by concupiscence.

2. The Catharist, that is the Puritants, raised from the sudes of infamy by
Luther and Calvin, rule the Protestanters faith and religion, and make it
plain puritanisme; to wit carnalitie and bestialitie, and that under color
of magnifying the spirit and heavenly grace of Christ. The old Puritan held
opinion, that the just were not freed from sin, as if they could not committ
the action of the same, but avouched that no sin never so beastly or
outrageous was imputed to a faithful person, or bereued I^en. l. 1. ca. 1.
Epiph hetes. 64 Hier. con. louin.
him of present grace and justice: so did also affirm with them louinion a
gross and filthy heretic. The Prorestanter accordingly as he professes
himself justified by the justice of Christ apprehended by faith, so pronounces
he, that as long as this faith abides, so long his justice does remain: so
that first this his faith, by his reputation, is preserved by God only from
all possibility of vtterdecay, never to be expulsed by infidelity, Rob. Abb.
def pa 304. Call l 3 Instit. cap. 2. Sect. 11.
then no sin of humane concupiscence can commit that fact, the which has
power to exclude the same. God, says Calvin, for ever does regenerate only
the elect with his incorruptible seed, that the seed of life sowed in their
hearts do never depart from thence. And whereas some avouched that no
certayntie is left for men, that their justice shall ever endure, thus does he
in scorn reprove them. Suerlie a goodly hope of salvation Sect 40.
is recommended to us, as if only by a moral contecture we for this instant
should esteem our selves in estate of grace, ignorant being what will become
of us tomorrovve! But this dross must be cast into the furnace of trial, and
so be proved what pure metal it will afford.

3. Christian Hope being meek and humble, recommendeth unto us a moderation 1
Cor 13. Humanity of Charity against the Protestanter.
in the esteem of our proper grace and perfection, and dissuadeth all arrogant
chalenging of any endowment serving for p^de and to a lof^ie conceit of
vanity: But this kind of Hope is only proper to the Catholic by virtue of
his doctrine and belief; cont^ar wise the opinion of the Protestater as
touching his justice not subject to casualtie of loss, is haughty and proud,
therefore erroneous, and to be refused The former proposition is manifest out
of scriptures, disp^ouing pride as a vice especially in Jacob. 4.
opposition to christian perfection. The m^n^r thus may be made good and
veritable: When ^n in reuiew of his own fra^ tie, looking upon himself, as
upon an earthen 2 Cor. 4.
and oritle vessel, containing ^ui. the weighte and moment of incitimable
glory, which is the grace of justification, discovers playnlie his own
danger, submitted himself in a fearful carefulnes to the mercy of Almighty
God, thinks but baselie of his one ability as concerning the danger infixed
in his own nature, to loose the preciousest it well he can devise of, and as
it were the whole substance of body and soul; On the otherside to claim a
security and certitude in all events of action, of temptation, of God his
ecret and just judgments, that never justice atcheeued can be taken from
Ephesians. 5.
us, is with security extreme pride and arrogancy; as not to repute our
selves britle veslells, prone to fall, or that we walk in ways and times of
danger, that we conuerst Ephesians. 6. ^. Pet. 1.
amidest so man^e adversaries, and that spiritual, as Sothan with his
accomplices wonderful spightfull, crafty and potent to work our destruction:
which is a resolution contrary to holy scriptures and a manifest presumption:
The which, says S Augustine, Aug l. de correptat great. c. 13. C. 6
Accepta^gratiam Deisuo in malum libero amisit asbittio. idem cap. 8 Justified
in Baptism may be reprobate. de Praedest. Sanctor. ca. 13. Quam multiintus
^uda^t, postea blasphema^nn? Tract 45. in Johan. c. 10.
in this place of temptation is not expedient, where is so great infirmity,
that security may engender pride: Yea moreover he plainly avouches some of
the damned once to have been in estate of grace and salvation, and by the
secret judgment of Almighty God, after to have wanted the gift of
perseverance. The which secret judgment of God, this great doctor affirms
to be profitable to us for our humility and fear; By reason of which
secrecy, We mnst believe, certain of the children of perdition, not having
re^eiued the gift of persencrance to the end, to begin to live in faith
which works by charity, and for a time sustlie and faithfully to live,
and after to fell, neither to dye before that this happen unto them. Then if a
reprobate person may for a time be just and holy in action, and after be
overthrown by deadly sin, what security of justice attained, as that it is
ever to keep hold, and to beautify the soul? And what monstrous pride it is
in the Protestantishe Puritan, to make himself by act of faith not only a
child of God for the present, but also in view of the same faith to place
himself out of all hasard of fall and iuine, as if not composed of flesh and
blood, not inclined to distoyaltie toward God, as if not in case to make God
enraged against him by his evil carriage, as if under his feet were all the
devils in hell crushed and broken there in his victory and conquest! Foolish
pride of the found Puritan, so to determine of his own estate and condition!

4. But indeed this Puritanisme is plain bestialitie, and a blytide flight of
the crow The Protestant proud, yet but a slouen by profession.
to the carrion, of the scarabee to the filth upon the earth. The which thus I
prove: Catholic Hope is employed in the observance of God his commandments,
in that faith does advertise, justice in the abiding of it to depend on the
obeying of heavenly precepts and fullfilling them by grace; but no certayntie
is thereof by faith that any man shall keep the commandments, as he is
willed in scripture, and as is necessary to salvation, therefore the
Protestant has no assurance of the permanencie of his received justice, but
such a one, as is Puritanicall, that is brutishe and unclean, The mayor is
denounced by our Savior Christ: Tou are my sisens, if you do those things
which I command. Joan. 15. Matthew. 19.
If thou vvilt enter into life, keep the commandments. Therefore Saint Paul
chasticed his body, to retain thereby his justice, knowing that justice could
not abide with a luxurious concupiscence therein: giving this reason of his
severe entreatie of it, least that when I have preached to others, I my self
become a reprobate. Then made the 1. Cor. 9.
Apostle this severe discipline a means to reserve his justice in better
establishment. Hear the answer of a Puritan. The commandments of God
therefore are laid before us, not Rob. Abb. Defen. p. 280. Virtue no co^ditio^
to be the child of God by the Protestant.
as the condition for obtaining of eternal life, but as the way to walk in
unto eternal life First his answer is quite contrary to the scriptures,
exacting the keeping of the commandments to eternal life, and so are either
causes of eternal life, or at the leastle conditions requisite thereunto. Then
the answer is beastly, ungodly, unchristian, and at one word Puritanicall,
that is abominable. For if the observation of the commandments not necessary
conditions to gain heaven, neither is it to necessary remain I uther in
Aphoris Fabrici loco; 9. auo^cheth that me^ consenting to sin do loose faith
and the holy Ghost Amittunt fidem, and spirirum Sanctum.
in iustice^ which if it be admitted, then does it follow, that there justice
may abide, and heaven there be due, where is not the keeping of the
commandments, but their contrary violations by adultery, robbery,
fornication, impieric, infidelity, envy, treachery, rebellion: which
concerpte, is to abuse the justice of Christ to villain, to make his Cross a
darte in the quiver of Venus and Satan to provoke concupiscence, in that is
absence of all virtue, and presence of all contrary vice, is there an estate
of justice, and an interest to heavenly bliss, and so indemnitie, liberty,
freedom to all outrage of wickedness. If the keeping of God his commandments
be not a condition to continue in the estate of justice, then virtue is no
condition commanded in those laws. If virtue be no condition, then the absence
of virtue hinders not the remaynder and abiding of a justifying grace: If the
absence of virtue do not exclude justice, then the presence of vice neither
does repugne with the same: in that in defect of virtue must needs be
abundance of opposite sin, bring no middle state for the soul betwixt good
and bad to remain in. O^gominie of the Christian profession, so aduersa^iue to
virtue, not requiring it as condition to persist in justice, and favor with
almighty God! It may be thus they will excuse this gross Puritanisme, and
color the filth thereof, saying: Although goodlife or the keeping of the
commandments be not exacted conditions to remain in justice, yet are they
necessarily consequens and followers of true justice, in that one once
iudified by faith shall be preserved from all heinous breach of God his
commanements, and be maynteined in charity, the which keeps the law: For
overthrow of this slight but ask of dust and defencel propose this argument.

5. No Protestant now justified by faith has divine assurance, that before he
dye, he The Protesta^tiuall sin will be just and regureth ver tue neither as
cause not as conditions.
shall not fall into great and heinous crimes, or that now at this present he
is not guilty of them: but all such heinous and grievous crimes can not
remain with the grace of justification; therefore he recayneth no divine
assurance that still he shall continue in grace and favor with almighty God.
The mayor is evident: for what scripture or revelation tells him, that he
shall not, at least in consent of will trespass it formication, in adultery,
envy, or such like, for all his life? Did not David and S Peter defile their
souls, as Adam did also after justification, with great and enormous sins?
What privilege then has our Protestant, that this proper person retayneth no
casualitie in it to fall into the same or equal? O the well guarded and
dadmintine breast of an apprehending Protestant! O sweet Paradise of his
worships soul, assured never to Isa. 34. Deus^non est saluator sapie tam,
potentu^, iustor^, sanctoiu, led solu^ Fidentifi quie quid fuerantno^ refer^
peccarot, publicamu, mere. (...) lairo fuetis, Lother. To. 1. page 126. August.
in Psalm. 12 Rob. Ab. def. page 217. The Protestants tears.
harbor vice or contamination, unto which all we Catholics hold our selves
subjects, dread them as bears, lions, and scorpions in the desert of our
Pilgrimage. But in truth he need not be so nice and so may denlie, as if his
soul were a virgin Puritanicall; it will play the good fellow some times know,
and dance a round and a currante with the devil, drink a health out of the
full creuse of iniquity: Tush, Tush, a Protestantcan and will sin, he would
not be without sin for a thousand pound by the year why then we will
accept of him this confession: first that for the present he does not by
divine oe^tayntie know that he is so just, as not guilty of any deadly
crime, or that absolutel e he is actuallie just as he ought to be, and as is
necessary to salvation: None of you, faith S. Augustane, daresy^, I am just.
And for the time to come he will not refuse to acknowledge, but he may tumble
into an offense of God, yea unto the violation of all the run commandments:
what then is the quality of a just Protestanter? Every day gives occusion of
great lamentation and mountning by great and grievous trespasses against God
and man. O Puritan in the kingdom of the goddess Cloacinal But who would
pity this mouraing minister, when he cries before he be hurt? Be of good
cheer man, all is well: The child of God weep, and one predestinate to
salvation! A pretty boy cry for a full, that has no harm! Let the Jew with
his ^nyons weep, not a brave Puritan with h^s gospel: Be still good ha^te,
here is a piece of sugar: thou art just, thy sins are forgiven thee, Christ
smyleth upon thee: one laughe for a p^nny, or a friscoll with m^nsieur B^za his
mate forall christian souls. I never heard of an old bearded doctor weep
and mourn for noth^ng before ^f these great and grievous offenses against God
and man, despoiled the offender his soul of justice and friendship with God,
if they sent on fire and flame the sacred temple there of in Jerusalem, and
expelling the holy Ghost seated therein Sa^han, then were there right good
occasion of do^^ and grief: but seeing by the ministers reckoning, they are
bugbeares o^ hobgoblines that hurt no body but in conceit, I see no reason
why he should lament or mourn at their a^^uall. Then have we this by grant
under his own hand, that a just man may offend God and man by great and
grievous trespasses. But such great and gri^uous trespasses c^n not abide with
the grace of justification; therefore justice once atcheeued may be lost. If he
deny the proposition ^he svveating sickness of a Protestant.
subsumed, he is a manifest Puritan; than the which name and title, nothing is
more infamous, nothing so abominable, for according to this reckoning fal^e
are those scriptures and void, which threaten damnation to adulterers, to
fornicators, to murderers, in that a just person and the child of God,
remaining so, may be an adulterer, a fornicator, a murderer, yet free from
hu^^e: False are the words of Christ denouncing Joan. 8.
him to be a slave to sin, that commits sin, for that any sin never so
grievous and heinous may (...) with the grace of justification, with impunitie,
without all anoye or spiritual d^^riment. To the which ^othsome Puritanisme
must turn an eye as well the civil magistrate, as the Catholic doct^ur, when
he shall hear from the minister of the beast and his bestialitie, that a just
and holy man, the child of God, A pretty householde of God by the
Protestant. Christiano nihil prorsus nego^^^ esse debet, presertim in te^tatio
ne, cu^ lege and peccato. Qua tenus est Christianus est supra legem and
pec^artum. Luther Tom. 4. page 46. The lore of a Protestant. Charity in
purity defended against the Protest. Amb^ li. 2. de Ab^^ham c 11 (...). 1. c.
1 and 6 ^pi. here is 64. (...) ^^. de (...) ca. 1. (...) con. Iou. Joan. 3.
Ecclesiast. ^.
may betray his Prince and country, may ^^e in arms against him, yea spill
his royal blood, committ any fact i^ breach of his l^w or custom, and yet to
have God for his smyling father, and bring it to pass, that so holy a father
retain many knaves in their knauerie to his children and servants, regenerate
in faith, and contaminate in work, holy in abstraction, defiled in condition,
servants to Satan, and heirs with Christ, white by external imputation, and
cole black by n^^td conversation: And of this quality is the foul Puritan,
with his raynbow of imputation. Then have I this in issue, that the
Protestanter must either admit justice once acquired to be subject to loss,
or else that all turpitude o^ life be proclaimed lawful by him, as the liberty
of the Gospel, as the license of the Cross, and no sin or villainy to hurt
a sound apprehending believer. Fie, who would not loathe to dispute against
this dunghill of the Puritanish ministry!

6. Reduce we now the whole matter to a conclusion, according to the prescript
of Christian Hope: We Catholics being rightly informed, knowing the grace of
justification to be continually in ieopardie of loss and miscariage, meeting
with sin, to which we are much inclined, thereby become heedfull and
^olicitious to eschew all occasions of great offenses, thereby to preserve our
^^^ell of justice and friendship with Almighty God: ^o time, says S.
Ambrose, ought to be without a guardfull taking heed sithence that there is
no time free from fault. Neither do we allow of the Puritans or Catharists,
Ioui^ians, Nouatians, accounting them s^lues just and undefiled to death by
committance of any crime whatsoever, as report of them Ireneus, Ep^phanius,
Ambrose, and S. Hierom, but rather are we stricken in dread with the saying of
our Apostle: He that commits sin, is of the devil. Also we embrace and
follow the good counsel of the sage delivered unto us: As from the face of a
serpent fly sin, for if thou cemest near, it will bite thee: for sin has
teeth as it were of a lion, slaying the souls of The Pelagians professed,
that there was no need for man to pray not to be sed into temptation: for
that man of him self is sufficient to overcome temptation. Aug. de Great and l.
a^. cap. 1^. accordingly protestants are Pelagians fea^ing no hurt by si^^
Luther and Call. Euangelisteres of Ba^ba^isme and the de^iall* to maintain ^^n
men. On the contrary side to the bane of pure charity, yea of all honesty
and civility, the Protestanter is a Puritan, that is carnal and loose, with
a pretended privilege from Christ, assuring himself of a steadfast estate of
justice, never to be infringed or broken, no not when he shall commit any
g^^euous trespass against God, and man; no not in the Very act of any sin
hateful to heaven and earth, contrary to charity, yea without it: by which
persuasion, or rather coll^sion, he first enhanceth himself in intolerable
pride, then delights he himself in a security, as out of all gunshott from
peril, as if no pilgrim here below, but a ci^^sen rather above, and finally
becomes in force of his own doctrine a libertine wholly devoted to sin,
audacious to dally and play with serpents of crimes in the green herbs of
his own concupiscence, and yet in disport to receive no harm or annoy from
their poisoned stings. He reputeth his justice in fasetie, and in abode not to
depend on the actions of his will as condition, but solelie and meerlie on God,
continually maynteyning him in faith: so that God will still uphold and
confirm his faith, whatsoever the will shhall determine or decree in filthy
lust or unlawful endeavors. Finally thus assecured by an enchantment from some
foul fiend, held by him as an Euangelister, he d^re adventure boldly upon
any crime never so offensive to God and man He can not think that God will
lose his hold, once supporting in him a justifying faith, either by his own
sins, or the malice of the devil: or tha^ he will change and alter his
purpose and favor once having justified him in Christ; therefore hereon he
assured, thereby is emboldened by confidence in almighty God, that he may
without dama^^e to his justice give the raynes and license to the weakness of
his affect^ons, for in the mean while God holds fast: and as the sun by
his influence continually maynteineth the rays of faith, allthoughe they
shine upon a dunghill of evil life. In sum he is a Puritan, that is ^
libertine, a beast, a Barbarian, deming him self without detriment or hurt
by defense of his justice, and apprehending faith. Suerlie in this respect I
take the Turk comparatiuelie to be the angel, and the Protestant a grimed
collier, or rather a deformed devil Alas, what security in this our frailty!
Or rather what turpitude, if by the Protestant our fra^ltie be thus assured!

Restitit Trota annis bis quints, Senec. Agam.

Noctis vnius ru^tura praeda.
Ten years in arms stood Troy both night and day,
In fine to fall, through sack of one nights pray.
Right good is the counsel of S Ambrose: Let the home bredd and the stranger,
the just Amb. lib. 2. de Ab^aha^ ca. 1^.
man and the sinner be circum^^sed by remission of sins, to the end that
sin be no more committed.

Hope Catholikelie acknowledges a grievous hurt by sin, and also in every
one a debt to avoid the same. Against which pure and honest information
stands the Puritanicall Protestanter in virtue of his justifying faith,
making reckoning neither of the one, nor of the other.

CHAPTER. XXVIII.
DIVERSLIE may we gather out of holy writ, yea from the very documents of
The bad condition of sin Qui homicidium, adulterium, fornicationem idola
triam, and similia quequae co^mi^erit, no^ propter fundamentu^ per ignem
saluabitur, sed^amisso fundam^to aeterno ignetorquebitur. Augu. D. Fid. and
oper. cap. 16. Psalm. 5. Psalm 118. Psalm. 5. 1 Joan. 3. Eccles. 5. Psalm 33. 1.
Cor 6. Mors quippe animae est apostata^e a Deo, quod primum eius pecc^tum in
paradiso sacris literis contine^ur. Aug. l. de Fid. and Simbol. ca. viti^. ^.
Chr^. hom. 8. ad pop. Iosu. 7 Number 25. ^. Reg. 14. Iosu 7. Io^. ^. c^sent to
sin demnable by regard of liberty there of otherwise necessity excuses
from ^^^ne Hiero^. (...). Aug l^. (...) ca. ^. D^ Not and (...) 65. (...) c.
(...) the (...) Christ. Aug. de Fid. and op^. c. 17. Romans 6. Just me^ may
sin mortallie in incontinencie 1, Cor. 12 Aug. Epist. 108. Aug. lib. 4. de
Baprismo ca. 19. Sinners not vvilling to repent are not to be admitted to
the^a. crament of faith baptism Aug De^^. and oder. ca. 21. Cyprian Ser. ^^de
C^n. S^^pleto^ Se^. in dom. Pass. Prompt Mor. Excuse from sin committed
derived from original sin according to the Protestant. Call. 3. Inst. c. 3
Se. 1^, 12. Wit taker ^ depec cat orig. c 11. l. de concupi. cap 1. Liberty
of sin, if good works be sins.
nature, of what a vile, miserable and damageable quality is sin committed
by man against the law of God and reason. Sin therein is declared to be an
auersion from Almighty God and all friendship with him, to be a bad thing
ingendered by Satan to hold an offender guilty of eternal fire, to strike
the soul with a deadly blow even with deprivation of justice, to be an
actual rebellion against the maker of heaven and earth, as it were a mark
exposed to the darts of his most just revenge as teaches S. Augustine. The
malignant person shall not dvvell near unto thee: Behold a departure from God
by offense, and the offender thereby an alien made from his court and
courtesy: (...) d^stant from sinners is health, here then is the malady of
sin banefull. Thou O lord do hate all that work in^quitie; sin then
is an object of God his ha^^ed and detestation: He that commits sin is of
the devil. A bratt then of Satan is a sinner ^ He that hates hi^ brother
remains in death He that transgresses in one, shall lose much good: The
countenance of our Lord shall look severely over those that do ill: here is
the indignation of God against sinners. Clemency prepares a way, but the
follovving of evil prepares death. Those that committ such things shall not
possess the kingdom of heaven: because that the like trespasses expelling a
justifying grace, make the transgressor liable to hell fire, and exclusion from
out heavenly bl^sse. Did not the prime sin of Adam deprive him and his whole
posterity of a justifying grace? as also did not the Angels created in grace
of justification after fall, become devils, revolted rebels and enemies
against almighty God? S. John Chrysostom among the rest does excellently
well entreat of the maleuolence and harm of sin; namely declaring how
sin transformeth as it were the nature of a man to the quality of a brute
beast, auileth and disgraceth nature; and thus he induces Satan vaunting of
his victory over man by sin: He that vv^s ensigned with the Cross of
Christ, now in his soul bears my image; He that has renounced me in
baptism, does in his life obey me. If we also call to my^ de the grievous
penalties inflicted on sinful persons, not only upon the parties
themselves offendan^s, but on others also for their sakes, we shall in
recountance thereof descrie the odious estate of deadly and mortal sin.
Achaz committed sacrilege, and lo all his people therefore are afflicted:
Zambre defiles himself with the Madianites, and all Israel endures
calamity. Ionathas tastes of the honey contrary to his fathers vow, and the
hoaste of God is putt to flighte by the Philistines: The s^aldiour enricheth
himself with the spoils of the enemy against the law of God, and behold
thousands of men's lives are cast into hasard of death: Jonas charged with sin
makes the ship with all therein ready to sink, and to be^deuoured by the
merciless waves. Then is sin the death of the soul, and an object of hatred
in God, exposing the offender as odious unto his divine judgment.

2. Moreover we Catholics considering the perfection of Christian justice,
office and function, do not think it sufficient a little at the beginning and
onsert of temptation to give some resistance, and after to yield consent, heart
and hand, or to committ sin with some remorse, grief and resentment of
conscience, but absolutely to withstand sin, that at no time the flesh over
come the spirit, but rather to procure that after solicitation to sin from
sense, the spirit be still superior, surrender not himself to sin, as a
weapon against his own life and salvation: VVhe that are dead to sin, says
the Apostle, how shall we still live in it? If dead to sin, then is sin
by grace not extant in the soul, for so it should live by existence of true
form and inhesion in the soul. If we are not to live in sin, then
absolute^^e is sin not to be performed by ou^ vital and franck operation or
employment. If the just be dead to sin, then in the (...) the flesh can not
domineere and command, it may not obtain the victory, offer some small
conflict and oppositions at the first encounter; We knovving tha^ our old man
is crucified, the body of sin to be destroyed. In the old man crucified,
can not be found the same old man in life and action, in empire, i^ conquest
to have the majesty of consent in all our endeuo^s, but rather in the
auoidance of sin, the regenerate do destroy the body of sin, excluding it
from their souls, and not acting sin by their consents. And as the
regenerate are free persons through grace, so are they not ^laues to sin,
obeying sin as commander over them? for as speaks the Apostle: you are
servants to that you obey, whether of sin to death, or of obedience to
justice. VVhereupon if the just suffer sin to be accomplished in their
souls, if they yield to sin, they are slaves to sin, to death: that is
they be in estate of damnation without all justifying grace. To those that are
fallen, says S. Cyprian, sins are as ha^le to fruits, as blasts to traces,
as pest^lence to heardes, to ships as cruel tempests and storms.

3. Whereas the Christian doctrine especially tends and is entirely
directed to purity of life, Antichrist endeuoreth nothing so industriouslie,
as by certain persuasions to corrupt the lame, and so to breed a contempt in
men's minds of virtue, and all christian perfection of endeavor. The which order
and issue of the Gospel the Protestant^^ diverse ways labors to stain,
and to corrupt this integrity of action by his judgments in matter of faith,
to bring in a neglect of honestie^ and a fearelesse boldenes to adventure upon
all sin and iniquity. First then to this purpose does he dispute out of the
nature of original sin, making the soul contaminated and defiled by
necessity and ^low as it were of corruption from it with all manner of
enormities He counts therefore every faculty of the soul, as the
understanding, the will, the appetite, bent to unlawful pleasure through Adam
his first transgression, and now in a disorder and distemperature in all, to be
wholly sinful; hateful to God, and worthy eternal damnation, and that in
the very just and regenerate. Then moreover he defines, that these abilities
of nature so weakened and empaired, as it were so many fu^^aces do cast out
continually as flames and spa^kles, and as fountains do yield forth the
streams, of deadly and mortal sins, and committments against all the
virtues, against the whole ten commandments Thus does he enfolde and
incompas^e man even by law of God and nature in a webb of sin and of
manifold deformities. VVhereupon moreover he does censure every good work
of man as stained and polluted with the aspersion of deadly and mortal sin
utter he displeasant to Almighty God, only pardoned by the imputative
justice of Christ, and in view thereof accepted for good. The which cont^gion
of sin, infecting all the good works of the just and regenerate, they think
derived unto them from the faculties of nature, out of which they actiuelie
proceed, or into the which passiuelie they are received. For in that the
understanding of man, his will, and all other his abilities to work are
sinful and odious to God, they impart the like malice and blemishe unto all
their operations: so that good works are sinful because issuing from
sinful faculties of nature badlie inclined, or in them placed as their
seats and subjects; whereby they repute them defiled and odious unto
almighty God.

4. Also the same Protestanters establishe the empire of sin, and the
indemnitie Sin commanded by the Protestant.
thereof by the very commandrie of God and nature. For no man is ignorant,
that both God and nature prescribe unto us the exerercise of virtues; the
which endeavors of man being necessa^ilie sinful, thereon does it follow,
that we are obliged to be be sinful, and that sin never so mortal or
deadly of it own nature, is not imputed unto a faithful man, or in any
respect harmefull unto his soul.

5. Lastly most urgent and capital for the liberty of sin stands the
Protestantish Justifying faith of the Protestant is sinful.
faith of justification, because they attribute justification from sin to
that faith, the which believes no sin to be imputed: The which faith may
consist with any Faith and knoledge cathe^ encreasen^nne the perdone it Aug.
lib. de Great. and. l. arb. c. 3. 10. Tra. in Johan. cap. 1. Chris hom. si ad
pop. Original sin forgiven is cause of a pure l^fe. Aug. in Ench. c. 64.
Baptism takes away sin Tollit, detra hit VV. taker. lib. de
concupiscentia. Luthers faith stronger then his wine or verity. Fidelis per
solam fidem potest erigere sese, concipere cer^am and fitmam consolationem: and
no^ pallescere a facie peccati, mortis, diabolt, and omnisi malorum Luther To.
2. Just persons and regenerate may sin against justice and chastitis. Act. 8
Aug. Epi. 108 Iren l 1. cap. 7 Tertull Apol. The quality of virtue is as
spur unto the same. Aug. lib. 2. de peccator merit c. 4 soluto re^tu, quo
vinctos originaliter de^nebat, ad ago nem interim manet.
sin, and so excuse from damnable fault the offender in the very act of
sin what soever, as in the trial shall appear.

We Catholics do not deem as original sin either the bad inclination of
nature, or the indeliberate and first motions of a necessary and natural
concupiscence; thereunto induced, for that we behold them to be in persons
holy and justified: knowing otherwise such to be the excellency of Christian
justice, as that it may not abide in a soul subject to sin, in a soul
defiled with innumerable sorts and kinds of mortal offenses, in a soul
hateful to God as teaches S. Augustine. VVherupo^ we eschew such trespasses
against the law as a wrack and ruin of justice and salvation; and thereupon
in charity become more pure and void wholly of all mortal and deadly
stain. Contrariwise according to the reckoning of a Protestant, man has no
reason to dread the committance of any sin, the purpose of any sin, the
intemperate act of any sin; in that actuallie, and that continually, he
does whether he will or no, violate deadly all the ten commandments, offend
in adultery, infornication, infidelity, envy, murder, and that with a
sufficient consent to a mortal crime. No cause therefore is therefore a
Protestant to fear sin, or to retain a care to avoid sin, in that by
will and appetite he does still nothing else but desire, wish, purpose deadly
sins, repugnant to all the virtues commanded in the decalog. The Protestant
is of opinion, that for one to be guilty of adultery, theft, murder, it is
not necessary he should freely consent unto such enormities; in that all such
offenders have no free will or sufficiency of grace to the contrary; and so
is it all one whether they be committed by them in sleep, or in time of
waking, upon deliberation or in a passion and frenzy; fn that equally they
were voluntary and free in the will of Adam: only is then according to him
required, that men do desire such bad things, and consent unto them in
appetite of will. Then what need a faithful Protestant regard much what he
does or intends to compass, in that whether he will or no, he shall be
adulterous, covetous, unjust, incontinent, and a violater of all the ten
commandments, and yet such sins are not to be imputed unto him, or to become
hurtful to his soul? For if he should say thus with himself: Tomorrow I mean
to murder such a man, or to kill my self, he shall have no reason to think
himself by such project and intents deuoide of a justifying faith; in that he
might repute them truly only natural acts of concupiscence, the which
concupiscence in its whole latitude ariuing to the breach of all the
commadements, is not imputed unto him, and he knows by faith as much. So
that to say that concupiscence in act is not imputed to any, is to affirm,
that the designements of murder o^ of any villain are not imputed, in that
the sins are equally mortal; and for that such sins necessarily issue
from concupiscence according to the Protestanter. Here then is the goal and
end of Protestancie, to perform all things never so wicked with indemnitie and
liberty in the lord; and it is that odious dunghill of Puritanisme, the which
in primitive time of the Church defamed the name of Christianity even with
reproaches from Pagans themselves, as termed meneaters, workers of sin in
darkness, Euersores luminum, as write Iren: and Tertullian.

7. As the Catholic admits no formalitie of original sin remanent in man
after baptism, so does he think worthelie of such good works, as be
virtuous endeavors, and of such functions, as the Holy Ghost by grace and
regeneration stirs up in the justified. Wherefore for the abolishment of
the empire of sin through Christ Jesus, and for the desire and love of
purity, we esteem virtuous works first as morallie good, in reckoning of
their proper ends and circumstances; then also good supernaturalle and
Theologicallie, through the grace and motion they have from our head Christ
Jesus: VVhereupon is ingendered in us a greater desire of virtue, and a more
maine hatred of sin so opposite and repugnant thereunto. Contrariwise Ne
sequaris iudicium rationis, quae dictat Deum irasei peccato ribus: sed mactata
ratione creed in cum. Luth. Tom. 4. pa. 76.
the Protestanter seeks continually for the preferment of sin, and in
despighte of all christian righteousness to place it not only in the soul,
where the same abides, but in the very action of righteousness, of sanctity,
as cohabitant with what goodness it may obtain howsoever. Against which
position thus I dispute* If a man may purpose to do a good work, and thereby
perform a bad one and a mortal sin without hurt to his justice, he may
also determine with himself upon the same warranty of not imputatio^ to committ
murder or any other villainy: but the sequel is wicked, it is abominable, it
is Puritanicall; therefore also of that quality and condition is the
antecedent part of the same proposition. The mayor is thus proved: To purpose a
good work, is to purpose a deadly sin, to have in act a good work is to
retain in act a deadly sin; bnt than a deadly sin in act can not be
divised a thing more malignant and contrary to justice, therefore the quality
of deadly sin in the purpose of murder can not work greater anoy to
justice, than the mortal infection adjoined to every virtue, equally both
being hatefell to God: if then one be not imputed but lawful and not hurtful,
neither is the other to be imputed, to become damageable or distressefull:
rather it is to be supped up by a lively faith, and so not imputed. O lively
says in a dunghill, and in the carcass of a stinking carrion! It is suerlie a
very sport, sent aside the doleful event, at which christianity greeueth, to
behold the Protestanter shifting and struggling to avoid this absurdiditie, to
wit that a good work should be a bad one, that a work procured by the holy
Ghost should be infected by the devil: that in a work, to which all are
obliged to putt in practice, should be descried the hateful condition of a
mortal sin. VVhereupon they refuse and abhor to say in express terms
that good works are sins, although Calvin directly avouch it, and it is
evident out of his doctrine; but affirm only, that they have some blemishe
of sin, some aspersion, some touch thereof. A fond collusion of words to
color a foul heresy, and to dally Rob. Ab. def. pa. 587.
and play with the simple senses of their ordinary followers. According to
this phrase of speech a man may say of a believer, if he behold him
committing theft or coulenage, that the man is an honest man in substance, yet
has only some touch and aspersion of knauerie and sin, and reduce all
abomination in the world to a touch and an Rob. Abb. his touch of aspersion.
aspersion. How gentle and civil is our Protestantish minister in the matter
of deadly sin! But let me question a little with this devils clearke, and
sprinkler of sin. Does not Calvin hold all the powers of man his soul to
be viciated and defiled by sin, in that pro^e to sin? The minister will
grant it. Farthermore does not the same Calvin thereon conclude, that all
works proceeding from those faculties, or received in the passiuelie behauing
themselves, if virtues to, admit a deformity, a blemishe a stain of a
mortal sin, as the water does. otherwise clear, receive contagion from a
defiled channel? True quoth the minister: Then good Sir, have we as granted,
that the formal Perkin refo. Catholic Se. of good works. Non sequitur
peccator es, ergo Deus te odit. Luther. Tom. 4. pa. ^87.
and principal part of a deadly sin is excited when a man works well. If
there be a formalitie of sin, a stain and blemishe then effected, I pray you
in what subject resideth it, or will your wits putt it out of all subject and
material cause? A subject it must then needs have: And where then is it, but
in the substance of a good work made by the faculty, or seated in the same,
and so from a polluted faculty it receives this formalitie of deadly sin.
If then the substance of a good work be a common recept^cle of good and bad,
of the formalitie of virtue, and that of sin, the self same act is good and
bad, and a good work in the material sense, is a mortal sin: for no man
can say that a good work, as good, is a mortal sin according to the form
of the thing; neither do we charge you with it, but only that you teach the
same work to be good and bad, and a good work materiallie to be in form a
mortal sin; and that the same work is truly good and bad by two
formalities subjected in the same act. Wherefore it is a simple similitude of
the minister comparing dross sticking to gold, to sin adhearing to a good
work: for dross is a distinct substance and suppositum from gold, and so can
not give any denomination to gold, as to say gold is dross; but the malice
of sin is inherent, as a moral quality in the act of virtue; and so the
self same act is a virtue, and a mortal sin. But that it is impossible one
act to be thus diverse and quartered in quality of good and bad, I have
otherwise proved: VVherefo^e the minister thus informed, in thus sort I shutt
up the argument. To a believing Protestant is not imputed a mortal sin in
act, whilste he does well, not is such good work being materially a mortal
sin hurtful un to him therefore neither is adultery, rebellion, impiety,
or any wickedness in act imputed unto him, or hurtful to his sweet gospelling
and puritanicall soul: Equally there is offense on both sides, and a moratll
sin. The cause is, for the will produces them with the same necessity, in
that according to the Protestanter he that commits adultery does it of
necessity, and so no difference may arise, for that the contagion of a mortal
sin proceeds from nature to a good work of natures necessity: The sin
adhearing to a good work is the sin of a concupiscence; and adultery is but
a trick of concupiscence, whilste faith stands aloft to shield sins from
anoye, to conceal them from God his sight. Then is a Protestant a free man,
his prentishipp is out, he may play the varlett by commission of faith and
belief.

8. Although we be prone to sin, yet is natures propension reclamed by
grace, The comma^dements of God and naturest and against sin. Aug. l. de Gra.
and l. arb. cap. 3. Christians both depart from out Aegipte of sin, and also
enter in to the red sea of Baptism and faith in Christ his passion. Aug lib.
de Fid. and open. cap. 11. Rob. Ab. Def. page 588.
and especially by the commandrie of God and reason, prescribing unto us the
auoidance of sin, and practice of all virtue. Wherefore to attain purity,
our Catholic charity regards reason and the will of God, thereby to eschew
sin and embrace virtue and innocence: on the contrary side the Protestanter
makes the very commandrie of God and precept of nature to tie men to sinne^,
and to defile them with the vile filth and ordure thereof: affirming those
virtuous endeavors to be mortallie sinful, to which we are obliged by God his
law and also instinct and precept of natural reason. VVhereupon I frame this
argument: All the good works of men prescribed by God and nature are mortal
sins, therefore we are bound to committ mortal sins, yea God and nature
are principal authors, inducers and persuaders to sins. The antecedent they
grant as good, and deny the consequent or illation upon a distinction, saying
the law of God and nature only to bind to the good act in as much as good,
and not to the same as bad and defiled by original sin, in that sin is not
implied in the duty, but arises by casual and accidental necessity from
the condition of the man. First who ever heard of a casual and accidental
necessity in any work of man, of which dreameth the slight brains of a
minister? If it be impossible that otherwise it should fall out, or that the
act of virtue should not be sinful, as now it is, supposing the sin of
Adam, how then is the duty thereof to God casuallie and accidentally polluted
with sin, being impossible, that concupiscence now should not be in man, in
that by nature all men, as says the Apostle, not by chance or accident, are
borne the children Ephesians. 4.
of wrath? O the casualtie of sin in an act naught and corrupted by the law
of nature, and not to be altered by any man his endeavor what soever! Yea that
the good works of men are stained with sin according to the Protestants own
principles is more necessary and less euitable, than that the act of murder
is a sin, or adultery, taking the act in the materialitie: that is, it is
more impossible that a virtue according to the material part thereof should
not be stained with mortal sin, than that the material act of murder and
adultery should be freed from such blot of deadly offense. I frame then this
argument to trouble the silly sophistry of the minister. Man is bound by God
and nature to perform that act, which is necessarily in the highest degree
sinful, therefore he is bound to sin, and to that sin of which God and
nature are principal causers and authors. The antecdeent is thus auerred.
There be two causes of sin, to which sin is imputed, the one is the
physical cause, as the will of man or angel that sins, the other the
moral, as he is, that persuadeth sin to an other by bad counsel or word;
and that these two manner of agents do sin is not required an Sin is not
purposed as sin.
express intention to sin directly with will of sin; for no man so
offends. For example, he that commits adultery, does not formallie and
directly intend to sin, yea he wishes rather that such a voluptuous act
were no sin: nevertheless he sins, because that such an act with all
circumstances adjoined, is sin, and that of necessity. Also one that
counsels an other to forswear himself for his own lucre, does not purpose
directly the sin of petiurie, but only the outward act, yet sins, for
that such an act invested with those circumstances can not be otherwise than
sinful. Therefore if man be bound and obliged to committ that act, as the
Protestant anoucheth, which is of necessity sinful, he is bound to sin:
and so if men be obliged to be virtuous, if the act of virtue of necessity be
contaminated with sin, and this thing be foreseen before the act, man ^s
bound to sin; yea after a straighter manner of obligation through
necessity, than he is in the case of adultery and perjury: for that
substantial act which now is adulterous, is so meerlie casuallie and
accidentally, because the party with whom the sin is committed might in
humane morality and occurrence of things, be the other parties wife or
husband, and so the fact is by chance only sinful: so also the act of
perjury might be lawful, alter only the matter, which may fall out all^o
no natural possibility in the mean season infringed. But that any act of
man's soul should not be a deadly sin, is altogether impossible according to
the Protestants grounds, and it can not otherwise be by any humane action or
event, seeing that only Adams sin supposed, and nature corrupted thereby,
by extremity of necessity all endeavors of men are polluted therewith, as with
a stain of a mortal sin; therefore obligation to virtue is a more forceable
obligat Bond to sin is found in all according to the Protestant.
on to sin, than is the obligation to adultery, murder, or perjury: because
these acts may be good and lawful, according to humane policy and events, as
to use familiarlie the party to one espoused, to kill by public authority,
or for defense of a man his own life, to swear a truth: Where as by no
humane chance it can fall out, that, virtue be not polluted with stain of a
mortal sin. Let the minister suppose one to be bound in conscience, or else
to purpose to kill or to steal: Then I demand of him, whether in this
supposall there were not an obligation to sin, and an intent of sin or no.
If he answer it were: Then I ask the reason: and he will tell me if he have
any wit, for that such acts are necessarily conjoined to the formalitie of
sin, the which of necessity will adhere to the act of the will, as soon as
it is produced. But then I will infer, that if a virtuous act be a mortal
sin of greater necessity, than is the act of adultery or murder, as has
been proved; then should there be in the obligation to virtue, an obligation
to sin, and ^n the purpose of virtue, a purpose of sin, which to affirm is
abominable, and a very villainy of the Protestantish faith and religion. The
consequent consisted on two parts; the first that men should be obliged to
sin by God and nature, the which is allreadie proved, the other implied that
God and nature should be principal authors and causes of sin: The which thus
I maynteine as good and as a just inference. God and nature persuade and induce
men to that act which of extreme necessity is a mortal sin, therefore they
are causes of mortal sin. The Antecedent is admitted by the Protestant, but
he denies the consequence upon a distinction, in that God and nature do not
persuade any act as sinful, but only as good and lawful.
Nothithstanding, this distinction, for the denial of the consequent, is
insufficient, yea childish, and frivolous. For example, if one should sit
down upon a stool unclean, although he intended only his ease, yet
knowing the event, should be cause of the defyling of his apparel, as is
evident, for that such an event is foreseen as naturally and necessarily
following on the act intended: so likewise if one should persuade an other,
with the like knowledge the same sitting, he also should be cause of the same
bad success, although he purposed directly and expresslie Induceme^tes to
virtue are induceme^tes to sin according to the Protestant.
no such thing: Even so God and nature, if they excite men to actions
necessarily made evil, as the immediate natural and necessary cause of
sin, they are also causes of sin, although not directly in form, yet in
a mediation of cause; in that an effect may becaused in an immediate action
arriving to the effect it self, and also attayning only to the cause thereof
naturally and necessa^^lie thereon ensuing: for example, he that is cause of
his own dronkennes does not expresslie desire or immediately procure
drunkenness, but only is cause thereof in drinking toe much, whereupon
dronkennes is a necessary consequent: In like sort if God and nature produce
in man any action, although otherwise good, yet if that action produced be
the necessary and natural cause of sin, they shall be deemed as causers and
prouokers of sin. But according to the Protestanter this good action or
work, in as much, as an effect of nature in man corrupted, and made vicious,
does necessarily i^plie the efficient and material cause of sin; that is,
sin is a necessary effect of that power and act in man prescribed by God and
nature, therefore to persuade and will such an act, is to persuade and command
sin. The cause is otherwise in the infusion of a soul into a body
propagated from Adam in respect of original sin, in that the immediate cause
of sin is not the information of the body by the soul, although the same
be required as a condition to contract original sin, but the common free
choice of the will in Adam. But here is a dispute not about habitual sin,
but actual and personal, and therefore God must be author of it, if in the
person offending be a necessity of sin, especially if Adam also offended
by necessity, as the Protestant teaches. No marvel then if sin hurt not a
Protestant, or that he need to be afrighted to committ sin, when he induces
God and nature as authors of his sin, and sin is not imputed by reason of a
faith apprehending the justice of Christ.

Qui mala principio genuit Deus esse putatur, Prudent. Hama^^.

Quique bona insecit vitsjs, and candida nigris!
Par furor illorum, quos tradit fama dicatis
Consecrasse deos Febrem, scabiemque sac^ll^s;
Inuentor vitij nonest Deus. Angelus illud
Degener infami conceptum mente creauit.
Calvinoita Deus tristis, ferus, insidiator.
God some men deem the prime effector of our offense,
As if good with bad, and white with black he did dispense.
Like frenzy certes of those in says, who for religions sake,
To scabs and se^ers temples do in honors v^^vv erecting make;
No, not vice did God first invent, but rather author of the same
The infamous Angel, who by sin from ra^e of hate condemned came.
He in mind of man ingendered crime: whereas a god of Caluins style
Is cruel, sierce and maynlie sell, devising how man to desile. The Puritan
his bo^e of honesty. The impurity of the Protestantish says of justification.
S^^e cauendum es^, nequ^squam eristimet infanda illa crim^n^, qualia qui agunt,
re^num Dei non possidebunt, quotidie perpe^^^nda. Aug. in Enchi^. cap 70.
Nemini enim d^dit laxamentum peccandi, quamuis mi^erando del^atiam sacta
pec^ata Aug. in Enchi^. c. 70 De Poenit. Did. 3 c sane. Clem Alex. l. 4.
st^om. Si quis dil^git mund^ non est charitas Pa^^is in ^o. Quo autem pertinent
omnia ^^^i tia mo^um malo^^^ nisi ad mundi huius dilectionem^ Ac per hoc illud
primum praeceptum quoad baptizan^os pe^^n^^e (...), sine (...) mo^^ us o^(...)
pacto potest. Aug. ^ de (...) and oper (...).

Why then is it not as lawful and as har^ elesse for him to committ
adultery, perjury, injustice, or any other villainy? And if faith abide with
the former deadly sins, why not with the later, and with the purposes of
any wickedness? Here is a bone for the minister; and if he can not ^reake it,
let him wear i^ in his cappe for a ma^ke of a loathsome Puritan.

9 But above all other Protestantish incitements to sin and liberty, to
committ the same without anoye, serves their faith of justification, the ve^^e
instrument of Antichrist to work the corrupt^on of all purity of life and
conversation. Thus then I argue: If that faith justify, the which believes
sin not to be imputed, then is there neither bond to avoid sin, or hurt
in (...), but rather from such a faith a liberty granted to sin: But the
Protestant accounts of no other justifying faith, it being the l^fe and
marrow of his religion, therefore does h^ a^counte neither of bond to avoid
sin, nor of harm by ^nne, but acceptethe of it rather as lawful and
allowable. The ma^or proposition thus is proved. The obligation we have to
eschew the sins of adult^rie, of fornication, of mu^ther, arises from the
harm such offenses do cause, as if they should exclude an offender from out
the friendship of Almighty God, and so make him a sl^ue to the devil, he
having sufficient and competent assistance by grace to avoid them: But there
is no such anoy or damage by them, if justification proceed from a faith
believing they be not imputed; in that there is no opposition or cont^arietie
betwixt that ^aith and any crime what soever; but rather a coherence and a
causali^e in the ve^^e nature of things, why they should consist both together*
For the sin is effected by consent of will and is the object and cause of a
justifying faith: the faith resileth in the v^derstan^^ng, and exp^cteth as it
were sin in the w^ll to work upon as object, when a man beleeu^th that which
his will commits, is not imputed unto him. And unless we consider this
faith to abide with actual sin never so mortal, and deadl^e, we shall never
behold it in practice of it proper function and work; in that it is the
office of faith and ^ct thereof, ^^ believe sin, as murder and adul^erie
accomp^^shed by the will, not to be imputed* Then I conclude: If sa^^h
iust^fying do a^ide with the act of adultery, or murder, it justifies the
soul from their crimes in the very moments they are committed: If so, then is
there no harm from any sin by the p^^uiledge of that faith, o^ any bounden
duty to resist and (...) them, their acts being tr^ed from a^oy by faith, and
the offender not hau^ng a sufficient grace to rep^ll them but are rather
necessary effects of concup^sc^^^e tak^ng awa^e free will, and through a
necessity enioyning the will to perform the^, as the Protestan^ does
generally licensing sin from God, determine. Far otherw^se does our f^^th
d^fine unto us for purity and charity, aduertising us, that faith will rather
aggrauate than excuse our offenses, and that if we break in matter of mo^^ent
the ^^wes of God and nature, we shall loose thereby our grace of justification,
become reu^lted enemies to Almighty God, and thereupon do we restrain the
b^nt and incl^^ation of ^oncupiscence to such evil demeanures. For this cause
in those rude Hebrews had Almighty God a principal intent to procure
purity of life, and extreme hatred of sin; forb^dding them to touch or
eat diverse things by his precept held as unclean, for that such things
prohibited in some sort did represent in their deformities the ugly shapes of
sin; as the hog filthy concupiscence, the k^ghte cruel oppression of the
poor, blood in form the inhumanity of manslaughter, upon whose aspects those
people abhorred sins in their loathsome pictures and representations.
VVhereupon we Catholics as we apprehend the malignant nature of sin to have
force, as the seed of Satan* (...) expel a ius^^ify^^g grace, the seed of
God from our souls, so are we thereby pure and hedefull to eschew such a bale
and shipwreck of our good estates.

Sed magis al^gera est, magis and medicata sagitta Prudent in Hamart

Quam iacit vmbrosi dominatio lubrica mundi
Eludens excussa oculos, calamique volantis
Praepete tra^s^ursu cordis penetralia figens.
But svvister is, and poisoned more
The dart of worldly power obscure,
Deceiving eye in flight, therefore
To ^ill the heart it holds in ure.
10. Now has the Protestantishe phancie and Venus licensed the world to sin
by a certain faith of indemnitie, if an offendant only can but believe that
his crime in act is not imputed, that the justice of Christ be apprehended by
the understanding, whilste in the mean season the will raceth out into
unlawful liberty. An easy sauegard from faith in the currence of iniquity:
for who can not believe in the mercies of God, although he yield to wickedness!
If the understanding will serve for security for innocence and indemnitie of
sin, only believing, then this says maynteined by the word, yea or
otherwise, it being so pleasant, so profitable for pleasures, by the same one
may save himself in the use and delights of any turpitude: For if there were
no sin in man, then had faith no cause or motive to exercise her act,
believing sin not to be imputed: so that then this act is to be produced,
when sin is performed. Then does faith not only remain with any act^all
sin, and justify from* it, but depends of sin. O vile indignity of
Epicurisme in the heart and soul of a Protestant! Neither is it requisite that
one which consents to attempt treason or murder, that he refuse first to
believe the Gospel and promises therein contained, that he believe no more
that God is his God, and Christ is his Crist, as speaks the minister: for
that this believe being an act of the vnd^rstanding, fyndeth no opposition with
the action of the will, and so there is no cause of infidelity* then remaining
faith there resideth with the same a warrantie to commit whatsoever bad is
suggested, and in virtue of that faith it shall not be imputed. This is the
sincke of Puritanisme and Gnosticisme. O light of the Gospel* The Protestants
confess al^sinne to be with justice vv^^^out harm. Ca^ 6. ca. epi. ad Romans


11. But here needs not any long discourse ^o prove the immunitie and
liberty of any sin to a believer, seeing that not onel^e reason and
experience prove the same, but also it is affirmed by the words of their own
mouths and styles. Whereas the Apostle S. Paul avouches death of the soul
to be effect of sin, Calvin a Protestanter thus contremandeth: How soever
you be desiled with sin, nothvvistanding you shall live, and the Apostle
promises unto you t^is life, so that you only follovv the endeavor of
mortification. Then may a man in act of adultery and murder obtain life of
the soul By faith, if the offendant be not a very beast, and have only a
desire of mortification. So that the act of any wickedness hurts not, if
there be a displeasance of the fact, and a wish that the matter went
otherwise. For says Calvin: The Apostle does not exactlie require the death
of the flesh, but only commands us, that we endeavor to (...)e the iusts
of the flesh Therefore according to this bestialitie of faith and religion, a
man in safety of soul may steal, murder, rebel, adulterate, if he have any
endeavor to resist sin, and to restrain the flesh* although sin in all
turpitude finally acted and brought to p^sse. To the same tenor also Beza:
Commodiouslie this exhortation i^ ^eza in ca 6. ^p ^d Romans
placed after the former, that we may understand, how we be dead to sin as
long as vvelyu^ in the (...): To wit so far, that the spirit give some
resi^tance, although it do not overcome. Then is it sufficient honesty and
sanctity for a Protestant to resist a little at the beginning of a temptation,
and after to yield consent and committ the sin whatsoever. Here the
Protestanter in his division gives more to the devil than to Christ: It will
The Protestants liberalit^e to Christ.
suffice for Christ his part, says he, if a man give some repugnance to the
devil, but the devil he must gain the victory, he must have the vpsh^tt the
sin effected, he must enjoy that he sought for, that is the consent of sin*
the preferment of pleasure before God, the brutish deportment of the life, the
deadly stain of the soul; and behold all men as his adulterers, his
fornicaters, his rebels, his manquellers, and what not in issue, only
excepted from him and his claim same small resistance at the beginning. A
proper fight of the Protestant against the world, the flesh, and the devil,
when as soon as he buckleth himself to strive and make opposition, he may with
his honor, with his sanctity after yield unto the empire of sin; I mean to
the acts of adulte^ie, of fornication, and such bestialitie! Is there no more
required for the life of the soul, and death to sin, than to resist at the
beginning, and after to yield, when holy scriptures absolutely condemn and
forb^d the actions of adultery, of fornication, of the^t and murder? What
purity of manners can befounde in this Theology, when no sin hutteth
tempting in pleasure, or is contrary to justification, effected in work! But
the Catholic Hope is far more pure, dreading to consent to sin, as mortal
to the soul, and a separation of it from the favor of Almighty God. The
Protestant in this point comes short of that intelligence of vice and virtue
acknowledged by the Pagan: for he thinks sin in general to displease God,
and to make the soul contaminated therewith, odious unto him: And when men
think to flatter themselves in a supposed security after their sins, or
devise to conceal them from men's ^nderstandings, yet, says he, God still
beholds them as most detestable sp^ctacles, with a purpose once to take some
revenge of them by his darts of justice.

-- Credamus tamen
Astu doloque tegerenos tantum nefas. Seen. Here^l.

Quid ille rebus lumen infundens ^^um
Matris parens? quid ille qui mundum quatit
Vibrans co^usca fulmen Aetnaeum manu
Sater deorum?
Let fancy frame a feyned ^eleefe
That craft the crime may yet conceal,
But where from God is found relief,
Whose light our secrets d^oth reveal?
Or how will he, that world does shake,
Hurling the bolte with arm so strong,
The fact in judgment seeing take,
The father and cheese of gods among?
Nevertheless a Protestant shielded by faith makes reckoning, as if Almighty
God did not see his offense, or would not impute the breach of his law or of
nature unto him. O foul event under a coulor of christian liberty and bounty
from Christ author and ensampler of all purity! And as in aged times even in
the Churches infancy, the Protestanters have a president of their filthy
doctrine derived from the Puritans, called Gnostikes, and Priscillianists, so
after even in S. Bernards days rose up one Tancheline in Antwerp, who broached
this libertine and lustful gospel protestantishe: And for that he pleased the
people in loosenes of faith, he came into that creditt with the^, that they
held him for an holy man, drinking relligiouslie the very water wherein he
washed his hands, his lotiones, as sovereign against diseases, and to be
respected as sacred relikes. And yet this foul wretch diuulged an opinion,
that adultery and fornication in true believers were divine works, in so much
as the inhabitans took it Hugo in vita S. Noberti cap. 34 Sur. Tom 3 die 6.
Iun^^ Baron. an. 1026.
for a great grace, if in their own viewes that varlet abused their wives, or
deflowred their daughters O fond and credulous popularitie! To the tune of this
vicious and luxurious sonnet define and dance Luther and Calvin, teaching to
be a divine work the act of procreation, and of rocking the cradle in vowed
persons; and that no sin is imputed to a believer. For if no^ imputed, why
can not the same faith procure, that as sin is not imputed, so that sin b^
no sin, but rather be a divine work, and please almighty God? And did not
the deceived Germans at worms desire to kiss for religion sake the not
nominable and abominable parts of Luther? In the time of S. Bernard were
found certain heretics called Apostol^kes, agreeing with the Protestant in
man^e points* as in denial of the real presence, of purgatory, intercession
to S and for prayers for ch^ist^^n souls, who as writes S. Bernard were
Manichean heretics in their filthy assemblies, and vulgar use of venery, and
that allowable by their doctrine, as he reporte^h.

12. It is therefore most manifest, that the Protestanter maintains at this
day the self same loathsome heresy, which arose in the Apostles time, and was
refuted generall^e by the church. And this may be euidentl^e proved out of
the words of S Augustine: Aug. l de fide and oper c. 14.
Who reports that some misconstruing the words of S Paul, did thinck that
to obtain salvation onl^^ faith to be su^ficient: and thereupon did neglect to
live vv^ll, and to hold the way of God. Which heresy, consi^^ing of ^owe
pa^tes: that is that the sole Protestants thinck of a Justifying faith, as the
old heretics did.
act of faith iustifyeth: and by virtue thereof one may neglecte good life
without^ loss of justice, is completelie and wholly avouched by the
Protestant As concerning the former part, the Protestant professes and
protests that he holds it. That also the second is admitted by him, thus
I prove. He may neglecte good life, and fear no sin, who once justified by
faith sins necessarelie and often times against God, and the law of nature
without detrimen: But the Protestant is of opinion that no sin against God
or nature anoyeth his believing oule, therefore by facultitie of his faith may
he neglect good life. The ma^or proposition is manifest: for why is not good
life to be neglected, when bad life does not endamadge? The minor is implied
in the doctrine of the Protestant, teaching that adultery and murder did not
hurt David, nor S Peter his denial of Christ: ergo he main^aineth the self
same heresy, which was broched by filthy infamouse heritickes in the times of
the Apostles, and condemned by the Church. Which abominablie among others is
roundly affirmed by the Archeministir, auouching on departing this life,
justified by only faith, Abbat page 308.
having no occasion to worck charitablie, or repen^a^the, to ar^ue to heavenly
felicity. Against which best^al^tie thus I argue. Whosoever affirms faith
to justify and to make passed^e into heaven without the worckes of charity
and repentance, avouches that to such an effect is sufficient a dead faith,
and such a one as is the Jacob 3. Aug. Tract 6 in Ihohan c. 1. D^^^^ and (...)
4 and 5. (...). c. 66. 83. que^t q. 73.
deuilles: but the ministir so affirms, therefore also he defines that a
dead faith and such a one as is found in deuilles to be a sufficient
pu^chace of heavenly bliss and beatitude The mayor proposition is auerred by
S. Ieames, and S. Augustine The minor imp^eth his one words, affording justice
and heaven to a bare beleuer dying without the worckes of charity, and
repentance: whereupon the conclusion is a flower garlic grouing in his one
gardaine. Farthermore I dema^de whether or no^th^s believing creature departing
this life before doing any good worck, might in the mean space have committed
murder or adultery, before that any occasion was presented unto him to work
charitablie or repentantlie? If he say he could not, then must he grannte,
that a good Protestant can no^ sin as David and S. Peeter did. But if he
admit the case, then let it be supposed moreover, that surhe a murderer or
thief be stricken with death, having no occasion to worck well: and to be
asked whether such a murderer Quousqueer go falluntur, qui de fide mortua sibi
vitam perpetuam pollice^tur? Augu. de 8. Question. Dulcit. q. 1.
and thief with his dead faith is to repair? If he save to hell: I shall
enquire, how was he then justified by faith? If to heaven, how then a muderer
an adulterer, and a knave? Surely if the matter go thus in the ministers
book, then honest men are to take heed^ of his commission: when as by virtue
of his mission believing knaves without worckes m^unte up to heaven And this
may serve for a flat demonstration. that the archeminister is a Baaliticall,
Gnosticall, puritanicall Carpocratian brutish heretic.

13. Now then i^ h^ped charity be a rule to decide the controversy, charity
I mean that keeps ^he law, that hate^h sin, suerlie the Catholic doctrine
is to be preferred, when as it auo^d^th sin, as the bane of the soul; and
contrariwise the Protestantish o^^on making no sin damnable to a belee^er,
inc^^neth men to sin, persuadeth them to sin, and finally exileth
charity, and violateth the link and lock of the soul with almighty God.

14 There ^^ no doubt, but as Antichrist in the Protestant hereby baneth the
purtitie The Protesta^ti^h opinion of sin not imputed is barbarouse.
and life of Christian profession, so also does he disfornish by rude and
filthy barbari^me civility of all strenght and ornament. For what subject
will much be restrained, for luker or purchase sake, to violate his prisucies
law, when want of impu^^io^ will assoile his sin, and make that Almighty
God in ^re and wrath do not behold his open treacher^e? The feminine Sex,
prone and frail in regard ^f concupiscence, by defecte of imputation has
fredome to dishone^ their husband^s, and ^ight good plea to stand against
their anger, as quitt from a boue, and not subject to devine wrath and
indignation. Who may trust his unthrifty servants fingers, were faith in the
lord shall sheelde his soul from giuilte of robbery, and secure his worst
fact from spiritual anoye? Th^s, this is the Protestantish close conuaiance
of a justifying faith: carrying sin, as no sin, upon all occasions into
every corner, to break trust and confidence betwixt man and man, were each
party has a ghostly indemnitie from hurt by any wickedness! O Barba^onse
faith, contrary to man his nature, the very plauge and poison of all civil
conversation! How dares the Protestant shutt up his watchefull eye, and leave
out of sight his neighbor, his servant, or wife, when they may dispose in
his affairs? Thincketh he not, that it will be soon believed of them, no thing
to be imputed unto them, when they shall carue up his substance, and deal out
the cards of his pack? And what will not such a belief perform, and couple
worckes to faith! And if they be by him apprehended in act of crime, as of
stealithe, or adultery, if they lay but once hold of the justice of Christ,
he may bid them good night, they be safe* and out of his r^ache. This brutish
heresy crosses herein the very sense of nature, best^ed upon us for our
great good and avail. For such is the malignant nature of sin, that by
penalty it does no less afflicte the guilty conscience, then the ho^ iron
sea^ing the live flesh anoyeth the same. Iuuenal satyr 13.


Exemplo quod^unque malo committitur, ipsi
Displ^cet au^^or^ Prima est hac vltio, quum se
Iudice nemo nocens absoluitur, imp^eba quamuis
Gratia fallacis Pr^toris vic^^^^ vrnam
VVh^se bad example ^^^mes does cause,
By bad attempt as auci^^^s dis^l^^ed,
This first (...) de^red by natur^s laws,
Offendantes feel* and judge them selves diseased.
No guil^^e man absolved is,
No when the Judge geues doom amiss.
Which profitable resenten^ent of sin is barbarous^ie abolished by the
Protestant, deeming no sin hvrtefull to his believing soul. And in vain
does the Protestante deduce his indemnitie from sin, in that he estemeth
that man can not possibly be without sin, and so is excused by necessity
from harm through^ sin: for S. Augustine expresslie reaches the contrary,
saying: If it be demanded whether a man or no Aug lib. 2 de peccator merit. c
6.
may be without sin in this life, ^^ons^sse that he may by the grace of
God and his one free will. By these and other innumerable testemonies, I can
doubt, that God has commanded unto man ante thing impossible, nether any
thing to beimpossible unto god aiding and helping, vvher^by that may be
performed, which is commande^: and hereupon a man, if he will, hellped by
almighty God, may be without sin. But excellently well in these words
he reproves Aug. l de Gra. and l. atb. ca. 7.
the Protestant: Certain persons not understanding the Apostle saying: we
thinck a man to be justified by faith without vvorckes of the law, have
demed him to say, ^aith to be svs^icient for a man, allthoughe beliue evil,
and have no good vvorckes.

Catholic Hope informed by faith distinguishes in purity accerding to
truithe, betwixt a venial and a mortal sin: to which is opposite the
doctrine of the Protestanter, making all offenses equally mortal and damnable.

CHAPTER. XXIX.
Charity ^ieth Sin^ ^^n a difference.
HOPE procures hatred against sin in general, as a thing either contrary
unto it, or in some other sort injurious and of hinderance. But for that there
are some offenses so in quality and malice small and minute, and to which
nature in us is in such sort prone, that morallie it is impossible to avoid
them all, hope working by charity does not eschew or shun all sins
indifferen^lie, or make the same reckoning Eccles 7. Prou. 24. Aug. l. 3. cont.
2. epist Pelag. ca. 3 De Na^ura and Gra^e 38 Amb. lib. 2 de poen. cap. ^0. S
Aug. in Enc. c. 64. puts a difference betwixt crimen and pecca tum. taking
crimen for a deadly sin not to be found in the just, and pe^^a tum for a
venial sin found in all c 71. ^. Cor 6. Deuteronomy. 27. Matthew. 5.
of every particular trespass. VVhereupon the Catholic doctrine, teaches
some crimes to be venial, that is, not of iniquity or validity to violate
amity and friendship of charity and justice betwixt God and man, but that
they may be found in persons most just and in the very children of God.
There is not the iustest man, that does so do good, that he sins not. The
just man falls seven times a day. Also S John, If we say that we heave no
sin, we seduce our selves. Accordingly S. Augustine: Allthoughe the devil
be author and prince of all sins, not vvithstanding every sin do^th not
make men the children of the devil. We be not all impious, as speaks S.
Ambrose yet all sinners: where he makes mention of daily penance delictorum
^euiorum, of lighter sins. The which truth is also conformable to humane
reason, whereby we perceive, that every small transgression does not violate
friendship betwixt man and man, or allegiance betwixt the Prince and his
subject, the leuitie thereof considered as derived from the quality of the
matter and object of the fact. On the contrary side holy Scriptures do
likewise inform us, that other offenses are repugnant to charity with God and
man, to the end of the Christian law: so that they deprive the party
offenda^t of divine grace and justice. Know you not, says the Apostle, that
the unrighteous shall not possess the kingdom of heaven? Accursed be he, that
remains not in obedience to the words of the law, nor does in work
perform it. Fo conclude, Our blessed Savior his words are, He that breaks
one of the least of these lavv^s, and accordingly teaches, shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven. Then are some crimes venial of their
natures, as composible with justice as teaches S. Augustine, others mortal,
and not Aug l. de Not. and Great. ca. 38.
consistable with the same grace of justification. Who discoursing about the
lives of certain (...) persons reckoned up by Pelagius, thus writes: But
because that offentimes in small matters, and some times sin crepeth upon
less heed ^ull persons, they were just, and yet not without sin In
which doctrine S. Augustine marketh out the original causes of venial sin*
to wit^ lightenes of the obiecte, and want of full and deliberate attention.
Also speaking of the continual battle we maintain against the motions of
concupiscence, By which says he either deadly, or veniallie, we are over
come: hereby contracting Aug. l. 2 cont. Julian ca 10. in Enchir. ca. 64 De
bone viduit cap. 4. speaking of ven^all conco^piscenscence in marriage Aug l de
perfect Iustitiae ^a. 9. Epist. 89. Tra. 2 in Ioh, e 3 tra. 26. c 6. No venial
sin ne according to the Protestant. Call l. 2 In c. 8 Sect. 28 ^8 59. L 3 cap.
4. Sect 28 The purity of cha^^t e against the Protestant.
tracting just cause to pray daily, Forgive us our trespasses. Also he
affirms a just man observing the law in some sort to be immaculate: who
vvanting damnable crimes, is not negligent by alms deeds to purge ven^all
sins. Moreover expresslie he makes a distinction betwixt grandia and l^tali
a peccata, ac peccata minuta, great and deadly sin^es, and small sins,
affirming these to be in the just, who are delivered from the other.

The Protestanter frames to himself a Hope, the which in passage accounts
all sins equal (...) mortal, that is equally contrary to sanctity,
semblably odious to God and in like measure worthy of eternal damnation; in
sum indifferenthe of one strain in respect of ha^me: in that generally not
imputed to the just and true believers. There is no reason, says, Calvin,
vv^y we should exempt the least desires of lust from the judgment of death.
And of sins forgiven, or not hurtful to the grace of justice, he pronounces
them to be venial: Not that they deserve not death, but because through the
mercy of God there is no damnation to those, that are in Christ Jesus, because
they are not imputed because they are taken away by pardon. Come we to the
comparison by the virtue Hope.

2. The Catholic Hope serves her self notably for purity by two documents,
to wit, that man may by the grace of Christ avoid any sin and the
turpitude thereof, and hereby encourages a^^ men to work with this grace, to
consent unto it for virtue and honesty: Moreover it teaches, that sin is to
be repulsed, for that it is worthy damnation, for that it con^rideth the death
of the soul, and can not abide with charity, due unto Almighty God. And
hereupon arises a grea^e hatred and dete^^ation of sin, and so consequen^lie
charity thereby is preserved in the greater purity and integrity. To which
defenses against sin and vice, as the suer guardes of Christian Hope,
opposes himself the Protestanter; first making i^ impossible to avoid mortal
sin, then fashioning such a sh^pe of deadly sin, as if a continual
companion of Hope and charity, and by their presences made ven^all,
pardonable, although never so grievous and offensive to God or man. According
to the former respect the Catholic conceiueth of Christ his grace, as more
beneficial to mankind, than does the Protestanter, in that he acknowledges
the grace of Christ given to the just of competent force to preserve them from
such evil facts, as be deadly breaches of God his commandments, as are
hateful^ to his diu^e Majesty, and an actual enmity against this his supreme
and ouerflowing goodness. Whereas the Protestanter reckoning all si^^es
equally damnable, disg^aceth the me^^ts of Christ as not of ability or
bounty to protect the just from them, but that notwithstanding such grace,
they daily offend d^^dlie, and contaminate their souls with the foul brands
of such vglle deformities. Moreover that the Protestanter hereby does
pa^^onise wickedness, and license the righteous to all impuritie with freedom,
I prove by this argument. If all offenses be damnable and deadly, and none
ven^all in the Catholic sense, then may the just as well and (...) as great^ a
^afe^ ^ seven times a day commit murder or theft, as they do trespass in
kind of sin mentioned by the Scripture; but such an opinion is flatt
Epicurisme barbarouse and brutishe, therefore all sins are not indifferently
deadly and mortal. The sequel of the Mayor proposition is manifest: for what
can hurt more than deadly sin? or what demeanure more potent is to exclude
justice, and endamage a man, than a mortal sin? but if every venial sin
committed by the just be in deed mortal and damnable, then it is not the
property of mortal sin to deserve damnation, exclude justice, and place the
offender in the estate of perdition, but only the quality of him that
sins; as if he t^ansgresse with faith in the promises of God, or without
such a faith: so that mortal sin is not damnable to a believer, in that a
believer never so just at the least sin ^ seven times a day mortallie
without any loss of his justice. Bu^ murder and theft are only in that
quality mortal, as be the daily offenses of the just, therefore as a
faithful person firmly believes that these his daily and quotidian sins
in act are not imputed, and that they expel not justice of Christ imputed to
his soul, so also believes he, that neither murder or theft, designed by
him, or hereafter entering his consent, can anoy or hurt his justice, but
rather not to be imputed, whilste they be in act and performance: which is an
abominable liberty not of the gospel, but of the flesh and filthy
carnalitie, reproved by the innocent life of Christ, by the commandments of
God and nature, finally by the testimonies of holy writ, denouncing
damnation to grievous offenders. And who perceives not, that hereby christian
charity is much empaired 1. Cor. 6.
and debased, whereas a Protestant knows by his faith, that this his saving
belefe and charity may consist with any mortal sin of wickedness, as well
as with an idle word, with a negligent government of the sensual part, with
the stealth of a pin or a point? Where is that charity then, which
observes the law, which is found in that soul, the which notoriously and
deadly violateth the same law? Where is the purity of this charity in the
auoida^ce of sin, when as it may remain in a sufficiency to salvation in
the very breach of all the ten commandments, in the concupiscence of
adultery, of murder and, heft, and dwell with any sin whatsoever, only
infidelity excepted, as with a venial trespass, turn^ng all sins into
venialities, and into good fellowships of a Puri^anicall and beastly
persuasion?

3. Neither does it avail the loo^e liberty of a Protestant the nature of a
venia^l How a venial sin is against the law.
sin, being a true and proper transgression of the law, as if to it in this
respect were due the stipend of death and damnation, as gene^allie to sins
the Apostle denounces, for indeed every venial sin is a proper and
formal breach of the law of reason and nature, in that reason tells us,
that this or that venial sin is not to be committed: nevertheless the
venialitie of it arises from the small weight and moment of the object, being
a transgression against natural reason* yet in a small matter, and so morallie
it is not mortal, or so odious to God, as is murder and theft: as to steal
from our friend one penny, is not to be esteemed by him reason a bly as hate
full, and as contrary to friendship, as the robbery or cousenage of an
hundred pounds, allthoughe both in the one and in the other be found a fact
against reason and judgment of justice. Therefore when the Apostle and holy
scriptures auouche generally, sin to be Damnable, and deadly, they
understand certain offenses notoriously against charity and friend ship with
Almighty God: unless the Protestant will condemn all just persons stained
with some offenses, or pardoning them by an adjoined faith, give a privilege
and indemnitie to mankind believing, to commit any outrage of sin and
iniquity. In deed this they conceit, and live accordingly: only shame
hinders them from conf^ssion and utterance of so foul a best^^litie masked
in the apparent counterfeit visour of a reformed Christianity.

Hope Catholic remarcheth heavenly bliss, as a reward, and purchase
through good, and meritorious actions in persons justified: of which meritt
seeing the Protestanter makes no account, in that behalf his hope is plain
arrogancy and presumption.

CHAPTER. XXX.
THE hope Catholic, since that it expects heavenly beatitude by means
What is requisite to me ^^t.
of merittes, and as s^^pende of good deserts, therefore it is behoufull, whee
declare in particular what is understood by an action of man meritorious, and
what conditions are requisite thereunto. First then a meritorious work is the
endeavor and operation of some virtue, as Intellectual, Moral, or
Theological, freely and voluntarily by God his grace performed by man in
this life to wards a good and ^^udable object, with all circumst^nces of
person, time, and place complet^ie furnished and invested. Then to this m^r^tt
is exacted l^kewise* precedent estate of justification, Council Trid. ^ess. 6.
cap. 6.
remission of sin, and childshipp with God: VVhereupon ^h^ Council of Trent
defines, n^ ^ther the (...) of says (...) that of hope, or of charity, or of
repentance, or of good purpose, the wh^^h do d^^pose man, and prepare the way
to the (...) of grace of iust^fication, to mer^tt or deserve this grace: in
that perfect me^^tt either o^ the increase o^ grace, o^ o^ (...), presupposes
the person so (...) to be first^ the (...) o^ God, and (...) with him by that
(...) of ami^ie cau^ed in (...). Moreover (...) in persons just and sanctified
do floe from the actual grace, (...) them by Christ: he as the vine
con^^nuall^e impa^ti^ge Joan. 6. ca. ^6. Cum Deus (...) me^i ^^ 1. (...)hill
aliud co^onat quam (...) ua. Aug ^^^. 106. Con Au. c. 11.
that sacred (...) of (...). the which does go^ before all their goo^
vvor^^e^* (...) them, and (...) them, (...) ^he which they (...) in no (...)
be grateful or (...) unto (...) God. (...) in the just and (...) us (...) that
there are two graces, the one perm^nent and habitual, to w^tt that of
justification, as quality inherent in the soul: the other actual and
operative, as vocation from God. and (...) the hol^e ghost, we design in the^e
graces the ver^e fountains as it were from wh^nc^ springs all value of
meritt and excellency to the good wor^kes of the just, wh^ (...) that they be
the worckes of s^ncti^ied persons, of the freindes of God, and such en (...),
as are excited and procured by motion from the holy ghost, and merit^es of our
savior Christ. Finally to a work me^^^otious app^^^aineth Heb 10. 2 Cor. 2.
Tim. 4.
the free promise o^ God through Christ, pledging his fidelity by grace, that
he will justly and truly reward the good actions of the just, and their
diligent keepinge of his commandments. For by a meritorious work we
understand such a one, as has efficacy and virtue to attain reward in
heaven, as of justice and bound 1. Cor. 2. (...) merito pe^at^ tanquam
s^ipen^ium redditut mors, ita merito iustitiae tanquam (...). Augu ^p. 105.
of debte in allmight^e G^d not only a merciful, but also a just and a
faithful paymaster, as the scriptures teach: The which the just judge shall
give unto me: and therefore that promise sent aside made to mankind only by
the deserte of Christ, no worckes of man can at^aine to glory, or chalendge it
at God his hands as due from his justice, nothing being of ability to oblige
him but his own promise and decree, and so without it no wo^^ke absolutely is
to be said meritorious. An example: if one labored in the field of an other
not (...), o^ not interceding any covenant, such labor should not be well
deserving, or in justice competent to exact stipende or reward. Nevertheless
the value and worth in the work does not arise only by outward The value
of a good vvorcke. Pro bono^^ oper^ metitis. iusto iudicio, (...) ipsa
mis^ri^ord^^ tribuetur August de corrept and Great. ^ap. 13. Trust in merittes
is trust in grace and mercy of God 1. Genesis
promise, but it supposes also a proportion of dignity in the same: as being
a work good and virtuous, conformable to reason, a work effected by one,
that is the child of God, justified, and lastly, excited and stirred up by the
inspiration of the holy ghost: then all these things concur^ing, the worckes
of virtue in the just are meritorious in Christ: that is by his grace inspired,
and promise of almighty God: so that we hoping for salvation by our merittes,
therein we especially confide and trust in the mercies of God through our
savior Christ: that is in his grace, cause of all good actions that be
meritorious in us: no otherwise then does the countrieman expect the increase
of harvest without presumption respectiuelie to his own toil, reposing also
confidence in the seasonable influence of the heavens, and benign clemency of
nature. And as it stood for the commendation of the fountain in the midst
of paradise, that by the strames thereof the whole circuit of that soil was
enriched with plants and herbs (...) painted with flowers, so does it
advance the work of Christ his cross and his meritt, that we in his (...)
express worckes of virtue and (...) the efficacy of his derived grace.

2 VTherevpon I cannot sufficient^^e admire the gross and (...) ignorance of
the The opinion of (...) from (...) m^me. Non est e^im ^
Protestan^er empea^hing out doctrine of meritt, as stained with the heresy of
Pelagius, against testimony of antiquity, repugnant to euidencie of discourse
from wit and reason. (...) and his accomplices strayed from the Catholic
truth precisely in three points: first for that he (...), that man by force of
nature without farther (...), (...) believe, hope, and (...) the
commandementes, and so (...): then of grace had acces^e, he (...) unto it the
office o^lie to (...) the^e good wor^kes: lastly he held opinion that such
grace was (...) by actions of man his pure natural ability and employmentes.
All which (...) in the sacred Council of (...) dis^rie, anat^ematise, and
(...): believing that grace is of necessity to n^^ritorious worckes, and not
onl^e of (...): likewise that such grace (...) the effect of God his sole
mercy through Christ, and no^ of man his action and conversation; graciously
from God his free dispense of goodness we receiving the grace of fatih, the
grace of hope, the grace of fear, the grace of repentance, the grace of
charity, the grace of good purpose, and so finally the grace of justice and
remission of sins. Whereupon the second Council of Au^osicum senten^inge
to damnation Pelagianisme, thus defines: (...) vvorckes, if they be performed:
but grace, which is not of debt^, goes (...). Au^. 2
before, that they may be performed: Where Pelagius is disallowed not
absolutely for assertion of meritt, but for his error of the necessity of
grace, and cause thereof: whereupon concordantlie the Council of Trent: So
great is the goodness of almighty God, (...). Trid. (...) cap 16 Aug. (...)
^^^. fundam ^^^eron ^^ ad (...).
that he vvill^th, that (...) actions (...), which are his own gifts.
Farthermore who doubts, but that heresy of Pelagius misprised the meritt of
Christ, extenu^ted and educuated the same, as teach S. Augustine and S.
Hierome? Whereas the Catholic este^me of meri^t rather commends and
aduanceth it: we taking meritt in our selves for the effect of Christ his
meritt and grace: unless according to the deep Theology of a Protestanter,
the nobility and excellency of the effect disgraceth the cause thereof. VVhe
establish meritt, but meritted and caused by Christ: we expect glory for
meritt, as grace for grace, increase for seed, gue^don for labor, repose for
warfare, yet by the merittes of Christ as origin of the same: we trust to be
saved in heaven by merittes in us servants to God, yett resolving this
confidence in the mercies of God, into the grace of Christ, the true agent in
all our merittes: we acknowledge meritt in man, yet entertain humility, not
reckoning of man as man, but as instrument and tabernacle of the holy ghost:
God forbid says our sacred Council Conc. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 16.
of Trent that an^e Christian man should trust in himself, or glory, and not
in our Lord: in that his gifts are our merittes. Where we may take notice of
the palpable ignorance in the Protestanter, accounting, that with the opinion
of meritt cannot subsist confidence in the mercies of God: seeing that our
merittes are the impressions, the motions of God his merciful grace: unless a
Protestanter to the ears of an ass will join the corpse and head of an hog;
and so meerelie trust in God his mercy, in that he hops for bliss thereby in
heaven independantlie on all virtue, on the observation of the commandments,
placing nothing betwixt God his mercies and his sins but a repose in mercy,
and a reachles disposirion of his own life and manners: for if a Protestant
expect salvation, this condicionall annexed, if he keep the commandments,
if he repent, if he suffer with Christ in mortification, then by his own
counters he must not repose only in God his mercies, but upon the condition of
his own action, which he deemeth presumption in extremity: and therefore to
avoid presumpsion he must discarde all honesty. O lamentable blindness that
brings a man to the donghill of so loathsome a resolution!

3. And if we revew the sacred testimonies of holy writ, we shall see that
from Meritt a^o^ched inscriptures. Matt 5.
heaven itself is establisted the Catholic opinion of meritt in the worckes
of ververtues. Your reward saves our Savior Christ is abundant in heaven.
If reward in heaven, then deserte on earth: in that they be relatiues, and
cannot be understood without a mutual respect. If a reward, then not a free
gift of sole benevolence, but an office of justice and judgment: unless the
wise Protestanter will call the alms imparted to a poor man* a reward of his
poverty: Wherefore unless improprietie of speech be attributed to God, as
the bla^phemous spirit Protestanti^h perhaps will have no scruple to grant,
if in heaven be a reward, here below is a meritt and well deserving service.
Call the vvorckemen, and give them their wages. Neither is eternal bliss
Matthew 20. Matthew 5.
bestowed on men absolutely as their perfection, but in reckoninge of worckes,
and for worckes, as cause: Blessed are they that suffer persequution for (...),
because the^^^ is the kingdom of heaven: Wherefore persequution being a cause
of ^oy in the kingdom of God, it must needs be the mora^l and meri^o^ious
cause thereof: otherwise by an absurd manner of words shall seem inserted
that particle because. And to signify this causalitie and meritorious
efficacy in good worckes the Apostle S. Paul expected this reward: They
vhich ou^ lord shall give unto me the just judge: Vhere for our reward 1. Tim.
2.
God is called a just judge in his repay and remercement, for that the worckes
of grace in us might mer^toriously chalendge as much. And our savior Christ
himself designeth the good worckes of the faithful as causes of glory, and
so deserts: Come you Matt. ^6.
blessed of my father, (...) the prepared kingdom for you from the beginning
of the world: for I have been hungr^^ and you have given me to eat. Also
universally holy David makes a Psalm. 65. How justice and mercy concur in
God revvarding our merittes. Gratia cum data fucrit in cipiun^ esse e^^am
me^i^a nostra bo^s. (...) tam^ Aug. l. de Gra. and ^ arb. ca. 6.
reference in the providence of almighty God to man's merittes and
demerittes, as if rewards and punishment from God took occasion from their
demeanours: Thou shall render to every one according to his vvorc^es.

4. Neither is th^r^ any just cause of the Protestantish esteem in this
affair, as if the opinion of meritt either impaired the b^neuolence of
almighty God, or diminished the value of our redemption by Christ: seeing that
all our merirtes are the peculiar effects of God his goodness, and Christ his
satisfaction: neither the judgment of God, accordin^ to justice of (...)
rendering stipend of bliss, being occasioned originall^^ by his own grace and
promise, does any whitt empeach his benevolence. Truth it is, that our
merittes of virtues do not found an absolute and perfect nature of justice and
debte betwixt us mortal men and almighty God, if we consider justice, as we
take it in humane affairs; yet it does cause a meritt of condignitie, and
Vasquez. 1. pa disp 85 and 85. Suarez. opust relect. de metitis.
of equivalent recompensation, p^oportionablie answearing the employment.
Taking justice a^ an office ^orall and humane in the conversation of men
deu^ded into justice Commutatiue and distribut^ue, on the party of him that
gives, we regard a thing as his own, not subject to him, unto wh^me it is
imparted before the gift and surrendry thereof: then in re^pect of him that
thaketh the thing yielded up, it is unto him beneficial and commod^ous, as it
appears in all bar^aines of selling and buyi^ge, and other services for
reward: both which, co^ (...) fail be^wixt God man* in that the merittes of
our wor^kes by m^nie ^tles are due unto God, and that ^^dependan^lie of our
consentes; neither is God enriched or abettered by any d^ety and functions of
mo^tal^ men^; yet (...) in this defecte of iu^^^ce taken in vigor, as we fi^de
i^ here in this l^fe be^wixt man an^ man, may consist perfect worth of meri^t
and dese^^e, and a certain iusti^e termed in the ^choo^e (...), and of a
semblab^^ Justice in the (...) of Christ.
analog^e and propo^^ion. An ex^^p^e (...) the merities of ou^ ^auiour Ch(...),
the which he offe^ed as the most sw(...) and prop^^ (...) for ou^ (...) to his
et^^nall father, in the which noth^nghe wa^ offered, that oath(...) d^d not
app(...) unto that ete^n^ll father, neither w^^ the^e a^^^ p^^ce ther^, the
which en^reased (...) unto him, (...) perfe^^, exact, and most rigo^ous (...)
the value a^^ (...) ed, the (...) Ci^ill ^om 4 ^^. T^es. ca. 3.
proce^ded from the (...) worck^^g and d^se (...). In (...) so^^e although the
virtues of mortal^ men ^n (...) of humane a^^ (...) cannot (...)act rewa^de a^t
God h^s hands, ^o (...) much as the^ be de(...)d (...) his grace, from the
mo^^^n of the ^o^^e ghost (...)s, and (...) end^auou^s of h^^ (...) an^ (...)
regenerate, they are (...) and (...) merit(...)ous. (...) (...) in the opinion
of meritt S. Augustine defend^th (...)om Pel (...) (...) the (...) of Christ*
or the mercy of God* S. Augu(...) (...)y, that so (...) and (...) battered
with h^s writi^ges the er^ou^^ o^ (...). This great Docto(...) pu^^nge of the
double estate of S. Paul, as by g^a^e first c(...)d, then through grace
worcking well, dese^uing, and expecting reward ^^om God ^s iu^t judge;
con^idereth one thing effect of God h^s mee^e me^cie, and an other Aug^ in
Isa. 100. 2. ^i^ 4. Quim (...) illis qu^^ ^be^at non re^d^^ (...) oper^ (...)
tunc redde^ vn^^uiqu^ se cund^ opera ^^us Aug lib. de Great. and ^^ a^^ cap 24.
Psalm. 100.
thing as meritin^e of his justice: The Apostle says he [hath f^und him a
given in time of mercy, and holds him as a debtor in time of judgment. And
how this is to be understood consider you. He says: for I am even now to be
(...) ficed, and the time of my resolution is ^eate. I have ^ought a go^d
fight, I have consummated my course, I have kept the faith This appert^^^eth to
the time of mercy. ^or the rest, there remains for me a crown of ^ustie,
that our lord shall re^de^ unto me the just judge in that day. He says not,
he shall give, but he shall render: when he gave, he was mercifu^l, when he
shall render, he shall be a judge: because I will sing to thee o lord mercy
and judgment. B^t forgiving sins he made himself debtor of a crown; then
did I attain to me^c^e. First therefore is our l^^d merciful: but here he
shall render me the croune of justice. Why shall ^e render it? Because he is a
just judge. And why a ^ust judge? Because that I have s^ught a good sight,
consummated my course, kept my ^aith And because he is ^ust, therefore he
cannot but crown these things, for he has found these to Crown. Before what
did he find I that first was a blasphemer, and a persequutor. These things he
has 1. Tim ^.
given, and the others he h^^h crowned. He gave these th^nges in the time of
mercy, and he has (...)wned ^he oth^^s in time of judgment. Because o lord
will (...)inge to thee of mercy and ^udgement] VVhe^e S August^^^, first
aga(...) Pelag^us, as co^ce^ning (...).
our (...), defines the ^^me of mercy and justification as proceeding from
the free gift of God his grace, without d^serte of such ^race by man his
natural ability: The Aug l. deGra. and (...). 24 R^dder bo na p^o^onis quoma^
^^nus and rustus ^st. Aug. l (...). ^. and (...) 6. (...) (...) (...), (...)
post bona m^t^ta conse* (...) ^. 22 etc. 12. ^. Co^. ^5.
against Iouin^an, and our Protestants* he mentions the time of justice ^^
God, when as reward shall not be a mee^e free gif^e, but a repay, a surrendrie
of a thing pur hased by grace; in that such grace does enable and en^ich the
good endea^ours of the heavenly crown and gue^don: so then S. Augustine
remarck^th in good worckes a value, a price, a digniti^ in resp^ct of such a
reward, as by justice, of deserte wo^^hy the same: and that n^^ just and
condign remer^ement cannot only a^^se from the sole promise of God without
some propo^tiona^^e con^^gni^ie and wa^ght in the wo^ck^, as after shall be
clea^^^e dem^^^tra^^^ To the same tenor of he Cathol^ke doctrine S Gregory
the great, and ou^ (...) Apostle, does ent^eate: The (...)lie (...) f^^st does
vvorcke in ^^ ^omethin^ ^ ^ ^. Where th^s Do(...) ^^ (...) i^ the former pla^e
(...) on thing eff^cte^ by (...) ^n ^* then placet^ ^e the cons(...)our free
w^ll (...) with that grace in good worck^s: ^: ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^* Greg (...).
(...) in (...) Hom. ^ (...). (...) ^p 80 (...). ^. ^^ (...). C(...). Cat 4.
^. Again sa^eth the^ same d(...): ^. Al^o S. Leo: ^ ^ ^ By which t^stimonies
appea^e how free gift of grace, with (...) o^ action, and in God merciful D.
Th^^ a ^. ^ (...). at. ^. Merit^es do follovv the prou^dence of God Au^ust ^p
ad ^^^entin. To^ 7. M^tth 25. Non quia (...) ^st me(...). vel (...) a (...)
D^us (...) Aug. (...) advalen. T(...) (...)* (...) the P^o^^^^ant.
bestowing with just rewarding, concur^e and meet, without any ^mpeachement
of the one or there other.

5. Which truth likewise is conse^uentlie deduced f^^m the very nature of the
providence in allmi^htie God, as S. Thomas with the school clea^^ o proueth^
for as ^^ppertaineth to almighty God to abilitate and accomplish ^he nature
of man with faculties and helps of grace to atcheiue his end, so also
conce^neth it his final^ are, as judge, to take a^count in reck^ninge of
justice of his b^hau^our; and so to r^warde in him either good dese^tes of
virtues, or punish bad c^riadge and d^meanu^t of life And if m^n by this
p^ouidenc^ for evil worckes shall be sertenced (...) h^ll* why not for good
enhaunced to heaven? So that the gr^sse and absurd heresy of he Protest^nter
denying merittes o^ wo^ckes, gives the repul^e to the ve^^e p^ouidence of
a^mightie God, and course; that it s^o take, either absolu^^lie euacua^in* such
pou^^ence, o^ by imputation of absurd the and iniquity (...) and* la ^heming
the same Let us now lay down the esteem and asse^tion of the Protestan^^^ in
this p^inct of meritt.

6. The Protestant Calui^iste^ is so far from adm^^tance of an^e value of
meritt in the vett^es of the just, that he ^^^her accounts of them no
b^tter* then o^ deadly and mortal sins, even odious unto almighty God, and
wo^th^e in deed of eternal damnation ^in that they proceed, as he deuiseth,
from faculties of nature vitiated and corrupted by original sin: in that
they are accompanied with original sin it self, VVitak. l 1. de pee orig.
^. 7. l. 1 c. 3. Luther ^. ^. 31 32. ^en. lib ^. Hiero cont. (...).
the which he deemeth to be a continual breach and violation of all the then
commandments, in the holiest, and so utterly void of any price and just
deserte. The just man says Luther in every good vvorcke, yea done after the
b^st manner, does sin. Neither do evil vvorckes make an evil man. Which
foul heresy in ancient times was broached by the Gnostickes and Puritanes:
then after recalled by Iouinian and his acco^plices. Whereupon S. Amb^ose
whriting to those of Vercellis, thus speaks I hear to have come unto you
Sarmation and Barbation vain talkatruefellovves, that say there Amb^ ep. 133.
The Protesta^tis^ (...).
is no meritt of abstinence. Yet for that the holy scriptures avouch certain
worckes of grace to d^serue as meritts, and that once in heaven they shall be
rewarded, the Protestanter agniseth as much, but in this bare sense, in tha^
God by verue of his promise has made them meritorious; and for the sake of his
sons justice impured unto the faithful, will admit them as rewardable and
gracious, otherwise displeasing unto him as of no value or worthy reputation.
And hearevpon he takes occasion in his railing Theology to disgrace our
cause, as injurious to the merittes of Christ: in that we trust to be saved by
them, to such effect not esteeminge sufficient the merittes of Christ: he
accuses us also as presumptuous in pressing so high, as to a divine reward
for repay of our worckes so imperfect, so deficient, and sinful: and here
he begins to weep again, his brains distilling through heat of his zeal,
when others pity, and laugh at the sillic idioti^me of his great foolerie.
The holy scriptures, says he, ascribe the gift of heavenly bliss
entierlie to the mercy of God, and to grace through Christ Jesus. How then of
deserte and iusticie may the Roman challenge the same, as if by action he had
merited as much? He that crovvneth thee says the Prophett Psalm. 102.
David in mercy and in merciful compassion: And our savior Chrisi himself.
When you have done all these things, say that ye are vnpro^itable servants;
we have done that we Luc 17. Romans 8.
ought to have done. Accordingly the Apostle: the grace of God is etrnall life.
The suff^rances of this time are not fully vvorthie etc. Now procred we to
trial.

7. That hope cannot consist wi^h due correspondence to a divine rule, the
which The hope Protestanti^^ pres^ptious.
mispriseth and extenuateth in man the grace of Christ and his merittes: rather
such hope is true and Theological, the which stan^eth eff^ctuallie for
commendation of them both. But of the former malignant quality is the hope
Protestantish, and of the other is the virtuous hope Cathollke, therefore this
is the hope sincere, and commanded by God, and not the other. Can in any
sort the hope Protestantish show it self for the greatninge of Christ his
grace and meritt, the which a^ileth them both in their proper effects and
operations, in that according unto the same it produces in man no goodness of
virtue, or moment of deserte, every endeavor of him being Hope Catholic
comm^deth the meritis of Christ and telyeth on them
hateful to God, and defiled with sin? Contrariewise we of the Catholic
profession avouch, that the merittes of Christ are so potent, that they cause
in us the merittes of virtues, as infinite finite, as a fountain the stream,
the stem the branches, the sun the beams. And as the fruit which issues
from the stock receives some resemblance of nature and taste from the same: to
which effect of relish some times is instilled the ^u^ce of balm, or spices
into the troncke or lock of the twigge engra^ted, so do we attribute that
vigor to the merittes of Christ, that it brings forth in Our merits at* God
^^^ (...) and e(...)s of his grace* and so no (...)(...) mentes unto them Aug.
l. de Gra. and (...) a^. c 6. and 67. D^ corrept and Great. c 13. We must co^
^esse without doubt, therefore eternal life to be called grace, because it
i^ given for (...) me rites as gracethe gave unto (...) Epist. (...) la ne
(...) (...)^um* (...), qu^a (...) The (...) of the Catholic hope against the
Protestanter. Matthew 16. ^uc. 12. T^^^et. ibid. (...) of in c. (...). (...).
dec(...) the difference of en^^case and revvard in heaven according to degree
in me (...). Iudic. 16.
us also mer^ttes in proportion imitating and representing them as origin and
root: our merittes being effected by those in Christ, the purchase of his
sacred blood, the gifts of his fathers mercy* and therefore reposing hope in
these out merittes for degree of glory* we therein hope in the merittes and
grace of Christ. Neither can I thinck, that the Protestanter hops for
salvation without all virtue of faith, of repentance of mortification, of
observing the commandments, unless the faith of Circes cupp have
transformed him in Christian man's shape to the conceit and spirit of a
beast. Do not we then more illustrate the grace of Christ and his passion by
opinion of our meritt, before the Protestanter by his esteem of mortal
sins? Good God, Through Christ and his grace no motion or action in man but
mortal sins! and yet thesese be they, the which to maintain their idle and
libertine faith, will reproach us with Pelagianisme in empayring the grace of
Christ* whilst they under the sun of Christ his justice place nothing else in
man but mortal and hateful sins! O strange kind of influence from heaven,
not falling upon a garden of virtues, but guilding and dissemblinge rather a
donghill of v^ces!

8. An^ as this argument drawn from the meritte of Christ is demonstratiue
against the hope Protestantish, so also no less efficacy has this other
deduced from virtue and the office of man prescribed by nature, and also by the
law of almighty God. That hope is not approueable, the which licenceth a man
to slooth, to neglect of good endeauours: rather is to be embraced an hope, the
which is franck in all commendable actions: But the hope Protestantish is of
the former taste, and the Catholic of the latter quality; therefore that hope
is to be abolis^ed, and this to be entertained, It is not to be sufficient the
expressed by words, what encouragement the Catholi^e receives from this
opinion of meritt: in regard whereof by good worckes he living reposeth a
treasure for himself in heaven not corruptible, he builds a mansion place of
eternal ^bode: and after that the worlds commaundrie has by distress of
fortune, or issue of death excluded him out of her service, remain the
fruictes of merittes sprouting out as high as heaven, according to our sauiors
words: that is bringing fourth effects worthy of heaven, and heavenly
joys. In view whe^eof we contemn worldly pleasures, and commodities, as the
haru^st of fatal misca(...)ge, and fruits of autumn soon ripe and soon
co^rupted In the opinion of meritt we dread not in the service of God to
adventure upon any difficulty, to suffer any calamity, seeing these actions
and sufferances to be meritorious, and worthy of a heavenly reward. But if
in worckes be found not any value of meritt, as the Protestanter deuiseth: yea
rather contamination of offenses, why should men endeavor in virtue, either
giving the onsett, or enduring the violencie of the adversary, life once
expired, all good thereby decaying, and mouldering away into the ashes of the
funerals? Or is it auaylable, to sin, to offend God, to displease the sacred
majesty? O vile heresy so bent to disgrace virtue, the flower and excellency
of mankind? O filthy heresy, so with Dalila clipping from the Sampsons of
Christianity, the locks of their fortitude: and ^ulling them in a sleep of
retchlesse contempt of all virtue and goodness! Far of an other intelligence
was S. Gregory Nazianzen, expound^ng that place of our savior: ^n the house
of my father are ma^^e mansions: As there be ma^^eelec(...) of lives, ^o with
God ther^ be M^tt 29. (...)g Naz. otat d(...)mo pauper. (...) de (...). ca 1^.
ma^^e places of entertaynment: the which are distributed and divided
according to (...) meritt and dignity. Whereupon we esteem of virtuous
actions in this life as it were of things consecrated to God, and characters
drawn out on the top of Olimpus in dust o^ ashes, to which, as reports
Solinus, remain still not altered, by reason of the hight in that place; so we
taking virtues as eternal in their effects, being meritorious, do busy our
selves to that aduantageable good purpose most industriouslie. How merit^
(...) Protestanter.


9. Notwithstanding Calvin perceiving that the sacred scriptures expreslie
term the bliss of heaven a reward, a goal, a crown, a stipe^d; also to
a^oyde that imputation of (...) liberty and neglecte of virtue, dissembleth
the matter some what (...) in cap* ^ Matthew.
by colors of words, and first a^mitteth glory celestia^l to be a repay and
guerdon, although with improprietie of speech a th^nge so termed. Then he
declares in what sense the good worckes of the just may be taken as
meritorious: and to that effect he ^ssig^^^h two causes; the one for that they
are adjoined to the justice of Christ apprehended by faith, and imputed to a
bel^eue^: as ^f God for ^uch justice sake held certain worckes of men as
meritorious: then for that to them is promised in Scriptures a stipe^d in
heaven, therefore in virtue of such promise they are made well deserving: yet
not in regard of any glory essential to beatitude, the which is o^elie due,
as he e^teemeth, to the justice of Christ, apprehended by says, but of some
other accidental ornament and perfection in that estate and happiness. So this
John of Picardie. Doubtless in this doctrine is enfolded many and manifest
injuries against the blood of Christ, and h^s holy grace First dishono^eth
the peon of the holy ghost, as if in speech it used improprietie, nor did
equal^ie the nature of things reported, which is a blasph^mie and ^mp^^eth as
much, as if the holy ghost were ignorant, and knew not how to speak or
en^ighte, but rather gave occasion by style to others of error and mistaking;
in that the Scrip^^res, recorded by him, ^n p^^ne terms call heavenly joy a
reward, a repay, and stipend: and now foorsoo^h according to the Dictionarie
Theo^^g^^ of this Pi^^rde, to the s^cre^ Sp^^it^ must be ascr^be^ improprietie
of speech, ^ea (...) and a^use against ^o^mon se^^^, as after shall be
de^lared. Then p^^cee^^th ^e in ^ebasi^g of the bl^ud of Ch^^st and h^s (...)
grace: for to Hope Protestantish against the i^stice o^ Christ and pro^^^e^ce
of God.
^^ow* that worckes, oth^^w^se in their own proper natures, mortal sins,
for Christ his just (...) b^ God the father to be taken as m^^^to^^ous, ^s to
fo^ce the justice of Ch^^^t ^o (...) sins* to (...) to be^^^fie sins, and
make them precious ^n the (...) ^f ^ll (...) God, ^ea to en^ou^adge men in
power of that faith to comm^^t^^ ou^ (...) of (...) attemp^es: Heeron ^o^h ^t
ensue, that ^n David mu^de^ (...) in S P^t^^ the (...) m^ster, were no^ only
pa^doble, venial, not ^mpu^ed, a (...) unto them, which he Protestanter
grants, such tresp^sses ^^^ing ^n them with the grace of justification; but
also meritorious and gra^^o^^ unto alm^^h^^e G^d If not (...) why good
Protestanter? because, says he, they (...) sins and ^ ^each^s of God ^is
laws: is it so? And is your memory so sh^^te, tha^ you have ^o g^^^en you
uttered ^o la^^ by your selves; to wit that (...) and mor^all sins are
accepted of God, for the justice of his son his sake, as me^^torious in
persons well beleeu^^g? an^ why then to that effect in murder and adul^e^^e
^^^dereth the turpitude o^ sin? If one sin be meritorious through Christ
his justice, why no^ all and eue^ie one? Let him an wear if he can, and rouse
himself out of the (...) of this his fo^^e and f^ll. A w^nde^ment, that
VVorckes in themselves naught and sinful, should be accepted for Christ his
justice, as good and rewardable! Then this Protestan^ish dishonest Theology
au^l^th ^he providence and justice of almighty God. For well it is know^n to
him, that all the worck^s of just men are in d^ed mortal sins; how then can
he accept them for other? much less esteem^ of them as allowakle and
me^^orious? does he not perceive, that they deserve rather damnation, and are
nothing abettered by the external justice of Christ impu^ed* ^o more then an
ass is made well lettered by the imputation of the Philosophy in Plato or
A^^sto^le. Then most absurd and unreasonable is that providence, allowed by
the Protestant, the which accounts of bad act^ons as meritorious, and worthy
reward. Such actions have no goodness in themselves, they are not well
qualified by the justice of Christ no more then is murder or adultery:
erroneous Meritt is not o^^^e by the promise of God.
then should be that judgment, the which should take them for meritorious and
priceable. To this ^^ we ad^oyne the promise of God, ye^ can it not preciselie
of it self make any work in man of the value or worth of meritt: for if to
this purpose were competent the sole promise of almighty God, then if to
David and Peter's sins had been promised some gift of heauenl^e bliss, in
power thereof they had been exibited meritorious, laudable, and of deserving
estimation: the which is most absurd. For indeed meritt and reward do not
arise only by a promise of any superior, that promises and pays: an
example, if one should promise unto an other a thousand pounds for leapinge
over a straw, such leaping thereby could not be rendered meritorious and
worthy: and the solution of that some should only be a satisfaction in way of
fidelity, but no reward of deserte, as is evident: in that meritt and reward
beside a promise include a proportionable equiualence of the one with the
other: that i^ a dep^^ in the reward purchased, and a dignity or worthiness in
the action performed: so then the Protestanter by his promise cannot make, or
in truth call men's actions meritorious, or heaven a reward, without extreme
improprietie of speech, yea falsitie in substance: which he blusheth not to
adsoribe unto the holy ghost. How heaven the grace of God Sed quia and ipsa
bo^^ ope^a (...) sunt, a quo nobis and fides est and dilectio, prop^e^e^ idem
ipse doctor Gcnrium etiam ipsam vita^ eternam gratia^ nuncupault. Aug de Great.
and l arb. 7 8. 9 de corr^pt and Gra* c. ^3 tract. 3 in Johan. cap. 1. Augu.
cap 9. He crouneth the in ^^seta^ion, and mercy* because by his miseration
vveedo good deeds unto* which a crouen is Rendered. 1. Cor. 4 Ipsa fides
gratia est, and vita aeterna* gratia pro gratia. Augu tra 3. in Johan cap. 1.
2. Cor 4. Ca^. Tolle^ in c. 8. ad To an 17. Protestantish hope reproved.


10. Neither would I that long it should stick in the quesie and weak stomach
of the Protestanter, as a thing harsh and crude, that we avouch of meritt, as
if it were repugnant to such places of scriptures, which call heavenly
salvation a grace and free gift of God, enforming us, that by grace we are
saved, and not by our own endeavors. For to clear this matter in his eye, and
to digest it in his affection, is wanting only a littell wit, and a penney
worth of learning. It has been told him of the Council of Aurosicum, out of S
Augustine, and S. Gregory; that our merittes are the gracious gifts of
almighty God, freely bestowed upon us: and so, as meritt is the effect of
grace given us only for the merittes of Christ, so is heavenly joy an effect
likewise of that grace, and finally resolved into a first cause of grace not
dependant upon our behavior: to wit to the grace of Christ, and meet goodness
of all mighty God. Otherwise if comparison be made betwixt the work and that
stipend the work well and fully deserves by value in it from grace, and
motion of the holy ghost: also the stipend is suitable to the work, as due
unto it with a certain proportion of equiualencie, and justice of
remuneration. Every one says the Apostle shall receive reward according to
his labor. Then is labor the cause of the reward, and thus much labor of
thus much reward: and in measure respecti^elie reward is to be rendered
according to labor: which is to say, that virtuous labor is the meritt of
reward, and reward the end and price of such labor. The word of God
stands for us against the Protestan^er: heaven and earth give testimony in
our cause against his heresy. And whereas the Apostle tells us, that the
sufferances of this life are not worthy of that eternal glory, he
considers those sufferances preciselie in as much as they are outward
impressions of adversities in us, in a^straction from act of will embracing and
enduring them patiently through the Grace of Christ: and as they last but for
a small time, that glory being eternal: although in respect of grace from
which they flow, in view of the holy ghost, by whom they are excited, as they
are labors in the harvest of our savior, deserve fully by condignitie as
merities, that pen of everlasting bliss, and recompensation.

11. Now for conclusion, seeing that the hope of the Protestanter leads to all
dissolution and misprision of virtue: to a retchles kind of cariadge in life,
allowing no reward for good worckes, even according to the nature of this
divine virtue judgment being made, does appear the presumption and vanity of
such hope aiming arrog^^tlie a^t the high pitch of beatitude; and in the mean
season co^temning the means assigned thereunto, that is the meri^tes of good
worckes: in that such beatitude is proposed unto us not as a mere
gratification, but as a reward, a stip^^de, a croune, answering to labor, to
industry, to warfare in the actions of the virtuous. Yea the Protestant in his
presumption not only void of merittes makes claim by a bare faith to that
beatitude* but also clogged and laden with sins mortal and deadly, and
that in number not recountable: which is not only a proud presumption, but
also an insolent impudency* with disgrace of man his nature, and of heaven it
self, ordained only for purity, and endeauours of persons well deserving.
But for that the hope Catholic expects everlasting glory as stipende of
virtuous merittes, recommending thereby the merittes of Christ as efficacious
and powerable in us, and making our repose in the goodness of God, and grace of
our redeemer, enkindeling in all a fervent desire to atcheiue and purchase
increase of heavenly glory, even according to the precept of reason is
approved as the true and sincere hope of Christians, and of all such, as
profess themselves the perfect servants of almighty God. Assuredly
Misp^isio^ of merit is barbarouse.
moreover this Protestantish belefe, as it is iniuriouse to the merits of
Christ, and grace of the Gospel, so is it also harshe and monstruous^^e ^ude
in accounte of civility. What spirit of courage will incite that Citizens
breast with a purpose to honor, and enriche his common wealth, to defend or
enlarge the same by his magnificence, or valor, once possessed with a
Protestantish faith, assuring that all such endeavors, deuoide of meretoriouse
worth* do expire in nothing, and leave finally his soul as naked, when his
last vital breath shall forsake his corpse as dead? When eternity is not
understood, in which virtue may flouer by repaie and guerdone, times vanishing
ornaments, as of fame, of preferment, will not advance virtuous endeavors:
espetiallie when damage or disgrace are to shut up the Act upon the stage of
this transitory life. This is the Northren clima^^ of protestancie, which
kills the buddes and fruictes of ^udable civility with cold of a massy
stupiditie: This is their pilo^es preposterous ar^e, whereby without card or
heavens aspecte, they will desperately sail in the tempestuouse sea of this
enraged world.

The crouen in heaven once denied
Makes toil on earth as vain espied.
Whereas the hope Catholic takes all strength and firmitude from the goodness
of almighty God, acknoledged by faith, and in that respect relyeth on his
secreat, hidden, and merciful predestination; The hope protestantish from
predestination deriueth that repose and security; which is base,
presumptuous, and in deed the high way to desperation.

CHAPTER. XXXI.
AS concerning this trial of Christian hope by the doctrine of predestination,
there Matters to be discussed.
presents themselves espetiallie and sutabl^e to our purpose three things to
be discussed: first whe^ein consists this pecul^ar grace of almighty God
his high predestination; then how it worcketh in man his soul: lastly what is
to be defined, ^^ concerning the ce^^ain^ie thereof known to every person by
way of ordinary illum^^^tion and instruction from above.

^. (...) we ^^ke in that sense, in the which it is understood by S. Augustine:
to wit, for the eternal knowledge and decree of will in God, ordayining to
bestow on predesti^^^io^ what it i^ August. l* 1. de predest. sanct cap 10. l
2. de ^ono pers^^. cap. 14.
some of the race of Adame, and once in the mass of perdition through his
default, an effectual and proper grace, that shall make them decesse and quitt
this life in the happy estate of justification. Predestination says S.
Augustine is the preparation of grace: that is a will of bestowing such a gift
upon the elect: it is Preparatio benefi little Dei, ap^^pa ring of the
benesittes of God. The effect of which predestination in the mind and will of
God, is his holy grace in men, moving them to faith, to hope, to repentance,
to charity, to justification, to mortification, to the observance of the law:
finally to maintain one by perseverance in the good estate of justice, so
that the soul be justified, when forced it is by fatalitie of death to forsake
this mansion of the body, and so at last to attain to beatitude, as
destinyed thereunto by grace and virtue. As concerning Grace of predestination
^ free gift.
the decree in God to imparte to any that grace of predestination, nothing in
man could excite him thereunto as end and purpose, but merely his own bounty
and goodness. Then if we compare man after the fall of Adam to this gift of
grace, as the effect of predestination, besides the merittes of Christ, the
which satisfying for Adames trespass, as infinitely being grateful unto the
divine Majesty, nothing in him appears as of deserte: but only is extolled
and magnified herein the mercy of our creator, Ephesians. 1.
and meritt of our savior Ghrist in the benevolence thereof: He has elected
us in him before the constitution of the world, that we might be holy,
says the Apostle. For in that all mankind was inuolued in the general ruin
of original sin, and so thereby rendered unto almighty God odiouse and
disgraceful, nothing could be proffered by us of deserte, that might lay just
claim to the grace of predestination: contrariewise we being rather punishable
by the subtraction of all heavenly succourse. Therefore the predestinate are
chosen in Christ: that is furnished with the grace of predestination by God the
father in view and reckoning of the worth of the merittes of our savior, his
only and most dear son. The end of which grace is sanctity of remission of
sins, sanctity of heavenly action, and conversation, and bliss of heaven:
serving all ^onioyntlie to the honor of the divine majesty. Elected are the
predestinate to the end that they may in virtue thereof be holy, and so not
for any holiness forseene in them proceeding from pure natures ability, and
foregoeinge all favorable gift of God his mercy. And what merit the
Catholic doctrine acknoledgeth of the increase of grace, or of reward in
heaven, it presupposes a former grace: so that resolution in the course of God
his grace predestinating, is to be made to a first grace no^ deserved, but
freely imparted. Whereupon S. Augustine excellently well: No human^ Aug epi.
106.
thing doeh go before the grace of God: but grace deserves to be a^gmented,
that increased it may me^itt to be perfected. Also ihe same Doctor
acknowledges a meritt of faith: that Aug. epi. 105. Cip l^. ^ ep. 2. Aug sermon.
15. de ve^bis Apost. Romans ^0.
is a meritt of congruitie before justification. Grace says he, goes before
meritt: grace is not meritt, but rather meritt of grace. For if grace be of
meritt, thou have bought it, and not received it of favor: The Apostle
deduceth the same consequence from the very nature and name of grace:
concluding grace to be no grace, if a repay and remercement of man his worckes
and deserte.

3. And as this grace of predestination is the free gift of almighty God,
seeing that The mystery of predestin^tion.
all are not endowed with the same, although in that general harm of mankind
by original sin there be no difference, every on vioaled alike thereby, and
borne the children of wrath, so it has origin from a secreat judgment and
decree in allmighty Ephesians. 2. Psalm 50.
God, not only in his mercy, seuering the elect from the reprobate, but
likewise in mystery and hidden wisdom effecting the same. Whereupon the
Apostle damnaundeth, Who is he, that separateth thee? excluding thereby as
cause of this separation any Romans 10.
worck^ of man goeinge before grace and election thereunto. And talkinge of the
election of the Gentiles, and reprobation of the Jews, in admiration
exesameth: O the Augu. l^ 1. de predest. san. l. cont 2 ^p Pelagian li. 1. ad
Simplican Ephesians 1 Titus 3. Luc. 20. Matthew. 10. 2. Tim. 1.
depth of the vvisdome, and knowledge in almighty God* as if from no caus^
or occasion might be deduced a reason, why this man has the grace of
predestination, and not an other, both without disparitie being fallen
equally from the favor of God by the sin of Adam, but merely to be admi^ed
the unsearchable disposition of divine ordinance, making betwixt them by a
gracious ghifte a differencie of election and reprobation. In regard Vherof S.
Augustine in diverse places designing the very beginning and offspring of
predestination, in those that are of years of discretion, in certain
vocations and persuasions, illuminating and stirring up the vnderstand^nge,
affirms, such vocations to be the free gifts of God, and dispositions of his
darcke and unknown providence* not subject in any sort to the natural
endeauours of man his free will, as causes or merittes of them. And this may
serve for a brief explication of the nature and quality of the grace of
predestination. The second point concerns the manner of worckinge of this
grace in the souls of the predestinate.

4. The grace of almighty God his predestination, although potent and
^ffectuall, How the grace of iust^fi. ca^^o^ vvor^keth. Isa. 3. Ez^ch. ^8.
Matthew. 3. Phil. ^. 1* Pet 2. Justin. Apoll.
as his word, avouched by the Prophet, able to contr^ue that, to whatsoever it
shall be directed; yet holy scriptures teach us, that m^rt^ll men do
actuallie cooperate with this grace, in that they are said to believe, to
hope, to love, to repent, to w^rcke their salvation; and by good life to
acerta^ne their vocation. Also as has been entreated, to this grace, yield a
free consent the predestinate children of God almighty, not forced thereunto
by constrainte, ord^^^en through necessity, as Iustine the Ma^^yr with others
excelle^tlie well does affirm. Neither does ^a^i^ white relish of Pelagianisme
such cooperation with grace and free consent to the same: as also has been
declared. Moreover se^ting a side onli^ the ignorance of the Protestanter* it
is nothing appe^tayning to the error of Pilag^us that God* predestinateth men
to glor^e dependantlie of their virtuous ^ndeauours through grace, as for the
meri^tes and worckes of grace: in that first against Pelag^us the Catholik^
teaches, that the beg^nning of grace in predestination is not deserved by man,
but is the free benevolence of God in our savior Christ: th^n for tha^ this
destination of certain^ person^ to glory by means of merittes, good and f^ee
worckes, is caused originall^e by an inward grace bountifully bestowed, not
purchased as our right and in^erest, all is finally resolved to the gift of
an inward grace, bestowed by God on his elect: and so Pelagianisme auoy^ed;
if the Protesta^ter can avoid in this mean season the mist of his own
unskillfulness. Now are we in l^ke b^^^^ti^ to handl^ the thi^de point of this
subject: to wit the certainty of p^ed^st^nation.

5. The predestinate are not so established in favor of God, as if in* vigor
thereof Predestinate persons may sin and l^os^ their g^^c^ of ^^stification
Aug. ^ de co^ ^ep* and Gra^. cap. 9* ^* C^ ^. 1 John 1. P^^ ^ (...) T^^d. sess
6 c 13. and ^^
they were retained always from the harm and ^^ne of sin: in that
oftentimes they may and do make choi^e of some unlawful pleas^are, proh^bited
by the law of God and nature: neither is the virtue of predestin^tion so in
force, as if in act of sin, it preserved them in ind^m^iti^ from ann^^ and
de^riment: se^ng that the stipende of sin vniuers^llie, ^as it is death of
^odie, so is it also, and that especially, according to the quality of the
fact, the death of the soul, and loss of justice and sanctity. He that
hates his brother, ^^^eth the Apostle remains in death. He that stands,
l^tt him ta^^ h^ed he fall ^ot. And allthough, as teache^h the sacred Council
of T^^nt, no man ought to doubt of the gracious influence from the mercies* ^f
God, yet no^^withstanding considering every one his own di^posi^ion and
cooperation, and also offenses of times past, knows not by certain^^e of
faith, that God will continue ^h^s favorable grace, or that he is to dye in the
esta^e of justification: this cariadge and co^uayance of man by predistination,
as it has been proved, being a sec^^cie in the Ephesians ^. Au* l. ^de pec. more
and remiss cap. 20. Aug l de bono perse^* Bernard. se^. 1. de septuag* Eccles
9. Greg l 30. Moral. ca. 32. 1 Pet. 4. Vega li. 1^. in Council. T^id. c. 12.
counsel and purpose of almighty God: in that all are predestinate*
according to the purpose of his will* that is his good affection: of which will
and affection from the written word no man in particular has assurance or
revelation, as excellently well teaches S. Augustine: also expressie
affirminge, as concerning the gift of final perseverance, no man in this life
by knowledge, without especial illustration, to have certainetie and perfect
persuasion. So likewise S Bernarde* Who can say I am of the elect, I am of
the predestinate to salvation, I am of the number of the children of God, the
scriptures reclaym^ng? Man kn^vveth not, vvhither ^^ be vvorthie of love or
hatred, b^^ all things rather f^r the time to come a^^ k^p^ as uncertain?
Wherefore if we will have any competent and moderate not^ce of our
predestination, we m^st recommend our selves to God, as wills S. Peter, in
benefactis, in good vvorckes, express in our selves such conditions as he has
appointed to the saved, as observance of the commandments* mortification,
suffering and burial with Christ: and according to the conscience we can
d^riue from those w^rckes, comfort our selves with a temperat^ kind of
persuasion, that we shall once be saved: of which matter entreats very well
Andreas Vega.

6. The Protestanter frames the mode^^ and idea of his predestination under
color The Protesta^ter denye^h all grace of predestination or bene^^^^ ^ in
man there by.
of hipocr^sie, altogether suitable to his own sensuality, yea to the the
ouerth^ow of hope finalli^: and so to induce either desperation, or else
extremity of all vice and liberty. First therefore he mayntain^th, such to be
the efficacy, as he dissembleth, of the grace of predestination; that
therewith the predestinate do not so much as coo^erate or mo^e even vitallie
or actiuelie* but only like* passive subjects receive from it, what shall
thereby be imp^^^te^: as if ^he predestinat^* were raised up into heaven in a
wh^^le wind o^ ex^e^n^ll necessity; their souls a sleep, and not actinge
any good endeauo^^ in the space of their lives* To which tenor of* brutish
doctrine, thus writes a Protestanter: The grace of God with me: which place
the pap^stes after R^ino. These. 6 sect. 32. 1. ^o^. ^5. S Aug* rep^oued
speaking for catholics l de Great. and l. arb. ca 5. Epist 105 106 Hi^^. l. 2.
con. P^l^g cap. 3. Rom 11. 9. To. ^1.
certain of the fathers of small or no skill in the Greek* ^ongue, do ^xpound
naugh^^lie* The grace of God and (...): ^o that S. Pa^le* ^^e which
expr^s^^lie gave all to God^, ass^^^g nothing to himself, by their gloss^
challenges a part to h^^sel^^, ^^d d^^h ^ffirme contra^^vvise, I and the
grace of God. Whereupon as if S. H^erom favored this s^^se Protestantish, he
commends his reading: The grace of God, which is with m^. For proof of
which vnderstand^nge about the grace of predestination is alleged by the
Protestants such te^^^s of S. Paul, as do exclude from cause of salvation,
or separation from ou^e the m^sse of perdition man his work and endeavor:
and therefore say they grace* of predestination performs the whole office of
a Ch^^stian man, without man h^s work and cooperation^; as the ^^^de build^th
her nest^^ the con^a^^^ie. of (...) or as the painter does beautify the wall
by (...) exter^^ll actiu^t^e of his ar^e: for otherwise men were to be saved by
their worckes, which they repute as detestable. So they wise men. And seeing
that the grace of predestination by this verdict does not admit^^nie Certain
knovvle^^^ of predest^nation in the Protestanter. Justified persons may vva^^
perseverance A^. de cor^ep^ and g^at cap ^. Confess P^c. 4 a^t. 5. and 13.
cooperation or vital motion of man his will, much less according unto the
same, does it permit fredome of will ^n ^he good worckes* of the predestinate*
esteeming all such endeauours as feate^ of grace, the (...) ^^ta^ning ^o
ability or liberty to the contra^^e. In reg^rde of the know^n certa^^^ o^*
this predestination the Prostanter is of opinion, that most assuredl^^ ^t is
p^rceiued and disco^ered by every one predestinate, being made apparent unto
him, that neith^r b^ no sin he shall at a^^e time loose his justice, or at
the least; that he shall be fore death recover such grace* and dye ^n the
happy estat^ thereof: Every man must pri^atlie conclu^e: By says I am in
Christ Ie^us, and therefore I cannot p^^^sh: and ^m most (...) of (...)
eternal salvation* Now come ^^to the (...).

7. That opinion of Christian hope is by choice to be preferred in this
controversy of predestination, that serves most to* virtue, to honesty, to
diligencie in the service of almighty God* But in this respect the Catholic
judgment and hope are most eminent, the Protestantish belief and trust
stands for the contrary; the hope therfoore Virtue in the predestinate
against the Protestanter.
Catholic is to be entertained, and the confidence Protestantish to be
refused. Virtue can not arise as a laudable endeavor of man, unless it be
produced by man: and that after a manner of free worcking, as has been
declared: how then are the predestinate of the Protestantish sect endewed with
virtue, and praise worthy employmentes, that neither vitallie and actiuelie
cooperate with grace, nor of free choice and Arist. l. ^. mag Moral. ca. ^5.
election any whit endeavor? Predestinate men are bound in chains of
necessity* meet matter and paste of a foreign impression! Is this Christian
hope for man to expecte salvation, by no act of man to be atcheiued, and he as
piece of wood to be fashioned by the artificeres chissell as he pleases, as
subject only to the operation of a^ other? Fie loathsome and floathfull
confidence! And why not loathsome? when hope is raised in arroga^^^e to heaven,
not maintained or supported by virtue? Why nor a sloathfull confidence, in
that bliss is aimed at in a laisie repose, as if man were not to stir or
move, but only grace to contriue the total perfection of the soul? And where
the Apostle S. Paul excludes worckes from being cause of salvation, disputing
against the Jews and Gentiles, he takes worckes in their substance without
Romans 10. and 11 How salvation without vvorckes.
faith, and grace, as the Protestanter might easily descrie, if he could ridd
himself of that gross cloud of ^gnorance, wherein his senses are ^^folded. And
must a predestinate Protestant look then for salvation without all his action
and work? then does he look to gain the goal without his race, the reward
without honesty, heaven without faith, hope, and charity: and are not these
three virtues by grace the worckes of men? Are they only the worckes of God
effectiuelie? if so, then a Protestant believes no^, he hops not, but God
for him: as the table is painted, and painteth not, the great fool tossed in a
blankett, and tosseth not. Yea but S. Paul, says one, R^^no^* sup.
adscribeth all to God. A deep speculation sure of th^^ shallow, allthough
spightfull head, as devoide of spirit, so of brains, and the very dishonor
of ou^ Oxforde and nation: whom yet neue^ learned Catholic deemed worthy an
answear^, after so much his froth disgorged against the rock of S. Peter. And
yet this babbling vain Wake. orat. Fun^b. Rex. Platon.
libelle^ must needs be recommended by a rabling orato^^ of that university,
as the flower and prince of literature and skill in Theology* Certes a fit
orator to blase out so fai^e a su^^e, and his course colors proportionable to
draw forth the vg^^e shape of deformed heresy. And is not hi^ eloquence so in
style r^de, and barba^ouse, a^ far from the learned la^guadge of (...), as it
is from the divine relligion thereof: a^ much stra^ned from judgment, as is
the argument of his en^omi^sticall speech from substance of verity?

-- Co^^ls^ c^spid^ (...) Papin lib. 9. ^ 100.

Diff^g^r^ i^b^, pat^itq^^ ingloria c^ssis.
By struck of s^^are ^is pl^me did loos^ its place,
And maked cr^st apper^^ ^^ foul disgrace.
Nether are we amated, if ^ew Theological M^s^s, entertained a C^^ls^^, give
us the ^roune, and present our eyse with the dreadful spectacle of a strange
Gorgon upon the sheelde of Pallas, or if those aged Graces abandon the de^aied
and withered Helicons, to repair nearer to a fuller Theames, or a louder cry
of London: for here we assure our salues, that Chealsea Doctors will never
prove so good as Chilsea cockles. Now let us come to the corpse of the ^^^ister.

^. I demand of him therefore, why there man do actuallie through grace believe
in God, hope in his mercy, and love him or not? If he an swear he does not:
then shall Grace vvoreketh in man and with man* Aug. l. de Gra. and l. ar.
cap. 5. 2 Timothy 4.
he injury the Apostle among the rest, that said, I have kept my faith, I
have consummated my cour^^ etc. and so the minister must confess, that he
never believed in God in all his life, or his ghost for him, or wrough ever
according to virtue: which certes is an high prejudice against the ministry,
and against all Christianity. But if he return answer, that man does
indeed actuallie and vitallie exercise the functions of those virtues; then
will I press him farther with this interrogation: to wit, whither man alone
perform such offices, or rather man with grace? To affirm that man alone
acts them, is Pelagianisme, and an open insolency against the grace of God.
Likewise to determine, that man and grace do produce them, is to grant that
man cooperateth with grace, and that both concur to the performance of such
virtues. Where then is the fault either in text or sense thereof, we
affirming, man to work with the grace of God, seeing that not only grace, no^
only man endeavors, but grace with man, and man with grace? O silly and
windye brain of the minister! But S Hierom, says he, stands for us in
favor, surrendering all to grace, worcking not with man, but in man. Let us
see and examine this favor, and try whither it be the favor of the whipp,
rather then of the purse. The Apostle, does say, that neither Hier in ^a. 15.
^. ae ad Cor. Aug epi. 10^. 106.
he did labor in the gospel without grace, least that, against that which
before he had a^^^ched, he shoul seem to arrogate to himself any thing,
neither grace without himself, that he might maintain free will. O ^auour
from S. Hierome against the minister affirming man his will not only vitallie
and actuielie; but by freedoome to concur and cooperate with God his grace!
How then is all accomplished by sole grace? And although disputing against the
Pelagians he read, But the grace, which is in me, yet he makes issue just
upon the Catholic and Roman sense: Not I, but the grace of God which is
Hier. l. 2 co^. Pelag. c. 3.
with me. He says that forthwith he does refer this his labor to the
help of God, affirminge: Not I, but the grace of God, which is with me. Then
according to S. Hierom, the Apostle labored: if he labored, and that not by
force of nature without grace, he labored with grace, and cooperated with the
same. And when as the Apostle attributed the work to grace, which was with
him, as expounds S. Hierome, he meant no more but that the cause of his good
work was not only natural ability, but the efficacy of grace: which grace
this Doctor terms auxil^^m an help: and so respects the concourse of
will together with grace as help. For in propriety of language has not
help a relation to an other cause as partial and concurrent? If any
Protestant be acquainted with the black genius or smoaky man^^ of this rotten
sectarie, let him awake, and defend his reputation, if he can, or da^e.

9. As conceaning the certain knowledge of private and personal
predestination, The Protesta^tish assura^c^ of personal pred^stinatio^
silthie, and the way to despair. Condi^ion^ requisi^e to salu^tion. Matthew 19.
Colos. 3. Rom 8. ^* Rom 6. T^^* ^. Colos 3. 2. Tim 2.
it has been proved in the precedent treatise, such belief to be no faith at
all, but a fained collusion, and a mere phanatisme. For the present I shall
remonstrate that it is also impute, vnchrist^an, ungodly, and the very lu^^
and bait of sin and all iniquity. First therefore this pretended hope
serves to denial and refusal of all hope in God, and resolves it self
finally into most odious and detestable desperation It is ^n assured verity,
and expres^ie mentioned in holy scriptures, that the attayning of eternal
bliss depends on certai^e conditions concerning the life and cariadge of
man: as that the commandments of God and nature be observed, our neighbor
and enemy charitablie be loved, our flesh and concupiscences chastised and
repressed, that our manners be squared according to the spirit and inward man,
not at the ditection of the body and outward substance: that we are to die and
to be bu^ied with Christ, to suffer with him, and conform our actions to that
innocence of hi^. Which thing once admitted by the Protestant, unless he
neglect the sentence of God his Children of God according to present
justification may die children of the devil Au. li. de corrept and Gra. cap.
9. Erant it a que in bono, sed quia in co n^ permanser^t, non erant ex no^is.
The predestination of a beast.
word, must needs according to his own principle of certain knowledge of
his personal predestination, drive and cast him to despair, to abandon his
own office and duty for the service of the diu^ne majesty. For when a
Protestanter finds himself in his whole tracte of life defective and faulty
in those conditions, as having been a great sinner, bestowing his time in suit
after sensuality, thereupon he may and will begin to doubt and stagger in the
assurance of his proper salvation: and so on the one side acknowledging that
the true children of predestination remain as fully persuaded that they be
predestinate, as that the sun shines, or that God him self is existent: and
on the other he not finding such clear and established conceit and
persuasion of his own salvation, has no other final resolution to make, then
to account himself as of one deuoide of faith and justice, and so a child
rather of perdition. If he make reckoning of his estate as derived from his
behavior, his actions and good worckes, as he confesses himself, Incerta
esset spessal^tis, the hope of salvation would be uncertain: Then of
consequence must he deem himself a beast, and God no just judge: and thus
devise to gain repose: I know my wholelife to be defiled in deed with sins,
and my demeanure not to have observed the commandments of God and nature, my
flesh and sensual appetite not to have been mortified, as it is prescribed in
holy writ: I have not died with Christ to pleasure, to the world, nor
suffered with him in resistance given to temptations internal and external;
finally I find that my behavior has in no sort been answearable to the
rules of manners given by Christ and his Apostles; yet relying only on the
mercy of God, I evidently and certainly ^epute my self a child of
salvation, one of the predestinate: and it is known unto me in spirit, I
feel it in my soul, and the Lord in the care thereof speaks as much. If
therefore I sum up the arguments of my hope taken from my worckes, and
condition appointed in scriptures, nothing presents it self to my
cogitations but greesly and ghastly despair; but reckoninge only according to
God his mercies, turoinge my eye away from the conditions of worckes and
virtues, I remain in a sug^ed repose, in a toure of assurance, that my
salvation is predestined by the Lord.

10. Is not the Lord much beholden to this his servant Protestante, that
makes 1. John. cap. 1 The Protest^ters larges of dishonestie, and semiquauer
of virtue.
his master a liar, a maintainer of dishonestie and disloyalty against his
own empire and authority? Certes such a one is the predestinatiue
Protestanter. It is enacted in holy writ, that none can enter into heaven,
but such as keep the commandments, as die with Christ in mortification, as
rise with him in newnes of life: and here the Protestanter comes in with a
short cut, and a brief cipher in algrim of his sole confidence in the
mercies of his lord, and thereon builds he the whole fabric of eternity,
of his certainty in belief, of his personal predestination! So that if a
knave can rely on the mercies of God, he is the child of God, although his
neighbors bye take him for a varlett, and well worthy the gallows. Great
honor doubtless to God, to have such fair children of his predestination! And
that this certain knowledge of his does not so much as require the presence of
good worckes, and of those conditions rehearsed in scripture, but may consist
with the want and violation of them all, he himself professes; chalenging an
ability about the discovering assu^edlie of his own salvation in the very
act of sin, as of adultery, fornication, murder, rebellion: and for the time
to ensue knowing undoubtedly that he shall fall into those greiuous sins,
yet confidentlie does he pronounce and believe, that he The unclean
predestination of a Protestant.
is predestined to salvation. Foul and filthy pride of the Protestanter!
The Protestant knows that no sin expels his grace of justification, and
thereupon sees himself predestinate in the very act of damnable crimes,
deeming his soul to receive Quae praesum p^o in isto tentationum l^co no^
exp^dit, vbi tanta est infirmitar vt super (...) possit gene^a re secu^^^^ Aug.
de correp and Great c. 13 ^ 2 de (...) eccl ca 19 reporeteth (...) the M^^chies
some were called elect in life very wicked. No Protestant more then a
Pelagian can pray for perseverance, being suer aovv thereof Aug. l. de corrept
and Great. c. 6. De dono perseu c. 3 o^ say our lord his prayer Joan. 1.
no hurt from such evil behavior. Why then should a Protestant be sorry or
repent him for his sins, saying that before such repentance and corrosiue he
evidently assures himself that he is predestinate, and that no action of
sin has wrought any detriment to his soul, or cast him in hazardie to
loose his joy in heavenly beatitude? Why should he retain a careful fear
for the menagement and bestowing of the time to come, perceiving in this sort,
that allthough he sin actuallie, as in felony, adultery, or breach of
charity, or for the time to come shall (...) such crimes, yet notwithstanding
he is to be saved, and to receive no damnadge spiritual by such enormities? O
impudent beastilitie, that swayeth the scepter in the religion Protestant^sh!
Verily who sees nor, that the opinion of the Protestanter in this matter
auoydeth all care and solicitude of virtues and good worckes, when he once by
faith beholds himself without all doubt as predestinate? knowing that the
predestination of God cannot be alltered or hindered: that the last effect
thereof, to wit glory in heaven, is due to faith accompanied with any sin,
resolves, that he shall be saved, let himself or the devil do what they
can by dishonestie to the conirarie. But the holy and virginal Apostle and
Evangelist S. John gives him the ^ye in plain terms, to his dishonor and
immortal reproach: If we shall say, that we have feloovshipp with him, and
walk in dar^knes, vvelye and perform not truth: but the Protestanter
committing any sin by assurance of faith judges himself just, and the
predestinate child of God, therefore he lies, and being in darckenes neither
does believe, or work any truth. Again: He that says he knovveth God, and
leepeth not his commanndementes is a liar: But the Protestanter avouches that
one actuallie breaking all the ten commandments knows God, and that as
his father, and aucthor of his predestination, and that no sin, into which
certainly he shall fall before he die, can cast him out of the estate of
justice or salvation, therefore he lies, and lies in deed like a beast in
the filthy soil of his own retchles behavior.

11. Far more pure and Christian is the moderation of the Catholic in this
affair, Predestination Catholic serves to virtue.
so conceiving opinion and confidence of predestination, as we are retained
thereby in the se^re of God, and diligent employment in virtuous actions and
holy endeauours. We are not ig^orant, but that if we be predestinate, then of
necessity we are to be saved, not that theerby we have license given us to
live as we lust, esteeming that no sin of ours can frustrate our
predestination: for so shoul we make the issue for our lives into all
corruption and bestialitie: but we include in predestination the grace of God
and effects thereof, which be virtues, good worckes, obseruances of the
commandments, mortification, newnes of life, repentance, prayer, devotion
perseverance, and such like offices of p^et^e and integrity: and so conclude,
that if we be predestinate, that is if we shall keep the commandementes,
repent us of our trespasses and live as we ought to do, finally die in grace
by perseverance, then shall we be saved of necessity: which necessity has no
brutish scope of wickedness, being restrained to grace and virtue: or imports
it any empeachment to man his free will, implying actions and merittes, which
proceed from freewill. And in that we challendge not to our selves salvation,
as by certain faith beholding our particular predestination, we conserve in
our selves the fear of God, accounting of sin, as of a fact, that may cast
us from out his savor, and object us to the sentence of eternal reprobation.
Also in the revew of our lives past finding that we have not kept the
commandments, as we should, nor repented our selves so from the heart, as is
requisite, neither to have walked with Christ, or in him, in purity and newnes
of life, we conceive the greater fear of God his iudgegementes, and in virtue
thereof, now carefully buckle our selves to repentance, tomortification, to
good purposes of virtues and holy conversation. Contrariwise the Protestanters
Iren. l. 1. ca 5. Ba^on Tom. 10 page 60. No Protestant can pray: thy name be
sanctified Aug de dono perseu ca. 2 Ciprian in orat. dom^n. Nunquid in his
co^putandus e^t Judas, qui non man sit in verbo eius? Aug. l. de correpet Great.
ca. 9.
just are of the same religion with the Puritan Gnostick condemned in the
primative church, assuredly believing and knowing themselves to be Semina
electionis the choice seed of predestinat^on: with Iouinian, also Eunomius,
and later heretics called Predestinations, license themselves in all
indemnitie to turpitude of life; knowing now certainly, althoug sinful and
detestable, that they shall die in favor with God, and so receive no dam^age
from their sins. This is a point certainly not only to be refuted by the
Catholic divine in the Protestanter, but also to be punished by the civil
magistrate: in that it is impossible any Protestante so framed in judgment,
to be a good subject to his prince, sithence he deemeth himself a child of
God in act of stealth, of rebellion, or of any vill^nie against the estate of
a common wealth. Emboldened is he heerby to accomplish what designement
concupiscence shall suggest, warranted still from heaven that he is the child
of God, do he in this life what he can or please. Auante hellish heresy, with
all thy peacockes feathers, fastened to the bodies of hogs and swine,
displeasing to God and man.

Such esteem makes the hope Catholic of God his gracious mercies through our
savior Christ, as that he destrinyeth none by reprobation to hell but through
their own default: whereas the Protestanter makes God a Tirant, in this
life disfornishing the reprobate of all sufficient grace, and after casting
them into hell fire without any misdeserte of theirs.

CHAPTER. XXXII.
AS the mercy of almighty God through predestination is deduced to the
childie^ and elect inheritours of his kingdom of heaven, and yet in wonderful
secrecy of couerture, in a mystical concealment of high disposition, so
also toward others by reprobatio^ is extended his most just judgment
notwithstanding enfolded 1. Pet. 5. 2 Timothy 1. What points concern
reprobation.
in semblable obscurity of his unsearchable designementes: our m^ndes in
conceit of the one and of the other are humbled under ^he powerable hand of
his will, purpose and decree. We are therefore for the particular intelligence
of reprobation to remarck two things, as especially employed in the same:
Frst, what manner of grace, or whether a^^e or none, be afforded to the
reprobate: and from what reason that providence di^ne toward them does
proceed: then in what sort such persons of perdition are destinyed to
everlasting torments of hell fire, estranged from the mercy of God, in
regard of ever abettering their estates: only become matter of his severe and
due justice to be inflicted upon their bodies and souls. The reproba^e are not
exclu^ed from out heaven only in vevv of original sin.


2. Although it be most true, that with great difference of eye and benevolence
God does respect these two orders of men, both plunged equally in the common
bale of original sin, to wit the predestinate and the reprobate:
Nevertheless we are not so to think of this divine disposition, as if from it
has passed a sentence from eternity against all the reprobate efficaciouslie
decreeing their utter exclusion out of his kingdom of heaven for the sole
demeritt of original offense For be it, that so it is in deed in regard of
children dying in their mothers wombes, and also of such as depart this life
altogether debarred from possible means of Baptism, nature in some cases
having effected that want, neither in their parents being ability to the
contrary, nevertheless in respect of those, which be reprobate attaining to
years of discr^tion, and use of freewill, it is said generally of God his
mercy by the Apostle: God vv^^heth all men to be saved, and to attain to the
knovvge 1. Tim 2.
of his name: which could not be verified, if he had allotted the reprobate to
such disgrace as cast out of heaven only for original crime; for that by his
appointance of such exclusion, he himself had made their salvation allredie
impossible.

3. VVherevhon seeing that all man kind God beheld in equal calamity by
original The mystery of reprobatio^
sin, he wrought not a separation and distinction amongst them, as of
himself excluding certain from out his heavenly paradise, electing others to
eternal bliss in that happy place; but rather begann this his separation and
distinction by the diversity of grace bestowed on them: which decree resolved
finally is meerlie into his own wisdom unsearchable by man or Angel. And
although original guilte contracted in every one, might be a just cause why
God should reprobate any, whom he pleased, and to deny them the peculier
favor of that especial grace of his predestination; yet why this person
should want it, rather then an other, both semblably in disfavor with him by
original fault, no other cause can be rendered by us, the^ that rehearsed by
the Apostle in exclamation: O the hight of knowledge and vvisdome of God! Rom
11. Matthew. 20.
And again: I will have mercy on whom I will have mer^ie. Is it not
lavvfull for me to do^ what I will? Which manner of preventing the reprobate
with a grace of meaner quality, then that which is bestowed on the
predestinate, seeing it imports a sufficiency of ability, in virtue whereof
they might believe, and live aright, is the free gift, and benefitt of God,
and so no punishment, as presupposing such persons endowed with that grace of
mere sufficiency, to have been absolutely before excluded from heaven, as
has been declared: in that such exclusion consisting of P^na damni Penalty of
loss and privation of the beatificall vision, is the most sharp punishment
that befalls the reprobate, and is not inflicted upon them, but upon
foresight of their actual misdemeanure e^ther in life, or faith, or both, as
testifies S. Augustine: God punishes, says he, the reprobote, Women
therefore he punishes, for that he did soresee Aug. l. 6. Hyp.
of what quality they were to be: nevertheless he makes not them to be
punished, or has predestined them thereunto. Wherefore seeing that exclusion
from heaven is so great a detriment, to that none is allotted, but only after
foresight in God of actual sins: otherwise they should of necessity be cast
into damnation, and that by the predestination of God, which S. Augustine
expressie reproves Wherefore the grace which Not like grace in the reprobate
and predestinate. Aug de praedestin Sanctorum c 8. l. 2 cont 2 epi. Pelag c 7
Epist. 105.
is imparted to the reprobate is not so potent or effectual, as that in the
predestinate: because God did foresee, that the reprobate, if prevented with
such grace, would not cooperate, as they might, or give correspondence, but
rather through their default were to dye in estate of mortal sin: not that
they could do no otherwise, or that they become infidels, adulterours of
necessity, for want of all sufficiency to the opposite virtues, but for that
God did foresee, that they would not work with his grace, when as they might:
and so giving them such a grace, presupposall mad^ that he knew condicionallie
before his decree of bestowing the same, that if they had such a grace, yett
they wolud depart this life in estate of mortal sin, as of infidelity,
iniquity, the rupon determining to bestow this precise grace, and no other, he
made in this variety of grace a fundamental distinction and separation
betwixt the predestinate and reprobate, not so merciefullie dealing with the
reprobate as with the predestinate he had ordained such a grace in that measure
of efficacy and congruite, as he knew condicionallie before his absolute
gift, that they would cooperate with it, and so to be prevented, as that they
would decease in the quality of justice and sanctification. The reprobate have
sufficient grace. Augu. de corrept and Great. c. 9. 11. 13. Tract 14. in Johan.
ca. 12. epist 49 107. ep^. ^o^. 107. Matthew. 11.


4. Nevertheless such persons once to be reprobated to eueralsting torments,
here in this life are not so sequestered from God his mercy and grace, as if
our savior Christ were not to them a redeemer at all, or from the meritt of
his cross they received no assistance and help to resist the corruption of
nature in them still prouokinge to evil, or by importunity thereof, and
through a necessity inevitable forsaken, as if they were carried into
wickedness and turpitude of life: as if God in them wrought the very effect of
obduration, and destination to injustice and abomination: when as rather we are
to judge of the sweet providence of almighty God, especially so mollified
and inclined to mankind by the sacrifice of his son in manner most eminent
and perspicuous* that it preuenteth and aideth here in this life by grace the
wills of delinquent reprobates* in force whereof they retain ability to
observe his commandments, and to avoid such sins, for which they are to
endure that immortal scorch of hell fire. The words of our sovereign judge
are vn^uersall, and directed 1. Tim. 2.
to every one: Come unto me all that labor, and are burdened, and I will
refresh you. And the Apostle: Who wills that all men be saved: therefore he
withdraws from none sufficiency of succou^se to per^orme their duties
Whereupon S. Augustine talking of that reprobate prince Phaaro, pronounces,
that What free will he did fight against the most m^rci^ull truth of
almighty God: and so had the possibility of virtue, although Aug l. de. pre
dest. and great. ca.
vicious in resolution of action, which possibility and freewill in offense
had not been in him extant, if he wanted all help of grace, oppressed in the
mean season with necessity of misdemeanure.

5. Finally as concerning that part of reprobation which consists in
deputation Reprobation to hell after sins fore seen.
of certain offenders to the torments of hell fire, it is vndoub^edlie to be
thought, that almighty God no otherwise by his decree casts men into the
infernal pit, or from eternity determines such their fall and painful
ruin, then after foresight of their sins: into the which voluntarily and
freely they flinghe themselves, having power to eschew such enormit^es, for
which they are so to be chast^sed. And this truth is evidently affirmed by our
savior and judge his words: who vtteringe against certain the sentence of
damnation* veldeth a reason thereof: For I have been hungry, and Matthew. 20.
Conc Valen. ca. 3. Aug l 6. Hip. cap. 7.
you have not given me to eat. And the Council of Valentia defines, that in
the reprobation of the wicked, Bad merittes go before the just judgment of
God. Likewise S Augustine avouches God to reprobate such persons, for that he
knew their evil manners to come. And who otherwise can esteem of the goodness
of God, then that only for sin, yea voluntarily and fre^lie committed, he
so severely takes revenge in those ever enduring flames of hell fire?

6 The Protestanter enters into conceit of reprobation, as if God first
beholdinge Protestantish cruel and which ^d reprobation.
the reprobate in the vulgar mass of original crime, should effectually
exclude them out of his kingd^me: then thereby after moved to deny them all
grace and possib^l^^^e for virtue, as for faith, hope, charity, repentance,
observance of the law: in respect whereof h^ p^onounceth, Christ never to have
offered his passion for the reprobate, or to have been either in his intention,
or their benefitt, a redeemer of them, otherwise by the decree and action of
God made obstinate in sin, and thereby destined in necessity to sin and
transgression: and so finally tumbled into hell fiere, and eternal damna^^on.
And that these persons of reprobation in their lives do want all grace to
resist temptations, by their accounte appears, in that they deny all grace,
that is merely sufficient, as also freedom of will: whereupon does it ensue in
consequence, that the reprobate never enjoy any grace from Christ, the proper
gift as they say, of the sole predestinate: but through necessity despoyled
of it fall and trespass. Whereupon thus after Calvin speaks a Protestanter
of the redemption of Raino. Apol. These. se 14* and The 4. sec. 24.
mankind by our savior Christ: The followers of the Gregorian doctrine ough^
to understand the words of ^ho^: he is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole vvorlde^, of ihe sins of the saithfull, and of all the elect of God
every where: and denies utterly, that Christ by sufficiency of redemption
or grace did ever provide for the good estate of the reprobate. Whereupon also
as concerning the other part of reprobation, to wit the sentencing to hell
fire, they acknowlddge such fall and punishment inflicted upon the reprobate to
be occasioned by their sins: yet so, as if in no sort they could avoid them,
but even by the work of God were first obdurated, corrupted with sins, and
tied in Chains of iniquities, then finally reprobated, and hurled into the
lake of hell fire: only for excuse and reason of such dreadful justice they
affirm, all such reprobate persons in Adam to have been of ability to avoid
their trespasses, and so to obtain grace: although now his defaulte supposed,
of necessity they be infideles, murderers, adulterers, and in all kind of
wickedness offenders. Proceedee we to trial.

7. That hope ought to be chief in preferment, the which most detecteth sin
Sin in the acc^u^^ Catholic declared as odious against the Protestanter.
Praedicit ergo and peccata ^ominum, quae poruit prae ^^ire, no^ facere Aug. ^p.
120. ca. 19.
unto us as detestable, and to be abandoned: but the Catholic hope is only of
this vigor, the Protestantish contrariwise impudent, and an emboldment to
dissolution, therefore that is the hope of Christ, and this the presumption of
Antichrist. If sin be the effect either of constraint, that urges beyond
faculty of resistance, or of necessity that bends farther then ability to
the contrary can ariue, what horror may they reprobate conceive in the
cogitation of their evil factes, reputing themselves as flaues of satan, and
iniquity, not through their proper and personal default, but only Adam his
fall: the which they in persons never could hinder or debar? Certes such
demeanure although brutish, yet not of freedom, and personal liberty, cannot
appear to any judgment as detestable, not being an humane cariadge or
defaulte in them, but an outward impulsion of fate and destiny. Where then
is sin so odious to God in the reprobate, where is the ugly shape of
injustice, of intemperance, of incontinence, when as poor nature ouerpressed
by concupiscence bears all their deformities through a necessity, not
conquerable or resistable? Neither to this effect Aug epi 7 23. where he
proves that ^^e will in Adam extended it self only to original sin in
his posteriti^ and not to actual, which depends on their personal fredome.
So all* so ^pi* 46 47. Arist l. 1 mag Me^al ca 14.
of culpable action in the reprobate is sufficient the freedom of will,
wherewith Adam, and they in him transgressed the divine law: for adultery,
maurder, rebellion, rapine, stea^^h, and the like are personal sins, not
original or habitual, remayninge in children before any work of sin: and
therefore require a personal knowledge and libartie in the offenders. And
without all substance of argument affirms the Protestanter that such sins
are free and voluntary in the prime offense of Adam: for although all sins
are euentes of that first miscar^age, yet nether Adam, nor all mankind did
sin in adultery, murder, or in those trespasses* wherewith now our race
generally is violated and defiled: for, that any event, ensu^ng of a cause be
voluntary and free in the same, is to be exacted the knowledge thereof, and
then consent thereunto after such information. For example: he that perceives
himself to be in danger to kill, if in drink he surpassed measure, should
not only sin against temperance; but also justice, and trespass inwardly
as a manslayer: but if there were no science theof, or obligation to
understand of such sequel, being mo^allie not any danger or cause of that
consequence, there should want the offense of manslaughter. In like sort Adam,
and we all, did not recount with our selves eating the for^idden fruit, that
David would murder, and commit adultery, that S. Peter should deny his
master, and so the freedom of that eatinge, could not be derived to the event
of all sins, that not follow that first transgression: and therefore
according to the Protestanter, murder and adultery are no otherwise the
effects of original sin, then punishments thereof, as be quartaneagues,
evil lauored bodies, and other calamities: and so no more culpable and
reproachful then they, in that all are indifferently of necessity, and had
all one freedom in our first parents with ability to have been avoided.

8. Moreover that hope is not sincerely Christian, the which abolisheth the
grace Hope Protesta^tish aga^st the grace of Christ.
of Christ, restrains the same in opinion from his natural flow, extente,
and abundance: then how is the hope Protestantish Christian or gracious, so in
disgrace and reproach of Christ and his meritt? If the reprobate have no
redeemer, what succor gain they from heaven against satan, and disobedience
in the first man Adam? How does Christ his justice equalize the injustice of
him: Adam his sin ouerflowing and surrounding all man kind, when as
redemption by Christ is recalled to the paucitie of the elect: and all others
as it were in the ^imerian soil estranged from the beams of his goodness? May
they not complain, that for Adams take they have been forlo^ne persons,
impotent to believe, to live according to the law, without Christ, without
God, and all benefitt of mercy? may the not avouch that to them was never
sent Christ, or that ever they heard him speak to the ears of their souls,
never received any stroke from his fiery da^tes of love and affection, never
sensed any liquor of his honey comb to sweeten the taste and passage of
virtue, never were refreshed with his chaste Zephirus, to cool the ardent
heat of their inflamed concupiscence, never beheld heaven favorable unto them,
or God beneficial? O cruel design of the Protestantish hope, and ex^remelie
injurious to the extremity of all grace flowing so copiouslie from the balm
tree of Christ his cross! Contrariwise the Catholic hope regards the meritt
of Christ first of infinite value and price, as action and sufferance of a
divine person, infinitely gracious and acceptable to his d^uine father: then
does it respect the communication of this merited grace to all mankind, as
informs us the Apostle, comparing the deserte of Christ to the trespass of
Adam: in such sort, that a^ this passed to all mankind, so does the other in
sufficiency extend Rom 5. 1. Joan 2.
it self to every one, good and bad, predestinate and reprobate: he being our
propititiation, and also a propitiation For the sins of the whole world:
in which manner, was God in Christ reconcilinge the world to himself; for
that the world was redeemed by abundance of price, and benefitted from the
same with sufficiency of grace.

9. And as this hope Protestantish stands im empeachment of Christ his meritt
The Protestant defines against the judgment of Christ's.
so also does it misprise, yea condemn as wicked the power of judicature,
given him by his father, as to a supre^me judge and determiner in case of
eternity at the latter day. What? will the Protestanter esteem so of
Christ, and his purchase in that kind o^ principality, as if he exceeded in
tiranni^ any Dionisius, any Phalaris, or the cruellest s^ithan infierced
never so much by the rude air of the northern climate? will Christ adiudge to
hell fire, and that for all eternity, breakers of his commandments, as
Infidels, incestious and licentious people, which never had power to avoid
such crimes, to believe in truth, or to restrain in righteousness the liber^ine
scope of an vnb^^dled sensuality? Fie filthy blasphemy, vamped from the mouth
of such an heretic* to stain the very rays of the sun his purity, yea to
dishonor the divinity Where then is justice, the weight of the punishment
balanced, and the excusable necessity of offense considered? or in what place
resideth mercy, if God give over so many as shall be condemned, to the fury
of devils, whilst they live utterly despoyled of all ability to resist, as
to repent, or to direct their lives according to virtue? Far of an other
sense was S. Ambrose: commentinge upon those words of 1. Tim. 2. Ambros. ibid
Oecum Aug. De corrept and Great. ca. 10. 11. Tra 54 in Johan. ca. 12. Cirill.
Alex l, 5. cont. Iul^^
the Apostle: He would have all m^^ saved, He wills that all be saved, if
they themselves will as much: for as he gave a law to all, so does he exempte
none from salvation. In respect of which reasons entreated, conclusion may be
made demonstratiuelie in way of trial against the hope Protestantish, as
brutish in action, injurious to Christ his passion in presumption, bending to
desperation, and blasphemous against the merciful disposition of almighty
God. Never did the Pagan behold his Mars so cruel as a Protestant does his
god: Ne^her could Mars beheld by the Pagan incite him to greater inhumanitie,
then does the providence of that God, which Protestants acknoledge in their
Idolatry.

The Hope Catholic, to the commendation of the meritt of our savior Christ,
expects from the Sacraments, as seven in number, so as from effectual
causes of sanctification, grace and justice inherent: vvheras the vain repose
of a fainted hope in the Protestanter is most injurious to such meritt, and
all ^enefitt of heavenly grace.

CHAPTER. XXXIII.
ALTHOUGH the mercies of God flow from that maine and infinite of his own
Means and conditions of grace.
goodness, the which redoundeth so in himself, yet for our peculiar instruction
and edification, he has applied to this great fountain of grace certain
inst^uments as conducte pipes reachinge to us, for the more commodious deriuall
thereof unto our souls: in manner as that our hope aiming at the favor and
grace of him, expects the same respectiuelie and dependantlie upon certain
means and conditions, designed to that effect by his admirable wisdom and
providence. So in the time of the sinagoge, the people of Israel looked for
grace from above conditionally relying upon their temple and propi^iatorie:
all mighty God promising unto them, that in that place especially he would
dwell by a loving grant unto their requests, and be more copious and prompt
to clemency, for their devotions, in that sacred house of his habitation,
exh^bited, then otherwise he would. Also for the like reason the rites of
religion and sacrifices used by the same people, were means whereby they hoped
for the succourse of heavenly grace, trusting to obtain it not only 2.
Paralip. 6.
immediately from the goodness of God almighty, but by the interceding
property and quality of religion, of ceremony, of sacrifice and outward
face of piety. Which hope of theirs, so limited and restrained to c^eatures
and secondarie causes, did in no wise diminish the ocean of God his natural
bounty, but rather commended the same* for that such bounty imparted unto
them that self same ceremony, that sacrifice: in virtue whereof they
concurred to the worck of grace and sanctification: yea they st^od for the
exalting likewise of the merittes of our savior Christ, for whose price and
worth God the father bestowed on them those monumentes of religion as aultare,
arcke, and the whole appearance of devotion. Whereupon in semblable manner we
Christians and members now of the Catholic church, hope for grace from the
mercy of God, from the purchase and deserts of Christ, yet attendinge it as
the effect of Sacraments, instituted by Christ, sanctified by his own
blood, yea dispensed by his principal ministry and execution.

2 Wherefore first our Catholic hope for the exaltation and glory of the
cross, and The number of seven sacraments been ficall and graciuos.
merittes in our savior Christ, regards the holy number of seven
sacraments, wherewith every pa^te and parcel of our l^ues. all estates of
Christian men, are benefitted, blessed, fenced, consecrated, and assisted by a
peculiar grace and commodity. To which sense of doctrine thus excellently
well the Roman Carechisme: [That* the sacraments in numberate no more nor
less, may be shown with a probable reason by a similitude, transferred from
the caturali to the spiritual. For a man to live and to conserve his life, and
to employ it for the public utility of the common wealth, Cat To. part. 2
sect. 11. D. Tho l. 4 con. Gent. cap. 58.
these seven things are necessatie: to wit that one be borne, that he
nourish and increase, that he be cured if he fall into desease, that the loss
of strength be repaired and as concerning the common wealth, that magistracy
do still continue, by whose authority and empire it be governed: lastly that
by lawful propagation of children he conserve himself and mankind. All which
things for that it appears are found by a correspondence of similitude in
the spiritual life of the soul, thereon may be gathered easily and fitly the
number of seven sacraments The first sacrament is Aug. lib. 1 de peccator
merit cap. 16 Aug^tra. 108. in Joan. Luc. 24. Aug. l. 2. cont. Pe^^l ca. 104.
Quod quide^ in genete signacu^orsi Sacrosanctu^ est si cut ipse Baptismus.
Johan. 6. Jacob 5. Aug. l. de peecato original c. 34.
baptism, as it were the door of the rest: wherein we are borne again to
Christ. Then follows Confirmation, by whose virtue is brought to pass, that
we be increased and fortified with divine grace. For as witnesses S. Augustine
when the Apostles were ^aptised, our lord said unto them: sit you in the
cirtie, until you be invested with virtue from above. Then is there the
Eucharist, wherewith as with heavenly food our spirit is truly fostered and
sustained. For of that sacrament is spoken by our Savior: My flesh is truly
meat, and my blood is truly drink. In the fourth place is penance, by
whose force health lost is recovered, after the wound of sin received. After
this is numbered extreme unction, whereby the relickes of sins are taken
away, and the virtues of the soul are refreshed. For S. James speaking of this
sacrament witnesses: If he be in sins, the shall be forgiven him. Order does
follow, by which power is given perpetually to exercise and execute the
public ministeries of the sacraments and holy functions. Last of all is
Matrimony, that by the lawful and holy conjunction of man and woman children
may be engendered, and religiously brought up to the worship of God, and
conservation of mankind.] So that divine Catechism from the sacred word of
God, and apt congruitie unto reason, deduceth the number of seven sacraments.
The virtue of the sacraments. Coe, Plor. and Tird. Sess. 7. Aug. l. de
peccator. meti ca. 16. Joan. 3. Tit. 3. Joan. 36. 2. Tim 2. Matthew. vlt* Aug. in
Psalm. 25.


3. The effect of these sacraments we affirm to be the grace of
justification and sanctification, either forgiving sins before committed, or
else increasinge justice once received. Which verity expresllie is avouched by
the scriptures, attributing to the sacraments force of sactification, as
tearming Baptism a regeneration, a purisication: the holy Eucharist a
spiritual repaste of the soul: Imposition of hands the impression of grace:
Penance remission of sins. Which effect of justice and sanctity allthough
it require as necessatie the disposition of faith, and sorrow in them which
receive the sacrament yet the efficiencie and causalitie of that iustifiying
grace is to be surrendered entierlie to the Sacraments, as instruments of God
his mercy, and omnipotency; and also as the vessels that contain in them the
worth of Christ his merittes and passion, instituted and sanctified by our
savior to that effect of our justification. Nevertheless to the material
element of the Sacrament, as to water, to oil, to words of the preiste, or
imposition of hands, do we not attribute so much, as if they could of their
proper abilities, and natural sorces produce such grace or sanctity, but
only accounting of their virtue as in the hands of God principal agent, as
his instruments raised to so sovereign and heavenly an operation, as once
was a Joan 9
a piece of mire by the fingers of four savior Christ enabled to restore sight
to a blind person. To which power of God, appropriated to the holy ghost, in
the operation of a sacrament, has access a moral kind of dignity and value
imparted unto it by the appointance and ordinance of our Christ, and also by he
ministration thereof by himself as chief officer, when the priest his
substitute perfecteth the same: The effect of cu^ing man his soul says our
doctor Midleton a famous clarcke in school Richard in. 4 d. 1. q. 3 D. Tho.
3 q. 62. ar 3 l 4. cont. Gent. c. 55. Scotus in. 4. D. 2. q. 11.
divinity, is by the sacraments as by certain instruments of God his
mercy, and by the pa^sion of Christ, as cause meritorious, also by God as
cause efsicient. And generally, as teaches Scotus, the blessed Trinity has
determined to bestow no help of grace to man sithence Adam his fall, but only
for the meritts of Christ his passion, offeringe himself upon the cross.
Wherefore considering and ponderinge the virtue and power of any Sacrament to
the effect of justification, we must behold it as instituted by our savior, as
purchased by his precious blood, as executed by hs function of preishood and
supreme Pastotshipp. He it is, that baptiseth in the holy ghost St. Augustine
expounds Joan. 7.
that place to such tenor of sense, as if it were avouched, that the Sacrament
did sanctify the receiver not in worth of the outward action of the priest,
but in respect of Christ his merittes operating in the same, and applied by the
Sacrament to the souls of men. Whereupon the Sacrament does sanctify in as
much aas dignified, elevated by the merittes of Christ, and his divine
institution: in that he has bought by sodeare a purchase the assistance of his
fathers power, that it, as principal agent, at the ministry of the
Sacrament, and presence of dew disposition in him to whom it is imparted,
should infalliblie effect and cause the grace of justification. The sacrament,
D. Tho 3. par. q. 62 ar. 4 ^d 3. at 6 l 40 cot. Gent. c. 15.
says S. Thomas attaineth a spiritual virtue by the benefiction of Christ,
and application of the minister to the use of the sacrament. The sacraments of
the church especially have virtue derived from the passion of Christ: which
virtue in a certain sort is coupled to us by the receiuiuge of the
Sacraments.

4. The Protestanter, an in his erroneous opinion he does euacuate all power
and The number of sacrament dininished by the Protestanter and also their
virtue empayred. Calu l 4. Inst c 14. Beza. li. de re sacrament.
faculty of the sacrament, so in his presumptuous hope does he expecte and
attend grace not by the designed means thereof; as if in deceit he should
look for water not at the cock or pipe, but from out the firm ground,
whence no issue or source thereof is possible to be obtained. From the number
of seven he cutteth of five: and will only admit two; that is Baptism, and
the supper. Then in general he pronounces of a sacrament, as to be only an
externe ceremony ordained by a similitude or representation to stir up man
his faith in the promises of Christ: as when one believes at the vewe of
Baptism, that as water purifieth the body, so does Christ the soul: at the
sight of the supper apprehending, that as bread freedeth the body, so does
Christ nourish the soul. And that they may seem to make something of
nothing, and more of a Sacrament then of bare picture and similitude, they
say, that they are appointed by Christ also to confirm our faith, and not only
as obiectes to provoke the same. Wherefore they allow of this knide of
process and consequence Sacraments are seals tied to the word acccording to
the Protestants.
for the declarance of their doctrine as concerning the use and benefittes of
the sacraments. First fore they will, that no Sacrament with fruit be
administered to any, vnlese they before be justified: which justification they
repose in the justice of Christ his justice is imputed unto them, and that
their sins, remaininge yet in essence and nature of offense in the soul, are
not to be imputed. Then if it be demanded of them, why they believe such
thing, and what assurance thereof they retain, for answer they return the
authority of the word so defininge and acertayning them. Lastly when it is
required, why they make the^ recourse to any Sacrament, being already in
estate of justification, and the children of almighty God, they say, that
sacraments are as it wre seals bearinge the marckand prince of Christ his
passion, annexed and fastened to the word: by acknowledgement whereof they
have their faith established and confirmed about the promises of God related
in that written word: as we see the instruments and rescriptes of princes
gain creditt witth the beholders by their seals, or peculier marckes and
cognisances. And there upon they exclame against the Catholic efficacy of
sacraments, as superstitious yelding that to a creature, as to water, to
oyele, to word of a mortal man, remission and pardon of sins, which is the
sole and proper work of God: likewise they seek the disgrace of the same
coulor of exaltinge and magnifying faith in Christ and his divine merittes: ae
if not from faith or Christ we expected justification and salvation, but from
the creatures outward shapes, and inuestitures of the sacraments. To this
tenor Antichrist for the destruction of Christian hope. Number of seven
sacraments against the Protestante. Genesis 2.


5. When the Catholic enters into consideration of the number of seven
sacraments, provided by the mercies of almighty God, and bought for us, by
the passion of our savior, whereby in all estates, and throughout all
occasions our lives are guarded by grace from heaven, as we behold hereby our
church like paradise watered by the fountain of life Christ Jesus diversely
flowing in continuance to each part and parcel thereof, so we extol that
goodness, and ^etle our hope in good assurance of sondrie helps and succouses.
To this purpose we hear that religious admonition given us in the Romance
Catechism with attention, and with a thanckfull devotion for so many
benefittes received: If the number of the sacraments be fitlse explicated,
Catech. Rom part. 2 q. 11.
that commodity will follovv, whereby the people may turn the strength of
their souls with greatere pertie to praise and commend the singular
liberality of almighty God toward us, when as they shall understand more
helps to salvation and happy life to be prepared for us from heaven. And as
we recount the passadges of God his grace unto us more in number, and in
seemlie conueniencie more suitable to all conditions of our lives, so we dilate
thereby our hope in more spacious manner, taking hold by sonfrie ways on the
goodness of almighty God, and fruits of Christ his passion. But the
Protestanter acknowledges no such flow from the fountain of grace, no such
stream from paradise of the church, or wholesome liquor from the tree of the
cross, making reckoninge only of two sacraments, so restrayning the ample
dispense of Christ his merittes, and attributinge the manifold means of
sanctity and salvation to the bare and naked elements of wine and bread. Who
them more does magnify the grace of the gospel, or enlardge by faith the
copious commodity that from thence comes to our souls left any equitable
person even in force of reason resolve and determine. We expect grace fouing
out of heaven fountains, they only out of too; who do more commend Christ
his benevolence.

6. And who sees not, that the Protestantish doctrine makes all sacraments
unprofitable, Use of sacrametes against the Protestat Aug l de peccator merit.
c 32. 3^. l 2 c 25 Baptism denied by the Protestante With Manichzus Pelagius.
serving to no necessary commodity of man his soul? First he denies any
sacrament to forgive sins, or to imparte grace of justification: whereupon
Baptism is rendered by him a vain ceremony, as affirms S. Augustine, yea an
absurd vsance, when it is bestowed upon young children. For if original guilt
in them be not pardoned thereby, what utility do they receive from such a
sacrament, or why are they baptized? And if a sacrament be only a seal
hanginge at the word written to confirm men's faithes a bout that word, to
what purpose is such seal exhibited to infantes, not able to know the
signification thereof, and who can not from view of such a marcke have any
confirmation of actual faith, or more efficaciouslie upon sight thereof
apprehende the promises of the gospel? And in deed according to the doctrine
of S. Augustine, the Protestant can not in this matter defend himself from
flat heresy avouched by Manichaeus, and Pelagius. The manichies says Aug l.
^. de peccator mc. ca 32 23. lib 2. con. 2. cp Pelog cap 32 Aug lib 1 de
peccar. mer. c 32. Aug. l. a. cont. lulian c 3 and 5 cpist. 38.
S. Augustine affirm the lover of regeneration, that is the water of Baptism,
to be supersiuous: and with a profane haert affirm at to be vnprositahle.
Which these heretical adversaries of Baptism join is heue the Protestants,
making the same of no validity for insantes. For what purpose says S.
Augustine is a litell child by Baptism conformed to the death of Christ, if he
be not poisoned by the bigl^tingh of the serpent! Vherupon he terms it a
paradox portent a sententia^um restrarum, in that the Pelagians maintained that
Baptism did not wathe and cleanse the soul: and also says to be a very
morkerie, ludibriu^ to baptize such, as a^e not to be purified thereby from
sin. To conclude, the denial of such inward necessary lauer by Baptism
he styles an herefie, contrary to scripture, contrary to the church, and
preachings of the Apostles. Then are Protestants according to the judgment of
S. Augustine heretics, denying the necessity and efficatie of Baptism for
infantes, making their Baptism profane, scornful, and ridiculous, as did
the Manicheans, Pelagians, and Massalians. The Protestant accords also with
Julian the Apostara in his impiouse emnitie against the Sacrament of Baptism.
For the said Apostara impugning the common belief of the church in his time,
demands how the water of Baptism can purify the soul from sin, seeing
that in can not healpe the body of any soore or disease? To whom S. Cirill
answers, that holy Baptism has been oftentines most effectual also
for recure of bodily malady: and that the water thereof, as instrument of the
holy Ciril. l 7 con. Iuhan. Matthew 3. Clem Alexa. l Paedagogi c 6 Theodo. in
Epitom. di uin. dog. Quest 16. super Genesiru.
ghost, as it were with fire, by a vashing kind of essicacie does consume the
spots and stains of sin. Then the Protestant in this affair disclameth the
faith of the primariue church, and conspireth traitorlike with the Apostata,
and Antichrist. Upon which consideration Clem. Alex. calls Baptism grace,
illumination a perfect lauer: and gives particulatlie a reason of each name?
A goodly sacrament so diuerted by the Protestantish minister from its natural
propietie and importment. And if that sacrament only serve for such enfocement
of faith, then before it be imparted the minister is to examine curiously first
whither according to humane probability or not the child be already in estate
of justice, and predestinate heir to the kingdom of heaven: otherwise to
yield up the princes whritinges with his seals of arms for title of one to
enjoy the inheritance, having no mortal certainty of right such an one has,
is to profane that divine testimony, and according to lot and fortune to
dispense the mysteries of Christ his passion. A busy and pretty occupation of
the minister to search out what children in his parish are of the number of the
elect, and accordingly by the sacrament to witness so much to the people!
Shall he not diue deep, that shall discover so high a mystery! But the
foolerie is too gross and discrible. Then have we by them a plain annullation
of Baptism: for if the child be borne of faithful parents, not from
Baptism but from generation has it grace of justification: if not so
benefitted by propagation, then Baptism neither affords him justice, nor
establishment in faith, and so is rendered vain and superstitious.

7. And whereas the Protestanter reckons of the sacraments, as of so many
seals Sacramnetes no seals of the word.
adjoined to the written word, to the end of strengthing faith, he does it
against all substance of reason, and force of euidencie. For how can a
sacrament be a seal to the word, if from the word it self it take the
whole creditt and authority, men by no other means knowing the same to be a
seal but only for that the word so reporreth? whereas contrariwise it ought
to fall out, that the seal of it own nature autenticke and credible do
afforde credence to the writ: as we see that the princes: mage, engraven in
wax, by his seal yeldeth a Regal kind of testimony to his letters patentes:
whereupon seeing that these seals Protestantish of the sacraments have all
weight and moment of account from the scriptures themselves, they cannot in
verity and proprietic of speech be^^ales of such word, or any ways concu^re
to establish men's faith about the word For what need is there of seal, or
use in respect of the word, if this wo^de do auctho^e and creditt the seal?
rather the word is a confirmation for the seal, and a mo^ive why we are to
regard such seal, and in no sort the seal can stand as a co^^oboratiue
approbation for the word. Then are not the sacrament seals for strengthening
of our faith annexed to the word, as the Protestanter does contend and
st^^ue: but needles and bootlesse additamentes unto the same: it being against
the very nature of a seal to take it valewe and worth from the scripture, to
which it is annexed.

8. Neither is there any probability, that a sacrament according to the
esteem of No confirm^tion of (...) by a sacra^e^t according to the Protestant.
the Protestant should serve as seal to confirm the faith of the rec^^uet:
for in that from the written word as warrantie there of he af^ordeth to the
sacra^e^t all abilit^e to that effect, if in him faith begin once to dr^^pe,
or needs repair, to the word ought to be made by him recourse, as to the
very sountaine and origin of faith and nourishment thereof: the which word if
it be fainte and weak to imparte desired corroboration to says, in vain it
will be to re^re to the sacrament as seal of credit^, which is on ^e derived
from the word: and if in the cause there be any distrust of diffidence, or
not found the^^ effica^i^ sufficient to wo^cke encouragement in faith, what may
be expected of the effe^^^* the sacram ent being accepted upon the auouchment
of the word^? Wherefore it seems that the Protesta^^^s^ seals either are
superfluous oriniurious to the word: superfluous if the sole word be competent
for the e^gendringe and encre^sing of faith* as moti^e and induce men why unto
the sacracrament is ^elded an^e faith of sacred force or utility: injurious,
if for the sustenance of faith ^^ be deemed not suffcient to read the word,
but also to behold the sacrament serving for a peculiar for^fication of
faith, to which the sole word is not fully a^aylable Wherefore seeinge that
in virtue and consequence from the doctrine Protestantish sacraments are not
seals of the word, or outward means in any peculiar sort fit to confirm
faith, it remains that they be only external pictures and representa^ons of
Christ and his promises: Permodum ob^^cts as speaks B^za, that is Be^a lib.
de tesac^an.
^^nages reca^l^nge them to our cogitations and memories: as when a man
beholds himself or an other to be baptized he may in that instante think,
that as water washes, so does the merittes of Christ ^ his passion purify and
justify, if apprehended by faith. And when he himself eats a^t the
communion table, or beholds an other so to do* he may repute with himself,
that as bread nourishes the body, so does Christ the soul* Of which
judgment, if no more be attributed to a sacrament, it follows first, that it
is all one in respect of the use and commodity thereof to receive a sacrament
and to view it taken by an other, in that in both cases the outwrde ceremony
may stand indifferently for a picture and representation, as it were a
resemblinge obiecte turn our meditations to Christ and his promises equally,
and in the same fashion altogheth^r. Then the value of a sacrament and waygh^
must be no greater then is the sight of the sun, and the moonne, of a calfe,
or of a lamb, all being representations of Christ, and as obie^tes may stir
up our meditations to the contemplation of him and his gospel. Donbtles a
worthy resolution of the Protestanter to equalize the sun and moon, all
pictures and images of Christ, with his sa^rame^tes, vessels of grace, and
sanctified by his ho^^e institution! Sacraments then are needles ceremonies.

9. A most vain and f^iuolus pretense of the Protestanter against the
Catholic hope reposed in the virtue and e^ficacie of the sacraments, as if
the same abased the price of Fo^ce of the sacrament against the Protestante.
Aug. lib 2. de great. and pec^. orig. c. 32 l. 13. and 3* con. (...) ^asi.
despir. sanct and de Bapris. Citil. in. ca. 3. Joan. Act. 2.
Christ his blood and redemption. But in deed all opposittio^ in this kind
has nothing for head and center but the gross ignorance of the adversary.
It is all one to say that the merittes of Christ remitte sins, or gi^e grace
of iusti^ication, and to affirm that the sacraments effect the same. For as
says S. Augustine Baptism produces a new creature Pet ^^r^utem
communicatam, by a virtue given by Christ. And S Basil tells us, that if to
such purpose there be in the water of Baptism any faculty. it agrees to the
e^ement, not according to it proper nature, Sed ex Spiritus praeseut^a, Through
the presence of the ho^^e ghost: in respect whereof S. Cirill compares water
of Baptism to hott and scaldinge liquo^, the which worcketh the effect of fire
by an external qualit^e from fie^ de^^ued: ^o does the element cause grace
not as water, but as sanctified by the fi^r of heaven* and Vigor of the ho^^e
ghost appearinge once in show of fi^^e tongues. Then if the element of water,
or words of a priest produce grace and ^em^ssion of sins, they perform such
fea^e as instruments of the holy ghosie, as inst^^uted and ministered by
Christ, as precious and well de^eruinge signs before God the father for his
metitres in the sacrament, and by the same, his blood effectinge grace and
sanctification Wherefore if the ^llation of the Protestanter be of value: to
wit that the virtue we attribute to the sacraments does pre^udice the blood
of Christ, and his dese^tes, in that the whole force of the sacrament is
implied in that blood, and in those meri^^es applied to the outward ceremony,
as organ and instrument, then the blood and his merittes are pre^udi^ all to
themselves, which is most absurd. For grace and pardon is no^ given by words
as words, but by words as h^ lowed by Christ, and for the sake of his
merittes and blo^d ad^oyned to the words by his own institution: so that what
soever is caused by such words is altogether produced by the blood: of
Christ, and his divine deserts. And in particula^ as concerning the words of
preistlie absolution they importe no injury to faith, or the passion of
Christ, or his justice: for first such words exact of the person to be
as^oyled a faith in all the aricles contained in the Apostles creed, and a
sufficient faith to justification: then the words in Baptism work
justification from original sin^ine, as the Scriptures teach, calling it the
word of life, the lauer of regeneration, accordingly and as they are
expounded by the fathers, without impeachement of Christ his merittes, in that
the water of Baptism like unto the red sea is purpled with Christ his blood,
made instrument thereof, as a familier element to the holy ghost Tit. 3.
Tertull. li. de Baptismo.
according to Tertullian: why then should not the words of absolution
instrument of the same blood and merittes, being given to the Apostles power to
remitt sins* without any injury to the same imparte grace and remission of
actual misdemeanures? O Protestant, does Christ his inst^ution disgrace his
redemption, and his blood Matthew. 20.
worckinge in a Sacrament auile it self shed upon the cross? No, neithe^r
now, in Heb. 11.
the time of gospel, is there any remission of sins without blood.

10. And whereas the Cathol^ke hope expects a grace of justice to be inherent
in I^stice inher^nt is no^ against the i^ stice of Christ 1. Cor 6. 2. Cor. 5.
2. Pet. ^.
the soul, to wash it from spots of sins, to frame it a new creature, to
repair the spirit, to transform men to estate of childshipp with God, and
make them participantes in a sort of the divine nature, he hops for such
grace of justice without in jury to the justice of Christ: in that we receive
this justice inherent in the soul from the justice of Christ, as price and
cause thereof: it is his justice by donation, and ou^s by possession. Good
Protestant, can the effect of Christ his justice work any disgrace to that
justice, which is cause thereof? or does the effect of benevolence impare or
impeach the benevolence it self? a gross conceipte. We deserve not by
natural Council. Trid. sess 6 cap. 7.
carriage, o^ any other precedent work, this inherent grace of justice, as
is avouched by the council of Trent We have it freely from the justice of
Christ, as his merciful ben^fi^t, yet our grace and ^r^amente. Protestan, if
inherent justice and sancti^ie do dim^nish or de^^e the justice of Christ, then
we having inherent virtues, as that of chastit^e, of repentance, o^ faith,
hope, and charity, from that justice in Christ in regard of these inherent
good qualities we diminis^ the justice of Christ: which is a sotterie, and a
mere asinarie to affirm. Therefore the Prot^sta^ters accusation in this po^nte
under pretense of magnifying the justice of Christ, ex luding inherent justice.
and ^. pro^inge it aue^red by us, is nothing else but a m^^^cious and
unlearned cosenadge of the poor common people, not grounded upon ^nie ^eason
o^ knowledge. Aug in Psalm 85. acknoledgeth inher^^ i^stice by Baptism.
But contrariwise it is a flatt den^^ll of the (...) of Christ, of all virtue
in it, and of all benefitte received from it, to thinck^w^th the Protestante,
that man is just formallie by the justice of Christ: for in deed so no man can
be tru^^e just, no more then omnipotent by his omn^potencie, ^^ocent by his
in^ocencie, redempti^e for the whole world, if his omnipotency, innocence,
and redemp^on were to him imputed. A good^ie grace of instification to be only
so in imagination, and falsitie of fact, in that, with that justice imputative
may consiste all manner of sins paste, being not thereby expulsed, or any
actual crime whatsoever, as it did in David an adulterer and a murderer:
These, these are they that magnify Christ, whilst they sound the trompett
before the devil. But of this matter in the third Patte more amply shall we
discourse.

11. But I marvel at the impudency of Protestantish hypocrasie in this
poincte, The pretogatiue of the Gospel before the law Heb 8. 10. Johan 1.
Aug. lib. 5. de Baptism ca. 9. and 10. 15. de unit ecclesi^ ^ 21* Tra. 4. and
5. in Johan* c. ^ Baptismus domini and Baptismus s^^ui. S. Cir. l. 8 co^t.
I^lian. prefer ^eth the holy ^ucharist befoore manna as Christ ^s to be
preferred before Moses. So also l. 3. in Johan. c. 37. Tertullian lib. de
Baptis. mo. c. 4. Damascen. l. 4. c. 5. C^ hieresol ^ar^ch. my. ^.
making resemblance as if the Gospel preached according to tenor of their
doctrine did much amplify and extol the grace of Christ* and his meritt:
seeing that, wereas Catholics give that precedencie and excellen^^e to the
Sacraments of the new law, in comparison ^f the ancient mysteries in the
sinagoge, as are according to the Apostle to be surrendered to the body in
regard of the shadow, to the verity in re^koning of the figure. So S.
Augustine auouch^th the Baptism of S. Ihon in hope and expectation to have
remitted sins, the which in deed and performance were to be forgiven only
in the Baptism of Christ. [It was not one and the self same Baptism, which
was given by shon, and by Paul.] On the other side the Protestant is in
effect so impiouse against the Gospel, and aucthor thereof Christ, that by his
doctrine the one is as valeuable as the other, as sacred and operative for
grace and iustificasion. Yea in the balance of his trial the Sacraments of
the old law are to be perferred: for who sees not, that manna, the food of
angels, and tipe of our Eucharist, in all respects is better then a crust of
bread: unless by the Protestantish calculation a baker and a minister be to be
preferred before an angel, and the oven befoore heaven? what advantage ^hen
for the Gospel by Christ to loose angels of the old law, and to gaigne
ministers and bakers of the new: to be deprived of a shining heaven in the
sinagog, and to make a purchaceof a smoakie furnace for the Gospel! Is this
the fruict and splendour of the cross! Thus to steal a goose, and stick dowen
a fether!

The Catholic hope relying on the vvorckes of virtue, as satisfaction through
the grace of Christ, and also on the value of indulgen^es, dispensed by the
princes of the church for remission of temporal penalties, is most^ sure,
Christian, and comfortable: whereas the Protestant in his vain hope of
salvation rejecting the one and the other assistance, svuarueth from the
direction and benefitt of the cross, and redemption by our savior Christ.

CHAPTER. XXXIIII.
SVCH is the malice and deformity of sin, and by commission thereof so great
Temporal pain due to sin after justification. Proterea de quibusdam
t^poralibus paenis, quae in hac vi^a peccan^^bns irro gantur, eis quor^ peccata
detinentur ne reserue^tur in fine^, ait Apostolus, si enim nosipsos
iudicaremus, a domino non ^udicaremu^. Aug. ^nc. c. 66 Gen 2. Romans 5. 1 Cor.
15. Number. 14 20. Psalm. 98. 2 Reg 24.
ha^me inflicted on the offeudour, that ordina^ilie the offense, although
remitted and abol^shed from cut the soul by the grace of justification, yett
is still therein a remaynder of debte, as yuou^heth S Augustine import^nge a
just deseru^nge to be punished temporallie, either in this life, or in the
other to come. Which manner of God his justice has passed against many
sins, as is recorded in holy w^i^t: for in respect of original guilt, when
to our first parents it was after repentance assoiled, and also is now
pardoned in us through baptism, is found nevertheless this deserte and
obligation for endurance of some transitory ca^tigation: in that they were,
and we are su^iecte thereupon to calamitise of sickness, and death, of labor,
and traua^le, of hungar, and thrist, although expiat^on of that sin in
Christ be already performed. So also that offense being forgeuen of
murmuration in the people of Ifraell, yet by the judgment of God they suffered
many disasters, an^ namely by decree of his providence were excluded from
entry into the land of promise. All you which have murmured from the adge of
^vven^ie years and vpvvardes, and have murmured against me, shall not enter
that land, upon which I have list up my hand, that therein I might make you
to dvvell. Ho^^e David his crime was a pattern and president of God his just
revenge temporal upon offenders: for although justified by an hearty sorrow
and charity, was notwithstanding punished by mortallitie of his army, and
death of his dearest child. This pain therefore of temporal harm we
Catholics hope to satisfy for, and clearlie to avoid, by certain worckes of
virtue, performed in the estate of justice, and sanctificaton. Of which
perfection and weight of holy endeavor speaks the Apostle saying: If we
would iudgeour selves, we should not be judged: that is, in us there would be
no cause of punishment, if we by penal worckes of satisfaction, should censure
and chastise our selves: in which thing being negligent, We are punished by 1
Cor. ^1. Cip. l 1. cp 4.
God, that we be not ^^nned with this world. Which distinction and
differencie of behavior thus S Ciprian does recount: It is one thing to
evpecte forgiveness, and an other to co^^ to glory: one thing for a man cast
into pr^son not to go from then^e until he has paid the last ^arthinge,
and an other thing ^oorth with to re^eiue the reward: one thing to be
a(...) by the long greese of punishment for sins, and long to be purged
insi^r, another thing by sufferance to have purged all sins: so to ^nclude
it is one thing to depend on the sentence of ou^ lord a^t the day of
judgment, and other thing st^aig^t way to be crowned by our lord. Also S.
Augustine entreating of the mitigation or satisfaction for temporal pains in
such, which endure them in purgatory, through the good worckes of pi^tie of
the living, thus speaks: By the prays of the holy church the wholesome
sacrifice, and almose, Aug. ser. 32. de verbis Apost. l. de cura promort. A
distinction of satisfaction
which arr bestovved for their souls, it is no doubt, but that the departed
are much helped, to the end that our lord do deal with them more
mercifully, then their sins do deserve.

2. But that it may particularly be understood, in what sense we approve
satisfaction by worckes, we may distinguish three kinds thereof; the one of
preparement and disposition, the other of justification, and the third of
pardon from temporal penalties. Man satisfies in the first forte through the
grace of Christ, when being in the estate of damnation through mortal sin,
and void of all justice, according to God his commendement and appointance
disposes himself to justification by faith, hope, charity, repentance: which
offices accomplished by him in Christ Jesus, he may besayde to have performed
that, which he was bound to do, to the end he might attain to justification,
and so satisfies the law of almighty God. The second manner of satisfaction
consistinge of grace justifying, cleansinge from sin, and driuinge away from
the soul all guilt or debt of eternal damnation, is not effected formally by
any work of man, but by an inherent quality of grace powered into the soul
by the holy ghost, altoghether freely for the merittes of our savior, and
not Con. ^ri. se. ^^
deserved by the precedent worckes of disposition, as has been related out of
the Council of Trent. The third and last form of satisfaction persupposeth
the party satisfyinge to be al ready justified, purified from the spott of
sin, and is employed in a virtuous action, caused by the Grace of Christ,
and dignified by his justice in man, as the endeavor of the child of God,
payinge by way of meritt and deserte for the residue of temporal pains,
ordinarily remayninge after justification: and of this sort do we now
particularly and presently entreat. Nevertheless although according to the
common course of justification we affirm to be found in the justified a debte
and obligation for some temporal pain, yett do we not exclude the total and
entier remission in some case from all such temporal pain from the effect of
justification it self: in that after sin a man may so earnestly by
repentance deteste the same, and so ardentlie through charity love almighty
God, that thereby not only the crime shall be extinguished and exiled, but
with it also what soever debt or cause of any temporal affliction: as in the
case of martyrdom and Baptism to fall out Catholics D. Thom. l. 4. co^.
Gen^. c. 72.
do generally define.

3. And as the just partly by the high degree of their repentance goeing
before Satisfaction of abundance by grace.
justification, partly through their excellent qualities, and singular
perfections of virtues after that happy estate, increase in meritt for
themselves, so also do they exceed in deserts of satisfaction some times
far surpassinge their own offenses. The which satisfactions proceeding from
the satisfaction of Christ, and thereunto being ad joined, sum ^p an infinite
treasure for others great commodity: the application of which made by the
church, we term indulgences or pardons, in virtue whereof temporal pains
are diminished, or taken away from those, on whom they are bestowed: so that
the Catholic hope for expiation and forgiveness of these temporal detrimentes
by indulgences, is derived from the merittes of Christ, and of his saints. In
which meaning the Apostle S. Paul, and that in the person of Christ, that is
as Apostle and Bishopp, bestowed on a person offendant indulgence: that is
relaxation from his penance imposed him: and so also remission of that
temporal pain he was to endure: for otherwise it had been no benefitt to
absolve him from his penance enjoined, and to leave him still to the demeritt
of his sin, that is to temporal pain to be inflicted upon him by God either
in this world, or in purgatory: and therefore the Apostle taking from him the
obligation to perform his penance, did bestow on him indulgence to clear and
free him also from the debte of that temporal loss and harm, the which
otherwise he was to endure. To whom you have pardoned any thing, 2. Cor. ^.
I also have done the same: approuinge the fact of their indulgence and
remission. And that from ^he wo^de of God such practice does arise, we may
gather it by the use of the primitive church: as calling to mind what
Tertullian recounteth, to wit, that gr^^uous offe^ lo^s in that adge, as
denyers of their faith having great and long penances ^^^g^ed them by their
pastores, made resort to the saints and appointed martyrs in p^^son, and from
them took the benefi^t of indulgences and pardon: Tertul. lib ad ^at^. C^pt
epist 11. Can. ^. and 12.
Which peace s^yeth he they not having from the church, were accustomed to
desire of the martyr in pr^son. Likewise that great Nicen Council aucthorised
the use and dispensasition of indulgences in the primative church: wherein it
is enacted, that the Bishopp perceiving great alacrity and good will in the
penitent to perform his penance, may relaxe the same, and give him indulgence.

4. The Protestanter, in pretense as if he would saine make the world believe,
for The Protest^tis^^ denial of satisfaction and indulg^^ces.
the magnifying of justice and remission of sins by Christ, defines
absolutely, that when a man believes that his sins be not imputed unto him,
that thereby he is not only freed from stain of crime, and demeritt of
eternal damnation, but also delivered from all debte or obligation to sustain
any temporal punishment from God either in this life, or else where: accusing
the Catholic, as if he impaired justice by 1. Joan. 2.
Christ, accountinge it not able to abolish that deserte of temporal
afliction. And hereupon takes occasion of an hot and eager declamation
against the Catholic hope, relyinge on man his worckes, as his satisfaction,
as if not true, that which is affirmed in holy scriptures, to wit, that
Christ his merities are our satisfactions: and also as if satisfaction by
Christ were not competentlie auayleable for us to attain eternal salvation,
but that it needs the adioynture and fellowshipp of our satisfaction: men as
they speak redeeminge and sauinge themselves, trustinge and reposinge
confidence in their proper satisfactio^s And that they may more effectually
cousin and deceive the common people, he does not insi^e in particular upon
satisfaction for temporal penalties, remayninge after justification, but in
general terms disputes against satisfaction by man his work: as if we
mayntained that satisfaction for sins were absolutely contrived by the
action of a sinner, and not through the merittes of our Redeemer Christ.

5. As concerning the Catholic hope fastened to the worth and value of
indulgences, Indulgences satisfactorie caluminated by the Protestanter.
first with calum^iation enters the Protestante into argument against us,
affirminge, that we teach the Bishopp of Rome may give any man license to
commit any sin whatsoever without loss or detriment, and impart such
absolution for money, or favor, to attempt any villainy without ghostly
annoy. Then mayntayninge no desere of temporal pain to abide after
justification; and also that in the Saints no worckes of virtues are
meritorius or satisfactorious, being in the account of God rather deadly
sins, and displeasing actions, thereupon he concludes, to be no such
treasure of indulgences in the church: with disgrace also to Christ affirminge
the Catholic practice to be; as if Christ were not sufficient for our full
ransom, justification, purification, and salvation, without access of
indulgences, drawn and forced from the endeauours of mortal men.

6. That we may begin with the doctrine of satisfaction, we are to note
first the Hypocrisy of the Protestante.
marckable and palpable hypocrisy in the An^ichristian Protestanter. He is of
opinion, that the grace of justification does not exclude or expulse from out
the soul any guilt, odiouse nature or essence of sin: only procuring, that
although remayninge, it be not imputed. So that after justification formallie a
man by denomination and true inherencie of quality, if before such
justification by his fact he was an adulterer, a thief, an infidel, he is
such an one in the view of God, and truth of the thing it self, still
detestable to his judgment, and indeed worthy of eternal damnation: as if the
prince should forgive an offense to a tr^ytor, exempting him from penalty due
there unto, he should not thereby abetter him, or make him not worthy of death
and capital sentence: so God, as the Protestante deuineth, takes not away the
spots and stains of sins by justification, but only not imputes them to
punishment, which in deed are punisheable and disgracious in his sight. Which
thing although it be an extreme injury to the grace of Christ, and his
justice, who is said to wash and bath, to cleanse and ^inse his children in his
own precious blood; yet they cry a Apoc. 1. Tit. 3.
maine against us for admitting the only debte of some temporal pain to
abide with the grace of justification: as if we sought thereby impeachment to
that justice and sanctification. O blind malice accompained with found and
loathsome error!

7. Let therefore the Protestanter know, that our belief about satisfaction
for What belongs to a vvorcke of satisfaction.
temporal pains left behind in debte, as effect of sins remitted, to
recommend rather and extol the grace of Christ, and his merciful goodness.
Wherefore we teach, such worckes, as are to that end satisfactorie, first to
be good employmentes of their own obiectes and circumstances, conformable to
faith and reason: then to suppose the grace of justification, childshipp with
God, and remission of sins: lastly to proceed from the actual grace of the
holy ghost, as from his vocations and inspirations, with which our w^lles do
cooperate to the obedience toward the law of God and nature, to the
performance of endeauours agreeable to heavenly institutions. If then the
force and virtue satisfactorie in any good action have ishue from the grace of
Christ, as from grace of justification, from grace of actual provocation, how
may such operative satisfactions ^erogate from grace, cause and fountain of
all value therein contained? It is the Protestanter that defameth and debaseth
the grace of Christ, as being not of force to make the good worckes of
justified persons to be satisfactorie for any purpose and commodity: but
rather to remain in verity and substance mortal and deadly sins and
displeasant altogether unto almighty God. But Christ affirms says he,
that he is our satisfaction, where is then place for the satisfaction of man?
Just: rather should he conclude, where is then room for the wit of a
Protestante? Christ is our satisfaction: I admit it is then this a good
consequence in the Protestantish Theology, that man must lie idle and not
work his Phil. 3.
ow^e salvation, yea that he may committ any villainy, and believe it not to
be imputed for the sake only of satisfaction in Christ apprehended by the
faith of a knave? Then needs he not to satisfy God his law, disposinge
himself to justification by faith, hope, charity, repentance, for fear of
injury against Christ his sat^sfaction. No, brutish heretic, such illation
is not Christian, but ^picurean and abominable. Christ therefore is our
satisfaction, because from the treasury of his merit^es we receive Christ is
our satisfaction.
grace to prepare our selves to iust^fication, as we ought to do: and after
the same to punish the flesh, and perform other exercises of virtue for
satisfaction of such pains, as otherwise temporallie we were to sustain. Our
satisfaction ^s a beam gleaminge from the sun of Christ h^s satisfaction, a
sparckle flyinge from the fo^nace of his redemption, an effect of his deserte
coule^ed and graced with h^s own precious blood, and value thereof. We hope
therefore to satisfy for our sins first by pr^parem^nt of f^i^h, hope,
charity, and rep^ntance, as requisite dispositions of good worckes, to receive
the grace of justification. We hope after justification to redeem temporal
debtes of penalties, and to satisfy for them in the operations of restrayning
and rigorouse ver^ue; Yet our hope in this is resolved finally into the head
of Christ our savior his grace and satisfaction; by which we perform or
duties and satisfy: so that all the power of our hope is fixed in confidence
to the grace of our savior Christ, and to his satisfaction. Is it then to
injury and impare the same?

8. Moreover our hope Catholic, directed to worckes of satisfaction, procure
in Satisfaction procures virtue. Cris. hom. 10 ad pop Epipha. l. 1. c. 15.
Te^t. l. de pae.
us sondrie and diverse employmentes in virtue, the which especially serve to
punish, mortify and restrain carnalitie, to dry up that humor of
concupiscence, to cool the heat and ^age of sensuality: as by fasting, by
prayer, by watchinge, and such holy afflictions, as terms them S John
Crisostome, and S. Epiphanius: whereas neglecte of satisfaction in the
Protestanter omitteth such sacred endeauours, contenting himself with an
apprehension of Christ his justice by faith: he in the mean season assured of
his proper and personal innocence, free from fault or penalty in
licentiousnes, yea in the act of any sin, by Christ his satisfaction only
beleeuinge to have patronadge and security of salvation. A loathsome hope.

9. For the benfitt of indulgences accepted of, and acknowledged by the
Catholic, the Protestanter shows himself extremely either ignorant, or
malicious, in such base and and gross terms of error traducing our
doctrine. He preaches to the people for their cosenage, that the Catholic
thincketh for a piece of money bestowed on the Sea of Room, or for favor of the
Pop^, to obtain a francke and free grant Hastinges vvarne word.
to have all sins past forgeuen him: Yea and moore, a patent license under
his hand and seal to committ for the time to come what outradge he may
design. Then speaks he in good earnest, that Christian justice as it takes
away the spott of sin, so does it exclude generally demerit of pain, and
therefore cancelleth the use of Indulgences to that effect as superflous and
superstitiouse. Likewise in that all works of Saints in this life, were of no
other condition then of mortal sins, deuoide of merit, or satisfaction for
themselves, as he defines, thereupon inference by him is made of the
inualiditie of Indulgences, with high prejudice by the^ wrought against the
satisfaction of our savior Christ.

10. First we return his slander by true and just excuse upon his own face,
and The devils Indulgences given by the Protestants.
tell him roundly, that we affirm Indulgences only to be auailable for the
remission of temporal pains in those, the which before are justified by hope,
Charity, repentance, the holy Ghost by his justice powered into their souls,
and therein inhabiting. No it is the Protestant that is lardge in his
indulgences, and gives his doole from the Pulpi^t, as if he were to feed
swine at the trofhe, and not Christian men in the Church. It is the Protestant
that teaches the law of God and nature to be impossible, and so to Dies
caniculares Protestantici. The dog days.
be no fault in the breach thereof: it is the Protestant that assures the
faithful from all spiritual anoy, although outwardly he deny his faith,
injury violently his neighbor by stelth, robbery and rapine, adultery or
prodition: or finally of he misdemeane himself by any crime nominable,
although abominable: it is the Protestant that makes all works of man good
and bad, deadly and mortal sins; and driuinge away the love of virtue;
brings in either a laisye sabothe, or a licentiouse liberty. It is the
Protestant that allows a man many wives alive at once after the Turchish
porchery. It is the Protestant that freeth the conscience from bond, to
observe any law of Church or country. These, these, are the black
indulgences of him, and blessings of the diuil, not to be purchased by money
at Rome or Jerusalem, but to be gained every whereby disporte and freedom of
the Gospel, by a pretty pleasant faith, turning all things into nothing,
and procuring in all that nothing hurt or anoye: Fie, Fie upon this donghill of
Geneuian indulgences.

11. Then I inform him* that our treasury of Indulgences does rather
magnify Indulgences make for the exaltation of the Cross.
and extol the merittes of Christ in his Saints. It is therefore a worthy
effect of our savior his passion, that through virtue thereof such copiouse
grace should flo^ unto the holy society of his blessed, that their works
thereby are rendered good, meritotiouse and satisfactorious, in that such
excellency of desert, redoundeth from the same. Moreover, this superaboundance
of virtue and dignity in the good works of Christ his servants, is implied
in the communion of Saints, which we are to believe as article of our faith,
by means whereof, as teaches the Roman Catechism, Catec Romans part. 2.
quest. 61.
the good endeavors of God his servants, do not avail only for their own
proper and private commodity, but also, for the general emolument ^fall, who
are members of Christ as head, and are parts of one body, as members; that is
of his Church: amongst which mutua^l and reciptocall vtilities The offices of
satisfaction are to be esteemed Wherein likewise is declared the goodness of
almighty God toward man Pauli^ ep. 4. ad Seuetum Col 3. c. 1. Orig. ho. 24.
kind, not only ordaininge satisfaction, exp^ation, and salvation of us, by
his own self, and his peculiar fact, but also prouidinge, that one man does
concur in that sort to the advantage and abette rance of an other, as being
means through Christ of justification, of satisfaction: an example appeareing
in the prayers of S. Stephen, serving and auailinge to the salvation of S. Paul
as well remarked Paul^^us. VVhe(...) S Paul reputed his labors as benificiall
to the whole church and not only of co^(...) to himself: [I lo rejoice in my
suffer^nges for you, and do accomplish tho(...), which are wanting to the
passions of Christ in my own flesh for this body, that is his church.] To
which meaning, thus Orige: [Consider whether perhaps, as our (...) and savior
as lamb, was l^dd to the slaughter, and off^ed up as sacrifice of the alter
has remitted the sins of the whole world, so perchance the blood of the
rest of just persons has been p^wred out in some par^e, for the expiation of
the people.] No doubt, this does rather stand with the g^earnes and perfect
on of redemption by Christ, then to affirm with the Protestants, that the
grace of Christ produces no other virtue, in the just then mortal sins,
void of all price of merit, of satisfaction or acceptance with his heavenly
father. Then is the hope of the Protestants antichristian, so dep^auin^e the
favor and efficacy of Christ his grace, so denyinge openly the communion of
Saints, and all mutual charity and benefitt among the children of salvation.

As the divine virtue hope attends grace of God through Christ our savior
derived and applied in sondrie sort of causes in mediation, so does it in
particular expect such grace, supplication being made to the saints, as well
living on earth, as blessed in heaven: vvheras erroniouslie the hope
Protestantish censuring such recourse to saints, as injurious to Christ,
abolisheth these convenient means of our heavenly benediction.

CHAPTER. XXXV.
THERE be too especial offices, which we Catholics perform toward the
Catholic respect done to saints.
Saints of God; the one consisting of a reverence and worship we imparte unto
them, as to his friends, to chosen vessels of his grace and honor, and peculier
instruments of the holy Ghost for the happy atchiuement of virtue,
victorious conquest over sin and iniquity. The other imports our devout
and piouse supplication we make unto them, that by their intercession and great
savor they have with almighty God, we may obtain heavenly benediction and
succourse here in this life, end after it once expired, eternal felicite with
them in the other. Of the former we are to entreat in the for the part, of
the latter, in this present Chapter and discourse.

2. Wherefore upon conceipte that we frame of the excellency and worthienesse
Dignity in the saints cause of our prayers.
in God his Saints, as reputing them so entierly beloved of him, and blessd^
^n all fpituall abundance, we resolve Catholickly, both to honor that
venerabilitie in them, and also to make them our patrones, they being in the
virtue of the same potent with almighty God as his faithful friends: his
obedient children, and rich inheritors of his heavenly provision, deeming the
intercessions of saints to be certain convenient means of our hope, for the
deriuall of grace to our souls, although the fountain thereof spring from
the goodness of God and merittes of our savior Christ. The S Augu lib 5. de B.
pusmo c. 17. (...) to be helped by. S Ciptian his prayers. He^. 12. Ephesians. 2.
Galat. 4. Apo. 5. Tob 12. Zach. 2. Apo. 8. ^^r. Ale ^li. 5. cont. Julian.
avouches that Sai^ctes have great power with God.
Saints therefore, as members of the triumphant Church, in that they are by
great charity of themselves inclined to procure us good, and do desire the
same most earnestly, in that respect, as speaks the Apostle, heaven being our
kind mother, and spiritual Jerusalem, we may conclude that they interpose
betwixt our demer^^tes, and God his justice, their intercessiions as beloved of
God, and dear brethren of our common Christian society. Therefore S. John, in
his Revelations, beheld the Elders adoringe before the Throne of God, and to
have had golden cruetts in their hands, of sweet odors, which be the prayers
of the (...). And that the Angels tender up prayers for us here warfairing on
earth, is evident expressly out of holy scriptures: why then should not the
sacred spiritts of the saints, more coniounctly members of our church, also
toward us perform the same office of piety, and of their charitable
assistance? Practice of the primative church, and testimonies of the most
famous Doctors and Pastors thereof witness the same. S. Gregory Naziansen
speakinge of the soul of his father departed, says: Now is he more
profitable to us by his prayers, then be fore by his learning, by how much he
is nearer to God haueing deposed his corporal bonds. Bie silla as speaks S.
Hierom to Paulina prays now to God for aid; for the remission of my sins.
Therefore in faith of our savior Christ, and in veue of his virtues and merits
found and discovered by us in the saints, we make access unto them, humbly
and religiously desyring their holy intercession; and hope herby to find at
God his hand mercy and great commodity. Patient Job was thus advertised in
his perplexity. Call Job. 5.
therefore if there be any to return the answer, and convert thy self to
some of the saints: wishing him to make prayer and petition to the Angels, as
understands that place S. Angustin, conformable to the fact of the patriarch
Jacob in his benedictionall prayer: The Angel, which has delivered me form
all evils, bless these chlldren Remember o lord paid Annot. in Job Genesis 48.
Moses, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, interposeing their favor and intercession
for the expiation of the people. Prayers offered to saints on earth, were
exhibited by the Apopostle S. Paul: I desire you brethren, that with God
you vvil. help me by your prayers. S, Romans 15. Augu quost. 149. ^n Exodus
Augustine to this tenor of doctrine thus discourses: we are admonished then,
when our misdesertes are heuie unto us, and may us not to be beloved of
alimightie God, that we may be eased with him by their merittes, whom he
does love. S. Basil thus counseleth those, which Basil. orat. in 40. martyr.
are pressed with any calamity: let them fly to these saints: They that are
in mirth, let them also pray unto them: these that they may be sheelded from
evil, and those that they may continue in prosperity. S. Chrisostom does
recount the relligiouse regard of Saints in the Chri. hom de adorate. eat
narum.
primative chursh: He that is reu^sled in purple comes hither to embrace their
sepulchers, that they may pray to God for him: so that no we one crouned with
a diadem, prays unto a Tentmaker, and a Fisher, as his protectors The
Angels says S. Ambrose are to be desired for us, Ambr. lib. de vidiuis.
who are given us for our defense. The martires are to be desired, whose
patronage we may seem to challenge by the pledge of their bodies. This then
was the vsance of the primative church allowed by the fathers, who knew full
well, that such rite and custom did not in an^e sort prejudice the merittes
of our savior Christ, or detract any glory from the splendour of his Gospel.

3. The Protestant here aduanceth himself upon the stadge in fell radge and
despite Saints by the Protestant debased and in them Christ, their maistre.
against the Saints of God, together with a gross, rude and material
conceipte of an ignorante spirit emboldened thereunto. First as concerning the
bliss of Saints, he by opinion excludes them out of the court of heaven, as
only yet attendantes in a certain portche or entry, expecting the cominge of
Christ at the latter day: so Calvin the arche protestanter. Then as touching
their excellency and degree of perfection through virtue and grace, he
depraueth them, auouching that all their worckes in the sight of God were in
this life mortal sins, and as a cloth unclean, diversely polluted: yea that
so much the more as they exceded others in the number of good works so did
they thereby excel in mortal sins. After this does he blind and disgrace
their understandings and intelligences as it were of so many mouldewarpes in
the ground, or battes flyinge by night about the flames, affirminge, that they
have no knowledge of our prayers and devotions. Lastly in all egernesse of
spirit does he condemn and impugn their intercession and mediation for us
with God as extremly iniuriouse to Christ his passion, to our Redemer, the
only mediator for man kind, as speaks the Apostle. In which heat to the
common people he vampeth out the breath of a canicular 2. Tim. ^.
Rhetoritian, speaking no thing but cooles and fire against our Catholic
faith and confidence. The Romans, says he, look not for salvation by
Christ Jesus, but by Peter and Paul, by Mary and Thecla: they regard these as
mediators, and not the sufficience of our sole mediator and savior Christ. And
whereas they should have recourse unto Christ, he moreover mercifully inuitinge
them to that piety toward his own person, as it seems, in distrust of his
redemption, they occupy themselves in the invocation of saints, yea and
sometimes forgetful of his blood demand salvation of God as the price of the
blood of some Saint of their own estimation, fabric and belief. If Christ
be reddy to yield ear unto our prayers, why do we direct our devotions from
so favorable a lord? And if trust and repose in him be abondant for our
salvation, to what purpose make we an addition of the Saints intercessions,
as supply for the want in the merits of Christ our Redemer? Can any Saint,
who is already copiously rewarded, for what soever he couldin this life
deserve, prevail with God, whenas he depriueth in this sort his son Christ
of his office of a Redemer, and becomes himself by vsurpatio^, a savior, a
Redemer of men their devoted suppliantes? This, this is the blase, the flashe,
the smoke, the ashes, the vanity and vanishment of their opposition.

Contiariewise, we Catholics to the glory of Christ, and honor af his
Saints Saints in bliss.
pronounce them now to be inhabitants in that heavenly and triumphant court,
and also to be blessed by the vision of almighty God: which reward of theirs
Christ upon the cross promised, and performed it also to the malefactor
hangeing by him, a faithful penitent and his holy Confessor. This day shall
thou be with me in paradise: Luc. 23. Heb. 12. Apoc. 6. 7.
which is the church, as says the Apostle, primiti^orum, of those which first
believed and lived a right. And of the Saints S. John affirms, that they have
received their stools, that is life of soul, as compa^^ons of the lamb
adoringe God before his throne. Then Where ^he Heretic defines, that all the
works of the Saints were of no value with God, but rather esteemed as mortal
sins, he utters a maine blasphemy against the children of God, against
Christ his divine blood, the wise providence of almighty God reping in the
Saints no other fruits thereof then odiouse factes: against likewise the
holy Ghost inspiring into them no other deeds, then loath some factes.

4. For just and reasonable reprouall of that knowledge which the saints have
of Saints do know our prayers and desires
our prayers, I see nothing to stand in force, besides the Protestants his
own gross and material conceit in the cloud of his own ignorance.
Wherefore the veue and aspect we afford unto the saints of our desires and
petitions here on earth, is altogether spiritual, intellectual, not sensitive
by bodily eye or ear, as the adversary in his rudenes deuiseth: not much
unlike that contemplation we attribute to the Angels being pure sustances,
intellectual and immateriall, booth in sight they have of natural things, as
also of our penitential recovery and amendment, at which they joy
excedinglie, as is reported in holy writ. To which beholding vision of theirs,
it being mental and by understanding, situation of place, as nearenesse or
distance, in respect of the thing so by them seen, is of no import or
consideration: for the mind of a man, we know, can as easily and as
expresselie think of a thing in Constantinople, residing now in London, as if
he wear in that city: so then the local separation or sequestration ketwixt
us and the Saints, they being above in heaven, we here belooe on earth, does
not in any sort make difficulty, or impeshe their intelligences of our
affairs. Wherefore out of warrant from holy scriptures it has been an
opinion, yea a certain faith, that the Angels offervp men's prayers in
favorable suite and recomendation unto almighty God: the which office they
could not perform, if they knew not men's devotions S. Augustine affirms that
the Angel Raphael preferred up to God that work of merit in Tobie, whilst
charitablie he buried the dead: The which, says he so pleased God, that the
oblation thereof, by the Archangell Aug. ser 226. cp^ 120. Bern. sermon 7. in
Cantic.
Raphaell, did ascend to the heavenly majesty: so likewise S. Bernard [we
believe the holy Angels to be by them which pray, to offer up unto God their
praires and voues of such men.] As concerning the Saints, they also being
puer spirits, why should not they in like manner have knowledge of our inward
affections, as well as the Angels, feing that nether the one nor the other can
ariue to the same of themselves, but only by particular revelation and
manifestation from God? And the Saints being of our own nature, and in same
sort are like unto the Angels, as teaches our Savior, if Matthew. 22.
not more then they, why not equally interested in the good estate of the
church militant on earth, and as speaks S. Hierom de sua salute securi, de
nostra solum: secure for Hiero. l 1. cont. Vigil. Ciptian de mortal. 4. Reg. 5.
their own salvation, and careful for ours? Wherefore if the prophets
living by a peculiar illumination from God had intelligence of diverse
secrets, as Heliseus beheld a far of in spirit, the fact of his seruante
Gezei, takeinge a reward of Naaman vnlaufullie, and told him of it, at his
return, why should not the Saints of God in that light of glory and heaven,
have greater force to see and pirceiue humane affairs? How much more says S.
Augustine shall they in this quality abound, when God shall be all in Augu in
Psalm, 120 Con^^^. 43. 109. lib. 22. Ciu cap 29. Aug l. de cu^a p^o mortuis. c.
13. S Aug li 5 de Baptismo ca. ^^ affirms S. Ciprian to be present among men
by his charity.
all? Truth it is, that the Saints by their natural abilities can not know
what we do here in couerture of hearts consent, but must attain thereunto by
the e^peciall power of God. And s. Augustine affirms, that if Martyrs do
entermedle in humane mat^ers, as hearing, ^r helping any, all to be
accomplished per diusnam potentiam, by divine power And allthough it be
granted, that the saints and blessed ^n virtue of the v^sion, wherewith they
behoulde God, as in formali^^e and property of that actio^, do no^ see the
secrettes and devotions of men's hearts on earth, yet not withstandinge the
revelations they have from God of such obiectes, seem connaturall and d^w
consequences and effects of that vision, as a grace and quality of the
saints properly belonging to their estates and happiness, in the now
participantes of our common nature, and so by order of charity peculiarly
affected toward our good their brethe^en and friends. For in that they be
enflamed toward us, in most ardent and ^erfect charity, and wish
importunelie our good to the honor of God, thereupon ^^s convenient and ^utable
to their estates, that from G^d they receive intelligence of our desires and
necessities, as i^int members of one absolute chu^h* and of that society,
wherein is practiced the communion of saints Moreover that the sa^nctes have
th^^ reuel^tion from God, we gather out of the Scriptures, which report ^^at
the saints in general pray for us, and that holy (...) ha^^ made
intercession unto them: Also by the universal practice of the faithful in
this invocation of saints, allowed by the doctors, and likewise approved by
the Greek and Latin church. A fooli^^ objection, of the Protestant


5. Surely that which the Protestanter for the contrary pretends, al^hough
in some color prevalent with the simple people, no doubt to the judicious is
most absurd, slight and ridiculous, makeinge show, as if our intercessions to
these sa^nct^s did equalize them with Christ, or impare his redemption, his
prime and full mediation. In proof whereof I frame against them this argument.

6. The prayers of Angels and saints, which they power out incessan^lie, are
in If the saints pray for us we may pray to them
no wise derogatorie to the merittes or mediatorship of our savior Christ:
therefore nether are derogatine thereunto our desires and petitions, we make
unto them to perform the same. The antecedent is manifest, for otherwise the
charity of the saints, should be injurious to Christ, and they voluntar^lie
prayinge for us, vsu^pe the office of Christ. The consequence also is clearly
true. For if it be lawful for the saints, to pray unto almighty God in my
behalf, and in that office perform no iniur^e One saint al^ue may be cause
of an other his justification and salvation. fo^^assis enim hic p^aedestinati
sunt. vt nostris oratiouibus concedantur, and acc^pia^^ ^^d^m gratiam qua
velin^, and efficiantur electi. A^ de dono pers^^ cap 22. Omnes marti^es qu^
cu^illo sunt* interpell^t pro nobis Aug. in Psalm 8^ and 88. One may pray to
saints living, therefore also to those in heaven.
to Christ, why is it in me injurious to Christ, and an empeachement of h^s
redemption and satisfaction, to require that of them, which they may and do^
^ustelie otherwise act themselves? If the Protestant^r do answer, that the
vnlawfullnesse consists in this, that I herby make them mediators betwixt my
own sins, and God his justice, and so point out many mediators, sau^ours,
Redeme^s, whereas there is but one Christ Ihesus, and that therefore to him
ought equity of faith only to have recourse, he shall but declare to the
world his own ignorance: for the saints, in that they pray and intercede for
me, make them selves, in a certain kind mediators, that is occasioners and
promoters of my good, because in that they pray for me, they think and hope by
the favor they have with God, as his children and frenders, to obtain some
benefitt for me. Wherefore I prayinge to them, to that teffect, make no more of
them, then they of their own charity make of them selves. And I demand no
more of them, then they do perform of them selves. Here is no passage for the
protestanters ox, or his ass, or for any thing that is confederat with his
blind wrathful heresy. It may be the Protestanter will advertise me, that no
Saint can pray for me in particular, or in general for the church, without
full presumption of taking upon him the office of Christ, interposing himself
as mediator. But then I will thus reply. The prayers of just persons alive,
procure no disgrace to the mediation or redemption by Christ: Therefore nether
does the sociable mediation of the saints in heaven cross or reuerse the
function of ou^ savior Christ. Let my pursey adversary here labor and sweat
to bear out a solid satisfaction to the argument, if he can make issue for it.
And in deed the very reason is, for that prayers of men here in this life,
although mediations and intercessions made on earth by saints, are purchased,
and bestowed upon us, by the prime, general, capital, and original mediation
of our Savior Christ upon the cross; and so are secundarie med^ations working
with virtue of that first and chief, as effects thereof: in that God the
Father for no other cause has given us the mutual commodity of prayers, and
communion of saints, when one prays for an other, then for the desert of
Christ who needs no prayer as remarketh Aug l. 2. co^t. parme^. ca 8. Our hope
does not end in the saints, but is resolved into the goodness of almighty
God, as principal cause and motive* Aug. ^^a. 1. in Ioha^. cap. 1. Et ta^^n n^
ipsi mont^^ sunt, in quibus Spes nostra ponen^a est. Tra 5. c. 1. No derogatio^
to Christ the prayer of saints on earth or in heaven. 1. Tim. 1. 1 Thessalonians. ^.
S. Augustine; so in like manner, the prayers of the saints, are imparted unto
us, as means of our spiritual good and advantage, and as applications of
Christ his Repemption, for no other merit or ualeue then for the price and
worth of the same Redemption, by our savior Christ, and in no sort
misprisable to the same, being only effects thereof, branches spronge ou^
of the root of the cross Wherefore either the Protestant must grant us, that
the saints in heaven, prayinge for the church do injury Christ, and
against his prerogative advance themselves as our mediators, or else that our
prayers to them moueing them to voutchafe to be our mediators and intercessors,
not to impare, or injury the mediation of our savior Christ: it being
without all sense, that my prayers to them should implie an injury to Christ,
when the thing it self* for which I pray, done by the saints, does importe
no such matter of offense.

7. Secondly I proceed in this argument. It is not any diminishinge of
Christ his mediation and propitiation that one man alive pray for an other, or
that one pray to a Saint alive to pray for him, therefore nether is it
disgraceful to our savior Christ to pray to the saints in heaven for help
and benevolence. That one man is to pray for an other in this life, approves
the Apostle, I beseech you, let there be made prayers obsecrations, thanks
geuinge, for all men. And the holy Apostle himself aduenturinge upon the
dangerous pickes, he expected at Rome, desired instantly to be assisted and
helped with the prayers of his brethren, saints, and his own devout
children. In which case one man in a certain manner is mediator for an other,
that is a means and cause of some spiritual good through Christ Jesus. For if
such commodity were not the effect of their prayers, to what purpose should
one desire the prayers of an other? Yet nevertheless the holy Apostle
expresselie tells us, that the intercession of one brother for an other, and
that in the same kind, the mediation of one for an other, is in no wise
opposite to the maine and capital mediation by our savior Christ: concluding
his exhortation to mutual prayers with these words, For there is one God and
man, the man Christ Jesus: the reason is before rehearsed, in that the prayers
of the living floe from the merittes of Christ, and are effects of the same,
workeinge in virtue thereof, Then also is it evident, that our prayers directed
to the saints in heaven are not iniuriouse to our savior Christ, no more then
on earth the prayers of S. Stephen were, vttred for saint Paul his conversion.
What difference, I pray you, may make a disparitie, and hinder the
consequence? Is it perhaps difference of place? But how can only place
procure that a prayer derogate from Christ here, and not there, only
diversity of place considered? Is it not all one whether the Saint, to whem
we pray, be in London, in Rome, or in Jerusalem, or in heaven, as concerning
the injury enforced upon Christ? Is heaven so odious to a Protestant, or so
out of request with Christ, that it only shall disgrace and auile the prayer,
the which in earth was by God reputed as good and well pleasinge, pious, and
meritorious? o the great asinarie of Germainie, and of the illuminated drols?
or else for disparitie will they aledge, that the saints in heaven are
glorified, and not so the mortal saints on earth, and therefore to pray to
Saints in heaven is extremely malicious against the cross, and flat
idolatry. O the subtilitie ane finenesse of the shallow sight of nothing? Are
not the saints rather thereby made more amiable to God, more potent and
powerable, more glorious, more intelligent, more cha^itable, reconing their
final effects of his love toward them? Then are their prayers for us thereby
rather adorned and graced, then made mal^perte and sacrilegious. Na, says the
Protestanter, you Romans prayinge to the saints in heaven, look to be saved
by Peter and Paul, by the virgin Marie, and the residue of the Saints, and
not by Christ. A pitiful complainte, able certes to make one groan again, if
it were not for leaping. I would to God the Protestant would look to be commended
by his wits, and then he would soon see how we hope to be saved by the
Saints. Good Sir, when you pray to a brother or a sister of yours alive, or to
the aged worshipful of the congregation, to intercede for you to God, as that
he will by their prayers shield you from temptations, preserve you from sin,
finally save your soul, if percase these petitions be in your memorial, when
you pray, do not you expect salvation from these your saints, and this your
brotherhoode? Then in your devotion what is become of Christ Jesus? If he be
sufficient and abundant for all these graces, why pray you to any of the
congregation, why read you the bible, why receive you any sacrament, why hear
you a sermon, unless you make these mediators also betwixt God and you? Then
we by our prayers to the saints do not diminish or deny redemption by Christ,
for whose sake, we acknowledge the prayers of them to be for us available.

8. Lastly, thus I argue: although mediation by our Savior Christ be most
abundant Saints means to apply the merits of Christ unto us.
and over flowing, yet the same is applied unto us as healthful and of
salvation, by sundry means and instruments mediatinge betwixt our souls and
his deserts, as by perusing of the written word, hearing of learned and
virtuous speeches, follouing good exhortations, also by the freqent use of
the sacraments: all which interceding means of our salvation as they do not
disalow or injury the merittes of our Savior Christ, so no more do the
prayers and gratiouse suffrages of the saints any thing tend to that bade
effect: therefore to pray to the saints, or to expect salvation by their
prayers, is no injury against the cross or meritt of Christ. Who can deny,
but that in a certain sense one may pronounce that he is to be saved by
baptism, by the holy Evcharist, and readinge the scriptures, by good
exhortations and examples of others, as to become thereby penitent, and so to
be saved, yet without imparinge mediation by Christ, because these sacraments,
these scriptures, these exhortations work in the efficacy of Christ his
merits, and are the effects of the price and desert of him, his blood
worckeing our salvation in such sacraments, in words, examples and
exhortations? Known it is, that only the divinity is the original chief
and prime cause of our salvation: yet notwithstanding the humanity of Christ,
his body and soul, and will, and that without misprision to the divinity,
also are causes of our salvation, in that such humanity is an instrument of
the divinity, sanctified thereby, and intercedeth betwixt the divinity and out
trespasses. The third person of the holy Ghost by apropriation is reputed
author of inspired charity, of justification, of repentance, and the like, yet
without empeachement to the second, to the humanity of Christ, his cross, or
his water in baptism, in that from the merits of Christ have we that
assistance and operation from the holy Ghost. Then also one man may be said to
save an other in soul, and to be a savior by commission, deputation: and in a
secondarie sense S. Paul saved many, and namely the Corinthians: [we do pray
unto God that you do no evil: not that we appear as proved, but that you do^
2. Cor. ^3.
that which is good: then S. Paul endeavored by his prayers to save the
Corinthians, and hoped that their salvation should be an effect thereof. Why
then good Protestant, one now an earth may not expect salvation by S. Paul his
prayers in heaven without derogation to our sauiovr Christ? I require only
here a little wit to make a Protestant a Catholic. Did not also the same
Apostle S. Paul pray unto God for the Philippi^ns, that their Charity might
abound, that they might appear sine off^nsa in die Christi, Phil. ^.
without defaulte at the day of Christ? So that if God heard the Apostle his
prayers* he saved them by the Apostle. Likewise S. Paul prayed for the
Thesalonians* and was a savior unto the^ under the chief Savior of all,
praying that they might prove worthy of the vocation of God, and that our
savior would power upon them the gifts of his ^. Thessalonians. ^.
mercies, and so save them to the glory of his name: then the Apostle
endeavored by his prayers to save the Thesalon^ans: and if they had hoped for
the same by his prayers, and hoped for as much as the Apostle intended, what
injury to Christ? To make an end, S. James thus counsaileth all good
Christians: Orat^ pro in^^^^m, vt saluemin^ Jacob. ^.
pray one for another that you may be saved: so then according to the Apostle
his request, one was to be saved by the prayers of an other. Wherefore, if the
sacraments, the scriptures, good exhortations, and examples work salvation to
many without injury to Christ, yea rather in commendation of his merit: he
haueinge chosen so many ways and means for his grace to ariue unto our
souls, so also may the prayers of the saints in heaven work our salvation,
and we hope for the same respectiuelie thereon, without any injury to Christ
our savior, he haueing appointed them as his instruments and conducte pipes to
convey his grace to our souls for their salvation. And therefore the Church in
her prayers directed to saints resolves the final end and principal thing
in our hope to our savior Christ, thus concludinge her petition. Through
Christ our lord. It is the purpose of our savior in this our hope, and in
these our prayers to saints, to honor his servants and Champeons in heaven,
to recall often for our edification them to our minds, makeinge the saints
his workmen in his harvest of the worlds salvation: he remainge still as
fountain, they as streams, he the son, they gleames: he the furnace, they
the sparcles, he the principal bark and commander of our hope and repose,
they his pilots for our direction and passage to salvation.

^. Wherefore there appears no just cause, why the Protestant should chardge
Difference betwixt a Pagan and a Christian in hope. C^^ill l 4. c^. Iul^an. So
also Pla^o ibid.
our relligion in this respect either with Paganrie, or approchement thereunto.
For in a brief compendium of heathenish Thelogie, given by Julian the
Apostata, recorded by S. Cirill, we may behold the whole drifte and compass
thereof. VVhereupon that unfortunate Imperour affirmed, from one God to have had
ishew diverse petigods, as Mercury, Mars, Apollo, and others of this sort: so
that the pouidence of almighty God, as concerning humane affairs, in all
businesses was to be committed to the immediate disposition of these his
substitutes; and that all our dutiful respects of reliance and relligion end
in them, as our nearest, and supreamest lords and may^^ers: from whose care
and Protection he affirmed to proceed the opposite variety of manners and
natural inclinations in sondrie people: as that the Germane, and the Scithian
be aduenterouse, the Grecian and Roman civil and courteouse, the Si^ian The
^lde Roman Pag^^, and also Grecian deemed every one sal^e and suer in his
several religion A^ist. l^ ^. de Caelo c. 1. A^ist lib de ^undo ^a* 5. Ciri l.
^. cont. Julian. The Pagans restrained Gods immen s^^e and providence.
sweet and tractable. Consequently he determined, that all Nations guided by
these Gods, allthoughe contrary in belief, rite, and action, yet had
sufficient means indifferently of eternal salvation: blaming the christian
doctrine restraininge the same to the faith and law of Christ. With which
estimation, we Catholics having dependence on the saints, and friends of
almighty God, retain no affinity. For the pagan with Aristotle did abridge
and confine the immensitie of the divinity within the compass of heavens
globes. The ancient, says he, did attribute the highest place unto the Gods,
because it is immortal. Moreover with the same Aristotle the limited divine
pro^idence to the celestial bodies, recommending the administration of humane
affairs to the inferior Gods. But S. Cirill shows how this profane
conceipte of the di^initie, as it iniurieth the providence of almighty God,
so does it hinder our piety and devotion. How may it be thought, that God
governs man, if with his one hands he ^^^che safed not to make him? And
how is he delighted with our relligio^, if from our beginning vv^ ^^ not his
c^eatures? VVhereupon it can not be said, that we do leave God as
insufficient with the pagan in that for salvation we make recourse to the
saints: for Julian the Apostata accused Christians to have prayed to saints
being prostrated at their sepulchers: but that Christian manner is defended by
S. Cir^ l 10. co^t. Julian Theodotet. l 4 co^. Graecos. Aug. l 2. con. parmen
ca 8. Aug. l. de do no perseu. c. 22. Aug lib 2. de peccat Merit c 6 Tract in
Johan cap: ^ Ci^il l 5. co^t. Julian.
this detraction from God proceeds in regard that either the saints are
creatures, or Gods in our accounte. From the former can not be d^eiued any
such derogation: for that all Christians, and the Protestants themselves, for
salvation immediately repair to the Scriptures, to the words and voices of
men, to Sacraments, to good examples and documentes, which be creatures. As
concerning the other respect, we esteem not of the saints as of Gods: to
wit as prime and principal causes of our salvation, but secundarie only,
they having from Christ, as principal, all virtue of mediation and suffrage:
as we do also judge of sacraments and other creatures outeward and inward,
concurring as means and causes to our salvation. There is one sole and ^^evv
mediator, says S. Augustine for whom there is no need that any should
pray. But all Christian men commend themselves to one another prayers. Yea
he makes the predestination of some, an effect of Saints prayers,
Peradventure they were so predestined, that it was granted them to be
predestined through our prayers, and received that grace, vvherby they
would, and were made elect. Therefore in that we make not reckoning of
saints as of Gods, or principal causes of our salvation, thereupon
notwithstanding we relying on saints, one the humanity of Christ, being
creatures, we de^ogate nothing in our hope from almighty God. From whom
says S. Augustine that we are to desire salvation, not from fortune, not from
fatalitie, or from any other besides almighty God, the ensuing words of
the Psalmist do teach: o lord direct my io^ness according to thy word.
Nether are the saints, as says the same Doctor those hills, in whom our
hope is to be reposed: in that the formal motive of our hope, regardable in
the obiecte thereof, is not in the saints themselves, but in the goodness and
power of almighty God, through out savior Jesus Christ. Farthermore the hope
of the pagan, according to Julian the Apost^ta, never arrived immediately to
almighty God, but to Mars, Mercury, Apollo, who where creatures: also it
branched out into diversity and contrariety of the Gods among them selves,
and also of Nations, who were their suppliantes: Contrary wise our hope
passes by the saints, by scriptures, by exhortations, by Sacraments,
immed^atlie to almighty God. Rather the Protestant agrees with paganrie of
Julian, affording salvation to all dissagreeing sects, as he did. They also
accord with Julian in this, that it may seem absurd for almighty God to
change or ordain the course of his holy providence respectively unto the
prayers of Moses, Phinees or any saint triumphing in glory.

10. To conclude then in charity toward the Christian reader, and to shutt
up the row parts of this Trial entreatinge of faith and hope, for thy better
instruction thereby, I beseech thee only observe this animaduersion: to wit,
that since the nature of men through the fall of Adam, and otherwise, is
weakened in all faculties for the workeinge according to reason, virtue and
civility, and is strongly inclined to sensuality, to unseemly pleasures,
and finally tends of it self to disorder and barbarism, thou must know,
that relligion to be best, and to be atcepted of the, the which for virtue,
for reason, for civility, gives the more efficacious forces of aid and
assistance, calling back as it were the motion and bend of this our
deprauation. In regard whereof, we with great probability argue against the
pagan for the truth of Christianity, in that our blessed savior, by his holy
faith, confortable hope, industriouse charity, and heavenly relligion,
stands before all other reformers for the abetterance of nature, and
reclaimeing of it to virtue and civility. Whereupon only balance by thy
own thoughts, I beseech the, whether the Catholic yeldeth to natures
weakness, ignorances, and calamities, better means to live according to virtue
and civility, then the Protestant can aforde, or no: and then shall thou see,
that whereas the faith catholic relyinge on the outward authority of the
church is a indicious faith, a faith of certainty, of verity, of purity,
contrariewise perceive the faith Protestantish estranged from authority, to
be deuoide of prudence, of judgment, of unity, of certainty, of integrity:
finally no faith at all, but a devised machine of Antichrist, colored with the
name of faith, to batter and destroy the Christian faith in substance and
saueing life thereof. Also clearelie will it appear unto thee, that as the
Catholic hope extolleth the goodness and mercies of almighty God, affords us
couradge and force to proceed in virtue, so the hope Protestantish, to imp^re
that goodness, tends wholly to liberty, to freedom in sin and to a
careless desperation, and so resolve, that saying the Roman Catholic faith
and hope helps a man better to his end, that is to live according to virtue,
and where nature is frail or broken, there to yield more commodiouse aid for
a good and virtuous deportement, the same faith and hope to be embraced,
entertained and respected by the as sole means of honesty and salvation: To
which drifte I promise the, by the help of allmighty God, to give the more
manifest proofs against Protestancie for the Catholic Roman belief in the
other too parts handleinge the virtues Charity, and religion. And whereas
these later years of novelty and change in the mysteries of heaven, have
wrought a great decay of Christian faith in this our kingdom; so have they
disfornished nature of many helps for virtue, and made strong, euenthrough
out, the empire of sin; of evil customs, and so of barbarism, the ugly and
monsterous bratt of such deformed parents. Wherefore no enemy either foreign
or domestical, can by any means work us so great harm and ruin, as if he
norish, and foster such bad and loose demeanures among us, neither can they
take a grvater revenge of us then by such a tolleration: for so by vice made
beastly, couardly, foolish, unfaithful, disloyal to God and man, careless,
a few united forces may incline us at pleasure, or break us by prouesse.

O Tumide, rerum dum secundarum status Sen. in Troas 305.

Extoll^t animos, timide, cum incerepuit metus Regum!
O vvilie wit fuelles that pride,
VVhilest flourishing state it feeds in joy:
But when the Tyrants law is cried,
He steppeth back for every toye.
Wherefore dear countrymen, with the cocle open soul your to receive the dew
of heaven, to be enriched with the pearl of true faith religion, and their on
will follow knowledge, wisdom, Valor, union, and that ancient English
worth, so famous by letters and arms, so graced by virtues, and approved by
the manifold blessings of almighty God. Do not seek by force only and
bloddie resistance to prevail, or to maintain by cruelty that sect, which
vulgarelie is professed in this kingdom. Be then prudent and charitable: and
so an end with my hearty wish of your eternal felicity.

Conspirat vno faederatus spiritu Prudent. Perysteph.

Grex Christianus, agmen imperterrirum
Matrum, virorum, paruulorum, virginum.
Fixa and statuta est omnibus sententia
Fidem tueri, vel libenter emor^.
One leauge of spirit makes conspire
To Christian fold, undaunted ranckes,
That mothers, men and babes retire.
The virgin enters band with thanks:
And all on this vow do rely,
Faith to defend, or else to dye.
FINIS.
A Cataloge of the Chapters contained in the second part of the Trial,
entreatinge of the virtue Hope.
CHAPTER. I.
The Catholic Roman faith, related to hope, in regard of principality, and
subjection in a civil common Wealth, as also of all virtue in general, is
maruelously commendable and convenient: implying likewise in it self hereby
such arguments of probable credibilitie, as humane prudence may either wish or
desire.

CHAPTER. II.
What the Protestant gives credit unto, according to propriety of his sect,
is altogether contrary to the honor, security, office and function of a
Civil Prince. Neither is it in any dew respect proportionable to that expected
good, which subjects are especially obliged to procure.

CHAPTER. III.
In the virtue of hope all strength and fortitude of Christian life is
comprised: by force whereof as man accomplisheth his office and duty, so also
thereby he attaineth to the final end of his Creation and being.

CHAPTER. IV.
Christian Hope Waits in attendance upon that grace of almighty God,
according to instruction from faith, Which in number of virtuous Worckes is
most fruictefull, and in their eminency high and sovereign.

CHAPTER. V.
The reliance, which Christian Hope has upon the endeavors of virtue, is not
only sacred and heavenly, but truly civil and Politic.

CHAPTER. VI.
Our Christian hope, as it bears strong hand against pride, and
voluptuousnes, so thereby stands it against tow mighty engines of inciuilitie
and barbaritie.

CHAPTER. VII.
What sufferances the Christian Catholic hope undergoes, the same it dndureth
by true fortitude. Conttatiewise all pressures and martirdoomes tolerated by
Protestants, are nether passages of Christian Hope, nor enterprises of
virtuous courage.

CHAPTER. VIII.
Seeing that our Christian hope is a firm expectation of supernatural
beneuolences, purchased for us by our Savior Christ God and Man, herupon it
follovveth, that no sort of men alienated from our Catholic Church, has so
certain a repose in the mercy of almighty God, as we. which assurance, and
establishment by the Protestant, to that purpose addressed by Antichrist, is in
sundry respects weakened and diminished.

CHAPTER. IX.
The virtue hope, that relieth on the grace of God, purchased for us by the
merittes of our Savior Christ, imports also our cooperation of francke and
fre consent. Whereas the Protestanter denying both the vital motion of man his
will, and also the free consent thereof in the works of faith, hope, and
charity, as likewise in the offices of all other virtues requiring the
especial assistance of God his grace, together with the empairinge of this
heavenly gift, he also does resist and cross the very nature and essential
quality of hope, and confidence in Almighty God.

CHAPTER. X.
The Catholic by hope expects from God such bounty of grace, as is not
only cause of good consent, but also in generality grace of sufficiency,
afforded to the wicked and reprobate; although they misdemeane themselfes in
sin: whereas the fained hope of the Protestante makes account of no such
favor from Almighty God, as if he should even to offenders imparte at any
time his grace of ability or possibilitio to do well.

CHAPTER. XI.
Whereas faith assures us of natures decay by original sin, so does the
Catholic hope designeth that grace of God by our savior Christ, as serves
to the recovery and perfection thereof: but the hope of the Protestanter
blaming and complaining too too much of natures calamities, affords nothing
to grace or virtue.

CHAPTER. XII.
The first or indeliberate motions of concupiscence befoore fre consent, are
not deadly and mortal* but rather adversaries for Christian Hope, in her
purity and constancy, set upon by their temptations, to fight against. In
which combat the Protestante blemisheth and disaduan^ageth Hope, accounting
them deadly crimes where such consent is wanting.

CHAPTER. XIII.
Hope in the Catholic is much provoked to virtue by faith believing the
commandments of God and nature to be possible. Contrariwise the Protestanter
making them impossible, empaireth thereby the strength and courage of that
great and sovereign virtue.

CHAPTER. XIV.
The positive laws of the Church, and of the Civil magistrate, are admitted
by the Catholic Hope as bands and obligations of men's consciences, and
therefore for purity and integrity of life it stands in prime and flower
against the Protestanter, acknowledging no such debte of duty from them
arising.

CHAPTER. XV.
Hope by the Catholic faith is busily set on work about prayer and piety
for the obtaining of heavenly grace: the which virtuous function is abolished
by the faith Protestantish.

CHAPTER. XVI.
Catholic Hope willingly undergoes the works of mortification; whereas the
Protestantish faith of justification abhors and makes utterly void so
necessary and holy a practice and institution for virtue and goodness.

CHAPTER. XVII.
The Christian Catholic hope has confidence and repose in the goodness of
Almighty God, accounting him an hater of sin, and in no ways worker of it
in man: whereas the hope protestantish regardinge this sacred and just
providence, attributes to God, as aucthor, cause, and effectour all iniquity
contrived by the malice of man, or satan.

CHAPTER. XVIII.
The Christian Catholic confidence expects of the goodness and justice of
Almighty God eternal salvation; supposinge that we before iustifcation
cooperate with his grace by faith, fear, hope, repentance, charity, and after
by obseruinge his commandments: whereas the hope Protestantish, emboldened
in presumption, looks for beatitude by only faith to be obtained, contratie
to all virtue, and the grace of Christ, whose effect is virtue.

CHAPTER. XIX.
The Catholic hope although surely grounded in the promises of God, and his
grace, by our savior Christ, yet it is adjoined to fear and dread of the
divine judgments, so recommended in holy writ. But the hope Protestantish,
enemy to such a fear, is a desperate presumption, and an arrogant refusal of
all heavenly favor and benefit by the cross of our Redeemer.

CHAPTER. XX.
Catholic hope by contrition for sins committed, and also by the love of
God above all things, as due dispositions, expects the grace of
justification: whereas the Protestanter by the quality of his justifying
faith, disanulleth the necessity of them, their use or practice.

CHAPTER. XXI.
Faith, the which is sufficient, in as much as is exacted to the true nature of
faith, through man his frailty may be separated from charity; allthoughe the
Protestant to make a color for his justifying faith, as if a faith charitable
and holy, denies the possibility of such a separation. But indeed his drift
is, to establish a faith of it self alone, deuoyde of charity, yea accompanied
with the opposite vices, as competent to justification and salvation.

CHAPTER. XXII.
Charity aimed at by Hope, according to the Catholic accounte, is a work of
man his soul, proceeding from grace, and the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
good and laudable; all though the Protestanter enemy thereunto, repute it as
naught, bad, and defiled by original sin, in the very regenerate children
of almighty God.

CHAPTER. XXIII.
What mixture of love and grief the Catholic conceyueth and nourishes in his
soul by the meditation of our Savior hangeing upon the Cross, the
Protestanter impiouslie and presumptuouslie impugneth, hinders, and
endeuoreth to abolishe as vain, superstitious, and of no spiritual importe or
commodity.

CHAPTER. XXIIII.
Hope leueling course to the benefitt of justification, acknowledged by the
Catholic, as consisting of a gracious quality inhering in the soul, aims
at a purpose worthy it self, and Almighty God: contrariwise The
Protestantish reputation of this grace is not so serviceable to such a good
affection toward our heavenly benefactor.

CHAPTER. XXV.
The benefitt of a justifying grace remitting and perdoning in us original
sin, Catholikelie esteemed, makes much for the worth of Christian Hope:
contratiwise what in this affair is defined by the Protestanter, is, as
hurtful to the same confidence, so derogatiue also to the Passion and merits
of our Redeemer.

CHAPTER. XXVI.
Great Hope of God his grace toward us, through Christ our Savior
conceived is by us, and moreover exhibited unto us, when we expect and enjoy a
washing away of actual sins by the grace of justification. An enemy of
which souetaine Hope is the Protestanter, denying the effect and is he we of so
desired a favor and benevolence.

CHAPTER. XXVII.
Catholic Hope causes fear to loose the grace of justification through the
occasions of sin, and therefore is heedefull and pure. On the other side the
Protestanter is a flat Puritan, that is carnal and bestiall, defyning,
justice once acquired not to be looseable, or in peril of falling from the
soul.

CHAPTER. XXVIII.
Hope Catholikly informed acknowledges a grieuouse hurt by sin; and also
in every one a debpte to avoid the same. Against which pure and honest
information stanneth the Puritanicall Protestanter in virtue of his justifying
faith, making reckoning neither of the one, nor of the other.

CHAPTER. XXIX.
Catholic hope informed by faith distinguishes in purity according to truth
betwixt a venial and a mortal sin: to which is opposite the doctrine of the
Protestanter making all offenses equally mortal and damnable.

CHAPTER. XXX.
Hope Catholic remarketh heavenly bliss as a reward and purchase through good
and meretoriouse actions in persons justified: of which merit seeing the
Protestanter makes no accounte, in that behalf his hope is plain arrogancy
and presumtion.

CHAPTER. XXXI.
Whereas the hope catholic takes all strength and firmitude from the gooddes
of almighty God acknoledged by faith, and in that respect relieth on his
secret, hidden, and merciful predestination; the hope Protestantish from
predestination deriueth that repose and security, which is base presumptuouse,
and in deed the high way to desperation.

CHAPTER. XXXII.
Such esteem makes the hope Catholic of God his gracious mer^ies through our
savior Christ, as that he destinyeth none by reprobation to hell but through
their own default: whereas the Protestanter makes God a Tirant, in this life
disfornishing the reprobate of all sufficient grace, and after casting them
into hell fire without any misdeserte of theirs.

CHAPTER. XXXIII.
The Hope Catholic, to the commendation of the meritt of our savior Christ,
expects from the sacraments, as seven in number, so also as from effectual
causes of sanctification, grace and justice inherent: whereas the vain repose
of a fained hope in the Protestanter is most injurious to such meritt, and all
benefitt of heavenly grace.

CHAPTER. XXXIIII.
The Catholic hope relying on the works of virtue, as satisfaction through
the grace of Christ, and also on the value of indulgences, dispensed by the
Princes of the Church fore remission of te^porall penalties is most sure,
Christian and comfortable: Whereas the Protestant in his vain hope of
salvation rejecting the one and the other assistance, suarueth from the
direction and benefitt of the Cross and redemption by our savior Christ.

CHAPTER. XXXV.
As the divine virtue of hope attends grace of God, through Christ our
savior derived and applied in sondrie sort of causes in mediation, so does
it in particular expecte such grace, supplication beeinge made to the Saints
as well living on earth, as blessed in heaven: Whereas erroneouslie the hope
Protestantish censuring such recourse to saints, as iniuriouse to Christ,
abolisheth those convenient means of our heavenly benediction.

FINIS:
LAVS Deo, Beatissimae Mariae Virgini, et omnibvs Sanctis.

