A BRIDE-BVSH, OR A WEDDING SERMON:

Compendiously describing the duties of Married Persons:

By performing whereof, Marriage shall be to them a great Help, which now
find it a little Hell.

Marriage is honorable amongst all men: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will judge.

Heb. 13.4. Printed at London by William Iaggard, for Nicholas Bourne, and are
to be sold at his shop at the entrance into the Royal Exchange, 1617.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader; Marriage has scarce more that use, then that accuse it.
Most men enter into this estate, and being entered complain thereof. They
should rather complain of themselves. It is an unjust thing, and a fruit of
ignorant pride, to cast the blame of our greeuances upon Gods ordinances. I had
been happy (says one) had I not been married. Then wast thou foolish both
before and since thy marriage. Use it well, it shall add to thine happiness.
We make bitter sauce, and cry out that the meat is bitter. Thou live in
Matrimony not after Gods direction, but the rules (crooked rules they be) of
thine own lusts, and then say, Oh that I had never married, Oh that I were
unmarried. For shame keep silence, thy crying shows thy disease. Thou art
indeed married to an ill companion (thy wicked flesh, that body of death, that
old husband) and art pestered with its brood, and neither seek a divorce
from this tyrant, nor endeauourest to crucify the wicked offspring thereof.
Hence are thy woes; not thy Husband, not thy Wife, but thy pride, thy passion,
cause all this annoyance, all this coffeehouse. I labor in this little
Treatise to plead the cause of marriage: not so much directly in speech, as
indeed actually, by directing the married to the knowledge and practice of
their duties, which would mend all. These what soever man and woman endeavor to
follow, if they prove not marriage a solace to their souls, and refreshing to
their other greefes, let me never but grieve.

These things I commend to thine understanding, to thy life: use them, and then
say how thou speedest. I intended them at first for a few, and now communicate
them to many. It is no uncharitable (I am sure) I hope, no unprofitable deed. I
desire thou should make some use of them, therefore I make them public: if
not, be ignorant and complain still. I mean them not to the learned, that
can find out better directions for themselves, but to those whose place is not
too good to learn of the meanest Teacher: even unto men of the same rank, as
they for the most part were, to whom I spoke them. If this work profit, I am
glad, then I know it shall please: howsoever, thou have it Reader, and better
should have had, if my store affoorded any better. I hope thou will not blame
me for meaning well, and doing no harm. So I commend thee to the Lord.

Banburie, August 20. 1608. Thine in the Lord, W. W.

A BRIDE-BVSH: OR A Wedding Sermon.
IF it were not grown out of custom to preach without a text, I should think
that the fittest course for meetings of this nature. No one place of Scripture
does either directly contain, or plainly express the full duty of the
married couple: which yet from many places may well be collected into the body
of one discourse. But lest I should seem to affect nouelty, in recalling the
long disused practice of antiquity, I will make the ground of all my speech,
those words of the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 5.23. where he says,

The Husband is the Wives head. THe comparison which the holy Ghost here
uses, affords this general point, That there is a mutual bond of duty
standing betwixt man and wife. They are indebted each to other in a reciprocal
debt. The parcels and specials of which debt, I am at this time to declare unto
you for the direction of all such as either are or shall be entered into this
estate.

2 Now that we may proceed in some order for the help of our own and your
memories, these duties are all of two kinds. Some be principal, some less
principal. Principal I term those, by the breach whereof this knot is
dissolved and quite undone: and which being observed (other smaller infirmities
notwithstanding) the bond remains entire on both sides.

3 These maine duties are two. The first is, the chaste keeping of each ones
body each for other. The Husband must not dare to give himself to any woman in
this world but to his wife; nor the wife to company with any under heaven
besides her own husband. Against which duty if either of them shall offend,
the party so transgressing, has committed adultery, broken the covenant of
God, removed the yoke from the yoke fellows neck, and laid himself open (if
the Magistrate did as Gods law commands) to the bloody stroke of a violent
death. Leu. 20.40. Deuteronomy. 21.22.


But if it be demanded, whether the party wronged may lawfully admit the other
party again, after the offense known: I answer, that in case the man or woman
have offended once or so, through, infirmity, and yet being convicted, shall
by manifest outward tokens, testify his or her repentance, and sure desire of
amendment, then it is meet and convenient that this offense be by the
yoke fellow passed by: for the love of the married couple should be very
fervent and abundant, and therefore able to pass by great, yea the greatest
wrongs, so far as it may with safe conscience be done. And we read not of
any express commandment which enioynes a final separation. But again I say,
that in case the party transgressing, shall continue in the begun fault, and
declare himself irreformable, the party thus iniuried is bound in conscience
both to complain of the sin, and separate himself utterly: for no man must
make himself a member of an harlot, nor woman of an whore-master. The chief
thing therefore that married people must take heed of, is this, lest by any
means they should so far offend God, neglect their public covenant, wrong
their yoke fellow, scandalize the Church, pollute their bodies, and adventure
their souls to damnation, as to follow strange flesh, and receive unto the use
of their bodies any besides themselves, whom God has coupled together, and
sanctified one for another. Yet not alone the gross act of adultery, but all
such ouer-familiar and light behauiours, as may give either occasion or
suspicion of an evil meaning, must be by them forborne and shunned; always
bearing in mind the grave speech of wise Solomon, Prou. 6, 29.
[ Whosoever touches her (speaking of his neighbors wife) shall not be
innocent.] Let no man therefore, let no woman take this burning fire into their
bosoms, or walk upon these scorching coals. And for the principal duty so
much.

4. The next is cohabitation or dwelling together, enioined in express terms
to the husband by the Apostle Peter (who bids him, 1 Peter 3, 7
Dwell with his Wife) and therefore by good consequent extending to her also:
for who can dwell with a woman that will run from him? And the Apostle Paul
commands the husband to give unto the wife due benevolence, 1 Cor. 7, 3.5.
and the wife to give the same to the husband; which cannot be without this
cohabitation: yea, he especially forbids them to defraud each the other,
unless it be by consent, and afterward to come together again. Which does
necessarily import the abode in one home. So that the married man or woman may
not abide or dwell where each of them pleases, but they must have the same
habitation as one body. I deny not, that the service of the country, and
needful private affairs, may cause a just departure for (even) a long time:
but a wilful and angry separation of beds or houses must not be tolerated.
And if it so fall out, that either party do frowardly and peruersty withdraw
him or herself from this matrimonial society (which fault is termed
desertion) the man or woman thus offending, does so far violate the covenant of
marriage, that (the thing being found incureable, through the obstinacy of
that party, after just care had to redress it) the other is loosed from the
former band, and may lawfully (after an orderly proceeding with the Church or
Magistrate in that behalf) join him or her self to another. Of which there
is very great reason. First, because such a separation is a wilful frustrating
of the proper purpose and end of matrimony, annihilating the same through his
default and sinnefulnesse (even presumptuous) which is found guilty, and for
this cause deserves (yea constrains) that he should be rejected, as no
longer a yoke fellow. Secondly, because such unfaithful desertion is almost
never separated from adultery, as the Apostle intimates in the forenamed
place, saying, Lest Satan tempt you for your incontinency. 1 Cor. 7, 5.
He does unavoidably cast himself upon uncleanness that so lewdly casts off
marriage, which he might avoid. And for this matter, we have received clear
direction from the holy Ghost by the Apostle, who says, 1 Cor. 7.15.
If the unbeliever depart, let him depart: a brother or a sister is not bound
in such thing. In which words, he permits not to the unbeliever such
separations as lawful, but casts the fault upon him alone, and after frees the
other party from the band by which he or she was formerly tied: as if he had
said; If he will needs be gone, let him; and trouble not your selves about
it, the sin lies wholly upon his own soul. A Christian man or woman, when
cases of this nature fall out, is no longer tied to the former covenant, nor to
the former party, which has himself first broken it. Neither is this any
whit contrary to that of our Savior, who forbids a man to put away his wife
and marry another, unless it be for adultery. Matthew. 19, 9.
For we allow not to him or her, any such liberty of putting away, but upon
that only cause. Yet if he or she be wrongfully put away (the yoke fellow
withdrawing him or herself out of the way, so that there be no hope to recall
them, or else not returning upon good persuasion or means used) we yield with
the Apostle, a freedom to the party so wronged. And these things you see may
well stand together. No man may lawfully forsake his wife, nor the wife the
husband (but in case of adultery) to marry another; and yet any man or woman,
being wrongfully forsaken by his or her yoke fellow, may lawfully then marry
another, as being disburdened of the former yoke, without any sin, on their
parts, in that thing, procuring it. Only we profess, that in cases of this
nature, a just and orderly course must be taken. Every one may not headdily,
and upon a sudde, carue to themselves: but seek direction, and crave help
from the Church and Magistrate, whose duty binds them to provide remedy for
such inconveniences. So that this thing also must be diligently avoided by
married people, that they do never upon occasion of coffeehouse, or the
like, absent themselves, or run away from each other; which to do, were to
untie that knot, which God before had knit betwixt them, and to separate the
things which God (and man by Gods allowance) had conjoined. Yea, they must not
alone beware of making an utter rent and total breach in their society, but
avoid also those smaller iarres and cracks, that make way thereunto. They must
not through passionate fallings out, and proud distasting of each others
behavior, separate house, bed or table, no not for a short space. They must
not seek occasions of long and needless absence, through carelessness or
slight respect each of other, or following vain pleasures and company-keeping
abroad. For, is it not a madness to procure a strangeness betwixt themselves,
which ought to be most familiar? And were it not better, not to depart, than
to make an open jar of that which might have been privately reconciled?

5. And for the maine and principal duties required in matrimony, viz.
chastity and cohabitation, so much. The less principal follow, to which, men
and women are indeed bound by their promise and vow, but yet not with so much
strictnes, that any offense in them should make the former bargain void:
wants in these matters, do stretch the corn of matrimony, and give (as I may
say) a sore gird unto it, but break it not: only they break Gods
Commandment exceedingly, that have not in these things also great care to
confirm that union, which should be made indissoluble, by their diligence.
Now these also are of two sorts, whereof the first respects their ordinary
society; the second looks to the society of the marriage bed. Again, those
which concern their ordinary society, are of two sorts: Some be mutual,
pertaining to both: others special pertaining to either of them.

6. The mutual therefore (that we may speak of them in order) are required
both of man and wife, though not in an equal measure of both. For in all these
common duties, the husband should be most abundant, knowing that more of every
grace is looked for from him, then from the weaker vessel. We call them not
therefore common or mutual, because both should have a like quantity of them;
but because both must have some of all, and the husband most of all. And for
these common duties, you must know in general, that whatsoever is required of
all men and women, generally toward other, by the Law of Christianity and
Charity, as they be men and neighbors; the same is in an higher degree and
larger measure required from the husband toward the wife, and from her to him.
So that look what the Law of Love or Religion bids thee perform to any
person, as a man or Christian, that it binds thee much more diligently and
carefully to perform to thy yoke fellow. The nearer band of matrimony weakens
not, but confirms the more common of humanity. But it shall be needful more
particularly to describe these common duties.

7. They be of two kinds: The former respecting themselves; the latter their
families. Unto themselves they owe in common; first love; secondly,
faithfulness and helpefulnesse; joined together, a faithful helpefulnesse,
and an helpefull faithfulness. As for love, it is the life, the soul of
marriage, without which it is no more it self, than a carcass is a man; yea,
it is uncomfortable, miserable, and a living death. For this, all must labor,
as all will yield, that take marriage upon them. The want of this, causes
defectiuenesse in all other duties: the abundance of it, supplyeth what is
wanting in the rest. Love seasons and sweetens all estates: Love breaks off,
and composeth all controversies: Love ouer-ruleth all affections, it squareth
all actions; in a word, it is the King of the heart, which, where it
preuayleth, marriage is it self indeed, viz. a pleasing combination of two
persons, into one home, one purse, one heart, and one flesh. But to commend it,
and the good effects of it, (which all do confess) were needless pains. Let
us rather show what a kind of love it must be, and how it may be gotten.

8. This love therefore which we speak of, must be first spiritual, then
matrimonial. Spiritual I say, that is, grounded principally upon the
Commandment of God that requyres it, (for I speak of Christians) not upon
the face, favor, proportion, beauty, dowry, nobility, gifts or good parts of
him or her, to whom it is due: for that natural love which builds it self
upon such sandy considerations, as the forenamed, will either be blown down
by some storm or tempest of displeasure, or fall of it self, or else
degenerate into jealousy, the most devouring and fretting canker that can
harbor in a married persons breast: but spiritual love, that looks upon God,
rests upon his will, yeeldes to his Commandment, and resolves to obey it,
cannot change it self, because the cause thereof is unchangeable. Thou love
thy Wife, for that she is fair, well-spoken, courteous, of good feature,
brings much, and is huswifely. It is well. But what will become of thy love,
when all those things fail, as all may, the most must fail? Thou love thine
husband, because he is a proper man, and has an actine and able body, is of
good health, wit, carriage; because he is kind, loving, of fair condition,
uses thee well. But where shall we find thy love, if an alteration come to
these things, as to all earthly things it may come? Lo then how there is no
constancy or firmitude in other causes. But he which loves his wife, and she
which loves her husband, because God has so bidden, the maker of all things
has enjoined it, the Lord and Master of the heart, who alone may command the
very affections, appoints it so; shall find his or her love lasting and
durable, as God alters not, and his Law continues always the same. This right
foundation of love, is Gods Commandment, and then it is spiritual when built
upon this rock.

9. It must be also matrimonial: We are to love our friends, our kindred, our
neighbors, yea forreiners, and our utter enemies, even all men euery-where:
but the nuptial love of yoke-fellowes, is a special and peculiar love, far
more dear and inward than all, or any of all these. It is the fixing of their
hearts in the good liking each of other, as the only fit and good match that
could be found under the Sun for them. The husband must rest his heart in
his wife, as the best wife that the world could have yielded him. The wife must
settle her very soul upon her husband, as the best husband that might have
been had amongst men for her. Thus doing, they should love perfectly; thus
striving to do, they love entirely. They may lawfully think others better men
or women, but none a better husband or wife for them than their yoke fellow:
for this were to admit the desire of changing, which cannot stand with true
love. Who would change his Child with any man? Every man's own son pleases
him best, though perhaps his qualities displease; so should the husband, so the
wife. They therefore that are still vpbraiding each other with the bypast
matches, which they might, or should have had, love not soundly, though they
may smile upon each other. Marriage-loue admits of no equal, but places the
yoke fellow next of all to the soul of the party loving; it will know none
dearer, none so dear. And of this quality is the love we require.

10. But how shall one that wants this love, attain it, and he which has some
portion thereof, gain a larger increase? I answer, there be two things which
will even cement and glue the fowls of man and wife together; the first is,
that they take special notice of Gods gracious providence, for good in their
match. They which look to God as the match-maker, and that in favor take each
other as loue-tokens from Heaven, and therefore cannot but love that well,
which comes as a sign of his favor, whom they strive to love above all. But
they which see not his hand mercifully coupling them in this fellowship, must
needs fall out speedily, seeing they want this third thing, as it were the
ligament and iuncture of their affections. A matter of small value is not
smally respected, when it comes in good will, from a great friend, and dear
withal. He that loves the giver, will love his gift also, though not so
precious: So the husband or wife. though not of the best parts, shall be dear to
the yoke fellow that loves God, if he or she resolve in their hearts, God in
great goodness has bestowed this man or woman upon me. Yea, say he or she
be somewhat froward and sullied (as I may say) with ill conditions, the
dearness of the giver will counteruaile some blemishes in the gift. Say the
Lord did correct thee, in giving thee this husband, this wife: It was in
savor, and for thy good. Can thou choose but kiss and love even the rod that
comes from a fathers hand? But to this means add a second (which will also
further unto this) and love shall grow without fail: Let married couples join
together in private prayer, good conference, singing of Psalms, and other like
religious exercises betwixt themselves alone. 2. Pet. 3.7.
S. Peter would not have the prayers of the married interrupted: for he knew
full well, that these were the best means of nourishment to their loves. In
these things, the bright beams of Gods Image will shine forth, which have
power to make them amiable each to other. Here they shall bring so much
profit and good to each others soul, even to their own feelings, as will
effectually provoke their affections to be mutually fervent. Here they shall
see themselves to be children of the same father, servants of one Master,
strangers of one Country, and Pilgrims travailing both to one and the same
home. So when the sudden land-floud of youthful and violent affections are
quite dried up, these fountains of spiritual love, which prayer, and other
exercises of Religion shall have dug, will still run with a more moderate
and sober, but yet more lasting and constant stream. Let them season their
natural society with this spiritual communion, in the secret serving of God,
and they shall avoid the surfeit of satiety, which choaketh love. Religion will
knit the hearts of strangers fast in one, making them dear to each other ever
after, that for the space but of one month or week, shall converse and join
together in the same; how much more effectual will it be to fasten their
souls that are tied with so many and perpetual bands besides? Therefore to
you all that are, to you that shall be husbands and wives, be this delivered
as a direction; which if you fail to observe, you hear without profit. Pray
together one with and for another in secret; confer, read the Word of God
together, and sing Psalms alone: this will so riuet your hearts, that no
contention shall disseuer them. For if you do fall to some actions of
unkindness, when you meet together again in prayer, in stead of faulting
each other, the husband will blame himself, the wife herself: she coming in
Gods presence, will see the greatness of her own sins, he of his, and then
the offenses one of another shall appear but small. Thus they shall be
ashamed after to jar, considering they must shame themselves before God for
iarring: so that if any grudge arise, prayer will heal and compose the same,
that it do not fester, rankle, or grow to a continued hard conceit. And let
every man ask counsel of his own heart, if the little praying together of
husbands and wives, the seldom joining together in any good exercises, be not
the true cause of their little love. Fond he or she may be, that pray not
between themselves, loving they cannot be.

11. And for the first common duty thus much. The second is faithfulness, and
helpefulnesse conjoined. Prou. 31.
Solomon says, that the Husbands heart may trust in his Wife. If she be a
good Wife, she must be trusty to him, how much more he to her? He says
also, that she will do him good all the days of her life. It was the end of
her creation to be an helper: he must be a greater helper to her, and do
more good, by how much his place is better. Now these two graces are well
united, when they be careful, not to do themselves, or suffer (through their
carelessness, or wittingly) to be done by any other, any manner of hurt each
to other; and when they be diligent, so far as in them lies, to do, and
procure by others to be done, all good one to another. Now, man and wife must
be thus faithful, and helpefull; first to each others foul, in wife and due
care, to heal each others faults, and chiefly to prevent the same. If the
Husband live in any gross sin, the Wife must labor by all kind, loving,
and Christian means to draw him out of it: which, if her own skill fail to
effect, she must procure a Physician for his soul, as she would do for his
body, being sick and diseased. Only, if after all good means used, he prove a
dog, a swine, that gru^ts and barks, and regards no admonition, she has now
discharged her duty, and for the rest, must wait and pray to God, the great
Physician of the soul to redress the matter, enjoying still in the mean this
comfort, that she has used the best means with faithfulness to procure his
amendment. And so must the husband also deal with the wife: yea, they must
both observe the diet, temper, and constitution (as I may speak) of each
others soul, till they perceive what infirmities they be specially inclined
and subject unto, that so he may withdraw from her, she from him, all
occasions and prouocations to that evil, and shun all occasions that might
cause them so to ouer-shoot themselves. And again, that they may apply all
means to weaken and hinder the ouer-flowing of such faults, and to stay them
from extremity, if they have begun to slip therein. They must labor to be
thus acquainted with the diseases and distemperatures of one another hearts,
not to vpbraide, not to disgrace, not to vilify, but to help and support one
another, by diligent avoiding all things, which will cause such evils to break
out, and using whatsoever will heal or mitigate the same. So that they deserve
to be condemned as treacherous and untrusty to one another, that for their
own ease sake, will quietly permit their yoke-fellowes to sleep in any sin
almost. Let the soul of the husband be infected with swearing, with breach of
the Sabbath, with injustice, or any such like; the wife fears an angry
passion, if she should admonish him, and holds her peace; and so deals he
sometimes with her. Is not this to betray one another to the devil, and
damnation? to suffer one another go to hell in quiet? And they be also most
harmefull and mischievous yoke-fellowes, that are ready to spy into the
frailties of one another, with an evil and malicious eye, to vpbraide, to
provoke, to vex one another. If he perceive his wife to be passionately
inclined, he is in heat, and will do this and this to vex her; she also
will do so and so to anger him: so that what infirmities they espy, as it were
gawled places, or sores, one upon another, they love to fret, chafe and rub
the same, and make them worse. Sorry help it is, that such persons afforde
unto the souls of their married companions. But they must be helpefull also,
and faithful to each others body, by a free and ready vnder-going any cost or
pains (to their power) to procure whatsoever diet, Physic, or other-like
necessaries, may make for the preserving of health, and preventing or remedying
of sickness. He must not think any pains or charges too much, that is this way
bestowed (with wisdom, and according to his power) upon her; nor she, which
is spent upon him. They must avoid that niggardice, which possesses many
folks hearts, that they cannot find in their hearts to allow one another, fire,
candle, food convenient, or the expense of Physic, when sickness comes.
This is not to be helpful, but to do harm rather: and argues a most unloving
disposition. Thirdly, they must be careful of others good name, that they
preserve it by honest secrecy and concealment. They must shun, as a
monstrous treachery, the publishing of one another faults and frailties, or
the discovering of one another secrets; I mean those things, which, in hope
of priuacie, they have communicated one to another. The wife is worthy all hard
measure, that spreads abroad every thing which she sees amiss in her husband,
still complaining and crying out in every company, what an ill match she has
met withal. And that husband cannot be requited with bad usage sufficiently
answerable to his deserts, that can find almost none other talk, but what a
bad wife he has light upon. These be ill birds, that defile their own nests,
and frantic folk, that uncover each others nakedness, and throw dirt in each
others faces. When man and wife fall to peaching, what soul loathes it not? If
they that be inward in such a degree seek to deface their names mutually; what
man, what woman can be free from reproach? Yea, they must not only cover each
others nakednesses, but also conceal each others secrets. For, if whatsoever
he tells her, she will talk of to another, by this means it comes to another,
and so successively to a fourth and fifth, till that thing be (to his grief)
made public to the whole town, that he left in his wives bosom, as it were
under the lock and key of trustiness, and he do the like to her; what peace
can they have, what concord? How can they avoid, but such occasions will bring
forth coffeehouse and dissension? There can be no quiet and comfortable
living, where there is not use of concealment and secrecy. Now therefore, let
these parts of faithfulness and helpefulnesse, to the souls, bodies, and
names one of another, be commended to all married people, which desire to enjoy
themselves in this estate.

12. And now having spoken of that rank of common duties, which concern their
own persons, I come to them which concern their families and households. For
men and women that before were parts of some other family, do therefore marry,
that they may be the chief of a new family; and begetting children, (and
trayning them up, together with servants, according to their place) may store
the world with people, and provide plants, as it were, for the Church, Gods
own Vineyard. Wherefore they shall not have thoroughly discharged their duty, by
performing all the aforementioned things mutually to themselves, unless they
regard their families also; wherein the husband, as the first mouer and chief;
the wife as a subordinate and good furtherer, must both join together for
good. These things themselves which shall be named. I confess to belong to
them, as they be governors, and stand in relation to servants and children; but
the joining together in them is the matter that I would press, as a part of
their marriage-duty. Now this their family they must maintain and govern,
keep it, and guide it,

13. For maintenance therefore: first, both must be laborious and industrious
in their calling, and set themselves with diligence to do something, for which
their family may fare the better. The husband must not be a drone, and make his
wife a drudge. The wife must not give her self to lazines, and cast all the
pains and care upon her husband: but he in things that concern him without;
and she (in things that concern her most within) must unite their pains for
their profit. If either live idly as a doe-nothing, that party is a burden,
and (as a gowty leg, or diseased member) troubles and molests an whole
household, Solomon has much commended the painfulnes of a good huswife, and he
has also spoken more then once, in commendation of a good diligent hand, for
the man's part. They must therefore join as partners in laboring. Secondly,
they must join in honest and thrifty saving, from cost and needles expenses:
They must not pinch from Mercy and Justice, but save from prodigality and
mispending. He must not cast away the goods in gaming and following the
Alehouse and Tavern, or other places of unthrifty meetings: neither must she
be lavish to her talking gossips: but both must avoid that sin, which
declares a man to be worse even then an Infidel; I mean, not caring for them
of his own household. They must neither nourish sweet toothes, or finish and
costly backs (these be thieves:) they must neither make private purses for
themselves, or let all things go at random as they come, but unite their
endeauours for the common benefit, as the right hand and the left. Thirdly,
they must have a common care, yt no necessary thing, through their default and
improuidence be wanting to their family in time of need; no hurtful thing
come upon them at unawares. They must join in foresight and due consideration,
what is or may be needful and useful for them, to the end it may be procured;
and what dangerous, to prevent it. Two eyes see more then one: and for this
intent they be linked in so near and close a fellowship, that they may be
but as one in all these things, in labor, thrift and foresight: which whilst
they do, the Lord will bless their endeauours, and their hands shall find
abundance. Otherwise the idle person walks upon an hedge of thorns, which
shall surely prick his feet. The unwise and unthrifty person thrusts his
foot into the snare that will entangle him, neither shall they ever be
without vexation, disquietment, discontent and brawlings, that neglect those
duties. Always provided, that they be both moderate in this matter. For, if
they fall to pinching, carking, coveting, and eager affecting of wealth; Heaven
and earth cannot keep a family diseased with this dropsy, from many sick,
troublesome and froward fittes.

14. But what shall it avail to maintain a family, without government; or
how can it be governed but by them? so that they must also be good rulers at
home, and join in guiding the household: the man as Gods immediate officer, and
the King in his family: the woman as the Deputy subordinate, and associate to
him, but not altogether equal; and both in their order must govern. Now to
this end, their first care must be to see, that Religion flourish in their
families, and be truly planted in their servants and children; by their care
to catechize them, to read the Scripture, and call upon the name of God in the
midst of them. And that they being instructed, may grow further; they must also
bring them to the public assemblies; examining them also of their profiting by
those means. These things, the husband being present, must perform; and the
wife in his absence, and both must have care to find convenient time for the
same; wherein if he grow slack, she must help him, and he her. Better (in
respect of themselves) keep no family, then a family of little devils; and
such shall they be without Gods more then ordinary work and grace, if they
perform not these things. He keeps an household of fiends, a Seminary for the
devil, a nurcerie for hell and the kingdom of death, which is not careful by
these forenamed means, to make his children and servants become servants and
children to God. Which, how often it falls out, woeful experience can
testify. Sometimes the husband would have God ferued in the family; the wife
hangs off, and counts it lost time. Sometimes the wife desires to have the
worship of God find place under the roof; and he like a profane beast calls
it precisenes, and will not have an hour so ill spent. Sometimes both conspire
in negligence and omission: but how seldom do their desires and endeauours
meet in this most needful point? How seldom do they one provoke, animate and
encourage one another in so profitable works? This is the fountain of all
disorder in families; where God is not served, what can abound but impiety and
profaneness, in Master, Mistress, servants, children, and the whole household?
But now, let all that fear God take care, that they fail not in using all
good means to establish Religion and the exercises of it in their houses,
remembering with fear that curse, which the Prophet prays God may come upon
the family, Ier. 10.25.
wherein his Name is not called upon. Secondly, they must ouer-see the ways of
their family. Prou. 31.27.
This thing Solomon commends in the virtuous wife, by a word worthy noting,
which signifies to stand as a watchman in a watch tower, to look on every
side, that no enemy do surprise the same at unawares. So she does diligently
look into the behavior of all under the roof, that no disordered nor sinful
practice may find quiet entrance and abode there: and it were a great shame
for the husband, if the wife should exceed him in this watchfulness. Both of
them must use their eyes with care then, to prevent all idleness and
wickedness in their servants and children, and to look that they faithfully
do their business committed to them, and carry themselves Christianly toward
one another, and all men. If inferiors of themselves would be careful enough
of their carriage, what need a governor in an house? But God knowing that the
best servants, and the best children, will not want infirmities, yea, will be
many ways subject to infirmities, as idleness, twatling, discord, and many of
the like nature; would that the Master and Mistress should have their eyes open
to prevent the same servants Children must be followed, their behavior must
be observed, they must be set to work, and the eye of the governors, with
their care conjoined, must effect it, or else the family shall prove
disordered, be the governors for other things never so godly. Thirdly, they
must join together in admonishing, or encouraging; in reproving, or if need
be, also correcting their inferiors. And in these things both must be careful
to maintain each others authority to ye full. If one do think it meet to
encorage any in the family with some little kindness that is fit, the other must
not seem to grudge at it, or be unwilling. If the one will reprove, the other
must not defend. When the husband goes about to correct the children, the wife
must not grow angry and save them, as if she thought it much to have them kept
under nurture; neither must he do so toward her. Suppose either of them
exceed, chiding or correcting without cause, or above the measure that agrees
to the fault: the other must then quietly speak of it in the absence of the
inferior, and not make a braule about it before their faces, as it were
bolstering the^ out against the authority of the yoke fellow. For if he do,
and she undo; or if she correct, and he cocker; what will be the fruit, but
heart-burning and distemper betwixt themselves, and contempt first of one,
after both their authorities from the party to whom they have showed themselves
so indiscreete? So at length, as in a Boat, wherein all the weight lies upon
one side, the whole family will be turned over into the waves of contention and
strife: whereas if they did sit together in good concord, to further the fruit
of one another admonitions, reproves, corrections, exhortations or
encouragements; they should both preserve their own authority in the family,
and keep peace between themselves, and find good amendment in their
inferiors by these means. And for the common duties of man and wife to
themselves and their families, for maintaining and governing the^, thus much.
We come now to speak of those that are peculiar to either of them.

15. And first I will inform the man; then the woman after. Now for the
husbands special duties, they may fitly be referred to these two heads: The
keeping of his authority, and the using of it. First, he must keep his
authority, and maintain himself in that place, wherein his Maker has set
him. Nature has framed the lineaments of his body to superiority, and set the
print of government in his face, which is more stern, less delicate then the
woman's. He must not suffer this order of nature to be inuerted. The Lord in his
Word calls him the head; he must not stand lower than the shoulders; if he do,
that is a deformed family. It is a sin to come lower than God has set one. It
is not humility, but baseness, to be ruled by her whom he should rule. No Gene
rall would thank the Captain, for surrendering his place to some common
soldier: nor will God the husband, for suffering the wife to bear the sway.
The authority is Gods, invested in his person; he must not commit, that it be
trodden down and despised. But, will some man say, my wife is disordered and
froward, how shall I then hold mine own? It is sooner said than done, if a man
meet with women of stirring spirits: direct us therefore how to do it. I
answer, that most men do wrongfully cast the blame upon their wives, of abusing
their authority, when it is due to themselves alone. It is not extorted from
the^ by ye wives violence, but cast away, and lost by their own folly and
indiscretion. Know then yt authority in this society, must not be kept by maine
force, and by violence, but by skill: not by big looks, and great words, and
cruel behavior, as of a great mastiffe toward a silly curre; but by a milder
and more artificial course. And that you may practice it, this it is. First,
the husband must give a good example, walking uprightly, Christianly, soberly,
religiously in his family. The wife must needs then give him the better place,
if he show himself to be the better person. No inferior can choose but in his
heart stoop to that superior, in who^ grace and Gods Image do appear. A
virtuous man shall be regarded, in the conscience even of the worst woman: yea,
and in her behauior also, if she be not monstrous. A godly wise carriage will
draw good respect, and willing subjection, neither can any man bring forth one
thus qualified, trodden down in contempt. In a mad fit and passionate distemper,
the wife of the best may sling forth, and be undutiful, but afterward her
heart will condemn her self, and justify him, and so he loses not authority,
though it be assaulted; yea, he recouers his own with advantage. And as in
general, we prescribe a godly conversation in the family, to be the
preserver and vpholder of the man's authority; so specially must he be
counseled to shun and abandon three special and disgraceful evils, that
have this effect, to make every man seem vile and base in all eyes that behold
him thus defiled. The first is bitterness: So Paul wills the husband; Be
not bitter. The savor of violent and raging passions, will smell so lothsomely
in the wives nostrils, coming from the husband, that she shall hardly choose,
but first hate him, and despise him after. This distasteful bitterness of
speech and behavior, bewrayes impotency of affection, and that great want of
wisdom; and this will produce great want of reverence. If thou be an husband,
and would be regarded, tumble not thy self in those foul, dirty and
stinking guzzels of passionate railing, stryking, or the like. That which
bewrayes so great folly, must it not procure exceeding great contempt?
Secondly, beware of unthriftiness, that is another great enemy to authority, and
as a worm, rottes and consumes the same. Whatsoever man gives himself to
drinking, gaming, ill-company keeping, (which three vices go commonly together)
shall at once lose his wit, wealth, estimation. When drink has dispossessed
reason, gaming providence, ill-company good conditions; the carriage will be
foolish, wicked, beast-like, and the person base, hated, loathed. Never did
unthrift keep his place, as not his money. For who can regard him that will
not be worth any thing? Thirdly, lightness must be avoided, foolish behavior
and carriage, chyldish and vnsober tricks, that have no print or stamp of
gravity upon them; these expose a man to contempt. For if the husband put on a
fools Coat, and take a babble in his hand, (and what else be these odd and
toyish demeanures?) can he blame his wife, though she take up laughter at
him? The bitter man is as a frantic head, troublesome: the unthrifty man as a
scald head, fulsome: the light man, the Iester, as a giddy head, ridiculous.
Such will soon displease themselves, though none go about to undermine them.
But let every godly man abhor these base evils, and strive for holiness of
conversation, that he may be indeed a governor, and his superiority remain
entire unto him.

16. Yet what auailes to keep authority, if he use it not? or how can it but
rust without using? Wherefore the husband must exercise his authority, and we
must direct him for that purpose. Now, to the intent he may govern well, it
behoues him to know both the end of his government, and the manner of it, The
end of this, as all other government, in Nations, Kingdoms, Countries, Cities
and Towns, is not the satisfying of his desires, or procuring of his ease,
pleasure, credit, which has ye chiefedome: (for then all things run out of
order, as when a bowl is not set with a right byas:) but the good and benefit
of the party governed, to the glory of God the chief Lord and Governor of
all. Thus one thing alone being well observed, would stop out a great stream
of inconveniences, from breaking in upon the family: For therefore most men
govern not well, because they do wholly serve themselves in governing, and
not the wife; therefore they will do any thing to please their own humors,
though it be never so dangerous to the wife (which is the greatest absurdity
in government that can be committed,) because they conceive that the place was
given them to fulfill their own desires, and not so much to procure their
wives good; which conceit is altogether false. For as the Ministers must watch
over the souls of their flock for their profit and salvation, not for their
own private wealth and advantage: so must the husband deal with his wife: for
this is the end why God has ordained governors, private and public under
him, that the inferiors might the better be drawn unto him by means of
them, which always should be (as they be called) their betters.

17. And yet to intend this, if he do not in some measure attain it, were to
little purpose: so that as he must aim at her good, so must he effect it, by
governing in a right manner, to the nourishing and increasing of whatsoever
virtue, rooting out and weakening of whatsoever corruption he shall meet with
in her. Now then he rules in a right manner, when in ruling, he rules himself
by three principal virtues, which are of greatest use and note in all
governments, and in this domestical kingdom, as I may so term it.

18. The first of these three virtues is wisdom; which is the stern of
authority, that does guide it in an even and steady course, that it dash not
against those two dangerous rocks, slavish fear on the one side, and contempt
on the other. And the chief use of wisdom is to carry ones self so, that
love and reverence may not enterfiere, cut, and so destroy each the other. Its
hard of an inferior so familiar, to be loved and not slightly set by; harder
to be reverenced, not slightly feared, not hated. Prudence therefore must so
manage the matter, that they may keep these two affections in their due
temper, free from excess, free from defect, so doing good according to the
dignity of the place. Now this wisdom must be used in giving commandments
and reprooses; with which two it is fit every wise man should content himself
in this society. We dare not allow him to proceed so far as to correct by
blows. Indeed what Christian woman will carry her self so, that a man of any
indifferent good behavior should need to strike? Let his wisdom rather
appear in abstayning from blows, and preventing the breaking forth of such
enormities as may challenge them, than in giving them moderately, and (as he
thinks) in due manner. But for commandments and reproves he may, he must
give them: and herein we will direct him as we are able.

19. First, in commanding he must regard these two rules chiefly. One is, that
he do not command senseless and unreasonable (much less wicked and
unlawful) things, that are grounded merely upon his wilfulness, and no just
besides. Such commandings make her take him for an heady fool, not a wise
head: and that conceit never rises but with the utter ruin of reverence, and
so of his authority. The wife indeed should cast her eye only upon the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of the thing, asking none other question but
whether it offend God, yea or no: but the husband must consider further, that
that which he gives in charge be discreet, useful and commodious, and
whereof himself can yield some sufficient cause to make it appear fit and
needful to be done. He that does not so, shuts out his commandments, as a
child does his arrow (a cockheight, as they say) not at any mark; and what is
more ridiculous than such childishness in a man of years? He that bids his
wife do a thing without reason, does as if it were ride without a bridle. If
such a man's horse be not exceeding gentle and well broken, he will sure either
run out of the way, or stumble and cast the rider. So if such a man's wife be
not more then ordinary in meekenes and patience, she will either rebel against
him, or contemn him. For the good that comes from the thing commanded,
yields sufficiency of argument to the woman's un derstanding, whereby she may
controlle her tumultuous rising of her passions (that will ask, Why should I
be at all that pains for the man's will?) lending aid as it were to bring
them soon into subjection. Which if it be wanting, it is hardly possible, but
they will mutiney at the least, if not break out into open act of rebellion.
Look therefore that thou bid thy wife do nothing, which reason (not only
will) does not first bid thee. Again, in commanding it must be regarded, that
authority descend not unto low, mean, and triuiall things, which are not of
any moment or importance in the family. The life of the head must be derived
even unto the feet; so the husbands authority does indeed guide all, even the
meanest things in the family; but the head is not always actually stooping
unto the foot; for then the body would grow crooked and ill shapen: so must
not the husband be charging, bidding and intermedling by strict commandments
in the small matters of the family; putting his hand (as it were) to every
matter. For that garment which is much worn, must needs become threadbare:
and this power of commanding is like a vesture for high days, to be put on,
for some special and needful occasions. When the husband will be huswife and
all, and be dealing with brewing, baking, washing, and the particulars of
these and the like businesses, it comes to pass that his wife can help in
nothing, because he will do all things. When the man will bid and charge so
eagerly in a thing of nothing, as if his whole estate did depend upon serving
the swine, or washing the bucke, etc. this disvalues his word, and makes his
charge of no regard. In such things he should let his wife rule under him, and
give her leave to know more than himself which has greater matters and more
nearly concerning the family to exercise his knowledge. And if he see any
thing in these and the like matters done disorderly, it were his part to advise
and counsel, rather than command. He that will be drawing out his
commandments for every light thing, shall find it at length regarded in
nothing. See then that the matter be so much worth, before thou lay a charge
concerning it. And these be the two special rules of wisdom for
commandments. Let thein be concerning things useful and also weighty for the
family.

20. The same virtue must be practiced in the matter of reproving; wherein, if
in any thing, great wariness ought to be used. This is a thing needful, I
mean reproof, and if it speed well, does much good; if ill, is very
dangerous: so that in administering it, discreet care must be had, that a man
poison not, in stead of healing. Now for the prudent giving a reproof, three
things are of needful observation: First, that a man open not his mouth to
tell his wife of a fault, when he perceiues himself to be hot and burning with
violent passion. A man is indeed most ready to speak then; but least able to
speak well. If an admonition be Vomited forth, how can it do good? how shall
that prosper, which proceeds from the mere drunkenness of wrath? No man goes
to judge of a color with a moath in his eye: and what other thing is passion
to the judgment? So that he which then will become a reprouer, shall disgrace
himself, not the fault; and make his wife contemn him, not condemn her
self. For in such case men use not to speak what they should, but what they
like; nor what is most fitting the fault, but most suitable to their distempers.
Thus the reprehension is not proportioned to the offense, but as licour it
sauoureth of the caske, and is outrageous, as was the heart whence it came. By
which means in seeking to mend a fault in another, he commits a greater
himself, and makes the other worse, not better. If thou be an husband
therefore, take this advice. When there is need of an admonition, there is
also need of wisdom to give it. Do it therefore when thou art in thy right
wits. Passion is a short madness: can any thing be done disc^^^^ly in that
fit? When thou art quiet, when thy judgment is clear, when thy heart is
settled, when thou art thy self, then show thy wife her fault; else thou shall
never bring her to the sight of it. Secondly, it is a point of wisdom for the
husband to consider his wives temper also, and observe if she be fit to
receive, as well as he to utter wholesome words. For when she is enraged by
passion, or dejected by grief and sickness, which make a ready way for
passion, it is no time to bring forth a reproof. No man will hoyse up sail in
a tempest; no Physician will administer Physic upon a full stomach. Those
words are cast away that are uttered when passion has both stopped up the
ears, and brought the mind out of taste. She will not relish a reproof when
her heart is imbittered. Al is then taken as proceeding from ill will and
hatred, though never so meant: for she judges with a distempered judgment. At
such times therefore power not forth all thy mind, but defer it till
afterward. When thou see a man drunken, thou first gettest him to sleep,
before thou chide him for his drunkenness. Think not yt strong drink is more
violent then strong passion. They both make him in who^ they are with excess,
incapable of all good counsel Say not, I will not suffer her to bear away the
last word? This were to scold with her, a thing absurd for a man. Better that
she have the last word, then both multiply worse words, till thy self also be
cast into the same frenzy. For it is extremely difficult to talk long with
an angry man, and not grow hot for company: but to contend with him, and not be
like him, is impossible. And what more indecent and unsightly thing then to
infect thy self in stead of amending her? as if the Physician and the patient
should fall together by the ears about taking the potion. Wherefore as thou
look to have all other things fit to receive what thou put into them, as
the vessel the liquor, the ground the seed, etc. So look that thy wives heart
be fit to entertain the reproof, and that there be room for thy words; which
is then when she is quiet, well pleased and pacified, not sowred and leauened
with rash anger, or much grief. Now the third and most necessary part of
wisdom is to give a reproof in secret. Every man is most willing then to
hear of his faults, when none is present to report the^ again but himself.
We are all naturally jealous of our credit; women are so principally; and if
they take a thing as done in way of disgrace, they are provoked to do worse,
not induced to amend. So that it is a matter and love equally, to see that none
ear be privy to the fault reproved, but her own. Men that lay plasters to
sores, choose a chamber, not the market place; they love not to do such things
with a witness. Christ bids reprove thy neighbor; Mat. 18.5.
first betwixt him and thee; then take two more with thee, and so proceed
further. More love is required to a wife, and so more secrecy. But say she
offend in public before the servants, children, strangers. Then show thy
dislike in a patient manner of speaking, that al may see thou winkest not at
the fault, and be much in expressing grief rather then anger. Leave the
lawful sharpness and wholesome launcing (as I may term it) for a reproof
till you come alone. By that time she will shame to remember how she ouer-shot
herself, if thou give her not advantage of replying, by committing the like
absurdity at the same time. Neither fear that faults so healed in secrecy
should infect the children and servants. Nay thy present grief and dislike will
work more upon them then any reproof; and there is time in her absence to
warn the^ of so offending, in theirs even to chide her for giving so bad an
example. They may know thou have reproved, though they hear thee not reprove.
So yt we can in no sort allow the foolish rashness of those husbands (yea we
most sharply condemn it) wc must needs out with their reproof before
children, servants, and perhaps also strangers (as if their stomach were
surcharged with it) not having ye wit to refrain til the oporrunity of
priuatnes. These men disgrace themselves in discrediting their wives, as the
head gains the knock if the heels be taken up. For now ye wife conceiues
that her disgrace is aimed at: hence she becomes more choleric, perhaps also
to justify the matter, that prouokes him to more anger, kindles more heat; and
so in conclusion yt grows to a plain braule or fray, wc should have bin a kind
and Christian reproof. Had not these bin better well saved till another time,
then so dangerously misspent at this time to both their hurts, both their
disgraces? And this is the practice of wisdom.

21. The next virtue is mildnes. This society comes nearest to equality, and
therefore allows familiarity (wc must not be suffered in other couplings of
superiors and inferiors) and requires more gentleness. This is ye sweet sauce of
this government, wc makes it not to seem over tart, it is the soft lining of
this yoke of authority, wc without it, is unsupportable. No woman can endure
government, if gentleness do not temper it.

22. Now this gentleness must be used in commandments and reproves. In
commandments, both for the matter of them, and for the manner, For the matter
of them it must be regarded, that a man extend not his commanding power (in
the use thereof) too far; neither show himself rigorous in every thing, but
be content to gratify his wife in some things, that she may less
unwillingly, yea with more cheerfulness be subject in other things.
Obedience would be enticed and allured, and as it were by committing it to it
own disposing in matters of inferior nature, that it may follow more
dutifully, when more necessity requires more speedy and voluntary
obsequiousness. The Sunamite is a noble pattern for this matter. 2 Kings 2.22
His wife in the midst of harvest (he not knowing any cause) required a man
and two asses from that needful and hasty work, to attend her unto the
Prophet. He is not urgent in asking the cause, nor peremptory in repelling the
suite, but grants her desire, though it might seem something inconvenient. He
knew her to be no gadder, and one day was not much. Thus she had liberty to
depart; and he himself was a gayner by it, as being freed from a great deal
of sorrow, which the news of his sons death would have procured; and
obteyning unspeakable comfort in his reviving: for she saw him raised up,
before he knew of his disease. It was in Abraham also more than ordinary
gentleness, that in a matter so nearly concerning him, would condescend to his
wives passionate request, about her maid Hagar. Let not the husband be as
churlish Nabal to his wife, but follow these paternes of husbandly mildness,
which will beget at once both love and reverence, testifying kindness, and
procuring it. He that will be Lord in every thing, stretches the authority
of his string so high, that it is at least in danger of breaking. So carry thy
self to thy wife, that she may perceive herself to have entered, not into
servile thraldom, but loving subjection.

23. Then when need requires a commandment to be given, it must be, for the
manner, not imperious, not in the heat and extremity of enforcing and charging
words; but with a sweet instinct of kindness (as the head does move the
members of the body) by loving persuasions and familiar requests. Indeed if the
wife try the mastery, and cast off the yoke of obedience, such her distemper
makes it not alone lawful, but very mere, that the husband (with good words
and behavior, not bitter, not raging) do stand for his authority even stiffly
and peremptorily, professing that he will have his will in things lawful. But
such a course would be seldom used, and that alone in matters of some
importance, that are worth so much earnestness. It is more safe, and as
honorable subduing a rebellious City by treaties of peace with good and
favorable conditions, than by the battery of ordinance, and fierce dint of the
sword. So that husband does with most praise and happiness subdue his wives
passions of disobedience, that can effect it by fair means. Yea indeed she
must be a monstrous and unwomanly woman, that being drawn by entreatie will
not yield. Authority is like the arts of Logic and Rhetoric, that must in
speaking be used, and yet concealed: and then they most prevail when being
used, they are least seen. It preuents resisting, to request when thou may
charge. There is nothing to strive for, when a man does not, as it were vaunt
his superiority. Things are also best done when the will is allured, rather
than the body compelled. If thou stand upon it, and come with flat
commandments (as, you shall; and, I will make you; and, you were as good as
you did; and, you shall know that I am master, etc. and the like big words,)
the heart goes against that which the hand performs; and thou art disliked
inwardly, though perhaps obeyed in show: and if obedience come not from the
heart, can it last long? This is the way to prevail with least burden to the
inferior, and toil to the superior, if with mild words he wish this and
this, rather then with imperious speeches enjoin it. Men that ride horses have
a wand and a spur, both; they will rather set forward their horses with the
whisk and sound, or perhaps little touch of the small stick, then with the
sharpness of their iron spur. They proceed not to spurring till their horse
be either restie or tiry; and if tiry, that does more hurt. So the husband
should govern his wife, and provoke her to accomplish his will with quiet,
pleasing and insinuating terms, rather than open and express, much less
violent commandings, unless she be more then ordinarily unruly. Christ
beseeches his Church most an end, which he might with most right command. Let
the husband imitate that best husband, and beware of, Do it, or you had best;
and, You shall whether you will or no; I will have it so to cross you, etc.
Such an husband will cross himself most. Violent things are never of long
continuance. And this is mildness in commanding.

24. It must be used in reproving, where it is rather more necessary, by how
much bitterness is less to be brooked, and a reproof less easy to be
borne. And this must also be showed in the matter, and in the manner of a
reproof. For the matter, in not finding fault for every trifle that he sees
amiss, nor chiding for every infirmity. Many things must be passed by (yea all
things that be not somewhat gross, and would endanger the wives self, if she
should not hear of them roundly) with none or half a word. This effect of
love is very needful toward strangers, that it passes by wants and
weaknesses; much more in the household, and in the nearest couple of the
household. Charity is in this sense a great couer-fault; it will see none but
where they be; and many it will see and not see, and not speak of, and it
descends to a reproof with a willing unwillingness. This virtue should abound
in this society. Here Christ's example must be followed of all husbands. He
shuts his eyes as it were, and will not spy out all his Churches faults; he
will not mark extremely what is done amiss; he knows she is but dust, and is
assured that she cannot but offend in many things: Yet he puts it up, and not
so much as checkes her, unless she comes to some wilfulnes in sinning. Let all
that be husbands do likewise: consider you be matched with women, the weaker
vessels: think how many faults your selves have; and if they have some, wonder
not that they be so many, but that not more; and with silence, so much as is
possible; and when it is lawful to be silent (viz. in weaknesses and
infirmities) strive to amend them. It is a great deal safer here to be
defective than to exceed; to be somewhat purblinde, than too Eagleeyed. In this
inwardnes of conversation, it is impossible but diverse wants shall offer
themselves to be seen: and he that will prye for them, and take occasion upon
every slight matter, to draw forth his reproof, shall himself live in
perpetual coffeehouse, and yield but little quiet to his wife. For from
hence she will conceive, (and that not without some cause) that he loves her
not much; and this will cause their affections to warpe and chap, till all be
full of dissension. Be not extreme here, be not rigorous; but as a mothers
tenderness of love makes her not respect or observe many deformities in her own
child; so stand thou affected to thine own wife. Pray to God against all her
faults, commend unto her all virtues; reprove not lesser wants and natural
weaknesses: let her perceive closely that thou know, but art not willing to
take notice of them, that she may take the more diligent notice thereof
herself, and be more careful to reform them.

25. Moreover for the manner of reproving, when the thing is most needful, it
must yet be gentle. The words and behavior used to declare and press the
fault upon her, must be mild, and such as breathe forth love and pity. A
reproof must be applied as a plaster, not with rating, but with moaning
rather. It cannot be avoided, no not in the best, but this medicine will be
needed: yet the husband must remember, not to use more roughnes than is fit to
his own flesh. Reproof of it self, as it were a potion goes against the
stomach: we need not by our bitterness make it more loathsome, as it were by a
foul and unsightly cup. The mothers care must be showed here. She gives the
child worme-seede to kill the worms, and raisins to till down the
worme-seed: so must a man reprehend to reprove the fault, and yet with great
louingnes of speech and countenance, to sweeten the reprehension. No patient
was never yet so sick and desirous of health, yt he could be persuaded to
drink a potion scalding hot: yt which burns the lips would never find
admittance into the stomach, though it were the most wholesome drink. It is just
so with a reproof: if it scalde the ear, as I may so speak, with vpbraiding
and disgraceful speeches, with bitter taunts, scoffs and mocks, with
vilifying and railing words, with a fiery look, and as arkling eye, with a
raging exaltation of the voice and demeanure of the body, it will never gain
passage to the heart. Compassion, love, kindness, declaration of ones sorrow for
the fault, desire of their good, and will of their amendment, these be the
things that frame the will to accept an admonition, and do much help the
kindly working of it. I am not against the wholesome earnestness of reproving,
and that sharpnes which in some cases God commands; this may stand without
bitterness, without violence of words and gesture, without that fierceness
against which we speak. A thing need not to be keycold, though it scalde not;
there is a large difference between these two. Then an admonition is
healthfully sharp and earnest, when a man in plainness and with good terms
lays open the absurdity, naughtiness and danger of the sin, enforcing these
considerations upon the heart and conscience of the party, even somewhat
lamentably, and with some moving, but still with declaration of sorrow more
then anger: and this ought to be done. In one word therefore let thy reproves
be warm, not hot. And thus much for the practice of mildnes.

26. The third virtue to be showed by the husband, is Justice, the soul of
government, the true temperature of authority, without which it rots and
putrifieth, and degenerates into the most fulsome and stinking carrion of
tyranny. Now the husband must deal justly with his wife in four things:
First, in allowing her sufficient maintenance, agreeable to his place and
ability, and that willingly, and with a liberal hand. He must not think
himself so absolutely Lord of all, but that she must also have the free and
plentiful use of all, according as his calling requires, and his sufficiency
will bear. Indeed if she should exceed both, or either of these, his
authority must sound retraite unto her lavishness; neither must he weaken,
much less overthrow his estate by pranking her body, and feeding her tooth:
this were after a sort to kill himself, her, his children, and whole family,
with fondness toward her, a part full of unrighteousness. But let her be
made equal partner of that which her husband has. So be it she cut her coat
according to her cloth, Justice will not permit that she should be scanted
with niggardice, which is so near a companion. The husband must communicate
maintenance to the wife, as the head does animal spirits to the body,
plentifully, willingly: for if any stoppance grow in this conueyance, great
distempers must of necessity ensue: yea, not alone whilst himself lives, but
even after his decease also: and supposing him to leave the world, must he
provide, after his ability, that her estate be competent, and that she be not
inferior to her children, and forced to stand beholding unto them, over whom
she should command. And this is one point of Justice. Another, and the second
is, that the husband compel not his wife by his authority to attempt things
unlawful. Where God has commanded, let not him forbid; where God has
forbidden, let not him command. What a madness is it to force either to disobey
God, or him? Will he exceed his commission, and think to be yielded unto? Is
not this unrighteous in the highest degree, for the Deputy to take upon him
even against the Sovereign Lord? This is to iustle her into some stinking
guzzle or ditch: whence it must follow, that if she prove stronger than
himself, and will not be thrust in, yet he renders himself odious that
attempted to do her harm: if she prove weak, and fall in, he must be at the
pains to pull her (out) and make her clean again: otherwise both must
perish; the one for sinning, the other for driving unto sin. Wherefore in some
doing he violates both Justice and Wifedome, showing himself in one action,
both a fool before her, and a rebel against God. Nay, he must not alone
abstain from urging her unto things that indeed are, but unto such also, as
she upon some supposed reason, grounded on the Word of God, thinks to be
unlawful. The conscience is Gods immediate officer, and commanding by virtue
of its commission, which is Gods revealed will; though it err in construction
of that commission, yet must it be obeyed, and ouer-weigh the authority of all
other commanders, till it be satisfied and set down with reasons, manifesting
such mistaking: for whosoever goes against conscience in things thought to be
sinful, and are not, will at length offend against it in such things as both
are, and are thought to be faults. Indeed if she will pretend conscience, and
cannot allege a reason out of the Word of God, yet may carry some show, this
is obsunacy; and in such case the thing being of weight and use, it is safe,
yea needful, if reason persuade not, to compel her. But when she grounds
upon the Word of God, though mis-interpreted and mistaken, she must be
resolved, and not compelled. Not every scruple of conscience makes a thing sin
to a man, but that which is grounded upon Gods Word, by which alone-conscience
must be informed and guided: which when it is, though it be misinformed
through want of judgment, yet it retains its own authority; and then to
enforce the wife against it, were to force her to sin, the most unrighteous
thing that can be in a Governor. None is Lord, but only the Lord of Heaven
and earth. Be not therefore so unrighteous toward thy wife, as to urge her
either to displease GOD, or her conscience, leaning on his word. The third part
of Justice, is, not to reprove without a fault, nor sharply for a lesser fault:
The former of these is to lay a plaster on a found place, which is a needless
labor at all times, and often dangerous: for it may cause a sore. So to find
fault without a cause, may procure a fault. The latter is to sear, and cut and
cauterize, where a Lenitiue would serve; and to give a violent strong
purgation, where an easy pill would suffice for health. This comes from
cruelty, and breeds distemper. A reproof must come forth, not when a man is
angered, but when God is offended: not when our profit or pleasure is crossed,
but when Gods commandment is broken. And as the plaster must be fitted to the
wound, the medicine to the disease; so the admonition to the fault. For of
those sins which necessarily call for an admonition, there are degrees,
according to the increase whereof, a man should show more or less anger and
dislike. So that the husband must be more earnest in reproving, not when she
has committed a smaller sin against GOD, that turns more to his loss; but
when she has done a greater evil against GOD, though he be a small, yea,
no loser; yea a gainer by it for his outward profit. And always when the fault
is amended, cease vpbraiding: this is a most unequal thing. When the fire is
thoroughly quenched, who would stand casting on water? Now the last point of
Justice follows, which is, that a man endeavor to confirm and increase the
good things that are in his wife, by all good encouragement and testification
of his love and good liking, as-well as to reform and diminish the evil
things by reproof. We prouender an horse as well as whip and spur him, else
the best would tire: and the wife must be animated to good things, and not
only withdrawn from evil. A man should use his right eye as well as his
left. Nothing can be more base then to be a faultspier, a fly-blower, that
is, always nibling where the skin is off. Fie upon that husband, which like
a fly seeks ever for a galled place to blow his maggots on; this heals not,
but pricks, and makes all things worse. It is a great unrighteousness to look
only to the worst things. Justice gives one his due for well and ill both;
which not to do is the bane of love, on both sides causing iarres,
heart-burnings, secret dislike, and open contention at the last. Therefore if
ever thou will live with comfort, consider as well what virtues thy wife has,
as what vices; what good, as what bad; and what help and benefit thou have by
her, as what hindrance; to comfort and strengthen her in the one, as help her
out of the other: yea and let her see that thou take notice rather of ye best
things. Surely these good herbs will grow best and safest in the sunshine. And
thus much for the man's duty: wherein I have been more long, because disorders
in him are more dangerous and hurtful, as diseases in the head; and any thing
amiss in the great wheel of a clock.

27. Now proceed we to the women's duty, and giving the men leave to chew the
cud awhile, request the women to listen with more diligence than before. The
whole duty of the wife is referred to two heads. The first is, to acknowledge
her inferiority: the next, to carry her self as inferior. First then the
wives judgment must be convinced, that she is not her husbands equal, yea
that her husband is her better by far; else there can be no contentment,
either in her heart, or in her house. If she stand upon terms of equality,
much more of being better than he is, the very root of good carriage is
withered, and the fountain thereof dried up. Out of place, out of peace. And
woe to these miserable aspiring shoulders, that content not themselves to take
their room, next below the head. If ever thou purpose to be a good wife, and
to live comfortably, set down this with thy self. Mine husband is my
superior, my better; he has authority and rule over me: Nature has given it
him, having framed our bodies to tenderness, men's to more hardness. God has
given it him, saying to our first mother Euah, Genesis 3.16.
Thy desire shall be subject to him, and he shall rule over thee. His will is
the tie and tedder even of my desires and wishes. I will not strive against GOD
and nature. Though my sin has made my place tedious, yet I will confess the
truth, Mine husband is my superior, my better. If the wife do not learn this
lesson perfectly, if she have it not without book, even at her fingers ends,
as we speak, if her very heart condescend not to it, there will be wrangling,
repining, striving, viyng to be equal with him, or above him; and thus their
life will be but a battle, and a trying of masteries. A woeful living.

28. Secondly, the wife being resolved that her place is the lower, must carry
herself as an inferior. It little boots to confess his authority in word,
if she frame not to submission indeed. Now she shall testify her
inferiority in a Christian manner, by practicing those two virtues of reverence
and obedience, which are appropriate to the place of inferiors.

29. And first for reverence, the wife owes as much of that to her husband, as
the children or the servants do to her, yea, as they do to him: only it is
allowed that it be sweetened with more love and more familiarity. The wife
should not think so erroniously of her place, as if she were not bound equally
with the children and servants to reverence her husband; all inferiors owe
reverence alike. The difference is only this, she may be more familiar, not
more rude then they, as being more dear, not less subject to him.

30. Also this reverence of hers must be both inward and outward. First, her
heart must be kept inwardly, in a dutiful respect of him, and she must
regard him as Gods Deputy, not looking to his person but his place; nor
thinking so much who and what an one he is, as whose officer. This the Apostle
does very strictly inioyne, saying, Let the wife see that she fear her
husband. Ephesians 5. last verse.
As if he had said: Of all things let her most carefully labor not to fail
in this duty: for if she do, her whole life besides will be rude and
unbeseeming. And you must know that the Apostle means here not a slavish, but
a loving fear, such as may well stand with the nearest union of hearts, as
between Christ and his Church. And this fear is when, in consideration of his
place, she does abhor it as the greatest evil, next to the breach of Gods
Commandment, to displease and offend her husband. Men stand in right awe of
God, when they loath it as the greatest of al evils, to break his Commandment
and grieve his Spirit; and the wife fears her husband in good manner, when she
does shun it as the next evil, to displease, grieve and disobey her husband,
who is next to GOD above her in the family. Such regard her heart must have of
her head, that it keep hand and tongue and all from disorder. I know this is
not customable, nay it is scarce thought seemly amongst many women; nay they
are as little for their husbands, as they for them; yea they despise him, yea
they have inuerted this precept, and cause their husbands to fear them. This
impudency, this vnwomanhood tracks the way to the harlots house, and gives all
wise men to know, that such have, or would, or soon will cast off the care of
honesty, as of loyalty. But if thou will be a virtuous wife, deal with thine
heart to make it stand in awe of thine husband: and know that God has not for
naught given the former Caveat to women. As thou growest in this inward
reverence, so look to get the better of all other infirmities: as thou art
careless herein, so shall thou be pestered with all other enormities. Where
the heart sets light by any one, the words and gestures will be contemptuous. If
the fountain be muddy with neglect, so shall the streams.

31. And as the heart principally, so next the outward behavior must be
regarded in three special things. First, in speeches and gestures unto him.
These must carry the stamp of fear upon them, and not be cutted, sharp,
sullen, passionate, teechie, but meek, quiet, submissiue, which may show that
she considers who herself is, and to whom she speaks. The wives tongue
toward her husband must be neither keen, nor loose, her countenance neither
swelling nor deriding: her behaurour not flinging, not puffing, not
discontented; but sauouring of all lowliness and quietness of affection.
Look what kind of words or behavior thou would dislike from thy servant or
child, those must thou not give to thine husband: for thou art equally
commanded to be subject. Herein Sarah once faulted, she was aloft in the
boughs; God be Judge between me and thee. Herein also Rachel offended, that
in a pelting chase came suming, and chod with her husband; Give me children, or
I die. Jacob could not brook this without anger, though he loved her tenderly.
Herein Micol also was out of the way, when she came scoffing and flouting to
her husband David: 2. Sam. 6.20.
How glorious was the King of Israel to day, etc. when her husband in her
conceit (though not indeed) carried himself somewhat unfit for a Kings place;
she cannot admonish him in good sort, but with bitter taunting breaks a jest
upon him. These examples show how subject women are to disreuerent behavior;
and withal how loathsome, how unwomanly they be. Yet for all these warnings
we have some women that can chase and scold with their husbands, and rail
upon them, and revile them, and shake them together with such terms and
carriage, as were insufferable toward a servant. Stains of woman-kinde,
blemishes of their sex, monsters in natures, botches of humane society, rude,
graceless, impudent, next to harlots, if not the same with them. Let such
words leave a blister behind them, and let the canker eat out these tongues.
But besides these so notorious ones, even women otherwise virtuous, must see
their faults in this behalf. They can take up their husbands with quick
speeches sharply set on. They can set them down short, with a cutted answer,
with a frowning countenance, with a disdainful look, and the side turned
toward them in displeasure. Why will thou teach thy children to be
rebellious, and show thy servants how to swell, pout, and fume? Think thou
such behavior will not infect? Shall not they also use it to thee? or is it
less tolerable in thee? Be submissiue rather, and let them learn reverence
from thee to practice to thee. That woman makes her self vile, that sets her
husband at naught, or else seems to do it.

32. Secondly, the wife must express reverence toward her husband in her
speeches and gestures before him and in his presence to others. His company
must make her more respective how she carries herself toward any else. Her
words must not be loud and snappish to the children, to the servants in his
sight. If she perceive a fault, yet must consider, that her better stands by,
and not speak without necessity; and then utter that in more still and mild
manner, which in his absence she may set on with more roundnes. No woman of
government will allow her children and servants to be loud and brawling before
her; and shall she before her husband be so herself? What is become of
inferiority then? Yea her reverence does inioyne her silence when she stands
by. I mean not utter abstinence from speech, but using few words, and those
low and mild, not eagre, 2 Timothy 2.11.
not loud. Paul commands the women to learn in silence. The word is, in
quietness: wherein be not alone inioynes a public, but even a general
silence to hold in the house and other like meetings: for why should that be
restrained without any need, which does well receive a larger extent? The
reason of which duty is grounded even upon the consideration of the two sexes:
for even as youth is inferior to age, and the young folk to the aged (unless
some other respect do ouer-ballance this difference, as sometimes it falls
out that the younger is in authority, and the elder under it; the younger has
more excellent gifts; the elder fewer, and such like; by which the inferiority
of young men is shadowed, and as it were covered:) so is the male sex
preferred before the female in degree of place and dignity, as all men will
yield that read what the Scriptures speak in that behalf. Now if there be an
inferiority of the sex, by what thing should it be better expressed, rather
then this, by which also younger people must testify theirs, namely, to speak
little and low before them? For what less thing can be required in witness
of this difference? Let women then either excuse chat and loudness in young
folks before their ancients, in children and servants before them; or else
condemn it in themselves before their husbands, yea before any men. I know
this duty goes against the hair: for where there is suddenness of wit, and
scarcity of wisdom (as in the most of this sex comparatively) there is
readiness to speak, and multitude of words; but amongst all wisemen,
talakatiuenes of women (chiefly when it comes to loud and earnest words) has
been reputed a fault most of all in the husbands presence. Now then let women
learn silence, and let the reverent account of their husbands work in them a
special moderation of speech whilst they be in place.

33. Thirdly, the woman's speeches of the husband behind his back, must be
dutiful and respective. She must not call him by light names, nor talk of
him with any kind of carelessness and slightnes of speech, much less with
despitefull and reproachful terms. Herein the godly fact of Sarah, commended
to our imitation, must be followed in practice. When she thought of her
husband in the absence of all company, she entitled him by the name of my
Lord. If in her private conceit she gave him so good and honorable titles,
what would she have done in company? what in his own presence? what unto
himself? So the women must inure themselves to submissiuenesse of thoughts and
speeches in their husbands absence, that they may the better practice the same
in their presence: for custom in this thing has great force. Who would brook
a child speaking disgracefully and murmuring. of his father behind his back?
And shall it be suffered in a wife? By how much here is more certain trial
of her her inward affection and disposition, by so much must she be more
attentive to her words in such case. Very dread may make a woman give good
words before her husbands face, because she dares do no other, and he will
brook none other; but this shows a conscionable subjection, when she will not
think nor speak of him, though he be far from hearing, without some note
of good regard, that those which hear may perceive she does account of him as
her Governor and her better. He that allows not an evil thought of the
Prince, will not allow evil speeches of the husband in private talk between
neighbors: for he is the household Prince, the domestical King; Though think
husband be from thee, let thy fear of him be with thee, that in mentioning
him to others thou show not contempt. And for Reverence thus much.

34. Obedience follows: as concerning which duty a plain text auers it to the
full, saying; Let the Wife be subject to her husband in all things, in the
Lord. What need we further proof? Why is she his wife, if she will not
obey? and how can she require obedience of the children and servants, if she
will not yield to the husband? does not she exact it in his name, and as his
deputy? But the thing will not be so much questioned, as the measure: Not
whether she must obey, but how far. Wherefore we must extend it as far as
the Apostle, to a generality of things, to all things, so it be in the Lord.
In whatsoever thing obeying of him does not disobey God, she must obey: and if
not in all things, it were as good in nothing. It is a thankelesse service, if
not general. To yield alone in things that please her self, is not to obey
him, but her own affections. The trial of obedience is, when it crosses her
desires. To do that which he biddes, when she would have done without his
bidding, what praise is it? But this declares conscionable submission, when
she chooses to do what her-selfe would not, because her husbands wills it. And
seeing she requires the like largeness of duty in his name from the
servants, her-selfe shall be Judge against her-selfe, if she give not what
she looks to receive. But if suffices not that her obedience reach to all
things that are lawful, unless it be also wiling, ready, without brawling,
contending, thwarting, sowrenesse. A good work may be marred in the manner of
doing. And as good stuff is spilt by bad making, so does the wife disgrace and
disfigure her obedience if she hang off and contend, and be impatient, and
will not, till she cannot choose. Needs must, needs shall, we say in the
Proverb. Such kind of yielding declares no reverence, deserves no praise.
Then it is laudable, commendable, a note of a virtuous woman, a dutiful wise,
when she submits her-selfe with quietness, cheerfully, even as a wel-broken
horse turns at the least turning, stands at the least check of the riders
bridle, readily going and standing as he wishes that fits upon his back. If
you will have your obedience worth any thing, make no tumult about it
outwardly, allow none within.

35. And for the less principal duties of husband and wife concerning their
ordinary society, thus much. I come now to such as concern the marriage bed,
which are as needful to be known as the former, because offenses in that
kind are more capital and dangerous, though not so public. Their
matrimonial meetings must have these three properties. First, it must be
cheerful: they must lovingly, willingly and familiarly communicate themselves
unto themselves, which is the best means to continue and nourish their mutual
natural love, and by which the true and proper ends of matrimony shall be
attained in best manner: for the husband is not his own, but the wifes, and
the wife the husbands. Secondly, their meeting must be sanctified. Paul says,
meat, drink and marriage are good, being sanctified by prayer. Men and women
must not come together as brute creatures and unreasonable beasts, through the
heat of desire; but must see their Maker in that his ordinance, and crave his
blessing solemnly as at meals, (the Apostle speaks of both alike) that
marriage may indeed be blessed unto them. To sanctify the marriage bed, and
use it reverently with prayer and thanksgiving, will make it moderate, and
keep them from growing weary each of other (as in many it falls out,) and
cause that lust shall be assuaged, which else shall be increased by these
meetings. Propagation and chastity, the two chief ends of marriage, are best
attained by prayer and thanksgiving in the use thereof, without which they
will hardly come, or not with comfort. Neither is it more then needs, to see
God in that which so nearely touches our selves, as the hope of posterity:
him, as the increase of his kingdom. Let Christians therefore know the fruit
of prayer even in all things. Thirdly, their nuptial meetings must be
seasonable, and at lawful times. There is a season when God and Nature
seioynes man and wife in this respect. The woman is made to be fruitful; and
therefore also more moist and cold of constitution. Hence it is that their
natural heat serves not to turn all their sustenance into their own
nourishment; but a quantity redounding is set apart in a convenient place to
chearish and nourish the conception, when they shall conceive. Now this
redundant humor (called their flowers or terms) has (if no conception be)
it monthly issue or euacuation, (and in some oftener) unless there be
extraordinary stoppings and obstructions, lasting for six or seven days in
the most: Sometimes also this issue, through weakness and infirmity of nature,
does continue many more days. Always after childbirth there is a larger and
longer emptying, because of the former retention, which continues commonly for
four, five or six weeks, and in some longer. Now in all these three times
and occasions, it is simply unlawful for a man to company with his own wife.
The Lord tells us so, Leuit. 15. c. 19.25. ver. also chap. 18 ver. 19. also
chap. 20. ver. 18. Of which places it is needful, that married people should
take notice: to which I send them. Neither let women think themselves
disgraced, because I have laid this matter open in plain, but modest speeches.
Where God threatens death to the offender, can the Minister be faithful, if
he do not plainly declare the offense? This fault is by GOD condemned to the
punishment of death, Leuit. 20.18. Bear then with necessary plainness. And
let no woman grieve that the cause of her fruitfulnes is known, when she
rejoices to be found fruitful. Say not, that I may let them read it. What
if they cannot? what if they will not? Can the Minister so discharge his
office, of giving men warning that they sin not, because they may read it?
But if any through niceness or otherwise, do take snuff at this opennesse
(for immodest and obscene speech they have heard none,) they shall argue
themselves guilty of the sin, which they would not have known; and show
rather a willingness to commit evil, then prove it evil to teach that plainly
which God has plainly revealed to be known. In a word, we must speak all
the truth, you should with willingness hear all; if not, you must against your
will. Though men will be offended, we must not conceal what God will have
known. And thus you have heard the duties of married people, principal, and
less principal, for their common society both mutual and special; and for
their nuptial society in the marriage bed. Now though I have been long, I will
tarry to make some use and application.

36. And first, this ministers a good instruction to young and unmarried
people, that they do not unadvisedly rush into this estate. A thing of such
difficulty should not be lightly undertaken. They shall have their hands full
of duty, if they get not their hearts full of grace, and their heads full of
wisdom; they shall find an house full of trouble, and a life full of woe,
meeting with gall in stead of honey, and gravel in stead of nourishing morsels.
Would thou be married? See what wisdom, what patience, what grace fit to
govern or fit to obey thou find in thy self. Get these against thou come
to use them, or else marriage will not yield thee such contentment, as thine
imagination promises. Vain youths grow wanton and fall in lust, and must
marry before they have any power to practice, any understanding to know their
duties; so they trouble themselves, and discredit their estate both at once. He
that leapes over a broad ditch with a short staff, shall fall into the midst;
and he that enters upon matrimony without care to attain great grace, shall be
mired and doussed in disquietment and vexation. Let unmarried people think of
this, and be wise.

37. Secondly, I must advise all married persons, to grow acquainted with these
duties, and to mark their fallings in the same But mistake me not. I would
that the wife should know hers, the husband his, and both the common duties. I
desire that they should observe each their own, not so much each others
faylings. Indeed it may be feared, that diverse hearers now will be worse for
hearing, because they heard amiss. The husband may perhaps ring his wife a
peale of her duty when he comes home, and tell her how her faults were ripped
up; and yet never consider or meditate of his own duties or faults. The wife
also may likely tell him of his own at home, when she has little or nothing
to say to her-selfe. Thus both shall be worse, when they seek to vpbraide each
other, not to amend each ones self. Thou husband did listen attentively when
the woman's duties were handled, and thoughtst, There he met with my wife; such
a time she showed little reverence, less obedience. Thou wife had the like
thoughts concerning thine husband: There he told him home of his duty. It is
not long since he showed himself neither wise nor gentle. I would he would
see to amend. Unwise man, unwise woman: why had thou not most care of thine
own soul? Could thou mark what was good for another disease, not what for
thine own? Will thou grow skillful in his way, and not know one foot of that
wherein thy self must travel? Brethren, sisters, let this be altered in us.
If thou be a Christian husband, have more care to know that, and be more
frequent in considering that, for which thine own soul must answer, then what
lie, to the accounts of another. So do thou that art a Christian wife. And
that man or woman that sees not more faults and failings in him or her-selfe
then the yoke fellow, bewraies wondrous great pride, ignorance and hypocrisy,
if he or she be not matched with one too too notorious for ill demeanours. If
the heart were well touched, it own sins would be more grievous the
husbands or wives less. Contend therefore, not how short thy yoke fellow
comes, but not to come short thy self. Pass by the others failings more
easily, be more censorious toward thine own: this were to deal as a
Christian, even to judge thy self. He never yet learnt to work well in any
work, that would cast his eye more upon his neighbors fingers than his own.
Neither was he ever good scholar that would con his fellows, and not regard
the task imposed upon himself. And that makes husbands and wives such ill
pay-masters one another, because they look often what is owing to them, not
what they owe. I doubt not but experience will back my speech, if I pronounce
that they be not the best husbands and wives, which are heard to complain much
of their yoke-fellowes defects in duty, little of their own. And yet is not
this ordinary? Every man would be a good husband, if his wife were not so bad:
and she a good wife, were not he so excessiuely faulty. All the accusations, all the iudgings are datted at each other. What folly is this? Understand idle man
and woman, it is not the requiring or receiving of duty from others, but the
knowing and performing of what pertaines to thy self, that will prove thee a
Christian, comfort thee in temptation, rejoice thee in death, and stand for
thee in judgment. And yet art thou soloud and much in calling for duty, so mute
and dumb and ignorant in yielding it? To conclude therefore, know thine own
duty best, mark most thine own transgressings of duty; then shall thou be
free from brawles with thy yoke fellow, if thou be taken up with pains about
thy self: and there is no better means of peace in families, than that every
one should learn and ply his own work, see and labor to mend his own
faults. Have you then been both or either unchaste, unloving, unfaithful?
repent both; and strain not courtesy who shall begin: but let either set
other a copy of goodness. And if you will needs strive, let it be, which
shall be the best, which mend first. Have thou been a foolish, passionate,
unjust husband, full of bitter words, perhaps also (which is monstrous) of
blows in anger, seeking and serving thy self alone, and not regarding thy
wives good, so thou might go away with thine own will? Diue not into her
faults, cry not out, she has been thus and thus to me: but repent of thy
bitterness, unthriftiness, folly of all sorts: confess it to God; beseech him to
make thee a better husband, that thy wife may be better. Have thou been a
disdainful, contemptuous, brawling, impatient, discontented, and disobedient
wife? ask thine hear before God, and dissemble nor. If yea, clamor not
against thine husbands folly, exclaim not of his rashness and hardness; but
condemn thy self before, and call upon God, to make thee fear and obey thine
husband, as a Commander under him. Entreat him of mercy to make thee better,
that thy husband also may be better. Follow the Proverb, and let every of you
mend one, I mean himself, and contention will cease. Pray for each ones self
first, then for each other. Where you have offended, labor to see it,
confess, bewail it, and call for power to reform, and be not skillful to
cast the fault upon another, but to cast it out of thy self. So shall your
loves be sure, your hearts comfortable, your example commendable, your houses
peaceable, your selves joyful, your lives cheerful, your deaths blessed, and
your memories happy for ever.

(...)
FINIS.
The duties of the married people are either
1. Principal: the breach of which annihilates the former covenant by them
made: which are 1. The chaste keeping of their bodies for each other: to which
is opposed adultery: sect. 3. 2. Cohabitation or dwelling together: to which
is opposed desertion: sect. 4.
2. Less Principal: the breach whereof notwithstanding, the comnant is firm:
and these are of two sorts:
1. Such as concern their ordinary society of life: which are either 1.
Mutual: such as both must mutually perform: which do respect either 1. Their
persons, and these are 1. Love, sect. 7. 2. Faithfulness and helpfulnes
conjoined, sect. 11.
2. Their families, as concerning their 1. Maintenance: sect. 13. 2. Governing:
sect. 14.

2. Special, pertaining to either separately, 1. The husband: whose duties are
1. To keep his authority: sect. 15. 2. To use his authority: of which I show
1. The end: sect. 16. 2. The manner, with three virtues, 1. Wisdom: sect. 18.
2. Meeknes: sect. 21. 3. Justice: sect. 26.


2. The wife: whose duty is 1. To confess her inferiority: sect. 27. 2. To
carry herself as inferior 1. In reverence: sect. 29. 2. Obedience: sect. 34.


2. Such as concern their society in the marriage bed, that it be 1. Loving.
sect. 35. 2. Sanctified. sect. 35. 3. Seasonable. sect. 35.



