A TRIPLE CVRE OF A TRIPLE MALADY.

That is, OF Vanity in Apparel. Excess in Drinking. Impiety in Swearing.


By E. W. Doctor, and Professor of Divinity.

PERMISSV SVPERIORVM. M. DC. XVI.

TO THE PRINCE HIS HIGHNESS.
HOPEFVLL PRINCE,

NONE so fit to Patronize works ordained to extirpate Vice and establish
Virtue as Co^manders: and amongst them, none more then Princes. For if we
consider what gives most dignity to the person of a Prince, or affoardeth him
best means for his authority to rule, Virtue will appear the most eminent; as
well to grace the one, as to maintain the other.

Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, Arist. l. 1. magnor. Moral. cap. 4. and
6.
speaking of the excellency of Virtue, and comparing it with Principality,
gives to Virtue the higher place, as a special inward good of the soul; and
puts Learning, Principality, and the like, among the outward gifts of
Fortune.

My purpose therefore, being in these Treatises to establish dece^t Modesty
against vanity of Apparel; Temperance against excess of Drinking; and
Religion against Impiety in swearing; and that Virtue establishes Civil
government: I have presumed to adresse the^ to your Highness, who one day (as
we hope) is to succeed in Regal Authority; because (in some part) they may
serve you, as necessary furniture of Christian policy. And if Favor might
grant me opportunity to speak of these subjects in your Presence: I should in
plainer terms declare, what is the original cause of these Abuses which I
reprove, and how the perfect redress of them, depends on the exact
reformation of the root, out of which they grow.

My Wish then (Noble Prince) is, that this may be gratefully accepted: and
stand your Highness in some steed, (when time shall come) for the government of
your people; remaining ever your HIGHNESS

Most humbly devoted Orator. E. W.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Judicious Reader.
THERE is not the best ground in the world, which will not abound with
brambles, briars, and ill weeds if it be not well tilled; nor any nation of so
good a disposition, which will not become vicious, and ouergrowne with evil
manners and customs, if it want good education, examples of true virtue,
documents of wisdom, and perfect Discipline. Yea it is observed, that the best
and quickest wits, if they be not well instructed, commonly break out into
actions of most violent, and outrageous vices: as the strongest and best
furnished ship, sailing most swiftly and irreuocably toward shallows and
rocks, is in most danger to miscarry by shipwreck.

Such also as are accounted to be of a good nature, that is, to be pliable, and
faci^e to give contentment to others from their own bounty and affection, do
soonest fall into debasements by the ill example of their fellows, whom they
have neither providence to eschew, nor courage to reprehend; but suffer
themselves to be entangled with good fellowship, as byrds with lime-twigs, and
so perish wittingly by their own facility.

I need not here to aggrauate the calamity which arises by these occasions,
nor the necessity of good Counsel to hinder their Progress, and beat men
back from ill Company: nor how great wrong those do to their Country and
Friends who hinder such as have most need of help, from conversation with
such persons as employ their endeauours most laudably in the setting forward of
virtue, and repressing of vice; for the ensuing discourse will sufficiently
declare it.

Only this I would have thee (Prudent Reader) to understand, that my drift is
not to write of these subjects, by way of amplification, or labored colors of
style, but only to lay down briefly some principal arguments that confirm
the truths which I seek to persuade; observing the method, which nature, and
practice of doctrine require in like cases.

And for entrance to the extirpation of these three pernicious vices, and
better understanding of all that follows; it may please thee to consider
first the force of custom, to change opinion even in the most palpable and
sensible things. As is proved by a prisoner which has lived some time in a
stinking prison, and is no more troubled with the bad sent that annoyed him in
the beginning, and were enough to make another which should come a new out of
the fresh air, to cast his gorge.

The same is exemplified by that which happened to Plutarke his guest, who bidae^
to dinner by his friend, could eat nothing the first day, because, forsooth, the
goodwife of the house, whom he supposed had dressed the meat, was blear-eyed.
The next day he had the like difficulty to overcome his apprehension, yet he
eat something. But the third day, custom had abated his auersion so far,
that he eat his meat as well as the rest. This is taught us in the old
saying, ab assuetis non fit passio: and we might bring a thousand other
examples to confirm it.

The second observation may be, that (as it is said) in apparel and the like,
fools bring up fashions, and oblige wise men to follow them, many times
against their wills, not to be holden for singular.

The third is deduced from these two, that discre^te men and women, which are
become Apes in apparel, not by desire but upon opinion of necessity, and not
to be noted of singularity, if they did as they would, and should do if they
did well, will be glad to see the vanity which themselves already mislike, laid
open in such sort, as those that had not discretion to fall into the account of
their folly by themselves, may at least reflect upon it, and acknowledge it
when they read it plainly set down.

And this was to be remembered before hand in the abuse of Apparel: for the
other of Drinking and Swearing are so foul and foolish of themselves, as they
need no more (but to be considered) to be detested by any reasonable man. For
the rest, such I mean as by custom of sin are transformed into beasts, be
not capable of discipline, but must be left to the providence and justice of
Almighty God: who keep thee ever (Gentle Reader) in the fear of his
Judgments, and love of his mercy. From my lodginge the 20. of August. 1616.

THE FIRST CVRE: WHICH IS, Of Vanity in Apparel.
CHAP. I. What is the Natural, and Civil use of Apparel.
THERE is no doubt but that the original use of Apparel, took beginning from
the quality of man's body; for it being much respected by the soul, to which it
is naturally united, the reasonable faculty according to obligation from
Nature, has been careful and industrious to cloth it, as well to defend it
from injury of the air, as to maintain it in honor and reputation, against
debaseme^t or misprision, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and S. Basil, do prudently
observe. Basil. in S. Iulit. in regul. fus. disp. inter. 23.


2. For as Princes and Great men, do not only procure estimation and support
of Honor in their own persons and estates; but also in the behalf and
quality of their dependants and servants, and so consequently receive disgrace,
when any thing is contrived either immediately against their persons, or to the
hurt or dishonor of such as have their whole reliances on them: So the soul
of man seeks not only how to gratify and content it self, or to maintain
it own excellency, but also labors to nourish the body, and to defend the
natural Nobility thereof against all reproach. Both which motives, seem to
have been regarded by divine providence, when the naked bodies of our first
parents were covered with the spoils and services of beasts; for after they
Genes. 3.
had sinned, their bodies being disordered and become debtors to death. Nature
enforced as it were to revenge, armed the Elements against their disloyalty:
and shame breeding in their own hearts a sharp resentment to behold
themselves in the distemperature of concupiscence, and as irksome spectacles to
their own eyes, were by the mercy of God clothed, as well to guard their
bodies from innoyance, as their minds from confusion. And then Nature in Man
was taught Ambros. de paradiso.
to protect honor, and adorn the body with Apparel; thereby to cover and
co^ceale nakedness, which otherwise carried resembla^ce of turpitude, after it
was spotted with sin.

3. The natural use then of apparel, in as much as it concerns health of
body, does much depend on the quality of the air, and clymate wherein men
Nissen. lib 1. Phil. cap. 2.
live: as being Inhabitants about the North or South Poles, or under the
Equinoctial line, or in some proportion nearer or further of, approaching, or
declining from them; according to this difference of situation, Apparel is to
be course or fine, of this, or that quality, and fashion. And so those which
live under the Equinoctial line go in a manner naked; others about the North
Pole, as the Scithians, wear strong and rude garments. Seneca epist. 90.
Do not the most of the Scithians (says Seneca) cover themselves at this day
with the skins of foxes and other vermin? which as Hier. ep. Epitaph. ad Nepot.
Ovid. l. 3. Trist. Clem. ^. ^x. l 3. pe^dag. c. 3.
they are soft, so are they not pierced by the winds. Now in this course we
may distinguish, what Nature affoardeth, as easy to be had for Apparel, and
what she affects in the same kind, with industry, labor, and art.

4. Cicero is of opinion, that Nature in man, as concerning Apparel, is Cicero
Tusc. 1.
sufficiently furnished by the creatures, which be subject unto him; affirming
that brute beasts (besides other causes) were by diuiue providence committed
to man's government, that they might Apparel him. Cannot the skins of beasts
(says Seneca) sufficiently defend a man's body Seneca Ep. 90.
from cold? Do not many Nations cover their bodies with the barks of trees?
Are not feathers sowed up in the fashion of clothes? To this purpose Homer
endeavoring to teach the Natural use of Apparel, brings in his Grecians
manteled in the skins of Lions, Panthers, Wolves, and such like. This rude
manner of artyre, remained long with the Northern, and Western people. Clem.
Alex. lib. 2. Pedag.
But the Easterlings, and namely the Persians, fell sooner to curious and
artificial composition of their Apparel: and because they went ordinarily in
silk, reproched Herod. in Helogab.
the Romans, as Herodia^ reports, that they were rustical, because they were
apparelled in cloth: from which custom they were in greatpart afterward drawn
by Heliogabalus the Emperor, too much effeminated with the Persian delicacy.
For before, -- -- Et vellere Tusco Iuuenal. Satyr. ^.
Vexatae dur^que manus. -- -- --

5. Whereupon, as excess in apparel contrary to natural institution, may
first in general be known by the departure from Nature, to the curiosity of
Art: so consequently it may be measured in particular by degrees of Art, by
which it has degenerated surthest from Nature; in that, some kind of Apparel
is more artificial then other, and further sequestered from the true original
use; Man's inconstancy and newfanglenesse aiming still at that which is most
remote, and extraordinary: whereas Nature to abridge this vanity of man, has
buried and hidden from us the creatures which Art does principally abuse in
this kind; as Pearls in the bottom of the Sea, Gold and Silver, and the like,
in the bowels of the Earth. In which respect, the old Poets feyned gold to be
kept Clemens Moral. lib. 2. pedagog. cap. 11. Hyerom. epist. ad Rusti. Tertull.
1. de cultu* ^emin.
by Griffins and Dragons, thereby to affright us from these fantasies, as
Clemens Alex. and S. Hierome do record. And Tertullian thinks, that women
could never have found out the secret iuyces of herbs, minerals and other
trumpery to color their hair and paint their faces, but instructed by evil
spirits: so foul be the Painters and their shops, from whence counter fet
beauty is fetched.

6. Besides this purpose of Apparel to defend the body from injuries of heat,
cold, and the like; Nature had another drift, namely by outward Apparel to
represent, as by a visible sign, the quality, and disposition of every man;
what his secret affections are, and of what judgment, discretion, and capacity
he is, for all this his Apparel does declare no less then his words. And so
the holy Ghost says by Solomon: Amictus corporis, and risus dentium, and
ingressus hominis annunciant de eo: that is to say: A man's Apparel, his
laughing, and the manner of his going, do manifest his inclinations, and
tells what is in him. And in this respect, I have oftentimes thought with my
self, that all Nations ought to be passing heedful in the choice they make of
Apparel and the fashions thereof: for as much as thereby they make remonstrance
to others of their natural dispositions, and lay open to the view of the world
what lies hidden in their hearts. And so, if in the representation of their
Apparel, their Newfanglenes, and inventions of art be expressed any error,
vanity, or lightness, to such men's judgments as have piercing intellectual
eyes; they make themselves objects of scorn and mockery, yea sometimes marks
to be shot at, and a prey to other men's policy.

7. But to rehearse that which in this kind, is naturally allowable, although
mixed with some Art, we will begin with persons consecrated to religion: for
that Religion, is a repayment of external ho^age and service due to Almighty
God, in respect of his supreme Majesty, rightly apprehended by man. And
therefore, the outward ceremony and ^ttire in religious actions, ought to be
precious and honorable, as we see it was ordained by God himself in the draught
he made of the old Testament. Exodus 28.
Thou shall (says he) make the vestement of Aaron, with glory and comelines.
Hereupon Exodus 19.
the Jew, by Gods appointment, was commanded for a sign of religious
sanctification and ciuility, to wash his garments, when he received the law
from mount Sinay, as S. Basil notes. And S. Basil. in cap. 1. Isa.
upon the ^ame consideration (no doubt by inspiration of the holy Ghost) the
faithful of the Primitive Church, solemnized Festival days consecrated to
religion with precious Apparel, as Theod. l. de Martyr. S. Gregor. Ep. ad
August.
Theodoretus, and S. Gregory report. Unto which signification by Apparel, is
conformable the habit of sacred and religious persons: who, as they have by
vow, and institution of life, forsaken all worldly endowments; so do they
declare as much by their exterior clothing: As when the clergyman* wears
Pier. lib. 4.
long garments of black or sad color; when the Monk seems rather shrouded
and buried then invested in his Cool; when the Hermit is apparelled in
hayr-cloath, or plat of the Hieron. in vit^ Pauli.
Palm Tree. As Paul the Hermit (says S. Hierome) had a meaner garment then
is used by any man's slave. And accordingly S, Athanasi^ Athanas. in vit^.
Antonij. August. l. 1. de mor. Eccles. c. 31. ^p. 109. Tertul. de velandis
virgin.
writing the life of S. Antony, makes mention of the austerity of his attire:
and Christ's Precursor that came to preach penance, was clad in Camells hair.
And for the same representation, the veyle of vowed virgins which covers
their heads and faces, testifies that their souls as well as their bodies
live in separation from earthly contentmens, and in solitude, and recollection
with God. Prudent. l. 2. contra Sym.


Sun^ and virginibus pulcherima praemia nostris,
Et pudor, and sancto ^ectus velamine vultus:
Et priuatus honos* nec not a and publica forma:
Et rarae, tenuesque epulae and men's sobria semper.
8. Now, to proceed from sacred to Civil persons, it is comendable also and
justifiable in Kings and Princes, to have their heads (as the seats of reasons
Empire) adorned with D^adems, after the manner of Asia; or with Crowns of
Clem. Alex. l. 2. Pedag. Virgil. ^. 7. Laz^us l. 8. de repub. Roman. Veget. l.
2. dear mi^it.
Lau^el, or Gold, according to the fashion of the Romans; and to be vested in
Purple, and hold in their hands Scepters, in resemblance of Authority.

9. For this cause likewise, Martial men bear for arms in their Scurchio^s
and upon their Crests, the portraitures of Lions, Eagles, and the like: and
wear upon their bodies, the skins of wild beasts to support the steel and
iron of their armor: notifying thereby, their contempt of voluptuous
effeminancy, and there warlike spirits devoted to manhood, and as it were
promising victory over their enemies by their armor, and Virgil. Enead. 7.
apparel.

^pse pedes tegmen torquens immane Leonis
Terribili impexum se^a* cum dentibus albis
Ind^^^s cap^^, sic Regia tecta subib^t
Horridus, Hercule^que humeros innexus amictu.
10. The Nobleman also, in token of his Nobility in those times, was known by
his attire. And* for this Al^iat. Em^.
cause, the Athenian Gent^eman, to signify that by ancestry he was not an
alien, or stranger, but homebred of his City, did wear upon his upper garment,
and the hair of his head, certain grasshoppers of gold; for that grasshoppers
never part Clem. Alex. l. 2. pedag.
far from their native nests, as Clemens Alex* records. And for the same
end also, the Noble Roman upon his black shoe did hear the resemblance of the
Alex. l. ^^ genesis die^. cap. 18.
Moon, as it was ordained by Numa: where the vulg^r sort was not permitted to
use any such ornaments. Also upon p^o^perous events, the same Romans, and after
other Nations, as they were joyful, or sorrowful for disasters; so did they
respectively change the color, and quality of their Apparel; as we read in
Cicero pro Sextio. Seneca ep. 18. Plutar. in Caesar. Lucan. l. 2. Phar.
Plutarc. q. Romans 2. 6. Trig* u^t. lib. 1. hist. Chin. c. 7.
Cicero, in Seneca, Plutarch, and Lucan:

-- -- Pleib^o tectus amictu
Omnis honos, nullos comitata est purpur a ^asces.
The women also of Rome, as Plutarch reports, performed their doale, attired
in white, because this color, amongst the rest, has least resemblance of
deceit: which manner, the Chinenses observe at this day.

11. Thus has it been declared how Nature in man, makes her use of garments,
as well for some signification of estate, quality, affection, disposition, and
judgment; as for the necessary defense of life against diseases and other
inconveniences, repugnant to the honor, and health of the body. But it may be,
that the same nature has yet a further intention, insinuated by the general
practice of all nations, in the sundry attire and ornaments of their bodies: of
which we are now to enquire.

What may be the general purpose of Nature; in that all nations endeavor to
adorn their bodies. CHAP. II.
IT would be an argument answerable Tertul. de pallio* Cle^. Alex. l. 2.
pedagog.
to a big Volume, to recount severally the diversity of habits used by
different nations, which either Historiographers, or Cosmographers have
described unto us, who although they Pier. l. 4.
much differ in manner and fashion, yet do they make manifest what in every one
nature intends: that is, to honor, grace, and benefit their bodies.

2. The common object of these diverse fashions every where, is a certain
decorum, or Corporal comlines, fit to represent to others aspects, that which
men think most priceable in themselves: and thereupon they procure t^ make it
known by Apparel, as by a purchase of their best reputation; notwithstanding
this decorum, or bodily ornament be not the self same every where: yea rather
what in this country is esteemed graceful and decent, in another is contemned
and scorned as evil fashioned and ridiculous: what in this people or Country
is ordained to signify a Martial, or a civil mind, in another appears of a
clear opposite representation. In so much, that if some persons of every
nation should meet together, every one wearing his proper National attire;
nothing would so move them all to laugh one at another, as when they should
behold each others apparel, formed in such diversity, notwithstanding, they al
agree in general in that wherein they disagree in particular: each one procuring
to set out himself, but in that manner which to himself seems best.

3. There may be thought upon three causes, why the soul by reason, and will
secketh to beautify the body through the use of Apparel. The first,
concerns the close, and near conjunction, which is betwixt the body, and the
soul, as has been said: for which respect, the soul procures to hide and
dissemble with honest apparel, what through sin or natures defect, is deformed
in the body. From hence proceeds that which S. Paul observes, as natural 1.
Cor. 12.
in man concerning Apparel. Such as we think (says he) to be the baser parts
of the body, we apparel them with more honor: and the less honest parts with
more show of honesty.

4. Another cause from which proceeds this affection in the soul to adorn
the body, may be thought to consist in this; that she knows the body to be
her instrument to accomplish many excellent endeavors; as to exercise temperance
in meat and drink; continency in other pleasures; prudence in the government
of the creatures committed to reasons charge; fortitude to conquer her enemies,
and the like, as it is noted Mercur. in Pymond.
by Mercurius Trismegistus. In which off^ces of virtue, the body does not only
perform a task of toylesome labor, but also for the souls sake, endures
oftentimes to be deprived of many delights which otherwise were due to the
senses, and to suffer many* contrary effects of pain, and grief. Whereupon
the soul respects the body with a grateful affection, and seeks by all
outward remonstrance, to cherish and honor it, as an agent with her in the use
of virtue, a fellow partener in all distresles, a dutiful servant in all
occurrences, a most assured friend, and companion in all Tertul. de resur^ect.
Trogus. 6.
necessityes, and as Tertullian speaks, the Case wherein she is kept, and
covered in this life. If Epaminondas his shield was so dear unto him, as that
lying upon his deathbed, he desired to see it, and departing this life kissed
it lovingly as his faithful companion in all his adventures; what account is
the soul to make of the body?

5. The last cause which provoke this love of the soul toward the body, is
the excellency of the body it self, well known to the soul truly informed.
For the body, though it be mortal by sin, yet is ordained to immortality,
and has title to everlasting glory, and a triumphant room in heaven. How can
the body (says Tertullian) be separated from Tertul. lib. de resur.
reward with the soul, whom in this life, common labor, and virtue have
joined together? And when nature is abridged by death to cherish the body more
in life, she covers the corse with black, she burns it with sweet spices,
she e^balmeth and entombeth* it, and erecteth for it the Plin. ep. 5. ad
Marcell. number. Tertul. lib. de cuitu Fem.
best memory of eternal honor that she can: neither has mankind suruiuing,
taken any thing with greater impatience, then to behold buryall denied to their
friends, or kinffolkes bodies, by the impiety of their enemies.

-- Non alijs vltum Cadmeia pubes
Insurgunt stimulis, quam si turbata sepulcris Stul. l. q. v. 1. Soph* in
An^igon. Piutar. in Number. Pau^on. in At^ic.

Ossa patrum, monstri^que datae crudelibus vrnae.
6. And when the earth has made a final concealment of all the bodies
substance, quality, and glory; yet reason living in posterity not unmindful of
that endless immortality, which belongs to it by right and custom,
repaireth to the tomb, and there by c^remony of flowers and incense,
protests what good it wishes to the body deceased; and to what it is once
(maugre death) to arrive in heaven.

Nos fest a souebimus ossa
Violis, and frigida saxa Prudent. cathemer. Hieron. in obit. Paulin.

Liquido spergemus odore.
7. Thus have we specified the general motives, for the soul to adorn the
body in this life with Apparel: and hereby may be understood the reason why
this care is so common to every ones cogitation, that few (according to their
ability) omit to do it more or less. And therefore, as the occasion is subject
to excess, so the moderation requires prudence, and virtue.

8. Now to come to the particular differences of Apparel in diverse Nations, we
may consider them in two sorts. First according to substance: then their
quality and fashion. And we shall see, that both kinds proceed originaly from
heat and cold of the Country wherein such people dwell. Now, concerning the
substance of Apparel; the matter is more clear. Heat of the sun, and cold,
in different climates, give occasion to the inhabitans, to make their clothes
thicker, or finer as necessity requires.

9. Also from the same constitution and temper of heat and cold, arise
varietyes of fashions, to cover men's bodies more or less; for we see, upon
every little difference in this kind, even in one and the self some kingdom,
according to variety of complexions, great variety of fashions: some judging
this form or color, to be an ornament to the body because it represents
some proportionate quality of their minds; which the inhabitants of other
places utterly mistike, and make choice of quite contrary colors and fashions,
for the same effect. The Indian glories in gay colored feathers, his
bracelets of gold, his ^aseius lib. 1.
V^icornes horn: and sometimes balls of Iron ^incked to his ears, and nether
lip be arguments of his Nobility. The Ouandus.
Easterling takes pride in the caruing of his flesh with Imagery works of
flowers, Trigault. hist. Chin.
and other figures. The Chinesian wears long nails, as ornaments of
nobility, and witnesses that he gets not his living by labor of his hands.
And in this kind, one thing is judged by some to be a decorum, and fit
remonstrance of inward excellency, which others judge to be disproportionate,
indecent, and ridiculous.

10. No doubt there is in things themselves, a decorum, or decency for the
office of Apparel; notwithstanding every nation seeking after it, apprehends
and practices it with great variety, which has no other origin, then the
difference of judgments, which proceeds immediately from the different
temperatures and complexions of their bodies that work upon their souls:
which temperatures have beginning from the heavens, under which they live and
take vital breath, and from the quality of the earth which gives them food.
Nevertheless it is most certain, that besides these different comlinesses
made so diverse and opposite, through men's different conceits; there is in
Nature one true, substantial, certain and Arist. in magn. moral. c. 29.
perfect comeliness, as Aristotle affirms, that (besides justice or equity of
law and custom which is a particular virtue) there is in the things themselves
a certain fundamental equity and justice common to all. Whereupon such people
as in election of Apparel, depart from that decency which is prime, and
originally employed in the very bowels of Nature, do discover thereby their
erroneous apprehension, and the weakness of their judgments, commonly
accompanied with disordered affections of their wills. Plin. l. ^1. hist cap.
8. lib. 8 c 48.


11. Pliny affirms, that men first beholding with pleasure the flourishing
colors of flowers, namely of the Rose, Polid. Virlio. ^. de in(...). ^. ^.
(...). l. 8. ^yntag. (...) l. (...). (...).
the Violet, the Marigold, and the like, did ^^^^ke that such colors also in
their garments would much adorn their booyes, and serve to represent the
nobility of their minds. Homer in his history, makes mention of painted
Apparel. The P^^igians first invented cloth of needle work. King Attalus
taught the world to mix golden threeds with others of silk, or wo^ll. The
Babylonian was famous for his variety in dying his clothes. The old Gaul for
branching them: and the Alexandrian for his motly twist. Now then, seeing the
world is thus divided, every nation seeking a peculiar decorum, and yet aiming
all at one and the self same end, let us examine, what general grounds may be
laid down, to find out this natural decency, which pleases best those who
have best Judgment, and most use of reason, and what is culpable in such
people, as upon vanity exceed in the use of Art, and miss that purpose which
nature attends in Apparel.

How in the use of Apparel, Nature and Art, may make a convenient temperature:
and what general observations, are necessary in this kind. CHAP. III.
I do not think that any man, according to judgment, can abridge the work of
nature so Stoically, or severely, as if Nature only were to appoint the
Apparel of the body without all intercourse of Art. For the rudest manner of
clothing we can think off, namely by skins of beasts, requires some
admixture of Art to make them fit for man's use: notwithstanding, some have
deemed that nature alone in the very naked fabric of man, has made
sufficient promision in this kind, as Lucretius and others, who note, that
every part of the Lucretius lib. 1.
body is able to resist cold, as the face of man, that is of the same
complexion Seneca ^p. 90.
with the rest, if use were not to the contrary: adding that in those northern
climats where the cold is most, some men have lived little better then naked;
and of the ancient inhabitans of our Island, thus writes one.

-- Quibus vda ferarum Anthir. Rhodigin. 1. 18. c. 31.

Terga ^abant vestes. --
2. Yet the first clothing afforded by Almighty God to our parents in Paradise
after their sin, ^^oueth that for us now to go naked were not according to
the prescript of nature. Many things (and amongst them Apparel) are become for
the present natural and necessary, which before sin, were not so. Wherefore
this truth supposed, we are not, with uncivil rigor, to debar nature wholly
of all Art in the form and use of man's attire: Only we must beware that
admitting Art and workmanship for the help and perfection of nature, it be not
permitted to range so far, as it destroy the original intent of nature: As
for example, if one should heap art upon art in things needless and extreme
costly, far fetched and dear bought, only for vanity, without any other
purpose. For the ornament of Apparel, being only an accidental perfection of
man, and of little moment in respect of other endowments of his body and mind,
if in this kind, any show of extrauagant excess do appear, it will be an
argument to the beholders, that in such a person is no internal quality of any
great worth, seeing him wholly addicted to an external toy; and that his wis and
valor reach no further then the Taylers Cut, and colors of his clothes: as
if the glory of the Ape consisted only in his pyde or motly coat.

3. Therefore, artificial invention is not to depart too far from the intent
of nature or natural parability: lest the wit of the person so curiously
apparelled, may seem to have been wholly spent in the pursuit it had after
the fashion of his clothes: or he so seriously employed thereabout, as he
would have the world think it the whole drift of his designs, and that his
capacity reaches no further.

4. And assuredly, there is no one outward argument, which more plainly and
effectually proves that the souse harbored within that body, has no talent
of any great worth, as too much affectation of Art in Apparel: for it seems
hereby, that Nature wanting her proper perfection at home, beggeth a
counterfaite resemblance thereof from abroad. And whereas art, as the inferior
should imitate Nature, attending on her and leueling at excellency only by her
appointment: now contrary wise, Art goes before, and preposterously directs
nature, and makes her to serve, and attend, and to be maintained and esteemed
by her. Whereupon it comes to pass, that this unnatural and proud
curiosity of Art, instead of grace, from others purchases commonly dislike and
hatred: for hereby, the beholders think that the party so attyred, vaunteth of
himself, as if he were greater then the rest in mind, as he is gayer in
Apparel; and the more he labors to make others of his opinion, the less he
persuades: for by his lauishing in expenses, they seo plainly he understands
not proportion, and consequently deem that his shallow wits are run out into
his clothes. And so, as on the one side they take him for a puppet, and hold
him in contempt: so on the other side, the affectation of that which they see
him unworthy of, is unpleasant; for all dissimulation and falsehood is naturally
odious. And this may serve for the moderation of Art in the use of Apparel.

5. Moreover, seeing that apparel (as has been said) besides the necessary
couerture of the body, brings with it a signification of the quality of the
mind; it is to perform this office respectively to the estate that a man
sustayneth. And as estates in a Common wealth are different; S. Tho. 2. 2.. q.
16. Nauar. in sum c. 23. number. 4^. 18. Lessius. lib. 4. de virt. Temp. cap. 4.
so require they different proprietyes of the soul, to be represented
exteriourly by Apparel. By which appears the preposterous and inordinate
practice of those, who by their Apparel make show above their quality,
disclosing in the mean while, affections in their minds not agreeable to their
condition: as if a woman should by her attire (according to the barbarous
example of Queen Semiramis) express in herself the quality of a man, or a
mean person make resemblance of some great Lord and commander. For hereby the
beholders understand, first that the party so disguised, is not content with
his own estate; next that he aspireth higher then his wit and ability does
reach: and lastly he discovers extreme folly, as though where true valor
and substance is wanting, there the Taylers sheers, with his needle and thread,
were able to make him that which he is not.

6. Seeing therefore, that besides the honest and necessary commodity of
apparel, Iso^rat. ad Dimonich. Homer. o^iss. 6.
some certain signification is thereby also to be yielded; it seems that the
advertisement given by Isocrates to Dimonichos, is in this ma^ter much to be
noted. I would not (says he) that thy clothes should give any notice that
thou do affect curiosity in Apparel, which is a token of a weak and
^ffeminate spirit. But above all, let it make manifest, that thou art
Magnanimous. By which is not understood a proud, arrogant or disdaindfull
mind, but such a one, as by his apparel and all other signs (according Tertul.
l. de pallio.
to Tertullian) appears great in virtuous designements, such as may benefit
the commonwealth and posterity: and not to have his cogitations and affections
fettered in silk, velvet, or gold lace; and much less in new fashions of the
Taylers invention, or other like Ieuities of Apparel.

7. He is magnanimous (says Aristotle) Arist. l. 1. magnor. moral. cap. 20.
who neither is alienated from the receipt of honor, nor looks for it upon a
false ground, nor procures it by counterfeit means, as insolent vain persons
do, who think they can purchase reputation with apparel. Whereas a Magnanimous
man indeed, esteems honor to be only due to virtue, and the excellent inward
parts of the mind, which God gives to such as he will have honored.
Whereupon the most grave and industrious nations, have always endeavored
(with contempt of curiosity, or variety in this kind) by the fashion and
quality of their clothes to declare themselves, to exceed all that which by
gay Apparel may be gotten. And in every nation, such men as are most eminent
in true valor, and most esteemed for their virtue, are most careless of their
attire: as contrariwise, those that be of least worth, seek the best they can,
to fashion forth themselves. Plaut. in Gurgust. Tertul. de p^llio.


8. The fantastical Grecian was known by his short cloak. The grave
courageous constant Roman, was notorious for his gown. And as nakedness is
not a natural object to the eyes; so such kind of Apparel as most discovers
the body, is least decent. In regard whereof, it beseemes not Gentry, and much
less Nobility, to be seen stripped in dublet and hose: which habit
rerepresenteth Inconstancy, Petulancy, Lightness, and the like affections
contrary to magnanimity. Yea the Easterling, at this day, scorneth in this
respect the attire of Christians, as not competently modest, but rather as a
testimony of effeminacy: in that our clothes are not side enough, whilst they
discover those parts of the body which should be hidden. And we see the Robes
of the Parliament, and of the Judgment seat, proportionable to represent state,
majesty, and greatness of mind, to be long; and consequently, grave, decent,
and honorable.

9. Lastly it is most disagreable to the dignity of man, to be daily diverse,
and mutable in the fashions and colors of his apparel: for thereby we give
notice of two things appertayning to our natural constitution which impair
much our credit. First it argues want of judgment: and secondly much wandering
and* inconstancy of mind; both very disgraceful to persons of account.
Philosophy teaches, Judgment or practical resolution of mind to be then most
firm, when it issues from longer, or deeper consideration. Whereupon it is
observed, that melancholy people, as they are commonly more valerous and wise,
so are they more constant and unremovable in their opinions and judgments, for
that they conclude not, but after much deliberation, and search of the causes,
effects, and circumstances of that which they resolve: and so neither do they
alter their resolutions but upon like serious consideration for the contrary
part.

10. Wherefore, when a Nation is noted to be various and unconstant in apparel;
it is a great proof, yea an open confession, that their understandings do not
in this point, diue so deep as they should, nor perceive sufficiently what is
truly decent, and convenient. And therefore, because they made their
determination upon a light ground, not being able or willing to reach any
further; they change easily and often upon the like inconstancy, still
remaining in chase after the idle contentment of foolish pha^-sies: as if a man
should employ himself continually, and all his cogitations and labors, to
give satisfaction to the wishes and desires of a child. Which being manifest
childishnes and folly, why should any prudent man make reckoning of the
friendship of such persons or Nations, which may seem as mutable in affection
toward us, as they are in their apparel toward themselves. And what soever
promise, or protestation they make of constancy; how can they be more assured
of themselves, or consequently we of them, then they were of their former
election, in the fashion of their clothes? for the Weather-cocke is subject to
all manner of winds, and ready to turn with every blast.

11. And if this mutability and newfanglenesse be so reprouable in the first
Inuenters of new fashions; it cannot be honest in such nations or persons as
take them up at the second-hand; for they declare themselves as mutable as the
first inuenters, and as little settled as they in their judgment and desire;
yea which is worse, they add of their own another degree of debasement,
publishing to all that look upon them, that they had not wit enough to play
the fools without a pattern; and therefore (though as newfangled as the best)
yet were forced to come behind, not for want of good will, but of invention and
wit to find out themselves the new fashions, which they are glad to imitate.

12. Wherefore seeing that so many inconveniences arise, as well against common
Ciuility, as against private reputation and virtue by the abuse of apparel,
which no doubt would be excused, if men fell once into a mature consideration
of the truth: it will be good to open a little more the general causes and
heads of this vanity, to the end, that being known, the Cure thereof may be
more easy.

That Pride, Effeminacy, and Impiety, be three Head-springs of Folly, in the
abuse of Apparel. CHAP. IIII.
THE inward arrogance of man's mind, where it is lodged, can hardly be bridled
that it break not out into external signs, which arise from a vehement
desire the party has to make known unto others, that excellency which he
supposes he has in himself. And therefore, wanting better means (if he can
get money) he helps himself with the Dyar, the Embroderer, the Tailor, and
all Craftesmen he can get, to set out himself, and testify that he is some
body, and something, by his apparel: as if the quality or fashion of a man's
clothes, could make him more then he is in himself,

2. No man (says S. Gregory) seeks after Gregor: Homil. 40. in Euangel.
precious garments, but for vain glory, and that he may appear more honorable
then others. For if this were not the original motive, why (as he asks) is
such apparel only used, when there is occasion to present it before other men's
eyes? To meet in company (says Tertullian) to look, and to be Tertul. l. 2.
de cultu Fe^^.
looked upon, all pomp of Apparelling is brought forth, to the end, that
either lasciuiousnes may make merchandise, or pride be puffed up. Such as seek
honor by excess in apparel, according Clem. Alex. li^. ^. p^d. c. 2.
to Clemens Alexandrinus, need Theaters, public shows, superstitious
assemblyes, and stages in market places, that they may be seen of others.

3. To the same purpose also discourses Basil. in ^^ 3. Isa.
S. Basil: and Aurelius Prudentius the Christian Poet, sets Pride apparelled
in this manner.

Turritum tortis caput accumularet in altum Prudent. l. Psich.

Congeries, celsumque apicem frons ardu^ feret:
Carbasea ex humeris summo collecta coibat
Palla sinu, teretem nectens a pectore nodum:
A ceruice fluens tenu^ velamine limbus,
Concipit ingestas textis turgentibus auras.
4. This passion of arrogance and pride residing, as I have said, in the heart,
and managing an empty body, sends out hoate vital spirits of the same nature
and quality to the eyes, the cheeks, the legs, and to all the rest, from top to
toe. And to the end that the same parts of the body may be the fitter
messengers, that Vice which lies hidden and cannot get out by it self,
trimmeth them up ^n diverse forms, that they may carry news where she lodges.

5. It is likewise evident, that Effeminacy is another special motive, to the
kind and fashion of Apparel, when it is with excess. And so those which
employ their cogitations, in sensual pleasures, describe also their thoughts
(as the proud man does) in the vanity and variety or their clothes; wherewith
weaklings being doted, are taken in Cobwebs, and become captives in the same
fetters and chains. And for that reason affords no sufficient argument to
persuade a man to such gross and foul delights as are common to brute beast;
therefore, the sensual poisoned spider lurking in her hole, uses apparel as
a lure to call the silly fly into her nets: for the senses have there most
power, where reason is most weak.

6. Thus is the Abuse of Apparel, the displayed banner of dishonesty; the
fowlers glass, which allureth to poisoned baits; the smoke of that impure
and smothered fire, which wastes inwardly all the substance and ornaments of
nature, grace, and virtue. And whereas, naturally, all other fire is bright, and
the smoke filthy, and stinking, here the fire is foul and black, and the
smoke (to wit the Apparel) adorned and perfumed.

7. To this effect, when age declineth in the Autumn of decay, with one foot
in the grave, we see sometime (not without laughing, though with compassion)
the inordinate love of fading beauty past, borrow the Paynters colors, to fill
up the wrinckles of a withered face, adorn the head with dead, yea and perhaps
damned hair: and whilst art seeks to reform nature in show, deformeth and
depraueth it in very deed, recommending the truncke of life to the memory of
fancyes past, and (though loath to dye) yet stroweth flowers upon the hearse,
whilst death gathers up the rotten windfals of foolish youth.

8. This kind of poison in custom drunk out of Circes cup, makes ^t at men
and women can hardly be w^an^d from their inueterate miseryes: and being loath
to bid them adue, discover by their Apparel and artificial ornaments
inordinate desires, which time should have taken away, and shame would have at
least concealed. What if Seneca Epist. 90.
Possidonius (says Seneca) should behold the thin linen of our days, in
garments which do scarce cover, and so far from affording help to the body,
that they give it not to modesty or shamesastnes? Clem. Alex. lib. 2. pedagog.


9. The third and last note, out of which springs this disorderly cost and
excess of attire, is Impiety, and neglect of God and heavenly affairs. For
such is the quality of man's nature, that when in his judgment he admireth, and
in his heart exalts the divinity and greatness of Almighty God; then does he
most of all humble and debase himself: And to the contrary, when he forgets
God, and lives without fear of his judgments, and providence of the life to
come, the^ does he extol himself and declineth from the care of his soul, to
the love of his body, bestowing all his time, study, and endeavors to pamper
and adorn it, and to serve it as an Idol. And this happens not only amongst
them that have knowledge of of the true God, and Christian religion: but it is
so grafted in the very bowels of Nature, that these two like a balance, when
the one goes up, the other declineth. And so the old Romans, whilst they held
reverence (after their fashion) to Divinity, as Nature it self teaches all
Nations to do, upon a reasonable judgment of their own unworthiness,
subjection, and dependence of a higher providence; they contented themselves
with such things as served merely for succor against necessity, abstayning
from super fluityes, which they thought might be displeasant to the power that
governs with order, or served only for their own magnificence and glory. The
Romans being in flower (says Salust) Salust. de coniur.
were sumptuous in their piety toward the Gods: but sparing at home toward
themselves.

Nec fortuitum spernere cespitem Horat. l. 2. carm. od. 15.

Leges sinebant: oppida publico
Sumptu iubentes, and Deorum
Templa nouo decorare saxo.
10. Whereupon, when any Nation comes to be extraordinarily addicted to
gorgeous apparel, and variety of new fashions, it is a most forcible argument,
that it bears little regard toward heavenly greatness. And for the same
reason, the inhabitants (each one in his degree) endeavor to get as high as
they can, and to greaten and extol themselves: and as if they were petty Gods,
they set themselves out with oste^tation of Apparel, as spectacles to be
admired and adored by the beholders.

11. Upon this consideration S. Augustine Angust. l. 1. de ciuit.
comparing the City of the pious to Jerusalem, and this confused world to
impious Babylon; says, that where the self love of Babylon wageth war, and
preuayleth against Jerusalem, that then it impareth it: and when Jerusalem by
the love of God is raised and gets the better hand, that then the Towers of
Babel do fall. Wherefore it is convinced, that Babylon is the City of those,
who for arrogance, impiety, or niceness, and inordinate love of their bodies,
set out themselves in Apparel above their degree, to the misprision of others,
and extenuation of the Deity it self, and with no small burden to the common
wealth. For (as they say) fools bring in fashions, and wise men are obliged to
follow them, not to be noted as singular. But because this vice and vanity (yea
in some sort, this sacrilege and idolatry) of Apparel, is crept into our
country, and grown into custom; it will be necessary to speak something
more in particular of every one of the said three heads, or fountaynes from
whence it came, and by which it is maintained.

How Modesty, and Prudence condemn excess in Apparel, and the like; as
signs discou^-ring Pride and Arrogance in the mind. CHAP. V.
THE Counsel of Ecclesiasticus is Ecclesiast. 11.
good, saying: Glory not at any time in Apparel, for assuredly what glory is
aimed at by excess in apparel, is no glory in substance, but a fond fiction
of the mind, which causes rather contrary effects of dishonor and disdain*
for who knows not, that arrogance and pride of heart, is odious when by any
way it is discovered? And for that, naturally men aspire more or less to
sovereignty, and to be freed from subjection to others whom they hold as their
equals; when they see one that has neither prehemine^ce nor dignity above
them, seek to set himself before them out of his rank, only with title of
better clothes; they disdain and hate him for his pride. Is it not then an
egregious folly, when with great industry, care, and expenses, the proud man
reapeth nothing but disdain and contempt, where he procured estimation, and
honor?

2. Therefore, by excess in clothing he can expect no good from others: and so
his only reward is to please his own fancy, with dislike of the beholders, and
much more of the wiser sort, that look upon our young Gallant, as upon Esops
Cock, clad with the borrowed feathers of other birds. For all the gay attire
which either man or woman can put on to make ostentation of themselves, may as
well be put upon a statua of stone, or upon a hedgstake. What state then, or
what greatness, excellency or ability of mind or body is represe^ted by excess
of Apparel? If to be great, and excellent in any good quality, require no more
but fancies of new fashions and painted clothes; who cannot excel, if he have
more money then wit, or the Taylour be his friend? But how base is such an
excellency, that may be common to the fool, as well as to the wise man; to the
Cobbler, or Carter, if he have money or trust in the Merchants books, as well
as to the Prince; to beasts, yea to senseless Creatures, as well as to men and
women?

3. Truly they do publish too much their weakness, and little worth when they
condemn themselves as needy of Cuts, and Iagges, needleworks, and invention of
Artificers, who commonly have all their understanding in their fingers ends,
to uphold their reputation: for dead flesh needs salt to keep it from
stinking, and the most corrupted bodies, sweet smells and perfumes. These
Peacocks or Iayes, these feathered fools disgrace and deiect the highest state
of themselves: they set nature, and virtue Bernard. l. 5. de consid.
a begging, to crave (as S. Bernard prudently notes) foreign dignity and
reputation, from such things as are far inferior to themselves. It is the
true doctrine of our Savior, that, The Mat. 7.
body is more then the garment, as the souse is more then the meat. Why then
is the body of a man animated with a reason^ble sou^e to be adorned
superfluously and impertinently, as though it could be honored or made great,
by that which in comparison of it self, is base and ignoble, and rather to be
graced by the body, then the body by it.

4. It is not convenient as it seems to me (says Cleme^s Alexandrinus) that,
that Cle^. Alex. l. 2. ^^^. c. 12.
which is covered, should show it self worse then the cover. As we see in the
Temple and Image; in the body and the soul. But now it falls out quite
contrary: for if the body were to be soull, who would give a thousand atticke
groates for it, whereas for a costly coat or jewel, diverse are ready to offer a
thousand talents? See then man's nature inuerted, and his dignities borne dow^e
by excremen^^ of the elements; by the off ^^^ of brute beasts, by the bow^^^ of
worms; and the work manship of the basest member of the Common wealth, who
ordinarily are neither idle nor well occupied.

5. But in this kind, that which is particularly and most injurious to the
sovereignty of nature, is the shameful practice of painting the face: wherein
they use liquors distilled from filthy weeds, from gums and poisoned iuyces,
which once advanced above their natural degree to the visage of a woman, and
plastered upon the chief mansion of a reasonable soul created to the likeness
of Almighty God; there, they eat and fret the skin; there, they putrify,
fester, and dry up into parchment the place where they were put to cause
beauty, which they might as well do upon an old buskin as upon a wrinckled
twisted face, yea a great deal better, and with a fresher gloze, and longer
continuance. What baseness then, is it for a man that he may seem (forsooth) a
man or a woman according to her sex, (and not in may-games or monsters) to
beg with much labor, pain, and hurt to themselves, such ornaments as I have
spoken off, with so much disparagme^r, if confideratio^ be duly made, as though
nature and reason had not remembered, to give sufficient and convenient
ornaments to both, and for unprofitable fancies, to reuerse and disorder the
whole course of Gods creatures, abusing the better, and magnifiyng those that
are most vile and contemptible.

6. So is it appointed by our creation, and by the vital motion of nature,
that our life consisting of the action of heat that feeds upon moisture, as
the flame in the lamp feeds upon the oil by little and little, the moisture
should be consumed, and with it that fresh color and flower of beauty which
thereby is caused, fade and decay. After the same manner, and with the same end
that nothing be permanent that is made only for use and passage to better
purpose, all the seasons of the year have their peculiar properties,
ornaments, and graces, with amiable intercourse of change; which teach us the
several dignities and comeliness of all the parts of our life. To our youth,
because it wants experience, prudence, and many other preheminences that are
not due but to industry and time (and specially to women, as to the most
deficient by reason of their sex) is given the veyle of exterior beauty, or
good favor to cover other wants.

7. Now, when this spring and su^mer are past, and Autumn has brought the
blossoms to fruit, and green fruit to maturity; what a folly is it for men,
or women, to usurp out of time, and counterfaite the couers and ornaments of
their former defects? And what a shame for a man to play the boy, or (which is
worse) the woman's part? or that the matrone should be such a turnebacke to the
follies of a little girl? The true ornaments of this age, be not gewgawes, nor
trifling shadows of youth: but all those things which declare and testify
the gravity and maturity of a discreet modest spirit, which is venerable of it
self, and needs no exterior ornaments, nor helps to be reverenced and
respected.

8. These ornaments, when they be not out of their season, they are in season,
when out of measure, they are ridiculous: but when they be false and Clem.
Alex. lib. 2. paedagog. cap. 11.
counterfaite they be ignominious. Against them, and specially against
painting, Clemens Alexandrinus makes this dilemma. If the visages of painted
women be fair of themselves, nature is sufficient to recommend their beauty:
and then they need not to strive by art against nature, nor with fraud to wage
war against truth. But if they be not fair by benefit of nature; then
applying this counterfeit gloze to their faces, they make open confession to
the beholders, that they want beauty. Is it I pray you, laudable in a woman, or
any ways to be esteemed, that her face can perform the office of a wall; as
fit, or fitter to receive al variety of colors, then she? Is this an
endowment, for which to be held either in love, or admiration with men? Is it
any commendation to depend on the lye-pott, on the cockle shell, for color of
the checks? or upon the dead scull, perhaps of a damned person, for counterfeit
hair? What base, ugly, ghastly, and abominable furniture is this, thereby to
set forth either the feature of the face, or commend the qualities of the mind?

9. It remains then, that the scope of costly apparel, of starching, of
painting, and falsifying nature, is only and wholly to please the lookers on:
what then? Is all this ado that fools be contented, admiring the Painters and
Taylers, puppets upon the stages of vanity? for the wiser sort of people laugh
them to scorn; discovering under the Scenecall studious curiosity of their
apparel, the leuity, effeminacy, and ignobility of their minds. For as the
cook when he perceaueth his meats tainted, bestows more spices on the
sauce; so when the conscience is inwardly guilty of the baseness and unworthiness
of the soul: then, forsooth, to dissemble and cover the inward imperfections,
the earthen vessel of the body without must be adorned; the rotten wood must be
gilded; the drowsy Ass must put on a Lions skin; the base minded Clown
must mask it out in the robes of a Prince. For only such as despair to be
respected for any good quality of their own, seek these external and borrowed
helps to be esteemed. Where, contrariwise, in him that is worthy indeed to be
honored; the confidence of Gods gifts which he acknowledges in himself; his
merits and endeauours past by counsel, valor, or charitable actions to
public benefit; or at least, the hope to get honor by honorable means;
does make him neglect these other petty patchings. Yea, those that be
magnanimous, and have great spirits, decline rather to the contrary extreme. As
we read in Scilla his foresight of Julius Caesar, for the same reason, seeing
him negligent and careless in the use of his apparel: Cauete (said he) a malo
cincto Iuuene. Take heed of this young fellow, that cannot put on his clothes;
for he carries bigger cogitations in his head.

10. The noblest, most valerous, resolute, and courageous minds, are always
Arist. lib. ^. Ethic. c. p. 7. Cicero. Tuscul. 4.
the most mild and moderate in speech, and all outward carriage: as the deepest
rivers slide along with the least noise. The greatest boasters be not the best
souldiars: nor the effeminate young man that puts all his study in his
clothes, commonly fit for any employment of worth. He may well prove an idle
Courtyer, for (as our Savior said) qui mollibus vestiuntur, in domibus Regum
sunt: but seldom he proves good for any Basil. l. de legendis Gentil. lib.
thing else. It is no less reproachful for agenerous person (says S. Basil)
to show extraordinary care in adorning his body: then by sloth, or any other
evil affection, to become ignominious. What would these do in way of
arrogance (says Chrysostom. hom. 50. in Mat.
S. Chrysostom) if they had in themseules any substantial worth of their
own, who are proud of the workmanship of others? And S. Gregory Gregor.
Nazian. orat. paranet. ad Olympiad.
Nazianzene: Purple, costly, golden, and glittering garments, are fittest for
such as have no splendor of life; which want all ornaments of virtue.
Wherefore, it may be concluded out of the judgment of these great Sages, and
for all the reasons above said, that sumptuous clothing is no fit means to
procure opinion of nobility and excellency in the person that wears it: But
rather if it be with curiosity and excess in whatsoever degree, it discovers
baseness of mind and condition; and lays open the imperfections, imprudence,
and leuityes of men, and women.

11. Appelles his prentises made a picture of Helena as prentises, and trimmed
her with all sorts of pearl and precious stones: which their master seeing,
told them, though their skill had not served the^ to make her fair, yet they
had made Tertul. l. de cultu Pem. Alex. Neap. l. 4. c. 15.
her rich. But the Persians and diverse other nations, as Tertullian notes,
used gold for the vilest, and basest employments; as to chain their prisoners
and slaves. Moreover, this disorderly excess of which we speak, is not only
ignominious and hurtful to the particular persons that use it: but also it
impareth ciuility, as a barbarous vice, and is very pernicious to the
Commonwealth, destroying the friendly society of the subjects, and their
abilities of wealth and means, as well to serve their Prince and defend their
country, as to succor and benefit one another.

12. And here we must note, that there be two kinds of Barbarity; to wit, one
original, the other occasional. Original Barbarity arises from nature,
despoyled of common habitation, mutual commerce, religion, crudition, and
moral Chrysostom. ^^^. quod Christus sit Deus.
(...) from which, by the Cross of Christ, the world has been reclaymed.
Occasional Barbarity sometime proceeds from a certain excess in ciuility,
which sharpueth men's wits to invent sundry unnecessary arts for more
contentment and pleasure: from whence consequently follow Effemi^acy,
Superfluity, Lust, Riot, and Pride. All which vices, as they be effects of
i^le ciuility: so are they instruments and inducements of Barbarity. For, as
expenses grow, and conscience decays: so there arise daily new devises for
cosenage, new plotes for deceit, and open tyranny and oppression of the more
potent against the weaker: and in this sense we term vanity and excess in
Apparel uncivil and barbarous. For Barbarity, is not only rude, and
rusticall, but also cowardly, crafty, and political; violating Arist. l. 2.
polit. c. 5.
Justice, and civil Society, under color of right.

13. As ciuility principally consists upon the united agreement of citizens
Cicerol. 2. offic. Arist. l v. polit. c. 5.
and Country men: so such vices as do most infest this union, and make them
disagree in distemper of judgments and affections, is undoubtedly barbarous. In
regard whereof, arrogant vanity in apparel, whilst it makes much for
alienation of minds among people, as has been said, is in comparison of
other offenses, most uncivil and barbarous. He is cruell^ says S.
Chrysostom) who Chrysostom. hom 50. in Math.
in regard of his sumptuous apparel, neglects the poor. So that there is
this difference only, betwixt a wolf in the City, and another of the forest:
that whereas both agree in cruelty and rauine, the one is covered with a rough
skin, and the other with a shining coat: the one is cruel in fact, and also
in outward appearance; the other civil in show, but barbarous in deed: not that
this outward countenance of the Civil Wolf does any whit diminish his
barbarity, when rather it serves him, better then the rough brissels of the
other, to catch his prey: when the poor innocent lamb that escaped the wild
wolf in the wood, falls into the power of the politic hungry Courtier,
that consuming idly his own, and owing more then he is worth, lies in wait to
catch up, and devour all that comes in his way.

14. By another way also, this excess and arrogance of apparel dissolueth
civil friendship: and therefore is barbarous. For as S. Basil teaches; He
that in the use of his garments above the common custom, shows himself more
curious and surpassing others; disgraceth them, as persons of meaner ability:
which disgrace cannot be disgested by them that are disgraced, without offense.
When ^ollow Rancor and hatred, and consequently Mutinies, Factions, and
Cou^tercourses one against another, which dissolve the very sinews of the
commonwealth.

15. For another respect also the same abuse of apparel is to be esteemed
Barbarous, in that it does unprofitably diminish (yea pernitiously wastes and
consumes) men's goods, lands, and liuely-hoodes, which otherwise were to
serve, as well for their present, honest and necessary uses, as for their
posterity. Who knows not, that every one even in regard of ciuility, has
urgent causes of expenses for himself, his wife, his children, his family,
his estate? without which, all would miscarry and go to wrack. But when a man*
clothed above his degree and ablity (with the Snaile, Tortuze, Fiddler, and
Ape-master) shall carry all he has, and much more then his own upon his
back, yea sometimes whole woods in extent of hundredes of ake^s, his childrens
portions, wives, his servants wages, the implements of his house, his friends
for sureties, his merchants wares, his chapmans indentures, his own credit:
how shall he defend himself assailed or circumuented by his enemy? How shall
he be able to supply other necessaries, and satisfy other wants that belong to
his charge? And how shall he not be esteemed Barbarous, when he neglects
them, and spends all upon himself? Right good occasion has this proud
peacocke, to be confounded with humility, when he turns his eye to his black
feet: considering the necessities in his family, the discordes in his house,
the clamours of his creditors, the complaints of his servants for want of their
dew, the misery and melancoly of his forlorn children; for that he carries
upon his back, that which should have served them al. And in this is to be
seen and weighed the admirable providence and wisdom of Almighty God, and how
(as S. Chrysostom says) he teaches, and reprehendeth us by the conditions of
other creatures, made for our benefit and use. Seeing it is observed in the
peacock that he is so cruel to his succession, as the femall hydeth from him
her nest, for if he can find it, he deuoureth the eggs: as the other proud
peacocks do their children and families, with the idle unnecessary expenses
which they put upon their backs, and in their train.

16. Besides, to omit the charges unthriftily and foolishly bestowed upon
curious and superfluous apparel, is it not a Barbarous folly for the husband
and wife to spend so much time every day in putting on their clothes, as they
have it not for their necessary business, but must either trust servants in the
economy of their house, and other things which much import them, or suffer all
to be neglected? The ancient Romans, besides other rites of matrimony,
presented to the wife (as Pliny tells us) a distaffe P^in. lib. ^. cap. 48.
with a spindle: in signification of that carewhich she was to have by her
houswifery of her family. But where superfluity and curiosity of apparel
reigns, there the mistres allotteth so much time to trim up her self, that
all the profit of the house may run out at the windows, before she can get out
of chamber door.

17. The world in all ages, and all times has been fraught with folly and
Tertul. l. de cultu ^e minar.
misery more or less: and so Tertullian describes that of women of his time,
in this manner: Upon one fine piece of linen, (says he) are bestowed twenty
thousand crowns: one neck bears whole Forests and Islands: the skin of
one ear wears in value a months expenses: and every finger of the left
hand, plays with the substance of a whole bag of money: one small body of a
woman, strengthened with ambition and pride, is able to support the huge weight
of many vsuries. Whereupon this pride of apparel, oftentimes rests not in
the private misery of one person or family that flow from the lauishme^t of
foolish idle expenses: but to uphold them, it broacheth and sets a work all
villainy, and treachery against the Commonwealth. And so the same Tertullia^
avouches, that Gowns did more perniciously invade, and more grievously
Tertul. l. de pallio.
hurt the Roman Empire, then Helmets: whilst insatiable desire of proud
apparel, forced the inhabitants to oppress their subjects, and to use
violence and fraud one against the other.

18. And as concerning expenses to be defrayed for help and service of the
Common wealth, two very bad effects proceed from the same fountain of
superfluous apparel: the one is want of means and ability to disburse any
thing valuable for that respect; the other, which is worse, want of good will, of
piety to their country, and of liberality to do it. For as the excess and
extremity of self love is the mother of arrogant and ambitious appa^ell; so
the same is a stepmother and mortal enemy to al bounty and communication of
commodity to others: and will have employed upon the person it possesses
whatsoever it can scrape up by any means; becoming the very bane of
friendship and ciuility, whose effect and proper quality is, to benefit others,
especially the universal good of the Commonwealth, and of posterity.

19. How detestable then is this abuse of superfluous and costly apparel, in
regard of pride and ambition, to which it serves: being (besides other bad
qualities) an occasion and introduction of Barbarity, and cruelty, and an
overthrow of public and private ciuility, as has been said? But this abuse
will appear yet more execrable, if we declare what an instrument it is of
dishonesty, and dissolution of manners.

Seeing that the curious, and disorderly use of Apparel is aspectacle, and
prouokement of wantonness; by all sound judgments, it is to be reproved: and
for this respect also holden as culpable, and dispraisable. CHAP. VI.
REASON and experience teach, that the pronenesse of men and women to
sensuality, requires rather bridles then prouocations to this miserable vice,
the chief Empress in this world for Satan, which stands always in arms
against Chastity the Queen of virtue. In regard whereof, ancient Error made
Venus a Goddess upon earth: for that unchaste love is powerful, where the
love of God is wanting. And therefore, grace and reason must join together to
fight against this beast, and conquer her.

Diua non miti generata ponto, Seneca in Hypol.

Quam vocat matrem gemina cupido,
Impotens slammis, simul and sagittis.
2. Thus the Poet describes this vice and another tells us: how violent it
is, yea over Martial minds, when it is once admitted.

Sic Venus horrificum belli compescere regem, Claudian. in Magnet.

Et vultum mollire solet, cum sanguine preceps
Aestuat, and strictis mucronibus exasper at iras.
Wherefore both in respect of virtue grounded upon faith, and the duty we
bear to almighty God: and also for civil policy, and honesty, this hurtful
disposition is to be restrained in all commonwealthes: and so tempered, that no
contagious signification thereof be permitted, whereby others (besides their
inward natural propension and Cyp. de bone pudicit.
weakness) may be drawn by external allurement, to the baits of so impure
and brutish an action. For without this moderation, what plighted troth in
wedlock will be sure? What virginity expecting marriage, will be kept? What
minds never so well composed, will be freed from iealosie and suspicion? What
person will not be often provoked to revenge the greatest injuries? All which
inconveniences are contrary to peaceable ciuility, and to that agreement and
concord of minds which makes a common wealth strong, either to defend it
self, or offend their enemies.

3. Notwithstanding this inordina^e affection whereof we speak (being a
sickness and distemper of man kind after his fall, and a punishment for sin)
seem to carnal people as it were natural: yet the very light of reason which
remains in the soul deepest buried in sensuality, if it be not wholly become
brutish, admireth at least and commends virgin ^ll and matrimonial chastity,
and condemns all contrary immodesty and liberty in others, so much more
detested in Christian profession, as Chastity and Virginity is more esteemed,
for the example of Christ our Savior, and the immaculate Virgin his mother,
and of so many Saints of both sexes, men and women, of all ages and estates
from the highest to the lowest, which for their love and imitation have
consecrated their bodies and souls to Almighty God in perpetual virginity,
and for the same reason matrimonial fidelity is so much respected, and so
inuiolably kept amongst Christians each party maintayning their love and troth
Heb. ^3.
to the other, and (as the Apostle speaks) an immaculate bed; mindful
always of that sacred promise they made as well to almighty God, as
reciprocally Ephesians. 5.
between themselves, a lively resemblance of the indissoluble union wherewith
Christ espoused his Church, and of immutable charity wherewith he loves it so
decrely, as he spared not his own precious blood, yet flowing, in the
Sacraments, wherewith she is washed every day and cleansed from sin.

4. Now as it is commendable always to imitate a perfect president, so is it
most praiseworthy in this case, when married persons (according to the pattern
here proposed of Christ and his Church) profit inuiolably in their fidelity
and love. The flower of virginity is also most beautiful and amiable to the
eyes both of faith and reason: for even amongst the Paynims, it has been held
in veneration, and request.

5. Our Savior Christ compares Matthew. 19.
Virginity to the estate of Angels, as indeed it is an Angelical virtue, and a
peculiar price (as he teaches us) of the kingdom of Heaven. S. Paul tells
us, 2. Cor. 7.
that it is a life fit only for those that employ all their care about heavenly
things, and how to please Almighty God: and therefore if it be vowed
(according August. tract. 9. in Joan. c. 2.
to S. Augustine) it makes marriage with Christ our Savior. Contrariwise, all
men by the very instinct of natural reason, hold the breach of matrimonial
troth, for a most foul and detestable disloyalty: in which (besides Arist.
lib. 1. Rhetor.
the brutish appetite of unclean pleasure) is committed an uncivil treachery
against the other party espoused: the one contemptible, the other odious. And
the degrees of hatred and detestation thereof are more or less in men's
opinions, according as the Commonwealth, in which they are found, is qualified
more or less with wit, ciuility, and religion. For some people through long
inurement of vice and barbarism, are so dulled and senseless in the feeling
of good or evil, honor or shame; as they apprehended not the dishonor and
offense of Adultery so much as they should by instinct of nature, Arist. 7.
cap. 6.
which abhors such persons as out of wedlock play the beasts, without
shame or remorse, to defile the bodies of their compartners in sin, wast
their goods, blemish their reputation, and send their souls to hell.

6. There is no doubt then, but that certain fashions of apparel, and
ornaments of the body, used to that end, and which serve for inticements to
incontinency, are damnable and detestable.

Nil non permittit mulier sibi turpe putat nil I^^enal. Satyr. 6.

Cum virides gemmas colla circumdedit, and cum
Auribus extensis magnos commisit elenchos.
This abuse, as it is repugnant to chastity so it is also contary to natural
modesty. For this kind of concupiscence is so conjoined with turpitude, as all
persons by force of shame seek to cover it from the eyes of others: which
apprehension of nature was then originally begun, when our first Parents (after
they had transgressed) ashamed of themselves, clothed their nakedness with
figgeleaues, seeking refuge of their calamity from the quality of their
external apparel. In which respect, all barbarous nations, (yea and the most
impudent stage players, as Cicero notes) have been Cicero. l. 1. offic.
careful not to have their nakedness seen. And the holy Scripture teaches us,
that the wicked Cham, and all his posterity incurred the malediction of his
father, because he had not refrained his eyes from the sight of a body, which
drunkenness had discovered.

7. How then is not the custom now a days clean contrary to nature, where
apparel in men and women, not only concealeth not their incontinency, but
rather draws the eyes and cogitations of others to consider their shame? What
barbarous impudency is this, and how odious a reuersing of natures chaste
purpose? Are not wretched men and women sufficiently incensed by their own
inward distemperature, and the temptations of their invisible enemy, but that
moreover they must studiously one tempt another? Who is not ashamed to discover
the botches and sores of his body, and other corporal miseries and
imperfections that he can hide? And how is it possible, that men and women
blush not to lay open by their Apparel, the miseryes and deformityes of their
souls? Who would not be angry, if another should call him Thief, Falsifier,
Cosoner, or the like? and yet through curiosity of Apparel, men and women
profess themselves Pick-locks of the Devil, and his Thieves, that lie in
wait to rob the souls of their neighbors, to make them slaves, and
falsifiers, that put counterfaite varnish upon their disguised persons, and
cosoners that set to sale the filth of their corruptible bodies, under the
deceiptfull show of precious Apparel: and to this they add moreover, that they
be Fornicators, and Adulterers, at least in mind and desire: or if they be not,
they publish themselves for no better.

8. Hereupon, the holy Ghost purposing to represent to S. John the city of
Babylon, oppsite and adversary to the Apoc. 17.
chaste Jerusalem, the Church of Christ, describes it in form of an harlot,
invested in scarlet, shining in garments embrodered with gold and precious
stones: as if this kind of array were more proper for dissolute then for honest
women. What may we expect from such, or suspect in Basil hom. de legend. lib.
Gentil.
such (says S. Basil) but that their lasciuio^^ attire, is adressed to
solicit wantonness, in such as lie in wait to violate Matrimonial fidelity?

9. When the husband considers his wife disguised in Apparel, as one that
would set out her self to sale: what conceit can he make of her carriage?
will not his heart abhor, and his eyes loath the impudent representation
fashioned to his dishonor? Likewise, when the wife shall behold her husband
not clothed in the habit of a man, but with drift of Apparel disposed to
falsify his faith: will not matrimonial liking be, if not killed, at least
wounded in her? And assuredly, though otherwise her natural modesty, or the
fear of God might withdraw her from disloyalty in the same kind: yet as women
be weak, desire of revenge will hazard her chastity. And so, when at home the
house is disordered, and domestical affections fight one against the other in
alienation and hostility, private life will be distasteful and unsupportable: and
families being thus at jar in themselves, will never serve the Commonwealth
in any duty: for health and strength of the civil, as well as of the natural
body, must arise from the good disposition, temperature, and concord of all the
parts united.

10. We see brute beasts, in certain Senec. in Hypol.
seasons of the year when Venery reigns in them, to be furious and violent,
though otherwise, and at other times, they be tame, sociable, and moderate.
Even so men and women, if they once loose love and reverence to chastity, and
such as are married cast of the sacred ba^d of truth and fidelity in wedlock,
and give over themselves to the wandering current of their bad inclinations:
without doubt, sociable and civil life amongst them will turn into contention
and confusion of hatred, conspiracies, treasons, arms and manslaughter, and
they become wild beasts or worse; not for a month or two, but for all the
year long. To which evil issue, is directed artificial trimming of the face,
and wanto^nesse in apparel opposite to chastity and matrimonial agreement,
and ordained by the Devil to the change of lust and savage concupiscence.

11. There is no reasonable cause (says Tertul. l. ^. de Pallio.
Tertullian) why a woman should paint her face to please her husband: she does
it then to please others. A goodly purchase for a w^^e, by the plaster of her
face, to loose her husbands heart, and gain the eyes of her foolish paramour;
who though by the unreasonable fervor and folly of youth, may love her, and
affect her for the time: yet a little after falling into a more sober
reckoning, contemns her as a strumpet. As we see in the history of Ammon and
Thamar. where the holy scripture ^. Reg. 13.
(for document to both men and women, not to yield to the like passions)
testifies the sudden change of unlawful and inordinate love, into the
contrary extreme. Et exosam eam habuit Ammon ^dio magno ^i^is, ita vt maius
esset odium quo oderat eam, amore quo antea dilexerat: Ammon abhorred her with
all extremity: in so much, as his hatred was far greater then his love had
been toward her before: which a little after cost him his life. All
(doubtless) temptations and instigations of the Devil, to work one wickedness
by another.

12. But to discover yet more evidently the deformity of this vice, both in men
and women: first it is to be examined Macrob. 7* Satur. cap* 7. 10*
in men, and considered that mankind differs in perfection of nature from the
femall sex, especially in that men be of greater constancy, and force both in
body and soul, then women. Whereupon, as man's strength, proper to him as man,
is showed in the dominion and moderation of his passions, especially in the
disordinate appetite of lust, wherein by power of very nature (setting virtue
aside) he is, and ought to be more puissant then a woman, who in this and all
other respects ordinarily is called the weaker sex: when a man, by his leuity
and the vanity of his apparel, shall declare himself to have fallen from his
own degree, to which nature had advanced him, he mispriseth more his own
condition and quality, then all his enemies could do by any other reproach. Who
then, being a man, and carrying the shape of a man, is so base, as that he
would be thought to have buried his man hood, and become with Heliogabalus at
the wheel, a vile and unnatural woman?

13. Moreover whereas these amarous Knights, affecting effeminacy, think
Arist. l. ^. Mag. Moral. c. 29.
thereby to gain the love and good liking of women: they are much deceived. For
as a woman acknowledges the infirmity of her sex; so does she make her
recourse to man, as to one by nature more eminent: hoping that by his valor
and force, she may be defended and advanced. When therefore she finds, that
vicious affection has corrupted in him this sovereignty of nature, inclining
him to the imbecility of an inferior sex, by what reason can she think to
be honored, or succored by such a one, or any way desire his friendship, if
it be not with more affection to his money then to his person, hoping to become
his master? For, how can she expect help or reputation from such a husband, as
by his very apparel protests himself unfit for any act of virtue; and as
weake-harted, or more then her self, to attempt or overcome any difficulty?

14. Assuredly I wonder, how men ^ue^ in respect of their honor, dare present
themselves effeminated in apparel to the eyes of women whom they respect, or
of whom they would be respected. For it is no less, but to tell them in
plain terms, that they are no better then they, but worse; in judgment
foolish, in courage childish, in appetite unchaste, and in all other respects
contemptible. And therefore, the Lacedaemonians, a Clem. Al^x. lib. 2* p^d. c.
^1.
nation that made account of manhood enacted a law, that none in their common
wealth but women might use effeminate garments: holding it a thing against
policy and state, that men by their apparel should dishonor themselves, and
their sex.

15. But without all doubt this circumspection in the modest and decent use of
apparel, does most of all touch the credit of women. For that nothing does so
much impair their reputation, and hinder the loyal love of their husbands* as
the least sign of lightness: nor contrariwise, anything does grace them more,
then such d^monstration of stayed behavior by their appar^ll, and the rest, as
may testify their fidelity: which makes them amiable to his judgment and
reasonable affection, and imports them more then to satisfy his sight. For
it is not the sole beauty of the body, which gains the heart of man with
durable love, being only an external sign of the inward beauty of the soul,
that is of virtue: which shinning in the body, draws affection with a secret
apprehension of the beholder. But when by the apparel or other signs of
lightness, the body seems merchandise set out to sale; the superfluous art
and industry, defaceth and dishonors the natural beauty, making it (at
least) vile and contemptible, as a false varnish that has lost the substance
within: yea which is worse, abominable and loathsome, as a dangerous poison and
Satan's bait to deceive and distroy. Whereby it is evident, that the excess
of wanton apparel is hurtful and dishonorable to women; by which those that
have little prudence, think to get possession of men's hearts, and (consequently)
by them, that assistance in temporal life which they need, and otherwise
(keeping themselves within the limits of honest, decent modesty, by opinion of
virtue) they might obtain, and conserve not for a day, or more whiles passion
dureth, but perpetually for all their lives.

16. Man's heart is not so base, as to love much, or to be tied in affection
long, for the bowels of worms; for false and fading colors plaistred upon a
parchment skin; for new fashions of the Taylours sheeres; for the hew of a
naked breast, sometime not virginal but bestiall, that must be carrion and
worms meat to morrow next. Certes some other thing there is which must gain
affection: such (at least) as is to be constant and unchangeable, for
otherwise, what can be more odious to the husband, then when he beholds the
apparel of his wife, as of one arrayed in venery, which professes her
employment to purchase, here and there, the affections of others which she
should not desire? And what fool will like her in this manifestation, which
(without blushing) she makes of her self? or joy to see her impudency
discovered in her wanton attire? by which, she tells him, that her heart
houereth aloft to seize upon whatsoever bait, to her liking shall come next
her; and therefore, sets her nets and lime-twigs to entangle the foolish
birds that come to gaze upon the owl? What man that has a ^ote of manhood,
will not resolve rather to chastise this folly in his wife; then to approve, or
dissemble it? No m^ruaile then, if women when (by their own want of judgment,
or at least of consideration) they loose the cordial affection of their
husbands for these bables and trifles, not worth a rush, afterward they find
them unkind and hard-harded in greater matters which they need and desire for
their family, their frindes, or themselves? What wonder, that iealosies turn
into hatred, and (the heart once divided) that there follow di^orcements of the
bodies, and consequently dissolution of honorable families; neglect in the
parents toward their children; emnity, suits in law, and open barbarous
hostility between the wives, kinsfolks, and the husband, that before were
united in affinity and friendship? and finally great unquenchable flames, from
little sparks, which should have been smothered and quenched in the beginning?
And this for married folks to beware.

17. Now likewise from the same abuse it comes in great part, that in these
our days, amongst single people ordained to matrimony, is found so rarely true
love, if comparison be made with the examples of former times: for whereas then
the use of apparel and the rest, was tempered with modesty, and was rather a
testimony of virtue and discretion, that could keep a decent mean, then of
vice and folly which passes always to extremes: men and women gathered pure,
honest, hearty, and constant affection one to another, that lasted in wedlock
not only whilst the flowers of youth continued, which every day and hour
decline and loose something of their worth, but all their lives: yea increased
more and more till their dying-day, to be continued after in heaven for ever.
Where now, the disposition of young solkes to marriage may seem rather a
Smith-field market, then the communication of a Christian Sacrament. Which is
one of the miseries and mischiefs (amongst many) that our Country has
incurred by newfanglenesse. On the contrary side; when the quality and fashion
of apparel in men did testify their valor, constancy, and wisdom; and in
women, was a protestation of their modesty, honesty and virtue, all things
passed in the commonwealth with fidelity, plain dealing, love, and friendship
between husbands and their wives, children and their parents, masters and
servants; the parts of every family being united one with another, and family
with family, and lineage with lineage in Christian charity, and ciuility: which
since has been barbarously distracted and divided by the contrary.

18. It was commanded in the old law Deuteronomy. 22.
by God Almighty, and that not without great reason and providence, that men
should not cloth themselves in women's apparel: for that such kind of habit is
disgraceful to them, and the more the worse, as a remonstrance of effeminacy.
But rather they were commanded to testify, by their clothing, their
reverence due to God, and their respect to his commandments, their loyalties
toward their wives, and their kind and manhood toward all. And when their
apparel is such an argument of maturity, and that they contemn beastly
pleasures, and live by reason and Gods law, not by fancy and sensuality: then
their wives love them, their children respect them, their servants and subjects
obey them, their friends honor them, their enemies dread them, yea the very
Devils themselves, that set enemies a work, are afraid of a modest man that
fears God; who (as they know) protecteth him, and honors him, because he
knows himself, and acknowledges his duty, and loves Christianity, and
according to his degree keeps himself within his bounds.

19. Women likewise, who stand in need of comfort, and help from God and man,
appear amiable to both, when their attire, and all their deportmentes bear
witness of their modesty, and chastity: which virtues are not solitary nor alone
where they reside; as the contrary want not company of other vices. Wherefore,
when the virgin, married woman, or matron, by her apparel and behavior
persuadeth that she is chaste: she persuadeth also, that she deserves all
reasonable affection and respect. But as these general reasons disprove the
excess of apparel in all Commonwealths so are there others, particular to
Christians, grounded in their belief and acknowledgme^t of almighty God, which
confirm the same most effectually, and are here to be examined.

Christian Piety directed by Faith, does very much disallow, and condemn the
vain, and curious excess of Clothing. CHAP. VII.
THE reason which may withdraw the desire of us Christians generaly from all
superfluities, and in particular from that of apparel, are derived principally
from two heads: to wit, from the perfection and dignity of men, and from that
especial love and reverence, which our faith teaches us, that we owe to
Almighthy God. Lucian* in dial. Cyn.


2. As concerning the former, Lucian in the person of the Cynicall Philosopher,
notes well, that things of higher quality and excellency, have always need of
fewer supplements and external helps to attain their felicity. Consider
(says he) that children need many things, not necessary when they be elder;
sick folks more then others in good health; women more then men. And to
conclude every inferior and more imperfect creature needs more helps then
the higher and more noble. And hereupon comes it (says he) that the Gods as
most perfect need nothing: and therefore, such men as need least, come the
Arist. l. ^. Magnor. Moral.
nearest to them. Whereupon it is an argument of natural want, when we have
recourse to multiplicity of external helps, as variety of apparel, or the
like, to satisfy our selves of our selves, or to commend to others the
perfection we have, or suppose to have, with desire to be honored and
respected.

3. But we Christians instructed by faith, discover in our bodies other causes
whereby our minds should be justly alienated from pampering, and trimming them
up, with delicate and curious apparel. For that, all excess in this kind, is
repugnant to the sublime end, and perfection of Christianity; upon which
consideration the discourse following is to be grounded. It was a convenient
natural providence and a just persuasion Genes. 3.
of almighty God, that our first parents, after their woeful trespass, should
(by the use of apparel) rather afflict then adorn their sinful bodies. And
therefore Joseph. l. 1. cap. ^. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 37.
they covered themselves with figge-leaues, which (as Josephus notes) have a
fretting property, fit (as S. Irenaeus observed) to pu^ish their rebellious
flesh. By which, they repeat three commodities: first, the memory of their
passed sin; then, wholesome fear, holding back their wills, and appetites
from the like disloyalty by that chastisement; and lastly the due execution of
justice, revenging by punishment in themselves, what before they had
transgressed. And when it pleased almighty God upon his commiseratio^ to pardon
their sin, he bestowed upon them, not curious, or costly apparel: but
clothed them as penitentes in skins of beasts; and retayning the form, he
only changed the acerbity of their habit into a softer and milder quality. Why
then should Christians, which know from whence they come, and have not only
contracted misery and sin from those our progenitors, but also themselves
waged war against God Almighty, contemned his authority, violated his laws,
and deserved punishment and death for many personal offenses; glorify and
beautify their bodies, the instruments of their sins?

4. O Repentance, art thou drowned in wretchles security! O Justice, do thou
lie buried in iniquity, whilst flesh triumphs in painted gay Apparel! for
whose misdemeanors, tears were rather to be shed from a penitent heart; and
restraynt of all unnecessary pleasures, and mortification of all inordinate
desires, were to be used with firm purpose of amendment; do we make so small
account of that ever being Maeisty, whom we have offended? or of our own
misdeeds, so many and so greiuous, as we dare (contrary to the course held by
our first parents to cover their confusion after they had sinned, approved also
by Almighty God) set out these vile rebellious carcasses of ours, spriugs of
vices, and armoryes of Satan's weapons for battaise against God and Nature,
with costly clothes and ornaments of glory, as though we had done such deeds
as deserved triumph, or were such as we might brag of our selves? If we be
loath to entertain the corrosiue fretting of the figge-leafe, at least, let us
(as Sinners) not depart far from the first weeds of our mortality: whereby
other creatures despoyled of life, serve to cover these bodies of ours worthily
condemned to death.

5. If we will make a review of what form of apparel has been used in times
past by godly persons recommended August. E^ar. 1. in Psalm. 10^.
in holy writ, we may learn from them our Christian duty in this behalf: at
least to moderate our selves within decency and ciuility, and not pass to the
contrary extreme. Esau his best apparel Genes. 15.
was made of the skins of goats breathing out the sweet smell of a
plentiful field; to signify the abondance of temporal goods, by moderation
and frugality in this kind. The Man tell of Rachel may be a pattern of lovely
modesty Genes. 24.
in women, wherewith she covered her face, upon the sight of her espouse;
teaching them, not to make ostentation of counterfeit shadows, where they are
rather to hide even that which nature warranteth them to a^owe: unless with
Dina, desiring to see, and be seen, Genes. 34.
they meet with occasions, as she did, to loose the jewel of their integrity.
Moreover, it appears by holy scripture, that Almighty God would have the
exterior apparel of his chosen people, such as they might thereby seem
consecrated to his service, and to virtue: willing the Jews to wear about the
hemme of their garments the written words of Number. 15. Deuteronomy. 22.
his holy law* by which they might be known: as Christians also ought to be by
the modesty and decency of their attire, different from that of Pagans:
professing in all their carriage, a reverence to almighty God, firm purpose to
keep his commandments, and contempt of wordly vanity and disorderly pleasures,
as men that believe and hope for eternal felicity.

6. The Prophets of Almighty God, that in old time were most honored and 4.
Reg. 1. Matthew. 3.
most in his favor, as Hieremy, Helias, Helizeus, and S. John Baptist, wore
passing rude, and course apparel. And for that this hard entreaty of the body
was then thought to be pleasing to almighty God his people in their distresses
and public dangers and calamities, desiring pardon of their sins, and to
divert from them imminent punishment, threatened by divine justice, clothed
themselves (even delicate virgins) in sackcloth and hair; and thereby pleased
the sight of God, and his Angels, who can better judge of the quality and
decency of apparel, then foolish light headed young men, and women.

7. But now to enter into the kingdom of the Gospel; the coat of our
Savior without welt or seame presents it self first to our sight: a vesture
that had no artificial ornament, or diversity either of parts or of colors;
but as near to nature as might be, and a ^ipe of his virginity and modesty.
And yet he was our king and our God; and is therefore an expr^sse judgment and
sentence against all manner of apparel in Christians, that may any wise
endanger Christianity, or entice to sin, or unlawful liberty. And as the
garment of our Savior preaches unto us most effectually all modesty and
moderation in this behalf, above all the rest that may be written or imagined:
so his nakedness upon the c^osse does teach us to beware, seeing with it he
ransomed our excess and prodigality in apparel.

8. The Apostles and other faithful people, that spread their clothes upon the
ground to honor and serve our Savior when he rid in humble manner toward
Jerusalem; teach us Christians, to contemn and cast away all arrogance of
attire upon the view of Christ's humility: and by our apparel, to endeavor
rather to yield him honor and homage, then to purchase vain praise or
estimation for our selves. Whereupon, the ancient Christians of the primitive
Church, by direction of their faith and Religion, kept great moderation in
their apparel; and for their outward clothing, chose rather to use a cloak
as a garment of less ostentation, then a gown: which, as Tertullian says,
Tertul. lib. Palli^.
was in those days the Romans a^tir^, who therefore, reproached the Christians.
They reproved also the Grecian robe, with a train that trailed on the ground
in sign of Majesty and state; for that (as Clemens Alexandrinus teaches)
Clem. Alex. lib. 1. de ped. cap. 11.
they thought it unseeming for Christian humility. How then do we now
degenerate so far in apparel from our renowned ancestors, as though either
we were made of another mettle then they; or cast in another mould; or aimed at
another end then theirs? In their days, inward solid virtues, and ornaments
of the mind, were holden for precious: and outward apparel esteemed only as a
sign and testimony of that worth which was really within; as the rich jewel
is covered with the case. But now, the soul being naked of virtue, and without
any ornament to be worthily esteemed: apparel is become (forsooth) an
instrument of ambition. Although, the wiser sort make no other account then of
old, that the most corrupted and stinking carcasses commonly are buried in the
richest sepulchers; as the vilest and most abominable souls, are many times
covered with the gayest clothes: which ^ell the beholders, what kind of stuff
is under them.

9. In other times, sinners grieuing upon the memory of their sins, shrouded
their bodies in doleful attire: and fearing to fall again, after pardon,
avoided all curiosity of apparel, and whatsoever else might give them occasion
of sin. When they loved Almighty God, they hated their bodies; whose
inclinations were contrary to his laws, and put their souls many times in
danger to be lost. But now, that error and darkness have prevailed so far,
that God is forgotten, and sins* holden by fools for fatal or natural
defectes; neither soul nor body are duly accused, but rather excused by the
offenders: and in lieu of due chasticement, the one is fed with flattery, and
the other pampered with dainty meats, and covered with rich apparel: under
which are harbored snakes, serpents, toades, and all sorts of venomous
creatures: yea sometimes, foul ugly Devils. Upon which consideration Clemens
Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. lib. 3. ped. cap. 2*
compares persons in sumptuous attire to the Egyptian Temples.

10. Nothing ought to be more familiar with Christians, according to their
profession, then mortification of their bodies. For, as they profess to love
God more then others, as they are bound: so ought they more carefully to remove
all obiectes, that may hinder or divert them from the accomplishment of this
duty, or entangle their wills in other imploymentes. In which respect, our
bodies are to be restrained in discipline, least they become Idols of self
love: and treacherously deprive the true and sole God of his own, that is, of
our pure, inflamed, final, and total affection.

11. Hester, that virtuous Lady, although upon occasion of Gods, and her
contryes service, she was forced to put her self in costly apparel: yet she
Hest. 19.
did it with grief, protesting before Almighty God, that from her heart she
detested the diadem that she carried upon her head. Much more Christian
Ladies, generally, have cause to mislike themselves in any attire, which is
either arrogant or licentious. And especially this mortification and modesty of
apparel is by them to be used in the time of prayer, when they present
themselves before Almighty God, according to the example of the same Hester and
Judith: Hest. c. 14. Judith. c. 9.
who going to pray, clothed themselves in sackcloth and hair, and dolefully
scattered ashes upon their heads, in witness of their repentance and humility
of heart. If then this mornfull attire be gracious in the sight of Almighty God,
and a fit habit for suppliantes, wherein to tender their petitions and
requests: the contrary bravery of Peacocks tails set up to band him, as is
the habit of his enemies friends to Satan, who, by such inventions,
impeacheth his honor, fills the world with sins, and works the bane of
mankind. Whereupon the Apostle S. Paul wills, Tim. 2.
that women perform in the Church their devotions in attire that may testify
their shamefastnes and sobriety: not with frizled hair, or with gold and
pearls, or precious garments.

12. The head then must be covered and abased to natures simplicity; The body
clothed in that wee^d, which rather signifies misery and trespass, then of
false pretended felicity; gold may be left in the bowels of the earth which is
his place; the pearls to the cockle shell in the bottom of the sea; sumptuous
apparel belongs to the Pagan and Infidel that makes an Idol of his body,
because he knows not Christ, nor aspireth by hearty affection to the
friendship of God. Therefore (says Tertullian) it is an outward irreligious
Tertul. lib. de pallio.
contempt, and as it were a displaying of a banner of defiance against his
divine Majesty, when men and women come to Church in their bravery; where,
consequently, they are so far from attayning pardon, coming in such manner;
as in the sacred place they redouble their former faults; because the^,
sinfully they despise Almighty God, when they pretend he should be most
merciful unto them.

13. S. Hierome talking of the penitent plight of B. Mary Magdalen, prostrate
Hieron. ep. 10. ad Furian.
at Christ's feet, washing them with tears, and drying them with her hair,
says, that in that case, she was the fayrer, by how much the fouler. So the
Ninevites punishing their bodies, and doing penance in sackloth, were doubtless
amiable unto God: who before shining in gould, and silver, and precious
apparel, were odious to him, and deserved that their city should be
destroyed. But they saved it (as S. Augustine notes) and from August. in 2
Psalm. ^0.
a Babylon worthy to perish, they turned it into a Jerusalem by their penance.

14. Whilst we perform our duty in the Church, the principal objects of our
thoughts there, must be the majesty of God, and the charity of our Redemer
hanging upon the cross. The former (if we have wit, and discourse) may cause
in us humiliation of soul, and of body also, in regard of so great a
sovereignty: and the other ought to provoke us to sorrow of heart, and true
repentance of our sins for which he suffered. Behold (says S. John) he
comes with clouds, Apoc. 1. Zach. 12.
and every eye shall see him, and they that wounded him. And all the tribes of
the earth shall bewail themselves upon him. Moses approached to God; Jesus
Naue entered into the land Exodus 7. Iosue 5. Luc. 10.
of promise bare footed; and the Apostles the nearest servants about our
Savior, used no shoes. When one part of the balance is depressed, the other
arises: so (says S. Basil) prayer being an elevation Basil. hom. in illud,
Attend tibi.
of the soul unto God, then it mounteth up the highest, when the body (as the
opposite part of the balance) by penance and mortification, is borne down, and
most depressed.

15. Neither only in time of prayer, and supplication, are we to represent the
humiliation and mortification of our bodies by our apparel and modest attire:
but in the whole course of our lives. It is the maine cry of S. Paul: Mortify
your Colloss. 3.
bodies, which are upon the earth: for they be enemies to the soul. From which
practice the custom of our days declineth much: and accordingly we thrive.
The enemy of the soul is to be kept under, not to be pampered, and much less
applauded and maintained in his hostility, and as it were carried about in
triumph, when he works our ruin. Who attireth a coarse when it is to be
buried in other color then in black? or who (according to Christian
discipline) his dead Christened body, then in a weed of humiliation and
penance? We know (according to the same Apostle) that we Romans 6.
are dead in Christ, and our lives hidden with him in God. To what purpose then
are our bodies to be set out upon the stage of vanity, in splendour of apparel,
to make profession that they live yet in sin? 1. Cor. 7.
The same Apostle, rehearsing such commodities as be lawful in this life,
aduertiseth us that we are so to enjoy them, as if they were not ours (as
indeed they be not, but lent) that is, not to dwell in them, or to expect our
felicity by them; but to use them and love them in such manner, as we be not
loath to leave them when God shall please to take them from us, or us from them:
and that in no wise they hinder our love toward him, in which respect they
are lent.

16. But where great curiosity of apparel is seen; there is given a quite
contrary signification. If all glory in this Tertul. lib. 2. de cult. Eem.
life be vain: (says Tertullian) that is the vainest of all, which is found
in our flesh. The present miseries of our daily corruption; the tragical end of
our lives; the earthly funeral of our bodies; declare sufficiently, if we be
not senseless, that neither the tragedy is to be increased, nor our funerals
garnished with unseemly apparel. What a fall will it be, fit for a tragedy
when after much ado, to trim up a rotten body in painted clothes it must be
shrouded in the winding sheet? The funerals must needs be more doleful where
pomp of apparel affords more prey for death, and the spoils for devouring
sepulchers be greater. Owe we so much to the dole of the tragedy, or to the
ghastly spectacle of the opened earth; as to honor our fall by the one, and our
corruption by the other with a costly mask of curiosity preceding? I have
heard of diverse fortunate seafaring men, who returning home with a rich booty,
have entered the harbor in triumph and bravery, their sails and topsailes of
silk, displayed with oftentation. But I never heard of of any that solemnized
his shipwreck in such a fashion, if he were not mad; and much less did it on
purpose to run upon the rocks. In like sort, it may seem a preposterous
error to attire superfluously these bodies of ours which have already received
an irreuocable sentence of death, and run on by natures motion, directly (as
to shipwreck) to our deathbed, and to the loathsome appurtenances of our grave.

17. When the Spider out of her own bowels has spunne her curious habitation
in the web; then comes the sweeper with his broom, and in a trice defaceth
all she has done. And when the best part of our life, of our time, of our
money, and of our cogitations and study, have been spent in clothing our body
and trimming it up, a little after enters death, called by another name,
Stoop gallant and with one dash casts all into dust: Your richesse (says S.
James) are putrified, and your Jacob. 5.
garments eaten up by the mothes. But above all, the acknowledgement of
Almighty Gods final judgment, should work in us restraint of this vanity. And
though superfluity and curiosity of apparel were not otherwise offensive to
his divine majesty or hurtful to us, then only in respect that it wastes our
time, and withdraws our cogitations from our last account, and the
employments of our hearts, from the memory, love, and reverence of God: yet it
is to be esteemed as very hurtful, and to be avoided. 18. Man was created to the
likeness of almighty God, that his principal occupation should be to think
upon his Creator, to love him, to serve him, to converse with him, and to live
continually in his presence. Wherefore he must withdraw himself from all
impertine^t or contrary distractions, which turn his eye another way,
diminish, interrupt, or extinguish his care and affection toward his master,
and maker, or hinder his endeauours, or the execution of what he is to do, if
he will not be rejected and punished as a careless and unprofitable servant.
For what Master would keep a lubber in his house which should spend all the
day in putting on his clothes? Hereupon is the Counsel of our Savior: Be
not solicitous of your body what to wear: as if he should say: Employ Matthew. 6.
not much time nor care of apparel: but be content with that which is easy and
ready to be had in this kind, through my providence. The cause of which
aduertisme^t, is for that a Christian which hops to get to heaven, ought so
to be wholly and perpetually in the memory and contemplation of heavenly
things, and in the execution of his necessary or charitable employmentes, and
so entierly occupied with them, that he should have no leisure to think of
trifles; amongst which is the care and curiosity of superfluous apparel, when
it had no other bad intention nor effect, but only loss of time: choosing
rather to be a Lilly of the field; then a Puppet of the Tailors shop.

19. But when it shall be proved against us in the last judgment, that we have
in this life been more careful to beautify the body, then the soul; less
careful and circumspect to please the eyes of God, then to present to the
world a false cover to a filthy carcass; that where Almighty God should be the
chiefest end and period of our endeauours, we have allotted the best part of
them and the flower of our years, to the service and idolatry of our bodies:
what a dreadful and horrible case will this then appear, though there were no
other sins in consequence thereof, the Judge being justly offended, and his
sentence not appealable? It is therefore no less wise then Christian resolution
of the Apostle: Having necessary food, and Tim. 6.
wherewith to cloth our selves, with these we should be content.

20. But alas, the curiosity of apparel is not only in it self evil, nor to
the party alone that uses it; but for the most part to others also, in
consequence, as has been said. Wherefore when they shall see, that by their
folly they have not only brought themselves to hell, but also many more created
to the likeness of Almighty God, and bathed in the precious blood of Christ;
what a confusion will it be to them, and what horror, to have such a
spectacle, for ever, before their eyes?

21. In some sort excusable is that trespass which occasioned by folly and
frailty, causes only the offendants personal hurt: but excessive, odious,
malicious, and most punishable is that iniquity, with which the delinque^t
draws others also to damnation. As if men and women in this life were
workfolkes in the devils harvest, by their wanton apparel, their painting,
their trimming, their foul shameful nakedness, to set out themselves to
sale, and allure others to sinful desires, thereby to fill up the infernal
caves with the bodies and souls of Christian people.

22. The Devil knows, that man is a noble creature, and by instinct of his
judgment and natural reason abhors sensual pleasure, as a thing common to
brute beasts: And therefore to garnish and grace it for seduction, he uses, as
an instrument of deceit the lascivious attire wherein the light woman is clad,
as a serpent to kill her sight. No Basiliske is more dangerous, no venime so
hurtful, no influence so infectious, no contagion so mortal, as an unchaste
mind under the attire of a Curtizane. O unworthy employment of a Christian
woman, to make her self a gilded goblet to entertain deadly poison, powered
in by Satan, for bane of the world; to adorn and beautify with art his
filthy baits of concupiscence; to betray man to hell, whose help and comfort
she should be; to kill her best friend and supporter with enchanted fruits; to
damn her own original root and pedigree! Is it not harm enough by her folly
and allurement, to have brought him and all his posterity to be slaves, and pay
tribute to sin and death? and to have cast him out of Paradise into this vale
of misery, unless from hence also, she throw him down headlong into hell
fire! O wreched woman, if thou have no care of thine own soul, given over to
sensuality, and willingly living, or rather festering and dying in slavery and
corruption: yet bear respect to man, who never gave thee just cause to hate
him; and much less to hurt him willingly, and destroy him. Consider the
dignity of his estate, as Lord and Sovereign over all earthly creatures: value
the worth of his body and soul, redeemed from thy first folly, and his
fragility, by the precious death of Christ Jesus: behold the height of his
calling, to be citizen of heaven, and a partaker of the eternal joys of that
happy place: look below, and view that opened hideous infernal gulf whereunto
thou would bring him: contemplate with attention and leisure, those horrible
endless torments, into which thou would plunge him and thy self: and then
doubtless (if thy heart be not of flint) very compassion engraven in thee by
nature (if thou art a Woman and not a Tiger) will recall thee from so
detestable an action, and stay thee from so horrible a treachery, against thy
friend.

23. Wherein if thou be careless and cruel: know, that Almighty God will take
the matter into his own hand, as most commonly he does; and even in this life,
by disgrace, penury, want, sickness, or otherwise, will chastise thine
offense. For, how can his just eye bear the presumption of thy pride and
vaunting in sin before his face, as if thou went innocent, bragging him with
superfluous and curious pampering, and setting forth of that flesh, which has
most hainously offended him many times; and arming his enemy that stands in
defiance of rebellion against his will and law?

24. If once he disdayned to look upon Luciser and his companions, who,
forgetting from whence they had the perfections of nature and grace that shined
in them, fell in love with themselves, and became obiectes of foolish pride, in
so much as in his just indignation he cast them down from heaven into eternal
misery and pain. If he could not abide the presumption of of Herod, that being
a King would forsooth needs be a God, and showing himself to the people in
rich apparel with his speech to that purpose, was no sooner saluted by his
flatterers and applauded to his contentment, but the Angel of God, knowing his
Masters condition, stroke him in his zeal, because he would honor himself,
and not give glory where it was due, and so he dyed miserably eaten up with
vermin: he which spares not Angels when they are proud; nor his Angels spare
Kings, when they keep not themselves within the measure and modesty of
mortal men: will he, think you, suffer a Jack, or a Gill to brag him out?
or spare to punish them, for their sumptuous apparel, whereby they diminish
not, but increase their sin?

25. If the stars in the firmament did not dutifully set forth God his honor
and renown, but rather sought by pride to magnify themselves, they should not
long be stars: but by his Justice be consumed to coals and dust: how then, or
with what reason, may we miserable caytiffs composed of earth, and creeping
upon the ground, presume to breath out a spirit of contempt against God
Almighty without, fear to be broken into pieces and consumed?

26. Without all doubt, our beggary, which we call bravery, and we patch up
with the off^ls of diverse base creatures to adorn our selves, is a manifest
contempt of the divine Majesty of Almighty God, and a misprision contrary to
all fear and religious homage due unto him. And it must needs be to him an
ungracious and odious spectacle, to behold man's nature made by his own hands,
to be corrupted, violated, abused, and abiured (by false ornaments of apparel,
or otherwise) to the service of the Devil.

27. With what patience then can be behold a painted face? a bush of hair died
and colored? as if art were more commendable then nature; or could correct and
amend Gods workmanship, admirable in our creation, and much more in our
justification: for which respect, he gives many times a hard favored face to
cover and keep a beautiful soul: and deuideth his talentes with justice, and
proportion, as they are most convenient and profitable for every one, if we had
wit to acknowledge them, or could tell how to use them.

28. Would not Apelles (think you) hold himself disgraced, and be angry, if a
Corido^, a saucy presumptuous clown passing by a picture drawn by himself
would needs take a pencell in hand, and presume to correct his work? So
certainly, the divine Majesty must needs be offended, to see our natural
feature expressed by his own supreme workmanship, to be altered and deformed
with false inventions. Some Emperors have borne such respect to their own
images, as they have forbidden, under great penalties, that they should be
carried into places of dishonor, upon any Sueton. in Tiber. c. 98. Senec. l.
3. de benefi. cap. 26.
occasion. So Tiberius (as Suetonius records) made it treason by law, to
wear in a brodell house a ring, in which his picture was graven. Seneca makes
mention of the like. And Constantine the Great made a decree that no man should
carry his picture into the Temples of Idols, or show it there, as Eusebius
writes. Eus^b. l. 4 de vita Constant. cap. 15. and 16.
What an offense then must it be, and subject to what punishment, when man or
woman dresseth or applies the lively Image of Almighty God, to the performance
of iniquity and service of the Devil? Julius Caesar disgraced and Dio ^ lib. ^
dishonored notably the British shore, when he made a corselet of the pearls
which there were found, and dedicated it to the impure Venus: ^o (infallibly)
they both debase themselves, and dishonor God and their Country, which with
excess of apparel and other (...) indecent ornaments, dedicate the (...)ties
of their bodies and souls to foolish pride and dishonesty. Wherefore no
^^^uaile if Almighty God so offended, prepare his darts of revenge against
such a sin, as is not only reproachful in the offendant, but injurious also
and hurtful to others, as has been said, and so directly intended against his
divine Majesty and Law.

29. The elect people of God, proved his wrath against them and their Cirty
Jerusalem particulerly, for the revenge and punishment of their riot in
corporal ostentation, and excess of curious apparel, and other impertinent
and lascivious ornaments of the body. And so the Prophet Isay fortelleth them
the Isa. 3.
ruin and destruction that was to fall upon them, in these words: For that
(says he) the Daughters of Sion are proud, and go their necks stretched out
with twincling eyes, clapping their hands, and ietting in a set pace; our Lord
will make bald the heads of the Daughters of Sion, and discover their hair.
That day, he will take from them their ornaments of their shoes, their little
moons, their chains, onches, and bracelets, their sweet balls, earlets,
ringes, and pearls that hang on their fore-heades, their changes of apparel,
their short cloakes, and fine linen, their needles, looking-glasses, launes,
head-bandes, and bongraces. And for their perfumes and s^^cet savors, there
shall be putrefaction and stincke: a cord in steed of a girdle: for frizled
hair, baldnes: and they hall wear haircloth, for stomachers. Thy fairest men
also shall fall by the sword: and the strong ones perish in battle. Her gates
shall mourn and lament: and she shall sit desolate upon the ground. Lo the
process, and judgment, the sentence, and execution, in this cause of
superfluous apparel. Lo the tragedy that shut up this abuse, in that
unfortunate people: which by degrees, came to the perdition and desolation,
which the Prophet foretold them. The like happened to the Greeks, and to the
Roman Empire; that by the same disorders and excesses came to ruin. And either
their example and the reasons alleged, in a matter so evident, will serve for
amendment: or it is a sign that our eyes are blind, and our hearts hardened:
for our sins as theirs were before their fall, and that our punishment is
also to follow.

The end of the first Cure.
THE SECOND CVRE: WHICH IS, Of Excess in Drinking.
What charge Nature has given to every man, in regard of his being, and
actions of a man, to avoid Drunkenness. CHAP. I.
IT would (no doubt) appear a great disparagement to the honor and worthiness
of a Noble Knight or other person of higher degree to enter into combat with a
vile, base, and ignominious adversary, who according to his bad disposition,
want of wit, and good manners, had been contemptuous toward him and done him
wrong; for in such a case, revenge and satisfaction were to be taken of such a
one, rather by some servant of his with a ^udgel* the^ by himself with his
sword: So in the vice of excessive Drink (because among other vices and
disorders incident to man's nature corrupted, it is as it were the very dregs
of the corruption, and an abuse of extreme indignity and baseness enforced
upon the sovereign quality and nature of man) humane wit and intelligence, may
judge it self ill matched and dishonored, to encounter such a Bestiality (or
worse, for no beasts are subject to this vile excess) with reason, and
eloquence of learning. For the correction of so foul a fault, the satisfaction
and revenge of so contemptuous a reproach, should rather be taken with a
whippe: for all the rest is improper punishment for so brutish, and base a
disorder.

2. Notwithstanding, for that this vice (although in it self so base and
contemptible as more cannot be imagined) is not sufficiently considered by
many, nor abhorred with that detestation and shame, which Nature it self
should teach them by the very sight of so ugly and filthy a sin: necessity of
charity imposes this task upon reason, to force learning and discourse to
take the matter in hand, though an unworthy subject, and (if it may be) to
chase this foul and infamous monster out of the world, at least out of those
countries that are not become wholly savage, and the people worse then beasts.

3. The mark then at which we aim, is a mass of that vastness and
deformity, that no Iaueline nor Pike of argument that is cast against it, can
err, but must needs hit at full push. Besides, the bulk of this foul
disorder is so staggering of it self, and so slenderly supported by judgment,
that it cannot be hit, but it must needs be overthrown. There is no doubt, but
that man, although he be not absolute Lord of his life and being (which
properly are subject only to the supreme dominion of Almighty God) yet by his
appointment and duty of nature, he is their keeper and guard to preserve them
in good estate, to defend them from hurt, to perfect and adorn them with the
best employments, and to remove and resist all contrariety which may either
destroy them, or weaken and hinder their operation. In regard whereof, and that
reason in us may prescribe the due and proper use of Drink; first, is to be
laid down for the ground and foundation of all that follows, upon what cause
arises the necessity thereof in man's body, and at what end nature leuelleth, in
giving this appetite.

4. The appetite then of drink, is occasioned through temper of man's body,
hoate, and dry, either natural upon good disgestion, or vicious proceeding
from corruption of surfer, heat of an ague, labor, abundance of choler, evil
custom of much drinking, (as Pliny Plin. l. 14. Not. hist. cap. 12. Galen. de
vsu part. l. 1. cap. 1.
says; or some other malignant dispositions of the stomach, where is to be
made the first and principal concoction. Man's body therefore, being so disposed
by any of the said accidents, that the veins of the stomach by dried; there
follows thirst, which is a vehement appetite of drink, to the end, that the
Galen. l. 6. de morb. vulgarib. com. 4. Galen l. 8. Decret*
stomach and other parts, dried by the heat of the same stomach, and
especially the liver, may be moistened and refreshed.

5. Now then, it follows to declare the effects of bear, wine, or any other
drink, that is received into the stomach: the knowledge whereof imports
greatly to make us temperate, and utter enemies of all excess in this kind.
First there is a general cause, for which a reasonable man ought to use great
moderation in his nourishment, either of meat, or drink. For, as drink in
particular conueyeth the meat down to the stomach, and brings it to a good
proportion and temper of disgestion; so is it also nourishment of it self, to
be disgested, or else if it have no nourishment, to be euacuated. And in this,
the nutritive faculty is distinguished in operation, and differs from the
expulsive: that the nourishing faculty, although it overcome the qualities of
the meat and drink, as does also the expulsive; yet notwithstanding, the
nutritive so ouercometh, as it entertayneth the prey it has gotten, and
conuerteth it substantially into the precedent parts of the body to be
nourished: whereas the expulsive faculty, when it has power, casts out by
excrement all such substance as is not convenient for nourishment. And though
the stomach, through natural heat gain the superiority over drink, and so
make it fit for nourishment and humectation of the whole: yet the same stomach
and natural heat suffers a repassion in the disgestiue faculty, from
drink; by which it is continually weakened, and made less and less able to
digest, and to make both the drink and meat profi^able for reparation of the
body.

6. In this manner, we see that a strong VVrastler, whilst he casts down
his weaker adversary, is yet thereby rebated in his strength; and finally, would
loose it all, by a great number of such victories: so although the natural
heat of the stomach conquer the adverse qualities of drink, yet is it
debilitated, extenuated, and made of less force by the battle: and according
to this repassion in the daily victory of the stomach over drink (though all
other causes were removed) it alone would finally procure old age, death, and
destruction, later or sooner, respectively as the drink taken in, is more or
less, of this or that quality, and the complexion of the drinker stronger, or
weaker.

7. Moreover, we are to distinguish (with Galen) in all the parts of man's
Galen l. 4. de vsu part. c. 13.
body, three sorts of faculties that serve to disgestion: one is the faculty
Attractiue, the other Retentiue, the third Expulsive. The power Attractiue is
instituted by nature, that every part of man's body may draw unto it self, as
it were from the common store house, what by similitude of nature is fittest
and most proper for nourishment: being first altered, and disposed by the heat
of the stomach, according to necessity and nature of every part. Then for that
the nutritive faculty cannot perform dew operation about the food attracted,
unless it be applied, and as it were held fast by hands, to the organ, or
instrument of nutrition: nature retayneth strongly what before she had drawn
to each part; to the end it may the more effectually conquer and convert the
same into the substance of every part of the body; wherein Galen observes the
wonderful diligence and industry of nature: That, where she would have any
thing stay longer time in any part of man's body, there she has made the
passage more difficult, by tortuosity of the parts; or by multiplicity of the
veiles, plats, and couers, wherein it is folded.

8. Lastly, seeing there is no meat or drink so pure and void of all
viciosity or dregs, that it is to be converted entierly into the substance of
the part to be nourished, thereupon (as in a City, that it may be kept clean)
nature has made provision of the expulsive faculty, which serves (as it were
the common Scauenger) to cast out all the gross and unclean surplussage of
nourishment, that might breed evil blood and noisome substance. Whence may be
gathered, that the quality and quantity of drink and meat, specially of
drink, have not only their proper effects in the stomach, but also in all
other parts of the body, specially in the liver, the longes, the belly, and the
head. The liue^ is the first which (by the Maceriacall veins) receaueth an
impression, good or bad from drink, well or ill decocted Galen. l. 4. de vsu
part. c. 13. l. ^. de decret. c. 9. l. 3 de locis ^ffect. c. 7^
in the stomach. The longes also (as Galen observes) are diversely affected by
the same: in so much (says he) that if one should drink any colored liquor*
and be presently bowelled, his longes would be found stained with the same
color. The bowels also contract sometims from drink indisgested in the
stomach, a vicious quality, or substance of excrements: as a biting fretting
choler, which (as Galen ^eacheth) is a cause of Galen. l. 8. de morbis vulgar.
c. 30. de simpli. l. 1. c. ^7.
greater thirst, and that the more he drinks that is so distempered, the more
he desires to drink; as it happens in the dropsy. Now concerning the head,
it is sufficiently known by experience, what communication it holds with the
stomach, and what interchangable concourse is betwixt them. There Galen. l. 3.
de lo^is affect. c. 7.
are (as the same Gallen tells us) certain sinowes and passages that go from
the brain to the mouth of the stomach by which the vampe and vapor of drink
is conveyed, and carried up into the head, as in particular shall be declared.
Wherefore if according to this course, which nature holds in the use of drink,
we examine al excess there in co^mi^ed, we shall see clearly the mighty hurt
and deformity which it brings, and many urgent motives to induce us to the
contrary virtue of temperance, which measures the proportion of nourishment
necessary to co^serue the body in health. For all that is more, turns to
excreme^ts: which (howsoever) are hurtful, for from them come sickness and
death.

9. How absurd then and how preposterous, and unreasonable a thing is it, that
meat, and drink, being by institution of reason and nature ordained to
conserve health and strength (for a little transitory ^ast of pleasure in the
mouth, and as it passes down the throat) should be wholly referred to the
contrary: that is, to multiply ex^rements, and bring detriment, decay, and
ruin to the body? Besides, the inordinate appetite of delight in drinking not
only makes the great drinker an enemy to himself, selling (as it were away
the inestimable worth of his life, for the short pleasure he takes to power
into his belly some base liquour; as Esau sold his prehemine^cy and patrimony
for a dish of pottage): but he offends with all perniciously, in a triple
abuse: Against Almighty God, the Lord and giver of life: against the propriety
of drink, profitable for the maintenance of the body when it is temperatly
used: and against the love which he owes to his family his friends, country
and common wealth; to which his health, life and honest labors might be more
or less profitable, according to his talent, if all were not buried in the
barrel, and drowned in excess of drink.

10. Is it not then a childish folly, so to delight himself and play with his
taste, as he not only divert the use of drink ordained for the conservation of
health, to a contrary end, but make it the bane of his body? The stomak^ is a
principal instrument of life, and the common fosterer of all the other parts
to maintain them in a good and flourishing estate, and therefore nature has
placed it in the midst (as Galen says) of the body, as in the center.
Wherefore, when this is surcharged, and disgestion weakened, it comes to be
filled and infected with corrupt and unnatural humors, whence of necessity
the whole body must want good nourishment, and become distempered and corrupt;
the vital spirits dull; and the soul so heavy as it waxes weary of the bad
intertaynement it has in a ruinous habitation, pestered with diseases: and
therefore with desire to be gone, shortneth life. For if drink (even according
to the precise and necessary use appointed by nature) taken never so
temperatly, causes always some repassion, and (giving, as it were, every time
a fillip, or a stroke to the stomach) by little, and little enfeebleth
disgestion: abundance of drink floating continually in the same stomach,
either with meat, or without it, by it self, must of necessity work a
strange effect upon that faculty, and make it every day less and less able to
digest. And when natural heat, which is the instrument of concoction in the
stomach, is once decayed; then nourishment is neither so much in quantity, nor
in quality so good; but much of the food rests behind, as matter of hurtful
crudities; nature not being able to draw from it any further commodity, nor
expel the excrements. Whereupon follow jointly decay of color, a wrinckled
skin, gray hairs before time, drowsines in the head, vnweldinesse in all the
body; and other like forerunners of the speedy funerals that are to follow, and
give warning to make ready the grave.

11. What a foul and unnatural fault is it then, in a man to shorten
voluntarily his own days, by drink; to work diseases by the instrument of
health; and to power into the lamp so much oil, as to extinguish the light
which it should nourish and preserve? What an hostility uses he against
himself, to defloure the complexion of his body; to infect it with choleric
humor, and stain it with yellow; to dull the vital spirits, and betray his
own life, bringing into the stomach (as into the castle of health, and
storehouse of provision) so deadly an enemy, as poysoneth the vitals, and
ouerfloweth the whole building of his lesser world.

12. But this vice is yet greater, and of more especial deformity in a young
man: who by the good disposition of his strength and wit, should be profitable
to himself, amiable to others, apt for matrimony to uphold his house and
family, and to continue the succession of those that are to honor and serve
God in this world, and to fill up the empty seats in heaven, of the Angels
that fell. But all this is hindered and reuersed by abundance of drink: whereby
the body becomes, as it were a quagmyre or bogge (as S. Augustine says)
August. serm^ 23^.
infirm, ^asie, ill colored, fluent, dissolved, and more fit to bring out
(with the fennish marshes) frogs, serpents, and venomous worms of naughty
actio^, then either children of any worth, or themselves to be profitable for
any action of manhood. For when by excess of drink and of gross vndisgested
humors (which be the dregs of that superfluity) the stomach is weakened; then
all the parts of the body fail in their action and perfection, as well
natural as animasticall. The blood is not so pure, as it should, nor so
clearly refined in the first passage from the original cause and matter of
nourishment; and consequently, the vital spirits loose their fiery quality of
motion, agility, and operation, and become dull, heavy, material and slow. The
vital actions of the senses which depend upon the spirits, are also
consequently more dampish and dead, for, as temperate dryness gives force to
action: so superfluous moisture does debilitate and destroy it. Is it not then
an unreasonable, and unseasonable damage (for a momentary pleasure in drinking)
to sustain all these harms and losses of our natural life? Is not the
exchange, for those that have skill in merchandise, more then unthrifty? for
those that make account of pleasure, sottish and foolish, to loose the greater
and more durable, for lesser both in quality and durance? and especially, for
those that have more noble cogitations, to make themselves contemptible, and
worse then beasts, which though they want the use of reason, yet exceed not in
this kind?

13. But to retain yet a while longer our discourse about consideration of the
stomach; we are to know, that not only the faculty of disgestion is impaired by
too much drink, but that the stomach it self becomes also imbued and
infected thereby with a bad relish, and evil sauouring humor of so wrenesse,
which f^etteth it, and brings in an unnatural and vicious quality. For if
wine and beer have force to work this effect in the wood of the barrel, much
more when they lie long in the stomach, through the excess of continual
drinking, they procure this corrosiue and crabbish disposition in the tender
bulk of the same. And no doubt but this biting gall, as it hinders
disgestion, and is painful to the drinkers making them ircksome to
themselves: so also they become harsh in conversation, and troublesome to
others.

14. To this bad constitution of the stomach by abundance of drink, may be
added in consideration the dregs of putrefaction and choler, which Wine, Ale,
or Beer drunk out of measure, leave behind them; which from the stomach flow
and are dispersed through all the parts of the body. And hence it proceeds,
according to observation, that Northren nations abound commonly more with this
kind of choler bred of indisgestion, then others: for that nature having
prouidently given them hoater livers to resist the cold of the region (which
with the same also is augmented by Antiperistasis, and repercussion) they
drink more then others, and are more subject to excess, if with reason and
temperance it be not moderated. But for better understanding of this matter it
is to be known that there be two kinds of choler, the one natural which
causes animosity and fearcenesse, rising from the hoate, agile, and quick
spirits which one has by constitution of nature, and may be increased by fumes
of drink that heat the brain; in which sense Galen says, that wine causes
men to be headlong in wrath. But there is another choler accidental engendered
in the stomach by indisgestio^ and putrefaction of superfluous meat and drink,
which being continued by surfets, breeds a permanent quality of the same
nature in the stomach, and consequently a like habitual disposition and
inclination in the whole body, whereby a man is said to be cholerike, that is
affected, in such manner as he is prone in all occasions of conversation to
show his Ire; as dry wood is quickly kindled. And in this sense we take choler
in this place, speaking of accidental and unnatural choler, that proceeds
from putrefaction in the stomach, and immoderate drink. And according to this
sober reckoning, the vice is seen to be detestable: for this distemperance of
the stomach, and consequently in the blood and spirits causes bitterness and
teastinesse in the very operation of the soul, and banisheth that sweetness
of life, which nature has otherwise ordained, as a reward of temperance in
such as be masters of themselves.

15. Besides, this accidental and unnatural choler is an opposite disposition
to all good abearance toward superiors, equals, and inferiors. And therefore
must needs be accounted an harmefull condition, when a man cannot live with his
wife, his children, nor with his family or friends, without continual
brauling, and breach of a mitie: whereby not only he loses that delight which
he might enjoy by quiet and tractable conversation, and tormenteth himself
inwardly by every occasion with bitterness of wrath and dislike: but moreover
he purchases at a very dear rate, and without any profit, the disfavor and
hatred of others, as many as must live in his company, or have any dealings
with him.

16. Neither is this choler, of which we speak, that which serves as an
instrument to valor and fortitude, but another beastly humor that makes a man
brutish and good for nothing. For (commonly) where it abounds there are not
to be found those ardent and gallant spirits, which other people in hoater
climates, or in the same, that be moderate in their drink have by nature and
good complexion, their bodies being more dry, their blood more pure, and their
spirits more Etheriall; whose choler is temperate, but constant, as natural:
and therefore as it is not moved but by reason, so is it reasonable, and lasts
as long as by reason it should: where the other brutish perturbation, as it is
easily up, to contradict, braule, and revile, so is it done with the drink, or
at least when the fumes are disgested and fitter for the tavern then for the
field. For great drinkers, though they abound with accidental choler, and are
tall fellows when they are armed with drink, yet their bodies are full of
moist and cold humors, which make them heavy and cowardly, especially if any
danger be presented upon cold blood.

17. Besides, who is cholerike in this manner cannot possibly be permanent in
contemplation, or prudent in practice; for that reason and judgment is either
wholly oppressed in him, or very much hindered by his turbulent beastly choler:
yea it suffers not the tongue to deliver, the month to utter, nor the hand to
execute orderly, what the mind has conceaned, but with fury and confusion
ordinarily breaks out into dishonorable and reproachful, yea sometime into
sacrilegious and blasphemous words: and causes a man to do with precipitation
and have, that which afterward he is to bewail by leisure. And this humor
abounding, turns consequently all other humors into it: and so working still
and fretting upon life, hasteneth death by corrosion, or (which is as bad) with
a moisty fogge of putrified fleame never sufficiently concocted, which
que^^heth by little and little, and as it were drowneth natural heat; and so
when moisture and cold, the proper quality of drink, have gotten the victory,
they return the body in which they abound, as a prey to the earth, from whence
it was taken.

18. Neither does drink powered immoderatly into the belly, attain the end for
which it is taken; to wit, extinction of thirst. For putrefaction causes hear,
as may be seen by a dunghill: and that unnatural heat affects the stomach
with the like quality, and inflameth also the liver adjoining, and so, as out
of a vessel full of corruption set upon the fire, ascend perpetually corrupted
vapors to the tongue and mouth, which cause continual thirst. And therefore
Pline writes, that the Ambassadors Plin. l. 14. hist. ^. 2^.
of Scythia were wont to say of the Parthians, that they became dry in drinking.

19. Lo then, how great an abuse is committed against nature by this excess.
That whereas drink is ordained to quench and expel the distemper of heat and
dryness; the same drink becom^^th an instrument of insatiable thirst: as if
men were made to hang by the spigot, and all their cogitations and desires to
be directed and employed about the remedy of this continual sickness procured
by themselves. What a slavery of base and ignominous employment is this? what a
circle of disorder from the preposterous and hurtful use of drink, when,
through a momentany delightonly of the mouth or throat which the organ of taste
affects with excess, where reason bears no rule, the foolish man
endeuouroth voluntarily to make his body still thirsty by continuance of
drinking: and effects upon himself that penalty and torment of continual
thirst, which damned gluttons suffer in hell.

20. This hateful effect of too much drink is so manifest, that experience to
the eye, and sense it self gives us no leave to doubt of it: for those which
are drunk over might (besides other evil consequences) always find
themselves in the morning distempered with thirst, proceeding from indisgestion
and putrification of humors, and dregs in the stomach; which thirst is not
taken away as the tripler imagines with adding more and more drink (though
for the present his mouth and throat ^e refreshed as it goes down) but must
be cured with abstinence, and moderate exercise, that may help the stomach to
digest the crudities which cause that thirst as has been said. Besides some
kind of drink often taken in, provoke the taste, and causes appetite to have
frequent use of the same: so as inordinate request after drink is caused not
only by unnatural heat of the stomach, but also by the particular disposition
of the taste it self distempered: both which proceed from intemperate use of
drink. And how base and vnma^ly an act it is, for one to tie himself (as it
were with his own hands) to the barrel or the bottel, and put his body into
a continual ague and fury of thirst: and let the Reader judge which is more,
by drink it self, appointed as a remedy against thirst, to condemn his life
to this perpetual and painful slavery: for (as the Martial. lib. 4. ep. 7.
Poet says)

Liber non potes, and gulosus esse. 21. Consider then, what drink powered into
the stomach with superfluity, works in the whole body; and what disposition
it causes. The stomach, as it is the common store house for nouriture: so what
evil y^ice or matter abounds therein, is conveyed from thence presently to
all the parts of the body. So as when there is too great abondance of moisture
in the stomach, it fills the veins rather with crude and indisgested dregs
and putrifactio^, then with pure and perfect blood: for that nature oppressed
with the abondance of these dregs cannot digest and refine them to perfect
nourishment, and so the attractiue faculty of every part draws in dispatch
what it finds. Whereby a man comes by little and little to loose the very
excellency of his complexion and kind, and consequently decay in understanding
and valor, and with the corruption of his blood and spirits to change also
his manners and condition. And that which I say of the superfluity of all
moisture, and excess of all kind of drink, is more pernicious, and sooner
infecteth and destroys the natural complexion, the stronger it is: as the
dregs and corruption of strong Wine, Ale, or Beer indisgested, are much more
hurtful and cause more incurable diseases, then the smaller and weaker drink
indisgested.

22. No doubt, but that living creatures, the hoater they be by natural
complexio^, so are they also thereby more excellent in their kind: and likewise
all nutriment the stronger it is to feed, the more potent it is to poison, if
it be corrupted. And so the dryer bodies, because the spirits are more fiery
and subtle, have naturally, as Heraclitus witnesses, Eus^b. l. 8. praepar. c.
8
the better wits. And in this respect a man is said to excel a woman; for
that, in natural complexion, he is hoater and dryer then she. Wherefore,
seeing that abondance of moisture must needs debilitate natural heat (as
contrariwise it is sharpened and increased by dryness) the exceeding moisture
of drink flowing in the stomach, and from thence dispersed, must needs cause
a continual decay of natural vigor, wit, and manhood: so as he that received
from God the dignity of a man, becomes by this excess, equal, or inferior
in nature and complexion to a woman: and sometimes worse then a beast, as
afterward shall be seen: for the heat, which follows upon the surfeit of
drink (of which we have spoken) is no vital nor natural heat, but a heat of
distemperature and putrefaction, as the heat of an ague, that consumes the
vital spirits and the ardent forces of nature, no otherwise then the sun (as
Celius Rhodiginius says, and Cel. Rhod. l. 28. cap. 31.
experience teaches us) extinguisheth the fire when it shines upon it: And
this heat may cause an appetite of beastly lust, or revenge; but it never
performs any action of manhood.

23. But, above all, we must remember the effects of superfluous drink in the
stomach, when they ascend to the head and invade the principal instrument of
sense and reason. From the stomach are extended, directly upward to the head,
certain sinews which have their root in the brain, and from thence are
derived to sundry Galen. lib. 12. de vsu part. ca. 4.
parts of the body: and be the especial means and instruments of feeling.
Now, when their common knot and root, the Brain, is ill affected and
distempered by the vampe and vapor of superfluous drink; consequently the
sense of feeling is every where hindered: and tasting also (which according to
Aristotle is a kind of feeling) is likewise benumbed; and so, first the
pleasure which nature affoardeth to eating and drinking is diminished and
decays: And next, from those vapors of drink engrossed above in the head,
streameth down into every part of the body an infinite number of diseases, as
Catarrs, Aches, Palsies, the falling sickness, and the like: and among the
rest, the stomach receaueth back again with anguish and hurt, that which first
it entertained with excess. Much drink (says Galen) hurts the sinews, and
their organ Galen. l. 3. demorb. vulgar.
the brain: which brain retourneth down again by the sinews, an infectious
cold humor engendered of the superfluous vapors sent up from the stomach, into
the same: whereby it loses the force of digestion, is weakened and
distempered, and thereby disposed to new crudities and defluxions.

24. This defluxion from the head to the stomach and other parts, is not like
to that, which first drawn from the earth in vapors, descends after from
thence again in dew and rain to fertilize the ground, nature repaying with
gain what erst she borrowed of courtesy: but contrariwyse, the indisgested
vampe of superfluous drink mounting from the stomach to the head, and there
engrossed by the cold quality of the brain, falls down after upon the
stomach as poison and putrefaction, to it, and to all the rest of the body; not
nature, but sin repaying with penalty that which a little before not nature,
but sin exacted with inordinate pleasure of sensuality. Surely it is an
extreme folly and madness, for a man, by the spoute of his throat, to annoy thus
his health: to ouerflow himself with a flood of waterish humors: to make
passage for an unnatural corrupt pestilent liquour into every part of his
body, and so to infect and corrupt them all. How far then is the use of
immoderate drinking from reason, and all humane decency and dignity? To which
if we add also the perturbation of the mind, the oppression and dullness of
wit, forgetfulness of the memory and extinction of prudence, folly, frenzy,
fury, c^rriage worse then brutish, and finally want of the souls best
direction and help, occasioned only by abondance of drink; no monster will be
thought more unnatural and ugly to be seen them one of those swilling
Drunkards.

25. Drunkards (says Pliny) do not see the sun rise, neither live they
long. They be Plin. l. 14. Hist. ca. 22.
pale colored, have hanging cheeks, bleard eyes, trembling hands, and power
out vessels full. For the present they suffer hellish dreams, and unquiet
sleep, and the day after have a stinking breath, with oblivion almost of all
things, and as it were a death of memory. And so always they loose both the
day wherein they live, and that which follows. Which premises considered,
make me wonder at the folly of some of the popular sort, who (according to Ce^.
Rhod. lib. 28. c 28.
Aristophanes) barbarously deem it valor and manhood to bear much drink,
without being drunk: condemning others as unmanly and weak, which cannot
pledge them and quaffe up their measurelesse measures without loosing their
wits. For this receiving, and carriage of much drink, is no sign of manhood:
but may proceed from debility of nature, as from strength. For great quantity
of drink ouerpressing the bottom of the stomach, does debilitate the
re^entiue faculty in such sort, as nature is not able to hold that weight, but
gives it passage, venting it out again almost as soon as it is supped up. No
marvel then, if the drink breath not upwards so strong a vampe, as it does
from the stomach of another that intertayneth it longer, and in some sort
concocteth it better, though not as it should.

26. And the like effect may be seen in a vessel of water upon the fire,
where the greater heat causes always more vapor and smoke, then if the
fire be less. In fine, those drinkers which have the moystest and coldest
brains with equal stomaks, bear most drink, which is no great commendation
of manhood, for that women have colder and moyster brains then men; and so are
seldomer drunk. As in some drunken countries, I have seen the good wives,
sober enough, lead their husbands home as drunk as Rattes: and yet the temper
of a man's brain is ordinarily more pefect by nature, and of a better
complexion, through the heat of blood and vital spirits, fitter for wit and
judgment when he is sober, then the woman's.

27. But (as Seneca says) when Senec. epist. 82.
thou have overcome all others in drinking: what commendation is it for thee
seeing thou thy self art overcome by the barrel? And when thou were as potent
a drinker as was the Tyrant Bonosus, thy praise would be no other then his. Of
whom when he was living Aurelianus was wont to say: Bonosus natu^est, nonvt
viueret, sed vt biberet: And when he had hanged himself (a death suitable to
the life of so valiant a drinker) a Roman soldier said in jest, that it was not
a man that was hanging, but a tankard.

28. Having thus summed up the effects which superfluous drink, by order of
nature and disorder of humane intemperance, works in man's body, and soul; it
rests only, for this point to speak something of some men's morning draughts
in these our drinking days; weighing them according to principles of good
health, and the natural use of drink which reason has ordained.

29. It is the wit and manner of sensual men, when they find any thing
grateful to their senses (to the end they may not seem merely led by pleasure
as brute beasts, being otherwise loath to alter their course) to set their
minds on work, to find out arguments of necessity or conuenience, to color
with show of a reasonable resolution, that which indeed serves only for
se^suality against reason and virtue. In this respect you may, if it please
you, hear almost every silly Serving man (as early as his drunken head will
give him leave to creep out of his nest) read a lesson of Physic over the
Buttery hatch, as much for his own health, as for his masters profit; and to
conclude solemnly, that drink copiously taken in fasting, is good to cleanse
the stomach from dregs of indisgestion, to free the body from grauel and
stone, to preserve the eyesight, and other petty commodities depending upon
the spigot. And first, for his eyesight, he might as probably affirm, that a
mornings smoke of an ill chimney, were as good for his eyes, as a mornings
Carouse.

30. Pliny tells us, that certain Plin. l. 14. Not. hist. cap. 22.
modern Physicians of his time against all practice and precepts of antiquity,
would needs persuade Tiberius the Emperor, that it was a wholesome custom to
drink betimes in the morning. Which new counsel Pliny affirms was
contrary to the judgments of elder Alex. l. 3. Genial. c. 11. Sueton. in Tiber.
cap. 42. Plin. l. 14. cap. 42. Suet. in Neronem. Senec. epist. 47. Cel.
Rhodigin. l. 28. c. 30.
Sages: and says it was given by those flattering Physicians, rather to the
Emperors intemperancy, to gratify his taste and sensuality, then for his
health. Who for his excess and ill custom of drinking was noted in Rome, and
the style of Caius Tiberius Nero, changed to Caius Biberius Mero. And Seneca
reproves that Roman custom of drinking wine vacuis venis, that is, in the
morning when they were fasting, as an intemperate and corrupt excess, in that
declining estate of the Empire. I do think Galen.
(says Galen) wine drunk without meat, to be hurtful. Then if authority may
bring prejudice to the contrary opinion, taken only from the cup; the
judgment of these two Sages may serve. But now let us examine the reasons also.

31. Drink, though it may be ordained to man's nourishment, yet it is properly
and according to the intention of nature, vehiculum cibi, a conueyer of meat
from the stomach to all the other places of concoction; and therefore
(according to rigorous prescript of health and nature, as S. Bernard says)
Bernard tract. de diligendo. Deo.
not to be taken, but together with meat. Moreover such as are passing dry,
when they be fasting in the morning, may thereby be certain that their stomaks
are distempered with unnatural heat. And so those which surfeted at supper and
labored all the night to consumate disgestion, or went drunk to bed, are
always dry in the morning: which distemper may be also nourished and
increased by daily custom of drinking betimes, the day following, to satisfy
unnatural thirst, as Galen, and Pliny Galen. de simp. med. l. 1. c. 30. Plin.
l. 4. hist. c. 22.
observe. And hereupon, these morning drinkers, ere they be fifty years old,
become wrinckled and withered by the action of unnatural heat, and look as if
their skin were of parchement, or their faces so many pecces of brawne soused
in bear.

32. Furthermore, when drink lies swimming in an empty stomach, without
meat, it is sooner corrupted; and the strongest wine or beer changed by
distemper into the sharpest vinegre, has greater force to weaken natural
heat, and hinder disgestion with crudity, then it could mingled with meat.
And hereupon, great drinkers if they live past forty years of age ordinarily
do not much desire meat, but still seek to gratify their taste, and refresh
their stomakes ill affected with unnatural heat, by continual swilling, and
drawing down some kind of liquor: which besides the impression it makes of
moisture, it leaves behind it dregs and choler; and so, first it ^aketh away
a man's appetite and makes his stomach unfit for the disgestion of his dinner
or supper. Besides, when beer or wine floateth in an empty stomach, natural
heat easily resolves it into wind; which after dispersed though all the body,
causes diverse aches, and diseases, as well in the stomach it self as in other
parts: But specially, those gross Vampes ascending up into the head,
distemper the brain, and cause defluxions to the eyes, and the breast.

33. Lastly the power of attractation and concection, stronger in young men,
works more forcibly upon those dregs in the stomach: and finding not in
them such matter of good blood, as bread and other food do yield; nature of
necessity, forces that trash of earthly moisture into the veins, and fills
them either with cold waterish blood, like to that of fishes; or else with
enflamed moisture, if it be corrupted in the stomach, and there turned into
choler: neither of which attayneth ever to the confection of fine, pure strong,
vital, and animasticall spirits: such as (proceeding in temperate men from
temperate nourishment) cause health of body, and be instruments of better
discourse, and of more clear and perfect intelligence of the mind.

24. But besides these arguments, deduced from the Physical consideration of
man's body and the natural use of drink; there are also other reasons, founded
in moral and Christian obligation; which carry great force, to persuade the
deformity and inconvenience of this excess; and of these reasons we are now
consequently to entreat.

Whosoever shall consider man's estate according to the rules of Faith, as
composed of body and soul: shall find just cause to hate and detest the vice
of Dr^nkenesse. CHAP. II.
NATVRE has this purpose as well in man as beasts, to season, sweeten, and
grace with some temper of delight such operations as are to be performed with
laborious motion, or otherwise are unseemly in themselves. And whereas in man,
reason and corporal faculties are jointly to concur to the same actions; to
the end that both may continue in one, and work with conformity, they have
their proper enticementes, and though several, yet directed to the same end.
Reason is allured to taste, by virtue: and Sense provoked to the same, by
pleasure. And so, the organ of taste (a parcel of the body) is as it were
bayted with the contentment which it receaueth in eating and drinking, and
thereby is increased the appetite to eat and drink. Reason also, knowing that
the charge and custody of the body is committed to the soul, and that by due
use of food and moderated yet this office is to be performed, accordingly, in
respect of this obligation, and for the service of God Almighty and of the
common wealth (of which every one should be a profitable member according to
his degree) seeks temperatly and wholsomly to feed it.

2. There is no riches (says Ecclesiasticus) above the riches of health. When
therefore Eccles. 30.
the reason and judgment of a temperat mind goes before, and pres^ribeth the
measure: then sense following and obeying, works with perfection of nature
and virtue. But when Sense precedeth and commands, and Reason follows; not
only the soul, in this passage contrary to all bound and term of Justice and
duty, is debased and held in vile slavery by the sensual appetite: but the
very body is injured by this preposterous disorder, whilst meat and drink,
which are appointed as natural means for the maintenance of health and
strength, given over to the empire and obedience of sensuality, become poison
and destruction of sense it self; as happens to the old Ape, who pampering
and embracing her young ones with too much force of affection, strangleth and
kills them ere she be a ware.

3. When therefore the use of drinking is with excess, there follow of
necessity to the drinker two very bad effects: the one, an opinion and note of
baseness, the other a double penalty in the body, and in the soul. It is
therefore a wonder to consider, how this foolish sensual delight could prevail
so much in the world, and enlarge it self in diverse ages, from one nation to
another: But that the just judgment of God permits one vice to succed for
ignominy and punishment of another: and that Nations and contries degenerating
from virtue by degrees, Sin it self depresseth the people to beastly
excesses, the messengers and to retellers of their fall at hand. First the
Indians were hereby infamous: from India the infectio^ brake out to the
Parthians: from these, to the Scythians; in so much as the Grecians, in common
speech of contempt, used to say, that it was to play the Scythian to be drunk.
Yet afterward, the Grecians themselves came to play the Scythians, when the
Romans termed drunkenness Herodot. Rhodigm. lib. 2. c. 32. ^nton. ^d Crimach.
Cicer. in ve.
a Grecian trick. From the Grecians it came down to the Germans: and from
them, to other bordering Kingdoms; and to some, who in my remembrance were
free from this ignominy, and now I am ashamed to hear them noted for it in the
world.

4. But to make the error more manifest with an example: let us suppose, there
were a noble young Gentleman, Lord of a goodly manor and fair estate of land?
lying upon the sea side; who by negligence, or upon his pleasure to go
sometimes a fishing near his house, would wantonly affoard the sea an entrance
to ouerflow his whole ground, and thereby be forced (himself and his family) to
live some hours every day in a cock-boat, tossed up and down with the waves
during the tide. Such an one (I say) looking about him whilst the sea were in,
when he should behold his lordship and land, no land at all but water; and
after, when the sea were our, himself in the midst of a marish of dirt and
mire; what would he say and think of his own madness, if he were not worse
then mad? No doubt, the condition of this young Gallant would be soon changed
from greatness to baseness; his means from abondance to penury; his estate
from nobility to beggary. And even so the soul of m^n, a divine substance, and
a Prince borne to govern the body, if it once for sport or by negligence
permit an Ocean of drunkenness to break in and subvert the senses; what shall
it find whilst the flood does last, but the bulk of a beast ouerflowed with
drink? And when as the liquor is past, what will be the possession? no good
ground to be manured; but a marish of corruption, where drink and dregs over
rule the senses, and they the soul, abased by this foul disorder to the very
bottom of objection.

5. Why then is drink permitted to reign? because it is pleasant to the taste.
And why does the taste obey? for that love of delight gives a law. Why does the
soul yield to so ignominious a law, and subject it self to the scepter of
taste? This has no other reason, but the freedom of man's will, that gives way
to the commandry of sensuality over reason, against reason: where if the matter
which gets sovereignty in this case were in any measure of nature comparable
to the dignity of the soul, the disparagement of drunkenness might seem more
tolerable. But it is no better then the juice of grapes; yea many times the
strayned liquor of a barley wispe. Or if the thing debased were of small value,
the fall and debasement thereof by drink should be less pitiful. But seeing
it was created to the likeness of Almighty God, and redeemed with the precious
Blood of Christ; how unworthy a thing is it, to see it cast down, and
depressed only with superfluity of drink?

6. And if this Tyranny surprised the soul upon a sudden, or gained victory
over it at unawares; the fault were more pardonable, and i^sse reproachful to
the soul, to be so overcome and debased: But, willing and wittingly to be
blinded; the understanding and will to be enthralled; the memory oppressed; the
fancy deluded; and all the senses given up to the power of drink; and a man
to put himself out of possession and use of his wits with his own hands;
what folly more exorbitant, or what trespass more worthy of punishment and
reproach?

7. Neither does this debasement by drink, only disgrace and disorder the
soul; but the body also For, as the Bernar sero s^de Aduent. Tertul. lib. ^^
Resur.
body lives by the soul; so, from the same it receaueth splendor of
complexion, comeliness of behavior, and a certain divine beauty, which that
noble substance when it is not defiled with the contagion of sin, imparteth
to the body. But this self same body; this sheath of the soul; this goulden
cloud that receaueth light and splendor from the sun; when it is ouer-loaden
with drink, becomes no better then a barrel: and, by continuance, loses
the natural complexion, the skin like a withered bladder, all comeliness
decays; and he which living with sobriety kept the dignity of a man, by
intemperance of drinking makes himself a beast, wallowing in his own foil
and filth. A dear sale of worth and nobility, for a momentary passage of
Beer, Ale, or Wine down the throat, to drown all the talentes of nature and
grace, and become a mere vessel to receive abundance of drink; and give the
spoils and triumph over so noble a creature as man is, to so vile and beastly
a vice as is drunkenness.

8. So as in fine the superiority and dominion remains to drink: Bacchus and
the Devil rest absolute co^manders. And how will man be able to answer to
Almighty God, dishonouring thus his body and soul? How will he excuse his
fault, in abusing the creatures committed to his charge? dishonouring, I say,
and abusing (with himself) both heaven and earth, the elements, the birds,
the fishes, the beasts, plants, herbs, and all the rest of Gods creatures:
who, if they could speak would disclaim from the subjection and service of
such a man, or rather a beast, that suffers himself to be overcome by
drunkenness: specially Heaven, which is notoriously injured, when the body
ordained to dwell there after death, is in this life made a Beer-barrell or a
vessel of wine, fitter for a celler, then to be seen above ground, and much
less in heaven? And the same, in proportion, may be said of the rest: for, as
the servants quality is blemished and impaired by the vileness and
disreputation of his master: so all creatures subordinate to man as to their
Lord, are dishonored and abased when he, by excess of drink, is transformed
into a swine, into a block without sense, and made a vessel for dregs and
draffe.

9. Let the soul then force it self to mount up above sense, to bridle the
taste, and moderate all unreasonable use of drink: hating drunkenness as a
monstrous vice, which the very brute beasts do ab^orre: and should be so far
from the excellency of man, as a sovereign Prince should be free from crue^l
^ondage. Wherinto, if by mishappe he should fall at any time, surprised by some
vile traiterous varlet; no doubt but getting his liberty he would take a just
revenge, and stand upon his guard all the days of his life after, not to come
any more into the like thraldom. The same must the soul do, once rescued and
set free from the servitude of drink: it must repress sensuality, and
restrain the power of drink with di^daine; so, that it never be able to
contriue any more with ^ast against reason, nor to bring the body and soul
into unworthy sl^uery again. To this purpose* Clem. Alex. lib. ^. paed. cap. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus compares a drunkard to a sea-Asse, whose har^ (says he)
is not in his breast* but in his belly: that is, when all the honor and dignity
of man* is subjected to the desire, and delight of meat and drink.

10. S. Basil also uses the comparison of S. Paul, for the disgrace of
drunkenness. Basil. orat. cont. Aebrios.
What thing more contemptible (says he) then an Idol or false God, which has
ears and hears not, eyes and sees not, hands and feels not, feet and
cannot walk? And yet drunkenesse, by reason of the object and effects, is no
less ignominious, then if a man by Idolatry should adore and serve an ox, an
ass, or any other beast. For these obiectes at least have senses, and keep
their due uses: whereas, the body of a drunkard ouerchardged with surfeit, though
it have eyes, yet it sees not; hands, it feels not; ears, it hears no^;
and though it have feet, yet can neither go forward, nor stand upright.

11. But to proceed a little further, and to pass from this baseness of man's
estate procured by drink, to the particular detrimentes of his body and soul,
and of the common wealth. It is an axiom both in Philosophy and Divinity,
that our affection toward others proceeds originally from the natural love
of our selves: so that we first wish well to our selves, and consequently to
others with whom we communicate by nature or grace, as members of our body For
if we be brutish and cruel to S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 2 ^. art. 4. Arist. l. Magnor.
Moral.
our selves, to whom shall we be sweet, and merciful? If every man should
destr^y himself, what would become of the (...)? Therefore, for a man to (...),
is by seq^ele to annoy the community of which he is a part: as, where ^ch one
in particular, the Senator, the Scholar, the Doctor, the Soldier, were given
to drink; what should become of the Ci^ty? Wherefore, drunk^rds, for as much as
lies in them, by their president and example, endeavor to make all their
countrymen turn* soppes, and the common wealth to swim in drink. For, if this
particular person may be permitted to swill and tiple till he be drunk; why
may not the second, the third, and all rest challenge the same liberty?

12. There be some bad dispositions in man which bring no damage to the soul,
as hungar, thirst, sickness, and the like: yea sometimes they are occasions 2.
Cor. 12.
of virtue, whereby the soul is strengthened, and perfected. There be also
sundry bad affections of the soul, which detract nothing from the body. But
drunkenness, with one and the self same inundation ouerfloweth and corrupts
them both: it depriueth the body of health, and deflowreth the soul of beauty.
Some sins there be, which first make entry into the soul, as Pride, Envy,
Heresy; and consequently, by naughty effects redound unto the body: These are
of a more spiritual, and (as we may term them) more subtle and aeriall
constitution. Others which make breach first upon the body, and in consequence
pass to the soul, are in a certain manner more gross and material: of
which sort is drunkenness, and one of the grossest and foulest of all. For
ouerch arging the body, it defiles and deformeth the soul by many ways.

13. And as for the body, we Christians know, that our bodies were bathed by
the sacrament of Baptism in the blood of Christ, mingled with the August.
tract. 11. in Joan. cap. 3.
water (as S. Augustine says) who therefore, calls Baptism the Red Sea,
through which we pass toward our country of heaven, the land of promise. That
purple water, drowned only the Aegiptians, as our Baptism now annoyeth only
the Devils; delivers us from their tyranny; and cleanses our bodies, and
soul from sin; and fertilizeth Psalm. 1.
them, to bring forth flowers of virtue and fruits of good life. What a
dishonor then is it, not only in prejudice of our bodies, but also of our
Baptism, to take the hallowed vessels from the altar, and make them vessels of
profanation and idolatry in sacrifice of Bacchus?

14. O washed Christians! O vnspoted Nazarites! now made drunken swine, and a
sport for Cerberus the Devil? We Christians Thren. 4.
are certain, that the bath of regeneration* fumed not up into the head to
distemper the brain; it served not for an object of corporal delight: but
clearing Romans 6. 1. Cor. 6.
the coast above where the soul resideth, prepared our bodies, and made them
so many clean Tabernacles to entertain worthily the holy Ghost. But o foul
and unworthy bath of drink, which blinds the eyes of the soul, makes the
head ^otter, and ready to fall from the body, like a worme-aten aple from the
tree; the body to be turned into one of Circes her hogs; an instrument of
turpitude; a ship fraught with a loathsome burden; a storehouse of sin; a
retraite for Devils, which was made and consecrated for a Temple of the holy
Ghost? Here the young man loses his complexion; the soldier his strength;
the Philosopher his wit; the Orat^r his discourse; the Merchant his reckoning;
the Husbandman his thrift; the Craftes-man his honesty; the Servant his time;
and all become so many sponges, to make the barrells empty, whilst the liquour
which greedily they draw in and cannot digest, fills them with incurable
diseases, that fall from the pot upon their miserable carcasses; which once
surprised, become slaves of sickness due to sin, and unfit either to serve
Almighty God, or profit the Commonwealth, in any exercise, or office of virtue.

15. The Foul auoydeth the Falcon; the sheep, the wolf, the hare, the
greyhound, the other fishes, the whale: and every creature flies f^o^ his
contrary. What a miserable and foolish thing then is man, who runs after
sickness and death; inuiteth them to lodge in his body; yea hireth them with
money to soiourne with him, only to enjoy the pleasure of drinking, although it
cost him his patrimony, his health, his honor, and his life?

26. Whilst I was writing this, came to see me an Honorable Gentleman of our
Nation, of 72. years of age: and (no doubt by Gods providence, though with
different intention and occasion) little knowing what I was doing, fell into
discourse of the corruption of our country since he could remember. He told
me, that when he was young and lived in the Court, and in London; if by chance
any base companion, as a water man, or the like should be seen overtaken with
drink, the Prentices would come out of their shops as to a wonder, and cry
after him, a Dutchman, a Dutchman. Where now (alas) the wondering has ceased,
with opinion, that only Dutchman are drunk: for they meet often not only
Englishmen, but (as he said) Englishwomen also, well tipled in Tauernes; which
commonly is not seen amongst the Dutch. For though the husbands be unthrifts,
and drink their wits sometimes from home, yet their wives be wiser, and it is
(as I have heard) a very rare thing to see a woman drunk, in the most drunken
and deboshed Countries. If it be now otherwise in England, it is the more
shame, and the more to be pittyed: though there be no wind so bad, that blows
not profit to some body. For the same person told me, that where in London
there was wont to be but one tippling house or tavern; now, there be 20. and
the like may be deemed in other cities and towns. From whence is deduced an
evident argument (not unprofitable to be considered) from this and the like
effects to their original cause; and so to know the root by the tree, and the
tree by the fruit.

17. But to return to our purpose: many have compared the soul of man Gregor.
Nicen. l. d^ char^ct. hom Basil. l^d* homin. dignit^t.
in his body, to almighty God in heaven. For that man's body is of the finest
corporal would and complexion amongst all the works of nature, set out with
the senses (as with so many celestial planets) whose operations are no less
to be admired then the motions of the heavens in their kind. Wherefore man for
the excellent composition, and disposition of his soul and body, and of the
powers and faculties of both, is worthily called a little world.

18. Let our drunkard then consider the metamorphosis and change of his heaven;
his firmament resolved into moisture; his planets rather swimming like fishes,
then abiding steadfastly in their places; all finally turned into dirt and
dr^gges, and made a very pudlewharfe: and he will be ashamed at the change, and
cannot choose but be sorry for the loss. Who would not rather preserve his
heaven pure, firm, and constant in all regular motion, by temperance; then by
intemperauce and surfeit defile and confound this noble work of nature? But for
better understanding, Tertul. l. de Resur. Amb^. de Paradiso.
to take yet a lower comparison with Tertullian, and S. Ambrose: the body of
man includes in it self a representation of the whole glory of the Elements,
as having some higher, and some lower, like hills and dales; his blood streaming
in the veins, as in rivers; his bones covered with the flesh, as metals, and
minerals under ground: upon which contemplation, we may see what a disorder and
deformity it is, for a man to make every day a new Noes Flood within his body,
and to drown in superfluous Genes. 8.
drink this Epitome of the earth. It is recorded in holy Scripture, what
abondance of suddes and slime the waves of Noes Flood leaft behind them upon
the face of the earth, which could not be consumed but with a drying wind that
Arist. l. moral. ^ect* 3. q. 1. and 6.
came from above. The effects remaining in the body after excess of drink,
are fumes in the head; humors in the eyes; dullness of wit; captivity of sense;
inward coldness; heaviness in all the body; and malignity of diseases: which
as Aristotle teaches, are to be dried up and taken away by virtue of a
temperate restraint. And as during the time in which that filth remained upon
the earth, no herb, flower, nor fruit could grow upon it: so as long, as such
evil dregs of drink be in the body, it is incapable of all good from the
soul, and barren for all operations of virtue.

19. But the similitude is yet extenuated August. in Psalm. 1.
by S. Augustine: and yet notwithstanding, the same moral truth auerred. He
compares then the body of man to the ark of Noah: by which also, we may learn
our lesson in this affair. The Arc made for the salvation of mankind, was to
swim above the water: for otherwise, if the water had broken into the Arc,
both mankind and beasts had perished. In like manner, our body which
contains a reasonable soul, and withal some wild passions and affections of
the sensitive appetite, is to be kept from all excess of drink: least man and
beast, reason and sense, be drowned.

20. Pleasures (says Seneca) when they exceed measure become penalties. Is it
not a Seneca ep. 82.
punishment, for him which according to his natural constitution should be a
man with vigor and strength; to be brought to such weakness, as he is not
able to defend himself from the most impotent enemy; nor to hide his misery
from the mockery and scorn of the beholders; no, not to stand upon his feet?
Finally the body of man comes to that deformity by excess of drink, that
when the soul is infatuated therewith, it is worse then the body of any brute
beast: and in this respect S. Basil Basil. hom. ^^. Chryso. hom. 1. and 37.
Senec. ep. 85.
and S. Chrysostom call drunkenness, a voluntary Devil: as Seneca calls
it, a voluntary madness.

21. Instinct of nature, preserves in beasts their natural shape, and all
ornaments agreeable to their kind: where the body of a drunkard, deprived of the
use and defense both of reason and nature through voluntary sin, rests with
no prototype, or likeness either of man or beast: but resembles rather a
filthy Fiend in hell. Let the Christian, therefore, whose body adorned with many
gifts of nature, has been washed in Baptism, and received therein new dignity,
loath this turpitude. Let the body, made to be a heaven for the soul; an
instrument of Justice; an inheritour of eternal bliss, abhor this hellish
deformity, not occasioned by necessity, not brought upon it by hazard of evil
success; but voluntarily procured, and consummated, only by folly and freedom
of the drunkards own will.

22. Thus much for the body. But now, if we consider what deriment the soul
receaueth by this vice, and how the corrupt vapors of immoderate drink,
spylling the complexion, and destroying the beauty of the body below, mounteth
up to blind also the eye of the soul, to blemish, darken, and defile the
crystal glass of intelligence, with the loathsome ordure of mortal sin;
to surrender the castle of free will, impregnable by force of any creature, to
the subjection of Satan; and the faculties of body and soul, for arms and
instruments to perform all manner of wickedness; and finally set the image of
God upon Dagons Altar, and in open hostility against God himself, deserving
thereby Eternal punishment: just cause shall we have, to conceive extreme
hatred against so monstrous and pernicious a vice.

23. But, yet a little further, dividing the whole hability of man's soul into
three parcels or portions, the co^cupiscible, irascible, and reasonable
faculties: we shall find, that immoderate use of drink disordereth them all.
Wine, Prou. 20.
says Solomon, stirs up lust: See then, how concupiscence is set on fire by
the fervor of drink. And drunkenesse is tumultuous: Behold ^re enraged by the
same intemperance. He which delights in them shall not be wise: So as this
beastly excess, depriueth also the reasonably portion of wisdom and knowledge.

24. And concerning the first damage: very natural Philosophy deemeth it a
great bondage and calamity, to be perturbed with lust. In so much as Cicero
Cicero lib* 1. offic.
among other good qualities and commodities of old age, judges one, and a
great one, to be; that it is freed from that bestiality. Seeing therefore that a
Christian knows, how, through original sin, his body is distempered and
disposed of it self to unquiet the mind, and incline reason to the imitation
of brutish appetite: his office is, and his care should be, rather to diminish
the force of this poison, to quench the heat of this fire, and rid himself
from the importunity and trouble of so base and contemptible a commander;
keeping his body in a temperate constitution, with moderation of diet, yea and
with abstinence from meat and drink sometimes (as there is need, and as
Christian people use, and have used to do in all times and places, when and
where God is, or has been duly served) and by this temperance to defend the
soul, and keep it pure and free, not only from the combustion of this infernal
fire, but from the soote, and shame of the smoke: rather, then to seek fuel
to cast into the furnace, and increase the deflagration of this miserable Troy.
To what purpose must youthful blood boiling of it self, be enflamed by the
hot spirits of wine, which not only consume the natural vigor of the blood
it self, drying it up and making it unfit for generation, as Aristotle
teaches; but also, blast all the virtues, which as green plants flourish in
the soul; and disfigure the soul it self? What brute beast is so beastly, as
to add fire to fire for increase of his lust?

25. Therefore, when a Christian puts in practice by drink, that which a
beast abhors by nature; in what degree of abasement should we hold him?
Assuredly, there is no affection more disgraceful and opposite to a laudable
life, or against which a Christian man ought more to strive, as unworthy of his
name and person, then this perturbation: for where it is not bridled by
temperance, and subdued with the grace of God, it carries away men's actions to
the vilest and basest obiectes, against both reason and faith; tying them both
to the stake with an iron chain of slavery; and by little and little consuming
into ashes of intemperance, all which either grace or nature had given for
ornament; so as there remains no more of Christianity, but the bare name, nor
of manhood, but the shape.

26. The truth of this miserable change may be seen in a notorious example of
one, that lived not long ago famous for the mischief and public scandal
that has followed in these parts of the world by his fall into sin, Martin
Luther.
who, had not only vowed Religion and chastity, but lived many years chaste in
Angellical profession and company; and yet in his declining years, by
intemperance of gluttony and drunkenesse, degenerated so far from himself, as
(measuring all by his own misery after his fall from Gods grace) amongst other
pernicious errors, he taught with shame enough, that man could not live chaste.
Though his meaning was, to cover his incontinent life with an excuse of
impossibility; the deceit lying in supposition of the like intemperance; that a
man given over to riot and drunkenesse, can hardly live chaste, which, without
prejudice to chastity, may be granted to the Doctors weakness that taught
this learning; and to the experience of his chiefest disciples, which have
followed his doctrine and life. And yet, for all this, the contrary is most
certain, for if Chastity could not be kept, Christ our Savior would never
have cou^sailed it to his followers: nor the Apostles commended so highly this
kind of life.

27. The difference is, that the disciples of Christ (which by continual
temperance keep the body subject always to the soul, and all the senses
employed in exercise of Christian life within the compass of reason and faith)
as in the rest of their actions, dedicated wholly to the honor and service of
Almighty God, they imitate the Angels that serve him in heaven: so they receive
from him, as a necessary ornament of their estate (and as a Gods penny of
greatter reward) the precious jewel of perpetual Chastity; which in some
degree aduanceth them above the dignity of Angels: Whilst they conserve
Angelical purity in corruptible bodies of flesh and blood, as we see performed
by innumerable persons of both sexes, helped (as I say) by the grace and
assistance of him that gave this counsel and example; helping themselves
also, as they should, by avoiding occasions of temptation, not to give
advantage to the Devil, and by the ordinary means of temperate diet and
abstinence, yea and of rigorous fasting also, and other exercises of penance
when there is need: which remedies, the old Heathens could tell were helps to
Chastity; and so they taught, that sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus. But
these new Doctors, because they desire not to live chaste, will not make use of
this doctrine. Thus we see that the disciples and followers of Christ our
Savior by temperance and Chastity, are exalted above their own nature, to be
like Angels in life; as the others giving themselves over to gluttony and
drunkenness, become worse then beasts. And so no marvel, if their master
and Foreleader taught so filthy and beastly doctrine, taking the measure of
man's possibility, by himself, and his own weakness, after he had degenerated
to the habit and custom of a beastly life.

28. The chaste temperate soul in the water of baptism beholds Almighty God,
his Angels, and the sacred mysteries of our holy faith; and there contemplateth
the temperate and fruitful quality of a Christian: The others in their riot
and intemperance of drink, what shape can they find, but of ugly Devils, and
fiends of hell, who are delighted to see them wallow in the mire of beastly
pleasures; and become worse then beasts and inordinate desires like to
themselves.

29. Consequently when immoderate drink has thus set the concupiscible part
of the soul on fire: as has bin said: the dregs and droppinges, are choler
and fury in the irascible. A strange effect, that from honey should be strayned
gall. But so it is: the face of a Nymph, but with the sting of a serpent. Much
Ecclesiast. cap. 19*
wine drunken (says the Wiseman) provoke wrath, and many ruins. What thing
more hurtful, or more mad, then for a man willingly to poison himself: and
draw down his throat, the sweetest liquor that may bereave him of his wits?
The mountain Etna in Sicily whose bosom always full of fire, groaning, and
roaring (as it were in rage) to disgorge itself of wrathful rancor, casts
up burning coals continually (as it were to take revenge of the heavens:) such
a monster is a drunkard, when the heat of drink has entered into his body
down his throat; scalded his veins; scorched his liver; and enflamed his head:
for then (like an Etna) with a burning face and glowring eyes, after that
drink has let loose in him all possible distemper of nature and vice, he
begins in rage to breath out contumelious words, and many times breaks out
into effects of fury, no less then if he were mad, as he is indeed whilst the
fit endures: and therefore Bacchus was painted in form of a Madman, as
Athenius Iuuenal. Satyr. 6.
reports, and Iuuenal, that the Egyptian Bacchanalies, or solemnities of
wine, were outrageous in violence of contention and fight, and seldom without
blood. Which disposition, who knows not how far it repugneth to the mild
spirit of a Christian? So as he denies this holy and most honorable name, and
(in very deed) renounceth his baptism, whosoever gives himself over to riot
and drink: for these kind of people be those of whom the Apostle says,
Quorum Deus venture est, and gloria eorum in confusione: Their taste and belly is
their God; and their glory confusion and repoach.

30. Thus far we are come in the offense and damage which a man receaueth in
the concupiscible and irascible parts of his soul, by excess of drink. Now
let us come to the third and chiefest. For as nothing in him is more precious
and honorable then the light of reason; so nothing can be to him of greater
impeachme^t, nor more disgraceful, then to have it by any means troubled or
eclipsed. The gross vapor raised from the earth, though it ascend to the
middle region of the air, yet it never arises so high, as to touch the sun
it self. How foul and unworthy a thing is it then, that the filthy vampe of
intemperate drink boiling in the stomach, should presume to deprive the soul
of understanding and freedom, S. Thom. 1. 2. q. 48. art. 1. ludic. 16.
by which principally it carries the image of Almighty God. Which surprised,
and blinded by drink, like another Sampson, is exposed to the scorn and
laughter of foolish perturbations. And if no country clown be so rude and
unmannerly, as to touch the robes of a Prince, without reverence; or to enter
into his priuy-chamber uncalled: what an unworthy presumption is it, for the
ignominious breath of vndisgested drink, not only to touch the light of the
soul, but ouerpresse it in captivity and darkness; yea to strike it dead,
till the force of nature helped by sleep revive it, and restore it to liberty.

31. How, think you, will God Almighty, beholding our drunkard deprived both
of reason and sense, and all resemblance of a man, take this villainy committed
against the sovereignty of his Royal arms, and image in his broad Seal,
surprised, defaced, and contemptously defiled by surfeit of drink, which
redoundeth also as an injury to himself, worthily to be punished. The Angels
also, looking upon the same spectacle of a reasonable soul thus annoyed by
drink will hold themselves highly prejudiced: for that the same image and
similitude, which they see defaced in man, is their principal flower, and the
diadem of their Nature and Being. Wherefore, if that force which should turn a
mighty Prince out of his robes and estate, into the habit and quality of a
Pesant, be holden for malignant: how strange and malicious is the fume of
intemperate drink, which ouermastering reason, casts down man's high dignity
to the basest condition, lower then of the filthiest beast.

32. We love our eyes (says Aristotle) and carefully defend them, because we
Arist l. metaph. c. 1.
love knowledge, to which our eyesight avails much. How much more then, are
we to affect and preserve the understanding it self, by which properly and
immediately we know; and not permit it to be stricken with blindness, only to
enjoy the pleasure of a little more drink then nature does desire. Wherefore, if
all kind of vice in general be odious in quality, for as much as it is
repugnant and injurious to nature; and so much the worse, by how much it is
more contrary: seeing then that other sins do only neglect, and as it were
contemn reason, passing by it with disgrace; this offense of drunkenesse which
rebelleth directly against it, seaseth upon it with violence, and kills it in
a manner stark dead, must needs be holden in a most superlatiue degree of
hateful deformity and disgrace.

33. Which supposed, and that according to the nature and quality of the
object, the measure of malice is to be esteemed more or less in any act of
man's will: and that a man losing the use of reason, is not only deprived of his
greatest good by the intemperance of drink, but that the same loss is
voluntarily procured by the drunkard himself; and without any benefit of all
to soul or body (for what meat or drink is taken in, more then nature
requires, for sustenance, which is but a little, setting evil custom aside,
serves for nothing else, but to make more work for the Scauenger) it must
needs be concluded, that this vice of surfeit and drunkenesse is a most foolish,
and grievous trespass.

34. If a man should willingly cast away his money, which should serve him for
the necessary maintenance of himself, his wife, his children, and family: no
doubt but the folly were very dispraisable. Or if by his own voluntary fact he
should procure ignominy, and the loss of his good name; it would also be
condemned for a foolish and unnatural injury. Or if he should willingly and
wittingly feed himself with unwholesome and poisoned food to destroy his
bodies health; would it not be thought he were desperate and out of his wits?
But above all the rest for a man of set purpose to contriue and procure his
own senselessenes, his own want of wit and discretion, his own folly, fury,
and madness; is above all comparison monstrous and detestable. Are there not
things now afflictiue and offensive to reason in this life, as it were so many
flying black clouds, that engrosse the air of our element, and obscure the
light of our understanding; but that the wretch with his own hands must raise
this mist of darkness, must cast this smoke before his eyes to confound and
infatuate himself? And why forsooth? to give a little passing pleasure to the
throat, that dureth no longer but whilst the liquor is going down; which
besides the hurt it brings to the drunkard in his soul, obliges his body
also to endure long penalty afterward: a pretty merchandise. Is reason and
health of no greater a worth then to be cast a way for so small a price? is the
drink taken in of more value, the^ the health drowned, and the wit vented out?
If it be just, that he which has a ring with a precious stone, be careful to
preserve it from defacing: much more, a man having so precious a jewel as a
reasonable soul in his body, is to keep it carefully from all injury. But
because humane diligence is not always sufficient to maintain the soul in
purity, to keep this shining beam of reason vnclowded, and vndazeled this eye
of the soul; we must make recourse to Almighty God, that he by his especial
grace will preserve this eye, and fortify it with internal light against
external darkness.

35. To this purpose holy King David cried out: Lighten, O Lord, mine eyes,
that I Psalm. 12.
never sleep in death. What an unnatural fact is it for a man, not only by
drink to hinder this accessory light of grace; but also to put quite out the
light of nature, not only vnabling himself to look up to heaven: but to look
down to the earth, or to see himself? That man in his understanding might have
light of a supernatural knowledge, the Son of God died upon the Cross, and
there disbursed the inestimable treasure of his precious blood: The holy Ghost
descended and bought for us stars to shine in the firmament of our souls:
And must then drunkenes extinguish all, as if they were nothing worth, and that
only to content the taste, during the current of drink?

36. All men (and that justly) reprove the ancient cruel Sacrifices of many
Nations, which committed barbarous slaughter of men to the honor of their
Idols: But is not drunkenness a worse slaughter of the souls intelligence in
the idolatrous service of drink? Will nothing content that Monster but to prey
upon reason? Is there no offering or sacrifice fit for his Altar, but humane
wit, there to be destroyed? Reason once gone, fury ensues: no sense is left
behind in any order, but all become instruments of drink. And what will not
sense commit in obscurity, when the light of reason is extinguished; and sense
in the darkness of ignorance (as the Wiseman says) let loose, without
Ecclesiast ^
all restraint.

37. Neither is the malice of drink ended with the end of a waking life: but
pursues the soul, even when the body lies in darkness, and the eyes are
oppressed with sleep. For then rush out of the imagination (as it were) so many
furies of hell, the horrible and ghastly representations of foul fiends, to
fright a troubled and tormented soul; putting the poor wretch in plight, as
if now he were in the pains of hell. O dear and sour payment, for a little
pleasure of drink? These, these are the Harpies and Furies which arise from
surfeit, and begin to torment the drunkard, even in this life, procupating his
damnation to come.

38. Thus have we compassed about by contemplation, the whole circuit of man's
nature, contained in the body and soul of a drunkard; and found each part and
faculty thereof depraved with drink. Let us now (to conclude) consider the
respect, which man should bear to Almighty God, and toward others of his own
kind with whom he must live: and we shall perceive by this reckonning also,
that he is exceedingly endomaged by drunkenness, as the sequel will declare.

Whatsoever duty belongs to a Christians charge, either to God or Man, is
only violated by this vice of Drunkenness. CHAP. III.
SOLOMON describing the sovereign wisdom of Almighty God, by participation
whereof, men become wise, sets it forth in such words, as we may understand
it to be far from all material constitution and quality: and consequently
teaches us, that if we will enjoy any parcel thereof in our selves, we must
free our souls from all troublesome passions, and, as much as we can, lighten
them of all unnecessary charge, which the body otherwise being ouerloaden must
needs be burdenous to the soul, and hinder her functions necessary for
wisdom. For in wisdom (says he) Sap. 7*
is the spirit of understanding, holy, one and manifold, subtle, eloquent,
moveable, undefiled, sure, sweet, loving goodness etc. For it is a vapor of
the power of God, and a certain sincere emanation of the glory of God
omnipotent: and therefore no defiled thing can come near it for it is the
brightness of everlasting light, the vnsp^tted glass of Gods Majesty, and the
image of his goodness. By which metaphorical words translated from things of
the noblest substance, is described the spiritual nature and condition of
divine wisdom. Therefore, a soul which is to be endowed therewith, must be
weaned (as much as may be without inconvenience) from the objects of our
senses: especially from such as are more gross, material, and earthly, and
which cause any violent alteration of the body. For as long as our souls be
harbored in our bodies, they must needs be troubled with their affections:
which, as they have immediately a kind of dominion over the imagination; so once
admitted, consequently, have ability and occasion to trouble the understanding,
and so to subdue the will if it be not otherwise prevented.

2. We may therefore in two respects give a reason, why drink taken out of
measure, is an obstacle in us, to divine wisdom, and to the love which we owe
to Almighty God: one consists in the peculiar temper of the brain, which
being once replenished with vapors of drink, as the imagination is thereby
carried away and distracted to wander, gazing after many impertinent matters;
so the understanding, which has a natural combination and friendship with it,
is consequently so occupied with trifles, as it has no leisure to contemplate
seriously and steadfastly upon Almighty God, and the other obligations of man:
whereby, the understanding is not only distracted for the time together with
the imagination; but with custom of trifling becomes also a trifler: and is
dulled and made unable to penetrate any thing which is sequestered from the
senses; loosing, as it were the edge and sharpness of all spiritual eye
sight, by continual looking upon sensible and material things -- Moreover by
reason of the bodies constitution and great desire of sensuality in the
sensual appetite, it bears such sway in man when it is not restrained, that
it commands his mind, his will, and the love of his heart; and keepe^h all
his affections in servitude. So that where disorder about drink (whose force
with custom becomes a Hercules) has engendered Seneca ep. 83.
in one, and egar desire still to be swilling, he cannot have feeling of God,
nor of any spiritual matter; which to a creature so material and be^otted,
will seem rather fantastical then credible, and so fare off to give taste or
comfort to an understanding soped in drink, as the very remembrance of
heavenly matters will be ircksome to it.

3. Alas, what a misery is this, when the soul, a spiritual substance, must
be weaned and kept so far from her natural food: and, as a noble man's child
driven from conversation with his peers be forced to converse with wild savage
people, or live with brute brastes, and so become like to them in behavior,
savage, rude, and beastly.

4. If a soul thus barbarized, and abased in the body, by intemperate
drinking, could for a time behold her own estate, and (the cloud of ignorance
dispersed) see perfectly what she enjoys now, and what she has lost: what
sorrow would she conceive? for as Ecclesiasticus Eccles. 2.
says: He which adds to knowledge, adds to grief: as it would fall out in
this case, whilst the soul should consider the ^urpitude of the things about
which it is employed, dead pu^ryfied carcasses, loathsome to generous minds to
think of, and rather for dogs to feed upon then for men to joy in, so many
false baytes of the Devil, to draw men to damnation: and as themselves are to
be corrupted a lit^e after, and come to nothing; so also the souls devoted to
them, Jacob. 5.
shall perish with them, and iumpeat unawares into an estate of eternal
misery, worse then nothing. August. in Psalm. 15.


5. The husbandman (says S. Augustine) carries up his corn from a lower
room unto a higher, lest it pu^rify: And so a man's h^rt, if it be not lodged
above in God, will fester below. Wherefore, a soul delighted in such corruption
(even by the judgment of Aristotle Aristl. l. 2. Magnor. Moral.
a heathen Philosopher) hates it self. Yet this is the Patrimony and portion
whereof the drunkard makes choice, and to which he sticks, for the inordinate
love of drink to loose friendship and acquaintance with Almighty God, and
virtue. With God and virtue (I say) which two make the center whereupon is
founded the whole circumference of man's felicity and being: so, as not to be
acquainted with virtue; nor conversant in har^ and cogitatio^ with Almighty
God, in whom is eminently comprised all perfection, al sweetness, all true
contentment and happiness: what is it but a living death and an epitome of all
misery?

6. Deerly beloved (says S. Augustine) August. ^^ Psalm. 84.
think upon all the beautiful things in the world, which you see and love:
and remember that God Almighty made them. If they be fair, what is God
himself? if they be great, what is he? if they be pleasant, he must needs be
more. Wherefore by means of these things which we love, let us desire him, and
love him above all; contenning all other things besides. Upon this
consideration, Daniel 6.
the Prophet Daniel, and his companions thought it a thing worse then death,
not to have access to Almighty God by prayer in thirty days: or not to adore
him seven times every day, though it were forbidden by the Prince. And not to
be virtuous, what a detriment is it? considering that virtue is a continual
work of the soul, inseparably accompained with pleasure, even (as Aristotle
teaches) surpassing all corporal A^rist. lib. Magnor. Moral, August l. 4.
contra I ^l. cap. 3.
delights, and (as S Augustine says) an endeavor with perfect co^tentment,
affording the proper ornament of a reasonable soul; whereby it is distinguished
in superiority of nature, from the soul of a brute beast. What exchange then
is this, for so short and brutish a pleasure of drink, to forsake God and
virtue? what loss, by drink to live without God and virtue in the darkness
of understanding; and to surke in the obscurity of a mouse-hole, in the corner
of a Tavern, fearful to behold the light of the world, and much more to
think upon Gods Judgments?

7. In this sort, when the people of Israel had charged their stomakes, and
heads with drink, They rose up to play. having forgotten Almighty God. Drink
made Idolatry a sport to that foolish people. Drink, is not a fit directour of
any serious work or employment; but only for foolery: as though a man were
made for nothing else, nor God to be employed, but only about idle pastimes, to
loose his time, and play the child, or worse.

8. No sooner does drink possess the heart and head of man, but it breaks
out into impiety. And no meruaise if all be dark, when reason by it is
obscured, and heaven hidden in a cloud. Whereupon the spirit of God, by the
Prophet I say reprehending the drunke^nesse Isa. 5.
of the Jews, told them the issue. Harp (says he) violl, tymbrell and
shalme, and wine in your feasts: And you regard not the work of our Lord, nor
consider what his hands have made. Unhappy hinderance by drink, betwixt men's
eyes and Almighty God; debarring them from contemplation of so worthy objects,
as be his works. Therefore, least drunkenesse might bring in the ungodliness of
heresy, infidelity, and contempt of heavenly things; Almighty God gave this
provident advise to his people. When thou have eaten and drunk, take heed
that thou do Deuteronomy. 6.
not forget thy Lord God.

9. The Poets feign in hell a river called Letheus; whose water drunk, causes
in the drinkers forgetfulness of the best things: that is, of Almighty God and
his gifts, and so fitter for damned spirits in hell, then for Christian people
upon the earth. Wherefore, the fact of holy Job was very considerate, when he
offered sacrifice for the expiation of his childrens sins, fearing least in
their banqueting and drinking together they might sin against God Almighty;
Daniel 6.
as King Baltassar did, when ouercharged with wine, in contempt and mockery of
Religion, he would needs profane hallowed vessels; and not content with the
use of his own cups, would needs quaffe in those which his father had taken
out of the Temple of Jerusalem.

10. Our Savior also, foreseing the effect of surfeiting and drunkenesse,
warned his chosen that they should take great heed of this vice: for that in
particular, it would make them forget themselves, and be unprovided for his
coming and account, as well with every man at the day of his death, as with
altogether at the general Judgment. Luc. 21.
Look well (said our Savior) to your selves, least perhaps your hearts be
ouercharged with surfeiting, and drunkenesse, and cares of this life: and that
day come upon you at unawares. It is then the fruit and effect of intemperate
drink, to bring that fearful and dangerous day upon a man, suddenly: that is,
to come when he has no cogitation thereof. And surely there is no ignorance so
bad in a Pilot, as to loose the sight of the Pole Star, by which he should
govern his course: as the memory of death and Judgment must be our stars
and guides in the sea of this life.

11. Aurelius Prudentius reports, that in the time of persecution which
afflicted the primitive Church, they whom no violence nor torment could
withdraw Epist. Cypr. ad Do^at.
from God, and the profession of their faith, drinking and banqueting made
them Apostat^es: for no doubt but as men through drink and riot neglect
A^mighty God: so he justly neglects them, permitting them to fall. And, if
they de^er^^ to rise again by speedy penance, will one day rouse them with
thunder out of their drunken sleep: when he also (as the Scriptue speaks
Psalm. 77. Deuteronomy. ^^.
to move us the more) in way of just anger will be drunk in revenge; and make
his arrows also and his dar^es of Judgment, as thirsty as drunkards, to
drink up the blood of such beastly offenders.

12. Who then, knowing this, will not rather mortify and overcome his taste by
temperance; then for a light contentment thereof, forget God, Heaven, Hell,
Judgment, and all divine providence and justice with men? Besides,
considering, that God Almighty is so offended with drunkenesse, that he
prepares with all rigor of s^u^rity to punish the drunkard from heaven, and
force him to drink up the cup of his wrath to Psalm. 10. 74. Esa. 5^.
the very d^egges; if reason may have any effect in man, it will procure in him
fear and detestation of this vice.

13. When drink has wrought a separation and diuercement betwixt God and man,
no marvel if he become contemptible to all creatures. It is a Matthew. 18. Act.
10. H^e^on. i^ c. ^^. Ma^^.
great humility in an Angel so excellent a substance, and adorned with so
noble qualities, to attend upon man, and to be his tutor. But when he
considers the party committed to his charge* to be endowed with a reasonable
soul, like himself in many things, and ordained no less then he, to the
honor and service of God, and to be partaker of the same beati^ude with him;
he takes great comfort, and with exceed^ng joy and ala^rity buck^eth himself
to his task and office. But when this glorious bright shining spirit beholds
his pupil oppressed with drink and tran^formed Hieron. l. ^. in cap. 5. ad
Galat.
into the sh^^ of a beast, a ^u^pe of flesh, a disfigured monster, neither dead
no^ alive: how may he not truly think his function disgraced* and justly
withdraw his most kind, and fau^u^able protection.

14. If women, according to the prescript ^. Cor. 1^.
of S. Paul, were to veyle their heads in the Church for honors sake due to
the earthly Angels, that is, to the Bishop and his Priests: what care is to be
had by all Christians, that by foul and disorderly life (especially by
drunkenness) they offend not, nor give dislike to the heavenly Angels, their
keepers and defenders? But let us finally descend from Almighty God, and his
Angels and Saints, to men; and considering drunkenness even in way of
ciuility, examine how great harm it brings to any commonwealth. No doubt but
as every private man is to receive profit from the community wherein he lives;
so does he owe service and duty to the good of the same community. Consider
then, how a drunkard depriueth others and his commonwealth of that assistance
which he owes them. Amongst other good offices which friends and neighbors
owe ec^ to other one is prudent counsel, the next secresy. But what counsel
or secrecy may we expect from one that is given to drink? It is the custom
of a frantic man (as Gal^^. li^. ^. de morb. vulgar.
Galen says) to be babbling always: as of one that is melancholy to be always
silent. And what difference between frenzy and drunkenness, for the time one
is drunk, seeing the mad* man and the drunken-man be both out of their wits?
And to this disposition of frensy (as the same Galen notes) some are sooner
brought then others. For light and turbulent brains upon small causes become
frantic; where* others of a more sober quality, fall not there into but upon
greater occasions. The drunkard (says Seneca) discloseth his secrets, as new
Seneca ep. 83.
working wine moving from the bottom, breaks out of the barrel above. And
therefore the ancients painted Bacchus with a Treuet by him; to signify, that
men given to drink utter all they know, to al they meet: as in old time in
Cities (at the head of three streets presented by the Treuet) nouellers
broached their news to the people. Wherefore, according to prudence, there is
no friendship secret, nor confidence to be reposed in the breast of a drunkard.

15. Neither may we say, that a drunkard in this consideration of Ciuility, is
subject to this or that miscarriage; but generally to all, which are either
rooted in his nature, or may be habituated by use. So that drink, is not only
of it self a matter of intemperance, but once admitted into the breast with
excess, what evil inclination or vice soever it finds in nature, or bad
custom, after it has once maistered reason that kept the perturbations in
awe, it gives t^em leave, and passage to rush out into all kind of
wickedness. So as nothing so much either increases or discovers sinful
affections in a man, as drunkenesse.

16. When wine h^th possessed the soul (says Seneca) what evil l^y hid
before* now Senec. ep. 83.
appears. Drunkenesse does not make vices, but discovers them. If one be
proud, drink makes him more insolent: if he be envious, more outrageous and
hurtful: lustful, more lascivious: and the like in all other dispositions to
wickedness: as if one should open the Goaile door, and give all the
malefactors leave to run out of prison. And so I remember a story worthy to be
noted of a discreet Father, which had an untoward Son in one of our
Universities: and hearing that he was given to play, said he could remedy the
matter by keeping him short of money. After he heard that he haunted evil
company: which also he neglected, saying, that time would cure the follies of
youth. But when he understood that he was become also a drunkard, as one vice
draws on another: then (quoth he) it is time to take him from the University,
for he will never be good for any thing.

17. According to this, what help can any civil community receive, or expect
from drunkards, that are so disloyal in all matters of importance, and so
lavish and unbridled in the restraint of all corrupt qualities and affections;
and prone to put in execution, in all times, places, and occasions, without
controlement, whatsoever folly and frenzy may suggest? But in particular,
choler and cruelty, which attend always on drunkenness, make it barbarous and
unsupportable in any commonwealth. For anger and cruelty is occasioned by
drunkenness, not only during the time that the man is drunk: but being often
stirred up by frequent use, it becomes so customary and habitual, that upon
every light occasion it breaks out like a flame out of brimstone or
gu^powder. Which distemper, though it be dangerous and to be condemned in all;
yet especially and above all in Princes and Seneca. ep. 83.
Magistrates, by the examples of Alexander, who being drunk at a banquet,
killed Clitus his decrest friend: and of Antony, that gave sentence of death
when he was hoa^e in wine, which after he had cause to repent. In which respect
Solon Rhodig. in lib. 28. c. 32.
enacted a law to the Athenians that their king should be punished by death, if
he were convicted to have been drunk: which was executed in Zeno the Emperor
(as Zonaras records) who being Tom. 3. Annal.
drunk, was buried alive by his wife.

18. Next to Magistrates, the vice of drunkenness (though foul in all) is
most detestable and pernicious in women in respect of their progeny; for from
intemperate parents descend naturally vicious and disorderly children. And
perhaps from this proceeded the ruin of great Monarchies (next to the
punishment of Gods justice) that as they were raised by valiant men, begotten
and brought up in temperance: so they were lost by effeminate cowards, bred in
riot and excess of meat and drink. Plato in his common wealth forbids
wine to women with child; And the Romans enacted many severe laws to debar
women from wine: and the use thereof was infamous amongst them. And the custom
for kinsfolks to salute their kinswomen, is said to have been introduced for
a trial, to find if they smelled of wine. And at this day the Persians, and
Turks want not their necessary provisions in this case, to keep their women
temperate and chaste. And if we consider, not only the service but the security
of the common wealth: seeing that drunkenness depriueth men both of judgment
and true fortitude, which are the keys, and supporters of a civil estate;
whatsoever external Enemy shall endeavor to make a prey of a people where it
reigns, may be greatly aduantaged by this vice.

19. But here one may ask me, what remedy for thirst: if drink be forbidden?
I answer, that drink is not forbidden nor dissuaded, but the excess and
immoderate use of drink: nor thirst is always to be remedied with drink: as
we see in a dropsy, which causes vehement and continual thirst, and yet is
so far off to be quenched, or the disease to be cured by drinking, as the
only way to be rid of both the cause and the effect, is to abstain from
drink. In like manner, he that was drunk ouernight, is commonly thirsty in
the morning, as above has been said. And if he will quench this thirst
proceeding from surfeit, by pouring drink upon drink, he shall be thirsty all
his life. Natural thirst caused by the operation of natural heat, that dries
up natural moisture, is to be refreshed by drink. But accidental thirst,
that proceeds from the corruption of meat or drink in the stomach, is by
abstinence to be removed; and by little and little will diminish of it self,
if you give nature leave and time to digest the excrements, which like a
dunghill breath out those hoate putrified vapors, that infect the throat, and
the mouth.

20. And amongst many other punishments of drunkards, it is no small one to be
continnally tormented with thirst: as the contrary, to be rid of this misery,
as temperate men be, me thinks should be sufficient to persuade any man to be
temperate; though there were no other reward for virtue, nor punishment for
vice, but in this life. But because this is the least, which passes with time,
and that the torments which shall never have end, are much more to be feared
and eschewed; I will conclude this matter with an example or two out of
approved authors, to this purpose. P. Martin. del Rio. to. 2. disq. mag. pa. 1.
4. 7.
In Flanders it happened of late years, that three companions much given to
drinking, and consequently to other vices, having tripled till it was late in
the night; one of them, not so bad as the rest, said: we have drunk enough,
let us give God thanks. But I (quoth another) give the Devil thanks; for him
we have served: and so in sport rising from the table, went all to bed. They
were scarce laid down, when behold a tall black fellow in Hunters apparel
broke into the chamber, and with two little Cooks: and looking about, asked
with a terrible voice, where is he that gave me thanks? I am come to reward
him. And with all pulling him out of his bed, delivered him forthwith to the
Cooks. They, by his commandment, made fire in the chimney; put him upon a
spit which they had brought for the purpose; and roasted him till he was dead.
And then the Hunter turning to the rest, said, you also have deserved the like;
but I am forbidden to touch you. And so vanished out of sight.

21. Another, no less dreadful, was Thomas Cantip. l. 2. Ap. c. ^6. page 2.
of two good fellows in a Tavern, who being well tipled one of them said: we
are grossly deceived by these Clergiemen, when they tell us, that our souls
are immortal. Presently a third coming in, asked them whereof they were
talking. Of the immortality of the soul, said the other: And if any body would
buy mine, I should give it him good cheap, and let the money be spent in
drink. All three laughing at the bargain, I will buy it, quoth the unknown
guest: and the price being agreed upon, and the money paid, they fell a
drinking merrily anew, till it was almost night. Then, said the stranger, it is
now time for v^ to get home, every one to his lodging: But before we depart, I
must ask a question. He that buyeth a horse, does he not also buy the halter
with which he was tied? Yes said the other. And he had no sooner answered; but
the stranger, embracing him, carried him up into the air out of sight, and
thence (as may be supposed) body and soul to hell fire.

22. But if there be no hell fire (says the Atheist) how then? If there be a
hell (says the Christian) as undoubtedly there is, how then? what shall become
of the drunkard, the Atheist, and other such good fellows? And howsoever
(leaving these beasts in their doubts) at least, they cannot (nor any of them
which has but a spoonefull of brains) will deny, but that in so dangerous a
deliberation as this of eternal felicity or damnation whereof we speak; the
best is, to cleave to the surest part. And this may suffice for the present
matter.

THE THIRD CVRE: WHICH IS, Of Impiety in Swearing.
Wherein consists the nature of an Oath: and how the use thereof is lawful and
Religious. CHAP. I.
AN Oath, as it is ordinarily understood is an external speech or other out
ward sign, whereby a man inuocateth the eternal and inviolable Truth of
Almighty God, and brings it in as a witness of that which is avouched
August. in Psalm. 109.
or denied. Upon which definition may be gathered, that an oath (although a
good and virtuous work) yet is occasional: that is, no other wise to be used,
then upon necessity or just cause, when he that affirms or denies any thing,
needs greater authority and assurance then his own testimony alone, to
certify others with whom he speaks, that the thing which he so affirms or
denies is true; which otherwise would not be believed: for that it is supposed
by all, that no honest man in his wits, would call God to witness, and
affirm any thing which were not true: disgracing thereby, as August. l. ^. de
mendacio c. 6.
much as is in man's power, and abusing the prime and sovereign Truth, whilst
he applies it irreverently to the testimony of falsehood. Therefore (as the
Angelical Doctor S. Thomas teaches) S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 89. art. 1.
the invocation and attestation of divine authority makes the thing, for which
it is brought, justly credible, and to be believed.

2. Thus having described an oath by all the parts and causes thereof; we are
to know, that there be two kinds of oaths: one is called assertiue, to wit, an
oath which affirms the verity of things either past, or now present in
action, or to come; as if one should swear, that he himself, or another, was
in such a place, at such a time, and uttered these or these words; or that he
is not culpable of any crime: or that there is no harm to follow, which may be
feared without cause; and the like. The other is called promissiue, when a man
brings the authority of Almighty God, as a witness and surety, that he will
perform such a matter as he promises: which manner of swearing implies, in
some part, an oath assertiue; which is, that now for the present he has an
actual purpose to accomplish what is by him promised; as the assertiue oath
aforesaid of things to come, inuolueth a promise. And in both kinds is found
one, and the same divine authority; by which, protestation is made, to the end
that men believe the verity of things sworn either by way of assertion, or of
promise.

3. These oaths, that they may be lawful and honestly given, or taken, require
three conditions specified in the word of God, and included in the institution
of nature. Thou shall swear (says Hier. 4.
Almighty God) Our Lord lives, in truth, and in judgment, and injustice: so
that whether we affirm, or promise any thing upon an oathe, the matter sworn
ought to be accompanied with these three qualities, that is, with truth,
judgment, and justice. As concerning the first, the matter is evident; for it
must needs be a sacrilegious offense, misprising Gods divinity to bring it to
witness falsehood: for, as Almighty God is in himself an infallible Truth,
and prime author thereof; so also is he infallible in revealing and witnessing;
and it is impossible that he either can be deceived, or deceive. Whereupon, to
induce him, as a witness of an untruth, is a maine trespass, and abuse
against his eternal Verity. Wherefore, this condition is evidently necessary,
not only in an oath of assertion, but of promise also. So that if one upon his
oath should promise the performance of a thing, and so promising not retain
inwardly a purpose, or think himself unable, to accomplish his promise; he
should be perjured, and offend immediately against the high and sovereign Truth
of Almighty God.

4. Moreover, the matter sworn is to be just and lawful, not repugnant to any
virtue, or other requisite obligation. For as it is a heinous fault against
divine Truth to make it a witness of falsity; so is it also, to avouch it in
confirmation of wickedness, whether it be assertion or promise. And indeed,
whatsoever wicked object is also practically and morally false; that is not to
be don by man: and therefore divine authority being brought to affi^me, or
confirm that which is unlawful and ought not to be, is injured and disgraced:
furthermore, it may fall out (namely in an oath of assertion) that the matter
which is affirmed be true in it self, and yet practically to be esteemed
false, because it is unlawful, as if one upon his oath should discover a
secret sin of another against ciuility, natural secrecy, and charity: such
an oath should not include falsehood, opposite to any specu^arine Truth, yet
notwithstanding it should be sacrilegious, and an impeachment of Gods
authority, for as much as it is taken against justice of charity and ciuility.

5. Lastly, for that the exhibition of an oath is a matter of great importance,
it ought to be don with judgment: that is, with prudent consideration of the
truth, and decency of the thing sworn, whether in way of assertion or
promise. The necessity of which condition is originally derived from the
dignity and authority of Almighty S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 8. art. 3. ad 3.
God, as S. Thomas teaches. For the inuocations of Almighty Gods authority,
supposes a reverent faith in him that swears, that it is able to confirm
all truth, and to discover and destroy all falsity: and therefore, swearing
(according to nature and right) is used, only upon necessity of procuring that,
which is good either for the common wealth, or for private persons, when there
wants other means to discover the truth. And this protestation by divine
authority, must issue from judgment; as well about the certain truth and
conueniency of the thing sworn, as also about the necessity of swearing: for
to swear for every small matter, or where there is no urgent cause, is to
swear in vain; and thereby to misprise the Majesty of God against his
commandment.

6. Hereby may be understood, that the taking of an oath rightly, invested and
accompained with all circumstances, is good and lawful: yea, an act of
Religion and supreme worship toward Almighty God. That it is a laudable act in
it self, will appear, if we consider it only in respect of ciuility or
natural piety. For an oath in it self implies no dishonor unto Almighty
God, or harm to man, when we avouch divine authority in witness of any thing
affirmed, or promised: yea rather we honor Almighty God; making him vmpier and
chief determiner of all humane affairs; and by his name and authority ending
controversies; establishing humane fidelity in contractes, in services and good
offices between man and man; as between superiors and inferiors, and
equals among themselves; which must needs be holden a practice conformable to
reason, and consequently virtuous and justifiable.

7. In this respect, the Roman soldier obliged and sacred himself to God and
his country by corporal oath: renewing the same every year upon the Calends
of January. Physicians also (as S. Gregory Nazianzen records) according Greg.
Nazian. in lib. Caesar.
to the ordinance of Hippocrates, beginning their profession, did swear
solemnly, that they would truly and piously perform their duties. And for that
the taking of oaths was a matter highly esteemed, Alex. Neap. lib. 1. ca. 20.
lib. 3. cap. 11.
as appertayning to religion; the Censors amongst the Romans, only were Judges
in cases of oaths.

8. Now if we regard the divine law of Almighty God, we shall see that it
approves an oath duly made, as an act of virtue, and an especial instrument
and means for the keeping of civil society. Thou shall fear thy Lord God,
and serve Deuteronomy. 6.
him only: and thou shall swear by his name. This was the decree of Almighty
God, enacted for his chosen people. They (says Psalm. 61.
David) shall be praised that swear in him. And S. Paul made a solemn oath to
the 2. Cor. 1.
Corinthians: I call God to witness upon my soul. Also, writing to the
Galathians: Those Calat. 1.
things that I write unto you, be holy: before God August. in Psalm. 31.
I lie not: So that we may conclude with S. Augustine, that nothing can be more
graciously offered to Almighty God, then an oath rightly performed.
Notwithstanding Anabaptists and other Heretics, have foolishly denied this
manifest truth; abolishing the use of oaths in all matters whatsoever, sacred
or temporal, as unlawful.

9. Two arguments which the heretics use to allege, may seem to ignorant
people to have some difficulty: and therefore are to be discussed. First (say
they) to endeavor to honor Almighty God by calling him to witness when we
swear, may seem superstitious, seeing his authority and name is alleged to
no other end then to attest and manifest a truth; but if he which swears by
divine authority, should conceive with himself, that the same authority will
therefore approve and reveal the thing sworn by him, it were an error of
superstition: and for this respect they say, it is not lawful to avouch Gods
authority in witness of any thing protested by an oath.

10. But this opposition is not of force against that which we have said: for
he that swears, does not intend princically that Almighty God should
miraculously reveal the truth; but leaves the matter entierly to his will and
pleasure: yet resolving withal to stand to his judgment and trial, if it
shall please his divine Majesty to make any manifestation thereof. And it is
sufficient to make lawful the invocation of a testimony, from the authority of
Almighty God, that one day (according to the Apostle) he will lay open to the
1. Cor. 4.
view of all, the secrets of every man's heart. And that which he that swears
principally intends, is as it were to make an adioynder and connection of Gods
eternal truth unto his words; by which conjunction, such words may appear to
others true, and worthy to be believed.

11. Secondly, the Heretic obiecteth, that although the Jew might swear, yet
it is forbidden to Christians by Christ himself, who distinguishing them from
Jews, said: You have heard that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not
commit perjury, but thou shall perform thy oaths to thy Lord. But I say to
you, swear not at all. Let your talk be yea, yea, no, no; and that which is
over and above this, is of evil. Notwithstanding, these words of our Savior
do not absolutely forbid swearing in necessary cases, as holy Fathers Bernard.
hom. 65. in Cantic. Bed. in cap 5. Jacob.
do teach: but only counsel perfection in this kind, proper to Christians,
and surpassing the quality of the synagogue. And the contrary comes of evil,
in as much as it repugneth to Christian perfection, that there should be need
of oaths, although they be not absolutely forbidden, when they are needful.
Therefore by way of Counsel our Savior persuadeth us not to swear,
especially upon light occasions, as the Jew did, thinking thereby to honor God;
but only upon necessary or important causes: that is, not to swear in vain,
although the matter which is sworn be true. And by this passage and the like
we may understand, how necessary it is, that there be some certain authority
of pastors and teachers for the certain delivery of truth in the holy
Scripture, to preserve our private interpretations from error and heresy.

12. By that which has b^n said, it is evident, that an oath is lawful, for
for as much as it is agreeable to reason; and so (consequently) an act of some
one virtue or other. Now, it remains that we declare to what virtue it
belongs. And concerning this point, it is most certain, that a lawful oath
is an act of Religion, which among the moral virtues is of high quality. For
although he that swears does not principally intend to honor God by his
protestation, but only purposes to approve some truth: nevertheless, by
swearing, he intends to protest his faith about the infallible truth of
Almighty God, and so brings it in as a sacred and potent witness of the
truth by him avouched: therefore in this respect, specifying the excellency of
Almighty God in his oath, he honors him with an outward sign, and that with
supreme subjection and service of Latria, which is a worship proper only to
Almighty God.

13. Hereupon, the ancient people Chryso. ho. 12. in 5. cap. Act. Apost.
either did swear immediately by Almighty God, or by some notorious, great, and
sacred Creature, in which Almighty Gods excellency did especially show it
self: as by Temples, by Altars, by Mountains, by Springs and Rivers, by men's
Heads, by the Emperors Image, his Scepter, his Genius, and such like, as
Homer, Tertullian, and Homer. ^li^d. 2. Tertul. in Apol. ca. 3. Alex. ^i. 5.
cap. 11. Genesis 25. August. in ^sal. 4^. Genesis 42. 2. Cor. 1.
others report. And in this sense (according to S. Augustine) Isaacs servant
did swear religiously, touching the thigh of his Master, as a sacred and
mystical thing, by reason of the genealogy of the Messiah thence deduced. Also
according to this manner Joseph did swear by the health of Pharao. S. Paul
took an oath by his own soul. Nevertheless all these oaths by creatures, in
as much as they are obiectes of an oath, and of the worship of God, imply in
them the truth of Almighty God, which only can infallibly attest, and which
only finally is to be worshipped by the act of an oath.

14. Lastly, it is to be observed, that an oath either of asseueration, or of
promise, may have adjoined unto it as accessory, an addition of execration, or
Imprecation; when a man not only swears a thing to be true, calling upon God
Almighty as witness, but desires moreover that God in particular reprove the
falsity by some harm to fall upon him that swears, or others: as if he
should say, If this be not so, let Almighty God take my life from me. Which
manner of protestation was familiar among the Romans, namely when the Heraldes
(as ^i^i. l. ^1. Hist. Rho. 21. cap. 15.
Liuie records) after an oath taken concerning promise made to others in the
name of the common wealth, they threw away a stone; wishing that Almighty God
would so cast them from the society of men by an accu^se, if the thing were
false which they by oath had affirmed, or promised to be done.

15. Also, for the same signification, in solemn oaths he which swear,
holding a lamb in his left hand, with his right took hold of the Altar, and
then stroke the lamb upon the head with a flint; wishing by that cerimony, his
own destruction if in case he were perjured. And that this manner of swearing
by way of Imprecatio^ is lawful (if requisite conditions of truth, justice,
and judgment be present) is also manifest. For, in the old Testament this was
an ordinary clause of an oath: Ruth. 1. ^. Reg. 18.
Let God do these things unto me* and add them. So also the Apostle S. Paul
used an execration, swearing by his soul: I call God 1. Cor. 2.
to witness upon my soul. And thus having briefly declared the nature and
issue of an oath, and the principal objects thereof, to be the supreme
authority of Almighty God, accompanied with supreme Religion: we are
consequently to enquire, what reverence is to be used by those which invoke,
by an oath, his holy name, and dignity.

What submission, and reverence is to be wished in all those who swear a
truth, inuocating the Excellency of God Almighty. CHAP. II.
SEEING that an Oath imports an invocation or bringing in of Gods authority,
for witness of that which a man affirms, respectively unto excellency of
this holy name and majesty, great respect and reverence is to be used in
swearing. For, as truth and majesty are two principal attributes in Almighty
God; so are they both called upon, by him which swears: his truth, for
auouchement of that which is sworn; and his majesty with acknowledgement that
he is infinitely potent to* give testimony by assured effects. Whereupon, an oath
falsely taken, is not only an impeachement against the truth of God: but also
an irreuerence to his sacred majesty.

2. This majesty in Almighty God, is nothing else but the height of all
perfection in him; as well implying such degrees thereof as are absolute in
himself, to wit, his goodness, wisdom, justice, sanctity, and the like: as
also those which respect his creatures; as his power and dominion, and the
like. All which summed up in one indivisible point of Deity, make the Majesty
of God the proper object of our fear, love, homage, and religion.

3. The Son honors his Father, and the servant his Lord: If then I be thy
Father, where Malach. 1.
is my honor? and if I be thy Lord, where is my fear? says the Lord of
Hosts. And to the end that God Almighty might the better appear an object of
majesty, to procure in us a duetifull reverence, he has often times notified
his personal perfection Os^. ^.
by a Title of majesty, The Lord is his Name. Which majesty God did manifest to
the Jews in particular, and indeed Deuteronomy. 5.
all the earth and the heavens are full of the same: which as it is in God
himself as fountain, so also does it flow from thence to the sacred humanity,
to the Soul and Body of our Savior Jesus Christ. For according to his words:
The Matthew. ^^*
son of man shall sit upon his seat of majesty, at the later day. Wherefore,
whether an oath taken by the divine authority of God, immediately, or by the
humanity of Christ our Savior: there is not only an allegation made of the
divine infallible verity; but also a reuerenciall estimation and protestation
of the majesty exhibited.

4. Whereupon our Savior purposing to abridge* or rather cut off the custom
of swearing held by the Jews* upon respect of divine majesty, forbad
Christians many forms of oaths used by Matthew. 19.
the Jews. I say to you, swear not by heaven, because it is the throne of
God. Heaven is not only a place wherein almighty God resideth in virtue of his
immensity, but (in regard of the proper nobility of substance, of the height,
situation, and immutability, Arist. l. 2. de mundo cap* 2. l. ^. de caelo.
Cyri^. l. 2. co^t. ^uli.
of which Aristotle was not ignorant) it is the throne of Almighty God: and so,
in respect that it does peculiarly represent his greatness, a rash, or a false
oath taken thereby, is offensive to his majesty, and injurious thereunto.

5. It is said moreover: Nor by the earth; because it is the footstool of his
feet. The earth, although in nature and place it be the last and lowest of the
elements; yet, related to the majesty of God, as his footstool, by
participation, it is maiesticall, and therefore not to be sworn by in vain,
for avoiding of irreuere^ce and misprision of that majesty in God, which is
dreadful and religiously to be respected by man, even in the meanest creature.

6. Neither by Jerusalem; because it is Isa. 60.
the city of the great King. Perjury, or ^emerity in swearing by Jerusalem,
implies a contempt of his majesty, who has peculiarly taken that city for
the place of his Court and Royal abode. Neither shall thou swear by thy head;
because thou can not make one hair white or black. The head of man being a
noble part of his body, and not absolutely subject to the owners dominion;
subsisteth in virtue of an especial protection of God: and in man also it is a
particular representation of the same sovereign majesty. Wherevpo^ an oath
falsely or unadvisedly taken by it, reaches injuriously to detract reverence,
and respect from the majesty of God himself. By which precepts of our Savior,
we learn that we are not only to swear truly, in reckoning of divine truth
alleged for witness; but also religiously in regard of his majesty containing
supreme iudicatory power over all estates. Let us then, in some part, give
notice of that majesty, which he that advisedly swears, is bound to know, and
respect.

7. Such is the excellency of dominion in a sovereign Prince, who by this
title of sovereignty is a lively image of Almighty God; that none of his
subjects name him advisedly (especially in solemnity) without some
signification of honor and reverence: because the naming or stiling of him in
that manner is a representation of his prerogative, and an intimation of the
duty and respective affection, which his subjects are to bear him. And if
this be reasobly given, as all men will confess, to a mortal man (no better
then the rest, but for as much as by office he represents the Majesty of God)
and therefore generally used in all nations more or less: men that depend, not
only of civil government, as the subjects of their Prince, but as creatures
upon their Creator wholly in life, operation, and being, upon the majesty of
Almighty God; how timorous, heedfull, and reverent ought they to be, when they
invoke his most holy Name, as a witness, by oath, in recognisance and
reverence of that supreme excellency of dominion which it imports. The
Prophets of Soph. 1.
God Almighty, having specified to the world by his words his holy will and
pleasure, concluded oftentimes their message with this clause: And let all the
Abac. 2.
earth be silent. For silence is an effect and sign of veneration, as blushing
is of modesty: and therefore, the well nur^ured child before his father, and an
intelligent inferior in presence of his superior, regardfully hold their
peace: as if their words were needless, and out of season, where such
excellency governs, nor convenient for them to speak, where wisdom and
gravity determines. Wherefore the Prophet says: Be Sopho^. ^.
silent before the sace of our Lord.

8. This religious silence was in custom with the Jews, when reading the holy
Scriptures they passed over the name of Almighty God with reverence, as not
pronounceable. The Romans also, as Plutarch teaches, worshipped a God Plutarch.
in constit. Romans
not nominable; and it was unlawful to pronounce his name. The name of
Almighty God, for this respect, is oftentimes called Great, and Holy: both
which Epithets intimate unto us the homage and religious fear and reverence
which we are to have when we think upon it. Much more, so great a Name in the
mouth of so poor a wretch, as the greatest of all men is compared to God,
exacteth duty: and so holy a Name, spoken by so sinful a creature, as the
innocentest man is, requires reverence and submission: for what is man, that
he dare in conceit, or word aspire so high, as to name, or think upon his
Creator? Or how may he presume to touch that sublime sanctity, by oath? For he
which swears, does not only name the greatness of God Almighty; but applies
it, as a seal, to humane affairs, debasing (as it were) his sublimity, by
that application to a thing inferior by infinite degrees; and therefore ought to
be performed with great respect.

9. No man brings his Prince to be a witness for him at any Tribunal
(especially, if the matter be of small importance) without great honor to his
person, and humble excuse of the fact: and much less mortal men may apply the
authority and majesty of immortal God, in confirmation of any matter here,
without exceeding great submission, reverence, and respect.

10. If holy David in wonder said: What is man, O Lord, that thou vouchsafest
to Psalm. 48.
he known unto him? Justly may we say: what temporal or transitory matter (o
Lord) can be of that importance, that I dare bring thee in testimony thereof?
Do not the Angels (Princes and pillars of the heavenly court) tremble and
cover their faces before thee, in regard of thy Majesty? And shall I, a
miserable wretch, not only name thee, but apply thee as a witness, even to
ordinary things, without due horror and religious reverence? The holy
Patriarch Abraham was loath and fearful to speak Genesis 1^*
to God Almighty here upon earth, deming himself dust and ashes: What
reverence then ought dust and ashes use when it presumes to scale heaven, and
there challenge God Almighty, as witness of their attestation, by oath?

11. Almighty God, to notify this his Majesty, when he made outward appearance
to his elect people, did it with thunder, excess of light, and other shows of
greatness: dazeling their senses in such manner, that it was reputed a great
matter among them for one to have come near unto that representation with
safety of his life and wit^s: But he which swears by him, Genesis 3^.
does not only approach to some such external representation of God, as to a
cloud, fire, flash of lightning, thunder, or the like: but lays hold upon his
proper divine authority it self, drawing it (as pliable to his desire) to
witness what he has avouched. Wherefore* when it must be done of necessity,
for the trial of truth, it is to be done with sanctity of words, with
lowliness of har^, and with all possible reverence and protestation of body
and soul: for we must not be more male part and sau^y, nor neglect more our
duty and good mann^r^, because the Majesty of God handles man with more honor
since the Incarnation of our Redemer Jesus Christ.

12. But yet, that we may attain to a more ex^ct apprehension of the sacred
dignity and Majesty of Almighty God: let us contemplate him more particulerly:
first in himself; secondly as he is related to man; and lastly, let us
consider man, as he is r^ferred to Almighty God.

13. Many things are to be seen in this world, which in respect of their
greatness and power have a certain resemblance of majesty: as the heavens
adorned with stars in the night time; the storms and thunders of the air in
foul wether; the huge mountains of the earth; the vastness and dreadful
tempests of the sea; the power of Princes; the sanctity of Churches, and holy
places. All which kinds, and the rest that represent greatness and power, are
all found and included in a far more noble and eminent manner, in one
infinity of Majesty in God, as in the center of all, and from whence all
things have their beginning; and as the circumference of all, that contains
all within it, and is supreme over all: whose Majesty rules that of the
heavens; commands that of the air; ouer-toppeth that of the mountains;
abridgeth that of the sea; rules that of the Prince; surpasses that of the
Church; and what else soever we can remember, or imagine.

14. These created Maiestyes astonish our senses, and we (as vulgar lookers on)
deem them complet and absolute: but Almighty God exceeds them infinitely,
and ouer-eacheth them all without measure or comparison. He knows (as says
S. Augustine) what is August. ep. 8.
short in their height; what is limited in their breadth; and what is shallow
in Arist. lib. 1. demundo cap 3. and 6. Homer. Iliad. 4.
their profundity. The continent land (as Aristotle notes) seems great if it
be compared with an ^^and: whereas the Cosmographer understands the whole
world to be but an Island, compassed about with the sea; and as the point and
center in the midst of a circle, compared to the firmament. So, as by error
things of small extent are judged many times great: as the King of China
entitleth himself Lord of the World, and Son of heaven, either contemming
other Trigault. in hist. Chin. cap. 2. and 6.
bordering nations, or not knowing the rest that be further off.

15. But Almighty God, without all error, is a maine of Majesty, not included
within any borders or bounds of definition; nor compassable within any fadomes
of extent. Therefore (says Aristotle) if we respect force, we are to esteem
him as most strong; if beauty, as most fair; if life, as immortal; if virtue,
as most excellent. And as Phidias couched so artificially his own image in the
engrauure he made of Pallas her shield, that it could not be abolished without
dissolution of the whole: even so, although our capacity be not so great as to
behold the divine Majesty of God Almighty in it self, yet nevertheless it is
so resembled and represented in all the parts and properties of the world, that
it* is irremouable from thence. For Almighty God resideth in it, as the Pilot
in his Ship; as the Coachman in his Chariot; as the Chanter in his Quier; as a
father in his family; as the law in the City; and as the Captain general in
his army, as Plutrach says.

16. And indeed the substance and Plutarch quas^. 2. Platon. August in Psalm.
84. and ^5. Cyril. lib. 6. Thesau^. cap. 1. and. 20
essence of God is so far elevated in Majesty above ours, that (as S. Cyrill
teaches) there is nothing common to us and him. What is more eminent in
things created, then immortality? And yet (as S. Cyrill says) fire is apt to
burn, but not in respect of God; and so an Angel is immortal, but not as
God. God only in propriety is immortal, because he is of that quality by
nature: and other things are immortal by his grace and favor, for as much as
it has pleased him to give them such a privilege, as to his creatures.
Aristotle, though a heathen, yet by sharpness of wit, and light of reason,
attained to the knowledge of this divine Majesty, by necessary consequences.
God (says he) is not virtue, because he is better then virtue; nor good by
reason of virtue, for so virtue should be better then God. Therefore (as he
says) it was a vulgar proverb with the ancients: What needs he any
friends, whom God blesses?

17. This Majesty of Almighty God appeared to S. John in the likeness Apoc. 4.
of a Iaspar stone, and a Sardine; one resembling water, the other fire: two
terrible elements, to which we ordinarily approach not without fear and dread.
And in consideration of this Majesty of God (as Seneca tells us) Epicurus,
although Senec. lib. 4. de benefi^. cap. 18.
he expected no good from him by devotion, yet he said he would adore him with
religion. Wherefore, in this regard of the honor and respect due to Almighty
God for his own Majesty and greatness in it self, he may and ought to be
excluded out of the number of reasonable men, and take his place among brute
beasts, which, without religious fear and reverence, dare swear by his holy
Name. Likewise, due consideration of the same divine Majesty as it is related
unto men and all other creatures, ought also to procure in such as swear by
it, religious veneration and reverence.

18. Almighty God, in holy Scripture is oftentimes entitled with the Hebrew
Homer. Iliad. 1. Ferrar. lib. 4. cont. Gent. c. 24.
name of Adonai, signifying him to be Lord and Judge over mankind; and of that
authority, which is proper and due to the first cause, fountain, and beginner
of all other things which be his creatures and dependantes. Therefore, when a
man is to take an oath upon record of such a Majesty, which is his supreme Lord
and Judge, and supporteth, manteineth, and governs his substance, and all he
has; reason teaches, that he is to perform it with the profoundest humility
and most religious reverence that he can. In proof whereof, let us only
remember here, what nature has ordained in this respect, and taught as a
necessary condition of man's pious carriage toward his Creator, in the act of
Religion.

19. Both Romans and Grecians, two nations which (as excelling in gifts of
nature and judgment) attained more then others to the natural knowledge of
this Majesty of Almighty God, deemed it an injurious deportment of man toward
the same Majesty, if in his access to it by sacrifice, he suffered himself to
be distracted with other objects: and hereupon he which sacrificed, used to
cover his face with a linen veyle, thereby, to deba^re from his eyes and
cogitations all other things occurrent.

Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu, Virgil. Aene. ad 1. and 3. Senec. ^^
Oct^u^a^.

Ne qua inter sanctos ignes in honor Deorum
Hostilis facies occurrat, and omnia turbet.
And for the same cause of reverence also in way of preparation, these ancient
worshippers of the Deity by outward ceremony, made themselves as clean as they
could; as by washing of their bodies, by chastity, and the like, before they
durst attempt their sacred duty. And least that men's petitions tendered to
Almighty God should not be sufficiently reverent, Numa ordained (as Plutarch
writes) that none should make prayer, but upon premeditation.

20. But we Christians, besides this natural imperfect knowledge of divine
majesty, which those ancient Heathens could get* by observation and discourse,
have another supernatural; which teaches us manifold relation and dependances
of the same, to our great profit, comfort, and direction in all we have to do.
Whereupon, when we Christians swear, understanding that then we exercise a
work of religion which has for object the very excellency of God himself; we
are to do it with great reverence, if we will not be mo^e b^rbarous and
irreligious then the very Heathens were: who could tell us* that religion Ci^^r
lib. de (...).
has two parts, one the outward ceremony of the body; the other the inward
fear and reverence of the soul. But what is the compass and extention of
this divine majesty so to be reuer^nced and adored? forsooth, it imbraceth,
contains, vpholdeth, and governs all humane affairs in goodness and
mercy; as the Prophet Zachary teaches us. Zach. ^.
Behold (says he) I will save my people from the land of the East, and from
the land of the Sun setting. No separation of banishment; no difference of
estate, high, or low, rich or poor; no prison so close, no dungeon so deep,
that can hinder the infinite majesty of God from being present in every place,
for the succor and comfort of his devoted servants and friends* And so the
holy Scripture teaches Genesis 19.
us, speaking of the Patriarch Joseph when he was in prison: Descendit cum illo
in foueam, and in vinculis non dereliquit eum. He went down with him into his
ca^e, and bare him company in his setters.

21 Moreover, when a man beholds this sacred divinity no less rayning down
fire, and brimstone from heaven, in revenge and punishment of sin, then
spreading sweet dew upon the earth to refresh and fertilize it for the benefit
of mankind: no doubt, if he be not a se^selesse beast, he must conceive
horror, and dread to violate this Majesty, and be moved to adore it with
religious submission and reverence, as often as he approaches to it by oath. O
sacred and maiestical name of Almighty God, as thou art the object of an oath;
so art thou of all reverence and devotion.

22. Finally whosoever with judgment and attention shall consider his own
estate, will doubtless tremble to avouch any thing rashly with testimony of
Gods eternal majesty and authority. For the distance of estate and dignity
between God and the greatest Prince of the world (at the highest rate, an
infirm Bernar. l. 3* de Consider. Bellarmin. lib de s^al^ Ascensionis in De^.
and miserable man) is infinitely more remote, then is the separation betwixt
the least and vilest worm creeping on the ground, and the most powerful
Monarch that ever governed Empire: To which if we add our manifold sins,
that contaminate this our misery in our selves, and offend Almighty God; we may
(upon a good reckonning) be afraid to bring in for witness his holy name and
authority, by the words of our polluted mouth.

23. If the praise of God be not seemly, Eccles. ^^.
nor sou^deth well from the mouth of a sinner; what is the protestation by
oath, when a sinful wretch shall presume as it were to arest Gods eternal
truth, and to bring it into court to attest in his behalf? Assuredly, if we
had comprehension or due conceit of the divine majesty and greatness, and true
knowledge and acknowledgement of our own baseness: We would neither think*
nor speak of God (much less swear by his holy name) but with religious Job.
^6. Nahu^ 1. Psalm. 96.
Veneration toward him, and humble confusion of our selves. Holy scriptures,
to declare this verity, mention, that in presence of Almighty God mountains
have quaked, and stony rocks been melted as in a furnace: noting the force of
his power, and the impression which i^ makes in the greatest and hardest
hearts, where there is feeling of life. Hereupon is grounded the counsel of
Ecclesiasticus: Let not thy mouth Eccles. 23. Chrysostom. hom. 27. ad populum.
be accustomed to swearing: for there be many faults in it Let not the naming
of God be usual in thy mouth.

24. The man which Daniel beheld standing upon a river, and swearing by Dan. 11.
Almighty God, did for a preparatiue of homage first lift up his hand to
heaven. In like manner S. John beholding an Angel Apoc. 12.
that swore, noted that he used the same cerimony and reverence to divine
honor, lifting up his hands in like manner to heaven. If Angels, so noble and
porent spirits, practice such reverence toward Almighty God when they swear:
what respect ought a poor sinful man to bear to the same excellency, in a
like case?

25. Therefore, in regard of the dignity of a solemn oath valuable in public
at a Bench of Judgment, the Church has ordained certain circumstances to
testify and advance the honor of Almighty God: as that such oaths be S. Thom.
2. 2. q. 89. art* 10. Cap. Testimon. Cap Si quis presh. 2. 9. Aug ser. 30. de
verb. Apost.
sworn fasting; that infamous persons cannot be admitted to attest upon their
oaths: that Priests are not to swear but in occasions of necessity and matters
of great importance, as S. Augustine witnesses of himself.

26. Next after the sovereign divinity of God Almighty, is placed the sacred
humanity of our Savior* Jesus Christ: by whose inestimable and precious worth,
the Faithful both consecrate their oaths, and also most assuredly confirm
them as true. And for the greater reverence in such oaths, first let us
consider the dignity of his person; then after the several excellencies of his
glorious body and soul, and lastly the infinite value of his precious blood
and merits, by which we were redeemed. When we speak, or think of the person
of our Savior Christ, we call not to mind only a holy man; as a man deified by
some participation of sanctity, whereby he comes nearest unto the divinity (as
wicked Nestorius the Heretic would have taught the world) but we think of a
man, which is naturally and substantially God, Divinity and Humanity (or as S.
Bernard speaks, August. in Enchir. ca. 36. Cyril. ep. 1. August. ep. 3.
Bernard. lib. 5. de confid.
our Earth and Deity) being knit up together in one person. We esteem him
therefore, as the types and figures of him in the old law did import: to wit,
the golden Ce^sar or Thurible, full of glowing coals, or the thorny bush set on
fire: for that his humanity, as a precious golden vessel, and as fresh and
flourishing wood, conteyneth as it were the fire of his divinity, under the
shape of his sacred body. Isa. 6.


27. It was a thing of terror and respect, when the Angel applied a burning
coal to the mouth of the Prophet, that his lips might be cleansed and
sanctified, before they spoke the sacred word: so no doubt, when men swear by
the humanity of Christ, they ought to it with fear and dread. For in person
Christ is the same, whom the Prophet beheld so long ago in shape of a man
sitting upon a throne of Majesty, environed with Seraphims, who with their
wings covered his face and his feet: crying aloud: Holy, holy, holy, the Lord
God of Isa. 6.
Hosts. Holy he was in divinity, holy in soul, and holy in the body: three
substances Bernard. l. 3. deconsid*
in one person, as S. Bernard teaches, and we Christians believe.

28. Furthermore, when a man is urged to swear, and mentions the body, and
soul of our Redeemer; he must remember that he uses them as a sacred book,
whereupon he swears; and consequently, with how great reverence he ought to
do it. For this holy body is deified with the very substance of divinity: it is
most pure, never touched with sin: it is of power to work miracles, to ordain
Apostles; to cast outdiuels to cure all diseases, to enamour and subject the
hearts of the wisest and greatest persons in the world. And in this body are
specially and deservedly reco^mended to our reverence, his precious wounds
engraven therein: those wounds (I say) which redeemed us upon the cross, and
out of which the full price of the worlds recovery was powered (as August. in
Psalm. ^0. Bernard. Sermon. 1* de Ep^phan. Joan. 20.
S. Augustine, and S. Bernard teach us) when the heart was pierced: those
wounds, which bare witness to the Apostles of his tri^phant Resurrection;
those wounds, which now in heaven are adored by the Angels, beloved of the
eternal Father, shinning as so many precious stones, couched in the gold of
that sacred body, where they serve as so many tongues to plead inces^antly for
the remission of our sins, for perseverance of the Church, and for every one
in particular; and therefore are not to be named, or thought upon (especially
of us miserable offenders) without humility, hearty devotion, religious
reverence, and respect.

29. Likewise the glorious soul of our Redeemer, which shines in his body as
a perpetual blasing star in the highest heaven: which ever kept in mind the
penal work of our recovery, never sleeping in forgetfulness of our distressed
estate, but sleeping the Lions sleep, with his eyes still open to behold our
need, and with the Nightingall continually pearched with a thorn in her
breast: and therefore deserves our affection, love, and reverence always, but
especially when we swear any thing by it.

30. To conclude, the merits of our Jesus, and anointed Priest, exact regard
of duty and lowliness whenever we remember them: but specially when we make
them our witnesses by protestation of oath. For these merits, seasoned with
gall and mirrh, cost him dear: they are gold and pearl, bought with grief,
labor, s^eat, hunger, thirst, agony and blood; they be honey in the comb,
wrought by the be which stingeth: they issue from the fountain infinitely
gracious to the eternal Father* How could the blood of an ordinary man (says
S. Cyril) be available for the worlds redemption? Upon which consideration, an
oath taken by these inestimable merits, ought to be done with exceeding great
respect of religion, devotion, innocence and purity, in him that swears.
Wherefore the premises duly considered, enforce this consequence: that it is an
heinous crime, to swear vainly; and much more to swear falsely: as will
appear by that which follows.

What a grievous trespass it is to swear falsely. CHAP. III.
IT may be avouched generally, and without all doubt, that whatsoever Nation
uses ordinarily to commit the sin of perjury; the same has made a great
breach and entry into fidelity, and barbarism. For assuredly if the people
retained any sparckle of true faith, it would preserve them from so great, and
so impudent, and irreligious contempt of the divine majesty. For, where the
excellency and authority of God is not acknowledge by steadfast faith: there
ensues consequently, a careless respect toward him; which brings in the
abuse of swearing with contempt against his holy name. And as for Barbarism,
the assertion is also evident: first, for that, where either ignorance of
Almighty God, or an audacious contempt of him reigns, there cannot any virtue
have a firm root; and where virtue is wanting, there ciuility which arises
from virtue, must needs fail, and Barbarism predominate. Heb. ^*


2. Secondly (as the Apostle S. Paul teaches us) the civil end and profit of
an oath, is to determine controversies betwixt men: Men (says he) swear by a
greater then themselves and the end of all their controversy, for the
confirmation, is an oath. Which benefit is altogether abolished, where perjury
preuayleth: for there, either men will refuse to be tried by oaths, nor ^aring
for their credit: and so fails the gre^^est and most certain means for the
ending of controversies. Or if that trial be admitted, it becomes an
instrument of injustice: both which consequences are wholly Barbarous. Also
whatsoever Commonwealth makes no conscience of perjury, the same discovering
open misprision and neglect of all divinity, is co^uinc^d (secretly in heart) to
have the te^porall Prince and all superiority; whence follows, that they do
well* no further then dread of punishment from the magistr^te enforces: so as
where, and whenever the sword of the magistrate is out of sight, there
sensuality, pride, and a legion of other vices breaks forth into disorder and
barbarity.

3. Therefore Princes, to conserve in their subjects dutiful regard and love to
their own person, are chiefly and originally as from the root, to bring it to
pass, by conseruing in them, by all means possible, the fear, dread, and
reverence of Almighty God. For as the picture is not respected but for his sake
whom it represents: so no more will a Prince be cordially reverenced, nor
accounted of by his subjects, unless they first religiously respect God
Almighty, whom the Prince represents.

4. And (here by the way) may be observed, how pernicious it is to the Prince
and Commonwelth* to give occasions to impertinent oaths, which have no other
certain effects, but to charge men's consciences; or to oblige them to swear
affirmatively, that which they are not first persuaded to be true; or promise
by oath, that which they cannot, or think they may not lawfully perform. For,
by this custom of swearing without true intention, is broaken, and (by little
and little) brought to contempt the sacred band which should be preserved in all
possible reverence and respect: being the safeguard of Kings; the security of
their Kingdoms; the sinew of justice; the determination of doubts; the pledge
of fidelity; and the root, foundation, and b^lwark of all ciuility, peace and
concord amongst men, where it is reverenced as it should: and without which no
Common wealth can long endure. And therefore, all prudent Governors (Christians
and Heathens) have always removed with great care and providence whatsoever
occasions might bring their people to set light of their oaths: forbearing to
impose them, where they might suspect that for any reason or occasion they were
not likely to be kept* though it were with hazard of some loss.

5. For (as our common law of England teaches us) it i^ better to suffer a
mischief then an inconvenience; specially such an inconvenience as this* so
much the more carefully to be prevented, as (once brought in custom) it is
harder to be cured, depending upon the secret opinion and affection of every
particular person; and for that it pierces the very root of the Common wealth;
for it exposes the Prince; his treasure; his honor; his estate; and
whatsoever may be dear, either to him or to any subject, be he little or
great, to open and continual hazard: as if a man should beat of the locks and
boltes from all his doors, and leave his house always open, day and night, and
what he has and may have out of his sight, to the liberty and discretion of
every thief or enemy: which were to give occasion to innumerable roberies,
murders, and other wrongs which no providence of the magistrate could
prevent, and the next degree to old savage life, when every one lived by
himself retired with his family to the best strength which nature or good hap
did affoard him, standing upon his own guard and defense. As now the barbarous
people live in Brasile, Chile, and diverse other parts of the Indies, not
brought to ciuility; and as men lived in England, Scotland, and other Countries
of old, before the people were gathered together in communities, under the
protection of Christian laws, conditions of Justice, reverence of sacred
promises and oaths, and other reasonable convenient customs of good
neighborhood, and civil honesty.

6. But to lay yet more open the heinous and abominable offense of perjury: we
must understand, that such is the malignant nature and quality of sin, that,
in free choice, it prefers always some base co^tentment of honor or of
pleasure, before Almighty God. Which man (being a reasonable creature, and
reason always chosing the better and rejecting the worse) would never do,
unless the calamity of this life had procured (as S. Bernard well observes)
that sensuality is powerful, and at Bernard. lib. 5. de Consid.
liberty to break out, whilst reason, the spiritual eye of the soul,
enfolded with error or inconsideration, is blinded. Which perverse manner of
carriage and freedom of concupiscence is more culpable in Christians, for that
(as the Apostle teaches) our lawgiver Christ is of greater authority, then
the Angel was, by whose hand the Jews received theirs. Whereupon Cyril. lib.
8. Thesaur. cap. vltim.
S. Cyril concludes very well, that their damnation shall be greater. For
according to the difference of the person injured, the punishment is justly to
be measured.

7. But by sin a Chris^ian is not only liable to punishment from the
dreadful hand of God Almighty; but also debaseth thereby his high vocation:
yea more, the quality of his nature also, approaching down to the condition of
a beast. Wherefore Aristotle, out Arist. l. 2. Magnor. Moral.
of natural judgment, affirms that: When we say a man is vicious, we say,
that he is not a man, but a beast. All which deformities and debasementes of
sin be found in perjury: as when a man to save or get some commodity,
forswearing himself, makes thereby more account of that which he saves, or
gains then of God Almighty: yea forsakes God, and in love and affection
adhereth to that temporal gain for which he swears. And what greater
baseness or bestiality can be imagined then to make so beastly a choice, and
change as this?

8. Moreover, the perjured person not only abandoneth God, and prefers his
transitory gain: but does it, with an especial injury against his divine
truth, his sanctity, and majesty. For, as nothing is more contrary to the love
and affection of God, then wickedness: so nothing so opposite to his S. Thom.
2. 2. q. 1. artic. 3.
infinite truth, as falsehood. Whereupon Christian Deuines determine, that
Almighty God cannot break his promise, nor affirm an untruth, nor give
testimony by miracle, or otherwise to a lie. And there is greater impossiblity,
and repugnance to believe it, then to say, that the sun causes darkness. For
the bright beam of divine truth dissolueth all error, and chaseth all
leasinges away; as the sun beams dissipate a mist upon earth, or clouds in
the sky. And not only this eternal truth makes God Almighty to speak always
truly: but it proceeds also from his original verity, that Angels and good
men be faithful and trusty.

9. Wherefore, as it should be amongst men a preposterous fact, to impeached:
as to defame the fairest Lady in the Court, as deformed and hard favored; to
reproach the most courteous Gentleman, as contemptuous, and ill mannered; to
traduce the most valiant Captain for a coward; to condemn the most liberal
and bountiful Prince for a niggard: so no doubt it is a trespass altogether
repugnant to nature and justice, to make God author and witness of falsehood,
by perjury: as if by man's false protestation, his light could diss^mble a ^ye;
his eye suffer and cover a l^e; his knowledge approve alye; for so, his light
his eye, his knowledge should stand in hostility and defiance against his
truth. O what an injury is Psalm 90.
this to make Gods shield, and Deificall truth an oracle of falsehood, and an
adversary to truth? yea to make the same indivisible truth, double, and divided
in two parts, banded against themselves, and the o^e contradicting and
destroying the other? Is it not enough, yea and too too much, that our
inordinate appetites and sensualities distemper our selves, and disorder all the
world besides: but that we must also stand in defiance against almighty God; and
for as much as lies in us, violate and dissolve his divine substance; turn
his light into darkness; his rectitude into crookedness; his knowledge into
ignorance; his truth into falsehood; himself into an idol of our own making;
and this same idol of ours into nothing? For all things stand by truth: and
therefore, where truth is wanting, there can be nothing.

10. It were an horrible crime (says S. Augustine) to avouch that the
goodness August. tract. 1. in 1. c. Joan.
of Almighty God can be author of sin: assigning to that indefectible cause,
an effect most disproportionable, impeaching very goodness it self, to be
bad, deficient, and malicious, and so no goodness at all: which is a manifest
contradiction and impossible. And yet a perjured person does no less, when
with his bl^spemous mouth he dares auow that the eternal truth of God bears
witness to falsehood; affirms a lie; mayntaineth it; procures that it
prevail at the Bar of Justice against justice and truth.

11. We may deem it a great descent of divine omnipotency, when it concurreth
with the elements to produce certain creatures, in common judgment holden for
base and unprofitable; as toades, adders, leprosies, agues and other diseases:
notwithstanding there is no beast so venomous, which has not some thing
beneficial to man: and as far as any real Entity reaches, so far is extended
true and real goodness in some kind, which may without Cyril. l. 4. Thesaur.
cap. 2.
inconvenience be produced by divine power. But, to ascribe falsehood that
consists of mere privation and has no goodness at all in it self, nor any
exemplar Idea in Gods intelligence, but is wholly defective, pernicious and
detestable to the truth of Almighty God, is not only to abase the same eternal
Truth more then should be done; but sacrilegiously to blaspheme it, and abuse
it in the highest degree.

11. Next after the truth of God Almighty, enters into consideration his
sanctity: which against perjury has an especial opposition of contempt and
defiance. For the matter and substance of falsehood, such as it has, is of
that malignant nature, that entierly and indiuisibly it is evil: that is (as
the Divines use to speak) intrinsecally vicious, repugnant to reason, and
naught. Other offenses there be, which although in regard of law, custom, or
circumstance; or according to the external action, they be bad and prohibited:
yet notwithstanding the action it self in substance may be good or
indifferent, when the law, custom, or circumstance is removed. As for example,
if there were in some country a law forbidding the use of such, or such
apparel: the wearing of it in that place were culpable, which might be lawful
and honest in another country where there is no such law, or in the same, at
another time, when the law should be revoked.

12. The self same action of stealth, which is damnable, committed by a
thief: may in another person, or with other circumstances, as in case of
lawful war, or the like, be justifiable: as it is, for one to take away
another man's goods, yea his life also by commandment of public lawful
authority. Other trespasses there be, which of themselves are so bad, that
their performances cannot be justified by any change of circumstance, purpose,
or precept: as to blaspheme Almighty God; to hate any man; or, as S. Augustine
August. l. 1. de mendacio.
teaches, to tell a lie. Wherefore to apply the sanctity and purity of Gods
Eternal Truth to give credit to a lie, must needs be a heinous crime.

13. If man's soul, and natural reason, and the intelligent substance of an
Angel, be so contrary to falsehood, as it is in them a deformity, an evil, a
blemish, to their perfections: how much more disproportion and repugnance has
it with the purity and sanctity of Almighty God, which exceeds without all
measure the sanctity and purity of creatures? And how detestable a sin is it,
by perjury to contaminate, defile, stain and pollute this soueraig^e purity
and sanctity, with the vilest excrement of wickedness?

14. We fear to touch things immediately ordained to religion, as in ancient
times the Jews ordinarily handled not sacred things in the Temple for
reverence sake. And in like manner when we approach to this divine Sanctity, we
must present our selves, not only without contamination of mortal sin, but
with Moses Exodus 3*
put of our shoes, and cleanse our souls from the least and lowest
imperfections; for that the ground is holy whereon God Almighty stands. What
shall we then say of him which with perjured lips presumes as it were to
kiss with Judas, I say not the humane face of our Savior Christ, but the
Eternal Sacred Truth of his Heavenly Father; and not only to kiss it
trecherously, as Judas did, the person of our Redeemer, but to disgrace and
deface it, bringing it as a testimony and warrant for a lie? How enormous a
trespass is this, and how peculiarly opposite to the sanctity of Almighty God?
There is none so holy as is our Lord. His 1. Reg. 2. Psalm. 110.
name (as the Prophet says) is holy and dreadful. But the periurer prophaneth
this holiness, when he uses it as the Princes broad seal to a counterfeit
instrument, thereby to procure that controversies be continued in debate against
justice and charity, which other wise might be easily determined with truth;
that innocent persons be endomaged; that malefactors escape, and the guiltless
be punished; and finally, that Almighty God be excluded from all men's
cogitations, care, and devotion. Which effects, as they are pernicious and
lamentable in any Common wealth; so to bring them to pass by usurpation and
attestation of Gods infinite holiness and truth, is a great deal worse, and
more execrable.

15. Lastly, let us measure the heinousness of this crime, by consideration of
Gods divine Majesty. There appears great Majesty in the admirable
workeman-ship of this visible world: the outward apparition of Angels to men
carries with it a mighty Majesty, as we may see by the fear of Daniel and S.
John to behold them: and Genes. 32.
in this respect they are called the tents or houses of Almighty God. But all
this is nothing to the infinite Majesty of God himself, which the periurer
abaseth most contumeliously when he brings it irreligiously, profanely, and
impiously to testify falsehood. He that lies (says S. Chrysostom)
neglects Chryso. ho. 12. in cap. 5. Matthew.
truth: But he which is perjured neglects Almighty God. What a neglect is
this? what a contumely (as S. Chrysostom exclameth) when worms meat and smoke
dares invoke the divine Majesty to witness a lie?

16. Let us lay a side a while this infinite Majesty, discovered partly to us
by faith; and let us only contemplate as much of it as nature discovers in
the heavens, elements, and other creatures, and we shall see what a monstrous
misprision is it to swear false. Homer, Homer, Iliad. 1.
to this purpose feyned ingeniously, that when Jupiter closed his eye, heaven
and earth did shake, notifying thereby the Majesty of God, not only in himself,
but expressed in the greatest works, brought to pass as it were with the
^winckling of his eye. Then must it needs be an heinous offense, for a vile
creature by perjury to dishonor this dreadful Majesty, and in a certain
manner deiect and submit it to the lowest and basest place, that may be
imagined, under the treachery and malice of the Devil. For it is the Devil
which persuades men to advance lies before truth: it is the Devil which
rejoices to behold the divine Majesty by man's mouth made servant and subject
to untruth: it is the Devil which by contempt of heavenly Majesty purchases
his own authority and preuailance with men, and does many things by them which
he dares not do by himself.

17. What greater misprision, then of the greatest Majesty can be thought of?
or what manner of offense can there be more detestable? And yet this is not
all; for the same sin of perjury, joined with execration, has yet another
further degree of beastly folly and contempt, as it were of daring Almighty
God, as though the perjured wretch feared not to provoke the divine Majesty to
work upon him that maledictio^, which his words express, and his fact
deserves: as if he deemed God either impote^t to inflict it, or not hardy
enough to do it. O infinite goodness and longanimity, which so powerfully
br^^le^st, and restraynest this power and justice, that they break not out, to
present revenge of so horrible and abominable a reproach?

18. Other trespasses which separate man from God, have their se^suall
contentmentes in which they rest, and do not so directly by presumption call
for revenge; nor have they any such formal signification: whereas this perjury
inuiteth God to punish the fact if he can; bids him (by contempt) strike and
do justice if he dare: resolving rather to scorne-the authority of his sword,
then to want that temporal commodity, which the fool procures by such a
desperate madness.

29. And although the humanity of our Savior, his sacred Body and Soul, and
his precious wounds, be not only veiles, and as it were a crystal to cover
the Majesty of his Godhead, but also (as the Apostle speaks) Phil. 2.
humiliatio^s and annihilations of that incomprehensible greatness: yet
notwithstanding, for that they are sanctified by his divinity, and be the rare
and singular effects of his inspeakeable charity toward us; the effectual
means of our Redemption, and the amiable obiectes of all our health and
happiness: it must needs be an heinous trespass, to bring them in by perjury
in attestarion of that which is false For, as divinity is the original truth;
so is the humanity of our Redeemer a secondary truth, and such a one, as
ascended (according to the Psalmist) from the earth to encounter with justice
that descended from heaven, in a souely meeting. What a crime then is it to
apply this truth avouched by God himself, denounced by his Prophets, performed
by his death and passion, and believed by his Saints, to give authority and
credit to a lie? The truth of the old Testament was glorious and magnificent
(as S. Paul teaches) but not comparable Heb. 10.
herein to the truth of the new, that is of the humane nature subsisting in the
divine person of our Redeemer: and therefore if it were a heinous fault to
violate and dis^roue the old sinagogue, and the ministers thereof by perjury:
what a detestable fact is it to work dishonor against the Majesty, sanctity,
and flower of the Church, and glory of mankind, the sacred Body, Blood, and
Souse of our Redeemer? Are those precious members of our salvation, and shining
jewels of our treasury, his sacred wounds, of no better worth, then to be (I
do not say forgotten by us through ingratitude) but remembered with impiety and
contempt, and cast out of our mouths to patronize deceipts, braueries, and
other such vile Merchandise of damnation, to pleasure the Devil? O sacred
seals of our Redemption, how irreligiously are you applied! how unthankfully
are you used!

That the ungodliness of vain and irreuerent Swearing, is an enormous
trespass against the sacred Majesty of Almighty God. CHAP. IIII.
BESIDES the great injury which is offered by man unto the divine Majesty,
through open perjury, there be other manners of swearing which are also
offensive against piety, religion, and that charitable respect which we are to*
bear toward Almighty God.

2. Among others, this is one, when through evil custom or otherwise, persons
charge their words advisedly with oaths, not considering duly the truth or
falsehood of the matter which they swear: but at hap-hazard whether the thing
be so or not, affirm by oath, as determinately true, that which they know not.

3. Among other conditions of an oath (as has been said) one is judgment: that
is, at the least a probable knowledge of the truth of the thing a^^ested by an
oath. Which condition if it be wanting, perjury is a deadly sin, and puts
the offendant for the present in estate of damnation, whether the ma^ter be
great or little: for to swear a known false-hood, or a thing, which through
suspicion or S. Thom. a 20. q 98 art. 3. ad 1.
doubt of the swearer may be false, is to apply divine testimony to the
asseueration of an untruth, either known or suspected. And so, whether the
matter be great or small, divine testimony is mortally abused, contrary to
religion and duty, being accommodated to the proof and a^^estation of that
which is thought or may be doubted to be false. Therefore, when we speak of
unadvised customary swearing, we may understand a double relation of the fact:
one to the will and intention of the swearer; the other, to the verity or
falsity of the thing that is sworn. And according to the first acception, an
oath is said to be taken unadvisedly when a man swears before he be fully a
ware that he swears: and in this meaning the oath it self is indeliberate,
and so excusable, if the indeliberation be no^ voluntary. Now according to the
other meaning, an oath is unadvised, when one swears advisedly, and with
reflection that he swears: yet, not discussing seriously with himself,
whether the matter be tr^^ or false which he swears.

4. Now therefore, to proceed by degrees of defaul^ which may be committed in
this kind: First we may suppose that one swears deliberately, with knowledge
that the thing sworn is ^rue: yet, in such case as the matter sworn is of
little moment, and no necessity or commodity, private or public, to enforce a
man to swear.

5. Likewise, when oaths great in their quality, are often repeated, without
attestation of any thing true or false; but only so many vain oaths and
dreadful blasts of sin: and against this manner of swearing the holy Fathers
do much inu^igh, and think such oaths to be forbidden by the law of Christ;
who has commanded; Thou Matthew. 7.
shall not swear: especially S. Chrysostom handles this matter in sundry
places. And assuredly although this manner of swearing be not formal perjury,
yet it is very dishonorable to the Majesty of Almighty God: and thereupon a
grievous offense against religion. For, although an oath be an act of religion;
yet is it occasional: that is, the^ only to be exercised, when the importance
of the ma^ter, necessary credit with others, and the truth of that which is
sworn, do require an oath.

6. A man that swears much, says Ecclesiasticus, shall be filled with
iniquity: Eccles. 23.
and the plague, or punishment of God shall not depart from his house. He does
not affirm these calamities to be annexed to perjury: but to often swearing.
As if he should say, that Almighty God to punish much swearing, will let the
swearer fall into many sins and miseryes. and by evil accidents and
successes, afflict both him and his.

7. Ought not a man (says S. Chrysostom) Chrysostom. h^. 12 in Matthew.
conceive horror, when Almighty God is named? If he should not be named,
without devotion and humiliation of the speaker and he^rers; to swear
frequently, and about tr^fles, by his holy name how great an irreuerence is it?
Christian men, for reverence sake do not ordinarily touch the Altar, nor the
book of the Gospel, but upon necessary Chrysostom. ho. 1^. ad pop.
occ^sion, and that with some outward sign of worship and respect: and how
dare men swear by the Majesty of Almighty God, or by the sanctity of our
Saviors precious Blood and Wounds, without v^gent cause, and profound
humiliation and honor?

8. In the old law, the name of God E^od. 28.
was engraven in a golden plate and borne only upon the forehead of the high
Priest; to notify (as S. Chrysostom teaches) that men must not bring in this
divine name by oath, but with respect to religion, charity, and necessity.
Chrysostom. ho. 12. in Matthew.
VVhereupon the same S. Chrysostom wondereth how man, which is earth, ashes,
and smoke dares so ordinarily swear by Almighty God, and bring him as
witness to every humane affair.

9. Moreover, he notes, that the custom of swearing was first induced, when
men fell into idolatry; when they had left and lost divine faith: and
consequently their words wanted credit without oaths. And therefore he
infers, th^^ where frequent custom of swearing is in v^e, there is a
manifest sign of infidelity: and that there is no more reputation, nor humane
credit left amongst men. According to which meaning the Prophet Zachary saw a
flying Zach. ^.
book, in which was written the judgment of damnation, not only against
forsworn persons, but absolutely against swearers. For notwithstanding this
vice alone, is enough to procure punishment: yet it is never alone, but
accompayned with others.

10. But yet there is an other further degree of idle and vain swearing, worse
in quality, and more opposite to religion then the former: that is, when a man
advisedly swears by God, or by the humanity of Christ our Savior, not caring
whether the thing be true or false, only by chance; applying Gods eternal and
immutable certain truth to the uncertain verity of the thing which he
swears: Which manner of swearing must needs be an heinous trespass. For if
we consider on the one side the sovereign dignity of divine nature, and the
sacred quality of our Saviors humanity, of his body, his soul, his honorable
and amiable wounds: and on the other side, hear a man hudle them out by oaths,
as it were casting dice to fall at their chance, not caring what side fall
upward: although the oath light on that side which is true, yet notwithstanding
the abuse and impiety is passing great. A man in his wits, according to very
manhood, would not so hazard his own credit as to cast it out without all
respect, in every occasion to testify as well falsehood* as truth: and much
less should he utter out of his mouth these sacred oaths to casual
auouchment of truth or falsehood.

11. The holy Ghost affirms generally of all human actions: He that loves
danger, shall perish in the same. That is, Eccles. ^.
he which will conuer^e near the borders and occasions of sins, shall at one
time or other stumble into them: or he which advisedly does frequent that which
he thinks, or ought to think, is naught, probably shall perish in the end.
And this peril, if it be generally probable in all other sins, it is much
more certain, where there is custom to swear, without pondering whether the
thing sworn be true or otherwise.

12. O monstrous boldness, and blindness of impiety, not only to name this
majesty and sanctity without due reverence: but to protest it in ordinary talk
without premeditation or judgment! If the oath meet with truth, no thanks to
the swearer: for he swore at all adventures, and committed the weight of divine
testimony to chance, as one that cared not with what he met.

13. Hereupon we may understand what an evil thing is a custom of swearing:
by which some do advisedly swear by the Majesty and Sanctity of God, not being
certain whether there by verity or no, in that which they swear: wherein
custom is so far from lessening the fault, that it rather much increases it.
For how can it be otherwise then to aggrauate sin, when a man by his custom,
as it were by his own hands, tyeth himself in weighty chains that incline
him mightily upon all occasions to swear without judgment of the truth? For
as long as Suar. lib. 3. de suramento c. 6.
custom does not take away free and advised consent to sin, it does not
diminish but rather makes greater the fault, in respect of the precedent acts
by which that habitual disposition to sin was contracted. Wherefore when a
swearer looks back upon himself, beholding the evil custom, by which he is
incited to swear indifferently, whether the matter be true, or false: he is
obliged in conscience to restrain himself from swearing, thereby to diminish
such a custom, and as the means to avoid periuries in the time to come. For
the same obligation which binds a man not to sin, does also oblige him, in
what he may to avoid and remove the nearest causes and occasions of his sin.

14. Moreover, there is yet a third degree of irreligious swearing, when a man
applies the name of God, or the sacred humanity of Christ to matter, (although
true and so esteemed by the swearer) yet in it self unlawful: as for example,
if one against the obligation of secrecy, should upon his oath reueile that
which he is bound not to disclose. In which manner of swearing although the
divine Majesty, or the sacred humanity of Christ be not debased with
attestation of untruth: yet are they injured with an unlawful testimony, and
made an instrument of sin.

15. If the Princes image (as has been said) was forbidden by law under pain
of death to be carried into any filthy or dishonest place: much more care is to
be taken, that the holy name of God, and of our Redeemer Christ Jesus, be not
brought, I say not, to witness things unclean or loathsome to our senses, but
sinful. For this condition to be contaminated with sin, exceeds all other
material turpitude whatsoever, as far as heaven is above earth, and more; as
will manifestly appear if we consider that nothing in this world how base or
^oule soever it may seem, is so opposite as the least sin to the sanctity
and purity of God and Christ our Savior. In so much as it cannot be cleansed or
taken away by any other means, force or industry, in heaven or in earth, but
only by the participation of their purity and sanctity. Therefore to make the
same purity and sanctity solemn witnesses, or instruments of sin, upon any
occasion, is quite contrary to that religious reverence and honor which we owe
them, and a most abominable trespass.

16. And in all manner of oaths it is to be noted, that as well he which
swears neglecting any of the circumstances above mentioned; as he that
exacteth such an oath, is blameworthy. And besides the sin occasioned and
committed against Almighty God by the swearer or forswearer, and him that
gives the occasion: he that provoke the oath, derogateth not a little to the
fidelity and honesty of the swearer, when he urges him to swear; for he
supposes him unworthy of credit, and his word not valuable to testify without
an oath, which is a contumely. And he which easily gives such an oath to
as^euere his word, when he is not believed, co^senteth to the reproach, and by
his consent admits and confirms the con^umelious supposition made against
him.

17. But much more he dishonoreth himself, who freely, and without compulsion
uses to swear upon every light occasion for by this frequent foolish sin,
he discovers the base conceyt he has of his own honesty and credit, fearing
not to be trusted unless he swear. And why should his person or his credit be
valued by others, more then by himself, which knows best how much they
weigh: yea such an one, the more he swears, the less is he to be believed:
for still he witnesses against himself. And I call the custom of swearing a
foolish sin, as it is the most unprofitable of all the rest. For the thief,
when he steals, brings something home: he that kills overcomes his
enemy, and has one the fewer to be afraid of: and these and the like sins,
have (at least) some color of excuse, as necessity, infirmity of man's nature,
or the like* But the swearer has none: he loses always, gets nothing by
his oaths, and is without all manner of Justification with God or with man:
more then that it proceeds from leuity, ill nourture, inconsideration, and
want of wit.

18. The last degree of abuse in swearing is, when great oaths are made only
signs of men's indignation; of their purposes of revenge; of their braueries;
of their manhood, that they dare do this or that; at least that they dare
swear: which custom some fellows (where other foolish and filthy customs
have gotten place) would grace, by saying, that he swears like a gentleman:
but in other places where men are in their wits, it is more properly said,
that he swears like a Carter.

19. The deformity of this manner of swearing will be manifest, if we consider
how base, ignoble, and vngentleman-like it is be ouer-ruled with Ire; to be
enraged like a mad man; to brag and boast of great matters done or undone.
For all this trumpery thus blustered, is nothing else but an unbridled unmannerly
passion, breaking out from a weak, impotent, and distempered mind: and
commonly it is joined with lying. For the greatest briggers and swearers, use
to be the greatest Dastardes: as when Ruffians, and swaggering Cowardes protest
upon oaths that they will do this, or that; which either they cannot, or dare
not perform, In which case, besides the peri^ty which they commit; there is
also a peculiar irreuerence to Almighty God, subiecting his holy name and
Majesty to their foolish pride or impatience; procuring, by great oaths, to
make the hearers believe that they will blow down all that comes a near
them. What brutish folly is it, thus to make the Majesty of God Almighty, the
blood, and precious Humanity of our Redeemer, signs and instruments to
increase madness? For, as cowardly brutish wrath breaks Chryso. ho. 15. and
16. ad pop. and. Hom. 12. in Matthew.
out commonly into oaths: so do the oaths increase this kind of wrath. And
hereupon S. Chrysostom aduertiseth, that if men would abandon the custom of
swearing, their perturbation would sooner be calmed.

20. What can be imagined so mild and moderate as the infinite goodness,
longanimity, and mercy of Almighty God? what more gentle and patient then the
Lamb of God, Christ Jesus our Savior, in whom was, and is magnanimity, and
manhood in the highest degree? And therefore to make them arguments, and
instruments of our impotent fury, and not so much manly, as womanly, or beastly
rage, void of all reasonable respect, is an offense directly opposite to their
natures and conditions. Which supposed, how can we expect that the Majesty of
God Almighty should be sweet, merciful, and patient with us; if we be so
impatient, unmannerly, injurious, and violent with him?

21. And truly, this manner of bragging and swearing, is so far from arguyng a
great or generous mind, fit (as they would make it) for a gentleman; that
contrariwise it manifests a degenerous and base disposition. For first, as
has been said of apparel, so may it now be avouched of swearing: that where
true inward and substantial manhood, and magnanimity is wanting, there the
young Gallant, to make ostentation of that which in very deed is not in him,
rappeth out oaths at randon, upon every occasion, and without occasion; as if
all greatness, magnanimity, and courage consisted in the breath of an
unbridled, uncivil, and savage mouth: where, to swear in this manner, and
profane the name of God without time or reason, is a token of Raskallity, want
of discretion and judgment, abiection of mind; and no more honor to be
accounted a swearer, then to have his breath to stink.

22. Secondly, it is not greatness, but baseness of mind, to be so overcome
with passion of rage, as not to be able to rule, neither brains, nor tongue: a
thing fitter, as I have said, for a woman which has no other weapon, then for
a man. Assuredly, there is no greater Dastard ^^ the world, then the brawling
Swearer: and reason does convince it to be so. For, when he dare not revenge
himself of his adversary by strokes, for fear to be stricken; he breaks his
anger upon the patient honor of Almighty God, with oaths. And so, upon my
word, where thou meetest with an ordinary Swearer; single him out for a coward,
and put him into thy Calendar under that title.

23. Lastly, it is certain, that there cannot be a great mind but accompan^ed
with a great judgment, which conceaueth worthily; that is, makes great
conceit and reckoning of great things: and to come short in this kind, is an
evident testimony of defect. A great and noble mind therefore, whersoeuer soever
it is found; there will be also jointly found, a great and reverent estimation
of the greatness of Almighty God, and of our Savior Christ, and of the great
and inestimable benefittes which we have received from their great bounty, in
our creation and redemption, and continually every hour and moment receive
from their hands, and withal a reuerentiall duty toward them: and
consequently, great horror and disdain of swearing and forswearing, which be
unmannerly contemptuous tricks of ignorant insolent clownes. For none else will
not blush for the only incongruity and indecencie of such a fact, though it
were not liable to any punishment, as to usurp so great and holy names, for
the supporting of trifles: and specially, to abuse them for the maintenance of
untruth. For they be foul and monstrous absurdities; apt to cause shame, and
detestation in a generous mind, as of other shameful defectes and diseases of
man's body or soul.

24. The Prophet Helias only hearing 3. Reg. 19.
a noise that resembled the divine Majesty of Almighty God, for reverence sake
covered his face with his garment. Surely, his sacred name, or the name of
Christ our Savior, is of no less force to represent this Majesty, then was
that noise of wind which the Prophet heard: and therefore requires no less
respect and veneration in whosoever (upon any occasion) shall hear them, or
take them in his mouth. This due reputation of the sovereignty of Almighty God,
is the welspring of all virtue; as virtue is the fountain that causes and
mantaineth Ciuility. And therefore, when any Nation by impiety of swearing, or
other neglect and contempt of religion, comes to loose the respect due to
Almighty God: howsoever they may flatter themselves with other exterior
shaddows and apparences of civil life; it is evident, that they have made a
deep entrance into Barbarism; and that civil felicity cannot long endure
amongst them, if they take not up, and alter their course betimes.

25. God Almighty grant therefore, that our Nation may happily be cured, and
delivered from this enormous vice of Swearing (which proceeds as has been
proved, from sensual servile ignorance, and contempt of Divinity) that
Christian policy, guided by conscience, and knit up in virtue, may make it
prosperous in this world, and blissful in the life to come. But because in
moral doctrine, it is both grateful and profitable to the Reader, to find
truth and reason confirmed with examples; I will conclude this Treatise, or
Cure of swearing, as I did the former of Drunke^nesse, with two or three that
may be to the purpose.

Vincent. Spec. historial. l. 24. c. 24.
26. Two noble women of France, sisters to a Duke of that Country, co^playned
to K. Charlemaine, that their brother had defea^ed them of their inheritance.
The Duke denied it: and the King, ^o make trial of the truth, commanded him to
lay his hand upon the body of S. Salinus, and declare by his ^ath, whether he
had wronged his sisters, as they had complained, or no. The Duke excused
himself with an oath, that he had done them no wrong: and immediately his body
began to swell, his bowels and excrements brake our, and the blood at his
mouth, his nostrels his eyes, and his ^ares with great force: and so, two
hours after, ended his miserable life.

Ex Autographo excuso Attrebati, anno 1601. cum approbatione D. Guliel^i Gazeti
Pastorts S. Magdalenae, and Canonici Ariensis.
27. Upon a monday the 29. of November 1599. Antony Crucke one of the Farmers,
for that time, of the Toles of Sermond, otherwise called S. Adrians, in
Flanders, and the villages about it, coming to the town to make up accountes
with others his parteners, lodged at the Golden ship; where there fell out a
difference amongst them, about a sum of money which the others affirmed that
Antony had received, and he denied with an oath; wishing that he might be
burned with the fire before them in the chimney, and the Devil carry him away,
if he had received any such money, or ever deceived them. Late after supper the
rest retired themselves every one to his lodging, with purpose to go forwards
in their accountes the next day following, and leaving the said Antony in the
chamber where their meeting was, he caused his bed to be made, and called for a
faggot to warm himself: which being almost burnt out, the Host left him alone
to take his rest. In the morning his brother-in-law coming out of the country
to speak with him, and thinking him to sleep because he answered not, caused
the Host to open his chamber door; where they found him burnt, and all his body
consumed into ashes, saving only his legs from the garters down which were
next the fire, for they remained whole and untouched, and the skull of his
head: which, notwithstanding, when they handled, fell presently into dust. But
because we write especially for English men, it will not be amiss to give them
an example of their own Country.

Polidorus Virgilius l. 8. Hist. Angl.
28. After the death of Canutus the third, Goodwin Earl of Kent was said to
have murdered by treachery, the Prince Alfrid, Son to King Etheldred then in
banishment, and procured the crown for Edward brother to Alfrid, which was
called Edward the Confessor. King Edward, in respect that the Earl had helped
him to the Kingdom, pardoned his former offense, and took his daughter to
wife. But though he were freed from the judgment of men, yet could he not
avoid the judgment of Almighty God. It happened one day that the Earl being
at dinner with the King, his son Harald the Kings cupbearer, as he brought
him drink stumbled with one foot, but recovered himself from falling with the
other. So (quoth his Father) the one brother has helped the other. The Earl
spoke it in jest, but the King took it in earnest; and (changing his
countenance) and turning the sense of the words to the memory of his Brother
Alfrid, that had been slain) answered the Earl: So might my brother also have
helped me, if thou had not been to blame. The malefactor fearing the Kings
anger, began to excuse himself with oaths; adding that, if he were guilty of
the Princes death, or of any other crime against the King, he prayed God that
the morsel of bread, which he held in his hand, might choke him: as it did.
For putting it into his mouth, he could neither swallow it down, nor east it
up: but there, at the Table, agonizing with death, forthwith gave up his
miserable soul. These three examples be against Perjury. But I will conclude
with a fourth, of S. Gregory; which for the dignity of the Author, and the
horror of the fact (not to entertain the Reader with longer narratio^s) may
suffice to make us* take heed of swearing.

D. Gregor. Magnus l. 4. dialog. c. 18.
29. It is a dreadful example, which this holy Father records of a child of
five years old, son to a noble man of Rome; who, by the negligence of his
parents, or perhaps for punishment of other their sins, had gotten a custom,
in those tender years, to swear and blaspheme God. The child one day, being
in his Fathers arms, began to cry out: Help me father, help me father. And
trembling for fear, shrouded his face in his fathers bosom. His father
wondering to see him in such an agony, asked him, what the matter was, and what
he felt? The child answered; Those Blackemores, father, are come to carry me
away. And with that, swea^i^g and blaspheming, gave up his ghost. ^y which
example, says S. Gregory, God Almighty would show, for what sin he was
delivered vpto those executioners: that his parents might be corrected, and
others, by his example and theirs, take heed.

The Conclusion to the Reader. CHAP. V.
GENTLE Reader, by these three vices, Excess in foolish apparel; Swearing;
and Drunkenness; thou may make account of the rest, which have grown up like
bad wedes in our Country, since the manner of tillage in these later years,
was altered from the ancient custom of good husbandry in that land. All of
them have pernicious effects, as experience teaches, both to private persons,
and to the Commonwealth. For from one bad consequence, men fall, for the most
part, to another worse: as from prodigal spending of their own goods in riot
and apparel, they pass to play the Cu^ny-catchers in Cheape-side; or to take
purses upon Salisbury plain. And when that fails them, they become Pirates
at sea; and finally, which is worst of all, turn Mores, or Turks, and
declared enemies to Jesus Christ: of which kind of people, Argell, Tunis,
Constantinople, and the Mediterraneum, and Ocean seas are said to be full.

2. Women, in like manner, that be wantonly brought up, to fare well, and go
gay; these will engage at least their honesty, if they find copesmen, and play
other tricks of legier-de-main that may stand with their quality, and come
within their reach: for, all that is not punishable by external laws, or
subject to open contumely, and shame, holds within their consciences now a
days.

3. But the misery is, that young folks may be witty, but of themselves they
cannot be wise; nor use to be wary till they have bought wit and experience
with more errors and inconveniences, then sometimes their liuinges will bear.
And therefore we feel daily more and more the want of the good bringing up,
accustomed in our forefathers days: by which young men and women of all
degrees, and specially those that were most subject to exceed, were kept in awe
of God, and with care of their consciences, when they had grave and religious
censors of their secretest thoughts. For so, of good virtuous children, became
honest, and honorable men and women. Good men make always good subjects: and
of good subject are easily made good Magistrates and rulers: for he that can
best obey, if he do it with judgment* is fittest to command; and all these
being good, the Common wealth (which consists of them) must needs be good also
and flourish: and this was Socrates his induction.

4. Whence also the contrary follows evidently, and of necessity; that, where
good bringing up wants, and liberty grows with years; there must needs
follow in the end great excesses and disorders in every estate and condition,
from the highest to the lowest; and such confusion in the Commonwealth, as
unbridled liberty, prodigality, and vice must needs bring forth. And
notwithstanding the foulest disorders may be covered with more civil and
honester names, according to the dignity of the persons where they are found:
(as for example, one shall be holden for a Politic Counselor or Magistrate,
for the same manner of proceeding, for which another of meaner quality should be
called a crafty knave, and the like in other vices) yet in effect all is one,
though in the poor man it be termed, as it is in old plain English; and in
the other by a figurative speech. But this hinders nothing, that the fact, if
it be evil, remain not as damnable in the one as in the other: and generally
is more hurtful to the Co^monwelth, where it is called by the honester name,
in respect of the person, who in higher degree may do greater wrongs, and more
in number with less impeachement, or fear of punishment, for the dignity of
his place.

5. Now, these differences and consequences, many times, are not so
particulerly considered, nor so clearly understood and fore seen as they
should be, to be prevented in their causes. Yea the most men reflect not to the
roots of evils, at least to the original; but rest in the immediate causes:
as contrariwise, they that want providence look only forward to the immediate
effects, and care for no further. The Yonker that comes new to his Lands, to
get ready money, makes of tentymes large bargains; or takes up at Usury to
spend idly, that which quickly will eat him out of house and home: looking
only upon the urgent contentment to follow his phansies, and serve his present
turn. For his thort eyesight reaches not so far to see, that extrema gaudij
luctus occupat; nor remembers he the many hungry meals, and restless nights
it cost his poor parents, to gather the goods, or purchase the lands, which he
lays at once or twice upon his back, or plays away in few hours at six and
seauens, or spends it worse: which many times is a just judgment of Almighty
God, who punishes not only the parents in their own persons in Hell, but upon
earth also in their children, for example of others, the sins which they
committed by injustice and extorsion, or otherwise gathering of their wealth;
or at least their negligence to bring up their children, as they ought in
virtue, or for both together.

6. Beasts, notwithstanding they do many pretty things by their several
instincts of nature, which God, according to the order of his providence, has
given to every one of them in kind, in which he is wonderful: yet none of
them, has discourse to infer one truth upon another, neither forward, nor
backward; from the causes to the effects, nor from the effects of their causes:
for this is only the work of reason, and discourse of man.

7. And amongst men, those that have most wisdom, foresee the furthest in
consequences, to follow whatsoever action, or resolution, and by reflection
ascend highest to the precedent causes from one to another, till they come to
the very first orige^, root and fountain of all. Which in phisike and
government is necessary: for till the Physician or magistrate find the true and
first cause of the malady in the natural, or civil body, under his charge,
they prooceed in the cure as the blind man castes his staff, and hits him
commonly that is next unto him, and kills many times instead to cure.

8. If we consider the present state of our Country, as well in the excess of
the three vices, mentioned in this Treatise, as in almost all the rest, or to
speak without limitation of (almost) comparing it with the ancient virtue,
modesty, ciuility, truth in word, and deed* Religious Christian love, and
charity amongst* themselves, and with their neighbors, and the reputation
which they had in the whole world, for honorable honest proceeding in all
sorts of people from the greatest to the least: we shall doubtless find as
great a difference, and change, as we find in the monuments of piety, which our
ancestors built and endowed; the like scarce to be found in any other
country, and now are almost out of memory with us, but as much as the
Cronicles restify that such things have been, and that all the ruins could
not be removed, notwithstanding the most and greatest of them be defaced. Now
if we will examine the causes of these present effects and reflect from the
fruits to the branches, and from them to the root; I suppose any man of
judgment, and discourse will easily find it.

9. Our Churches (as I am told) are changed, in many places, some into barnes
and stables, and others into playhouses, devotion into curiosity, prayer in
them to Preachments, where the idle ignorant Minister intertayneth the people
with a tale of a tubb, ab hoc, and ab hac, making them believe revelations,
that the Pope is Antichrist, that Papists are se^^elesse Idolaters, that they
adore storkes and stones; and in fine that the moon is made of green chesee.

10. Neyghbourhood is changed into encroachment, friendship into cosenage,
patronage into oppression, duty into flattery, Religion into policy of state,
Ciuility into the excesses of riot, drunkenness, and swearing reproved in this
Treatise: and finally to omit many other transmutations which I leave to the
Reader, men and women in apparel, speech and manners, for the most part into
apes. And whither will they go in newfanglenesse, and licenciousnesse, if they
be let alone? God only knows, who permits many times disorders to bring in
remedies, as we may hope of his mercy in this case, and that he has not wholly
abandoned our Country. Which if it be so: the worse the better for those that
are to come, if they which now live would open their eyes, and understanding to
consider the errors which have brought the people into these absurdities, and
must needs bring all to ruin in few years, if they that stand at the Stern,
foresee not the shipwreck, and turn their course betymes.

11. If it would please them only to confer ages, manners, and dispositions,
past in our old forefathers days, with these of ours; and with indifferency
of affection and judgment, give to each one his dew: they would infallibly find,
that the old English fashion in all things was far better then the present: and
that all these new excesses and disorders come from one; and I think may be
concluded with the poor man's answer, who being examined by one of our married
Bishops, of whom he had asked an alms, if he could say the Lords prayer: he
answered he could? which of the two would his Maistership have, the old, or the
new? The Bishop bad him say both, as he did: and after asked his opinion which
of the two he thought was better? the poor man was afraid to speak his mind
till the Bishop promised him that he should not be hurt. Then (quoth he) in
good faith master I can say no more, but that three score years ago, when I
was a child, I knew a good time in England, great truth amongst neighbors,
every one kept his rank, and was known by his clothes, great plenty in the
land, many goodly Churches and Monasteries, where Gentlemen and others had
place for their children that desired to serve God; younger brothers were
retained, and poor people were relieved with daily alms, and loan of money
in their wants, and corn in dear years to sow their grounds, and feed their
familyes, till God sent foyson: All this Pater Noster builded, and founded, and
kept up, and many good things more, which I see (the more the pity) that Our
Father has pulled down. The rest (good Master) I leave to you, for your
maistership is wiser then I to make the conclusion.

12. And so do I (Gentle Reader) to thy self upon view of this Treatise, and
what has been said to find out the true root, and cause from whence the
disorders have proceeded, which if thou have eyes and sense of humanity, thou
can not choose but lament: and if thou be a person in authority, procure the
remedy without prejudice, passion, or particular interest of thy own, that may
be hurtful to thy Country, and Commonwealth: for to morrow next thou must
leave all, and give a strict account to God, upon peril of thy soul to be
rewarded, or punished for ever. And if thou be a private person, at least
absteyne from these vices here noted, and from the rest that may any way
offend God, and procure to be one of five at least, in the town or city, for
whose sake the mercy of Almighty God may spare the rest, and give them leisure
to amend their faults; and pray heartily for the Prince and those which govern
under him, that they may open their eyes, and see the peril of our ruin, and
prevent in time: and so I betake thee with my best wishes to Christ Jesus our
Savior.

A TABLE Of the Contents of this Book.
THE FIRST CVRE.
WHAT is the Natural, and Civil use of Apparel. Chap. 1. page 1. What may
be the general purpose of Nature; in that all Nations endeavor to adorn
their bodies. Chap. 2. page 12. How in the use of Apparel, Nature and Art may
make a convenient temperature: and what general observations, are necessary in
this kind. Chap. 3. page 21. That Pride, Effeminacy, and Impiety, be three
head-springs of Folly, in the abuse os Apparel. Chap. 4. page 32. How Modesty,
and Prudence condemn excess in Apparel, and the like; as signs discovering
Pride, and Arrogance in the mind. Chap. 5. page 39. Seeing that the curious,
and disorderly use of Apparel is a spectacle, and prouokement of wantonness;
by all sound judgments, it is to be reproved: and for this respect also holden
as culpable, and dispraisable. Chap. 6. page 58. Christian Piety directed by
Faith, does very much disallow, and condemn the vain, and curious excess of
Clothing. Chap. 7. pa. 78.
THE SECOND CVRE.
What Charge Nature has given to every man, in regard o^ his being, and
actions of a man, ^o avoid Drunkenness. Cap. 1. page 109. Whosoever shall
consider man's estate according to the rules of Faith, as composed of body and
soul: shall find just cause to hate, and detest the vice of Drunkenesse. Chap
2. page 145. Whatsoever duty belongs to a Christians charge, either to God
or Man, is only violated by this vice of Drunkenness. Chap. 3. page 182.
THE THIRD CVRE.
VVherin consists the nature of an Oath: and ^ow the use thereof is lawful
and Religious. Chap. 1. page 205. What submission, and reverence is to be
wished in all those who swear a truth, inuocating the Ex^ellency of God
Almighty. Cap. 2. page 216. What a grievous trespass it is to swear falsely.
Chap. 3. page 244. That the ungodliness of v^ine and irreuerent swearing, is
an enormous trespass against the sacred Majesty of Almighty God Cap. 4. page
263 The Conclusion to the Reader. Chap. 5. page 287.
FINIS.

