A most strange and wounderfull accident, happened at Weersburch by
Franckford, by a most fearful Earthquake and daknesse, with a mighty tempest
of Thunder and Lightning.

Also a most dreadful Embassage, uttered to the Governor of that City, by
three strange Children which were found in a Wood, threatening destruction to
that Country, and to all Christendom.

First it was published in Print at Franckford, next at Cullenvpon Rhyne, and
last at Nimweghen. And now Translated out of Duch in to English, by T. C.

LONDON Printed by William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in Gracious
street. 1600.

A most strange and wonderful accident, happened at Weersburch, by
Franckford, by a most fearful Earthquake and darkness, with a mighty
tempest of Thunder and lightning. And of a dreadful Embassage, uttered to the
Governor of that City: by three strange Children, which were found in a
wood, threatening destruction to that Country, and to all Christendom.
RIght just is the Lord in all his judgments, but yet most merciful to such as
do repent, and turn away from their wickedness: and although often times he be
severe in his punishments, yet does he long forbear before he execute his
wrath, giving many warnings to all finners to repent and leave off their wicked
living: and dealing with us even as a loving Father does with his children,
first threatening us for our faults, and in hope of amendment, forbearing and
suffering us, to see if we will take warning and leave off our evil doings. But
when he sees that by no means we will be won to dread his judgments, then
he takes his rod of affliction in hand, and therewith ^^^urgeth the obstinate
and rebellious: For although the Psalmist says in one place, That he is very
merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness: It in an other places he
says. The Lord is righteous and just, and rewards all men according to their
deeds: So that his mercy and justice are of equal quantity, and as he
shows mercy to the humble and contrite, so he executes his judgment upon
the froward and ungodly. And yet notwithstanding, although we see and hear
daily what tokens he sends us, as favorable warnings, and what judgments
he executes as terrible threatenings: yet we still go on carelessely in our
former wickedness, making no more account of all his admonitions, then of a
matter nothing appertinent unto us.

It is not long since he afflicted us here in England. First, with
pestilence and mortality, and now last by death and famaine, and even so long
as our punishment continued, so long we in some sort sought unto him, but now
it has pleased him again to send us our former health and plenty, we in
greater abundance, daily commit more grienous sins then before, and by how
much more the mercy of God is showed unto us, so much the more do we
continually transgress, neglecting his service, and giving our selves to all
sinful lusts and voluptuous pleasures, taking pleasure and delight in all the
most detestable and abominable sins that are in the world. Young men and
women, in pride and whoredom, and old folks, in covetousness and gluttony:
But wherefore do I impute part to young and part to old? For surely although
those sins be most rife in these estates, yet both young and old are
partakers in them all, and in a great many more, so as I may say that both
young and old, great and small, of all ages, and of all conditions: are apt to
all manner of deadly sins and pernicious vices. And although we have the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, plentifully preached amongst us, and many
thousands of good, faithful, and painful Pastors and Ministers, to
distribute the same amongst us. Yet there is none of any other Heathen nations,
and erroneous Religion that are so slack, in their devotion as we are, nor so
negligent and careless in the worship and honor of their false Idols and
fained Gods, as we are in duty and reverence unto our true God and heavenly
father. This is a grievous case, and of all things most lamentable, that we
being by profession Christians, and bearing the name of Soldiers to so worthy
a Captain as our Savior is, should make so small resistance against our
enemies the world, the flesh and the devil, as to let them harbor and
remain amongst us, executing their malice upon our wretched souls as they
do. Is it not great shame for us being of so excellent a profession, to take
so little regard and care thereof, and to see them of false and famed, damned,
and superstitious opinions, so careful in maintaining their most wicked
heresies? Yes surely it is great shame, and greatly to be feared, that those
ignorant Heathen nations, shall in the day of judgment rise up against us, and
condemn us for the small care and regard that we take of the truth.

And surely I would wish every Christian soul to take heed: and have more
regard of the honor of God then before times he has had, least he in his
just judgments, bring utter ruin and destruction upon us all, as he has
lately threatened, by these tokens which now I purpose to declare, aduising thee
whosoever thou be, that either read or hear the same, not to esteem
lightly of the matter, but to alter thy mind and leave off thy wickedness in
time, while the Lord will be found to show mercy unto thee. And so briefly
to the matter.

Upon the twenty day of July last past, 1600. A most fearful judgment of
God, happened in the City of Weersburch by Franckford, where al at one time
the Lord sent a mighty Earthquake, and darkness, with a great and fearful
tempest of Thunder and Lightning, which continued for the space of five whole
hours in most dreadful manner, so that all the inhabitants of the City,
thought surely the last judgment day then to have been come, the terrible
shaking of the earth, caused the people both small and great to forsake their
houses, (and finding no place for succor wherein they durst abide) did run up
and down the streets, weeping and crying in most doleful manner. Many Churches
and stonewalles, with other buildings, fell dawne by reason of extreme shaking
of the earth, and in their fall, killed and maimed a great number of Christian
people, the suddenness of this fearful tempest, put the poor inhabitants
in such extreme fear, as no man had any mind of any thing in his house, no,
the husband never remembered his wife, nor the wife her husband, but were so
exceedingly astonished, that they ran up and down the streets from place to
place, like mad or frantic persons.

The Thunder and lightning, was likewise so terrible, as the lightning ceazing
upon the houses, burned an hundred and twenty of them down to the ground: and
by reason of the peoples fear, there was no man that used any kind of means
to hinder the force of the fire.

The man that had now been there, to have seen the demeanor of these poor
fearful souls, and could without fear and astonishment, have noted their
behavior: might there have seen a most lively Map of misery and misfortune.

During the time of this tempest, another most strange and dreadful accident
happened in the City. For a man of a most strange complexion, appeared to
many people: his hair on his head seemed to be flames of burning fire, his
eyes stood staring in most fearful and ghastly manner: his beard all grown out
of order, that by visage he seemed like a wild man, in his right hand he held
a bloody sword, and in his left hand a rod, from whose branches blood dropped
in abundance, his look was stern and reuengfull, and his words full of
terror, which were these.

Thus says the Lord, your sins have moved me to wrath, and your
transgressions have provoked my displeasure, therefore except you speedily
repent and leave off your wickedness, I will utterly destroy you from the face
of the earth, and behold this bloody Sword, that I hold in my right hand,
betokens dreadful war, which the Lord will bring upon you speedily,
except unfeigned repentance. The rod that I have in my left hand, signifies the
punishment which the Lord will inflict upon you, because you will not be
warned, and forsake your pride, and such other abominable sins, for as he
has long forborne you, still admonishing and exhorting you by his Preachers,
to reform your selves and amend your lives: So now seeing no other means will
serve, he purposes to take his rod of affliction in hand, and to correct your
sins most severely. And seeing mercy will not prevail, nor you make no
account thereof, he will now execute his judgments upon you. And having
uttered these and such like speeches, he vanished away: at whose departure
there was heard such a sorrowful howling and crying: that the people more
afraid of this wounder then of all the tempest before, were now with fear so
mightily astonished, as they rather seemed dead men then living creatures.

Not long after, it pleased God that the tempest ceased, and the weather brake
up. which comforted the Citizens hearts, but yet this joy was not perfect with
the most part, for there you might see some wayling for the loss of their
goods and houses consumed with fire, others making woeful lamentations for
their husbands and children, searching amongst the dead bodies which were burnt
and slain, with the fire and fall of the buildings, here one crying and
wayling of his wounds, gotten in the time of the tempest, there another
sorrowing for the loss of his friends, in such pitiful manner, as would have
moved the most stony hard, and abdurate heart to relent, and take compassion:
but al in vain were these lamentations, for that by them no man is able to
recover such losses, wherefore every one as well as they could, striving to
comfort themselves, made this their chiefest joy, that it pleased God to stay
the tempest, and in some measure to appease his wrath.

Some two or three days after: to show forth the great joy that they
received by the mercy of God, in sparing them at that time. The Governor of
the City with some other of his friends, took Wagon, entending for their
recreation, to ride to the next City called Ausburch, being not far distant
from thence, and as they were in the mid way in a certain Wood called Rade,
where suddenly they heard a great noise and cry of certain children, and
looking about could see nothing: upon that the Governor sent the Waggoner to
see if he could find the persons, from whom that clamor proceeded, who went
and sought all about, but could find no body, so when he had sought a great
while in vain, at last he returned again to the Governor, telling him that
he had sought in every place near thereabouts, but could neither see nor
hear any such matter. This answer made them greatly to wonder, for still
they heard the cry louder then before: which increased their desire so much,
as the Governor bad the Waggoner to drive forwards into the Wood, to see if
they could by any means know the reason of this clamor: Not long had they
ridden before they came to a cross way, where four ways met, where they
spied three children, two boys and one gerle. The Gerle had upon her head a
costly Call, made of the newest and stateliest fashion, that is at this present
worn, upon her lower-parts a pair of Breeches, like a man of the newest
fashion likewise, both which attires, signified pride, the one in women, the
other in men. The Girl approaching near unto the Wagon, spoke to the
Governor as follows.

The extreme pride that reigns in these days among Christians, has so much
provoked the Lords displeasure, that it has caused him to send us down from
heaven, to pronounce his judgments against you all, and to tell you that he
has promised utterly to root you out and destroy you, except you speedily
repent, and regard the favorable and merciful warnings that he sends you
by us: So having uttered such like speeches, she likewise vanished away in a
great flash of Lightning, and was seen no more.

The next approached one of the Boys, who was clad in Turks apparel, who
threatened dreadful war against all Christendom, and that the Turk should
according to an ancient Prophecy: come and overrun that Land, and bring
his Army into the City of Culen upon Rhyne, which is the place from whence
the Renish wine comes: and with sword and fire should destroy all those
places in which he entered, and this he said should fall out the next year
without fail, except speedy repentance. And that their land should be brought
to such extremity through the want of men, that there should not be left in
all the Country a man to follow the plough, so as all the country should be
desolate and unfruitful.

Then came the other Boy, who holds in either of his hands, a piece of their
Country money called a Real, and he said that in certain time after, the
Turk should be beaten back again into Hungary, and then should be such
plenty, as no man should have need to borrow of his neighbor, but they should
have Gold and Silver at will: but there should follow such pestilence and
contagion, as the number of the people should be so much deminished, that
victuals shall be so plenty, as for three Stiuers (which is in English money
some seven pence half penie) a man should buy a bushel of of Wheat, and for
half so much a bushel of Rye. But a dead man's Coffin should not be found,
although a man would give for the same a Duck at of Gold, so grievous the
plague should be.

When all these speeches were uttered, they made the Governor swear, to
publish the effect of their words in all their Dominions, and to all other
nations near adjoining unto them, which they took their oaths to perform.
And so they made letters of Credence, sealed with their Seals and sent them
from City to City. First to the Palsgraue, then from him to the Duke of
Bronswicke, and so over all the land. This Coppie came into England the twelfth
day of this present Month of November. 1600.

The names of those Officers to whom this Embassage was uttered. Jasper
Vromen, Governor of Weersburch, which in their language they call the Scoute,
and Iacobus Vos, Burgomaster.

FJNIS.



