THE HOPE OF the Faithful.

Declaring Breefely and clearly the Resurrection of OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST past,
and of our true essential bodies to come: and plainly confuting the chief
Errors, that has sprung thereof, out the Scripture and Doctors.

With an evident probation, that there is an eternal life of the Faithful,
and an euerlalasting damnation of the Unfaithful.

Newly Imprinted and Corrected. 1574.

To the Christian READER, GRACE and peace.
EVERYE MAN must needs confess, that this is now a lamentable time. In the
which the world is not only unquieted with wars, dearthe, sickness and
such like but also stands ever more and more in greater pearill, thorovve
vices every where bearing the svving. So that it is to be feared if we
banishe them not the sooner, we and our posteritye shall yet come into far
greater sorrow, then we are already vvrapped in. For if one should barely, and
vvythout all rhetorical amplifications, but rehearse only the great pomp,
vainglory, riot, fornication, open idolatry, perjury. etc. of mighti men and
rulers, which vvast the world miserably, the space even of many days would
scase be any thing sufficient thereunto. And what heaps of wickedness
private persons do add unto the same, all wise men ca^ ponder by themselves.
For if we go into our own bosoms, we find that we altogether will
wholy fashion and frame our lives after the world: seeking vain pomp and
private commodity for our own lust, with sure shame and public
discommodity to others loss.

Which all are undoubted tokens, that the law and love of God is little
esteemed among us. Which with grievous threats forbids the foresaid and
other vices by straight commandment forsing, and sure rewards alluring us
to the contrary dealing Neither may we think, but that such vices daily
will increase till the time they ouervvhelme us, except the contempt of Gods
la ve set apart, being the only sufficient vvelspring of all wickedness, for
which the wrath of God is inkindled, and his bitter curses fall upon us the
same word be had in greate^ price and reverence. For why, what godline^^e
can be hoped for of them, which hold nothing of God, the only fountain of
goodness, and laugh his word to scorn, of whom we can know nothing, but
that is there shevved us: save that small knowledge, that is of beholding of
the creatures* which nevertheless declares rather that there is a God, then
what he is, and how he will be pleased. And though all the scripture serve us
to enjoy Gods blessings, yet as in a compound medicine, all the simples being
holsom, some one may less be spard the^ the other so the article of
resurrection, clear and often inculcated in Sc ipture, is most available, so
that it unknown, all vices svvarm and roste in us. For we, not considering
our end, wherein salvation and life stands, or pains prepared for the
accursed, will but stain our selves in voluptuousnes. For who knovveth but
the flesh in this life, why should he not think, as good take it as leave it,
and best to make the most of that which at last ceasseth. In this case the
Ethnikes being said: live merely while ye be in the world: and eat we and
drink we lustely, to morovve we shall die, which all the Epicures protest
openly, and the Italian atheoi in life practice, and no worse man, then a
Pope, in our days has given the like definitive sentence, among his Court
deuines, of the souls immortality: the story is known. Contrariwise, the
learned in Gods word, knovving that this life is a death from sin, and a
way to the life to come, which Christ with his cross has opened unto
them, for desire thereof run forth in the race of godliness: assured of the
revvard, since Christ, therefore bidding death battle, that we might live,
has broken her bonds and risen again. For goods are not the possessors, as
the Philosopher says, and Christ alludeth in the parable of the two strong
men, but the more valiant ma^s. Wherefore, gentle reader, I having this little
but absolute work of Christ's and our resurrection, and that there is an
eternal life and damnation, vvherin the devil has sore assaulted the
church, by men, this only excepted, of great authority and learning: thought
it my duty, to put it in Printe, not keeping that private, which might do
such good common. The matter is plain in scripture: yet learn we better
things called in question, and forced to us by reason. Wherefore not to stir
up Gods grace in us by imbrasing such treatises, were to tempt God, and
extincte the spirit.

For the scholar learneth of his schole fellovv, that he perceived not by his
more learned master, and understands him ever after the better: and so men
forder one an other in scripture. Which as I mean in printing, if thou desire
in reading, the Lord no nay shall grant our request: which gives blessings
plentuously to all such, as ask it constantly. To whom give honor and thank^
from heart, for the good that thou repest in his creatures.

FARE WELL.
The first part of THIS BOOK, ENTITLED THE HOPE OF THE FAITHFVL, which
entreats of the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, with the fruit and
commoditye thereof.
THE FIRT CHAPTER. The Contents of this book, and the Authors purpose.
COnsidering that, by the Evangelists, and by all the Apostles, there is nothing
written more diligently, then touching the resurrection of our lord Jesus
Christ: my purpose is, some what more largely to talk of the same, and of the
glorious ascension of his body into heaven: Item of the resurrection and
asce^sion of our own bodies: of the damnation of unbelievers, of the hope and
eternal life of ye blessed. And this I mind to do, only unto the honor, laud
and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ: that the mystery of the holy gospel may
be set forth and opened to the commoditye and edifying of the faithful, and
that of every man it may be plainly understood, how great things are
prepared and given us of Christ. This matter also does specially belong to the
declaration of the holy Gospel, forasmuch as the best fruit of ye gospel is
contained and taught therein. Therefore if I write ought herein more largely, I
do nothing that concerns not my purpose. Yet I intend also to keep a
measure, and not to open eueri thing, that hereof might be written, but only
that which is cheifest, and most necessary of all.

CHAP. 2. That the Lord verily arose with his body.
THat our lord Jesus Christ, with his own very true body, did verily arise
from ye dead, it shall be expedient before al things to testify and prove.
Therefore let the first witness, even our Lord Jesus Christ himself, come
forth now and bear us record out of the Prophets, concerning his true
resurrection. Math. 12.
Like as Jonas (says he) was three days and three nights in the whales belly,
so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. Now did not the fish cast up to the dry land any other for Jonas, but
even ye same Jonas himself, whom he had swalowed. Therefore the very same
true bodi of the Lord also, that was buried, arose again. Which thing the
holy Apostle Paul minding perfectly to expres, said: 1. Cor. 15.
first of all I delivered unto you (or taught you) that which I received: how
yt Christ died for our sins, agreing to ye scriptures: and yt he was buried,
and that he rose again the third dai, according to the scriptures.

Lo, what can be spoken more evident and plain? He that died for our sins,
and was buried, even he himself the very same rose also again. Of this now it
follows, that the very true substancial body of our lord did rise again: for
even the same died and was buried. But to the intent yt it might the sooner be
believed, Paul the holy teacher declares furthermore, yt he speaks this
according to the contents of scripture, and that the same was taught in the
scriptures before, meaning undoubtedly the law and the Prophets.

Nevertheless, we will now bring forth the true and evident testimonies of
the Angels, who in Mark, Math. 28. Mark. 16. Luke. 24.
Luke and Matthew, speak unto the women yt came to the sepulcher: Ye seek Jesus
of Nazareth, him that was crucified. Why seek ye the living among the dead? He
is risen, he is not here. Behold the place where they had laid him. Remember
how he spoke unto you, while he was yet in Galile, saying, that the son of man
must be delivered into the hands of sinful me^, and be crucified, and the
third day rise again. Therefore go quickly, and tell this to his disciples,
yt he is risen from ye dead. And behold he shall go before you into Galilee:
there shall ye se him, as he himself told you.

These are the words of the Angels, which (if al circumstances be thoroughly
well considered) do plainly declare, that the very true body of the Lord did
verily arise from the dead. The weme^ come and seek the body of ye lord,
desiring to annoint it: therefore the question is, touching the body of
Christ. The Angels also speak of ye true body of Christ, and make answer,
saying: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth. Whereunto they add distinctly, him yt was
crucified. Now are we sure that his very true body was crucified and died. He
(say they) namely that died, even Jesus of Nazareth, the same is become alive
again. Why seek ye the living among the dead? The lord died of a truth, but
death must not have dominion over him, nether must his body putrify or
corrupt, as other men's bodies do, according as holy David said before:
Psalm. 16.
Before hand, I saw God always before me: for he is on my right hand, that I
should not be moved. Therefore did mi heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad.
Moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my soul
in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Thou have
showed me ye ways of life, thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance:
and at thy right hand, there is pleasure for evermore.

These words extend wholely unto Christ, according as the.ii. excellent
Apostles, Acts. 2.13.
namely Peter in the second, and Paul in ye 13. of the Acts, do declare. Out of
the Angels words also is it com into the articles of ye creed, as we all
confess with these words: he rose again from ye dead. This word (from the dead)
does truly express the death and resurrection after this sense. He died, as
other men also do, according to the law of nature. And even in ye same flesh,
which he therefore took upon him that he might die, received the immortalitye
and took it unto him again. Therefore say the Angels: he is rise^ again. But
that thing rises no up, which fell not before: therefore even the same body of
Christ, that fell in death, is from death risen up again.

Moreover, they name also the place where he was laid, to express perfectly,
that ye very true body was risen, saying: behold the place, where they laid
him. The mortal body of the Lord has his certain place, yea his own place
(that the Logicians call, Vbi, that is to say, where) in the which he was laid.
And as he now is become immortal, he has his own place again. For if the
body that was raised up, were every where, then had not the Angels said:
Behold the place where they laid him. Yea, they had not been able to show any
one place, where he was not if the immortal body must be every where. But now
they show a place, in the which the immortal body was not, and that with
plain express words, saying: he is not here. Of this now it follows, yt
the body of Christ. which is but in one place, did verily rise again. In the
gospel o^ s. John also the sepulcher cloths wherein the Lord was wrapped (as the
head cloth, and that which was about his body) are mentioned as strong
testimonies of the bodi risen up: which clothes Pete^ and John did perfectly
see. Furthermore, the Angels prove his very true resurrection out of the word
of god, and say, remembe^ what he said unto you while h^ was yet in Galilee:
the son o^ man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men. etc. Wit^
these words will they instruct us, that the son of man, a very true body,
is truly risen again. They say moreover: go quickly, tell the disciples, that
he is risen from death. Now was the body dead, and (as all men's bodies, yt die)
laid in the grave. And even ye same body was made immortal, and rose again
from the dead. He shall go before you into Galilee, yea before you shall he go,
with a true bodi that moves from one place to another: there, as in a certain
place, shall ye se him. Ye shall se him I say: for with a visible and palpable
body is he risen, as ye are told by the Lord himself, who can neither lie nor
deceive.

CHAP. 3. Appearings of the body raised up.
HEreunto extend the manifold appearings or open shewings of Christ, mentioned
by the Evangelists. In Mark it is written thus: Mark. 16.
when Jesus was risen early the first day after the Sabbothe, he appeared
first to Mary Magdalen. To whom in the gospel of John, he says: go to my
brethren and tell them: John. 20.
I go up to my father and your father, to my God and your God. Now when she
came to the disciples, she told the^ that she had seen the Lord, and that he
had spoken such things unto her. In Matthew he meteth the women, and says:
All hail. Fear not, Math. 28.
go and tell my brethren, yt they go into Galilee, there shall they see me. In
holy S. Luke is mention made of two appearings. The first when he showed
himself to the two that went to Emaus, Luke. 24.
and opened unto them the true resurrection of his body. The second, wha^ they
were gone again from Jerusalem, they came to the Disciples, minding to show
them, and to give them to understand, what they had seen and hard. Then
prevented they them, and said: the Lord is truly risen in deed, and has
apeared unto Simon. Luke. 24.
Now while they were talking of such things among them selves, Jesus stood in
the mids of them, and said: peace be unto you. But when they saw him, they
were sore afraid, thinking yt they had seen a spirit, or some other vision.
The^ said the lord unto them: why are ye troubled: And why do thoughts arise
in your hearts? Behold my hands and my fete.

CHAP. 4. The body of Christ rose again, not a spirit but a true body.
Now that no man should think it to be another body, which he had not before
his resurrection, he adds thereto immediately: It is eue^ I my self. Handle
me, and see: a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And with
that showed he them his hands and his fete.

With this evident testimony of the Lord, De agone Christiano. cap. 24.
was S. Augustine moved, boldly to say, that they ought not to be heard, which
deny the body of the Lord to have risen again, as it was laid in the
sepulcher. For if it were not so, he would not have said to his disciples after
the resurrection: Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have. Now is it as much as to rob God of his honor, if any man would
think, that the lord, who is the truth it self, had in any thing, that he
spoke, not said the truth. etc. Thomas was not there, when ye Lord showed him
self alive unto his disciples: but when he came again, they told him with
great joy, what they had seen and heard. Nevertheless he thought it had not
been as they spoke, and he said: except I see in his hands the print of the
nails, John. 20.
and put my finger into the holes of them, and my hand into his side, I will
not believe it. Therefore after.viii. days, when the disciples were assembled
together again, and Thomas with them, Jesus comes in, while the doors were
shut, and stands in the mids among them, and says: peace be unto you.
Afterward said he unto Thomas: reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands, put thy hand here also and lay it in my side, and be not faithless,
but believing. Thomas answered and said unto him: my Lord, and my God. For S.
Paul also in the first chapter of the Epistle to ye Romans does out of the
resurrection of the Lord, Romans 1.
prove the godhead thus: which was borne of the seed of David after ye flesh,
and evidently declared to be the son of god after the spirit that
sanctifies, and by that he rose again from the dead, namely Jesus Christ our
lord. What ca^ be spoken more plain, more evident or more certain? For freely
did the Lord set before their eyes his body, which was hanged upon the
cross, that they might see it and handle it. For the body was pearsed with
nails, and marked with the printes thereof. Out of this now it follows, yt the
lord with his true body did verelye rise again, and not a spirit. And further,
the Lord also shows himself unto the seven, which then were in Galile,
fishing at ye sea of Tiberias. The Evangelist adds likewise thereunto, John.
21.
that it was not expedient for any of the Disciples to ask him who he was:
for they knew that it was the Lord. In the.28. chapter of Mathewe, the eleven
Apostles saw the Lord, Math. 28.
and worshipped hi^, as it is declared before. Some think, that the same was the
excellent appearing, yt Paul speaks of, saying: Afterward was he seen of more
then five hundred brethren at once: 1. Cor. 15.
of whom many are alive this day, but some are a sleep (or dead.) And in ye
same place does the Apostle make mention yet of two more appearings, saying:
after this was he seen of James, then to all the Apostles. And last of all he
was seen of me, as of one that was borne out of due time.

Luke the Evangelist, in the beginning of the Acts of the Apostles, has in
manner collected all the probations together. Acts. 1.
The Lord (says he) showed himself alive unto his apostles after his
Passion, and that by many tokens, appearing unto them forty days, and
speaking of the kingdom of God. S. Peter also, instructing Cornelius in the
Faith of Christ, Acts. 10.
said: we are witnesses of all things, which he did in the land of the Jews,
and at Jerusalem, who^ they slew and hanged on tree. Him God raised up ye
third day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto us witnesses,
chosen before of god for that intent: which did eat and drink with him after
he rose from death. With these plain probations and testimonies (as I suppose
it) it is evidently declared, and sufficiently showed, yt our Lord Jesus Christ
with his own very true body, which hanged on the cross, did vereli rise from
the dead. As touching the glorificatio^, I shall speak thereof, when I come to
ye resurrection of the bodies: and there will I show more, that the
glorification does nothing minishe the veritye or truth of the body, read the
sixth chapter.

CHAP. 5. The fruit of the Resurrection of Christ.
NOw I will declare the occasion, why I have with such diligence, and so
earnestly preased unto this, yt Jesus christ with his true body did truly rise
again. That is, how profitable and necessary it is, so to believe, and what
fruit the true resurrection of Christ does bring and engender unto us. And
albeit that hereof, as of a plentiful treasure, much might be spoken: yet will
I comprehend it all in a short sum. Though we be co^plete and made perfect
through the death of Christ, while the just judgment of god is satisfied, the
curse taken away, and the penalty recompensed and paid: Yet says Peter, we are
borne again, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, unto a liui^g hope. For
like a christ with his resurrection overcame death, so stands also ye triumph
and victory of our faith in ye resurrection of Christ. Therefore through his
death is sin taken away, by his resurrection is righteousness brought
again. For how could he with his death, have delivered us from death, if he
himself had of death ben overcome? Or how could he have obtained the victory
for us, if he had been destroyed in the battle himself? Therefore through death
is death discomfited, and with the resurrection is life to us restored.

Hereof comes it that Paul says: if Christ be not risen, 1. Cor. 15.
then is your faith in vain, and ye ar^ yet still in your sins: and so
they, that be a sleep in Christ, are lost. And to the Romans Christ (says
he) was delivered up for our sins, Romans 4.
and rose again^ for our justification.

Hereunto serves it also, yt h^ writes in the. Romans 10.
10. Chapter. I^ thou confess ye lord Jesus with thy mouth, and believe in
thin^ heart, yt God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved. T^ the
Philippians he says more over: Philip. 3.
I count al things but loss^ for the excellent knowledge sake of Jesus Christ.
Out of all this is there yet another thing concluded, namely: that not only
life is restored unto us, but also that in the resurrection of the Lord, the
immortalitye of the soul is grounded fast and sure. For so says the lord
himself in the gospel: John. 11.
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes on me, though he were
dead, he shall live: and whosoever lives and believes on me, shall never die.

Yet another fruit also receive we out of the resurrection of the lord: namely
that we are assured and out of doubt, even as if we had received writing and
seal thereof, yt our own bodies likewise shall rise from death: forasmuch as in
the true resurrection of the body of Christ, our resurrection has a fast and
vmnoueable ground For Paul says: Christ ros^ from the dead, 1. Cor. 15.
and is become the first fruits of them yt sleep. For by one man came death,
and by on^ man came the resurrection of ^ dead. For as by Adam all die, by
Christ shall all be made alive but every one in his own order* The first is
Christ, then they are Christ's. etc. Now he that i^ ye first can not be alone:
the hea^ also shall not forsake the member* Seeing then yt Christ the head ^
risen, it must needs follow, tha^ we also, as members, must ri^ again. For
even in ye same plac^ does Paul conclude: if the dea^ rise not again, the^ is
not Christ risen again. And finally out of the words of the holy Apostle
Paul we learn, Romans 6 Collos. 3.
that through the ensample of Christ, that was raised up, we are not only
provoked to take upon us a new life, but yt we also through the power of Christ
are renewed, yt we might lead an innocent and holy life. And thus have I
breefely comprehended and declared the principal fruits of the resurrection of
the Lord.

CHAP. 6. Of the true Ascension of the Lords body, that arose a body and no
Spirit, and of his place whether he went to be in.
Moreover, it shall be exdient to know, to what place the true body of the
Lord was carried or came: whether it was laid in the earth again, or vanished
away, or turned into ye nature of the Godhead, or otherwise changed into a
sprite. In this point, we affirm thus: The right old Christian faith, the
upright holy scripture, and the ancient Doctrine of the Christian church, does
teach, hold, and co^fes, that Jesus Christ, very go^ and man, has not laid
away, no^ mixed together, nor yet put of hi^ natures, the godhead and the
ma^hode: but yt he keeps still both natures in their properties v^blemished,
and that he ascended v^ to heaven very true God and man For so we knowledge and
confess in the Creed: he ascended up to heaven. We find also in the gospel of
Mark: so then, when the Lord had spoken unto them, Mark. 16.
he was received into heaven, and sits on the right hand of god. Item
Ruffinus an old writer (who has declared the articles of the faith) says:
Ruffinus.
he ascended into the heavens: not thither where the word, that is God, was
not before (for he was ever still in heaven and continued in his father) ^ut
thither where the word, that became man, sat not before. Yet ^il we declare this
more plain^y out of ye gospel of Luke, Luke. 24.
where ^t is written thus: and he led the^ out into Bethanie, and lift up hi^
hands, and blessed them. And ^ came to pas, as he blessed them he departed
from them, and wa^ carried up into heaven.

Now if thou ponder every thing here thoroughly, thou mu^^ needs acknowledge,
and being overcome with the truth, tho^ must needs confess, that the very
true body of the lord was n^ laid away, neither turned into the nature of the
godhead: but h^ a very true man, who at one ti^^ is but in one place, ascended
a^ was taken up into heaven, as ^ to one place. He led them out^ says he. Who?
I prai the. Eue^ the Lord Jesus, which unto than, by the space of forty
days, had in very deed truly showed himself unto his disciples, that he was
risen from the dead with a very true essencial body. Even he, the very same
that had taken unto him a true bodi, led his disciples out unto Bethanye, and
from thence brought he them farther to Mount Oliuet. And in ye same place,
lifting up his hands (no doubt, bodily and humain hands) yea with the prints
and tokens of the wounds, he blessed them, ^amely his disciples: that is, he
saluted them, as the manner is of those that take their leave of us. And so
departed he from them, ^ set his body corporally in heaven, as in one place.
For afterward it follows yet more plai^: he departed from them: that is, he
was carried into heaven.

For, to be carried, may hear be spoken, only of the body: and in such sort
departed he from them, that his body was from the earth taken up into heaven.

And though all this be euiden^ and plain in it self, yet by the Evangelist
Luke, Acts. 1.
in the Acts o^ the Apostles, it is set forth an^ opened more manifestly. For
before all things he testifies, yt the Lord arose with his own true b^dy: and
that by the space of. 4^ days, with many tokens and euide^ces, he plainli proved
and declar^ his resurrection unto the Disciples. And immediately he adds
thereunto, yt even the very same body was taken up into heaven. For when he had
spoken these things (says he) while they beheld him he was taken up on hie:
and a cloud received him up out of their sight. Lo, the Lord was taken up: yea
even in their eye sight was he taken up on hie, so yt a cloud received his very
true body away from the sight of their eyes. I beseech you, what can be more
aptly or more conuenientli spoken of an essencial body?

It follows farther in the Evangelist Luke: and while they looked steadfastly up
toward heaven as he went (mark that well) behold, two men stood by them in
white Apparel, which also said: ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gasing up
into heaven? This same Jesus, who is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven. Wherefore our Lord Jesus is
departed up into heaven, with his own true essential body: yea even with the
same which he raised up from ye dead. For even with the same very true human
body shall he come again unto judgment, according as the Lord himself said,
and the Prophet Zachary, Math. 26. Zach. 12. John. 19.
whose words s. Ihon aledgeth: They shall look on him, who^ they have pearsed.

Thus I trust it is sufficiently proved and declared, that the Lord Jesus,
with his own very true body which he raised from death, is gone up into
heaven. But to the intent that no man mistake this word (heaven) or otherwise
imagine any thing, yt is dark or not understand, whereby the simple being in
error, may scase know at the last where heaven is, or where Christ has his
dwelling: It shall therefore be nedeful, brefely to declare, what the heaven is:
and that the Lord with his own true body does dwell in heaven, as in one place.
For heaven is a certain assured place, and not only a name and declaration of
the estate and being in heaven. Therefore when it is said, Christ is gone up
into heaven, it is not so much as only to say, he has taken upon him an
heavenly estate or being: but also, he dwells bodily in heaven, as in one
place.

CHAP. 7. The diverse significations of this word, Heaven, as it is used in
scripture.
THis word (Heaven) in the scripture, is used diverse and sundry ways. First
for ye whol^ firmament, which is called the heavenly host, or beutifull
apparel of the heavens. Hereof ha^ thou record in the eighte an^ ninetenth
Psalm. Psalm. 8.19.


It is taken also for the air which is above us, as the Prophet says: he
covers the heaven with clouds, Psalm. 146.
to prepare rain for the earth. Hereof comes it, that the fowls, which fly
in the ^ire, are called fowls or birds of heaven, that is to say, birds ^n
the air. Item, heaven also is used for a seat, habitatio^ or dwel^ing, as: the
Lord has prepared his seat in heaven, and: Psalm. 103. Math. 5.
ye shall not swear by Heaven, for it is Gods seat. And though God be
^nfinite, and can not be compassed about with any place (as the most wise
Solomon said: 3. Reg. 8.
The heavens, and the heavens of all heavens, are not able to contain thee.
And how should then the house do it, yt I have builded? Yet the scripture
calls the heaven yt is above us, a dwelling ^ God: which dwelli^g is ordein^
for all faithful and virtuous bel^uers, and is named the heaven This does
Paul witness, saying, we know, 2. Cor. 5.
that if our earth mansion of this dwelling were destroyed, we have a building
^ God, an habitation not made ^ hands, but eternal in heaven.

Here is now heaven taken f^ the kingdom of God, for ye kin^dome of the father,
or joy and ete^nal life, which is peace and re^ The heaven (I say) is a seat a^
dwelling of the faithful or ble^sed beleuers: a determinat place also, into
the which the lord Jesus was received, when he was taken up into the heaven.
And this does the scripture plainly declare unto us, namely ye above ^s there
is a certain determinate place prepared for us.

For Luke says: he was recei^ed up on hie, Acts. 1.
and a cloud took ^im up away out of their sight. Item, and while they looked
sted^astly up toward heaven, the Angels said: this same Jesus, which is
taken away from you unto heaven, shall so come, eue^ as ^e have seen him go into
heaven. ^ho is so ignorant now, that he ^otteth not where heaven is or the
clouds, or into which heau^ the Apostles looked so stedfast^ Besides this, the
holy Apos^ Paul says also: our conuersa^on, Phillip. 3.
freburgership or dwelling in heaven: from whence we lo^ for the Savior, even
the L^ Jesus. Lo in heaven, says ^ Apostle, is our dwelling. ^ which
heaven, I pray you? ^^ in the same whence we look the savior. Now is it euid^
from whence we wait and lo^ seeing yt the Apostle says ag^ we, which shall live
and rema^ shall be caught up with them ^ in the clouds, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
to mete the L^ in the air, and so shall we eue^ with the Lord.

He says also in another place: if ye be risen again with Christ, Collos. 8.
then seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand
of God. And therefore is the Lord Jesus gone up into the heaven that is above
us, and namely into yt sure certai^ place, which is prepared for ye blessed.

And in the same heaven, as in a sure certain place, does Christ now dwell
bodily.

Of this opinion also was holy Augustine, as in deed it is right and agreeable
unto holy scripture. His words are found in the book ad Dardanum de praesentia
Dei. Fulgentius
Holy Fulgentius in the second book that he wrote unto King Trasimundus, is
earnest to bring every man unto this understanding: that the human kind and
nature of Christ, which now dwells in heaven, is circu^scribed, and in one
place. With him also accords uniformly the holy martyr Vigilius, Vigilius.
whose testimony I will now omit, and come again to the holy scripture.

The Scripture, minding t^ show what is become of the body, that rose again
from death and ascended up, and where h^ has his dwelling, says simpl^ and
plainly: Christ sits at the right hand of God.
he sits at the righ^ hand of God the father almig^tye. Thus now is the
body (...) Christ come to the right hand God, there sits he. But here
shall it be expedient to declare what the right hand of God is, and what it is
to sit at Gods right hand.

CHAP. 8. What Gods right hand is, and to whom it is referred.
FIrst, the right hand of God is not referred unto god him self, but unto men,
that are on the right hand. So that first the right hand of God does signify
the eternal salvation, and the place of those, that be saved. This did holy
Augustine teach, whose words I may well allege, forasmuch as he also does
confirm and prove his opinion by the divine and holy Scriptures. In his book
de Agone Christiano, August. de agone Christiano. cap. 26.
he says: we ought not to hear them, that deny the son to sit at the
right hand of God. For they say, has god the father also a right or lef^
side, as bodies have? Nether d^ we understand that of the father For with no
bodily proportion can God be described or comprehended. As for the right hand
o^ the father, it is nothing else but eternal salvation, which he sha^^ give to
al godly and faithful beleuers. In like manner is the left hand rightly taken
for the everlasting damnation, yt shall com^ upon the unbelievers. So yt n^ of
God, but of the creatures ^ must be expounded, yt is written of the right and
left hand. For even the body of Christ also, which is the church, shall come to
ye right hand, that is, into salvation, as the Apostle says to the Ephesians:
Ephe. 2.
he has raised us up together with him, and made us sit together with him among
them of heaven. For though our bodies as yet be not there, our hope
nevertheless is there already.

The same holy Augustine says also further in the book De fide and symbolo. De
fide and symbolo. cap. 7.
By the right hand (says ^e) must be understand the highest salvation, where
righteousness, peace and joy is: like as the gotes also shall be set on the left
hand. That is, by reason of their sins and wickedness, they shall come into
great calamity, troble and misery All these are the words of holy Augustine.

CHAP. 9. What it is to sit at the right hand of God, how Christ sits
the^ and what he does.
ANd thus now, to sit at the right hand of God, is eue^ as much, as to be in
rest: that to say, al wretchedness and miser^ set aside, to live in a godly
life, to be partaker of eternal joy Now that this word (to sit) used in
Scripture for rest, the places declare. In the. 4. book Moises it is written
thus: sha^ your brethren go to war, Number 32.
and wo^ ye sit here? Mich. 4.
And in Micheas: eu^ry one shall sit under his vine and figtree. etc. Mani mo
such places there be. Wherefore now, wha^ the scripture says, that the lord
Jesus sits at the right hand of his father, it understands it chefely of
his human nature: which he he took upon him, that the same being discharged
and free from al travail and misery of man, is now all in joy, and partaker of
the kingdom everlasting. Thus says also Rufinus in his exposition of the
Creed: Rufinus.
to sit at the right hand of the father, is convenient for the manhead
received, which is received through a mystery. For to ascribe that to the divine
nature, it is unseemly, as though it had a seat in heaven: but of the human
nature it is properly understand and spoken.

And the like yet did holy s. Peter teach before Rufinus time, a^ it is to see
in the Acts. Acts. 2.3.


But now might one ask wha^ does the son at the right hand o^ the father? Must
he always sitt^ there, and be as much as made fast and bound unto it? Answer.

The Lord Jesus, after his human nature that he took upon him, and which he
put not from him in heaven, has now eternal joy with his elect: he as the
head with his members ruling and reigning with all faithful believers for
evermore. Whereof we shall spea^ more afterward.

A very superfluous and unprofitable question also is it, wha^ one will so
curiously inquire and know what God does in heaven.

For God will only teach us with his holy word, yt he lives and rules eternally
in the glory of his heavenly father. Holy Augustine says also in the book De
fide and symbolo: De fide and symbolo. cap. 6.
To go about for to seek and inquire, where and how the body of our Lord is in
heaven, it is a point of nice people, and brings no profit.

Only we ought to believe, that he is verily in heaven. For truly it stands
not with our weakness, to comprehend and discern the priuity of the heavens: but
it besemeth our faith, to have the worthy and glorious body of the Lord in
high and worthy estimation. Hitherto Augustine.

CHAP. 10. That Christ sits at the right hand of God by his humanity, but
circumscribed in place, and is not every where.
NOw though the heavenly honor and glory be high, and may not be expressed: yet
the place where he dwells, is certain, and the body yt is in heaven can not
be every where. For the right hand of God, in and after this first
signification thereof, is not infinite. Else must al faithf^^ beleuers also, and
they that are saved, be every where, seeing they are with the son of God, who
is taken up into heaven. For the Lord himself says: John. 17.
now from henceforth shall I be no more in the world, but they are in the
world, and I come unto thee. Upon this he says: father, they whom thou have
given unto me, I will that where I am, they also be with me, that they may see my
glory which thou have given me.

Item, he that does me service let him follow me: John. 12.
and where I am, there shall also my servant be. Seeing now that our souls and
our bodies also, after the resurrection of the flesh, shall be in heaven, as in
a place certain: it follows that the body of the Lord, which into heaven is
taken up, has also a place certain in heaven, and yt the right hand of God in
this signification can not be every where.

In this vprighte matter, let it trouble no man, that is read in s. Paul, Ephe.
4.
how yt Christ ascended up above all the heavens by means whereof, a curious
body might peradventure conclude: if Christ our Lord be taken up above the
heavens, then can there no place certain be ascribed unto him, seeing there is
no place above or with out the heaven. Neither ought it to offend any man yt is
written, how yt unto Christ there is given a name, which is above al names. Or
that Paul says, Phillip. 2. 1. Cor. 2.
how that no eye has seen, neither any ear heard, nor is come into the heart
of man, what god has prepared unto them that love him.

For the scripture of God through out, does witness constantly and sure, that
Christ Jesus is taken up into heaven, and sits at ye right hand of his
father. Whereby it is out of dout, that the Apostle thought not to set Christ
wtoute heaven: but therefore proponeth he the matter with so high and excellent
words, to show and declare unto us, that the body of our lord which before was
despised, and shamefulli defaced, is now in the supreme and highest glory, and
that means he, where he says, above all heavens. For who ^ does thoroughly
consider yt plac^ of Paul to the Ephesians, finds yt Paul has set two part
of his oration, Ephe. 4
the one against the other. For first he says thus that he ascended, what
meane^ it, but that he also descended fi^ into the lowest parts of ye earth
Against this, sets he now: h^ that descended, is even the sam^ also that
ascended up, even ^boue all heavens.

Therefore is here the one set against the other: namely, to de^cend into the
lowest parts of t^ earth, and to ascend above all he^uens. But who would here
conclude: Christ ascended into the lowest parts of the earth: Ergo, he had no
place upon earth? For every man understands well, yt Paul with these words
minded to declare the true coming of the Lord upon earth, and the great
humility and mekenes of our lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, who would the^ in
the other part of the oration conclude: Christ ascended up above all heavens:
Ergo he is not in heaven, or in any other place? For is there also any one
place without the heaven: Who understands not now, yt Paul here minded to
say nothing else tha^ that, which he utters more plainly to the Philippians:
Phillip. 2
he has exalted him on hie? An^ though this high or heauenl^ honor be
greater and more glor^ous, then any man's tongue ca^ or may express: yet the
heaven is and does remain still the dwe^ling of the faithful, and therefore is
it a place certain.

Wherefore after my plain an^ simple understanding, which i^ not curious, I
believe consta^tly yt the glorified body of Christ i^ ascended up above all
heavens that is above al co^pace, or spher^ and height of heaven, and so even
i^ heaven, that is in the dwelling ^ the faithful, and there remains and is
not (as they say) passed b^ on the out side of heaven.

For the truth witnesses evidently: where I am, John. 12.
there shall also my servant be. Now shall the servants of God be in
heaven, and not without or above the heaven (that is to say) in no place. For
Paul, the chosen man of god, says to the Philippians: Phillip. 3.
our dwelling is in Heaven, from whence we look for ye savior. etc. plainly
also and evidently does the true word of God declare, yt the heaven, into the
which Christ ascended, is a place certain: for the Lord says: in my fathers
house are many dwellings: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to
prepare a place for you. John. 14.
And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come to you again and receive
you even unto my self that where I am, there you may be also.

Here in deed could nothing b^ brought forth more mete and convenient to our
purpose. For the thing yt we now treat of, is the heaven, which is the
dwelling native country of the blessed, an^ which here is called a dwelling or
mansion, or place: yea a dwe^ling and place in the house of Go^ ye father. Who
is now any mo^^ so malapart or arroga^t, as to v^dertake to deny, that heaven
is place? For thus says the Lord In my Fathers House alread^ there are many
mansions: the not only I, but al mine also have a place and dwelling.

If it were not so, then had I told you, that I would go to prepare the same
for you. But now it is not needful, seeing they be prepared already, and wait
for you.

Whereas I now go away, and must be from you a little seson, it is not that I
would prepare mansions for you, for they are prepared already: but that I
through my death may make the way for you into Heaven, and open the street to
the said dwelling. Now to the intent no man shall say, that we happily have a
place in heaven as men, but Christ has not so a place: therefore does the
truth of god plainly express, yt the place, where christ is, is a place in
deed.

For he says: I will take you unto me: John. 14.
yea not only unto me, but unto my self. For immediately upon ye same, does he
yet add it more plain: That where I am there you may be also.

Christ then, as a very true mi^ is in Heaven, as in one place wherefore it
follows, that we also shall be in Heaven, as in o^^ place certain. This the
truth says: therefore must it needs (...) even so, and can be none otherwis^

The same also does ye human kind and nature require which God, as Augustine
says, did e^due with immortality, but too^ not away the nature and kind.

The Seleucians, The Seleucians error.
or Hermians denied our savior Christ after the flesh to sit at the right
hand of the father. But the true faithful beleuers have ever still confessed
and taught, yt the very true body or flesh of our Lord does sit at the
fathers right hand. For verily if the bodi and flesh of our Lord have not his
place given him, or if that be wtdrawne from him: then is this the plain
meaning, that our Lord had no true body. For holy Augustine says, and says
right: take all room and place from the bodies, that they have no place to be
in, and then are they no where: if they be no where, then are they nothing at
all. As for the place of Paul to the Philippians in the second Chapter, it
teaches nothing at all, that, with the exaltation and ascension of Christ, any
thing is withdrawn from the nature human, or yt we ought to speak nothing
more of it, or yt we should or might ascribe no name and place unto it: but
like as with y^ words goi^g before (which serve much to the matter) he thought
to express the lowest humilitye of Christ, even so is it now his mind, with
very honorable and hie excellent words, to set forth his glory.

Yea he declares himself in the words following, and says: in the name of
Jesus shall all knees bow, Phil. 2.
both of things that are in heaven, of things that are on the earth, and
things that are under the earth.

And thus has the father exalted the name of Jesus above all names, The name of
Christ is above all names.
even in showing and declaring, that Jesus is the same, whom al they that are
in heaven, upon earth, and under the earth ought by right to know, worship and
fear, as Lord of al things and creatures: yea, and that all things should
confess, yt Jesus is ye lord, to the praise of god the Father.

For verily we must needs knowledge that Jesus Christ is lord, yea lord of
all things, king, defender and redemer, of like power and honor with the
Father. Which thing extends not to ye fathers derogatio^ or dishonor, as the
Arrians folishly thought: Arriani.
but to the great glory of the father.

The Lord says himself in the gospel: John. 5.
the father has committed all judgment unto the son, because that all me^
should honor the son, even as they honor the father. He that honoreth not ye
son, the same honoreth not the father which has sent him.

Moreover there he says: and now glorify thou me, O father, with thine own
self, John. 17.
with yt glory which I had with thee, or ever ye world was. From the beginning
had he ye honorable name of god, which is glorious and far excellent above all
names.

Now through the incarnation, and by reason of the contemned and despised cross
of Christ, the godly honor in Christ was thought to be somewhat darkened. But
that did the father restore and bring to glory, in that he raised up his son
from death, and took him up into heaven. And thus gave he him a name, which is
above all names: for so he declares, yt he is Lord of all things.

Holy Peter also, a fellow helper of S. Paul, in the second chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles, did in like manner utter the same. Acts. 2.
For after he has opened and declared the true resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ from death, and his glorious ascension into heaven, he says: so
therefore, let all the house of Israel know for a surety, that God has made
this same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, Lord and Christ. And to be short:
Paul by the name of Christ, that is above all names, understood the blessed
name of God the Lord, which can not be uttered, and is above all names.

But seeing our Lord is a true man, like as he is also very God both together,
and has with the glorification not put of the kind and nature of man, nether
consumed it through the godhead: therefore remains he still a true creature, yt
is, a very true man, and therefore may he also right well be named after the same
nature, and has likewise a place certain.

Finally, as for the words of the Apostle Paul (the eye has not seen, and the
ear has not hard, 1. Cor. 2.
neither have entered into ye heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for the^ that love him) these words, I say, must not be referred to the place
of those, that are saved. For they are written of the vnoutspeakable greatness
of the joy, as the whole text of the words sufficiently does declare.

Brefely, forasmuch as it is op^ and manifest unto us, yt the Lord Jesus Christ
after his nature yt he took upon him, is a very true man in glory: It follows,
yt the true humain body of Christ has his own place, whereof I hau^ hitherto
spoken so much, not with out cause: namely, to the intent al^ godly persons may
know, tha^ this is a place certain prepare^ for them in heaven: and yt the^ may
constantly believe, yt in heaven they have a brother, namel^ ye Lord Jesus
Christ. Touching the fruit of the Ascension of o^ lord, I shall more largely
speak of it afterward.

CHAP. 11. An other signification of sitting at the right hand of God, by
which manner of sitting Christ is every where, sitting there in such sort
after his Godheade.
THus come I again to the former part, what the right hand of God signifies,
and is called. It is taken in the scripture for strength, protection, power,
and for the incomprehe^sible honor or glory. And therefore it is written: thy
right hand, Lord, Exodus 15.
is become glorious in power, thy right hand has al to dashed the enemy. Item
in the Psalm: Thou have given me the defense of thy salvation, Psalm. 18
thy right hand also shall hold me up. Moreover: Psalm. 118.
The right hand of the lord has the pre-eminence, the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass. After this signification of the right hand
sounds the name to sit, to rule, to govern, to defend, to behave hiselfe as
a prince or Regent diligently in his office, and faithfully to execute the
same. For in the third book of the kings, says David: 3. Reg. 1.
Solomon shall sit upon my seat, and shall reign after me. And so in the
Psalm he says: the Lord said unto my Lord, si^ thou at mi right hand, Psalm.
110.
til I make thine enemies thy foot stool. And Paul says: Christ must
reign, 1. Cor. 15.
till he has put all his enemies under his fete. Item in the Prophet Zachary:
Zach. 6
behold ye man whose name is ye branch, and he, that shall spring up after him,
shall build up the temple of the Lord, yea even he shall build up the temple of
the lord: he shall bear the praise, he shall sit upon the Lords throne, and have
the domination. A priest shall he be also upon his throne. This kind of speech
is taken of the use and custom of Kings and Princes, which have their
Deputies, to whom they freely give all auctority to rule and govern. Even so is
Christ, in who^ the father will be honored, and through his authority and power
is it his pleasure to rule. He is taken up to ye right hand of the father, that
is to sai^ to have the dominion or governance in heaven and in earth: an^ this
commission is given hy^ faithfully to execute, and to be lord and governor of
all things.

Thus the right hand of Go^ is infinite, neither may it be she in, for Gods
might and power^ incomprehensible: the kingdom of Christ also, which is
euerl^sting, is a kingdom of al world, and so is he of one substance, of o^
power and honor with the father not bound to one place, but every where, who
in all thing rules and works: seeing he not only a very true man, but ^ so
the very true God, after ^ ma^hode finite, but after his godhead infinite, and
incomprehensible, and that in one undivided person he contains very true God
and man, King and Lord of al things. For S. Peter says Christ is at the
right hand of God, gone up into heaven, 1. Peter. 3.
angels, might and power, being subdued unto him.

Item Paul to the Ephesia^s: God the father raised up Christ from the dead,
and has set him on his right hand in heavenly things above all rule, power,
might and domination, and above al names that are named, not in this world
only, but also in the world to come. And has put all things under his feet,
and has made him above all things: the head of the congregation which is his
body, and the fulness of hi^ that fills al in all things. Th^^ much concerning
the right ha^^ of god, and concerning heaven that is the place certain or
dweling of the blessed: in the which also our lord Jesus with his body has his
mansion and seat.

CHAP. 12. The fruit and commoditye the corporal ascension of Christ, both^
that he does now for us, and in that w^ learn by it.
AFter this from hence fort^ will I speak of the frui^ and profit of the
corporal ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his seat and place at the righ^
hand of his father. Before al things we must know, that our Lord ascended up
with his very true body, yt he as mediator between God and man (being very God
and man himself) and high priest in his own temple, might be before his
heavenly father, make intercession for us, and wholly take upon himself our
necessities and grefes. For Paul says to the Hebrews: Christ is not entered
into ye holy places that are made with hands, Heb. 9.
which are similitudes of true things: but is entered into the very heaven, to
appear now in the sight of God for us. Hereunto al so pertein other sentences
or testimonies of John in his first epistle. 1. John. 1.2.
Item of Paul to the Romans, Romans 8.
wherein he says: According to the same, did our Lord ascend up bodily, that
he, with his flesh taken up into heaven, might stay and direct upon the holy go^
all worshipping and Gods service of those that are his. For ^ corporal
worshipping does fr^ hence forth please him, but such as is done to his
spiritual body He says in the gospel of John the pore have you always wy^
you, John. 12.
and when you will, you m^^ do the^ good: Mark. 14.
but me have ye n^ always. Hereunto also serves saying of Paul: although w^
have known Christ after ye flesh yet know we him so no more. 1. Cor. 5.


Moreover, the Lord with his resurrection has taught us, that we also should
lift up our minds into heaven, seking no salvation at all upon earth, seeing
that heaven is our right native country. Therefore ought we to use the world,
as though we used it not, 1. Cor. 7.
and to direct all our care and thought unto heavenly things. For Paul
says to the Colossians: Colos. 3.
set your affection on things which are above, and not on things which are on
earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in god. Phillip. 3.
Item to the Philippians: our dwelling is in heaven, from whence we look for ye
savior, eue^ Jesus christ our lord.

Christ also with his ascension into heaven, thought to declare unto us his
power and might, wherein consists our strength our power, richesse, triumph
against sin, death, world, devil, and hell.

For he ascending up on high led captivity captive, and wha^ he had spoiled the
ennemies, h^ gave gifts unto his people, an^ endueth them yet daily with
spiritual riches. Ephe. 4.
Therefore sits h^ now on high, to the intent tha^ with his own strength,
which he daily bestows upon us, h^ may regenerate us into a spir^tual life,
and quicken us with his holy sprite, garnishing his church that is to say the
faithful, with manifold gifts of thanks, defending them against all evil,
suppressing the terror of his ennemies, but preserving and saving us, as those
that truly do honor and worship him. For he, as having the victorious triumph,
is the king, savior, and head of all faithful beleuers.

Finally, also with his resurrection, he has prepared us a place, and made
the way, and opened it into heaven. Thus in heaven has he placed the true man,
that we might have an assured true testimoni, that our flesh also shall rise
again, and that the whole perfect man, with body and soul, shall be carried into
heaven. For members shall be like unto ye heat. Therefore, as the cloud took up ye
very true body of the Lord, ye^ even the whole perfect manne Christ: so shall
all godly persons be taken up into the air to mete the Lord, that they may
live with Christ their Lord and head for evermore. For Paul says: ye dead in
Christ shall arise first. 1. These. 4.
The^ we, which live and remain, shalb^ caught up with them also in the
clouds, to meet the Lord i^ the air, and so shall we ever b^ with the Lord.

Item to the Hebrews: by the means of the blood of Jesus, w^ have free entrance
into the hol^ place by the new and living way, Heb. 10.
which he has prepared for us through the veil, that is to say, by his
flesh. Unto this meaning agrees very well, the godly and excellent sentence of
the old ancient writer Tertullian, Tertullian.
who in ye book of the resurrection of the flesh, says thus: Christ, which is
called the arbiter and mediator between God and men, has, of the same that is
set and committed unto him of both, reserved al so unto himself, the adding to
of the flesh, for an earnest penny of the whole sum.

For like as he has left us the pledge of the sprite, even so contrariwise
has he received of us the earnest penny of the flesh, and carried it up with him
into heaven, a true evidence or pledge yt he will bring thither also the whole
sum, body and soul. etc. For this great and high benefit, declared unto
us by his divine mercy, without our deserving, be laud and praise, honor and
thanks unto our King, our victorious Triumpher, head and Redemer, even our
Lord Jesus Christ, from hence forth now, and for evermore.

Amen.
The second part, ENTREATING OF our bodies.
CHAP. 13. Of the true Resurrection of our Flesh.
Now comes it to the point, that we must also speak of the true raising up
of our bodies, or resurrection of this our flesh: for the same follows out of
the resurrection and ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. This word (to rise
up) as Tertullian De Resurrectione carnis declares, extends to nothing more,
the^ unto that which was fallen. For nothing ca^ arise, save only it that fell.
For when a thing was fallen, and stands up again, we say, it is risen, for
as much as this term, to rise up, has a relacion. S. Paul uses the word
Anistemi which signifies to erecte, to rise up, to set up again, and to
stand. Egeromai ex hypnou, I rise up and awake from sleep. The Hebrews use ye
word kum, which signifies, not only to rise up, but also to endure to
continue, and to remain upright.

Joshua. 7.
For in the book of Joshua we read: the children of Israel could not stand
before their enemies, that is, they might not endure and continue before them.
Furthermore in the book of Genesis: every thing was destroyed that remained (yt
is, Gene. 7
whatsoever there was, and stood vprighte or erected it self) upon the face of
the earth.

Hereof it comes, that to stand up, and to raise up, is called the
immortality, or the everlasting and perpetual continuance of the soul.

As when the Lord says in the gospel of John: I will raise him up at the last
day. John. 6
For if by the last day the hour of every man's death be understand, then does
the Lord raise up (that is, he preserves) the soul in the state, yt it dies
not, neither perishes in death: now if by the last day, be understand domes
day, then raises he up the body from ye earth at the last day in the
general judgment.

Therefore the words, to stand up and raise up, signify either the conservation
of a thing, which is, that it be not destroyed and pearishe: or else the
restoring of a thing, that was fallen to his right case and estate again.

CHAP. 14. Our flesh, or body it self, shall rise again, though it be hard to
believe, and what the flesh or body is.
Now will we speak also of these terms, flesh and body, or corpse. We
believe the resurrection of the body or flesh. The scripture commonly calls
it the resurrection of the dead: to declare euidentli, that the resurrection
must not be referred to the soul, nor to the spirit, but directly unto the
body and to the flesh. Cyprianus or Ruffinus says, that the church toward
the West, did express and knowledge the article in the holy Apostolical Creed,
after this manner: I believe the resurrection of the flesh. And so they added
there unto manifestly this term (the) to the intent that no man should
understand any other flesh, save only the same natural and essenciall flesh,
which we carry about. So says Augustine also in the book of the Articles of ye
Creed: yt same visible, which properly is called flesh, shall without all dout
and assuredly rise up again.

Me thinks that Paul the Apostle minded to point unto the flesh, as with a
finger, and therefore said: 1. Cor. 15.
this corruptible must put on incorruption.

With the term (this) poynteth he as with a finger unto our flesh.

Holy Hierome forces and co^pelleth John, the bishop of Jerusalem, to
confess and knowledge the resurrection, not only of the body, but also of the
flesh, and says: the flesh and the body are two things.

Every flesh is a body, What the body or corpse is called of the Latinistes.
but every body is not flesh: namely, a wall is a body, but flesh it is not.

For flesh is properly called a substance of blonde, synowes, bones and
veins set together. As for a body, though the name thereof also be used for
flesh, and most part for a substance yt may be seen or handled, yet it
betokens sometime a subtle state, yt can neither be handled nor seen. As
namely, the air. It is hard to believe the resurrection.
But at all times it has been a hard thing for man to believe, that ye bodies
which are buried and resolved to corruption, should wholely, without
imperfection or blemishe, be brought again, and restored.

Therefore the Athenians, wha^ they heard of the holy Apostle, the resurrection
of the dead, they mocked and laughed his doctrine to scorn.

For who would lightly credit that the bodies, which now are corrupt and
returned to earth, o^ otherwise torn, and devoured o^ wild beasts and
fowls, yea sonn^ time bre^t and brought to ashes, or drowned with water,
should perfectly be brought again, an^ wholly restored? But God, willing to make
that easy and light, which is hard unto us, has i^ the resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ set before our eyes an open, plain, and sure trial,
declaration or evidence of the true undoubted resurrection: whereunto, as to an
ensample and sure strength of the resurrection, we ought to have respect,
as much and as often as we think upon it, and wonder how our bodies should rise
again.

Therefore with so many testimonies and arguments have I declared before, that
Christ our Lord with his own body rose truly again from death. He carried up
Helias also living body and soul into heaven, and mani ^ne raised he up from
the dead, that we concerning the resurrection of the dead, should have utterly
no doubt at all.

Finally, with plain and evident testimonies of ye scripture, has he opened
and showed as I now will declare: which testimonies and arguments truly do
teach, yt the flesh of men shall rise again from the dead: that is, that our
bodies shall at ye last day be truly raised up unto judgment. Holy Job says
thus in the.19. Chapter: The true resurrection of the flesh proved.
O that my words now were written: O that they were put in a book: would God they
were graven with an iron pe^ in Led, or in stone to continue. For I am sure
that my redemer lives, and that he shall stand over the dust (or earth) in
the later dai: that I shall be clothed again with this skin, and see God in my
flesh. Yea I my self (or for my self) shall behold him, not with other, but
with these same eyes. Mi reins are consumed within me. Jobs adversaries
complained of him, Antagonistai Job.
as though he knew not God, and as though he set nothing by him. Upon this
great slander and blasphemy, he answers, and declares his faith, desiring
that his belefe were written in Led, and in hard stone: that is, he wishes
his faith to be known to those that come after, which he also declares with
few words, after this manner: I am of you complained upon and accused, as though
I knew not God: now do I know right well in my heart, yea and I believe, and am
certified assuredly, that my redemer or auenger lives. Here Job uses an
Hebrew word called Goel, which some expound a redemer: it signifies a
rescuer and an auenger, such one as is a more friend of ours, such as were
they, to whom in the law of the Jews, it apperteined to redeem the goods and
to rescue them, as we may learn farther out of Ruthe, and of the fourth book of
Moses: Ruth. 4. Number. 35.
and with the aforesaid name Goel, does Job set forth and specify ye Messiah
our Lord Jesus Christ, that he lives: namely, that he is the true living God,
the life and resurrection of men, and that he is also the rescuer and aue^ger,
doutlesse even the same that is our very nere friend: namely a very true man,
such one as has taken our own flesh and blood upon him, suffered death, and
with his death has made us living.

Moreover he says: at the last shall he stand over the dust. For our Lord
Jesus, with his very true body, shall come at the last day to judge, and then
shall he stand over the dust. This saying declares evidently, that he will
undertake and do somewhat: namely, that he shall put to his mighty hand, so
order and bring to pass, that the dust shall come to life again. The dust
calls he here our flesh, Gene. 3.
and that according to the scripture. And with this does he wonderful well
express ye truth of our flesh: namely, that our very own true flesh shall
rise again.

For he will certify us, yt even the very same bodi, which at the first was
made of dust, and now into dust is sown, and through the corruption is become
dust again, yea even that same very body and none other, shall be raised up.

But to the intent that no man should draw or refer the dust to any other
thing, the^ to the body of man: It follows moreover in holy Job, that after
they (namely the father, the son, and the holy ghost) have with my skin (not with
a strange, but with mine own skin) clothed the body, eue^ mine own body,
which I now have called dust (and thereby understands he the flesh, the
sinowes and the bones) then shall I see God in my flesh: that is, fully and
perfectly shall I be restored and made whole again. For to see God, is nothing
else but to be partaker of eternal joy and salvation. And to se god in, or from
out of, yt flesh, is to be taken up corporally into everlasting joy. Besides
this, he does yet more evidently express the perfectness of the resurrection
of the flesh, and faith: Whom I for my self shall see (yt is, to my commodity
and salvation) mine eyes shall see him, eue^ I my self shall se him, and none
other for me. In ye which words it is principalli to be noted, that he says, I
shall se him, yea eue^ I my self. Then, mine eyes shall see him. Finally, I and
else none other. As he would say: even I ye now have true flesh and bone, and
look now upon you with mine eyes, shall with the very same eyes behold God
also. Therefore in the resurrection of the dead, we shall, with the essenciall
substance and nature, be even the same that we were before death: namely we
shall have our members, as head, eyes, bones, belly, arms, legs, hands, fete.
etc. Now where this distinction is, there must be also circumscription, there
must the same have compace and limits. It follows yet farther in Job: my
reins (namely my desire and lust) are wasted away and consumed within me: that
is, with in me, namely in my heart, are ceased all other desires, lusts and
pleasures, in comparison of this my hope toward the resurrection: yea in
comparison thereof, they al are nothing, neither worthy to be esteemed. For in
the only Resurrection rests all my hope and delight.

So said Paul also: I have counted all things but loss, and do judge them
but dunge, Phillip. 3.
that I might win Christ, to know him, and the virtue of his resurrection.

And therefore the old translator of the book of Job has evil interpreted
these words after the sense: this hope is laid up in my heart.

After all this, does holy Io^^ add hereunto, that makes the understanding
perfect, and concludes his saying, thus: Seeing I this knowledge and co^fes,
why hold ye me for ungodly? Why do ye persecute me and vex me thus with
spiteful words of reproach and slander? Yet is the root of the word found
in me. And he calls the root of the word, the right foundation and ground
of godliness. As if he would say: forasmuch as the true head article of
salvation is found in me.

For like as the rote gives al virtue and sap unto the tree: even so is the
matter of the resurrection of the dead through Christ, the cheifest, greatest,
and true principal point of the word and affairs of God. Repent therefore
(says Job) for wrath handles or does nothing right, but rather provoke
god unto vengeance. The prophet Esaias in his twenty six chapter does testify
the Resurrection (...) this manner: Esaias. 26.
Thy dead shall ^^e, even with my body shall they arise. Stand up and be glad, ye
yt rest (or dwell) in the duste: for the dew of the herbs is thy dew, and the
ground of tyrants shall thou cast down. Thy dead O god (says the prophet) shall
live, nameli the souls of those yt for thy sake are slain, and that have
worshipped thee. Nevertheless, their bodies shall not prevent my body in the
Resurrection: but at the last judgment, or upon domes day shall they rise
again with my body? Likewise says also S. Peter, yt the souls of such, 1.
Peter. 4.
as died before time, do live with god, but with the flesh they shall be judged
as other men. Therefore did the holy Prophet Esaias believe and confess the
general resurrection of all bodies at the last day. In the which Resurrection,
he openly knowledgeth, that his own bodi also shall rise again. Afterward
brings he in an Archangell blowing the tro^pet, and saying: stand up and be
glad, ye that rest in the dust. To rest in dust, is nothing else but a
description of man's body. To rest in the dust.
For the souls and sprites do not rest or lie in dust: but ye bodies are
buried therein, and become dust. Therefore me^, according to the substance and
state thereof, wherein they rise again, are called inhabyters and I^^ dwellers
of dust, or such as rest in duste.

The declares he with a similitude, how our bodies, yt putrify and corrupt,
shall through the power of God from death and corruption be easily raised up
again.

The power of god, that charge and commands us to rise up from death, does
he compare to the dew: which wha^ it falls down, quickens and reuiueth the
dead herbs. Likewise also does the power of God to our dead bodies, which it
quickneth and raises up again. Contrary to this he sets another sentence,
saying: the earth of tyra^ts that is, the bodies of tyrants ^halt thou raise
up, O God: but ^hou shall cast them down, that ^s, thou shall overthrow them
unto hell and eternal pain.

Moreover, touching the true ^esurrection of our bodies, the ^ision of the
Prophet Ezechiel ^s so evident and plain, Eze. 37.
that it ^s not needful to speak ought ^herof.

And of this have we many te^timonies and witnesses in the Prophets, which
might here ^ell have served: but seeing it is not necessary, I have, because
of shortness, omitted them, and now will I come to the sentences of the new
Testament.

The Lord says: Verily, verily I say unto you: John. 5.
the hour shall come, and now it is, yt the dead shall hear the voice of the
son of God, and they, that hear it, shall live. And immediately after he says:
the hour shall come, in the which all they yt are in ye graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth. Now is it manifest yt neither the souls nor
sprites, but the bodies are in ye graves And if other bodies should rise up
for ours, what needed he always to make mention of the graves: But to the
intent that he, immediately in ye gospel, might declare the evident, plain,
and vn^oubted resurrection of our bo^ies: he forthwith, by his migh^y and
wonderful power, John. 11.
raised ^p Lazarus from death, who now ^id stink, and had line.4. days ^n the
grave. This marvelous ^ct had the lord himself declared unto Martha with these
words: by brother shall rise again. The^ ^nswered she: I know yt he shall ^se in
the resurrection at the last any. Lo how commen, manifest, and known unto
every man was ^e general resurrection of our ^odies? The Lord says more
unto Martha: I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes on me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live. And every one, that lives and believes on me,
shall never die.

But what needs me to collect so many testimonies of ye resurrection of the
dead, considering that the Apostles were upon no article more fervent and
earnest then upon this? He, that will allege all the sentences and witnesses,
must write out almost the whole new testament. Luke says in the Acts of the
Apostles: Acts. 4.
with great power did the Apostles bear witness of the resurrection of the
Lord Jesus Christ. And in ye same book says Paul: or the hope and
resurrection of the dead, am I judged. Acts. 23.


And yet again: Acts. 28.
for the hope sake of Israel, am I bound with this chain. In many places has
the holy Apostle Paul brought forth evident ensamples and testimonies of our
resurrection, concerning the which we shall speak in due time.

He says moreover: we, 2. Cor. 4.
which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that ye life of
Jesus might appear in our mortal bodies.

What could he have spoken more evident and plain? For immediately upon the
same he says thus: we have believed, therefore have we spoken, and know, that
he, which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall through Jesus raise us up also.

Wherefore our true bodies, which now are mortal, shall verily rise again:
howbeit after ye resurrection, they shall no more be mortal but i^mortal. To
these witnesses out of gods word, and therefore invincible, I will now also
add the testimony of Ihon Damascene.

Johannes Demascenus de orthodoxa fide. Cap. 28.
The Resurrection (says he) shall be nothing else, but a true conjunction of
soul and body, and another laudable restitution of it that was fallen away,
and brought to naught. Therefore the same body that perishes, is dissolved
and falls a sonder and the very same rises up again vndissoluble. For he,
that in the beginning created man out of the dust of the earth, and then
brought him again to earth and duste, that he was taken of: The same (I say)
is mighty and of power according to his word, to raise up the self same man
again from death.

Thus much Damascenus.

And truly every man now may well think, that God, principally for this
cause, did not create the first man of naught, as he did other things, but out
of ye dust of the earth: that as concerning the resurrection of our bodies,
though they turn to duste and earth again, we should have no doubt. Now, as I
suppose, I have sufficiently and plainly declared, yt the true flesh of al men,
yea even our own body, and else none for it, yea even the humain true body shall
rise again from death: namely formed and fashioned with his own right
proportion, measure and property, as a true body: so that the measure and
property of the true body, which now is divided and parted in his members and
joints, remains: that is, he shall have true flesh, blud, bones, synewes,
joints, members. etc.

CHAP. 15. The manner how the bodies shall rise again, and the kind that
they shall be of.
But to the intent that this ^ay yet be more plainly understand, I will now tell
how our bodies shall rise, and what nature and kind they shall be of in the
resurrection. At the end of the world, shall the Lord come with great majesty
unto judgment, and shall declare and show him self, in, and with a right
true essenciall body.

Hither also to shall he be brought and shall stand in the clouds of heaven, that
al flesh may se him. Yea al men that are upon earth shall behold him, and know
him by his glory. In the mean season also shall he send his Archangel to blow
the trompe. Then shall all the dead hear, and perceive the voice and power of
the son of God. And so al men, that died from the first Adam, shall immediately
arise out of the earth.

And al they, that live until the last day, shall in the twinkling of an eye be
changed. And thus all men, every one in his own flesh, shall stand before the
judgment se^te of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall wait for the last
sentence and judgment of the Lord: which sentence, being given quicklye and
without delay, shall call one part into heaven, and thrust out the other into
hell.

This fashion and manner of the resurrection, have not I imagined of my self,
but written it al out of the Evangelists and scriptures of the holy Apostles.
For thus we read: The powers of heaven shall move in ye last time, and then
shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven, Math. 24.
and then shall all the kinreds of the earth mourn, and they shall see the
son of man come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he
shall send his Angels with ye great voice of a tro^pet, and they shall gather
together his chosen from the four winds, and from the one end of the world to
the other. etc. Hereunto add, yt he spoke in Mathewe and John. Math. 25. John.
5. 1. These. 4.
And Paul in the first to ye Thessalonians, says: This say we unto you in the
word of the lord, that we, which live and are remaining in the coming of the
lord shall not come before the^ which sleep. For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, and the voice of the Archangell, ^ trompe of God. And
the dead i^ Christ shall arise first. Then sha^ we, yt live and remain, be
caught up with them also in the clouds, t^ mete the lord in the air. And s^ shall
we ever be with the Lord Furthermore to ye Corinthian^ says Paul: behold I
show you mystery. 1. Cor. 15.
We shall not all sleep but we shall all be changed, an^ that in a moment, in
the twin^ling of an eye, at the time of the last trompe. For the trompe sha^
blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
This is now the manner of ye resurrection of our bodies, and in what nature
and kind they shall rise again. But in the resurrection they shall, through the
power of God, be made immortal and incorruptible. For the Apostle says
expressly: the dead shall rise again. After that he says: this corruptible
and mortal, must put on incorruption and immortality. In the which words ye
term this, poynteth directly, as with a finger, to our living and human
body.

Job. 19.
And so Job said: even I my self shall see him, and none other. Wherefore our
bodies, after they be risen again from death, shall remain even in their own
right state and substance, as before. Yea even ye very same men shall keep still
their nature and kind, as they did before: saving yt they, which before time were
subject to frailti, shall from thence forth be pure, clean, perfect, immortal,
of a sincere and purified nature, subject and obedient unto the spirit.

What a glorified body is.
Such bodies, raised from death, did the old writers call glorified, purified
or glorious bodies, and that according to the doctrine of the holy Apostles.
Albeit there were some which abused yt word, and therefore made the veritye of the
bodies void and of none effect: beginning to dispute of glorified bodies, as of
the pure substance and estate of a spirit. Whereof we shall speak shortly, if
God will.

CHAP. 16. That Paul spoke rightly of a glorified body, and what a glorified
body is, and what a natural.
But now will I declare, that Paul did rightly and well use this word,
glorious or glorified body, even as it is truli in it self. For to the
Philippia^s he says: Our dwelling is in heaven, from whence we look for the
savior, Phillip. 3.
eue^ Jesus Christ the lord: which shall change our vile earthy body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his own glorious body, according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. In this sentence thou
haste that term (glorified body) thou have also of what nature and kind the
glorified body shall be: namely whole, and as the body of Christ yt rose again
from death. And thus shall it not be a body utterly made void, or brought to
nothing, or altogether turned into a sprite, and therefore having no room and
place, inco^prehensible and invisible: but it shall be an vprighte very true
human body, as it is sufficiently declared before, where I spoke of the true
resurrection of the lord. In the which place we understand, yt when the Lords
disciples thought they had seen a spirit when they saw the Lord, he said unto
them: a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. Luke. 24.
Handle me and see: for it is even I my self. The Lord also, after his
resurrection, set before them some fashion or evidence of his glorification:
namely when he was transfigured before them. And at that time remained the
right essenciall substance of the body: but in form and fashion it was
altered, in that it became glorious.

So stands it plainly, he was transfigured, and not yt he was made void or
brought to nothing, or altered into another substance. Thus says Paul also:
Phillip. 3.
he shall change our body. etc. Wherefore even the right true substance of the
glorified body shall remain still.

As for the change or alteration, it shall be in the infirmities yt happen unto
us. So that, when the body takes upon it the glorification and immortality,
they shall be wholly removed and fall away.

Howbeit, this shall be more evident and plain to understand, if it be through and
with diligence considered and declared, what this word, glory, or
glorification, means.

For transfiguration, glory and glorification, is one thing. So says holy
Augustine in his book against the Arrians.

To bring to glory, to make glorious, and to glorify, are.iij. words, Contra
Arria. cap. 31.
yet is it but one thing. The Greeks call it doxazein, but the translators in
Latin have otherwise interpreted it. Thus much says Augustine.

But glory in scripture is taken for light, brightness and shine, as S. Paul
speaks to the Corinthians: if the ministration, yt through the letter kills
and was graven in stone, has glory so, 2. Cor. 3.
that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moises for the glory
of his countenance. And here unto serves this sentence of Daniel: the wise,
such as have taught other, Daniel. 12.
shall shine as the brightness of heaven: and they that have instructed
multitudes (or many) unto godliness, shall be as the stars world with out end.

Much after the same wise, does the Lord himself also use it, saying: then
shall the rightuous shine as the Sun, Math. 13.
in the kingdom of their father. Wherefore the glorified bodies shall be clear,
bright, and shining bodies, even as the body of Christ was in his
transfiguration upon the Mount of Thabor: of whom it is specified in the
gospel, yt his face was as bright as the Sun, Math. 17.
and his clothes did shine as the light. After the resurrection, did the lord
show unto his disciples his palpable and visible, that is, his very true
substanciall body, but the brightness and shine he reserved, to teach and
instruct the weak here beneath: like as also after the resurrection he did
eat and drink, not that he neded any such thing, but that he so would
declare and prove the true resurrection of his body. The glorification also is
set directly against the low estate and dishonor, as Paul evidently declares,
saying: he shall change our vile body, that he may make it like unto his own
glorious and glorified body. This word humilitye, low estate or dishonor,
comprehends all that is called earthy, frail, miserable and mortal. For by
means of our sins, we are brought low and into misery: so yt we must needs
feel and suffer sickness, hunger, thirst, cold, heat, pain, vexation,
manifold lusts and affections, fear, wrath, heuinesse, and such like things
innumerable, yea, and death also at the last.

Again: glorification comprehends deliverance, that is, the laying away and
clear discharge of al these miseries and sorows. So that now glorification is
called (and so it is in very deed) pureness, perfect strength, immortality and
joy: yea a sure, quiet and everlasting life. For Paul says: We, that are in
this tabernable, sigh and are grieved because we would not be unclothed: 2. Cor.
5.
but we would be clothed upon, that mortalitye might be swalowed up of life.

And to the Romans he says thus: I suppose, Romans 8.
that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed upon us. For the fervent desire of the creature abides waiting for the
appearing of ye children of God.

In all these words it is sufficiently declared, what glorification means,
and what is understand by it. Namely a fredome or discharge from this frail
servitude and bondage, and a deliverance into the glorious and comfortable
liberty of Gods children.

By the which fredome, we are delivered from al sickness and frailtye, and
from all thraldom of weakness: that is, from all that which brings
sickness, heaviness and frailty. From all such are we free, discharged and
delivered, having now the perfect fruition of god, and made of like shape unto
his son Jesus christ, as holy s. John declares. Hereunto serves it well, 1.
John. 3.
that Paul says: when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this
mortal has put on immortaliti, 1. Cor. 15.
then shall be brought to pass the saying, that is written: death is swalowed up
in the victory.

Therefore the glorified body, after ye signification of glory, shall be a
purified bodi, which is purged and cleansed from all frailty and vileness, and
now is clothed upon and apparelled with clennesse, pureness, joy and rest, and
finally with the glory of eternal life. That this is now the kind and nature
of the glorified body, ye holy Apostle Paul more largely and more perfectly
declares with these words: it is sown in corruption, and rises in
incorruption, and rises in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, and rises
in glory: it is sown in weakness, and rises in power: it is sown a
natural body, and rises a spiritual body. Item what he means by the
natural and by the spiritual body, he declares immediately upon the same, A
natural and spiritual body.
and says farther: If there be a natural body, there is also a spiritual body,
as it is written: The first man Adam is made into a natural life, and the last
man Adam into a spiritual life. Yet is not the spiritual body ye first, but
the natural: and afterward the spiritual. The first man is of the earth
earthy, the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are
they yt are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they that be heavenly.
And as we have born the image of the earthy, so shall we bear also the image of
the heavenly. This the holy Apostle declares yet more evidently, and says:
1. Cor. 15.
by one man came death, and by one man comes the resurrection of the dead.
For like as in Adam they all die, so in Christ shall they al revive. Thus Paul
calls Animale corpus, Animale and spirituale corpus.
the soulish body, which is interpreted ye natural body, the same that has his
virtue, strength, power, and life of the soul: which body we have of Adam, and
it is earthy, frail and mortal. The spiritual body he calls, not it that is
become or made a sprite: but therefore names he the glorified body a spiritual
body, because it lives of the sprite of Christ: which spiritual body (that
is incorruptible, indissoluble and immortal) we have received of Christ our
Lord. Of all this, is sufficiently spoken in our expositions of the epistles
of s. Paul.

CHAP. 17. The case of our members in the bodies resurrection, and of their
functio^s.
But here might some man sai: if our very true bodies with their members shall be
in heaven, then it follows, that the use and exercise of the members shall be
in heaven also. To this, I give like answer as now is said: namely that we
shall have even these members and this body which we now carry: but seeing that
through ye glorification they shall be made heavenly, they shall not need earthy
exercise. Neither shall they use any frail thing at all. Hereof comes it that
Paul says: 1. Cor. 15.
flesh and blood may not possess the kingdom of God, neither may corruption
inherit uncorruption. By flesh and blood he means not the true essenciall
body, but bodily frail lusts and tentations which he now called the earthy
and frail body. Such tentations and lusts (says he) shall not be in the
glorified bodies, neither shall there any frail bodies be in heaven.

For he says immediately upon the same: corruption shall not inherit
uncorruption, for in the kingdom of God there shall be no corruption nor
frailty. For the heavenly joy is far of another kind and nature, then that
it ca^ receive or suffer such vile and unclean lusts and tentations, yea such
a stained and defiled flesh. For before ye bodies of me^ come in heaven, they
must be wholely and perfectly altered: that is, cleansed and purified from all
filthiness and frailty.

This did our savior teach also, when he answered to the question of the
Saducees, Math. 22.
who denied the Resurrection of the dead. Of the which I have written much upon
ye gospel of Matthew. Holy Augustine says also.

This does sore hinder the Ethnikes and heretics, that we believe, Augustinus
de fide and symbolo. Cap. 6.
that the earthye body is taken up into Heaven: for they think, that into
heaven there can come no earthy thing. But they know not our scripture,
neither understand how it is spoken of Paul: it is sown a natural body,
and shall rise a spiritual body. For this is not spoken to the intent, as
though the body should become a sprite, or be changed into a sprite. For eue^
now also our body, which is called natural (or soulishe) and is natural in
deed, is not changed into the soul, and become the soul. But therefore is
the body called a spiritual body, that it may so be prepared to dvvell in
heaven. Which thing comes to pass, when al feblenesse and earthy blemish
is changed into an heavenly pureness and steadfastness.

All these are the words of Augustine.

CHAP. 18. The diverse errors that sprung about the article of the bodies
resurrection.
Hitherto have I told, what the Scripture of the Prophets and Apostles does
hold and testify concerning the resurrection of the dead, and of our ood^ that
is to sai, our own true flesh^ namely, that our true flesh and body shall rise
from death, and be glorified in the resurrection, and that the glorification
does not therefore take away the verity of ye bodi, or make it nothing, but
does translate and bring it it into a more vprighte and better state: so that
nevertheless the true essencial substance of the the body remains still.
Upon this now, to the commodity of the reader, and for a more evident
declaration and understanding of the aforesaid words: I will show what errors
spring-vp concerning the resurrection of the dead, yt any good faithful
Christian may the better avoid the same. Erroures touching the resurrection of
the flesh.
That there have been many, which denied the resurrection of our bodies, and
had it utterly in derision, all Stories declare. In the which register, the
Philosophers for the most part are reckened and esteemed them Hymeneus and
Philetus, Philosop. 2. Timo. 2.
of whom Paul makes mention. In like manner are there many recited of Ireneus,
Tertullian, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Philastrius and Augustine: namely these, the
Simonians, Valentinians, Marcionites, Cerdonians Carpocratians, Caijnes,
Archontici, Seuerians, Hierarchits, Seleucians, Appellites and Manichees.

Among the Greeks also and Latinistes there were excellent me^, that turned
themselves to the golden, and yet earthy Jerusalem, promising much (I wotte
not what) of a kingdom of ye world to come after the resurrection: ascribing
unto us such bodies, as being partakers of the kingdom, should also beholden
with these earthye desires. To these there is found yet the third part, which,
as touching the substance and state of the glorified bodies, so said and
taught that they utterly take away and overthrew the bodily nature, and gave
unto it no more, nor other thing then a sprite. Against the second sort
speaks holy Hierom: that forasmuch as they were carnal, they have also loved
only the flesh.

Against the third speaks the said Hierome: that they, being unthankful for
the benefits of God, would not have and bear the flesh, wherein Christ yet was
borne and rose again. Whereupon he gives very godly counsel, that we tarry in
the mean way: Namely, that we esteem and make the glorified bodies no more
spiritual, then the perfectness, property and truth of the bodies may
permit and suffer.

Contrariwise, that we make them not altogether so carnal and vngostly, that
it might he thought, how that natural and frail bodies shall be in the
glory. Old writers say also, that Origin did not perfectly confess the
resurrection of ye flesh, Origin.
but that in the resurrection he fantasied and imagined such a body, as has
little difference from a sprite. And therefore in Definicionibus Eclesiasticis,
Definici. Eccle. ca. 6
there is a Chapter against the said Origin, in manner following.

If that which falls do stand up again, then shall our flesh truly rise
again: for the same falls in very deed, and shall not come to nothing as
Origenes opinion was, that there should be made a shifting and change of the
bodies, namely, that there should be given us a new body for the flesh: but
even the same frail flesh that falls of the just and unjust, shall without
feblenesse rise again, that because of sin it may suffer pain, or else
according to his deserts continue in eternal honor and glory.

CHAP. 19. The errors of Origin concerning the resurrection, confuted by
Hierome.
But forasmuch as I have once recited Origens opinion, touching the
resurrection of the body, and somewhat recited the errors of some, that divided
the resurrection, declaring the scornful opinion of those, whom they call
Chiliastes: I will show now more largely, what holy Hierome held of the
resurrection of the dead, and how he confessed the true vprighte belief. He
speaks to Pammachius concerning the errors of Ihon bishop of Jerusalem: and
in the same writing he comprehe^deth the doctrine and opinion of Origin,
concerning the resurrection in manner following.

Origin says, that in the church there be sprung up two errors: the one from
us, the other from the heretics. Namely that we, as the simple and lovers of
the flesh, say, that even these bones, this blood, and this flesh, that is,
that our face, members, and all the proportion of the body, Hieron ad
Pammachium.
and the whole body it self shall rise again at the last day, so that we
shall also go with the feet, work with the hands, see with the eyes, and
hear with the ears. This (says he) we speak as simple, homely, gross and
ignorant people. But the heretics (as Marcion, Appelles, Valentinus, and mad
Manes) deny vvholely and utterly the resurrection of the flesh or body, giving
salvation only unto the soul, and saying, that our words are nothing, when
we affirm, that according to the ensample and pattern of our Lord Jesus Christ
we shall rise again, saying that the Lord himself rose in a fantasy or
sprite: and that not only his resurrection, but also his birth came to pass
more in imagination, than in very truth: that is, that he was not borne in
very deed, but supposed to be borne.

Now for the opinion and mind of both these parties, Origin says, it
pleased him not: namely, that he abhorieth the flesh on our side, and the
fantasye on the heretics part for each of them does too much. And namely they
of our side, for that they would be again, the same they were before: and the
other, for that they utterly deny the resurrection of the bodies.

And after certain words does Hierome set forth Origens opinion, and what he
held of the resurrection, and says.

There is promised us another body, namely, a spiritual and heavenly, that can
not be comprehended, nor seen with eyes, nor having any vvaighte or burden,
and that according to the circumstance and diuersitye of the places, that it
shall be in, shall be changed.

And after certain words does Hierome set forth the opinion of Origin yet more
plainly, saying.

O ye simple, the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ ought not to deceive
you, in that he shevved his hands and feet, stood on the sea shore, went
over the field with Cleophas, and said he had flesh and bones. This body,
that was not borne of the seed of man, and of lust or pleasure of the flesh,
is endued with greater fredome then another body, and with his nature it is
not unlike the spiritual and heavenly body. For when the doors were shut, he
entered, and in breaking of the bread, vanished he away from their sight. etc.

But at the last, The confutation of Origens error.
Hierome answers unto Origens foundation, and says.

Like as he shevved his true hands and his true sides, so did he truly eat
with the^, went truly with Cleophas, spoke to them truly with his mouth,
sat truly at the table with them at supper, took the bread with his true
hands, gave thanks, brake it and reached it them. And vvheras he immediately
vanished out of their sight, that is ascribed to the power of God, and to no
fantasy or false body. When he, before his resurrection, was brought out from
Nazareth, that they might throvve him down from the top of the hill; he
passed thorovv the mids of them, that is, he escaped out of their hands.
May we then talk with Marcion, that his birthe was therefore but a fantasy,
because that he against nature escaped those that had him? How say thou,
did not they know him in the way, when he yet had the body, that he had
before? Upon this hear the scripture: their eyes were holden, that they should
not know him. But was he any other when they knevve him not, or was he any
other when they knevve him? Verily he was alvvay one and like himself.

And therefore, to know and not to know, is given to the eyes, and not to him
that is seen: although it be ascribed unto him also, that he held their eyes
least they should know him. Afterward with many words gives he answer to
that, that the Lord entered, when the doors were shut. Yet does he brefely
answer thereunto in his Comme^taries upon the last Chapter of Esaye, and
says: I marvel that some, after Christ's Ascension, will give and measure
him a body made of the air, and soon returned to air again, because the
Lord, by the power of his majesty, came into the Apostles, vvha^ the do^es
were shut, considering that before his resurrection also he went upon the
water of the sea, permitting the same unto holy Peter: who at the first,
thorovv faith, vvalked upon the water. But afterward, when he being fainte
in faith, began to sincke and go under, he said unto him: O thou of little
faith, why have thou doubted?

Thus much wrote Hierome against Origin, and many other more yet in this book
written to Pammachius, against John bishop of Jerusalem: which because of
greatness and length, I have omitted to put here in writing.

CHAP. 20. S. Hieromes opinion of the resurrection of the flesh.
YEt in the same book has the said Hierome set his own opinion, touching
the resurrection of the flesh, directing the oration unto Bishop John, and
saying.

If thou vvilt now confess the resurrection of the flesh, after the truth
and not after fantasy, as thou say, then look, that unto the words, which
thou haste spoken to content the simple, that even in the body, vvherin we die
and are buried, we shall rise again, thou add these words also, and say:
seeing the sprite has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have: and forasmuch
as it was so distinctly spoken unto Thomas: put thy finger in my hands, and
thy hand in my side, and be not faithless but believing: Therefore say thou,
that we also after the resurrection shall have even the same members, that we
daily use, yea even the very same flesh, blood, and bone. The works vvherof
the holy scripture condemns and rejects, and not their nature.

And this is the right and true knovvledging of the resurrection, which so
gives honor unto the flesh, that therevvith it minisheth nothing the verity of
the flesh.

Afterward speaks he yet more evidently.

I vvil freely confess, though ye vvry your mouths at it, scratch your head,
and scrape with your feet, yea, and though ye should stone me to death
forthwith: Yet will I manifestly and plainly knowledge and confess the
faith of the church or congregation of God, and boldly pronounce that the
right profound Christian truth of the resurrection, can utterly not be
understand without flesh, bone, blood and members.

Where flesh, bones, blood, and members are, there must needs be a difference
of kind, as of man and woman. And where these both are distinct the one
from the other, there John must be John, and Mary must be Mary. But thou nedest
not to be astonished at the matter, as though a wedding also were there to be
kept in all the haste: seeing that before they died, they lived without the
work of their kind, that is, without the act of marriage.

It is promised us, that we shall be like unto the Angels, that is, partakers of
the salvation: in the which salvation, the Angels are without flesh and
distinction of kind. And yet it is given unto us in our flesh and kind. Thus
believes my simplicity, and understands that the kind must be understand,
how be it without the works of the kind: yea that men must rise again,
and so become like unto the Angels of God.

Neither ought the resurrection of members forthwith to be therefore esteemed
unprofitable and superfluous because they shall not do their office, but stand
idle. For while we are yet in this life, we endeavor our selves not to
perform the works of our members. As for the comparison toward the
Angels, it is not a changing of men into Angels, but it is an increasing of the
mortality and glory.

Thus much have I spoken of the confession of holy Hierome.

CHAP. 21. S. Augustines mind of the Resurrection of the flesh.
TOuching the resurrection of our flesh, not only did holy Hierome believe
thus, who yet testifies, that he knowledgeth and confesses the universal
Christian faith: But also S. Austen wholely agrees unto s. Hierome, and
namely Lib. 2. Retractat. Cap. 3. For in repeting and correcting certain
points out of the.32. Chapter in the book de Agone Christiano, he says.

I said it shall not be flesh and blood, but an heavenly body. This ought no
man to understand, that therefore there shall be no true substance of the
flesh: but with the names of flesh and blood, must the infirmity of the
flesh and blood be understand.

Item. Lib. 1. Retractat. cap. 17.

In repeting and correcting certain points, which he had written long before,
in the book de fide and symbolo: In the time of the Angelical change (says
he) it shall not be flesh and blood, but only a body. etc. This I spoke of
the changing of earthye bodies into heavenly. etc.

But if one would understand it so, that the earthy body, which we now have,
should so in the resurrection be altered and changed, that these members and
the substance of this flesh shall not remain, no doubt he is not in the right
way, but ought better to be instructed: considering that he is warned and
monished thorovve the body of our Lord, which after the resurrection
appeared even with the same members, not only that he might be seen with
eyes, but handled also and touched with hands.

Besides this, he testifies, that he has true flesh upon him, when he
says: handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye se me
have. Therefore it is evident and plain that the holy Apostle Paul denied not,
that the true substance of the flesh should not be in the kingdom of God.
But rather with these words, flesh and blood, he understood, that either
men, which live after the flesh, should not have the inheritance of heaven:
or else that there should be in heaven no infirmity of the flesh at all. This
is a grievous matter for unbelievers, and hardly are they persuaded to believe
the resurrection: but most diligently and after my power, have I treated
thereof in the last book de Ciuitate Dei.

De ciuitate dei. Lib. 13. ca. 22. and. 23.
Yet handles he of the resurrection, not only in the last book, but also in
the.13. book de Ciuitate Dei he writes thus.

The Christian faith doubts verily nothing at all, to confess of our
savior, that also after the resurrection, though now in the spiritual
flesh, yet also in his true flesh, he did eat and drink with his disciples.
Hereof are they called also spiritual-bodies: not that they therefore cease to
be bodies, but that thorovve the spirit, which gives life, they shall be
preserved and remain.

For like as these our bodies, which have a living soul, And the same is
again. Retractat. Li. 1. cap. 13
and yet be not named a spirit that gives life, but natural or soulishe
bodies, and therefore are not souls but bodies: so shall the glorified bodies
be called spiritual.

Yet God forbid we should therefore believe that they shall be spirits: but
bodies shall they be, which shall have the substance of the flesh. And
forasmuch as they are preserved and made alive thorovve, the spirit, they
shall suffer no grief or infirmitye. Then shall not man be ea^thy, but
heavenly: not that the body, which is made of the earth shall no more
continue the same body: but that thorovv the heavenly gift and grace he shall
be so from henceforthe, that being such a kind and nature as can not perish,
and altered from all infirmity, he shall be able to dvvell commodiously in heaven.

Furthermore says s. Austen in the. 22. book the 30. Chapter.

How the bodies there shall move, I dare not rashly define for I can not
comprehend it, it passes my understanding. Yet shall their mou^ng and state,
even as also their proportion, be altogether beutifull: and how so ever it
shall be, it shall be in that place, vvher nothing can be but that, which is
beutifull and comely: yea where the sprite vvil, there straight shall the body
be also. Nether will the spirit any thing that is not very semely and comely
both for him and it.

Thus have I hitherto recited s. Augustins belief, to conclude this matter of
the resurrection.

CHAP. 22. What Aurelius Prudencius thought of the same.
J Will hereunto add the verses of the excellent and christian man, Aurelius
Prudentius, which do wonderfully expres unto us the resurrection of our
flesh, and set it directly before our eyes.

MY body in Christ shall rise again:
I speak it earnest for it is plain.
Why would thou then I should despair,
O flesh, when I do see so fair
The way, that Jesus Christ, my Lord,
Went after his death, as says his word?
This is the ground, and foundation,
My heart believes with confession:
That I am sure, and know certain,
My body shall rise vvholely again.
Not one here less, then was before:
Neither in greatness any more:
With strength and shape as it lived here,
Before they it to grave did bear.
There is no tothe nor nail so small,
No here so little, but though it fall:
Yet perish it shall not finally,
But out of grave rise certainly.
God which before created me,
With shape and strength undoubtedly,
VVhervvith I here on earth should live:
No feeble nor vveake thing me shall give.
For where any thing shall perish at all, Our bodies at the resurrection shall
not be feeble nor vveake.

It is old feeble. So do not thou call,
Of our bodies the renouation.
Therefore is this my expectation.
What sickness* pain and adversity,
What (...) in this ^ale of misery,
Out of this world ^^vve takes away:
Shall, when I rise at the last day
From death to life a new, certain
be given me all together again.
For seeing that death is overcome:
It ever besemeth us all and some,
Quietly to trust, with steadfastness:
Our God will keep with us promise.
Least when we come into the grave,
A man no hope then after have,
When he to life comes eternal,
That he, for his body mortal,
Which here so full of faults was,
As brickle and frail, as any glass,
Shall have a body of perfectness,
That cold can not, nor hunger press.
Though weakness be, at all season,
The strength of death, and operation.
Thereby in us what is consumed,
When it again shall be restored.
Then thorovv the power, vvherby we rise,
We go to the father in perfect wise.
This should right well content our heart:
Therefore my body regards no smart.
In Christ my trust, is constantly:
Who promises us assuredly,
To ra^se us up from earth at last:
Therefore be thou nothing aghast.
For sickness nor for aduersitee:
Nor yet let thou the grave fear thee.
Let this ever thy comfort be,
That Christ prepared the way for thee,
VVherin himself is gone before.
Follow thou and live for evermore.
CHAP. 23. The bodies of unbelievers shall verily rise again.
But to the intent that no man doubt, touching the resurrection of the flesh
of the unbelievers: I will bring forth certain testimonies of holy Scripture,
which do manifestly declare, yt the unbelievers or ungodly, shall with their
own true bodies rise again. Esaias. 66.
The Prophet Esaias in the last Chapter of his book says: they shall go
forth, and look upon the bodies of them, yt have vilely behaved themselves
against me: for their worms shall not die, neither shall their fire be
quenched, and all flesh shall abhor them. With this sentence does the Prophet
play after the manner and custom of those that have sone gotten the victory:
which with great desire, after that the battle is won, get them out of the
city into ye field, to view and look upon the bodies of such as are slain,
and how fortunately they have fought. Forasmuch now as Christ also has
fought prosperously, overcome his ennemies on domes day, and made them his
foot stole: the faithful shall go out to see the bodies of the ungodly. The
prophet does for this cause call them bodies, eue^ to declare, that the bodies,
raised up from death, shall be very true flesh. He continues further also in
ye recited sentence, and says: their worm shall not die. For the bodies or
coarses are full of worms, neither are they aught but worms meat.

All this is spoken after the custom and property of man, and weakness of this
time: and herewyth is described unto us, and set before our eyes, eternal
punishment, and how it shall go in the life to come.

In Daniel we read thus: Daniel. 12.
many of them, that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake: some to
everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe. The whole multitude of
bodies, says he, yt are become dust, yea al flesh shall through the power of
God rise again, but not in like case and sort. For the good shall arise to
eternal life, the evil to everlasting death. After this manner spoke the Lord
also: verily, verily, John. 5.
verily I say unto you: The hour comes, in the which all they, that are in
the graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: they that have don
good, to life: and they that have done evil, to death. Who is so ignorante
but he perceives, that to sleep in the earth, as the prophet Daniell said, and
to be in the graves, as Christ said, is one manner of speech and of like
effect? Now forasmuch as they, that are in the dust of the earth, and in the
graves, come forth, awake and rise again* and only the bodies are in the
graves, wherein they corrupt* it follows that men's true bodies, not only of the
good, but also of the evil, shall truly rise again. And the same does the
Lord yet declare more evidently. Mat. 10. Fear ye not them, that kill the body,
and are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, which may destroy
soul and body into hell.

Not only the souls, but also the bodies of unbelievers, does the Lord
destroy. Out of the which it follows, that they shall rise again: for if
they should not rise again, they could not be tormented and plaged. Neither
shall any other body rise again to pain and punishment, but even the same,
that with his use works has deserved the plage.

And hereunto serves also the description of the last judgment. Math. 25. And
S. Paul says. 2. Cor. 5. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ: that every one may receive in his body, according as he has don,
whether it be good or bad. See, how manifestly and expressly the holy Apostle
testifies, yt the body shall rise again. In the same terrible judgment of God
says he, must every one take his body to him again. And why must he take the
body upon him again? Even to the intent, that wha^ any one has received his
body again, he may likewise receive the reward, that he by and with his living
body has deserved.

Now has the body some thing to do with godliness and ungodliness, with
virtue and vice: for the body is an instrument or vessel wherewith somewhat is
done: and therefore in the just judgment of God, the body, according to the
divine righteousness, shall not be omitted, nether forgotten at all.

For if it have been obedient and subject unto the spirit, if it have suffered
much trouble for the name of Jesus Christ, if it has been an earnest follower
of righteousness: then shall it be worthy also to be glorified. Again: If it
has been given over to worldly voluptuous pleasures, or tra^sitory things of
this world: then with the soul that wrought with it, shall it justly go to
eternal damnation. Wherefore the unbelievers shall truly rise again in their
own flesh: yea eue^ in the same, which they here in this time have fed, and
pampered with all voluptuous pleasure and excess.

And like as they in this time have with their body taken their own pleasure,
joy and delight: so in the life to come they shall be plaged and punished with
everlasting pain and torment, in the same body.

For S. Paul witnesses farther in the acts of the Apostles, Acts. 24.
and says: I worship the God of my fathers, believing al things which are
written in the law and in the prophets: and have hope toward God, that the
same resurrection of the dead, which they themselves look for, shall be of the
just and unjust.

Therefore holy Augustine in book De fide ad Petrum diaconum said well and
Christianly, De fide ad Petrum. cap. 3.
according to the nature of the Apostles doctrine.

The unrighteous shall have a common resurrect on of the flesh with the
righteous: but the grace of the change, or glorification, they shall not have.
For frailty and misery shall not be taken away from the bodies of the
ungodly, neither the shame and reproach, sickness and feblenesse, in the which
they are sown: which therefore thorovve death are not extincte and taken
away, that they may belong to eternal death, pain and punishment,
everlastingly to be plaged body and soul, with continual torment that never
ceasseth.

These are Augustines words.

And after like sort did the lord also say in the gospel: they, that have done
evil, John. 5.
shall arise to the resurrection of judgment or damnation. As if he would say:
the ungodly, that with their bodies shall rise again, shall rise with such
property and proportion of their bodi, that their bodies may suffer the pain
and torment: namely, that they now being made everlasting, may not be wasted
and consumed away through any pain or trouble, how great and horrible so ever
it be. And so the bodies of the ungodly, that rise again from death, shall
after the said manner be altered and changed. For the bodies that might before
through pain and trouble be broken and consumed, are now altogether as iron,
yea such as can not be broken, and yet painful and passible: so that from
henceforthe, the more they be tormented, the harder they become, and, through
Gods vengeance, more unapt to be destroyed, and yet made the more able to
suffer misery.

The third part TOUCHING THE damneds perdition and the blesseds salvation.
CHAP. 24. The death and damnation of the ungodly.
Now seeing the onset is given, and the Oration come so far, that I must
also speak somewhat of the eternal death and damnation of the unbelievers,
that this matter may be wholely, vprightlye, and perfectly brought to an end:
I will therefore brefely declare, that the death, and damnation of the
unbelievers and ungodly, is enjoined unto them of God. Item, yt the souls are
passible. Moreover where the scripture declares the place of damnation to be,
and after what sort damnation shall torment the unbelievers. Finally, I will
declare, whether the punishment of the ungodly be everlasting, or whether it
shall cease at length. Holy scripture does often and many times make mention of
the death of the soul, The death of the soul.
which yet concerns not the substance, but the state thereof.

For holy Augustine in his book de fide and symbolo, speaks thereof very well
and Christianly.

Like as the soul (says he) by reason of vices and wicked manners is frail,
De fide and symbolo. cap. 10.
so may it also be called mortal. For the death of the soul, is to fall from
God, and not to keep it self unto God: which is also the first sin
committed in paradise, as it is contained in holy scripture.

Moreover the soul dies, when it is verily spoiled of eternal life, and
cast into everlasting sorrow, trouble, and miserye.

And therefore, says Augustine farther. The soul also has her death,
Namely when it lacks and is destitute of the eternal and godly life; which
truly and justly is called the life of the soul. But vndeadly or immortal is
it called, because it never cease to live, how miserable so ever the life
of it be.

What bodily death is, every man knows well: but eternal death, when a man
dies the second time, is this: when the flesh rises again, and so is placed
in everlasting torment.

For after the last sentence or judgment of God, the whole man, and not the
half, shall be either saved or damned. The eternal death also has S. John in
his Revelation called the second death. Apo. 2.20.
This is appointed because of sin, and is not a resting or ceassing, but a
continual pain. This death is called also damnation, that is, a judgment
because the ungodly is adjudged unto pain: and for that there is appointed him
a torment, sorrow and trouble that never cease, and that, as touching the
greatness thereof, can never be expressed with tongue.

CHAP. 25. That there is an eternal death and damnation, and that the soul is
passible.
NOw that there is an eternal damnation, ye truth and righteousness of God
testifies. For how could God be rightuous, if he had no punishment, wherewith
to torment and plage the vicious and wicked? Therefore out of dout an eternal
death and damnation there is, though the ungodly do mock and laughe it to
scorn, and pass not upon it. The godly sacred Bible, which is an assured
witness of the truth, says evidently: death is the stipend or reward of
sin. And: Romans 6.
by one man came sin into the world, Romans 7.
and by sin death. Item, through the sin of one man, is the evil fallen by
inheritance, and come upon all men unto damnation. For, in yt book of Genesis,
Gene. 3.
God says: In what day so ever thou eatest of this tree, thou shall die the
death.

Now did he eat thereof, and therefore he also died, and was even condemned,
appointed and adjudged unto eternal death. The Lord says also in the gospel:
John. 8.
if ye believe not that it is I, ye shall die in your sins. Item: he, that
believes not, John. 3.
is condemned already. Such like testimonies are found in holy scriprure
innumerable: out of the which we finally conclude, that death and damnation is
enjoined, appointed and adjudged of God, unto all unbelievers and ungodly. But
forasmuch as there be some which think, that, seeing the soul is a sprite,
it ca^ not, neither may suffer, yea that it is not subdued to any passion at
all: Therefore, against such curious teachers, I will set now the soul of the
gorgious rich man in the gospel, which expressly and plainly says: O send
Lazarus, that he may dipe the tip of his finger in water, and cole my tunge:
Luke. 16.
for I am tormented in this flame: lo, the rich man's soul is tormented in
the fire. Hereout now it follows, that the souls are passible and subject to
suffer.

And though this be showed unto us of the Lord as a parable, yet is it done
for this intent, even to describe and declare unto us the state and case of the
souls, that are separated from the bodies.

And how pain and punishment is appointed unto the souls, it is found
expressed not only in the similitudes, but also in the holy gospel of Mathewe
the truth it self says: fear ye him rather, which may destroy soul and
body into hell.

What the mouth of god speaks, must needs be true: Yea a shameful and
strange thing were it: for any man from henceforth to doubt in this, that with
so evident testimonies is witnessed.

We ought rather to beware, that with our vicious life, we deserve not to
learn and feel by experience, the righteous judgment of God, concerning the
which we now doubt and demand so folishlye, as though there shall be nothing
of it. Now what I have spoken of ye souls, that are already departed from the
body, must be understand also of the bodies, which come again to the souls in
the resurrection.

CHAP. 26. The bodies of the unbelievers, being raised, are passible.
FOr that the bodies, which come again to the souls and are raised up, are
passible: it may well be understand and perceived by that, which is treated of
already. S. Augustine Lib. 21. de ciuitate Dei. Cap. 4. shows by many natural
examples and evidences, that living bodies may well remain and continue in the
fire. But touching the place of the punishment, or where the souls with their
bodies shall be tormented, the scripture says simply and plainly, that the
unbelievers go down into hell. Hereof is it easy to perceive, that hell is
under us in the earth: notwithstanding to go about to describe, to show and to
compass precisely the place and the rowme, where it lies, and to point it
out, becomes not us verelye, but is a folishe presumption. The testimonies of
the scripture are simple and plain. Psalm. 55.
For the Prophet David says: let death fall suddenly upon them, and let them
go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their houses and priuye
chambers. Item: with all their substance went they down quick into hell, Nume.
16.
and the earth covered them, and they perished from out of the congregation.
Gene. 19.
Hereunto serves also right well the destruction of Sodom, and that which
the Prophet Ezechiell declares: Ezech. 32.
namely, that all cruel people are gone down and descended into hell: as the
Elamites, which are the Persians, Edomites, and others. And therefore concludes
he farther, that even Pharao, the king of Egipte, seeing that he also is a
tyrant, must be thrust down into hell, and be gathered unto other
uncircumcised, that is to say, unbelievers. Item in Luke is the hell placed
beneath downwards. Luke. 16.
For thus is it written in the Evangelist: between us and you, there is a
great space set: so that they, which would go down from hence to you, can
not.

1. Peter. 2.
The holy Apostle Peter speaking of the angels that fell, says evidently: that
they are cast down into hell, kept and bound with the chains of darkness for
ever. Esaias also speaks of hell, Esaias. 30.
and says: the Lord has set hell in the deep, and made it wide. As for the
manner, fashion, and measure of the damnation, and how great ye torment of hell
is upon unbelievers: I suppose no to^g is able to express the terrible and
vgsome pain and punishmente thereof. For Virgile the old Poet, though he were
an Heathen man, Virgilius.
yet wha^ he had recited diverse and sundry vices, and what punishment is
ordained for them of God, he said in his sixte book of the Eneydes.

An hundred tunges,
And mouths as many,
Although I had,
With eloquence hie:
And though my voice
All iron were
In strength: yet could
I not declare
The vices of men,
Nor yet can tell,
What pains therefore
They suffer in hell.
CHAP. 27. The pains of Hell, and the matter for the continuance of the
torments, with the space of the place, and kinds of punishments.
YEa though the holy scripture it self, can not with sufficient words expres
the pains of hell, and punishment of the damned: yet does it partly describe
the same with outward and corporal things, giving us occasion thereby, to
consider far greater things: and, so to say, out of the small to ponder and
wey the greater: as when it calls the pains of hell, the outward darkness,
that is, most terrible sorrow and trouble, calling the pain also weping and
gnashing of teethe. Item, cold: and continual fire that never quenches, and
the perpetual gnawing worm. As every one that has red the gospel, is well
informed. The prophet Ezechiel says, Eze, 32.
that in hell there is a great multitude of graves. And so, by a figurative
and borrowed speech, he declares the horror, mourning, weeping, and
lamentation of the damned. The Greeks in their language named hell of
darkness, cold, trembling and quaking.

For Ades comes of, a, and Eidein, that is of not seeing: or Tartarus of the
word tartarizeia. that is, to shudder for cold: or of taratto: that is, to be
in heuines, put in fear, and out of quiet. But for the opening of this matter,
we will take the testimonies of the scripture in hand again.

The Lord says: at the end of the world, shall the son of man send forth
his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into the fire oven: there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teethe. And even the said words does the Lord
use again in the same Evangelist. Mat. 22.24.
Item Esaias says: Esaias. 30.
for he from the beginning has prepared Tophet, that is, hell even for kings,
and made it deep and wide.

The mansions or chambers thereof are of fire and exceading much wood, which
the breath of the Lord, as a river of brimstone, does kind. The place of the
Prophet have I partly declared, in the exposition of the.5. chapter of Mathewe,
and here will I now partly expound it.

The prophet truly, with these words, declares an assured and a very wide and
broad place of hell, wha^ he says: he has made it deep and wide.

Hereof than it follows, that hell is in the depth, and that the place it self
is an horrible depth, so that who so does once sincke down into it, shall come
no more thereout: nether needs any man to think, that the place is not great
and wide enough. For touching wideness, it shall be able enough to hold all
damned persons.

For, the wideness and greatness thereof, says the Prophet, is exceading
horrible. The terrible pain also and torment, wherwyth the ungodly are
punished, has the prophet described with these words, and said: the mansions
or chambers thereof are of fire. As if he would say. The pain of hell is greater
then can be expressed, for the fire notes an vnoutspeakeable trouble. As for
stuff to be tormented withal, it shall never lack, neither shall the pain have
ever any end. Therefore says he, that there is much wood. It follows
moreover, yt the Lords breath, which is as a river of brimston, does kindle,
and as a belowes, blow the fire, quickening it, and ever renewing it, to burn
evermore. Therefore we ought not to think that that fire is kept in by natural
causes: for by the power of God is it kindled and kept in. The same Prophet
says also: they shall go forth and look upon the bodies or coarses of them,
Esaias. 66.
yt have vilely behaved the^ selves against me: for their worms shall not
die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and all flesh shall abhor the^.
And unto these words has the Lord respect, when he says in the gospel of
Mark: better is it for thee to go halt or lame into life, Mark. 9.
then having two fete to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched: where their worm never dies, and their fire never goes out.

Herein therefore consists the punishment and damnation, that the ungodly,
which here upon earth would not know God, and receive the light of the
gospel, shall be cast out from the face of God, wherein only yet is the
fullness and perfectness of all joy: and than shall they be shut up in the
great, thick, and perpetual darkness. For the judge commands them to
depart from him, and to go into eternal pain and damnation. Yea the ungodly
shall go into themselves, and shall know ye equity of the judge: and therefore
fret and gnawe their own heart, with sighing, with unspeakable pain, great
sorrow and trouble.

This is called, and so it is in deed, the gnawing worm, that in the hearts of
the ungodly never dies. For S. Paul says plainli, Romans 2,
yt at the righteous judgment of God, the consciences of all men shall bear
witness, and that the thoughts in themselves shall either accuse or excuse
the^.

The same S. Paul also, speaking of the judgment of God, says: praise, honor
and immortalitye shall he give unto them yt continue in good doing, and seek
eternal life: but unto them, that are rebellious, disobeying the truth, and
follow iniquity, shall come indignation and wrath, trouble and anguishe.
Besides all this, shall the ungodly be in the fellowship of most foul sprites,
with whom they had their lust in this life.

There shall all be full of confusion, lothsomnesse, and great torment, and so
shall all burn together for evermore. For thus shall the judge give sentence with
plain and express words: depart fro me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
Math. 25.
which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.

The Prophet Daniel says also: the wicked shall rise to perpetual shame and
rebuke. Item Esaias: all flesh shall abhor them. And holy scripture says, yt
the ungodly are given over unto yt devil, to burn perpetually.

CHAP. 28. The Refutation of them, that denied the punishment of the ungodly to
be eternal.
Moreover s. Augustine says in the last book de ciuitate Dei. That some
heretofore have been so merciful, that they durst promise grace, deliverance
and life, even unto those that are damned and adjudged to eternal death.

The same witnesses also S. Hierome, in his writing upon the last chapter of
Esaias.

But no man ought to be moved by such a folishe and erroneous opinion of
certain unbelievers: which opinion has of all faithful men been ever
still rejected and condemned. For the testimonies or witness of the
scriptures, which vvholely without all contradiction are to be credited,
speak simply and plainly, that the punishment and damnation of the ungodly or
unbelievers is everlasting, and not only of long continuance, as some expound
it: but so great, that it cannot be expressed, and so perpetual, that it is
without end.

Hereupon, for the opening of the matter, we will show mo testimonies. Esaias
says: thy rivers shall become rozine, Esaias. 34.
and the dust brimstone, ye earth burning pitche, not able to be quenched day
nor night: the smoke shall eternally go up, from generation to generation shall
there be a destruction: neither shall any man be able to walk there in
everlasting eternity.

The Prophet doubtless speaks of hell, minding with many words to declare,
that the punishment and pain of hell is eternal and without end.

For first he says: day and night shall it not quench. Then says he
farther: the smoke shall go up still for evermore. Item, yet more plainly: from
generation to generation shall there be a destruction: namely a dwelling, where
as is nothing but pain and undoing.

And at the end he adds: neither shall any man be able to walk there, in the
everlasting eternity. Which is such a manner of speech, that scarce there can
be any other found, that more distinctly, evidently and plainly expresses ye
eternity. For what is the everlasting eternity else, but a time without end?
But to be able to dwell or walk there, signifies not, that no man shall dwell in
hell: but that it is a loathsome horrible place, wherein every man desires
neither to dwell nor walk.

Other Prophets also, speaking of the destruction of lands and Cities, have
with such like manner of speech, described a very foul and horrible subversion.
Therefore would the holy Prophet Esaias also express here nothing else, but an
everlasting lothsomnes, that never ceasseth. In the holy Prophet Daniel, it is
written thus: they, Daniel. 16.
that have instructed ye multitude unto godliness, shall shine as the stars
in seculum and in perpetuum, for ever and ever.

Now least that by this word, seculum, any man understand a long season, as an
hundredth, a thousand or.10000. years, he adds thereunto immediatlye
inperpetuum, that is, in to the eternity, or for evermore. And like as the
eternity is appointed for the rightuous, so is there an everlasting eternity
ordained for the wicked. For the Lord says plainly. They yt have don good,
shall come forth to the resurrection of life: and they yt have done evil, John.
5.
to the resurrection of judgment. Note here the manner of speech, to the
resurrection of life, and to the resurrection of judgment. Now have I showed
before, that this saying, to rise up unto the resurrection of judgment, is
as much as to rise to a continual and still remaining state, in the which ye
bodies raised up endure perpetually in torment. We find also the like in ye
same gospel of John, that the Lord says: who so believes on the son,
has eternal life: but he that believes not the son, John. 3.
shall not see life, but the wrath of god abides upon him. Lo, what could be
more evidently and pithely spoken? He shall not see life, says the Lord.
Item: the wrath of God remains upon him. If he shall not see life, how shall
he then, as yonder men say, be preserved or saved? Item: If the wrath of God
abide upon him, then surely the vengeance, that is, the pain and punishment,
shall not be taken away from him. And note, yt he says: the wrath of God
abides, yea abides on him. As if he would say: the punishment ha^geth upon
him, sticks fast, moves not away, alters not, but works in the
unbelievers without ceassing for evermore. The Lord says: all sins shall be
forgeuen the children of me^, Mark. 3.
and also the blasphemies wherewith they blaspheme. But who so blasphemeth ye
holy Ghost, has no forgiveness for evermore, but is gilty of eternal
judgment. For evermore, says he, has he no remission.

And hereunto he adds: he is in danger of eternal judgment, that is, he
shall be punished with everlasting continual punishment. The lord says moreover
in the same Euangeliste: Mark. 9.
better it is for thee, to enter into life halte or lame, then having two fete,
to be cast into hell fire: the fire that never quenches, where their worm
dies not, and their fire goes not out. Wherein he repeateth once again,
that the fire never quenches, and adds thereto, that the worm never dies.
Wherefore as ye bodies ever continue, so endures their worm also perpetually.
For the worm lives and is sustained only of the body or caryon. S. John also
says in his revelation: Apo. 14.
if any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand: the same shall drink the wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured in the cup of his wrath. And he shall be punished in fire and
brimstone, before the holy Angels and before the Lamb. And ye smoke of their
tormente ascends up for evermore, and they have no rest day nor night. etc.
And ye like is repeated in the.20. Chapter. Thus much of eternal damnatian.

CHAP. 29. Of eternal life and salvation, and that there is an eternal life.
Now rests, that in the end of this book we collect somewhat out of the
scripture, concerning everlasting life, and the most perfect salvation of all
elect, which is our only expectation and only hope, that we undoubtedly look
for and trust to inherit, and that through the benefit and merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ. That there is a blessed and eternal life, no man ca^ deny,
unless he be altogether an enemy of god, and except there be in him no life at
all. For if there be no everlasting life, and no everlasting salvation, then is
there also no God: or though there were one, yet were he neither true nor
just, seeing that unto all rightuous and faithful he has promised eternal
life. But a God there is, who is true and rightuous: therefore is there also an
eternal life and salvation, which he has promised to faithful beleuers. This
does holy scripture record with these witnesses. David says: Psalm. 27.
I believe and trust to see the richesse of the Lord. And in the gospel the
lord says: Math. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father, and possess the kingdom, which has been
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Item, O thou good and
faithful servant: thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler
over much: enter into the joy of thy Lord. Paul also says: if we have a sure
hope in Christ Jesus only in this life, 1. Cor. 15. Heb. 4.
then are we of all people the most wretched. And with many words to the
Hebrews treats he of the everlasting rest.

But in the.11. Heb. 11.
chapter he speaks of the hope of the faithful: They desire a better
country, yt is to say, an heavenly. Item Hebrews.13. we have here no
remaining city, but we seek one for to come. For holy scripture calls
eternal life the kingdom of God, the kingdom of the father, the native
country of heaven, the joy of the Lord, the blessed rest, and everlasting
life. S. Peter speaks very evidently and plain: 1. Peter. 1.
praised be God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ which, according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from death, to an inheritance immortal and undefiled and
that perishes not, reserved in heaven for you, which are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation. etc.

CHAP. 30. Where the place of the faithful is.
YEt are there some, that ask where the region or place of the blessed and
faithful beleuers is. Of this have all rightuous and godly men had ever one
opinion: namely, that the dwelling of the living shall be with God, according
to that, which the Lord says in the gospel: Math. 5.
blessed are they which be of a pure heart, for they shall see God. And though
God be every where, yet will he not be seen in this time, but principally in
the time to come, and in heaven, according as Moses has written, Exo. 33.
no man shall be able to see God and live. Therefore is it necessary for us to
depart out of this time, and to be brought elsewhere: namely to the place yt
is above us, where God dwells in a light, 1. Tim. 6.
that no man can atteine unto, as Paul says. For there will he be perfectly
seen of his. In S. Luke it is red, that Abraham's lap, or bosom, is above in
the height: but the harborow or dwelling of ye damned beneth in the depth. It
is found also, 4. Reg. 2.
that Helias was in a fiery charet taken hence and carried upwards into heaven.
And in John does our Lord Jesus Christ pray, John. 17.
saying: father, those whom thou have given me, I will that, where I am, they
also be there with me, that they may see mine honor and glory. But in this, yt
I have treated of before, it is manifestly declared, that the heaven is the same
rowme and place of Jesus Christ, into the which he is bodily taken up in his
glory. Whereof then it follows of necessity, that the heaven, into the which
Christ ascended with his true body, is eue^ the same place and rest, that
faithful beleuers are taken up into.

And into the same heaven desired Steven to be received, wha^ he lift up his
eyes into heaven, and saw at the right hand of the father Jesus standing, to
whom he committed his soul, and said: O Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

CHAP. 31. How the salvation shall be.
But what the same life, and of what sort, fashion and manner the salvation of
the faithful shall be, or what the elect do or occupy in heaven, can of mortal
men not perfectly be spoken. For s. Augustine also in his.22. book de ciuitate
Dei. cap. 29. says.

De ciuitate dei. Lib 22. cap. 29.
If I will say the truth, I can not tell after what manner the operation,
rest and quietness of the blessed in heaven shall be. For the peace of God
excels and passes all man's understanding.

And likewise speaks also s. Paul out of the Prophet, concerning the
quality, Esaias. 64. 1. Cor. 2
fashion and manner of eternal life: the eye has not seen, and the ear has
not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things, which God
has prepared for them, that love him. Wherefore touching the excellency of
eternal life though all were spoken that the tongs of men were able, yet should
it be hard for them to attain, and by words to express the least and smallest
portion thereof.

For albeit we hear, that the kingdom of Christ be filled with glory, joy, and
salvation, yet the things that are named, continue still far from our
understanding: yea they remain wrapte, as it were, in a dark speech and in a
miste, until the day come wherein he will open and give unto us his glory.
Therefore when the holy Prophets could with no words express the spiritual
salvation, as it is in it self: yet as much, as was possible, they described
and set it forth by outward and bodily things. Therefore we may also, I
suppose, by outward and corporal things get up, as it were by steps, to
things invisible, and purchase unto our selves an understanding of spiritual
and everlasting goud things. For S. Paul to the Romans, speaking of the
knowledge of ye true only, and eternal God, says, ye Gods invisible things,
namely his eternal power and god-heade, are understand, Romans 1.
if his works be pondred and considered. And out of yt good things, that here
upon earth are given unto men, has the Poet Marcellus very goodly and well
concluded and compted, yt the good things, which for the blessed are prepared
in the life to come, shall be such, as now can not be considered and expressed.
And thus he says.

O Heaven, that art the throne most hie, Marcellus de piscibus

A beautiful crown, fair and worthy,
How vvonderfull, pure and excellent,
Art thou beset in firmament,
With stars, with sun, and moan doutles,
Replete with joy and much gladness:
Which God for us has prepared,
And cattle to give has not spared,
Waters and wood, with many a hill,
vineyardes, medovves, fair fields to till.
Pleasant on earth and commodious:
Thy dwelling, O Lord, how precious
Is it? All full of honor and glory
For thy celestial host with thee.
Moreover holy scripture speaks very simply and plainly, yt eternal life
consists here in, yt we shall see God, and have the fruition of him, in whom
is the fullness of al good, and without whom nothing can be desired or found,
that is good, beautiful or pleasant. For eternal life or eternal salvation is
nothing else, but man's everlasting and always continuing state, which by
means of the best things of all, is fully perfect.

This state is given us, through the beholding or sight, through the fruition
and through the communion or fellowship, which we shall have with the blessed
God in the world to come.

Hereof is it that S. Aug. says Lib. 22. De ciuitate Dei cap. 29. De ciuitate
dei lib. 22. cap. 29.


If I be demanded, what the blessed shall do in this spiritual body, I shall
not say that I now see but that which I believe. Therefore I say, that even in
this body they shall see God.

Thus also did holy Job hold thereof, and said: Job. 19.
I shall see him to my self, and mine own eyes shall see him, yea I and none
other. Even of this occasion spoke S. Augustine in the last chapter of this.22.
book, that ye corporal eyes of the body raised up, Lib. 22. cap. Vlt.
shall execute their office, that is, they shall see. What he farther treated
of the beholding of god, it is penned at large in the.112. Epistle, Epist. 112.
ad Paulin. John. 17.
which he wrote ad Paulinam. Our Lord Jesus says also in the holy gospel:
this is the eternal life, that they know thee to be the only true, God, and
who^e thou haste sent Jesus Christ. This knowledge is not only belief, and
the knowledge of understanding: but also the present beholding and fruition of
God, and the fellowship with God, which after this life shall happen unto all
faithful beleuers. For Paul said: we see now through a glass in a dark
speaking, 1. Cor. 13.
but then face to face. For faith is a steadfast substance of things, that we
hope for, and as a beholding or sight of God: albeit somewhat more dark, and
not so evident and clear, as shall be that, which, as a reward of faith, shall
be given to the faithful in the world to come. To see face to face is nothing
else but to use, enjoy, and have the fruition of all things: presently also to
behold the promise, and perfectly to be pertaker thereof. Therefore says the
holy Apostle John yet more evidently: dearly beloved, 1. John. 3.
we are now the children of god, and yet it does not appear what we shall be:
but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see
him as he is. With the which words s. John will declare three things: namely
that even now in this very present time we are Gods children, and therefore
also heirs. And though this be a great fore deal and an excellent jewel, yet
the great and unspeakable glory that in time to come shall be declared unto
us, has not yet appeared. For we, says he, shall be like him, namely our
Lord Jesus Christ: who, according to the saying of Paul, shall alter and
change our frail body, that he may make it like unto his own glorified body.

Besides this, even as he is, shall we see him: namely Christ the Lord, not
only as man, but also as very God. Therefore shall we see god as he is: namely
god as the only chief and highest good, in whom we have al good things. For
Paul says: 1. Cor. 15.
when all things are subdued unto the son, then shall the son also be
subject unto him, who unto him has subdued all things, yt God may be all in
all.

And therefore said he also in the gospel: John. 17.
that they know thee to be the only true God. Not yt Christ is not very god,
but that the mystery and the entreating of the son, our mediator and
reconciler, shall after the judgment be no more so in heaven, as it has been
before upon earth. But the only God, in the holy Trinity, shall be of all good
the full perfect sufficiency to all faithful. For all that we can wish,
think, and desire, shall only god give and be in all things.

And that is also the meaning and understanding of Paul, when he says: ^.
Cor. 15.
God shall be all in all. And hereunto serves now the goodly sentence of S.
Augustine, De ciuitat. Dei lib. 22. cap. 30.
who says thus: God shall be the end of al our longing and desire: him shall we
perpetually see, him shall we love without tediousness and grefe, and him
shall we praise without ceasing. For tediousness and grefe runs customably
with saturation or fullness. As for us, we shall with the beholding of God, be
filled to the bodily satisfying: which filling shall be as little tedious or
grievous, as we are grieved at the waters and rivers, yt still run into the sea,
and yet out of the ground of the earth spring forth again.

For the same comes to pass without all men's tediousness, yea rather with
great joy and commodity, seeing they water and moisture all things, and make
the^ fruteful. And hereunto serve now these testimonies of ye scripture: the
Prophet David says: in thy presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and at thy righthand there is pleasure for evermore: that is in the beholding
of thee, is, and consists all joy, and in heaven shall everlasting pleasure
be.

Item: in thy righteousness shall I behold thy face: Psalm. 17.
and when I awake, I shall with thy likeness be satisfied. Unto the Lord also
says the holy Apostle Phil lip: John. 14.
Lord show us the father, and it suffiseth us.

Therefore the Poet Marcellus, spoke very Christianly and well in these his
verses.

HEreof has God his name truly,
Because the highest good is he.
For where he is, there is present
Much honor and glory excellent.
And therefore every pleasant thing,
That water and earth does here forth bring,
And what in the air is beautiful,
That may delight and be fruitful:
There is in all that number not one,
Which is not seen at all season,
Within the circle of heaven ivvis:
Where the highest fathers dwelling is.
The blessed also and elect, shall in the heavenly and eternal country, with
continual praise incessantly, laud and magnifye the name of God.

For when s. John in his revelation thought to signify and show this, he said:
Apo. 5.14.
I hard the voice of many angels, which were about the throne and about the
beasts and the elders. And I heard many thousands, that sang a new song,
saying: worthy is ye lamb, that was killed, to receive power and richesse,
wisdom and strength, honor, glory, and blessing. etc. Moreover the same
eternal life shall be altogether fre and discharged from all heaviness,
sickness and temptations, whereas temporal joy, rest, and welfare of men is
mixed with sorrow. As also the holy Apostle John does witness: I John, says
he, saw that holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a bride garnished for her husband. And I hard a great voice out
of heaven, saying: behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God him self shall be with them, and
shall be their god. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there
shall be no more death, nether sorrow, nether crying, nether shall there be any
more pain: for the old things are gone. And he, yt sat upon the seat, said:
Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me: write, for these words
are faithful and true. And hereunto in manner serves all, that follows
after in the.21. chapter to the end of the book.

CHAP. 32. The souls departed, vvotte not what they do that are alive,
thereby any thing to be disquieted.
De cura pro mortu. is agenda. cap. 13.
Therefore did holy Augustine also teach, that the souls of those, that are
departed, wotte not what they do, which are alive. Yet will I resite his words.
Thus says Augustine.

If the souls of those, that are departed, were among the doings of such as
are alive, they should, when we see them in sleep, talk with us: and
then, I will not speak of others, at the least my good and faithful mother,
that by water and land followed me so far, to be with me, should now not
forsake me. For God forbid, that he should have made that blessed life more
unfriendly or more terrible.

God forbid, that when my heart does any thing press and unquiet me, she
should not comfort me her son, whom she yet so entierly loved, that she
could never suffer or see me heavy. Undoubtedly it must needs be true that
the holy Psalmist says: my father and my mother have forsaken me, Psalm 27
but the Lord has taken the cure to keep me. If our fathers now and
mothers have forsaken us, how can they be then in our cares and doings? And
if father and mother do nothing at all in our business, how can we then
think, that the other dead meddle ought with us, Esaias. 63.
or know what we do or suffer. The Prophet Esaias says: thou O God, art our
father: for Abraham vvotteth not of us, and Israel knovveth us not.

Seeing then that such honorable Patriarks wist not, what was don concerning
their people, which came of them selves, to vvho^ yet, as to Gods faithful
believers, the same people was promised out of their own stock: how can
then the dead open themselves the door, to know and further the doings and
not doings of them that are alive? And how shall we be able to say, that
they, which are dead, were helped and eased, before the evil came that
followed up on their death: when they after death feel all the calamity and
miserye of man's life, that here happens unto us? Or be we in error, that
speak such things, and count them to be in rest? Or does he err, that makes
the unquiet way of the living so careful, and full of combrance? I pray
thee, what great benefit is it then, that our lord God promised the virtuous
king Josias: namely that he should die, because he should not see the great
misery, 4. Reg. 22.
which god threatened unto all the land and people of Israel? The words of
the Lord unto Josias are these: Thus says the Lord God of Israel: seeing
that by reason of my words, which thou haste heard, thy heart has melted,
and thou have humbled thy self before the lord, when thou hardest what I had
threatened unto this place and to the inhabiters thereof, namely how they
shall be destroyed, destitute and accursed, and thou there upon have rent thy
garment and wept before my sight: Behold I have heard thee, says the Lord
God of hosts. The plage shall not touch thee. Behold, I vvil gather thee
unto thy fathers, and into thy grave shall thou be laid in peace: and thine
eyes shall not so all the plages, that I will bring upon this land, and upon
those that dwell therein. Lo, this king, standing in awe at the threatening of
God, did vvepe and rent his clothes: and thorovve death, that came before hand
was he in safety from all misery to come. For he must before depart in peace,
and take rest, least he should see that great calamitye. Therefore the souls
of those, that are departed, must needs be in such a place, where they see
not all that is done, and happens in the life of men.

All this have we taken and written out of the.13. Chapter of Augustines book
de cura pro mortuis agenda.

If the souls now in everlasting salvation have a perfect rest, yea such a
rest as their body, which they have put of, has not yet received again: and
seeing that they are yet alive, who^ they specially loved, while they were with
them in body: how much more perfect joy shall they then first have and
possess, wha^ their bodies shall come again, and when they shall see, that all
their brethren, whom they in this life had loved so entirely before, are
together in honor and glory, when now ye time of frailty has ceased, and when
in the eternal time there can now no cause of heaviness and grefe be
thought upon, nor found any more at all. Therefore the glory and joy, which
the mercy of god shall after the last judgment give unto men, that are
made whole again of body and soul, shall be without sorrow, and in all points
perfect. And like as the ungodly, and unbelievers, shall be gathered together with
the devil and all his companions: so shall also the rightuous and elect have
the joyful fruition of the company and fellowship of their head Jesus Christ,
and of his members, that is, of all faithful beleuers.

CHAP. 33. The faithful shall know one an other in heaven.
THen also shall the blessed know one another again, having joy together, and
rejoicing in the obtained health. For if there should be no knowledge, to what
end then should the bodies rise again? Or what fruit and profit should the
resurrection have? Or how might the sentence of Daniel the Prophet be verified,
when he says: Dan. 12.
they that have instructed and taught other unto godliness, shall shine and
be as light, as the stars in the firmament?

When the Lord was risen again from death, and has taken upon him his
glorified body: the Apostles knew him, yea so perfectly and thoroughly well knew
they him, that, as S. John witnesses, none durst say: who art thou? For they
all knew, that it was the Lord. I pass over, that the Lord spoke in the
gospel, saying: Luke. 22.
when the son of man shall sit upon the seat of his majesty, then shall ye
also sit upon 12. seats, and judge the.12. tribes of Israel.

For if they, that rise again, shall not know one another, how shall then the
Apostles judge and give sentence upon those, to whom they preached here in
their life time? Note, that the Apostles shall judge in ye room and place of
their lord, to whom only is given all power to judge: but this understanding it
has, that the apostles do then judge, when they are there at the Judicial
court, as witnesses of the rightuous judgment of God, with the which he
condemns the unbelievers.

For where as the unbelievers would not give credence to the Apostles, that is
to say, their preachers, but cried out upon the^ as upon ungodly heretics:
when they now shall see those present with the judge of all men, they shall
immediately be overcome by the Apostles, and have witness in themselves, that
they shall be and are justly condemned. And for this matter read the.4. and.5.
Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, which serves very well to this purpose. And
seeing it is manifest, that, in the life to come, eue^ the wicked shall know the
good, how much more then shall one good person know another, and one faithful
another. In the Transfiguration of the Lord upon the mount appeared Moses and
Helias, and were known of the three disciples of the Lord: Math. 17.
yea they knew the Lord himself, though he was now transfigured.

Hereunto serves it also, that Paul says: Heb. 12.
ye are come to the city of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable multitude of Angels, and to the congregation of the first borne
sons, which are written in heaven, and to the sprites of the perfect
rightuous. etc. Besides this, we have for us the uniform and universal opinion
of all faithful, which also witnesses, that in the life to come, the blessed
shall know one another.

For when we talk of death, and of the state and case of the life to come, we
say: though we now must depart a sonder, yet shall we see one another again
in the eternal country.

Socrates also, the right famous and most excellent among all the wise men of
the heathen, marked such a like thing, and saw it as in a dream, when, as
Cicero witnesses of him, In tuscula questi.
he was unto death condemned of ye judges or counsel, and now should drink
the poison. For he said: O how much better and more blessed is it, to go
unto them, that well and vprightlye lived here in time, then to remain here in
this life upon earth? O how dear and worthy a thing is it, that I may talk
with Orpheus, Museus, Homerus, Hesiodus, with those excellent me^? Verily I
would not only die once, but many and sundry times also, if it were
possible, to obtain the same. etc. After this sort, like as in a dream, did
the good Philosopher imagine in himself joys vain and of none effect. But we
promise unto our selves true assured joy, in that we hope and know, that in the
eternal and ever during country, after the oesurrection of the dead, we shall
see Adam, our first father: Adam. Noe.
Noe, the dearly beloved friend of God: Abraham.
Abraham, to whom god made special great promises: Moses, Moses.
the most gentle hearted man, and one, that had greatest experience of all the
mysteries of god: Samuel.
Samuel, the friendly and loving prophet: David, the king and Prophet, David.
who was Gods elect according to his own will and desire: Josias.
Josias the most godly and best among all the kings of Judah: likewise John ye
Baptiste, John Baptist.
holyer then whom there was none borne of woman: and with all these, the holy
Virgin Mary, Mary.
the mother of God, and highly replenished with grace among all women.

Item, Peter, John, James, chefest of the Apostles, Peter. John. James. Paul.
with the other disciples of Christ: Paul, the famous teacher of the Heathen,
and all the holy congregation of the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martirs and
faithful beleuers.

As for our glorified and pure understanding and memory, now endued with
immortalitye, the multitude and infinite number of the blessed, in our said
native country, shall nether grieve nor entangle the same.

From the beginning of the creation, there was in Adam a wonderful and
excellent efficacy of understanding and remembrance, forasmuch as unto all
things, and to every one in especial, what so ever was within the whole
compass of the world created, yea in paradise also, he gave their names, and
knew every one.

A much more excellent, more pure and more clear understanding shall God give
to the raised up and glorified bodies: so that they shall not lack, nor be
destitute of any thing at all.

And where as the blessed shall rejoice and have joy together one with another,
yet shall all their delight be in the only god, who shall be all in all. Of
these everlasting and heavenly things, more and farther to write, I have not at
this present.

How be it there shall be graciously given us things far greater, much more
glorious, more joyful and more divine, then we can comprehend, namely,
salvation as it is in it self, in yt day, when we, after the ouerco^ming and
treading down of death, through our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be carried up and
taken to heaven, into eternal joy and salvation. Touching the which, I have
hitherto written, not according to the Majesty and worthiness thereof, but
after my small ability in most humble wise.

God the father of all mercy, through his dear son our Lord and redemer,
Jesus Christ, vouchsafe graciously to take us pore sinners up to his glory,
and after the joyful resurrection of our body, that we long for, to give and
show us the vnoutspeakable joy, which he has prepared for all faithful
beleuers: that we ever living, and having joy in him, may praise him for ever
and ever, that is from eternity to eternity. So be it.

With Christ, even in death, is life.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Chapters Contained IN THIS Book, and here follows the
chapters of the first part.
CHAP. 1. The authors purpose 1. CHAP. 2. The Lord verily rose with his body.
3 CHAP. 3. Appearings of the body raised up. 14 CHAP. 4. The body of Christ
rose again, not a spirit but a true body. 16 CHAP. 5. The fruit of the
Resurrection of Christ. 23. CHAP. 6. Of the true Ascension of the Lords body,
that arose a body and no spirit, and of his place whether he went to be in.
25 CHAP. 7. The diverse significations of this word, Heaven, as it is used in
scripture. 38 CHAP. 8. What Gods right hand is, and to vvho^ it is referred.
45 CHAP. 9. What it is to sit at the right hand of God, how Christ
sits there, and what he does. 48 CHAP. 10. That Christ sits at the
right hand of God by his humanitye, but circu^scribed in place, and is not
every vhere. 52 CHAP. 11. An other signification of sitting at the right hand
of God, by which manner of sitting Christ is every vvher, sitting there in such
sort after his Godhead. 71 CHAP. 12. The fruit and commoditye of the corporal
Ascension of Christ, both in that he does now for us, and in that we learn
by it. 76
The second part.
CHAP. 13. Of the true Resurrection of our flesh. 85 CHAP. 14. Our flesh, or
body it self, shall rise again, though it be hard to believe, and what the
flesh or body is. 89 CHAP. 15. The manner how the bodies shall rise again,
and the kind that they shall be of. 114 CHAP. 16. That Paul spoke rightly of a
glorified body, and what a glorified body is, and what a natural. 121 CHAP.
17. The case of our members in the bodies resurrection, and of their functions.
134 CHAP. 18. The diverse erroures that sprung about the article of the bodies
resurrection. 138 CHAP. 19. The erroures of Origin concerning the resurrection,
confuted by Hierom. 143 CHAP. 20. S. Hieromes opinion of the resurrection of
the flesh. 149 CHAP. 21. S. Augustines mind of the resurrection of the
flesh. 152 CHAP. 22. What Aurelius Prudencius thought of the same. 156 CHAP.
23. The bodies of unbelievers shall verelye rise again. 159
The third part.
CHAP. 24. The death and damnation of the ungodly. 171 CHAP. 25. That there is
an eternal death and damnation, and that the soul is passible. 175 CHAP. 26.
The bodies of the unbelievers, being raised, are passible. 179 CHAP. 27. The
pains of Hell, and the matter for the continuance of the torments, with the
space of the place and kinds of punishments. 186 CHAP. 28. The Refutation of
the^, that denied the punishmente of the ungodly to be eternal. 194 CHAP 29.
Of eternal life and salvation, and that there is an eternal life. 203 CHAP. 30.
Where the place of the faithful is. 207 CHAP. 31. How the salvation shall
be. 210 CHAP. 32. The souls departed, vvot not what they do that are alive,
there by any thing to be disquieted. 226 CHAP. 33. The Faithful shall know
one an other in heaven. 231
GOD IS MY HELPER


PRINTED at London in Creed Lane, by Hugh Singleton, at the sign of the Golden
Tun.

ANNO. 1574.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


